Coverdale Bible

This Bible is in the Public Domain.


Genesis

Chapter 1

1 In ye begynnynge God created heauen & earth:
2 and ye earth was voyde and emptie, and darcknes was vpon the depe, & ye sprete
of God moued vpo the water.
3 And God sayde: let there be light, & there was light.
4 And God sawe the light that it was good. Then God deuyded ye light from the
darcknes,
5 and called the light, Daye: and the darcknes, Night Then of the euenynge and
mornynge was made the first daye.
6 And God sayde: let there be a firmament betwene the waters, and let it deuyde
ye waters a sunder.
7 Then God made ye firmamet, and parted the waters vnder the firmamet, from the
waters aboue the firmament: And so it came to passe.
8 And God called ye firmament, Heauen. Then of the euenynge & mornynge was made
the seconde daye.
9 And God sayde: let the waters vnder heauen gather theselues vnto one place, yt
the drye londe maye appeare. And so it came to passe.
10 And God called ye drye londe, Earth: and the gatheringe together of waters
called he, ye See. And God sawe yt it was good.
11 And God sayde: let ye earth bringe forth grene grasse and herbe, that beareth
sede: & frutefull trees, that maye beare frute, euery one after his kynde,
hauynge their owne sede in them selues vpon the earth. And so it came to passe.
12 And the earth brought forth grene grasse and herbe, yt beareth sede euery one
after his kynde, & trees bearinge frute, & hauynge their owne sede in them
selues, euery one after his kynde. And God sawe that it was good.
13 Then of the euenynge & mornynge was made the thirde daye.
14 And God sayde: let there be lightes in ye firmament of heauen, to deuyde the
daye fro the night, that they maye be vnto tokes, seasons, dayes, and yeares.
15 And let them be lightes in ye firmament of heauen, to shyne vpon the earth:
And so it came to passe.
16 And God made two greate lightes: one greater light to rule the daye, and a
lesse light to rule the night, and (he made) starres also.
17 And God set them in the firmament of heauen, yt they might shyne vpo earth,
18 and to rule the daye and the night, and to deuyde the light from darcknes.
And God sawe that it was good.
19 Then of the euenynge and mornynge was made the fourth daye.
20 And God sayde: let the waters brynge forth creatures that moue and haue life,
& foules for to flye aboue the earth vnder the firmamet of heauen.
21 And God created greate whalles, and all maner of creatures that lyue and
moue, which the waters brought forth euery one after his kynde: and all maner of
fethered foules, euery one after his kynde. And God sawe that it was good,
22 and blessed them, sayenge: Growe, and multiplie, and fyll the waters of the
sees, and let the foules multiplie vpon the earth.
23 Then of the euenynge and mornynge was made the fifth daye.
24 And God sayde: let ye earth brynge forth lyuynge soules, euery one after his
kynde: catell, wormes & what as hath life vpon earth, euery one after his kynde.
And so it came to passe.
25 And God made ye beastes of the earth euery one after his kynde, and catell
after their kynde, and all maner wormes of the earth after their kynde. And God
sawe that it was good.
26 And God sayde: let vs make man in or similitude after oure licknesse, that he
maye haue rule ouer the fysh of the see, and ouer the foules vnder ye heauen,
and ouer catell, and ouer all the earth, and ouer all wormes that crepe on ye
earth.
27 And God created man after his licknesse: after ye licknesse of God created he
him, male & female created he them.
28 And God blessed them, and sayde vnto them: Growe, and multiplie, and fyll the
earth, and subdue it, & haue domynion ouer the fish of the see, and ouer the
foules of the ayre, and ouer all the beastes that crepe vpo the earth.
29 And God sayde: lo, I haue geuen you all maner herbes that beare sede vpon the
whole earth, and all maner frutefull trees that beare sede, to be meate for you.
30 And to all beastes of the earth, and to all foules vnder the heauen, and to
euery worme that hath life (vpon earth) all maner grene herbes to eate. And so
it came to passe.
31 And God behelde all yt he had made, and lo, they were exceadinge good. Then
of the euenynge and mornynge was made the sixte daye.

Chapter 2

1 Thus was heaue and earth fynished with all their hoost,
2 and thus in the seuenth daye God ended his worke, which he had made, & rested
in the seuenth daye from all his workes which he had made:
3 And blessed the seuenth daye, & sanctified it, because yt in it he rested from
all his workes, which God created and made.
4 These are the generacions of heaue and earth whan they were created, in the
tyme whan the LORDE God made heauen and earth:
5 before there was eny twygg vpon earth, and or euer there grew eny grene herbe
vpon the felde. For the LORDE God had yet sent no rayne vpon ye earth, nether
was there eny man to tylle the earth.
6 But there arose a myst from the earth, & watered all the londe.
7 And ye LORDE God shope man eue of the moulde of the earth, & brethed in to his
face ye breth of life. And so was man made a lyuynge soule.
8 The LORDE God also planted a garde of pleasure in Eden, towarde ye east, and
set man therin whom he had made.
9 And the LORDE God caused to sprynge out of the earth all maner trees, pleasaut
to loke vpo, and good to eate: and the tre of life in the myddest of the garden,
and the tre of knowlege of good and euell.
10 And out of Eden there wente a ryuer, to water the garden, and there deuyded
it selfe into foure heade waters.
11 The first is called Phison, which renneth aboute all the londe of Heuyla.
12 And there is founde golde, (& the golde of that countre is precious,) and
there is founde Bedellion, and the precious stone Onix.
13 The second water is called Gihon, which runneth aboute the whole londe of ye
Morias.
14 The thirde water is called Hydeckell, which runneth towarde the east syde of
ye Assirias. The fourth water is Euphrates.
15 And the LORDE God toke man, & set him in the pleasaunt garden of Eden, to
dresse it & to kepe it.
16 And the LORDE God commaunded man, sayege: Thou shalt eate of all maner trees
in ye garden:
17 But of ye tre of knowlege of good and euell, shalt thou not eate. For loke in
what daye so euer thou eatest therof, thou shalt dye the death.
18 And the LORDE God sayde: It is not good yt ma shulde be alone. I wil make him
an helpe, to beare him copany.
19 And whan God the LORDE had made of the earth all maner beastes of the felde,
& all maner foules vnder the heaue, he brought them vnto man, to se what he
wolde call the: For as ma called all maner of liuinge soules, so are their
names.
20 And man gaue names vnto all maner catell, & vnto the foules vnder the heaue,
and vnto all maner beastes of ye felde. But vnto man there was founde no helpe,
to beare him company.
21 Then the LORDE God caused an herde slepe to fall vpon man, and he slepte. And
he toke out one of his rybbes, and (in steade therof) he fylled vp ye place with
flesh.
22 And the LORDE God made a woman, of ye rybbe that he toke out of man, and
brought her vnto him.
23 Then sayde man: This is once bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh. She
shalbe called woman, because she was take of man.
24 For this cause shal a man leaue father and mother, and cleue vnto his wife, &
they two shalbe one flesh.
25 And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.

Chapter 3

1 Bvt the serpent was sotyller then all the beastes of the felde (which ye LORDE
God had made) and sayde vnto the woman: Yee, hath God sayde indede: Ye shall not
eate of all maner trees in the garden?
2 Then sayde the woman vnto the serpent: We eate of the frute of the trees in
the garden:
3 But as for the frute of the tre that is in the myddes of the garden, God hath
sayde: Eate not ye of it, and touch it not, lest ye dye.
4 Then saide the serpent vnto the woman: Tush, ye shall not dye the death.
5 For God doth knowe, that in what daye so euer ye eate of it, youre eyes shalbe
opened, and ye shalbe as God, and knowe both good and euell.
6 And the woman sawe that ye tre was good to eate of, and lustye vnto the eyes,
and a pleasaunt tre to make wyse, and toke of the frute of it, and ate, and gaue
vnto hir husbande also therof, and he ate.
7 Then were the eyes of them both opened, and they perceaued that they were
naked, and sowed fygge leaues together, and made them apurns.
8 And they herde the voyce of the LORDE God, which walked in the garden in the
coole of the daye. And Adam hyd him self with his wyfe, from the presence of ye
LORDE God amonge the trees of the garden.
9 And ye LORDE God called Adam, and sayde vnto him: Where art thou?
10 And he saide: I herde thy voyce in the garden, and was afrayed, because I am
naked, and therfore I hyd my self.
11 And he sayde: who tolde the, that thou art naked? Hast thou not eaten of the
tre, wherof I commaunded the, yt thou shuldest not eate?
12 Then sayde Adam: The woman which thou gauest me (to beare me company) gaue me
of the tre, and I ate.
13 And the LORDE God sayde vnto the woman: wherfore hast thou done this? The
woman sayde: the serpent disceaued me so, that I ate.
14 Then sayde the LORDE God vnto the serpent: Because thou hast done this,
cursed be thou aboue all catell and aboue all beastes of the felde. Vpon thy
bely shalt thou go, & earth shalt thou eate all the dayes of thy life.
15 And I wyll put enemyte betwene the and the woman, and betwene yi sede and hir
sede. The same shal treade downe thy heade, and thou shalt treade him on the
hele.
16 And vnto the woman he sayde: I will increase thy sorow, whan thou art with
childe: with payne shalt thou beare thy childre, and thy lust shal pertayne vnto
yi husbande, and he shal rule the.
17 And vnto Adam he sayde: For so moch as thou hast herkened vnto the voyce of
thy wyfe, and hast eaten of the tre, wherof I commaunded the, sayenge: thou
shalt not eate of it. Cursed be ye earth for thy sake. With sorowe shalt thou
eate therof, all the dayes of thy life.
18 Thornes and thistles shalt it beare vnto the, and thou shalt eate the herbes
of the felde.
19 In the sweate of thy face shalt thou eate thy bred, tyll thou be turned
agayne vnto earth, whece thou art take: for earth thou art, and vnto earth shalt
thou be turned agayne.
20 And Adam called his wyfe Heua, because she is the mother of all lyuynge.
21 And the LORDE God made Adam & his wyfe garmentes of skynnes, & those he put
on them.
22 And the LORDE God sayde: lo, Adam is become as it were one of vs, & knoweth
good & euell. But now lest he stretch his hande, and take also of the tre of
life, and eate, and lyue for euer.
23 Then the LORDE God put him out of the garden of Eden, to tyll ye earth, whece
he was take.
24 And he cast Adam out. And before the garden of Eden he set Cherubes, and a
naked fyrie swerde, to kepe ye waye vnto the tre of life.

Chapter 4

1 Morouer Adam laye with Heua his wyfe, which coceaued & bare Cain, and sayde, I
haue opteyned ye man of the LORDE.
2 And she proceaded forth, & bare his brother Abell. And Abell became a
shepherde, but Cain became an husbande man.
3 And it fortuned after certaine daies, that Cain brought of the frute of the
earth, an offrynge vnto ye LORDE.
4 And Abell brought also of the firstlinges of his shepe, and of ye fat of them.
And the LORDE had respecte vnto Abell and to his offerynge:
5 but vnto Cain and his offerynge he loked not. Then was Cain exceadinge wroth,
and his countenaunce chaunged.
6 And the LORDE sayde vnto Cain: Why art thou angrie? and why doth thy
countenaunce chaunge? Is it not so? that yf thou do well, thou shalt receaue it:
7 but and yf thou do euell, thy synne lyeth open in the dore? Shal he then be
subdued vnto the? and wilt thou rule him?
8 And Cain talked with Abell his brother. And it happened, that whan they were
in the felde, Cain arose agaynst Abell his brother, and slew him.
9 Then sayde the LORDE vnto Cain: Where is Abell thy brother? He sayde: I can
not tell. Am I my brothers keper?
10 And he sayde: What hast thou done? The voyce of thy brothers bloude crieth
vnto me out of the earth.
11 And now shalt thou be cursed vpon the earth, which hath opened hir mouth, and
receaued thy brothers bloude of thine hande.
12 Whan thou tyllest ye grounde, she shall hensforth not geue hir power vnto
the. A vagabunde and a rennagate shalt thou be vpon ye earth.
13 And Cain sayde vnto ye LORDE: my synne is greater, then that it maye be
forgeuen me.
14 Beholde, thou castest me out this daye from out of ye londe, and from yi
sight must I hyde myself, and must be a vagabunde and a rennagate vpon ye earth.
And thus shal it go with me: that who so fyndeth me, shal slaye me.
15 But the LORDE sayde thus vnto him: Who so euer slayeth Cain, it shalbe
auenged seuenfolde. And the LORDE put a marck vpon Cain, that no man which
founde him, shulde kyll him.
16 So Cain wente out from ye face of the LORDE, and dwelt in the lande Nod, vpon
the east syde of Eden.
17 And Cain laye with his wyfe, which conceaued and bare Henoch. And he buylded
a cite, and called it after the name of his sonne Henoch.
18 And Henoch begat Irad, Irad begat Mahuiael. Mahuiael begat Mathusael.
Mathusael begat Lamech.
19 And Lamech toke him two wyues: ye one was called Ada, & the other Zilla.
20 And Ada bare Iabel, of whom came they that dwelt in tentes and had catell.
21 And his brothers name was Iuball: Of him came they that occupied harpes &
pypes.
22 And Zilla she also bare Tubalcain, a worker in all connynge poyntes of metall
& yron. And Tubalcains sister was called Naema.
23 And Lamech sayde vnto his wyues Ada and Zilla: Heare my voyce (ye wyues of
Lamech) and herken vnto my wordes: for I haue slayne a man, and wounded my
selfe: and (haue kylled) a yonge man, and gotte my self strypes.
24 Cain shalbe aueged seue tymes: but Lamech seuen and seuentie tymes.
25 Adam laye yet with his wyfe agayne, & she bare a sonne, and called him Seth.
For God (sayde she) hath apoynted me another sede, for Abell, whom Cain slew.
26 And Seth begat a sonne also, and called him Enos. At the same tyme beganne
men to call vpon the name of the LORDE.

Chapter 5

1 This is the boke of the generacion of man, in the tyme whan God created man,
and made him after the symilitude of God.
2 Male and female made he them, and blessed the, & called their names Man, in
the tyme whan they were created.
3 And Adam was an hundreth and thirtie yeare olde, and begat a sonne, which was
like his owne ymage, and called his name Seth:
4 & lyued therafter eight hudreth yeare, and begat sonnes and doughters.
5 And his whole age was nyne hundreth and thirtie yeares, and so he dyed.
6 Seth was an hundreth and fyue yeare olde, and begat Enos:
7 & lyued therafter eight hundreth and seuen yeare, and begat sonnes and
doughters.
8 And his whole age was nyene hudreth and twolue yeares, and so he dyed.
9 Enos was nyentie yeare olde, and begat Renan:
10 and lyued therafter eight hundreth & fyftene yeare, and begat sonnes &
daughters.
11 And his whole age was nyene hudreth and fyue yeares, and so he dyed.
12 Renan was seuetie yeare olde, and begat Mahalaliel:
13 and lyued therafter eight hundreth and fourtie yeare, and begat sonnes &
doughters.
14 And his whole age was nyene hundreth and ten yeares, and so he dyed.
15 Mahalaliel was thre score yeare olde & fyue,
16 and begat Iared: and lyued therafter eight hundreth and thirtie yeare, and
begat sonnes and doughters.
17 And his whole age was eight hundreth, nyentie and fyue yeares, and so he
dyed.
18 Iared was an hundreth and two & sixtie yeare olde, and begat Henoch:
19 & lyued therafter eight hudreth yeare, and begat sonnes & doughters.
20 And his whole age was nyene hundreth and two and sixtie yeare, and so he
dyed.
21 Henoch was fyue and thre score yeare olde, and begat Mathusalah:
22 and led a godly conuersacion thre hundreth yeares therafter, and begat sonnes
& doughters.
23 And his whole age was thre hundreth and fyue and thre score yeares.
24 And for so moch as he lyued a godly life, God toke him awaye, & he was nomore
sene.
25 Mathusalah was an uhdreth & seue and foure score yeare olde, & begat Lamech:
26 and lyued therafter seuen hundreth and two and foure score yeare, and begat
sonnes & doughters.
27 And his whole age was nyene hundreth and nyene and trescore yeares, and so he
dyed.
28 Lamech was an hundreth and two and foure score yeare olde, and begat a sonne,
29 & called him Noe, and sayde: This same shall coforte vs in oure workes, and
in the sorowe of oure hondes vpon the earth, which the LORDE hath cursed.
30 After this he lyued fyue hudreth and fyue & nyentie yeare, and begat sonnes
and doughters.
31 And his whole age was seuen hundreth seuen and seuentie yeares, and so he
dyed.
32 Noe was fyue hundreth yeare olde, and begat Sem, Ham and Iaphet.

Chapter 6

1 So whan men beganne to multiplie vpon the earth, and had begot them doughters,
2 the children of God sawe the doughters of men, that they were fayre, and toke
vnto the wyues soch as they liked.
3 Then sayde ye LORDE: My sprete shal not allwaye stryue with man, for he is but
flesh also. I wil yet geue him respyte an hundreth and twety yeares.
4 There were giauntes also in the worlde at that tyme. For whan the children of
God had lyen with the daughters of men, and begotten them children, ye same
(children) became mightie in the worlde, and men of renowne.
5 But whan the LORDE sawe yt the wickednes of man was increased vpon ye earth,
and that all ye thought and imaginacion of their hert was but onely euell
contynually,
6 it repented him, that he had made man vpon the earth, and he sorowed in his
hert,
7 and sayde: I wyll destroye man kynde which I haue made, from the earth: both
man, beest, worme, and foule vnder the heauen: for it repenteth me, that I haue
made them.
8 Neuertheles Noe founde grace in the sight of the LORDE.
9 This is ye generacion of Noe. Noe was a righteous and parfecte ma, and led a
godly life in his tyme,
10 and begat thre sonnes: Sem, Ham and Iaphet.
11 Notwithstondinge ye earth was corrupte in ye sight of God, and full of
myschefe.
12 Then God loked vpon ye earth: and lo, it was corrupte (for all flesh had
corrupte his waye vpon the earth.)
13 Then sayde God vnto Noe: The. ende of all flesh is come before me, for the
earth is full of myschefe before them. And lo, I wyll destroye them with the
earth.
14 Make the an Arcke of Pyne tre, and make chambers in it, and pitch it within
and without with pitch
15 and make it after this fashion: The length shal be thre hundreth cubites, the
bredth fiftie cubites, and the heyght thirtie cubites.
16 A wyndow shalt thou make aboue of a cubyte greate: but the dore shalt thou
set in the myddest in the syde of it: And the Arke shalt thou make with thre
loftes one aboue another.
17 For lo, I wyll bringe a floude of water vpon the earth, to destroye all flesh
(wherin the breth of life is) vnder the heaue: All that is vpon earth, shal
perishe.
18 But with the wyll I make a couenaunt, and thou shalt go in to the Arcke with
thy sonnes, with thy wyfe, and with thy sonnes wyues.
19 And of all creatures what so euer flesh it be, thou shalt bringe into the
Arcke, euen a payre: the male and the female, that they maye lyue wt the:
20 Of foules after their kynde, of beastes after their kynde, and of all maner
wormes of the earth after their kinde. Of euery one of these shal there a payre
go in vnto the, that they maye lyue.
21 And thou shalt take vnto the all maner of meate that maye be eaten, and shalt
laye it vp in stoare by the, that it maye be meate for the and them.
22 And Noe dyd acordinge to all that God commaunded him.

Chapter 7

1 And ye LORDE sayde vnto Noe: Go in to the Arcke thou & thy whole house: for
the haue I sene righteous before me at this tyme.
2 Of all cleane beastes take vnto the seuen and seuen, the male and his female.
And of vncleane beastes a payre, the male and his female.
3 Like wyse of the foules vnder the heauen, seuen and seuen, the male and his
female, that there maye be sede left a lyue vpon the whole earth.
4 For yet after seuen dayes, I wil sende raine vpon the earth fourtie dayes and
fourtie nightes, and wyll destroye all maner of thinges that I haue made, from
of the face of the earth.
5 And Noe dyd all that the LORDE commaunded him.
6 Sixe hudreth yeare olde was he, whan the water floude came vpon earth.
7 And he wente in to the Arcke, with his sonnes, his wyfe, and his sonnes wyues,
for the waters of the floude.
8 Of cleane beastes and of vncleane, of all fethered foules, & of all that
crepeth vpon earth,
9 wente in vnto him to the Arcke by pares, a male and a female, as ye LORDE
comaunded him.
10 And whan the seuen dayes were past, the water floude came vpon the earth.
11 In the sixe hundreth yeare of Noes age, vpon the seuentene daye of the
seconde moneth, that same daye were all ye fountaynes of the greate depe broken
vp, and the wyndowes of heauen were opened,
12 and there came a rayne vpon ye earth fourtie dayes and fourtie nightes.
13 Vpon the selfe same daye wete Noe into the Arcke, with Sem, Ham and Iaphet
his sonnes, and with his wyfe, and the thre wyues of his sonnes,
14 and all maner of beastes after their kynde, all maner of catell after their
kynde, all maner of crepynge thinges (that crepe vpo the earth) after their
kynde, and all maner of foules (what so euer coude flye & what so euer had
fethers) after their kynde:
15 These wente all vnto Noe in to the Arcke by cooples, of all flesh in whom was
the breth of life.
16 And these were the male & the female of all maner of flesh, and wente in,
acordinge as God commauded him. And the LORDE shut (the dore) vpon him.
17 Then came the water floude fourtie dayes vpon the earth, and the water
increased, and bare vp the Arcke, and lift it vp ouer ye earth.
18 Thus the water preuayled, and increased sore vpon the earth, so that the
Arcke wente vpon the waters.
19 Yee the waters preuayled and increased so sore vpon earth, that all the hye
mountaynes vnder the whole heauen were couered.
20 Fyftene cubytes hye preuayled ye waters ouer the mountaynes, which were
couered.
21 Then all flesh that crepte vpon earth, perished, both foules, catell,
beastes, and all yt moued vpon earth, and all men.
22 What so euer had the breth of life vpon the drye londe, dyed.
23 Thus was destroyed all that was vpon the earth, both man and beast, both
wormes and foules vnder ye heaue: all these were destroyed from the earth, Saue
Noe onely remayned, and they that were with him in the Arcke.
24 And the waters preuayled vpon the earth, an hundreth and fiftie dayes.

Chapter 8

1 Then God remembred Noe and all the beastes, and all the catell that were with
him in the Arcke, and caused a wynde to come vpon the earth: and ye waters
ceassed,
2 and the fountaynes of the depe and the wyndowes of heauen were stopte, and the
rayne of heaue was forbydden,
3 and the waters ranne styll awaye from ye earth, and decreased after an
hundreth and fiftye dayes.
4 Vpon the seuentene daye of the seuenth moneth rested the Arcke vpon the
mountaynes of Ararat.
5 And the waters wete awaye and decreased vntyll the tenth moneth: for the first
daye of the tenth moneth, the toppes of the mountaynes appeared.
6 After fourtie dayes Noe opened ye wyndow of the Arcke which he had made,
7 & sent forth a rauen, which flew out, and came agayne, vntyll the waters were
dryed vp vpo the earth.
8 Then sent he forth a doue from him, to wete, whether the waters were falle
vpon the earth.
9 But when ye doue coude fynde no restynge place for hir fete, she came agayne
vnto him in to the Arcke, for the waters were yet vpon the face of all the
earth. And he put out his hande, and toke her to him in to the Arke.
10 Then he abode yet seuen dayes mo, & sent out the doue agayne out of the Arke:
11 & she returned vnto him aboute the euen tyde: and beholde, she had broken of
a leaf of an olyue tre, & bare it in hir nebb. Then Noe perceaued, that the
waters were abated vpon the earth.
12 Neuertheles he taried yet seuen other dayes, and sent forth the doue, which
came nomore to him agayne.
13 In the sixte hundreth and one yeare of Noes age, vpon the first daye of ye
first moneth, the waters were dryed vp vpon the earth. Then Noe toke of the
hatches of the Arke, and sawe yt the face of the earth was drye.
14 So vpon the seuen and twentye daye of the seconde moneth the whole earth was
drye.
15 Then spake God vnto Noe, and sayde:
16 Go out of the Arke, thou and thy wyfe, and thy sonnes, and thy sonnes wyues
with the.
17 As for all the beastes that are with the, what so euer flesh it be (both
foule & catell and all maner of wormes that crepe vpon the earth) let them go
out with the, and be ye occupied vpon the earth, growe and multiplye vpon the
earth.
18 So Noe wente out, with his sonnes, and with his wife, and with his sonnes
wyues.
19 All the beastes also and all the wormes, and all the foules, and all that
crepte vpon the earth, wente out of the Arke, euery one vnto his like.
20 And Noe buylded an altare vnto ye LORDE, and toke of all maner of cleane
beastes & of all maner of cleane foules, and offred bret sacrifices vpon ye
altare.
21 And ye LORDE smelled the swete sauor, & sayde in his hert: I wyl hence forth
curse the earth nomore for mas sake, for the ymaginacion of mans hert is euell,
euen from the very youth of him. Therfore from hece forth I wil nomore smyte all
that lyueth, as I haue done.
22 Nether shall sowynge tyme and haruest, colde and heate Sommer and wynter,
daye and night ceasse so longe as the earth endureth.

Chapter 9

1 And God blessed Noe and his sonnes, and sayde vnto them: increace & multiplye,
and fyll the earth.
2 The feare also and drede of you be vpon all beastes of the earth, vpon all
foules vnder the heauen, and vpon all that crepeth on the earth, and all fyshes
of the see be geuen in to youre hades.
3 All that moueth and hath life, be youre meate. Euen as the grene herbe, so
haue I geue you all.
4 Onely eate not the flesh with the bloude, wherin the soule is:
5 For the bloude of you wherin youre soule is, wyll I requyre of the hande of
all beastes: and the soule of ma wyll I requyre of mans hande, yee euery mans
soule of anothers hande.
6 He that sheddeth mas bloude, his bloude shal be shed by man agayne, for God
made man after his owne licknesse.
7 As for you, be ye frutefull, and increase, and be occupied vpon the earth,
that ye maye multiplye therin.
8 Farthermore, God sayde vnto Noe and to his sonnes wt him:
9 Beholde, I make my couenaunt with you, and with youre sede after you,
10 and with euery lyuynge creature that is with you, both foule, catell, and all
beastes vpon the earth with you, of all that is gone out of the Arke, what so
euer beast of the earth it be:
11 And thus I make my couenaunt with you, that hence forth all flesh shal not be
destroyed with the waters of eny floude, and from hence forth there shall come
no floude to destroye the earth.
12 And God sayde: This is the token of my couenaunt which I haue made betwene me
and you, and all lyuynge creatures amonge you for euermore:
13 My bowe will I set in the cloudes, and it shal be the token of my couenaunt
betwene me and ye earth:
14 so that wha I brynge cloudes vpon the earth, the bowe shal appeare in the
cloudes.
15 And then wyll I thynke vpon my couenaunt betwixte me and you and all lyuynge
creatures in all maner of flesh: so that from hence forth there shall nomore
come eny floude of water to destroye all flesh.
16 Therfore shall my bowe be in the cloudes, that I maye loke vpon it, and
remembre the euerlastynge couenaunt, betwixte God and all liuynge creatures in
all flesh that is vpon earth.
17 God sayde also vnto Noe: This is the toke of the couenaunt, which I haue made
betwene me and all flesh vpon earth.
18 The sonnes of Noe which wente out of the Arke, are these: Sem, Ham and
Iaphet. As for Ham, he is the father of Canaa.
19 These are Noes thre sonnes, of whom all londes were ouerspred.
20 Noe beganne to take hede vnto ye tyllinge of the grounde, & planted a
vyniarde.
21 And dranke of the wyne, and was dronken, and laye vncouered in his tente.
22 Now when Ha the father of Canaan sawe his fathers preuities, he tolde his two
brethren without.
23 The toke Sem and Iaphet a mantell and put it vpo both their shulders, and
wente backwarde, and couered their fathers secretes: & their faces were turned
asyde, yt they shulde not se their fathers preuyties.
24 So whan Noe awaked from his wyne, and perceaued what his yonger sonne had
done vnto him,
25 he sayde: Cursed be Canaan, and a seruaunt of seruauntes be he vnto his
brethren.
26 He sayde morouer: Praysed be the LORDE God of Sem, and Canaan be his
seruaunt.
27 God increase Iaphet, and let him dwell in the tentes of Sem, and Canaan be
his seruaunt.
28 And Noe lyued after the floude thre hundreth & fiftie yeare,
29 so yt his whole age was ix. hudreth and fyftie yeare, and so he dyed.

Chapter 10

1 This is the generacion of the childre of Noe, Sem, Ham, and Iaphet, & they
begat children after the floude.
2 The children of Iaphet are these: Gomer, Magog, Madai, Iauan, Tubal, Mesech
and Thyras.
3 The childre of Gomer are these: Ascenas, Riphat and Togarma.
4 The children of Iauan are these: Elisa, Tharsis, Cithim and Dodanim:
5 Of these are deuided the Iles of ye Heithen in their countrees, euery one
after his speach, kynred and people.
6 The childre of Ham are these: Thus, Misraim, Phut and Canaan.
7 The children of Chus are these: Seba, Heuila Sabtha, Reyma and Sabthecha. The
children of Reyma are these: Sheba and Deda.
8 Thus also begat Nemrod, which beganne to be mightie in the earth,
9 and was a mightie hunter in the sight of the LORDE. Therof commeth the
prouerbe: This is a mightie hunter before the LORDE like as Nemrod.
10 And the origenall of his kyngdome was Babel, Erech, Acad & Chalne in ye londe
of Synear.
11 Out of that lode came Assur, and buylded Niniue, and ye stretes of ye cite,
and Calah,
12 and Ressen betwene Ninyne & Calah: This is a greate cite.
13 Mizraim begat Ludim, Enamim, Leabim, Naphtuhim,
14 Pathrusim & Casluhim, from whence came the Philistynes and Capthorims.
15 Canaa also begat Zidon his eldest sonne, & Heth,
16 Iebusi, Emori, Girgosi,
17 Hiui, Arki, Sini,
18 Aruadi, Zemari & Hamati: fro whence ye kynreds of ye Cananites are dispersed
abrode.
19 And ye Coastes of ye Cananites were fro Sido forth thorow Gerar vnto Gasa,
tyll thou comest vnto Sodoma, Gomorra, Adama, Zeboim, & vnto Lasa.
20 These are the children of Ham in their kynreds, tunges, londes & people.
21 And Sem which is ye father of all the children of Eber, & the elder brother
of Iaphet, begat childre also.
22 And these are his children: Ela, Assur, Arphachad, Lud & Aram.
23 The childre of Aram are these: Vz, Hul, Gether & Mas.
24 And Arphachsad begat Sala, and Sala begat Eber.
25 Eber begat two sonnes: the name of the one was Peleg, because that in his
tyme the worlde was deuyded, and his brothers name was Iaketan,
26 And Iaketan begat Almodad, Saleph, Hazarmaphet, Iarah,
27 Hadoram, Usal, Dikela,
28 Obal, Abimael, Seba,
29 Ophir, Heuila & Iobab: All these are ye childre of Iaketan.
30 And their dwellynge was from Mesa, tyll thou come vnto Sephar a mountayne of
ye east.
31 These are ye children of Sem in their generacions, tunges, londes and people.
32 This is now ye generacion of ye children of Noe in their kynredes & people.
Of these were ye people vpon earth spred a brode after ye floude.

Chapter 11

1 Morouer all the worlde had one tonge & language.
2 Now as they wente towarde the East, they founde a playne in ye londe of
Synear, & there they dwelt,
3 & saide one to another: Come on, let vs make bryck & burne it. And they toke
bryck for stone, & slyme for morter,
4 And sayde: Come, let vs buylde a cite & a tower, whose toppe maye reach vnto
heaue, yt we maye make vs a name, afore we be scatred abrode in all londes.
5 Then came ye LORDE downe, to se ye cite & tower, yt ye childre of me had
buylded.
6 And ye LORDE saide: Beholde, the people is one, & haue one maner of language
amoge the all, & this haue they begonne to do, & wil not leaue of from all yt
they haue purposed to do.
7 Come on, let vs go downe, & cofounde their tonge eue there, yt one vnderstonde
not what another saieth.
8 Thus ye LORDE scatred the fro thece in all lodes, so yt they left of to buylde
the cite.
9 Therfore is it called Babell, because the LORDE cofounded there the language
of all the worlde, and from thece scatred them abrode in to all londes.
10 These are ye generacions of Sem. Sem was an hundreth yeare olde, and begat
Arphachsad two yeare after the floude,
11 and lyued therafter fyue hudreth yeare, and begat sonnes and doughters.
12 Arphachsad was fiue & thirtie yeare olde, and begat Salah,
13 and lyued therafter foure hundreth and thre yeare, and begat sonnes &
doughters.
14 Salah was thirtie yeare olde, and begat Eber,
15 & lyued therafter foure hudreth & thre yeare, & begat sonnes and doughters.
16 Eber was foure and thirtie yeare olde, & begat Peleg,
17 and lyued therafter foure hundreth and thirtie yeare, and begat sonnes &
doughters.
18 Peleg was thirtie yeare olde, and begat Regu,
19 and lyued therafter two hudreth and nyene yeare, and begat sonnes &
doughters.
20 Regu was two and thirtie yeare olde, and begat Serug,
21 and lyued therafter two hundreth and seuen yeare, and begat sonnes and
doughters.
22 Serug was thirtie yeare olde, and begat Nahor,
23 and lyued therafter two hundreth yeare, and begat sonnes & doughters.
24 Nahor was nyene and twentye yeare olde, and begat Terah,
25 and lyued herafter an hundreth and nyentene yeare, and begat sonnes and
doughters.
26 Terah was seuentie yeare olde, and begat Abram, Nahor and Haran.
27 These are the generations of Terah: Terah begat Abram, Nahor and Haran. And
Haran begat Lot,
28 but Hara dyed before Terah his father in ye londe where he was borne, at Vr
in Chaldea.
29 Then Abram and Nahor toke them wyues. Abrams wife was called Sarai, & Nahors
wyfe Milca the doughter of Haran, which was father of Milca and Iisca.
30 But Sarai was baren, and had no childe.
31 Then toke Terah Abra his sonne, & Lot his sonne Harans sonne, & Sarai his
doughter in lawe, his sonne Abrams wife, & caried them wt him from Vr in
Chaldea, to go in to the lande of Canaan. And they came to Haran, & dwelt there.
32 And Terah was two hundreth & fyue yeare olde, and dyed in Haran.

Chapter 12

1 And ye LORDE sayde vnto Abram: Get the out of thy countre, and from thy
kynred, and out of thy fathers house, in to a londe which I wil shew the.
2 And I wil make of the a mightie people, and wyll blesse the, and make the a
greate name, yee thou shalt be a very blessynge.
3 I wil blesse them that blesse the, and curse them that curse the: and in the
shal all the generacions of the earth be blessed.
4 Then wente Abram out, as the LORDE commaunded him, and Lot wente with him.
Fyue & seuentie yeare olde was Abra, whan he wente out of Haran.
5 So Abram toke Sarai his wife, and Lot his brothers sonne, wt all their goodes
which they had gotten, and soules which they begat in Hara, and departed to go
in to ye londe of Canaan.
6 And whe they were come in to the same londe, he wente thorow, tyll he came
vnto the place of Sichem, and vnto the Okegroue of More: for ye Cananites dwelt
in ye lode at ye same time.
7 Then the LORDE appeared vnto Abra, & sayde: This londe wil I geue vnto yi
sede. And there he buylded an aulter vnto ye LORDE, which appeared vnto him.
8 The brake he vp fro thece, vnto a mountayne yt laye on ye east syde of the
cite of Bethel, & pitched his tent: so yt he had Bethel on the west side, and Ay
on ye east syde: & there buylded he an altare also vnto the LORDE, & called vpon
the name of the LORDE.
9 Afterwarde departed Abram farther, & toke his iourneye southwarde.
10 But there came a derth in the londe. Then wente Abram downe in to Egipte to
kepe himself there as a straunger, for the derth was sore in the londe.
11 And whan he was come nye for to entre in to Egipte, he sayde vnto Sarai his
wife: Beholde, I knowe yt thou art a fayre woman to loke vpon.
12 Now whan the Egipcians se the, they wil saye: She is his wife, and so shal
they slaye me, and saue the alyue.
13 Therfore (I pray ye) saye thou art my sister, that I maye fare the better by
reason of the, and that my soule maye lyue for thy sake.
14 Now whan he came in to Egipte, ye Egipcians sawe ye woman, yt she was very
faire:
15 & Pharaos prynces sawe her also, & praysed her before him. Then was she
brought in to Pharaos house,
16 and Abram was well intreated for hir sake: and he had shepe, oxe, and he
Asses, seruauntes, maydes, she Asses and Camels.
17 But ye LORDE plaged Pharao & his house wt greate plages, because of Sarai
Abras wife.
18 Then Pharao called Abra vnto him, and sayde: Why hast thou dealt thus wt me?
Wherfore toldest thou not me at the first, yt she was thy wife?
19 Why saydest thou then, that she was yi sister? Wherfore I toke her to my
wife. And now lo, there is yi wife, take her, and go thy waye.
20 He gaue his officers also a charge ouer him, to conveye him out, and his
wife, and all that he had.

Chapter 13

1 So Abra departed out of Egipte, wt his wife, & with all yt he had, & Lot wt
him also, towarde ye south.
2 Abram was very rich in catell, siluer & golde.
3 And he wente on forth from the south vnto Bethel, vnto the place where his
tent was at ye first, betwene Bethel and Ay:
4 euen vnto ye place where he had made the altare before, & where he called vpon
the name of the LORDE
5 Lot also which wente with him, had shepe, greate catell & tentes:
6 so yt the londe was not able to receaue them, that they might dwell together:
for the substaunce of their riches was so greate, that they coude not dwell
together.
7 And there fell a strife betwene the hirdmen of Abrams catell, and the hirdmen
of Lots catell. The Cananites also and the Pheresites dwelt at that tyme in the
londe.
8 Then sayde Abram vnto Lot: O let there be no strife betwene me and the, and
betwene my hyrdmen and thine, for we are brethre.
9 Is not all the whole londe open before the? Departe fro me, I praye the. Yf
thou wilt go to the left hande, I wil take the right: Or yf thou wilt go to the
right hande, I wil take the left.
10 Then Lot lift vp his eyes, and behelde all the countre rounde aboute Iorda,
that it was a plenteous countre of water. For before the LORDE destroyed Sodoma
and Gomorra, it was rounde aboute Zoar, euen as the pleasaunt garden of the
LORDE, and as the londe of Egipte.
11 Then Lot chose all the coastes of Iorda, and toke his iourney towarde ye
East. And so the one brother departed from the other.
12 Abram dwelt in the lande of Canaan, and Lot in the cities of the same
coastes, and pitched his tent towarde Sodome.
13 But ye men of Sodome were wicked, and synned exceadingly agaynst the LORDE.
14 Now whan Lot was departed from Abram, the LORDE saide vnto Abram: Lift vp
thine eyes, and loke from the place where thou dwellest, northwarde, southwarde,
eastwarde, and westwarde:
15 for all the londe that thou seist, wyll I geue vnto the and to thy sede for
euer,
16 and wyll make thy sede as the dust of the earth: so that yf a man can nombre
the dust of the earth, he shall nombre thy sede also.
17 Arise, and go thorow the londe, in the length and bredth, for I wyl geue it
vnto the.
18 So Abram remoued his tent, and wente and dwelt in ye Okegroue of Mamre, which
is in Ebron, and buylded there an altare vnto the LORDE.

Chapter 14

1 And it chaunsed in the tyme of Amraphel the kynge of Synear, Arioch the kynge
of Ellasar, Kedorlaomer the kinge of Elam, & Thy deal the kynge of ye Heithen,
2 That they made warre wt Bera ye kynge of Sodome, and wt Birsa the kynge of
Gomorra, & with Sineab the kynge of Adama, & with Semeaber the kynge of Zeboim,
and with the kynge of Bela, which is called Zoar.
3 These came all together in to the brode valley, where now the salt see is:
4 for twolue yeares were they subiectes vnto kinge Kedorlaomer, & in the
thirtenth yeare they fell from him.
5 Therfore in the fourtenth yeare came Kedorlaomer, and the kynges yt were with
him, & smote the Giauntes in Astaroth Karnaim, & Susim at Ham, & Emim in the
felde of Kiriathaim,
6 and ye Horites in their owne mount Seir vnto the playne of Pharan, which
bordreth vpo the wildernes.
7 And then they turned, & came to the well of iudgment (which is Cades) & smote
all the countre of the Amalechites, and also the Amorites, that dwelt in Hazezon
Thamar.
8 Then wente out the kynge of Sodome, & the kynge of Gomorra, & the kynge of
Adama, and the kynge of Zeboim, and the kynge of Bela (called Zoar) & prepared
them selues to fight in the brode valley
9 wt Kedorlaomer the kynge of Elam, & with Thideal ye kynge of the Heithen, &
with Amraphel ye kynge of Synear, & with Arioch the kynge of Ellasar: foure
kynges wt fyue.
10 And yt brode valley had many slyme pyttes. But the kynge of Sodoma and
Gomorra were put to flight, & fell there, & the residue fled vnto ye mountaynes.
11 Then toke they all the goodes at Sodoma and Gomorra, & all their vytales, &
wente their waye.
12 They toke Lot also Abrams brothers sonne, & his good (for he dwelt at Sodome)
and departed.
13 Then came one that had escaped, and tolde Abram the Aleaunt, which dwelt in
the Okegroue of Mamre the Amoryte, which was the brother of Escol & Aner: for
these were confederate with Abram.
14 Now whan Abram herde yt his brother was taken, he harnessed his bonde
seruauntes borne in his owne house, thre hundreth & eightene, & folowed after
them vntill Dan,
15 & deuyded the, & fell vpo them by night wt his seruauntes, and smote the, and
chased them awaye vnto Hoba, which lieth on ye left hande of the cite of
Damascos,
16 and brought agayne all the goodes, and also his brother Lot, and his goodes,
ye wemen also and the people.
17 And as he came agayne from the slaughter of Kedorlaomer & of the kinges that
were with him, the kynge of Sodome wente to mete him in to the playne felde,
which is called kynges dale.
18 But Melchisedech the kynge of Salem brought forth bred and wyne. And he
beynge the prest of the most hye God,
19 blessed him and sayde: Blessed be thou Abram vnto the most hye God possessor
of heauen and earth.
20 And praysed be God the Hyest, which hath delyuered thine enemies in to thy
handes. And Abram gaue him tythes of all.
21 Then sayde the kynge of Sodome vnto Abram: Geue me the soules, and take ye
goodes vnto thy self.
22 But Abram sayde vnto the kinge of Sodome: I lift vp my honde vnto the LORDE
the most hye God, possessor of heauen and earth,
23 that I wyll not take of all that is thyne, so moch as a threde or a shue
lachet, lest thou shuldest saye: I haue made Abram ryche:
24 Saue onely that which the yonge men haue spent, and the men Aner Escol and
Mamre, that wente with me, let them take their parte.

Chapter 15

1 It happened after these actes, yt the worde of ye LORDE came vnto Abra in a
vysion, and sayde: Feare not Abram, I am thy shylde and thy exceadinge greate
rewarde.
2 But Abram sayde: LORDE LORDE, what wilt thou geue me? I go childles, and the
seruaunt of my house (this Eleasar of Damascos) hath a sonne.
3 And Abram sayde morouer: Beholde, vnto me hast thou geuen no sede: and lo, the
sonne of my housholde shal be myne heyre.
4 And beholde, the worde of the LORDE spake vnto him, and saide: He shal not be
thine heyre, but one that shal come out of thine owne body, he shal be thine
heyre.
5 And he bad him go forth, and sayde: Loke vp vnto heauen, and tell ye starres:
Canst thou nombre them? And he sayde vnto him: Euen so shal thy sede be.
6 Abram beleued the LORDE, and yt was counted vnto him for righteousnes.
7 And he sayde vnto him: I am ye LORDE, yt brought the from Vr out of Chaldea,
to geue ye this londe to possesse it.
8 But Abram sayde: LORDE LORDE, Wherby shall I knowe, that I shall possesse it?
9 And he sayde vnto him: Take a cow of thre yeare olde, and a she goate of thre
yeare olde, and a ramme of thre yeare olde, and a turtyll doue, and a yonge
pigeon.
10 And he toke all these, and deuyded them in the myddes, and layde the one
parte ouer agaynst the other, but the foules deuyded he not.
11 And the foules fell vpo the flesh, but Abram droue them awaye.
12 Now whan the Sonne beganne to go downe, there fell an heuy slepe vpo Abram.
And lo, feare and greate darcknes fell vpon him.
13 And he sayde vnto Abram: knowe this of a suertye, that thy sede shalbe a
strauger, in a londe that is not theirs. And they shall make bonde men of them,
and intreate them euell foure hundreth yeares.
14 But the people who they shal serue, wyl I iudge. Afterwarde shall they go
forth with greate substaunce:
15 and thou shalt departe vnto thy fathers in peace, and shalt be buried in a
good age.
16 And after the fourth generacion they shall come hither agayne, for the
wickednes of ye Amorites is not yet full.
17 So whan the Sonne was downe, and it was waxed darcke: Beholde, there smoked a
fornace, and a fyre brande wente betwene ye partes.
18 The same daye made the LORDE a couenaut with Abram, and sayde: Vnto thy sede
wil I geue this lode, from the water of Egipte, vnto the greate water Euphrates:
19 the Kenytes, the Kenizites, the Kydmonites,
20 the Hethites, the Pherezites, the Giauntes,
21 the Amorites, the Cananites, the Gergesites, and the Iebusites.

Chapter 16

1 Sarai Abrams wife bare him no children: but she had an handmayde an Egipcian,
whose name was Agar,
2 and sayde vnto Abram: Beholde, the LORDE hath closed me, that I can not beare.
Go in (I praye the) vnto my mayde: peraduenture I shalbe multiplied by her, more
then by myself. And Abram herkened vnto the voyce of Sarai. Than Sarai
3 Abrams wife toke Agar hir mayde ye Egipcian (after they had dwelt ten yeare in
the londe of Canaan) and gaue her vnto hir husbande Abra, to be his wife.
4 And he wente in vnto Agar, and she conceaued. Now whan she sawe yt she had
conceyued, she despysed hir mastresse.
5 Then sayde Sarai vnto Abram: I must suffre wronge for thy sake. I layde my
mayde by the: but now because she seyth, that she hath conceaued, I must be
despysed in hir sight: the LORDE be iudge betwene me and the.
6 And Abram sayde vnto Sarai: Beholde, thy mayde is vnder thine auctorite, do
with her, as it pleaseth the.Now whan Sarai dealt hardly wt her, she fled from
her.
7 But the angell of the LORDE founde her besyde a well of water in the
wildernesse (euen by the well in the waye to Sur)
8 and sayde vnto her: Agar Sarais maide, whence commest thou? & whyther wylt
thou go? She sayde: I fle fro my mastresse Sarai.
9 And the angel of the LORDE sayde vnto her: Returne to thy mastresse agayne,
and submitte thyself vnder hir hande.
10 And the angel of the LORDE sayde vnto her: Beholde, I wil so encreace yi
sede, that it shall not be nombred for multitude.
11 And the angel of the LORDE sayde further vnto her: Beholde, thou art with
childe, & shalt bringe forth a sonne, and shalt call his name Ismael, because
the LORDE hath herde yi trouble.
12 He shal be a wylde man. His hande agaynst euery man, and euery mans hande
agaynst him: and he shal dwel ouer agaynst all his brethren.
13 And she called the name of the LORDE yt spake vnto her: Thou art the God that
seist me. For she sayde: Of a suertye I haue sene the back partes of him that
sawe me.
14 Therfore called she the well: The well of the liuinge that sawe me. Which
(well) is betwene Cades and Bared.
15 And Agar bare Abram a sonne, and Abram called his sonnes name which Agar bare
him, Ismael.
16 And Abram was foure score yeare olde and sixe, whan Agar bare him Ismael.

Chapter 17

1 Now whan Abram was nyentye yeare olde and nyene, the LORDE appeared vnto him,
& sayde vnto him: I am the allmightie God, walke before me, & be vncorrupte.
2 And I wyll make my couenaunt betwene me & the, and wyl multiplye the
exceadyngly.
3 Then fell Abram vpon his face.And God talked furthur, with him, and sayde:
4 Beholde, It is I, and haue my couenaut with the, and thou shalt be a father of
many people.
5 Therfore shalt thou nomore be called Abram, but thy name shal be Abraham: For
I haue made the a father of many nacions,
6 & I wil multiplye the exceadingly, and wil make people of ye, yee and kynges
also shal come out of the.
7 Morouer I wil make my couenaut betwene me and the, and thy sede after the
thorow out their posterities, that it maye be an euerlastinge couenaunt, so that
I wyll be the God of the, and of thy sede after the.
8 And vnto the and to thy sede after the, will I geue the lande, wherin thou art
a straunger: euen all the lande of Canaan for an euerlastinge possession, and
will be their God.
9 And God sayde morouer vnto Abraham: Kepe my couenaunt then, thou and they sede
after the.
10 This is my couenaunt which ye shal kepe betwene me and you, and thy sede
after ye thorow out their posterites. Euery manchilde that is amonge you, shalbe
circumcyded:
11 and ye shall circumcyde the foreskynne of yor flesh. This same shalbe a token
of the couenaunt betwene me and you.
12 Euery manchilde whan it is eight dayes olde, shalbe circucyded thorow out
youre posterities: In like maner all housholde folkes borne at home, or bought,
or eny other also that is a strauger and not of thy sede.
13 Thus shall my couenaunt be in youre flesh for an euerlastinge couenaunt.
14 And yf there shalbe any manchilde vncircumcided in the foreskinne of his
flesh, his soule shalbe roted out from his people, because he hath broken my
couenaunt.
15 And God sayde vnto Abraham: Sarai thy wyfe shall nomore be called Sarai, but
Sara shal be hir name:
16 for I will blesse her, and geue the a sonne of her. I wil blesse her, and
people shall come of her, yee and kynges of many people.
17 Then fell Abraha vpo his face, and laughed, and sayde in his hert: Shal a
childe be borne vnto me that am an hundreth yeare olde? And shall Sara yt is
nyentie yeare olde, beare?
18 And Abraha sayde vnto God: O that Israel might lyue in thy sight.
19 Then sayde God: Yee euen Sara thy wyfe shall beare the a sonne, and thou
shalt call his name Isaac: for with him wil I make my euerlastinge couenaunt,
and with his sede after him.
20 And as concernynge Ismael also, I haue herde thy request: Beholde, I haue
blessed him, and will increase him, and multiplye him exceadingly. Twolue
prynces shal he beget, and I wyll make a greate nacion of him.
21 But my couenaunt wyll I make wt Isaac, whom Sara shal beare vnto the, eue
this tyme twolue moneth.
22 And he left of talkynge with him, and God wente vp from Abraham.
23 Than toke Abraham his sonne Ismael, and all the seruauntes borne in his
house, and all that were bought, (as many as were men children in his house,)
and circumcyded the foreskynne of their flesh, euen the same daye, as God had
sayde vnto him.
24 And Abraham was nyentie yeare olde and nyne, whan he cut of the foreskynne of
his flesh.
25 As for Ismael, he was thirtene yeare olde, whan the foreskynne of his flesh
was circumcyded.
26 Euen vpon one daye were they all circumcyded: Abraham, and Ismael his sonne,
27 and all the men in his house, (whether they were borne at home, bought, or
eny other straunger:) they were all circumcyded with him.

Chapter 18

1 Annd the LORDE apeared vnto him in the Okegroue of Mamre, as he sat in his
tent dore in the heate of ye daie.
2 And as he lift vp his eyes, and loked, beholde, there stode thre men ouer
agaynst him. And whan he sawe them, he ranne to mete them from his tent dore,
and bowed him self downe vpon the grounde,
3 and sayde: LORDE, yf I haue founde fauoure in thy sight, go not by yi seruaut.
4 There shalbe brought you a litle water, & ye shall wash yor fete, & rest youre
selues vnder the tre.
5 And I wyll fet you a morsell of bred, to comforte youre hertes withall, and
then shall ye go youre wayes, for therfore are ye come to youre seruaunt. They
sayde: do euen so as thou hast spoken:
6 Abraham wente a pace in to the tent to Sara, and sayde: Make haist, & mengle
thre peckes of fyne meele, knede it, and bake cakes.
7 And he ranne to the beastes, & fet a calf that was tender and good, and gaue
it vnto a yonge man, which made it ready at once.
8 And he toke butter and mylke and of the calfe that he had prepared, and set it
before the, stode him self by them vnder the tre, & they ate.
9 Then saide they vnto him: where is Sara thy wyfe? He answered: within in ye
tent.
10 Then sayde he: aboute this tyme twolue moneth, (yf I lyue) I will come to the
agayne, and Sara thy wyfe shal haue a sonne. And Sara herde that out of the tent
dore, which was behynde his backe.
11 And Abraham and Sara were both olde, & well stryken in age: so that it wente
nomore with Sara after ye maner of wemen:
12 therfore laughed she within hir self, and sayde: Now that I am olde & my
lorde olde also, shal I yet geue my self to lust?
13 Then sayde ye LORDE vnto Abraham: Wherfore doth Sara laugh, and saye: Is this
true in dede, that I shal beare, and yet am olde?
14 Shulde eny soch thinge be to harde for the LORDE? Aboute this tyme (yf I
lyue) I wil come to the agayne, & Sara shal haue a sonne.
15 Then Sara denyed it, and sayde: I laughed not, for she was afrayed. But he
sayde: It is not so, thou dyddest laughe.
16 Then the men stode vp from thence, and turned them towarde Sodome: and
Abraham wente with them, to brynge them on their waye.
17 Then sayde the LORDE: How can I hyde from Abraham, ye thinge that I wil do?
18 seynge he shal be a greate and mightie people, and all ye people vpo earth
shalbe blessed in him?
19 For I knewe him that he wil comaunde his children and his housholde after
him, to kepe the waye of ye LORDE, and to do after right and conscience, that
the LORDE maye bringe vpo Abraham what he hath promised him.
20 And the LORDE sayde: There is a crie at Sodome and Gomorra, which is greate,
& their synnes are exceadinge greuous:
21 therfore will I go downe & se, whether they haue done all together, acordinge
to that crye, which is come before me, or not, that I maye knowe.
22 And the men turned their face, and wete towarde Sodome. But Abraham stode
still before ye LORDE,
23 and stepte vnto him, and sayde:Wilt thou then destroye the righteous with the
vngodly?
24 Peradueture there maye be fiftie righteous within ye cite: wilt thou destroye
those, and not spare the place, for fiftie righteous sake that are therin?
25 That be farre fro the, yt thou shuldest do this, and to slaye the righteous
with the vngodly, and that the righteous shulde be as the vngodly. That be farre
from the. Shulde not the iudge of all the worlde do acordinge to right?
26 And the LORDE sayde: Yf I fynde fiftie righteous at Sodome in the cite, I wil
spare all the place for their sakes.
27 Abraham answered, and sayde: O se, I haue taken vpon me to speake vnto the
LORDE, howbeit I am but dust and asshes.
28 Peraduenture there maye be fyue lesse then fiftie righteous therin: Wilt thou
then destroye the whole cite because of those fyue? He sayde: yf I fynde fyue
and fourtie therin, I will not destroye them?
29 And he proceded further to speake vnto him, and sayde: Peraduenture there
might be fourtie founde therin. And he sayde: I wil do nothinge vnto them for
those fourtyes sake.
30 Abraham sayde: Oh let not my LORDE be angrie, that I speake yet more.
Peradueture there might be thirtie founde therin. And he sayde: Yf I fynde
thirtie therin, I will do nothinge vnto them.
31 And he sayde: O se, I haue taken vpon me to speake vnto my LORDE.Peradueture
there might be twetie founde therin. He answered: I wyll not destroye them for
those twentyes sake.
32 And sayde: O let not my LORDE be angrie, that I speake yet once more.
Peraduenture there might be ten founde therin. He saide: I wil not destroye them
for those ten sake.
33 And the LORDE wente his waye, whan he had left talkynge with Abraham. And
Abraham returned vnto his place.

Chapter 19

1 In the euenynge came the two angels vnto Sodome. And Lot sat vnder the gate of
the cite. And whe he sawe them, he rose vp for to mete them, and bowed him self
downe to the grounde vpon his face,
2 & sayde: Se lordes, turne in (I praye you) in to youre seruauntes house, and
tarye all night: let youre fete be wasshen, so maye ye ryse tomorow by tymes,
and go youre waye. Neuertheles they sayde: Nay, but we wyll byde in the stretes
all night.
3 Then compelled he them sore: and they turned in vnto him, and came in to his
house. And he made them a feast, and baked swete cakes, and they ate.
4 But before they wente to rest, the men of the cite of Sodome came and compased
the house rounde aboute, yonge and olde, all the people from all quarters,
5 and called Lot, and sayde vnto him: Where are the me that came vnto the to
night? Bringe them out here vnto vs, that we maye knowe them.
6 And Lot wente out at the dore vnto the, and shut the dore after him,
7 and sayde: O brethren, do not so wickedly.
8 Beholde, I haue two doughters, which yet haue knowne no man: them will I
brynge out vnto you, do with them as it liketh you. Onely do nothinge vnto these
men of God, for therfore are they come vnder the shadowe of my rofe.
9 But they sayde: Come thou hither. Then sayde they: Camest not thou onely herin
as a straunger, and wilt thou now be a iudge? Wel, we will deale worse with the
the with them.And they pressed sore vpon ye man Lot. And whan they ranne to, and
wolde haue broken vp the dore,
10 the men put out their hondes, and pulled Lot vnto them in to the house, and
shut to the dore.
11 And the men at ye dore of the house were smytte with blyndnesse both small
and greate, so that they coude not fynde the dore.
12 And ye men saide vnto Lot: Hast thou yet here eny sonne in lawe, or sonnes or
doughters? Who so euer belongeth vnto the in the cite, brynge him out of this
place:
13 for we must destroye this place, because the crye of them is greate before
the LORDE, which hath sent vs to destroye them.
14 Then wente Lot forth, and spake to his sonnes in lawe, which shulde haue
maried his doughters, and sayde: O stonde vp, and get you out of this place, for
the LORDE wyll destroye this cite. Neuertheles they toke it but for a sporte.
15 Now whan the mornynge arose, the angels caused Lot to spede him, and sayde:
Stonde vp, take thy wife & thy two doughters which are at hande, that thou also
perishe not in the synne of this cite.
16 But whyle he prolonged the tyme, the men caught him and his wife, and his two
doughters by the hande (because the LORDE was mercifull vnto him,) and brought
him forth, & set him without the cite.
17 And whe they had brought him out, they sayde: Saue thy soule, and loke not
behynde the, nether stonde thou in all this countre: Saue thy self vpon the
mountayne, that thou perish not.
18 Then sayde Lot vnto the: Oh no my LORDE,
19 beholde, in as moch as thy seruaut hath founde grace in thy sight, now make
ye mercy greate, which thou hast shewed vnto me, in that thou sauest my soule
alyue. I can not saue my self vpon the mountayne. There might some mysfortune
fall vpon me, that I shulde dye.
20 Beholde, here is a cite by, that I maye flye vnto, and it is a litle one: let
me saue myself there in. Is it not a litle one, that my soule maye lyue?
21 Then sayde he vnto him: Beholde, I haue loked vpon the in this poynte also,
that I will not ouerthrowe the cite, wherof thou hast spoken.
22 Haist the, and saue thy self there: for I can do nothinge tyll thou be come
thither. Therfore is the cite called Zoar.
23 And the Sonne was vp vpon the earth, whan Lot came in to Zoar.
24 Then the LORDE caused brymstone and fyre to rayne downe from the LORDE out of
heauen vpon Sodoma and Gomorra,
25 and ouerthrew those cities, the whole region, and all that dwelt in the
cities, and that that grew vpon the earth.
26 And his wife loked behynde her, and was turned into a pillar of salt.
27 Abraham rose vp early in the mornynge, and gat him vnto the place, where he
had stonde before the LORDE,
28 and turned his face towarde Sodoma and Gomorra, and all ye londe of that
countre, and loked. And beholde, there rose vp a smoke from ye countre, as it
had bene ye smoke of a fornace.
29 For whan God destroyed ye cities of the region, he thought vpon Abraham, and
conueyed Lot out of the cities which he ouerthrew, wherin Lot dwelt.
30 And Lot departed out of Zoar, and dwelt in the mountaynes with both his
daughters (for he was afrayed to tary at Zoar) and so remayned he in a caue wt
both his daughters.
31 Then sayde ye elder vnto the yonger: Oure father is olde, and there is not a
man more vpon earth, that can come in vnto vs after the maner of all the worlde.
32 Come therfore, let vs geue oure father wyne to drynke, and lye with him, that
we maye saue sede of oure father.
33 So they gaue their father wyne to drynke that same night. And the elder
doughter wente in, and laye with hir father: and he perceaued it not, nether
when she laye downe, ner when she rose vp.
34 On the morow the elder sayde vnto the yonger: Beholde, yesternight laye I
with my father: let vs geue him wyne to drynke this night also: that thou mayest
go in and lye with him, that we maye saue sede of oure father.
35 So they gaue their father wyne to drynke that night also: And the yonger
arose like wyse, and laye with him: & he perceaued it not, nether when she laye
downe, ner when she rose vp.
36 Thus were both the doughters of Lot with childe by their father.
37 And the elder bare a sonne, and called him Moab, of whom come ye Moabytes
vnto this daye.
38 And ye yonger bare a sonne also, and called him the sonne Ammi, of whom come
the children of Ammon vnto this daye.

Chapter 20

1 As for Abraham, he departed thence, into the south countre, and dwelt betwixte
Cades and Sur, and was a straunger at Gerar,
2 and sayde of Sara his wife: She is my sister. Then Abimelech the kinge of
Gerar sent for her, and caused her be fett awaye.
3 But God came to Abimelech by night in a dreame, & sayde vnto him: Beholde,
thou art but a deed man, for the womans sake which thou hast taken, for she is a
mans wife.
4 Neuertheles Abimelech had not yet touched her, and sayde: LORDE, wilt thou
sley a righteous people?
5 Sayde not he vnto me: she is my sister? Yee and sayde not she her self also:
he is my brother? With a pure hert & with innocent handes haue I done this.
6 And God sayde vnto him in a dreame: I knowe that thou dyddest it wt a pure
hert, and therfore I kepte the, that thou shuldest not synne agaynst me, nether
haue I suffred the to touch her.
7 Now therfore delyuer the man his wife ageyne, for he is a prophet: and let him
pray for ye, and thou shalt lyue. But and yf thou delyuer her not ageyne, be
sure, that thou shalt dye the death, and all that is thine.
8 Then Abimelech rose vp by tymes in the mornynge, and called all his
seruauntes, and tolde all these thinges in their eares, and the men were sore
afrayed,
9 and Abimelech called Abraham, and sayde vnto him: Wherfore hast thou done this
vnto vs? And what haue I offended ye, that thou shuldest brynge on me and on my
kyngdome so greate a synne? Thou hast not dealt with vs, as a man shulde deale.
10 And Abimelech saide morouer vnto Abraham: What sawest thou, yt thou hast done
this thinge?
11 Abraham sayde: I thought: Peraduenture there is no feare of God in this
place, & they shall sleye me for my wifes sake,
12 And of a trueth she is my sister, for she is my fathers doughter, but not my
mothers doughter, and is become my wife.
13 So whan God charged me to wadre out of my fathers house, I sayde vnto her:
Shew this kyndnes vpon me, that, where so euer we come, thou saye of me, that I
am thy brother.
14 Then toke Abimelech shepe and oxen, seruauntes and maydens, and gaue them
vnto Abraham, and delyuered him Sara his wife agayne,
15 and sayde: Beholde, my londe stondeth open before the, dwell where it liketh
the.
16 And vnto Sara he sayde: Beholde, I haue geuen thy brother a thousande syluer
pens: lo, he shalbe vnto the a couerynge of the eyes, for all that are with the,
and euery where, and a sure excuse.
17 As for Abraham, he prayed vnto God: Then God healed Abimelech, and his wyfe,
and his maydens, so that they bare childre.
18 For a fore the LORDE had closed all the matrices of Abimelechs house, because
of Sara Abrahams wife.

Chapter 21

1 The LORDE also vysited Sara, acordinge as he had promysed: & dealt with her,
euen as he had sayde.
2 And Sara was with childe, and bare Abraham a sonne in his olde age, euen in
the tyme appoynted, like as God had spoken vnto him afore.
3 And Abraham called his sonne which was borne vnto him (who Sara bare him)
Isaac,
4 and circumcided him the eight daye, like as God commaunded him.
5 An hundreth yeare olde was Abraha, whan his sonne Isaac was borne vnto him.
6 And Sara sayde: God hath prepared a ioye for me, for who so euer heareth of
it, wyll reioyse with me.
7 She sayde morouer: Who wolde haue saide vnto Abraham, that Sara shulde geue
children sucke, and beare him a sonne in his olde age?
8 And the childe grew, and was weened. And Abraham made a greate feast, in ye
daye whan Isaac was weened.
9 And Sara sawe the sonne of Agar the Egipcian (whom she had borne vnto Abraham)
that he was a mocker,
10 and sayde vnto Abraham: Cast out this bonde mayden and hir sonne, for this
bonde maydes sonne shall not be heyre wt my sonne Isaac.
11 This worde displeased Abraham sore, because of his sonne.
12 Neuertheles God sayde vnto him: let it not displease the because of the
childe and the hand mayde: What so euer Sara hath sayde vnto the, folowe it, for
in Isaac shall the sede be called vnto the.
13 As for the honde maydens sonne, I wyll make a people of him also, because he
is of thy sede.
14 Then Abraham rose vp early in the mornynge, and toke bred and a botell with
water, and put it vpon Agars shulders, and gaue her the childe, and sent her
awaye. Then departed she, and wandred out of the waye in ye wyldernes beside
Berseba.
15 Now whan the water in the botell was out, she layed the childe vnder a bush,
16 and wente, and sat hir downe ouer on ye other syde, a bowe shote of. For she
sayde: I can not se the childe dye. And she sat hir downe ouer on ye other syde,
and lifte vp hir voyce, and wepte.
17 Then God herde the voyce of the childe, and the angell of God called vnto
Agar out of heauen, and sayde vnto her: What ayleth the, Agar? Feare not, for
God hath herde ye voyce of the childe, where he lyeth.
18 Aryse and take the childe, and holde him by the hande, for I wyll make a
greate people of him.
19 And God opened hir eyes, that she sawe a well of water.Then wente she and
fylled ye botell with water, and gaue ye childe drynke.
20 And God was with the childe, which grew vp, and dwelt in ye wildernes, and
became a connynge archer,
21 and dwelt in ye wildernes of Pharan, and his mother toke him a wyfe out of
the londe of Egipte.
22 At the same tyme talked Abimelech and Phicol his chefe captayne with Abraham,
and sayde: God is with the in all that thou doest.
23 Therfore sweare now vnto me by God, that thou wilt not hurt me, ner my
children, ner my childers children: but that thou shalt shewe vnto me (and to
the londe wherin thou art a straunger) the same kyndnesse that I haue done vnto
the.
24 Then sayde Abraham: I wyll sweare.
25 And Abraham rebuked Abimelech for the well of water, which Abimelechs
seruauntes had taken awaye by violence.
26 Then answered Abimelech: I knewe not who dyd it, nether dyddest thou tell me,
and I haue not herde of it but this daye.
27 The toke Abraham shepe and oxen, and gaue them vnto Abimelech, and they both
made a bonde together.
28 And Abraham set seuen lambes by them selues.
29 Then sayde Abimelech vnto Abraha: What meane those seuen lambes, which thou
hast set by them selues?
30 He answered: seue lambes shalt thou take of my hande, that they maye be
wytnes vnto me, that I haue dygged this well.
31 Therfore is the place called Berseba, because they sware there both together.
32 And so they made the bonde at Berseba.Then rose Abimelech and Phicol his
chefe captayne, and departed agayne in to the londe of ye Philistynes.
33 And Abraham planted trees at Berseba, and called vpon the name of the LORDE
ye euerlastinge God,
34 and was a straunger in ye londe of the Philistynes a longe season.

Chapter 22

1 After these actes God tempted Abraham, and sayde vnto him: Abraham. And he
answered: I am here.
2 And he sayde: Take ye sonne, this onely sonne of thine, eue Isaac whom thou
louest, and go thy waye in to the londe of Moria, & offre him there for a
burntofferynge, vpon a mountayne that I shal shew the.
3 Then Abraham stode vp by tymes in the mornynge, and sadled his Asse, and toke
with him two yonge men, and his sonne Isaac, and cloue wodd for the
brentofferynge, gat him vp, and wente on vnto the place, wherof the LORDE had
sayde vnto him.
4 Vpon the thirde daye Abraham lift vp his eyes, and sawe the place a farre of,
5 and sayde vnto his yonge me: Tary ye here with the Asse: as for me and the
childe, we wyl go yonder: and whan we haue worshipped, we wyll come to you
againe.
6 And Abraha toke the wodd to the brentofferynge, and layed it vpon Isaac his
sonne. As for him self, he toke the fyre and a knyfe in his hande, and wente on
both together.
7 Then sayde Isaac vnto his father Abraham: My father. Abraham answered: here I
am, my sonne. And he sayde: lo, here is fyre and wodd, but where is the shepe
for the brentofferynge?
8 Abraham answered: My sonne, God shall prouyde him a shepe for the
brentofferynge. And they wente both together.
9 And whan they came to the place which God shewed him, Abraham buylded there an
altare, and layed the wodd vpon it, and bande his sonne Isaac, layed him on the
altare, aboue vpo the wodd,
10 and stretched out his hande, and toke the knyfe, to haue slayne his sonne.
11 Then the angell of the LORDE called from heauen vnto him, and sayde: Abraham
Abraham. He answered: here am I.
12 He sayde: Laye not thy handes vpon the childe, & do nothinge vnto him: for
now I knowe that thou fearest God, and hast not spared thine onely sonne for my
sake.
13 Then Abraham lift vp his eyes, and sawe behynde him a ramme, holde fast by
the hornes in the breres, and wente, and toke the ramme, and offred him for a
brent sacrifice, in steade of his sonne.
14 And Abraham called the place. The LORDE shall prouyde. Therfore it is a comon
sayenge yet this daye: Vpon the mountayne shal the LORDE prouyde.
15 And the angell of the LORDE cryed vnto Abraham from heauen the seconde tymy,
16 and sayde: I haue sworen by myne owne self (sayeth the LORDE) that for so
moch as thou hast done this, and hast not spared thine onely sonne,
17 I wyll prospere and multiplye thy sede as the starres of heauen, and as the
sonde vpon the see shore. And thy sede shall possesse the gates of his enemies:
18 and in thy sede shal all the nacions of the earth be blessed, because thou
hast herkened vnto my voyce.
19 So Abraham turned ageyne to the yonge men, and they gat vp, and wente
together vnto Berseba, and dwelt there.
20 After these actes it fortuned, that it was tolde Abraham: Beholde, Milca hath
borne children also vnto thy brother Nahor:
21 namely, Hus ye eldest, and Bus his brother, and Kemnel, of whom came the
Syrians:
22 and Cesed, and Haso, and Pildas, and Iedlaph and Bethuel.
23 And Bethuel begat Rebecca. These eight dyd Milca beare vnto Nahor Abrahams
brother.
24 And his concubyne called Rehuma, bare also: namely, Theba, Sahan, Thahas, and
Maacha.

Chapter 23

1 Sara was an hundreth and seue and twentye yeare olde: so longe lyued she,
2 and dyed in the head cite which is called Hebron, in the lande of Canaan. Then
wente Abraham, to mourne and wepe for her.
3 Afterwarde he stode vp from his coarse, and talked with the Hethites, & sayde:
4 I am a strauger and an indweller amonge you, geue me a possession to bury in
with you, that I maye bury my coarse by me.
5 Then the Hethites answered Abraham, and sayde vnto him:
6 O heare lorde, thou art a prynce of God amonge vs: bury thy dead in the best
of oure sepulcres, there shall none of vs forbyd ye, that thou shuldest not bury
thy deed in his sepulcre.
7 Then Abraham stode vp, and thanked the people of ye londe: namely the
Hethites.
8 And he talked with them, and sayde: Yf it be youre wyll that I burye my coarse
by me, heare me the, & speake for me to Ephron the sonne of Zoar,
9 that he maye geue me the dubble caue, which he hath in ye ende of his felde.
For a reasonable money let him geue it me, for a possession to burye in amoge
you.
10 For Ephron dwelt amonge the Hethites.Then answered Ephron the Hethite vnto
Abraham, that the Hethites might heare, before all that wente out and in at the
gates of his cite, and sayde:
11 No my lorde, but heare me: As for the felde, and the caue also that is
therin, I geue it the: and in the sight of my people I geue it the, to burye thy
deed in.
12 Then Abraham thanked the people of the londe,
13 and talked with Ephron, that the people of the londe might heare, and sayde:
Heare me then, Receaue of me the money that I geue the for the felde, and so
wyll I burye my deed there.
14 Ephron answered Abraham, and sayde vnto him:
15 Heare me my lorde: The felde is worth foure hundreth Sycles of syluer: but
what is that betwixte me and the? Burye thy deed.
16 Abraham herkened vnto Ephron, and weyed him the money which he had sayde,
that the Hethites might heare: namely foure hundreth syluer sycles of currant
money amonge marchauntes.
17 Thus Ephrons felde (where in the dubble caue is) which lyeth ouer before
Mamre, euen the felde and the caue, was made sure
18 for Abrahams owne good, with all the trees of the felde also rounde aboute,
in the sight of the Hethites, and of all that go out and in at the gates of his
cite.
19 Then Abraham buried Sara his wife in the dubble caue of the felde, that lyeth
ouer before Mamre (that is, Hebron) in the londe of Canaan.
20 So the felde and the caue therin was made sure of the Hethites vnto Abraham,
for a possession to bury in.

Chapter 24

1 Abraham was olde and well stricken in age, and the LORDE had blessed him in
all thinges.
2 And he sayde vnto his eldest seruaunt of his house, which had the rule of all
his goodes: Laye thine hade vnder my thye, that
3 I maye make the sweare by ye LORDE the God of heauen and earth, that thou take
no wife vnto my sonne amonge ye doughters of ye Cananites, (amonge whom I dwell)
4 but that thou go in to my countre? and to myne owne kynred, and brynge my
sonne Isaac a wife.
5 The seruaunt sayde: What and the woman wyl not folowe me in to this countre?
shal I then cary thy sonne agayne in to yonder londe, where thou camest out of?
6 Abraham sayde vnto him: Beware of that, that thou brynge not my sonne thither
agayne.
7 The LORDE, the God of heauen, which toke me fro my fathers house and from the
londe of my kynred, and that talked with me, and sware also vnto me, and sayde:
Vnto yi sede wyll I geue this londe: Euen he shall sende his angell before the,
that thou maiest brynge my sonne a wife from thence.
8 But yf the woman wyll not folowe the, thou art discharged of this ooth: onely
brynge not my sonne thither agayne.
9 Then ye seruaunt layed his hade vnder his master Abrahams thye, and sware the
same vnto him.
10 So the seruaunt toke ten Camels of the Camels of his master and departed, and
had wt him of all maner of goodes of his master, and gat him vp, and departed
vnto Mesopotamia, to the cite of Nahor.
11 Then let he the Camels lye downe without before the cite besyde a well of
water in the euenynge, aboute the tyme that the wemen vsed to go forth, and to
drawe water.
12 And he sayde:O LORDE, thou God of my master Abraham, mete me to daye, and
shew mercy vnto my master Abraham.
13 Lo, I stonde here besyde the well of water, & the mens doughters of this cite
wyll come forth to drawe water:
14 Now yf there come a damsell, to whom I saye: bowe downe thy pytcher, & let me
drynke, and yf she saye: drynke, and I wyll geue ye Camels drynke also: That ye
same be she, whom thou hast prouyded for thy seruaunt Isaac: & that I maye knowe
by ye same that thou hast shewed mercy vpon my master.
15 And or euer he had left of speakynge, beholde, Rebecca the doughter of
Bethuel (which was the sonne of Milca, that was the wyfe of Nahor Abrahams
brother) came forth, and bare a pytcher vpon hir shulder,
16 and she was a very fayre damsell of face, and yet a virgin, and vnknowne of
eny man: She wente downe to the well, and fylled hir pitcher, and came vp
agayne.
17 Then ranne the seruaunt to mete her, and sayde: Let me drynke a litle water
out of yi pitcher.
18 And she sayde: drynke syr.And haistely let she downe the pitcher in hir
hande, and gaue him drynke.
19 And whan she had geuen him drynke, she sayde: I wyll drawe for thy Camels
also, tyll they haue dronke ynough.
20 And she made haist, and poured out hir pitcher in to the trough, and ranne
agayne to the well to drawe, and drew for all his Camels.
21 The ma marueyled at her, and helde his tonge, tyll he knewe whether the LORDE
had prospered his iourney or not.
22 Now whan the Camels had all dronken, he toke a golde earynge of half a Sycle
weight, and two bracelettes for hir handes, weynge ten Sycles of golde,
23 and sayde: Doughter, whose art thou? tell me. Is there rowme for vs in thy
fathers house to lodge in?
24 She sayde vnto him: I am the doughter of Bethuel, the sonne of Mylca, whom
she bare vnto Nahor.
25 And sayde morouer vnto him: We haue plentye of litter and prouender, and
rowme ynough to lodge in.
26 Then the man bowed himself, and thanked the LORDE,
27 and sayde: Praysed be the LORDE the God of my master Abraham, which hath not
withdrawen his mercy and his trueth fro my master, for the LORDE hath brought me
the waye to my masters brothers house.
28 And the damsell ranne and tolde all this in hir mothers house.
29 And Rebecca had a brother called Laban. And Laban ranne to the man without by
the well syde:
30 and that came by the reason that he sawe the earynges, and the bracelettes
vpon his sisters handes, and herde the wordes of Rebecca his syster, that she
sayde: thus spake the man vnto me.And whan he came to the man, beholde, he stode
by the Camels at the well syde.
31 And he sayde: Come in thou blessed of the LORDE, wherfore stondest thou
without? I haue dressed the house, and made rowme for ye Camels.
32 So he brought the man in to ye house, and vnbridled the Camels, and gaue them
litter and prouender, and water to wash his fete, and the mens that were with
him,
33 and set meate before him.Neuertheles he sayde: I wil not eate, tyll I haue
fyrst tolde myne earade. They answered: Tell on.
34 He sayde: I am Abrahams seruaunt,
35 and the LORDE hath prospered my master richely, so yt he is become greate:
and he hath geuen him shepe and oxe, syluer and golde, seruauntes and maidens,
Camels and Asses:
36 yee and Sara my masters wife hath borne my master a sonne in hir olde age:
vnto him hath he geuen all that he hath.
37 And my master hath taken an ooth of me and saide: Thou shalt not take a wife
for my sonne amonge the doughters of the Cananites, in whose lande I dwell,
38 but go yi waye to my fathers house and to myne owne kynred, and there take a
wyfe for my sonne.
39 But I sayde vnto my master: What and the woman wyl not folowe me?
40 Then sayde he vnto me: The LORDE (before whom I walke) shall sende his angell
with the, and prospere thy iourney, that thou mayest take a wife for my sonne of
myne owne kynred, and of my fathers house.
41 And so whan thou commest to my kynred, yf they geue her not vnto ye, thou
shalt be discharged of myne oothe.
42 So I came this daye vnto the well of water, and sayde: O LORDE thou God of my
master Abraham, Yf thou hast prospered my iourney that I go:
43 Beholde, I stonde here by the well of water: Now yf there come forth a virgin
to draw water, and I saye vnto her: geue me a litle water to drinke out of thy
pitcher,
44 and she saye vnto me: Drynke thou, and I wyll drawe water for thy Camels
also: that the same be the woma, which the LORDE hath prouyded for my masters
sonne.
45 Now or euer I had spoken out these wordes in my hert, beholde, Rebecca
commeth forth with a pitcher vpon hir shulder, and goeth downe to the well, and
draweth.Then sayde I: geue me a drynke.
46 And immediatly she toke downe the pitcher fro hir shulder, and sayde: drynke,
and I wyll geue thy Camels drynke also.
47 So I dranke, and she gaue the Camels also to drynke. And I axed her, and
sayde: Doughter, whose art thou? She answered: I am ye doughter of Bethuel the
sonne of Nahor, whom Milca bare vnto him. Then layed I the earinge vpon hir
face, and the bracelettes vpon hir handes,
48 and bowed myself, and thanked the LORDE, and praysed the God of my master
Abraham, which had brought me ye right waye, to take my masters brothers
doughters vnto his sonne.
49 Yf ye be they then that shew mercy and faithfulnes vnto my master, tell me:
Yf not, yet tell me, that I maye turne me to ye right hande or to the left.
50 Then answered Laban and Bethuel, and sayde: This is come of the LORDE,
therfore can we saye nothinge agaynst the, nether euell ner good.
51 There is Rebecca before the, take her, and go thy waye, that she maye be thy
masters sonnes wife, as the LORDE hath sayde.
52 When Abrahams seruaunt herde these wordes, he bowed him self vnto the LORDE
flat vpon the earth,
53 and toke forth Iewels of syluer and golde, and rayment, and gaue them vnto
Rebecca. But vnto hir brethren and the mother, he gaue spyces.
54 Then he ate and dronke, and the men also that were with him, and caried there
all night.But in the mornynge he arose, and sayde: Let me departe vnto my
master.
55 Neuerthelesse hir brother and hir mother sayde: Let the damsell tary with vs
at the leest ten dayes, and then shall she go.
56 Then sayde he vnto them: holde me not, for the LORDE hath prospered my
iourney: let me go, that I maye departe vnto my master.
57 Then sayde they: let vs call the damsell, and axe her, what she sayeth
therto.
58 And they called Rebecca, and sayde vnto her: Wilt thou go with this man?And
she answered: Yee I wyll go with him.
59 So they let Rebecca their syster go with hir norse and Abrahams seruaunt, and
his men.
60 And they blessed Rebecca, and sayde vnto her: Thou art oure syster, growe in
to many thousande tymes thousandes, and thy sede possesse the gates of his
enemies.
61 So Rebecca gat hir vp wt hir damsels, and satt them vpon the Camels, and
wente their waye after the man. And the seruaunt toke Rebecca, and departed.
62 As for Isaac, he was commynge from the well of ye liuynge & seynge, for he
dwelt in the south countre,
63 and was gone forth to his meditacions in the felde aboute the euen tyde. And
he lift vp his eyes, and sawe, that there were Camels commynge.
64 And Rebecca lift vp hir eyes, and sawe Isaac. Then lighted she of the Camell,
65 and sayde vnto ye seruaunt: What man is this, that commeth agaynst vs in the
felde? The seruaut sayde: The same is my master. Then toke she hir cloke, and
put it aboute her.
66 And the seruaunt tolde Isaac all the earande that he had done.
67 Then Isaac brought her in to his mother Saras tent, and toke Rebecca, and she
became his wife, and he loued her. So Isaac was comforted ouer his mother.

Chapter 25

1 Abraham toke another wife called Ketura,
2 which bare him Simram & Iaksan, Medan & Midian, Iesbak and Suah.
3 Iaksan begat Seba and Dedan. The children of Dedan were Assurim, Latusim, and
Leumim.
4 The children of Midian were Epha, Epher, Hanoch, Abida and Eldaa. All these
are the children of Ketura.
5 And Abraham gaue all his goodes vnto Isaac:
6 As for the children that he had of the concubynes, he gaue them giftes, and
(whyle he yet lyued) he sent the awaye from his sonne Isaac, eastwarde in to the
east countre.
7 This is the age of Abraham which he lyued: euen an hundreth and fyue and
seuentye yeare,
8 and fell sicke and dyed in a good age, whan he was olde, & had lyued ynough
and was gathered vnto his people.
9 And his sonnes Isaac and Ismael buried him in the dubble caue in the felde of
Ephron the sonne of Zoar the Hethite, which lyeth ouer before Mamre,
10 in the felde that Abraham bought of the Hethites. There was Abraham buried
with Sara his wife.
11 And after the death of Abraham God blessed his sonne Isaac. And he dwelt by
the well of the lyuynge and seynge.
12 This is the generacion of Ismael Abrahams sonne, whom Agar Saras mayde the
Egipcian bare vnto him.
13 And these are the names of Ismaels children, of whom their kynredes are
named. The eldest sonne of Ismael, Nebaioth, Cedar, Abdeel, Mibsan,
14 Misma, Duma, Masa,
15 Hadar, Thema, Iethur, Naphis and Kedma.
16 These are the childre of Ismael with their names in their courtes and cities
twolue londeprynces.
17 And this is the age of Ismael, euen an hundreth and seuen and thirtie yeare,
and he fell sicke and dyed, and was gathered vnto his people.
18 He dwelt from Heuila vnto Sur towarde Egipte, as men go to the Assirians And
he dyed in the presence of all his brethren.
19 This is the generacion of Isaac the sonne of Abraha. Abraham begat Isaac.
20 Isaac was fourtye yeare olde, whan he toke to wyfe Rebecca the doughter of
Bethuel ye Syrian of Mesopotamia, & Sister of Laban the Syrian.
21 Isaac besought the LORDE for his wyfe (because she was baren) and the LORDE
was intreated, and Rebecca his wyfe conceaued.
22 And the children stroue totogether in her wombe. Then sayde she: Yf it shulde
go so with me, why am I then wt childe? And she wente for to axe the LORDE.
23 And the LORDE sayde vnto her: Two maner of folke are in thy wombe, and two
maner of people shall be deuyded out of thy body, and the one nacion shall
ouercome the other, and the greater shall serue the lesse.
24 Now whan the tyme came that she shulde be delyuered, beholde, there were two
twyns in hir wombe.
25 The first that came forth, was reed, all rough as an hyde, and they called
him Esau.
26 Anone therafter came his brother forth, which helde the hele of Esau with his
hade, and they called him Iacob. Thre score yeare olde was Isaac, whan they were
borne.
27 And whan the boies were growne vp, Esau became an hunter, & an husbande man.
As for Iacob, he was a symple man, and dwelt in the tentes.
28 And Isaac loued Esau, because he ate of his venison. But Rebecca loued Iacob.
29 And Iacob dight a meace of meate. The came Esau from the felde, and was
weery,
30 and sayde vnto Iacob: Let me proue of yt reed meace of meate, for I am
fayntie (therfore is he called Edom.)
31 But Iacob sayde: Sell me this daye thy byrthright.
32 Esau answered: Lo, I must dye neuerthelesse, what good then shall my
byrthright do me?
33 Iacob sayde: Then sweare vnto me euen this same daye. And he sware vnto him,
and so he solde his byrthright vnto Iacob.
34 Then Iacob gaue him bred and that meace of ryse. And he ate and dronke, and
stode vp, and wente his waye. And so Esau regarded not his byrthright.

Chapter 26

1 There came a derth in the londe, passynge the other that was in Abrahams tyme.
And Isaac wente to Gerar, vnto Abimelech the kynge of ye Philistynes.
2 Then the LORDE appeared vnto him, and sayde: Go not downe in to Egipte, but
tary in the lande that I shall saye vnto the.
3 Be thou a strauger in this lande, and I wil be with the and blesse the. For
vnto the and thy sede wyll I geue all this londe, and wyll perfourme myne ooth
that I sware to thy father Abraham.
4 And I wyll multiplye thy sede as the starres of heauen, and vnto thy sede wyll
I geue all this londe, and thorow thy sede shall all nacions be blessed,
5 because Abraham was obedient vnto my voyce, and kepte myne ordinaunces, my
comaundementes, my statutes, and my lawes.
6 So Isaac dwelt at Gerar.
7 And whan the men of the same place axed him of his wife, he sayde: she is my
sister. For he was afrayed to saye: she is my wife, (thinkinge thus:) they might
slaye me for Rebeccas sake, for she was beutifull to loke vnto.
8 Now whan he had bene there a longe season, Abimelech the kynge of the
Phylistynes loked out at a wyndow, and sawe Isaac sportinge with Rebecca his
wife.
9 Then Abimelech called Isaac, and sayde: Beholde, she is thy wyfe, why saydest
thou then: She is my sister? Isaac answered him: I thought, I might peraduenture
hahe died because of her.
10 Abimelech saide: Why hast thou then done this vnto vs? It coude lightly haue
come to passe, that some of the people might haue lyen with thy wyfe, and so
haddest thou brought synne vpo vs.
11 The Abimelech commaunded all the people, and sayde: Who so toucheth this man
or his wyfe, shal dye the death.
12 And Isaac sowed in that londe, and foude the same yeare an hundreth busshels,
for the LORDE blessed him.
13 And he became a greate man, wente forth, and grew, tyll he was exceadinge
greate,
14 so that he had moch good in shepe and greate catell, and a greate housholde.
Therfore had the Philistynes envye at him,
15 and stopped all the welles, that his fathers seruauntes had dygged in the
tyme of Abraham his father, and fylled them with earth,
16 In so moch that Abimelech also himself sayde vnto him: Departe from vs, for
thou art farre mightier then we.
17 Then departed Isaac from thence, and pitched his tent in the valley of Gerar,
and dwelt there.
18 And whan he was satled, he caused to dygge vp the welles agayne, that they
had dygged vp in his father Abrahas tyme, which the Philistynes had stopte after
the death of Abraham, and he called the after ye same names that his father had
named them withall.
19 Isaacs seruauntes also dygged in the valley, and there they founde a well of
lyuinge water.
20 But the hyrdmen of Gerar stroue with Isaacs hyrdmen, and saide: The water is
oures. Then called he the well Eseck, because they had done him wronge.
21 Then dygged they another well, and stroue for that also: therfore called he
it Sytena.
22 So he gatt him from thence, and dygged another well, for the which they
stroue not: th rfore he called it Rehoboth, and sayde: Now hath the LORDE made
vs rowme, and letten vs growe in the londe.
23 Afterwarde he departed thence vnto Berseba.
24 And the LORDE appeared vnto him the same night, and sayde: I am the God of
thy father Abraham, feare thou not, for I am with the, and wyll blesse the, and
multiplye thy sede for my seruaunt Abrahams sake.
25 Then buylded he an altare there, and called vpon the name of the LORDE, and
pitched his tent there, and there his seruauntes dygged a well.
26 And Abimelech wente vnto him from Gerar, and Ahusath his frende, and
Phicolhis chefe captayne.
27 But Isaac sayde vnto them: Wherfore come ye to me? seynge ye hate me, and
haue put me awaye from you?
28 They sayde: We se with open eyes, that the LORDE is with the, therfore we
deuysed that there shulde be an ooth betwixte vs and the, and that we wolde make
a bonde with the,
29 that thou do vs no harme, like as we haue not hurte the, and as we haue done
nothinge vnto the, but all good, and let the departe in peace. As for the, thou
art ye blessed of the LORDE.
30 Then Isaac made them a feast, and they ate and dronke.
31 And on the morow they arose, and sware one to the other. And Isaac let them
go, and they departed from him in peace.
32 The same daye came Isaacs seruauntes, and tolde him of the well that they had
digged, and sayde vnto him: We haue founde water.
33 And he called it Saba. Therfore is ye cite called Bersaba vnto this daye.
34 Whan Esau was fourtye yeare olde, he toke wyues: Iudith the doughter of Beri
the Hethite, and Basmath the doughter of Elon the Hethite:
35 both these were dishobedient vnto the sprete of Isaac and Rebecca.

Chapter 27

1 And it came to passe when Isaac was olde, his eyes waxed dymme of sight, and
he called Esau his greater sonne, and sayde vnto him: My sonne. He answered him:
Here am I.
2 And he sayde: Beholde, I am olde, and knowe not whan I shal dye.
3 Now therfore take thy geer, thy quyuer and thy bowe, and get the forth to the
felde, and take me some venyson,
4 and make me meate (soch as I loue) and brynge it me herein, that I may eate,
yt my soule maye blesse the, before I dye.
5 But Rebecca herde these wordes, that Isaac sayde vnto his sonne. And Esau
wente his waye in to the felde, to hunte venyson, and to brynge it home.
6 Then sayde Rebecca vnto Iacob hir sonne: beholde, I haue herde thy father
talkinge with Esau thy brother, and sayenge:
7 Brynge me venyson, and make me meate, that I maye eate, and blesse the before
ye LORDE, yer I dye.
8 Now therfore my sonne, heare my voyce, what I commaunde the:
9 Go thy waye to the flocke, and fetch me two good kyddes, that I maye make
meate of them for thy father, soch as he loueth:
10 this shalt thou brynge in vnto thy father, that he maye eate, that he maye
blesse the before his death.
11 Neuertheles Iacob sayde vnto Rebecca his mother: Beholde, my brother Esau is
tough, and I am smooth:
12 then might my father peraduenture fele me, and I shulde seme vnto him as
though I begyled him, and so brynge a curse vpon me and not a blessynge.
13 Then sayde his mother vnto him: That curse be vpon me my sonne, folowe thou
my voyce: go thy waye and fetch it me.
14 So he wente his waye, and fetched it, and brought it vnto his mother. Then
his mother made meate, acordinge as his father loued,
15 and toke Esaus hir elder sonnes costly rayment (which she had with her in ye
house) and put them vpon Iacob hir yonger sonne.
16 But the kyddes skynnes put she aboute his handes, and where he was smooth
aboute the neck:
17 and so she put the meate with bred (as she had made it) in hir sonne Iacobs
hande.
18 And he brought it in vnto his father, and sayde: My father. He answered: here
am I, who art thou my sonne?
19 Iacob sayde: I am Esau thy firstborne sonne, I haue done as thou saydest vnto
me: aryse, syt vp, and eate of my venyson, that thy soule maye blesse me.
20 But Isaac sayde vnto his sonne? My sonne, how hast thou founde it so soone?
He answered: The LORDE yi God brought it to my hande.
21 The sayde Isaac vnto Iacob: Come neare my sonne, that I maye fele the,
whether thou be my sonne Esau or not.
22 So Iacob wete vnto Isaac his father. And whan he had felt him, he sayde: The
voyce is Iacobs voyce, but the handes are the handes of Esau.
23 And he knew him not, for his handes were rough like as ye handes of his
brother Esau. And he blessed him.
24 And he sayde vnto him: art thou my sonsonne Esau? He answered: Yee I am.
25 Then sayde he: Bringe me here then to eate of thy venyson my sonne, that my
soule maye blesse the. Then he brought it him, and he ate: and he brought him
wyne also, and he dranke.
26 And Isaac his father sayde vnto him: Come nye, and kysse me my sonne.
27 So he came nye, and he kyssed him. Then smelled he the sauoure of his
clothes, and blessed him, and sayde: Beholde, the smell of my sonne is as ye
smell of the felde, which ye LORDE hath blessed.
28 God geue the of the dew of heauen, and of the fatnesse of the earth, and
plenteousnes of corne and wyne.
29 Nacions be thy seruauntes, and people fall downe at yi fote. Be thou lorde
ouer thy brethren, and thy mothers children fall downe at thy fote. Cursed be
he, that curseth the: and blessed be he, that blesseth the.
30 Now whan Isaac had made an ende of blessynge, and Iacob was scace gone out
from his father Isaac, his brother Esau came from his huntinge,
31 and made meate also, and brought it vnto his father, and sayde vnto him:
Aryse my father, and eate of yi sonnes venyson, that thy soule maye blesse me.
32 Then answered him Isaac his father: Who art thou? He sayde: I am Esau thy
firstborne sonne.
33 Then was Isaac exceadingly amased aboue measure, and saide: Who? Where is
then the hunter that brought me, and I haue eaten of all afore thou camest, and
haue blessed him? And he shall be blessed still.
34 Whan Esau herde these wordes of his father, he cried loude, and was
exceadynge sory, and sayde vnto his father: O blesse me also my father.
35 But he sayde: Thy brother came with sotyltie, and hath taken thy blessinge
awaye.
36 Then sayde he: He maye well be called Iacob, for he hath vndermined me now
two tymes. My byrth right hath he awaye, and beholde, now taketh he awaye my
blessynge also. And he sayde: Hast thou not kepte one blessynge for me?
37 Isaac answered, and sayde vnto him: I haue made him lorde ouer ye, and all
his brethren haue I made his seruautes. With corne & wine haue I prouyded him.
What shal I do vnto the now my sonne?
38 Esau sayde vnto his father? Hast thou not one blessynge more my father? O
blesse me also my father. And he lift vp his voyce, & wepte.
39 Then Isaac his father answered and sayde vnto him: Beholde, thou shalt haue a
fat dwellinge vpon earth, & of ye dew of heauen from aboue:
40 with thy swerde shalt thou get thy lyuynge, and shalt serue thy brother. And
it shall come to passe, yt thou shalt put of his yock, and plucke it from thy
neck.
41 And Esau bare euell wyll vnto Iacob, because of the blessynge that his father
had blessed him withall, and sayde in his herte: The tyme wyll come shortly,
that my father shal mourne, for I wil slaye my brother Iacob.
42 The was it tolde Rebecca of these wordes of hir elder sonne, and she sent,
and bad call for Iacob hir yonger sonne, and saide vnto him: Beholde, thy
brother Esau threateneth the, that he wil slaye the.
43 And now my sonne heare my voyce: Get the vp, and flye vnto my brother Laban
in Haran,
44 and tary there with him a whyle, tyll the furiousnes of thy brother be
swaged, and
45 till his wrath agaynst ye be turned from the, and he forget what thou hast
done vnto him. So wyll I then sende for the, and cause the be fetched from
thece. Why shulde I be robbed of you both in one daye?
46 And Rebecca sayde vnto Isaac: I am weery of my life, because of the doughters
of Heth: Yf Iacob take a wife of the doughters of Heth, which are as the
doughters of this londe, what shall this life then profit me?

Chapter 28

1 Then called Isaac his sonne Iacob and blessed him, and charged him, & sayde
vnto him: Take not a wife of the doughters of Canaan,
2 but get the vp, and go in to Mesopotamia vnto the house of Bethuel thy mothers
father, and take ye there a wife of ye doughters of Laban yi mothers brother.
3 And the Allmightie God blesse the, and make the frutefull, and multiplye the,
(that thou mayest be a multitude of people)
4 and geue the the blessynge of Abraham vnto ye & thy sede with the, that thou
mayest possesse the lande, wherin thou art a straunger, which God gaue vnto
Abraham.
5 So Isaac let Iacob departe, that he might go in to Mesopotamia vnto Laban the
sonne of Bethuel of Siria, ye brother of Rebecca, his and Esaus mother.
6 Now when Esau sawe that Isaac had blessed Iacob, and let him departe in to
Mesopotamia, that he might take a wife there: and yt, as he blessed him, he
charged him, & sayde: Thou shalt not take a wife of the doughters of Canaan,
7 and that Iacob obeyed his father and his mother, and was gone vnto
Mesopotamia:
8 seynge also that Isaac his father loked not gladly vpon the doughters of
Canaan,
9 he wente his waye vnto Ismael, and besyde the wyues that he had afore, he toke
Mahaloth the doughter of Ismael (Abrahas sonne) the sister of Nebaioth, to wife.
10 As for Iacob, he departed from Bersaba, and wente vnto Haran
11 and came to a place, where he taried all night: for the Sonne was downe. And
he toke a stone of ye place, & put it vnder his heade, and layed him downe in ye
same place to slepe.
12 And he dreamed, and beholde, there stode vpon ye earth, a ladder, whose toppe
reached vnto the heauen. And beholde, the angels of God wente vp and downe vpon
it,
13 and the LORDE stode vpon it, and sayde: I am the LORDE God of thy father
Abraham, and the God of Isaac: The londe yt thou lyest vpon, wyl I geue vnto
the, and to thy sede:
14 and thy sede shal be as ye dust of ye earth. And thou shalt sprede forth
towarde the west, east, north, and south: and thorow the and thy sede shall all
the kynreds vpon earth be blessed.
15 And beholde, I am with ye, and wyll kepe the where so euer thou goest, & wyl
brynge the hither agayne in to this lande: for I wil not leaue the, tyll I haue
made good, all that I haue promysed the.
16 Now whan Iacob awaked from his slepe, he saide: Surely the LORDE is in this
place, and I knew not.
17 And he was afraied, and sayde: How fearfull is this place? here is nothinge
els but an house of God, & a gate vnto heaue.
18 And Iacob arose early in the mornynge, and toke the stone that he had layed
vnder his heade, and set it vp, and poured oyle vpon it.
19 And he called the place Bethel, but afore the cite was called Lus.
20 And Iacob made a vowe, and sayde: Yf God wyll be with me, and kepe me in this
iourney yt I go & geue me bred to eate, and clothinge to put on,
21 and brynge me peaceably home agayne vnto my father: The shall the LORDE be my
God,
22 and this stone that I haue set vp, shalbe an house of God: and all that thou
geuest me, I wyl geue the the tenth therof.

Chapter 29

1 Then Iacob gat him vp vpon his fete, and wente in to the east countre,
2 & loked aboute him, and beholde, there was a well in the felde, and ye flockes
of shepe therby, for the flockes dranke of the well. And there laye a greate
stone at the welles mouth,
3 and thyther they vsed to brynge the flockes, and to roule the stone from ye
mouth of the well, and to geue the shepe drynke, & so they put the stone agayne
vpon the welles mouth in to his place.
4 And Iacob sayde vnto them: Brethren, whece be ye? They answered: we are of
Haran.
5 He sayde vnto them: Knowe ye Laban the sonne of Nahor? They answered: We knowe
him well.
6 He sayde: Is he in good health? They answered: he is in good health. And lo,
there commeth his doughter Rachel with the shepe.
7 He sayde: It is yet hye daye, & is not yet tyme to dryue in the catell: geue
the shepe to drynke, & go youre waye, & fede them.
8 They answered: We can not, tyll all the flockes be brought together, and tyll
we roule the stone from the welles mouth, & so geue the shepe drynke.
9 Whyle he yet talked with them, Rachel came with hir fathers shepe, for she
kepte ye shepe.
10 Whan Iacob sawe Rachel ye doughter of Laban his mothers brother, and the
shepe of Laban his mothers brother, he wete, & rouled the stone from the welles
mouth, and gaue his mothers brother shepe to drynke,
11 and kyssed Rachel, lift vp his voyce, and wepte,
12 and tolde her, yt he was hir fathers brother, and ye sonne of Rebecca. Then
ranne she, and tolde her father.
13 Wha Laban herde of Iacob his sisters sonne, he ranne to mete him, and
enbraced him, and kyssed him, and brought him in to his house. And so he tolde
him all this matter.
14 The sayde Laban vnto him: Wel, thou art my bone and my flesh. Abyde with me a
moneth longe.
15 But after that saide he vnto Iacob: Because thou art my brother, shalt thou
therfore serue me for nought? Tell me, what shall thy wages be.
16 Laban had two doughters, the eldest was called Lea, & the yongest Rachel.
17 And Lea was tender eyed, but Rachel was beutyfull & well fauoured of face,
18 and Iacob loued her well, and sayde: I will serue the seuen yeare, for Rachel
thy yongest doughter.
19 Laban answered: It is better that I geue her the, then vnto another: tary
thou with me.
20 So Iacob serued seuen yeare for Rachel, and they semed vnto him but few
dayes, he loued her so well.
21 And Iacob saide vnto Laban: geue me my wyfe, for the tyme is come that I
shulde lye with her.
22 The Laban bad all the people of that place, and made a mariage.
23 But at eue he toke his doughter Lea, and brought her in vnto him, and he laye
wt her.
24 And Laban gaue Zilpa his mayde vnto his doughter Lea to be hir mayde.
25 But on the morow, beholde, it was Lea. And he sayde vnto Laban: Why hast thou
done this vnto me? Haue not I serued ye for Rachel? Why hast thou then begyled
me?
26 Laban answered: It is not the maner in oure countre, to mary the yongest
before the eldest.
27 Holde out this weke, & I will geue the this also, for the seruyce yt thou
shalt do me yet seuen yeares more.
28 Iacob dyd so, & helde out yt weke. Then gaue he him Rachel his doughter to
wyfe.
29 And Laban gaue Bilha his mayden vnto Rachel his doughter to be hir mayden.
30 So he laye with Rachel also, & loued Rachel more the Lea, and serued him yet
seuen yeares more.
31 But when the LORDE sawe, that Lea was nothinge regarded, he made her
frutefull, and Rachel baren.
32 And Lea coceaued, and bare a sonne, whom she called Ruben, and sayde: The
LORDE hath loked vpon my aduersite. Now wyll my husbande loue me.
33 And she conceaued agayne, and bare a sonne, and sayde: The LORDE hath herde
that I am despysed, and hath geue me this also, and she called him Symeon.
34 She coceaued yet agayne, and bare a sonne, and sayde: Now wyll my husbande
kepe me company agayne, for I haue borne him thre sonnes, therfore called she
his name Leui.
35 She conceaued ye fourth tyme, and bare a sonne, and sayde: Now wyll I geue
thankes vnto the LORDE, therfore called she him Iuda, and left bearynge.

Chapter 30

1 When Rachel sawe that she bare no children vnto Iacob, she had enuye at hir
sister, & saide vnto Iacob: Geue me childre also, or els I am but deed.
2 But Iacob was very wroth at Rachel, & sayde: Am I then in Gods steade, which
kepeth ye frute of yi wombe from ye?
3 Neuertheles she sayde: Beholde, there is Bilha my mayden, lye wt her, yt she
maye beare vpon my lappe, & that I maye be increased by her.
4 And so she gaue him Bilha hir mayden to wyfe. And Iacob laye with her.
5 So Bilha conceaued, and bare Iacob a sonne.
6 Then sayde Rachel: God hath geuen sentence on my syde, and herde my voyce, and
geue me a sonne, therfore called she him Dan.
7 Bilha Rachels mayde coceaued agayne, and bare another sonne vnto Iacob.
8 Then sayde Rachel: God hath turned it with me, and my sister, and I haue gotte
the vpperhande. And she called him Nephthali.
9 Now whan Lea sawe that she had left bearynge, she toke Silpa hir mayde, and
gaue her vnto Iacob to wyfe.
10 So Silpa Leas mayde bare Iacob a sonne.
11 Then saide Lea: This is good lucke, & she called him Gad.
12 After this Silpa Leas mayde bare Iacob another sonne.
13 Then sayde Lea: Well is me, for the doughters will call me blessed, and she
called him Asser.
14 Ruben wente out in the tyme of ye wheate haruest, and founde Mandragoras in
the felde, and brought them home vnto his mother Lea. Then sayde Rachel vnto
Lea: Geue me some of yi sonnes Madragoras.
15 She answered: Hast thou not ynough that thou hast taken awaye my husbande,
but wilt take awaye my sonnes Mandragoras also? Rachel saide: Wel, let him lye
with the this night for thy sonnes Mandragoras.
16 Now whan Iacob came home at euen from the felde, Lea wente forth to mete him,
and sayde: Thou shalt lye wt me, for I haue bought the for my sonnes
Mandragoras. And he slepte with her that night.
17 And God herde Lea, and she conceaued, and bare Iacob the fifth sonne,
18 & sayde: God hath rewarded me, because I gaue my mayden vnto my husbande, and
she called him Isachar.
19 Lea conceaued yet agayne, and bare Iacob the sixte sonne,
20 and sayde: God hath endewed me with a good dowry. Now wyll my husbande dwell
with me agayne, for I haue borne him sixe sonnes, & she called him Zabulon.
21 After that she bare a doughter, whom she called Dina.
22 Neuertheles God thought vpo Rachel, and herde her, and made her frutefull.
23 Then she conceaued, and bare a sonne, and sayde: God hath taken awaye my
rebuke,
24 and she called him Ioseph, and sayde: God geue me yet another sonne.
25 Now whan Rachel had borne Ioseph, Iacob sayde vnto Laban: Let me go, &
departe in to my place and vnto myne owne lande:
26 geue me my wyues and my children, (for the which I haue serued the) yt I maye
go: for thou knowest, what seruyce I haue done the.
27 Laban sayde vnto him: Can I not fynde fauoure in thy sight? I perceaue, that
God hath blessed me for thy sake.
28 Appoynte thou the rewarde, yt I shal geue the.
29 But he saide vnto him: Thou knowest how I haue serued the, and what maner of
catell thou hast vnder me.
30 Thou haddest but litle afore I came hither, but now is it growne into a
multitude, and the LORDE hath blessed ye for my sake. And now whan shall I loke
to myne owne house also?
31 He saide: What shal I then geue the? Iacob sayde: Thou shalt geue me nothinge
at all, but yf thou wilt do this for me yt I saye, then wyll I fede and kepe thy
shepe agayne.
32 I wyll go thorow all thy flockes to daye, and separate thou from amonge them
all the shepe that be spotted and partye coloured, and all blacke shepe amonge
the lambes. Now loke what shalbe partie coloured and spotted amoge the kyddes,
the same shalbe my rewarde:
33 so shal my righteousnes testifie with me to daye or tomorow, whan it cometh
vnto my rewarde before the, so that, what so euer is not spotted and partye
coloured amonge the kyddes, and blacke amoge the lambes, let that be theft with
me.
34 Then sayde Laban: Beholde, let it be so as thou hast sayde.
35 And that same daye he sundered out the speckled and partye coloured goates,
and all the spotted and partye coloured kyddes (where there was eny whyte vpon
them) and all that was black amonge the lambes, and put them vnder the hande of
his children,
36 and made rowme of thre dayes iourney wyde betwixte him and Iacob. So Iacob
kepte the residue of Labans flocke.
37 But Iacob toke staues of grene wyllies, hasell and of chestnottrees, and
pylled whyte strekes in them,
38 and layed the staues that he had pylled, in the drynkinge troughes before the
flocke, which came there to drynke, that they shulde conceaue, whan they came to
drynke.
39 So the flockes conceaued ouer ye staues, and brought forth speckelde, spotted
and partye coloured.
40 Then Iacob parted ye lambes, and put them to the flocke vnto the spotted: and
all that was blacke in Labans flocke, that put he vnto the spotted. And he made
him a flocke of his owne, which he put not vnto Labans flocke.
41 Neuertheles in the first buckynge tyme of the flockes, he layed the staues in
the drynkinge troughes before the eyes of the flockes, that they shulde conceaue
ouer the staues.
42 But in the latter buckynge tyme he layed them not in. So the later were
Labans, but the firstlinges were Iacobs.
43 Thus the man became exceadinge riche, so that he had many shepe, maydens &
seruauntes, Camels and Asses.

Chapter 31

1 He herde also of ye wordes of Labans children, that they sayde: Iacob hath
brought all or fathers good vnto him self, & of oure fathers good hath he gotten
these riches.
2 And Iacob behelde Labans countenaunce, & beholde, it was not towarde him as
yesterdaye and yeryesterdaye.
3 And the LORDE sayde vnto him: Departe agayne to thy fatherlade, and to thy
kynred, I wyll be with the.
4 Then sent Iacob and bad call Rachel and Lea in to the felde to his flockes,
5 and sayde vnto them: I se youre fathers countenaunce, that it is not towarde
me like as yesterdaye and yeryesterdaye: but the God of my father hath bene with
me.
6 And ye knowe, that I haue serued youre father with all my power.
7 And he hath disceaued me, and chaunged my wages now ten tymes. But God hath
not suffred him, to do me harme.
8 Yf he sayde: The partye coloured shalbe thy rewarde, then the whole flocke
bare partye coloured.Yf he sayde: The speckelde shalbe thy rewarde, the the
whole flocke bare speckelde.
9 Thus hath God with drawen youre fathers goodes from him, and geuen them vnto
me.
10 For whan the buckynge tyme came, I lift vp myne eyes and sawe in a dreame,
and beholde, the rammes leapte vpon the flocke that was speckelde, spotted, &
partye coloured.
11 And the angel of God sayde vnto me in a dreame: Iacob. And I answered: here
am I.
12 He sayde: lift vp thine eyes, and beholde, the rammes leape vpon the
speckelde, spotted, and partie coloured flocke: for I haue sene all yt Laban
doth vnto the.
13 I am ye God at Bethel, where thou dyddest anoynte the stone, & maydest a vowe
there vnto me. Get the vp now, & departe out of this londe, & go agayne in to
the londe of thy kynred.
14 Then answered Rachel and Lea, and sayde vnto him: As for vs, we haue no
porcion ner inheritauce more in oure fathers house,
15 & he hath couted vs as straugers, for he hath solde vs, & spent vp or wages.
16 Therfore hath God withdrawe or fathers riches from him vnto vs & oure
children. What so euer now God hath sayde vnto the, that do.
17 So Iacob gat vp, and set his children and wyues vpon Camels,
18 and caried awaye all his catell and all his substaunce, that he had gotten at
Mesopotamia, yt he might come vnto Isaac his father in the lande of Canaan.
19 Laba was gone to clyppe his flocke, and Rachel stale hir fathers ymages.
20 Thus dyd Iacob steale awaie ye hert of Laban ye Syrian, in yt he tolde him
not that he fled.
21 So he fled, & all that was his, gat vp, and passed ouer the water, & wente
straight towarde the mount Gilead.
22 Vpon the thirde daye it was tolde Laban, that Iacob fled.
23 And he toke his brethre vnto him, and folowed after him seuen dayes iourney,
and ouertoke him vpon the mount Gilead.
24 But God came vnto Laban the Syrian in a dreame by night, & sayde vnto him: Be
warre, that thou speake nothinge to Iacob but good.
25 And Laba drew nye vnto Iacob. As for Iacob, he had pytched his tente vpon the
mount. And Laban with his brethre pytched his tent also vpon the same mount
Gilead.
26 Then sayde Laban vnto Iacob: What hast thou done, that thou hast stollen
awaie my hert, and caried awaye my doughters, as though they had bene taken
captyue wt ye swerde?
27 Wherfore keptest thou that secrete, that thou woldest flye, and hast stollen
awaye fro me, and toldest me not, that I might haue brought the on the waye with
myrth, with synginge, with tabrettes and harpes?
28 and hast not suffred me to kysse my children and doughters? Thou hast done
foolishly, and so moch might I haue made,
29 that I coude haue done you euell: but youre fathers God saide yesterdaye vnto
me: Bewarre, that thou speake nothinge vnto Iacob but good.
30 And for so moch then as thou woldest nedes departe, and longedest sore after
yi fathers house, why hast thou stollen away my goddes?
31 Iacob answered and sayde vnto Laban: I was afrayed, that thou shuldest haue
taken away thy doughters fro me:
32 but loke by whom thou fyndest thy goddes, let the same dye here before oure
brethren. Seke that thine is by me, and take it awaye. (But he knew not, that
Rachel had stollen them.)
33 Then wente Laban in to Iacobs tent and in to Leas tent, and in to both the
maydens tetes, and founde nothinge: and out of Leas tente he wente in to Rachels
tent.
34 Then toke Rachel the ymages, and layed them vnder the Camels strawe, and sat
downe vpon them. But Laban searched the whole tent, and founde nothinge.
35 Then sayde she vnto hir father: Be not angrie my lorde, that I can not ryse
vp vnto the: for it goeth wt me after the maner of wemen. So he sought, and
founde not the ymages.
36 And Iacob was wroth, and chode with Laban, answered & sayde vnto him: What
haue I trespased or offended, yt thou art so whote vpon me?
37 Thou hast searched all my housholde stuff, & what hast thou founde of thy
housholde stuff? Laye it here before my brethren & thyne, yt they maye iudge
betwene vs both.
38 Twentye yeare haue I bene wt the: thy shepe & goates haue not bene
vnfrutefull, the rammes of thy flocke haue I not eaten:
39 Loke what was torne of beastes, I brought it not vnto ye, I was fayne to paie
it my self: thou requyredest it of my hande, whether it were stollen fro me by
daye or by night.
40 On the daye tyme the heate cosumed me, and the frost on the night, and my
slepe departed fro myne eyes.
41 Thus haue I serued twentye yeare in thy house, fourtene yeares for thy
doughters, & sixe for thy flocke, and ten tymes hast thou chaunged my rewarde:
42 & yf the God of my father the God of Abraham, and the feare of Isaac had not
bene on my syde, thou haddest latten me go awaye emptye. But God hath loked vpon
myne aduersite and laboure, and rebuked the yesterdaye.
43 Laban answered and sayde: The doughters are my doughters, & the children are
my childre, and the flockes are my flockes, & all that thou seist is myne. What
can I do this daye vnto these my doughters, or to their children whom they haue
borne?
44 Now therfore come on, let vs make a couenaunt (I & thou) which maye be a
wytnesse betwene me and the.
45 Then toke Iacob a stone, & set it vp (for a piler or markstone)
46 and sayde vnto his brethren: Gather stones. And they toke the stones, and
made an heape, & ate vpon the same heape.
47 And Laba called it Iegar Sahadutha, but Iacob called it Gilead: (either of
them after the properte of his language.)
48 Then sayde Laban: This heape be wytnesse betwene me and the this daye
(therfore is it called Gilead)
49 and a testimony, for he sayde: The LORDE loke betwene me and ye, whan we are
departed ye one from ye other:
50 yf thou vexe my doughters, or take other wyues vnto them. There is no ma with
vs, but lo, God is the wytnesse betwene me and the.
51 And Laban sayde morouer vnto Iacob: Beholde, this is the heape, and this is
the marckstone that I haue set vp betwixte me and the:
52 the same heape be wytnesse, and the same marckstone also be wytnesse, yf I
passe ouer vnto the, or yf thou passe ouer this heape & marckstone vnto me, to
do eny harme.
53 The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, and the God of their fathers, be
iudge betwene vs. And Iacob sware vnto him by the feare of his father Isaac.
54 And Iacob offred an offerynge vpon the mount, and called his brethre to eate
bred. And whan they had eaten, they taried vpon the mount all night.
55 But vpon the morow Laban rose vp early, kyssed his childre & doughters, &
blessed the, & departed, and came agayne vnto his place.

Chapter 32

1 As for Iacob, he wente on his iourney, & the angels of God met him.
2 And whan he sawe them, he sayde: It is Gods hoost, & called the same place
Mahanaim.
3 Iacob sent messaungers before him to his brother Esau in to the lande of Seir,
of the felde of Edom,
4 & commaunded the, & sayde: Saye thus vnto my lorde Esau: Thy seruaunt Iacob
sendeth ye this worde: I haue bene out wt Laban, & haue bene hither to amonge
straungers,
5 & haue oxen & Asses, shepe, seruauntes & maydes, & haue sent forth to shewe it
the my lorde, yt I might fynde fauoure in thy sight.
6 The messaungers came agayne vnto Iacob, and sayde: We came vnto thy brother
Esau, & he commeth forth also agaynst the with foure hundreth men.
7 Then was Iacob sore afrayed, and wyst not what waye to turne himself, &
deuyded the people that was with him, and the shepe, and the oxen, & the Camels
in to two droues,
8 & sayde: Yf Esau come vpon the one droue, and smyte it, the other shal escape.
9 Iacob sayde morouer: O God of my father Abraha, God of my father Isaac, LORDE
thou that saydest vnto me: Departe agayne to thine owne londe and to thy kynred,
and I wyl do the good:
10 I am to litle for all the mercies and all the trueth that thou hast shewed
vnto thy seruaunt (for I had no more but this staff whan I wente ouer this
Iordan, and now am I become two droues)
11 delyuer me from ye hande of my brother, fro the hade of Esau, for I am
afrayed of him, lest he come and smyte me the mother with the children.
12 Thou saydest: I wyll do the good, and wyll make thy sede as the sonde of ye
see, which can not be nombred for multitude.
13 And there he taried that night, and toke of soch as came to hande, a present
vnto his brother Esau,
14 two hudreth she goates, twentye he goates, two hundreth shepe, twentye rammes
15 and thirtie mylck camels wt their foales, fourtye kyne, ten bullockes,
twentye she Asses with ten foales,
16 and put them in the handes of his seruauntes, euery flock by them selues, &
sayde vnto them: Go ye forth before me, & put a space betwixte one flocke after
the other,
17 and commaunded the first and sayde: When my brother Esau meteth the, and
axeth the: Whose art thou? & whyther goest thou? and whose are these that thou
dryuest before the?
18 Thou shalt saye: They be thy seruaunt Iacobs, which sendeth a present vnto
his lorde Esau, and commeth behynde vs him self.
19 Thus commaunded he the seconde also, and the thirde, and all them that
folowed the flockes, and sayde: Like as I haue tolde you, so speake ye vnto
Esau, whan ye mete him,
20 and saye vnto him also: Beholde, yi seruaut Iacob is behynde vs. For he
thought: I wyll reconcyle him with the present that goeth before me, after warde
wyll I se him my self, peraduenture he shall receaue me to grace.
21 So the present wente before him, but he taried in the tente the same night,
22 and rose vp in ye night, and toke his two wyues and the two maydens and his
eleuen sonnes, and wente vnto the foorde of Iacob,
23 toke them and caried them ouer the water, so that all that he had came ouer,
24 and taried him self alone on this syde. Then wrestled there a man with him
vntyll the breake of ye daye.
25 And whan he sawe yt he might not ouercome him, he touched the senowe of his
thye, and ye senowe of his thye shrancke in wrestlinge with him.
26 And he sayde: Let me go, for ye daye breaketh on. But he answered: I will not
let ye go, excepte thou blesse me.
27 He sayde: What is thy name? He answered: Iacob.
28 He sayde: Thou shalt nomore be called Iacob, but Israel, for thou hast
stryuen with God and with men, and hast preuayled.
29 And Iacob axed him, & sayde: Tell me, what is yi name? But he sayde: Why
axest thou what my name is? And he blessed him there.
30 And Iacob called the place Peniel, for I haue sene God face to face, & my
soule is recouered.
31 And as he came ouer fro Peniel, ye Sonne rose vpo him, & he halted vpon his
thye.
32 Therfore eate the children of Israel no vane vpon the senow of ye thye vnto
this daye, because ye vane vpon the senow of Iacobs thye was touched.

Chapter 33

1 Iacob lift vp his eyes, & sawe his brother Esau comynge with foure hundreth
men: and he deuyded his children vnto Lea vnto Rachel, and to both the maydes,
2 and set the maydens with their children before, and Lea with hir childre
after, and Rachel with Ioseph hynder most.
3 And he wente before them, and bowed him self to the grounde seuen tymes, tyll
he came to his brother.
4 But Esau ranne to mete him, and enbraced him, and fell aboute his neck, &
kyssed him, and wepte,
5 and lift vp his eyes, and sawe the wyues with the children, and sayde: What
are these with the? He answered: They are the children, which God hath geuen
vnto thy seruaunt.
6 And the maydens came forth with their children, and dyd their obeysaunce vnto
him.
7 Lea came forth also with hir childre, and kneled vnto him. Afterwarde came
Ioseph and Rachel forth, and kneled vnto him likewyse.
8 And he sayde: What meanest thou wt all the droue that I met? He answered: that
I might fynde grace in the sight of my lorde,
9 Esau sayde: I haue ynough my brother, kepe that thou hast.
10 Iacob answered: Oh nay, but yf I haue founde grace in yi sight, receaue my
present of my hande (for I sawe thy face, as though I had sene the face of God)
and be at one with me.
11 Take this present in good worth, that I haue brought ye, for God hath geuen
it me, & I haue ynough of all thinges. So he compelled him to take it.
12 And he sayde: Let vs go on and take oure iourney, I wyll go in thy company.
13 But he sayde vnto him: My lorde, thou knowest that I haue tender children by
me, and small and greate catell also, which are yet but yonge: yf they shulde be
dryue ouer in one daye, the whole flocke wolde dye.
14 Let my lorde go on before his seruaut. I wyll dryue after fayre and softly,
(there after as the catell & the children can go,) tyll I come to my lorde in
Seir.
15 Esau sayde: Yet wil I leaue some of my people with the. He answered: What
nede is it? Let me but onely fynde grace in the sight of my lorde.
16 So Esau departed againe the same daye towarde Seir,
17 and Iacob toke his iourney towarde Sucoth, and buylded him an house, and made
tetes for his catell. Therfore is the place called Sucoth.
18 Afterwarde came Iacob peaceably vnto the cite of Sichem, which lyeth in ye
lande of Canaan, after that he was come agayne out of Mesopotamia, and pitched
before the cite,
19 and bought a pece of londe of the children of Hemor ye father of Sichem for
an hundreth pens. There pitched he his tent,
20 and there he set vp an altare, and called vpon the name of the mightie God of
Israel.

Chapter 34

1 Dina ye doughter of Lea, which she bare vnto Iacob, wente out to beholde the
doughters of the londe.
2 Whan Sichem the sonne of Hemor the Heuite (which was lorde of the lode) sawe
her, he toke her, and laye with her, and forced her,
3 and his hert hanged vpon her, and he loued ye damsell, and talked louyngly
with her,
4 and spake to his father Hemor: Get me this mayden to wife.
5 And Iacob vnderstode, that Dina his doughter was defyled, and his sonnes were
with the catell in the felde, and Iacob helde his tonge tyll they came.
6 Then Hemor the father of Sichem wente forth vnto Iacob to comen with him.
7 In the meane season came Iacobs sonnes from ye felde. And whan they herde it,
it greued the men, and they were very wroth, that he had wrought foly in Israel,
and lyen with Iacobs doughter: for so was not the vse to do.
8 Then comened Hemor with the, and sayde: My sonne Sichems hert longeth for
youre doughter, O geue hir him to wife:
9 make frendshipe with vs, geue vs youre doughters, and take ye oure doughters,
10 and dwell with vs, the londe shall be open vnto you, dwell and occupie, and
haue youre possessions therin.
11 And Sichem sayde vnto hir father and brethren: Let me fynde grace with you:
loke what ye appoynte me, I will geue it:
12 requyre the dowrye and gift of me hardely, I wyll geue it acordinge as ye
wyll axe, onely geue me the damsell to wife.
13 Then Iacobs sonnes answered Sichem and Hemor his father (and spake
disceatfully, because their sister Dina was defyled)
14 & sayde vnto them: That can we not do, to geue oure sister to an
vncircumcided man: for that were a shame vnto vs.
15 Neuertheles we wyll consente vnto you, yf ye wylbe like vnto vs, and be
circumcided as many as are males amonge you:
16 then will we geue you oure doughters, and take youre doughters vnto vs, and
dwell with you, and be one people.
17 But yf ye wyll not herken vnto vs, to be circumcided, then wyl we take oure
doughter, and go oure waye.
18 These wordes pleased Hemor and his sonne wel,
19 and the yonge man deferde not to do the same, for he had lust to Iacobs
doughter: and he was holden in honoure aboue all in his fathers house.
20 Then came Hemor and Sichem his sonne vnder ye gate of cite, and comened with
the citisens of the cite, and saide:
21 These men are peaceable with vs, and will dwell in the lande and occupye: now
is the londe brode of both the sydes, we wyl take their doughters vnto vs, and
geue them oure doughters.
22 But then wyll they consent vnto vs, to dwell by vs, and to be one people with
vs, yf we circumcyse all the men children amonge vs, like as they are
circumcysed:
23 their catell and goodes, and all that they haue, shalbe ours, yf we consent
vnto them, that they maye dwel with vs.
24 And they herkened vnto Hemor and Sichem his sonne, as many as wente out and
in at ye gate of his cite, and circumcided all the males, that wente out and in
at his cite.
25 And vpon the thirde daye (whan it was panefull to them) the two sonnes of
Iacob Simeon and Leui Dinas brethren, toke euery man his swerde, and wente
boldly in to the cite, and slew all the males,
26 and slew Hemor also and Sichem his sonne with the edge of the swerde, and
toke their sister Dina out of Sichems house, and wente their waye.
27 Then came Iacobs sonnes ouer the slayne, and spoyled the cite (because they
had defyled their sister)
28 and toke their shepe, oxen, Asses, and what so euer was in the cite and in
the londe,
29 and all maner of goodes: All their children and wyues toke they captyue, and
spoyled all yt was in the houses.
30 And Iacob sayde vnto Symeon and Leui: Ye haue brought it so to passe, yt I
stynke before the inhabiters of this lande, ye Cananites and Pheresites, & I am
but a small nombre: Yf they gather them selues now together against me, they
shal slaye me, so shal I be destroyed with my house.
31 But they answered: Shulde they the deale with oure sister as with an whoore?

Chapter 35

1 And God sayde vnto Iacob: Get the vp, and go vnto Bethel, & dwell there, and
make there an altare vnto the God, that appared vnto the, whan thou fleddest
from thy brother Esau.
2 Then sayde Iacob vnto his housholde and to all yt were with him: Put awaye
from you ye straunge goddes, that are amonge you, and clense youre selues, and
chaunge youre clothes,
3 and let vs get vp, and go vnto Bethel, that I maye there make an altare vnto
the God, which herde me in the tyme of my trouble, and hath bene with me in the
waye that I haue gone.
4 Then gaue they him all the straunge goddes that were vnder their handes, and
their earynges, and he buried them vnder an Oke that stode besyde Sichem,
5 & departed. And there came a feare of God vpon the cities that laye roude
aboute, so that they folowed not after ye sonnes of Iacob.
6 So came Iacob vnto Lus in ye lande of Canaan (which is called Bethel) and all
the people that were with him,
7 and there he buylded an altare, and called ye place Bethel, because the LORDE
appeared vnto him there, whan he fled from his brother.
8 Then dyed Debora Rebeccas norse, and was buried beneth Bethel vnder the Oke,
and it was called the Oke of lamentacion.
9 And God appeared agayne vnto Iacob, after that he was come out of Mesopotamia,
and blessed him,
10 & saide vnto him: Thou art called Iacob, neuertheles thou shalt nomore be
called Iacob, but Israel shal be yi name. And so was he called Israel.
11 And God sayde vnto him: I am the Allmightie God, be frutefull and multiplye:
people and a multitude of people shal come of the, and kynges shall come out of
thy loynes:
12 and the lande that I gaue vnto Abraham and Isaac, wyll I geue vnto the, & wyl
geue it vnto thy sede after the.
13 So God departed from him, from ye place where he talked wt him.
14 And Iacob set vp a piler of stone, in the place where he talked with him, &
poured drynkofferynges theron, and poured oyle vpon it.
15 And Iacob called ye place where God talked with him, Bethel.
16 And he departed from Bethel: and whan he was yet a felde brode from Ephrath,
Rachel traueyled, & the byrth came harde vpon hir.
17 But whan she had soch payne in trauelynge, ye mydwife sayde vnto her: feare
not, for thou shalt haue this sonne also.
18 But as hir soule was departynge, yt she must dye, she called him Ben Oni:
neuertheles his father called hi Be Iamin.
19 So Rachel died, & was buried in the waye towarde Ephrath, which now is called
Bethlehe.
20 And Iacob set vp a piller vpon hir graue, there is Rachels grauestone vnto
this daye.
21 And Israel departed, and pitched his tent beyonde the tower of Eder.
22 And it chaunsed, that when Israel dwelt in that londe, Ruben wente and laye
with Bilha his fathers concubyne, and that came to Israels eares. And Iacob had
twolue sonnes.
23 The sonnes of Lea were these: Ruben Iacobs first borne sonne, Simeon, Leui,
Iuda, Isachar, & Zabulo.
24 The sonnes of Rachel, were Ioseph and Ben Iamin.
25 The sonnes of Bilha Raches mayde: Dan, and Nepthali.
26 The sonnes of Silpa Leas mayde: Gad and Aser. These are ye sonnes of Iacob,
which were borne vnto him in Mesopotamia.
27 And he came to his father Isaac to Mamre in to the head cite which is called
Hebron, where in Abraha & Isaac were straugers.
28 And Isaac was an hundreth & foure score yeare olde,
29 & fell sicke, and dyed, & was gathered vnto his people, whan he was olde, &
had lyued ynough: and his sonnes Esau & Iacob buried him.

Chapter 36

1 This is the generacio of Esau, which is called Edom.
2 Esau toke wyues of the doughters of Canaan. Ada the doughter of Elo the
Hethite: & Ahalibama the doughter of Ana, the childes childe of Zibeon the
Heuyte:
3 And Basmath Ismaels doughter, the sister of Nebaioth.
4 And Ada bare Eliphas vnto Esau. Basmath bare Reguel.
5 Ahalibama bare Ieus, Iaelam, & Korah. These are the childre of Esau, yt were
borne vnto him in the lande of Canaan.
6 And Esau toke his wiues sonnes & doughters, and all the soules of his house,
his substaunce, and all the catell with all the goodes that he had gotten in the
lande of Canaan, and wente in to a countre awaye fro his brother Iacob:
7 for their substaunce was so greate, that they coude not dwell together: and
the londe wherin they were straungers, might not holde them because of their
goodes.
8 So Esau dwelt vpon mount Seir. And Esau is Edom.
9 This is ye generacio of Esau, of who are come ye Edomites vpon ye mount Seir.
10 And these are ye names of the childre of Esau: Eliphas ye sonne of Ada Esaus
wife: Reguel ye sonne of Basmath Esaus wife:
11 The sonnes of Eliphas were these: Theman, Omar, Zepho, Gaetham & Kenas.
12 And Thimna was a concubyne of Elyphas ye sonne of Esau, and bare him Amaleck.
These are ye children of Ada Esaus wyfe.
13 The children of Reguel are these: Nahath Serah, Samma, Misa. These are the
children of Basmath Esaus wife.
14 The children of Ahalibama Esaus wife the doughter of Ana, that was the
childes childe of Zibeon (which she bare vnto Esau) are these: Ieus, Iaelam and
Korah.
15 These are the prynces amoge the childre of Esau. The children of Eliphas the
first sonne of Esau, were these: The prynce Theman, ye prynce Omar, the prynce
Zepho, the prynce Kenas,
16 the prynce Korah, the prynce Gaethan, the prynce Amaleck. These are the
prynces of Eliphas in the lade of Edo, and are the children of Ada.
17 And these are the children of Roguel Esaus sonne: ye prynce Nahath, ye prynce
Serah, ye prynce Sama, ye prynce Misa. These are ye prynces of Reguel in ye
londe of ye Edomites, & they are ye children of Basmath Esaus wife.
18 These are the children of Ahalibama Esaus wife: The prynce Ieus, ye prince
Iaelam, the prynce Korah. These are the prynces of Ahalibama, ye doughter of Ana
Esaus wife.
19 These are ye childre of Esau and their princes. He is Edom.
20 The children of Seir ye Horite yt dwelt in the londe, are these: Lothan,
Sobal, Zibeon, Ana,
21 Dison, Ezer & Disan. These are the prynces of the Horites, all children of
Seir in the londe of Idumea.
22 But ye childre of Lothan were these: Hori, & Hema, & Lothas sister was called
Thimna.
23 The children of Sobal were these: Alua, Manahat, Ebal, Sepho & Ona.
24 The childre of Zibeo were: Aia & Ana. This is the same Ana yt foude Mules in
ye wyldernes, wha he kepte his fathers Zibeons Asses.
25 The children of Ana were: Dison: & Ahalibama, yt is ye doughter of Ana.
26 The childre of Dison were: Hemdan, Esban, Iethra & Charan.
27 The children of Ezer were: Bilhan, Seana, & Ackan.
28 The children of Disan were: Vz & Aran.
29 These are ye prices of ye Horites: The prince Lothan, ye prynce Sobal, ye
prynce Zibeo, ye prynce Ana,
30 ye prynce Dison, ye prince Ezer, ye prynce Disan. These are the prynces of
the Horites, which ruled in ye londe of Seir.
31 The kynges that reigned in the londe of Edumea (before the childre of Israel
had eny kynge) are these:
32 Bela ye sonne of Beor was kynge in Edumea, & ye name of his cite was Dinhaba.
33 And wha Bela died, Iobab ye sonne of Serah of Bosra was kinge in his steade.
34 When Iobab dyed, Husam out of ye lode of the Themanites was kynge in his
steade.
35 Whan Husam dyed, Hadad ye sonne of Bedad) which slewe ye Madianites in ye
Moabites felde) was kinge in his steade, & the name of his cite was Auith.
36 Whan Hadad dyed, Samla of Masreck was kinge in his steade.
37 Wha Samla died, Saul of Rehoboth by ye water syde, was kinge in his steade.
38 Whan Saul dyed, Baal Hana the sonne of Achbor was kynge in his steade.
39 Wha Baal Hana the sonne of Achbor dyed, Hadad was kinge in his steade, & the
name of his cite was Pagu, & his wifes name was Mehet Abeel, the doughter of
Matred, the doughter of Mesahab.
40 Thus are the princes of Esau called in their kynreds, places & names: The
prynce Thymna, ye prynce Alua, ye prynce Ietheth,
41 the prynce Ahalibama, the prynce Ela, the prynce Pynon,
42 the prynce Kenas, ye prynce Theman, ye prince Mibzar,
43 the prince Magdiel, ye prynce Ira. These are the prynces in Edumea, like as
they dwelt in ye lade of their possessions. And Esau is ye father of ye
Edomites.

Chapter 37

1 Iacob dwelt in ye lande, wherin his father was a straunger, namely in the lade
of Canaa.
2 And these are ye generacios of Iacob. Ioseph was seuetene yeare olde, wha he
became a keper of the catell wt his brethren, & the lad was wt the children of
Bilha & Silpa his fathers wyues, and tolde their father of ye euell reporte yt
was of the.
3 Israel loued Ioseph more the all his childre because he had begotte him in his
olde age, and he made him a cote of many coloures.
4 Now wha his brethre sawe, yt his father loued him more the all his brethre,
they had euell wyll at him, & coude not speake a fredly worde vnto hi.
5 Ioseph also had once a dreame, and tolde his brethre therof. The hated they
him ye more,
6 for he sayde: Heare I praye you what I dreamed.
7 Me thought we were byndinge sheeues vpo ye felde, & my shefe arose, and stode
vp, and youre sheeues rounde aboute made obeysaunce vnto my shefe.
8 Then sayde his brethre vnto him: Shalt thou be or kinge, and haue domynio ouer
vs? And they hated him yet ye more, because of his dreame, & his wordes.
9 And he had yet another dreame, which he tolde his brethre, & saide: Beholde, I
had yet another dreame: Me thought ye Sonne & ye Moone & eleuen starres made
obeisauce to me.
10 And wha this was tolde his father and his brethre, his father reproued him, &
sayde vnto him: What maner of dreame is this, yt thou hast dreamed? Shall I &
thy mother, & thy brethren come & fall before ye vpon the groude?
11 And his brethre had envie at him. But his father marcked this sayenge.
12 Now wha his brethren were gone forth to kepe their fathers catell in Siche,
13 Israel sayde vnto Ioseph: Do not yi brethren kepe the catell in Sichem? Come,
I wil sende the vnto the. He answered: Here am I.
14 And he sayde: Go thy waye, and loke whether it be well wt thy brethren and
with ye catell, and brynge me worde agayne how it is. And he sent him out of the
valley of Hebron, to go vnto Sichem.
15 Then a certayne man founde him, wandringe out of his waye in the felde, which
axed him, and sayde: Whom sekest thou?
16 He answered: I seke my brethren: tell me I pray the where they kepe.
17 The man sayde: They are gone from hence, for I herde them saye: let vs go
vnto Dothan. Then folowed Ioseph after his brethren, and founde them at Dothan.
18 Now whan they sawe him a farre of, afore he came at the, they deuysed to
sleye him,
19 and sayde one to another: Lo, there cometh the dreamer,
20 come on, and let vs sley him, & cast him in a pytt, and saye: a wicked beast
hath deuoured him: the shal it be sene, what his dreames are.
21 When Ruben herde that, he wolde haue delyuered him out of their handes, &
sayde: O let vs not sley a soule.
22 Ruben sayde morouer vnto him: Shed no bloude, but cast him in to this pytt yt
is in the wyldernes, & laye ye no hades vpon him. (He wolde haue delyuered him
out of their hades, yt he might haue brought him agayne vnto his father.)
23 Whan Ioseph now came to his brethre, they stryped him out of his cote, that
partye coloured cote which he had vpon him,
24 & toke him and cast him in to a pytt. But the same pytt was emptye, and no
water in it,
25 & they sat them downe to eate. In the meane season they lift vp their eyes,
and sawe a copany of Ismaelites comynge from Gilead, with their camels, which
bare spyces, balme, and myrre, and were goinge downe into Egipte.
26 Then saide Iuda vnto his brethre: what helpeth it vs, that we sleye oure
brother, and hyde his bloude?
27 Come, let vs sell him vnto the Ismaelites, that oure handes be not defyled
vpon him, for he is oure brother, oure flesh and bloude. And they herkened vnto
him.
28 And as the Madianites marchaunt men wente by, they drew Ioseph out of the
pytt, and solde him vnto the Ismaelites (for twetye syluer pens) which brought
him in to Egipte.
29 Now whan Ruben came agayne vnto the pytt, & founde not Ioseph therin, he rent
his clothes,
30 and came agayne to his brethre and sayde: The lad is not yonder, whyther shal
I go?
31 Then toke they Iosephs cote & slewe a goate, and dypped the cote in ye
bloude,
32 and sent awaye that partie coloured cote, and caused it be brought vnto their
father and sayde: This haue we founde, loke, whether it be thy sonnes coate, or
no.
33 But he knewe it, and sayde: It is my sonnes coate, a wicked beast hath
deuoured him, a rauyshinge beast hath rauyshed Ioseph.
34 And Iacob rete his clothes, and put a sack cloth aboute his loynes, & mourned
for his sonne a longe season.
35 And all his sonnes & doughters came vnto him to coforte him. But he wolde not
be coforted, & saide: With sorowe wil I go downe in to the graue vnto my sonne.
And his father wepte for him.
36 But the Madianites solde him in Egipte vnto Potiphar Pharaos chefe Marshall.

Chapter 38

1 It fortuned at the same time, yt Iuda wente downe fro his brethren, & gat him
to a man called Hyra at Odollam.
2 And there Iuda sawe a ma of Canaas doughter called Sua, and toke her. And whe
he had lyen with her,
3 she conceaued and bare a sonne, whom she called Er.
4 And she conceaued agayne, & bare a sonwho she called Ona.
5 She proceaded yet further, & bare a sonne, who she called Sela. And wha she
had borne him, she left of bearinge.
6 And Iuda gaue his first sonne Er a wife, whose name was Thamar.
7 But he was wicked before the LORDE, therfore the LORDE slew him.
8 Then sayde Iuda vnto his sonne Onan: Go lie with thy brothers wife, and marye
thyself with her, that thou mayest rayse vp sede vnto thy brother.
9 But when Onan knewe that the sede shulde not be his owne, whan he laye with
his brothers wife, he let it fall vpon the earth and destroyed it, yt he shulde
not geue sede vnto his brother.
10 This thinge that he dyd displeased the LORDE sore, and he slewe him also.
11 Then sayde Iudas vnto Thamar his sonnes wyfe. Remayne a wyddow in thy fathers
house, tyll my sonne Sela be growne: for he thought: peraduenture he might dye
also like as his brethren. So Thamar wente hir waye, and remained in hir fathers
house.
12 Now wha many dayes were past, ye doughter of Sua Iudas wife dyed. And whan
Iuda had left mournynge, he wente vp vnto Thimnath to clyppe his shepe with his
shepherde Hyra of Odollam.
13 Then was it tolde Thamar: beholde, thy father in lawe goeth vp vnto Thimnath,
to clyppe his shepe.
14 Then put she of ye wyddowes garmentes that she had vpon her, couered and
dysgysed hir self, & sat hir downe without the porte by the waye syde towarde
Thymnath. For she sawe that Sela was growne, and she was not geuen vnto him to
wife.
15 Now whan Iuda sawe her, he thought it had bene an whoore, for she had couered
hir face:
16 and he gat him to her in the waye, and saide: I praye the let me lye with
the, for he knewe not that it was his doughter in lawe. She answered: What wilt
thou geue me, that thou mayest lie with me?
17 He sayde: I wil sende the a kydd from the flocke. She answered: Geue me a
pledge then, tyll thou sende it me.
18 He sayde: What pledge wilt thou that I geue the? She answered: Thy signet,
and thy bracelet, and thy staff that thou hast in thy hade. Then he gaue it her,
and laye with her, and she was with childe of him.
19 And she gat hir vp, and wente hir waye, and layed of hir cloke, and put on
hir wyddowes garmetes agayne.
20 Iuda sent the kydd by his shepherde of Odolla, to fetch the pledge agayne
from the woman, and he founde her not.
21 Then axed he the men of the same place, & sayde: Where is the whoore yt sat
without in the waye? They answered: There hath no whoore bene here.
22 And he came agayne vnto Iuda, and saide: I haue not found her, morouer ye men
of the same place saide: that there hath no whoore bene there.
23 Iuda sayde: Let her take it vnto her, lest we happly be shamed, for I haue
sent the kydd, and thou hast not founde her.
24 After thre monethes it was tolde Iuda: Thamar thy doughter in lawe hath
plaied the whoore: and beholde, by whordome is she gotten with childe. Iuda
sayde: brynge her forth, that she maye be brent.
25 And whan she was brought forth, she sent vnto hir father in lawe, and sayde:
By the man yt oweth these, am I wt childe. And she sayde: Knowest thou whose is
this signet, this bracelet & this staff?
26 Iuda knewe the, & sayde: She is more righteous the I, for I gaue hir not my
sonne Sela: But he laye nomore with her.
27 Whan the tyme came that she shulde be delyuered, there were two twyns founde
in hir wombe.
28 And as she was now in trauelynge, the one put out his hande. Then the mydwife
toke and boude a reed threde aboute it, and saide: This shal come out first.
29 But whan he pluckte in his hande agayne, his brother came forth. And she
sayde: Wherfore is there a rent mayde for thy sake? And he was called Phares.
30 Afterwarde came his brother forth, which had ye reed threde aboute his hande,
and he was called Zarah.

Chapter 39

1 Ioseph was brought downe in to Egipte, & Potiphar an Egipcia Pharaos chefe
marshall bought him of ye Ismaelites, yt brought him downe.
2 And ye LORDE was wt Ioseph, in so moch yt he became a luckye ma, & was in his
master ye Egipcians house.
3 And his master sawe yt the LORDE was wt him: for what so euer he dyd, the
LORDE made it to prospere in his hade:
4 so yt he founde fauor in his masters sight, & was his seruaunt. He made him
ruler of his house, and put all that he had, vnder his hande.
5 And from the tyme forth that he had made him ruler of his house and all his
goodes, ye LORDE blessed the Egipcians house for Iosephs sake: and there was
nothynge but the very blessynge of the LORDE in all yt he had in ye house & in
the felde,
6 therfore left he all yt he had, in Iosephs hande. And medled with nothinge
himself, saue onely the bred that he ate. And Ioseph was fayre of bewtye, and
well fauoured of face.
7 And it fortuned after these actes, that his masters wife cast hir eyes vpon
Ioseph, and sayde: Slepe with me.
8 But he denyed, and saide vnto her: Beholde, my master knoweth not what is in
ye house, and all that he hath, that hath he put vnder my hande.
9 And there is no man so greate in the house as I, and he hath kepte nothinge
fro me, excepte the: for thou art his wife. How shulde I then do so greate
euell, and synne agaynst God?
10 But she spake soch wordes vnto Ioseph daylie. Neuertheles he herkened not
vnto her, to slepe by her, or to be in her company.
11 It fortuned vpon a tyme, that Ioseph wente in to the house to do his
busynesse, and there was none of ye folkes of the house thereby.
12 And she caught him by his garment, & sayde: Slepe with me. But he left the
garment in hir hande, and fled, and gat him out of the house.
13 Now wha she sawe that he had left his garmet in hir hande, and fled out,
14 she called the folkes in the house, and sayde vnto the: Lo, he hath brought
vs in the Hebrue, to do vs shame. He came in here vnto me, to slepe by me: but I
cried with loude voyce.
15 And whan he herde that I made a noyse & cried, he left his garmet here by me,
and fled, and ranne out.
16 And she layed vp his garmet by her, tyll his master came home,
17 and tolde him euen the same wordes, and sayde: The Hebrue seruaunt whom thou
broughtest here vnto vs, came in here to me, for to do me shame.
18 But whan I made a noyse and cried, he left his garment here by me, and fled
out.
19 Whan his master herde the wordes of his wyfe which she tolde him, and sayde:
Thus hath the Hebrue seruaunt done vnto me, he was very wroth.
20 Then his master toke him, and put him in the preson, wherin the kinges
presoners laie. And there he laye in preson.
21 But the LORDE was with him, and had mercy vpon him, & caused him to fynde
fauor in the sight of the officer of ye preson,
22 so that he committed all the presoners of the preson vnto his hades: that
what so euer were done, might be done by him.
23 For the officer of the preson sawe, yt the LORDE was with him in all yt was
vnder his handes, and that what so euer he dyd, the LORDE made it to come
prosperously to passe.

Chapter 40

1 And it fortuned after this, that ye kynge of Egiptes chefe butlar and ye chefe
baker offended their lorde the kynge of Egipte.
2 And Pharao was angrie wt them, & caused them be put in preson in ye chefe
marshals house,
3 where Ioseph laye presoner.
4 And the chefe marshall put Ioseph vnto them, yt he might serue them. And so
they were in preson for a season.
5 And they dreamed, both the butlar & the baker in one night, euery ma his owne
dreame, and euery dreame had his interpretacio.
6 Now in the mornynge whan Ioseph came in vnto them, and sawe that they loked
sadly, he axed them and sayde:
7 Why loke ye so sadly to daye?
8 They answered: We haue dreamed, and haue no man to declare it vnto vs. Ioseph
sayde: Interpretinge belongeth vnto God, but tell it me yet.
9 Then the chefe butlar tolde Ioseph his dreame, and saide vnto him: I dreamed
that there was a vyne before me,
10 which had thre braunches, and it budded, grewe and bare blossoms, and the
grapes ther of were rype.
11 And I had Pharaos cuppe in my hande, & toke (the grapes) and wronge the in to
ye cuppe, and gaue Pharao the cuppe in his hade.
12 Ioseph sayde: This is the interpretacio:
13 The thre braunches are thre dayes, and ouer thre dayes shall Pharao take the,
and putt the in thine office agayne, that thou mayest geue him the cuppe in his
hande after the olde maner, wha thou wast his butlar.
14 But whan thou art in thy prosperite, thynke vpon me, and shewe me kyndnesse,
that thou mayest certifie Pharao of me, yt he maie bringe me out of this house:
15 for I was preuely caried out of the lande of the Hebrues, and here also haue
I done nothinge, that they shulde haue put me in this dongeon.
16 Whan the chefe baker sawe, that the interpretacion was good, he sayde vnto
Ioseph: I dreamed, that I bare thre wyker baskettes vpon my heade,
17 and in ye vppermost basket all maner of bake meates vnto Pharao, and the
foules ate out of the basket vpon my heade.
18 Ioseph answered, and sayde: This is the interpretacion: The thre baskettes
are thre dayes,
19 and after thre dayes shall Pharao take the, and hange the vpon the galowe,
and the foules shal eate thy flesh from of ye.
20 And vpon the thirde daye it came to passe, that Pharao helde his byrth daye,
and made a feast vnto all his seruauntes, and toke the chefe butlar and the
chefe baker before all his seruauntes,
21 and restored the chefe butlar to his butlar shipe agayne, so that he reached
the cuppe in to Pharaos hande.
22 As for the chefe baker, he caused him be hanged like as Ioseph had
interpretated vnto him.
23 Neuerthelesse the chefe butlar thought not on Ioseph, but forgat him.

Chapter 41

1 And after two yeares Pharao had a dreame, how that he stode by a water syde:
and beholde, out of the water there came seuen
2 goodly kyne, and fatfleshed, and wente fedinge in the medowe.
3 After these he sawe other seuen kyne come out of the water, which were euell
fauoured and leane fleshed, and wente by the kyne vpon ye water syde:
4 and the euell fauoured leene kyne ate vp the seuen goodly and fatt kyne. Then
Pharao awaked.
5 And he slepte agayne, and dreamed the seconde tyme. And he sawe that seuen
eares of corne grewe vpon one stalke, full and good.
6 Afterwarde he sawe seue thynne and blasted eares come vp,
7 and the seuen thynne eares deuoured the seuen greate and full eares. Then
Pharao awaked, and sawe that it was a dreame.
8 And whan it was daye, his sprete was troubled, and he sente out, & caused to
call all the soythsayers in Egipte & all the wyse men, and tolde them his
dreame. But there was none, that coude tell Pharao the interpretacion of it.
9 Then spake the chefe butlar vnto Pharao, and saide: This daye do I remembre my
fawte.
10 Whan Pharao was angrie with his seruauntes, and put me in preson with ye
chefe baker in ye chefe marshals house,
11 we dreamed both in one night euery ma his dreame, hauinge his owne
interpretacion.
12 Then was there with vs a yonge man an Hebrue, the chefe marshals seruaunt,
vnto whom we tolde it, and he declared oure dreames vnto vs, vnto eueryma
acordinge to his dreame.
13 And as he declared it vnto vs, so came it to passe. So I was restored vnto
myne office, and he was hanged.
14 Then Pharao sent and called for Ioseph and they let him out of the dongeon.
And he let himself be shauen, and chaunged his clothes, and came in vnto Pharao.
15 Then saide Pharao vnto him: I haue dreamed a dreame, and there is no man that
can interprete it: but I haue herde tell of the, that wha thou hearest a dreame,
thou declarest it.
16 Ioseph answered Pharao, and sayde: God shall geue Pharao a prosperous
answere, yee well without me.
17 Pharao sayde vnto Ioseph: I dreamed that I stode by a water syde, and
beholde, out of the water there came
18 seuen kyne, fatfleshed and goodly, and wente fedinge in ye medowe.
19 And after them I sawe other seue kyne come out, thynne, euell fauoured, and
leenfleshed. So euell fauoured sawe I neuer in all the lande of Egipte.
20 And the seuen leene and euell fauoured kyne, ate vp the seuen first fat kyne.
21 And whan they had eate them vp, a man coude not perceaue that they had eaten
them, & were as euell fauoured as they were afore. Then I awaked.
22 And I sawe agayne in my dreame seuen eares of corne, growinge vpo one stalke,
full and good.
23 Afterwarde there spronge vp seuen wythred eares, thynne and blasted,
24 and the seuen thynne eares deuoured the seuen good eares. And I haue shewed
it vnto my soithsayers, but they can tell me nothinge therof.
25 Ioseph answered Pharao: Both Pharaos dreames are one. God sheweth Pharao what
he wil do.
26 The seuen good kyne are seuen yeares, and the seuen good eares are seuen
yeares also. It is one dreame.
27 The seuen leene and euell fauoured kyne, that came vp after them, are seuen
yeares. And the seuen thynne and blasted eares, shalbe seuen yeares of derth.
28 This is now the thinge which I tolde Pharao, that God sheweth Pharao, what he
wyll do.
29 Beholde, there shal come seuen yeares wt greate plenteousnes in ye whole
lande of Egipte,
30 and after the same there shall come seuen yeares of derth, so that all this
plenteousnes shalbe forgotten in ye lande of Egipte: and the derth shall consume
the lande,
31 so that the plenteousnes shal not be perceaued in the lande, because of the
derth that commeth therafter, for it shall be very greate.
32 Where as Pharao dreamed the seconde tyme, it signifieth that this thinge is
surely prepared of God, and that God wil shortly brynge the same to passe.
33 Let Pharao now prouyde for a man of vnderstondinge & wysdome, whom he maye
set ouer the lande of Egipte,
34 and se that he ordene officers in the londe, and take ye fifth (parte) of the
lande of Egipte in the seuen plenteous yeares,
35 and gather all ye foode yt shal come of the plenteous yeares, that they maye
laye vp corne vnder Pharaos power for sustenaunce in the cities,
36 and kepe it, yt there maye be foode founde prepared for the lande in the
seuen deare yeares, which shall come vpon the lande of Egipte, that the lande be
not destroyed of honger.
37 The sayenge pleased Pharao well and all his seruautes.
38 And Pharao sayde vnto his seruauntes? How might we fynde soch a man, in whom
is the sprete of God?
39 And sayde vnto Iosep: For so moch as God hath shewed ye all this, there is
none of soch vnderstondinge & wysdome as thou.
40 Thou shalt be ouer my house, and acordinge vnto thy worde shall all my people
obeye: onely in the kynges seate wyll I be more then thou.
41 And he sayde: Beholde, I haue set the ouer the whole lande of Egipte.
42 And he toke of his ringe from his hade and gaue it Ioseph in his hade, and
clothed him with whyte sylke, and honge a cheyne of golge aboute his neck,
43 and made him ryde vpo the seconde charet: and caused it be proclamed before
him, that men shulde bowe their knees vnto him, as to him who Pharao had set
ouer the whole lande of Egipte.
44 And Pharao sayde vnto Ioseph: I am Pharao: without thy wyll shall no man moue
his hande or his fote in all the lade Egipte.
45 And he called him Zaphnath Paena, & gaue him a wife, euen Asnath the doughter
of Potiphar the prest of On. So Ioseph wente out, for to vyset the lande of
Egipte.
46 (And he was thirtie yeare olde, whan he stode before Pharao.) And he departed
from Pharao, and wente thorow all the lande of Egipte.
47 And the londe dyd so those seuen plenteous yeares, and they gathered
48 all the foode of the seuen yeares that were in the lande of Egipte, & layed
it in the cities. Loke what foode grewe in the felde rounde aboute euery cite,
they put it therin.
49 So Ioseph layed vp the corne in stoare, and that moch aboue measure, as the
sonde of the see: in so moch yt he left of nombrynge of it, for it coude not be
nombred.
50 And vnto Ioseph there were borne two sonnes (before ye derth came) whom
Asnath the doughter of Potiphar prest of On bare vnto him.
51 And the first called he Manasses: for God (sayde he) hath caused me to forget
all my laboure, and all my fathers house.
52 The seconde called he Ephraim: for God (sayde he) hath caused me to growe in
ye lande of my trouble.
53 Now whan ye seuen plenteous yeares were ended in Egipte,
54 then beganne the seuen deare yeares to come, wherof Ioseph had sayde. And
there was derth in all landes, but in all the lade of Egipte there was foode.
55 Now whan the lande of Egipte beganne to suffre honger also, the people cryed
vnto Pharao for bred. But Pharao sayde vnto all ye Egipcians: Go vnto Ioseph,
what he sayeth vnto you, yt doo.
56 So whan there was derth in all ye lade, Ioseph opened all yt was by him, &
solde vnto the Egipcians. Thus ye derth preuayled in the lande,
57 & all countrees came to Egipte to bye at Ioseph: for the derth was mightie in
all landes.

Chapter 42

1 Whan Iacob sawe that there was moch corne in Egipte, he sayde vnto his sonnes:
Why gape ye?
2 Beholde, I heare that there is moch corne in Egipte, go downe & bye vs corne,
yt we maie lyue, & not dye.
3 So Iosephs ten brethre wente downe to bye corne in Egipte.
4 As for Ben Iamyn Iosephs brother, Iacob wolde not let him go wt his brethre,
for he sayde: Some mysfortune might happen vnto him.
5 So ye childre of Israel came to bye corne, amonge other yt came wt them: for
there was derth also in ye lande of Canaan.
6 But Ioseph was gouernoure in the lande, and solde corne vnto all the people in
the lande. Now wha his brethre came to him, they fell downe to the grounde
before him vpon their faces.
7 And he sawe them, & knewe the, and helde him self straunge towarde them, and
talked roughly with them, and saide vnto them: Whence come ye? They sayde: Out
of the lande of Canaan to bye vytayle.
8 Neuertheles though he knewe them, yet knewe they not him.
9 And Ioseph thought vpon ye dreames that he had dreamed of them, and sayde vnto
them: Ye are spyes, and are come to se where the lande is open.
10 They answered him: No my lorde, thy seruauntes are come to bye vytayle:
11 we are all one mans sonnes, we are vnfayned, and thy seruauntes were neuer
spyes.
12 He sayde vnto the: No, but ye are come to se where the lande is open.
13 They answered him: We thy seruauntes are twolue brethren, the sonnes of one
man in the lade of Canaan, and the yongest is with oure father: as for one, he
is awaye.
14 Ioseph sayde vnto them: This is it that I sayde vnto you: spyes are ye.
15 Here by wyll I proue you: By the life of Pharao ye shall not get hence,
excepte youre yongest brother come hither.
16 Sende awaye one of you to fetch youre brother, but ye shalbe in preson. Thus
wyll I trye out yor wordes, whether ye go aboute wt trueth or not: for els, by
the life of Pharao ye are spyes.
17 And he put the together in warde thre dayes longe.
18 Vpon the thirde daye he sayde vnto the: Yf ye wil lyue, the do thus, for I
feare God:
19 Yf ye be vnfayned, let one of youre brethren lye bounde in youre preson: but
go ye youre waye, and cary home the necessary foode,
20 & brynge me youre yongest brother, so wyll I beleue youre wordes, that ye
shall not dye. And so they dyd.
21 And they sayde one to another: This haue we deserued against oure brother, in
that we sawe the anguysh of his soule, whan he besought vs, and we wolde not
heare him: therfore cometh now this trouble vpon vs.
22 Ruben answered them, and saide: Tolde not I you ye same, whan I sayde: O
synne not agaynst ye lad, but ye wolde not heare. Now is his bloude requyred.
23 But they knew not that Ioseph vnderstode it, for he spake vnto the by an
interpreter.
24 And he turned him from them, and wepte. Now whan he had turned him to them
agayne, and talked wt them, he toke Symon from amonge them & bounde him before
their eyes,
25 and commaunded to fyll their sackes wt corne, and to put euery mans money in
his sack, and to geue euery one his expenses by the waye. And so was it done
vnto them.
26 And they laded their corne vpon their Asses, and departed thence.
27 ut whan one opened his sacke to geue his Asse prouender in the Inne, he spyed
his money in his sack mouth,
28 and sayde vnto his brethren: My money is restored me agayne: lo, it is in my
sack. Then their hertes fayled them, and they were afrayed amonge them selues,
and sayde: Wherfore hath God done this vnto vs?
29 Now whan they came home to Iacob their father in the lade of Canaan, they
tolde him all that had happened vnto them, & sayde:
30 The man that is lorde of the londe, spake roughly to vs, and toke vs for
spyes of the countre.
31 And whan we answered: we are vnfayned, & were neuer spyes,
32 but are twolue brethren the sonnes of oure father: one is awaye, and the
yongest is yet this daye wt oure father in the lande of Canaan,
33 He sayde: Hereby wyl I marke, that ye are vnfayned: Leaue one of youre
brethren with me, & take foode necessary for youre houses, & go youre waye,
34 and brynge youre yongest brother vnto me: so shal I knowe that ye are no
spyes, but vnfayned: the shal I delyuer you youre brother also, and ye maye
occupie in the lande.
35 And whan they opened their sackes, euery man founde his boundell of money in
his sacke. And wha they and their father sawe, that it was the bundels of their
money, they were afrayed.
36 Then sayde Iacob their father: Ye haue robbed me of my children. Ioseph is
awaye, Simeon is awaye, and ye will take Ben Iamin awaye: It goeth all ouer me.
37 Ruben answered his father & sayde: Yf I brynge him not to the againe, then
slaye my two sonnes: delyuer him but in to my hande, I wyl brynge him agayne
vnto the.
38 He sayde: my sonne shal not go downe with you: for his brother is deed, and
he is left alone. Yf eny mysfortune shulde happen vnto him by the waye yt ye go,
ye shulde bringe my graye hayre with sorowe downe vnto the graue.

Chapter 43

1 Bvt the derth oppressed ye lande.
2 And whan all the vytales that they had brought out of Egipte were spent, Iacob
their father sayde vnto them: Go agayne, and bye vs a litle foode.
3 The Iuda answered him, and sayde: The man sware vnto vs, and sayde: ye shal
not se my face, excepte youre brother be with you.
4 Yf so be now that thou wilt sende oure brother with vs, we wil go downe, and
bye the foode.
5 But yf thou wilt not sende him, we wyl not go downe. For the man sayde vnto
vs: Ye shal not se my face, excepte youre brother be with you.
6 Israel sayde: Wherfore haue ye done this euell vnto me, to tell ye man, that
ye had yet a brother?
7 They answered: The man enquered so strately of vs and of oure kynrede, &
sayde: Is youre father yet a lyue? Haue ye yet a brother? Then tolde we him, as
he axed vs. How coulde we knowe, that he wolde saye: brynge youre brother downe
wt you?
8 Then sayde Iuda vnto Israel his father: Let the lad go with me, that we maye
get vs vp and take oure iourney, and lyue, and not dye, both we and thou, and
oure childre.
9 I wyll be suertye for him, of my handes shalt thou requyre him. Yf I brynge
him not vnto the agayne, & set him before thine eyes, I wil beare ye blame my
life longe.
10 For yf we had not made this tarienge, we had now bene come agayne twyse.
11 Then sayde Israel their father vnto the: Yf it must nedes be so, then do
this: take of the best frutes of the lande in youre sackes, and brynge the man a
present: a curtesy balme, and hony, and spyces, and myrre, and dates, and
almondes.
12 Take other money with you also, and the money that was brought agayne in
youre sacke mouthes, cary it agayne with you: peraduenture it was an ouersight.
13 And take youre brother, get you vp, & go agayne vnto the man.
14 The Allmightie God geue you mercy in the sight of ye man, that he maye let
you haue youre other brother, and Ben Iamin. As for me, I must be as one, that
is robbed of his children.
15 Then they toke the present, and other money with them, and Ben Iamin, gat the
vp, and wente in to Egipte, and stode before Ioseph.
16 Then Ioseph behelde them with Ben Iamin, and sayde vnto the ruler of his
house: Bringe these men in, and sley, & make ready, for they shal dyne with me
at noone.
17 And the man dyd as Ioseph bad him, & brought the men in to Iosephs house.
18 Whan they were brought in to Iosephs house, they were afrayed, and sayde: We
are brought hither because of the money, that came agayne in oure sackes at the
first, to pyke a quarell with vs, and to laye somethinge to oure charge, and to
take vs for bonde seruauntes with oure Asses.
19 Therfore came they to ye man, that was ruler of Iosephs house, and talked wt
him at the doore,
20 and sayde: Syr, we came downe at the first to bye foode,
21 and whan we came in the Inne, and opened oure sackes, beholde, euery mans
money was in his sack mouth with full weight: therfore haue we brought it with
vs agayne,
22 & haue brought other money with vs also, to bye foode: but we can not tell,
who put oure money in oure sackes.
23 He sayde: Be content, feare you not, youre God euen ye God of youre fathers
hath geue you yt treasure in youre sackes, I had youre money. And he brought
forth Simeon vnto them,
24 and led them into Iosephs house, and gaue them water to wash their fete, &
gaue their Asses prouender.
25 And they made readye ye present, ageynst Ioseph came at noone: for they
herde, yt they shulde dyne there.
26 Now whan Ioseph wente in to the house, they brought him home ye present that
they had, and fell downe to the grounde before him.
27 But he welcomed them curteously, and sayde: Is youre father, (that olde man
which ye tolde me of) in good health? Is he yet alyue?
28 They answered: Thy seruaunt oure father is in good health, and is yet alyue.
And they bowed them selues, and fell downe before him.
29 And he lift vp his eyes, and sawe his brother Ben Iamin his mothers sonne,
and saide: Is this youre yongest brother, that ye tolde me of? And he sayde
morouer: God be mercifull vnto the my sonne.
30 And Ioseph made haist (for the grounde of his hert was kyndled towarde his
brother) and sought how he might wepe, & wente in to his chamber, and wepte
there.
31 And whan he had washed his face, he wente out, and refrayned him self, and
sayde: set bred (on the table.)
32 And they brought vnto him by him self, and vnto them by the selues, and to
the Egipcians also that ate wt them, by them selues. (For the Egipcians darre
not eate bred with the Ebrues, that is an abhominacion vnto them.)
33 And they were set ouer agaynst him, the first borne acordinge to his first
byrth, and the yongest after his youth. They marueled at it amonge them selues,
34 and there were brought them sundrye meates from his table. But Ben Iamins
parte was fyue tymes more then the other. And they dronke, and were mery with
him.

Chapter 44

1 And Ioseph commaunded the ruler of his house, and sayde: Fyll the mens sackes
with foode, as moch as they maye carye,
2 and put euery mans money in his sacke mouth, & put my syluer cuppe in the sack
mouth of the yongest with the money for ye vytayles. He dyd as Ioseph had sayde.
3 And on the morow whan it was daye, they let ye men go with their Asses.
4 But whan they were out of the cite, and not come farre, Ioseph sayde to the
ruler of his house: Vp, and folowe after the me, and whan thou ouertakest them,
saie vnto them: Wherfore haue ye rewarded euell for good?
5 Is not that it, that my lorde drynketh out of? and that he prophecieth
withall? It is euell done of you, that ye haue done.
6 And whan he had ouertaken them, he sayde the same wordes vnto them.
7 They answered him: Wherfore saieth my lorde soch wordes? God forbyd, that thy
seruauntes shulde do eny soch thinge?
8 Beholde, the money that we foude in oure sackes mouthes, that brought we vnto
the agayne, out of the lande of Canaan: how shulde we then haue stollen either
syluer or golde out of thy lordes house?
9 Loke by whom it shall be founde amonge thy seruauntes, let him dye: yee and we
also wyll be my lordes bondmen.
10 He sayde: let it so be, as ye haue spoken. Loke by whom it shall be founde,
let him be my seruaunt, but ye shalbe harmlesse.
11 And they made haist, and toke downe euery man his sack to the grounde, and
euery man opened his sack:
12 And he searched & beganne at the greatest vnto the yongest, and the cuppe was
founde in Ben Iamins sacke.
13 Then rente they their clothes, and euery man lade the burthen vpon his Asse,
& wente agayne vnto the cite.
14 And Iuda wente with his brethren vnto Iosephs house (for he was there yet)
and they fell before him on the groude.
15 Ioseph sayde vnto them: What maner of dede is this, that ye haue done? Knewe
ye not, that soch a man as I am, can prophecy?
16 Iuda sayde: What shall we saye vnto my lorde? or how shal we speake? and what
excuse shal we make? God hath founde out ye wickednesse of thy seruauntes.
Beholde, we and he, by whom the cuppe is founde, are my lordes seruauntes.
17 But he sayde: God forbyd that I shulde do so. The man by whom the cuppe is
founde, shall by my seruaunt, but go ye vp in peace vnto youre father.
18 The stepte Iuda vnto him, and sayde: My lorde, let thy seruaunt speake one
worde in thine eares my lorde, be not displesed at yi seruaunt also, for thou
art eue as Pharao.
19 My lorde axed his seruauntes, and sayde: Haue ye yet a father or brother?
20 Then answered we: We haue a father, which is olde, and a yonge lad begotten
in his age, and his brother is deed, & he is left alone of his mother, and his
father loueth him.
21 Then saydest thou: Brynge him downe vnto me, and I wil se him.
22 But we answered my lorde: The lad can not come from his father, yf he shulde
come from him, he were but a deed man.
23 Then saydest thou vnto thy seruauntes: Yf youre yongest brother come not
hither with you, ye shall se my face nomore.
24 Then wente we vp vnto thy seruaunt my father, and tolde him my lordes wordes.
25 Then sayde oure father: Go youre waye agayne, and bye vs a litle foode.
26 But we sayde: We can not go downe, excepte oure yongest brother be with vs,
then wyll we go downe: for we darre not loke the man in the face, yf oure
yongest brother be not with vs.
27 Then sayde thy seruaunt my father vnto vs: Ye knowe that my wife bare me two
sonnes,
28 one wente out fro me, and I sayde: he is torne in peces.
29 Yf ye take this fro me also, and eny mysfortune happe him, then shal ye
brynge my gray heer with sorowe downe vnto the graue.
30 Yf I now come home vnto my father, & the lad be not with me (seynge his soule
hangeth by the soule of this)
31 then shall it come to passe, that yf he se not the lad there, he shal dye. So
shal we thy seruauntes brynge the gray heer of thy seruaunt oure father with
sorowe downe to the graue.
32 For I thy seruaunt became suertye for the lad vnto my father, and sayde: yf I
brynge him not agayne, I will beare the blame all my lyfe longe.
33 Therfore let thy seruaunt byde here in steade of ye lad, to be my lordes
bonde man, and let the lad go vp with his brethren.
34 For how can I go vp vnto my father, yf the lad be not with me? Then shulde I
se the mysery that shulde happen vnto my father.

Chapter 45

1 Then coude not Ioseph refrayne him self before all them that stode aboute him:
and he comaunded euery man to go out from him, and there stode no man by him,
whan Ioseph vttred him self vnto his brethren.
2 And he wepte loude, so that ye Egipcians and Pharaos housholde herde it.
3 And he sayde vnto his brethren: I am Ioseph, is my father yet alyue? And his
brethren coulde not answere him, they were so abashed before his face.
4 But he sayde: Come nye vnto me. And they came nye. And he sayde: I am Ioseph
youre brother. whom ye solde in to Egipte.
5 And now vexe not youre selues, & thinke not yt there is eny wrath, because ye
solde me hither. For God sent me hither before you, for yor lyues sake.
6 For these are now two yeares, that ye derth hath bene in the lande, and there
are yet fyue yeares behynde, wherin there shalbe no plowinge ner haruest.
7 But God sent me hither before you, yt he might let you remayne vpon earth, and
to saue youre lyues by a greate delyueraunce.
8 And now, it was not ye then that sent me hither, but God which hath made me a
father vnto Pharao, & lorde ouer all his house, and a prynce in the whole lande
of Egipte.
9 Haist you therfore, and go vp vnto my father, and saye vnto him: Thy sonne
Ioseph sendeth the this worde: God hath made me lorde in all Egipte, come downe
vnto me, tarye not,
10 thou shalt dwel in the lande of Gosen, and be with me: thou and thy children,
and thy childers childre, thy small and greate catell, and all that thou hast.
11 There wyll I make prouysion for the (for there are yet fyue yeares of derth)
that thou perishe not wt thine house, and all that is thyne.
12 Beholde, youre eyes and the eyes of my brother Ben Iamin se, that I myne owne
self speake vnto you by mouth.
13 Shewe my father all my worshipe in Egipte, and all that ye haue sene: haist
you, and come downe hither with my father.
14 And he fell aboute his brother Ben Iamyns neck, and wepte, and Ben Iamin
wepte vpon his neck also.
15 And he kyssed all his brethren, and wepte vpon them. And afterwarde talked
his brethren wt him.
16 And this tydinges came in to Pharaos house: Iosephs brethren are come, which
pleased Pharao well, and all his seruauntes.
17 And Pharao spake vnto Ioseph: Saye vnto thy brethren: Do thus, lade youre
beastes, go youre waye, and whan ye come in to the lande of Canaan,
18 take youre father and youre housholdes, and come vnto me, I wyl geue you of
the goodes in the lade of Egipte, so that ye shall eate the fatt in the lande.
19 And he commaunded them, Do thus, Take you charettes out of ye lande of Egipte
for youre children and wyues, and brynge youre father, and come,
20 and regarde not youre housholde stuff: for the goodes of all the lade of
Egipte shalbe yours.
21 The children of Israel dyd so, and Ioseph gaue the charettes acordynge to
Pharaos commaundement, and expenses by the waye,
22 and gaue them all, vnto euery one a chaunge of rayment: but vnto Ben Iamin he
gaue thre hundreth syluer pens, and fyue chaunge of rayment.
23 As for his father, he sent him ten Asses laden with goodes out of Egipte, and
ten Asses with corne and bred, and vytayles for his father by ye waye.
24 So he sent awaye his brethren, and sayde vnto them: Stryue not by the waye.
25 Thus they departed out of Egipte, and came to the lande of Canaan vnto Iacob
their father, and tolde him, and sayde:
26 Thy sonne Ioseph is yet alyue, and is a lorde in all the lande of Egipte. But
his hert wauered, for he beleued them not.
27 The tolde they him all the wordes of Ioseph, which he had sayde vnto them.
And whan he sawe ye charettes that Ioseph had sent to fetch him, his sprete
reuyued,
28 & he sayde: I haue ynough, that my sonne Ioseph is yet a liue I wil go, and
se him, before I dye.

Chapter 46

1 Israel toke his iourney with all that he had. And whan he came to Berseba, he
offred offerynges vnto ye God of his father Isaac.
2 And God spake vnto him in a vision by night: Iacob Iacob. He sayde: here am I.
3 And he saide: I am ye mightie God of thy father, be not afrayed to go into
Egipte, for there wyl I make a greate people of the.
4 I wyll go downe with the, & wil brynge the vp also. And Ioseph shal laye his
hande vpon thine eyes.
5 Then Iacob gat him vp from Berseba, and ye children of Israel caried Iacob
their father with their children and wyues vpon the charettes that Pharao had
sent to cary him.
6 And they toke their catell & substaunce which they had gotten in the lande of
Canaan, and so came in to Egipte: Iacob & all his sede with him,
7 his children & his childers children with him, his doughters, and the
doughters of his children, & all his sede.
8 These are ye names of the children of Israel, which came in to Egipte, Iacob &
his sonnes. The first borne sonne of Iacob: Ruben.
9 The children of Ruben: Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron and Charmi.
10 The children of Simeon: Iemuel, Iamin, Ohad, Iachim, Zohar and Saul the sonne
of the Cananitish woman.
11 The childre of Leui: Gerson, Cahath & Merari.
12 The childre of Iuda: Er, Onan, Sela, Phares & Serah. But Er and Onan dyed in
the lande of Canaan. The childre of Phares: Hesron and Hamul.
13 The children of Isachar: Thola, Phua, Iob & Semron.
14 The children of Zabulon: Sered, Elon and Iahleel.
15 These are the childre of Lea, which she bare vnto Iacob in Mesopotamia with
his doughter Dina. These all together with sonnes & doughters make thre &
thirtie soules.
16 The childre of Gad: Zipheon, Haggi, Suni, Ezbon, Eri, Arodi and Areli.
17 The children of Asser: Iemna, Iesua, Iesui, Bria & Sera their sister. The
children of Bria: Heber and Malchiel.
18 These are the children of Silpa, whom Laban gaue vnto Lea his doughter, and
she bare vnto Iacob these sixtene soules.
19 The childre of Rachel Iacobs wife: Ioseph and Ben Iamin.
20 And vnto Ioseph in ye land of Egipte were borne Manasses and Ephraim, whom
Asnath the doughter of Potiphar prest of On bare vnto him.
21 The children of Ben Iamin: Bela, Becher, Asber, Gera, Naama, Ehi, Ros, Mupim,
Hupim and Ard.
22 These are the children of Rachel, which were borne vnto Iacob, fourtene
soules alltogether.
23 The children of Dan: Husim.
24 The childre of Nephtali: Iahzeel, Guni, Iezer, Sillem.
25 These are the children of Bilha, whom Laban gaue vnto his doughter Rachel, &
she bare Iacob these seuen soules.
26 All the soules yt came wt Iacob in to Egipte, which proceaded out of his
loynes (besyde the wyues of his childre) are all together sixe & sixtie soules.
27 And Iosephs childre which were borne vnto him in Egipte, were two soules: so
that all the soules of the house of Iacob which came into Egipte, were seuentye.
28 And he sent Iuda before him vnto Ioseph, to shew him the waye to Gosen, &
they came in to the lande of Gosen.
29 Then Ioseph bended his charett fast, and wente vp to mete Israel his father
vnto Gosen. And whan he sawe him, he fell aboute his neck, & wepte sore vpon his
neck.
30 Then sayde Israel vnto Ioseph: Now am I content to dye, for so moch as I haue
sene thy face, that thou art yet alyue.
31 Ioseph sayde vnto his brethren, & to his fathers house: I will go vp, & tell
Pharao, & saye vnto him: My brethre and my fathers house are come vnto me out of
the lande of Canaan,
32 and are kepers of catell (for they are men that deale with catell:) their
small & greate catell, and all that they haue, haue they brought with them.
33 Now yf Pharao call you, and saye: what is youre occupacio?
34 then ye shal saye: Thy seruauntes are men yt haue dealt wt catell from oure
youth vp hytherto, both we & oure fathers, that ye maye dwell in the lande of
Gosen: for the Egipcians abhorre all kepers of catell.

Chapter 47

1 Then came Ioseph, and tolde Pharao & sayde: My father and my brethren, their
small & greate catell, & all yt they haue, are come out of ye lande of Canaan:
2 & beholde, they are in the lande of Gesen. And he toke fyue of his brethren, &
presented them vnto Pharao.
3 Then sayde Pharao vnto his brethren: What is youre occupacion? They answered:
Thy seruauntes are kepers of catell, we and oure fathers also.
4 And they sayde morouer vnto Pharao: We are come to dwell with you in the
lande, for yi seruautes haue no pasture for their catell, so sore doth the derth
oppresse the lande of Canaan. Now therfore let yi seruauntes dwell in the lande
of Gosen.
5 Pharao sayde vnto Ioseph: Thy father and thy brethren are come vnto the:
6 the lande of Egipte is open before the, let them dwell in the best place of
the lande, & se yt they dwell euen in the lande of Gosen. And yf thou knowest
that there be men of actiuyte amoge the, make the rulers of my catell.
7 Ioseph brought in Iacob his father also, & set him before Pharao. And Iacob
thanked Pharao.
8 But Pharao axed Iacob: How olde art thou?
9 Iacob sayde: The tyme of my pylgremage is an hudreth and thirtie yeares: litle
and euell is the tyme of my pilgremage, and attayneth not vnto the tyme of my
fathers in their pylgremages.
10 And Iacob thanked Pharao, and wete out from him.
11 So Ioseph prepared dwellinges for his father and his brethren, & gaue them a
possession in the lande of Egipte, euen in the best place of the lande, namely,
in the lande of Raemses, as Pharao comaunded.
12 And he made prouysion for his father and his brethren, and all his fathers
house with bred, euen as yonge children.
13 There was no bred in all the londe, for the derth was very sore: so yt the
lande of Egipte & the lande of Canaan were fameshed by ye reason of the derth.
14 And Ioseph brought together all the money that was founde in Egipte and
Canaan, for ye corne that they bought. And he layed vp all the money in Pharaos
house.
15 Now whan money fayled in the lande of Egipte and Canaan, all the Egipcians
came vnto Ioseph, & saide: Geue vs bred. Why suffrest thou vs to dye before ye,
because weare without money?
16 Ioseph saide: Brynge hither youre catell, so wil I geue you for youre catell,
seynge ye are without money.
17 Then brought they their catell vnto Ioseph. And he gaue the bred for their
horses, shepe, oxen and Asses. So he fed them with bred yt yeare, for all their
catell.
18 Whan yt yeare was ended, they came vnto him the next yeare, & sayde vnto him:
We wil not hyde it from or lorde, yt not onely the money, but all the catell
also is spent vnto or lorde: & there is nothinge left more for or lorde, but
onely or body & oure lande.
19 Wherfore suffrest thou both vs to dye, and oure londe? Take vs and oure lade
for bred, that we and oure lande maye be bonde vnto Pharao: geue vs sede, that
we maye lyue and not dye, & yt the lande become not a wildernesse.
20 So Ioseph toke all the lande of Egipte in for Pharao: for the Egipcians solde
euery man his lande, because ye derth was so mightie vpon them: and so the lode
became Pharaos,
21 with the people that wente out and in at his cities, from one syde of Egipte
vnto the other,
22 excepte the prestes londe, that toke he not in: For it was ordened of Pharao
for the prestes, that they shulde eate that which was appoynted them, which he
gaue them, therfore they neded not to sell their londes.
23 Then sayde Ioseph vnto the people: Beholde, I haue taken possession of you
and youre lande this daye for Pharao, Beholde, there haue ye sede, sowe the
londe,
24 and of the corne ye shall geue the fifth parte vnto Pharao: foure partes
shalbe youres, to sowe the londe for youre sustenaunce, and for youre houses and
children.
25 They sayde: Let vs but lyue, & fynde grace before the oure lorde, we wyl
gladly be Pharaos seruauntes:
26 So Ioseph made the a lawe vnto this daye ouer the Egipcians londe, to geue
Pharao the fifth parte, excepte the prestes londe, which was not bonde vnto
Pharao.
27 So Israel dwelt in Egipte in the londe of Gosen, and had it in possession,
and grew and multiplied exceadingly.
28 And Iacob lyued seuentene yeare in the lande of Egipte, so that his whole age
was an hudreth and seuen and fourtye yeares.
29 Now whan the tyme came that Israel shulde dye, he called Ioseph his sonne,
and sayde vnto him: Yf I haue founde grace in thy sight, then laye thine honde
vnder my thye, yt thou shalt shewe mercy and faithfulnes vpon me, and not burye
me in Egipte,
30 but I will lye by my fathers, and thou shalt carye me out of Egipte, & burye
me in their buryall. He sayde: I wil do as thou hast sayde.
31 But he sayde: Then sweare vnto me. And he sware vnto him. The Israel bowed
himself towarde the bed heade.

Chapter 48

1 After this it was tolde Ioseph: Beholde, yi father is sicke. And he toke with
him his two sonnes Manasses and Ephraim.
2 Then was it tolde Iacob: beholde, yi sonne Ioseph cometh vnto ye. And Israel
toke a corage vnto him, & sat vp vpo ye bed,
3 & sayde vnto Ioseph: The Allmightye God appeared vnto me at Lus in ye lade of
Canaan, & blessed me,
4 & saide vnto me: Beholde, I wil cause ye to growe & increase & wyll make a
multitude of people of ye, & wil geue this lade vnto yi sede after ye for an
euerlastinge possession.
5 Therfore shal now thy two sonnes Manasses & Ephraim (which were borne vnto the
in Egipte, before I came hither vnto the) be myne, like as Ruben & Simeon.
6 As for those that thou begettest after the, they shal be thine owne. But these
shalbe named with the names of their brethren in their inheritaunce.
7 And wha I came out of Mesopotamia, Rachel dyed by me in the lande of Canaan,
by the waye, whan there was yet but a feldes brede vnto Eprath: and I buryed her
in the waye towarde Ephrath, which now is called Bethleem.
8 And Israel loked vpon Iosephs sonnes, & sayde: What are these?
9 Ioseph answered: They are my sonnes, which God hath geuen me here. He sayde:
Brynge the hither to me, yt I maye blesse the.
10 (For Israels eyes were heuy for age, & he coude not well se.) And he brought
the vnto him. So he kyssed them, & enbraced the,
11 & saide vnto Ioseph: Beholde, I haue sene yi face, which I thought not: & lo,
God hath caused me to se yi sede also.
12 And Ioseph toke them from his lappe, and they fell downe to the grounde vpon
their face.
13 Then Ioseph toke them both, Ephraim in his right hande towarde Israels left
hade, and Manasses in his left hande towarde Israels right hade, & brought the
vnto him.
14 But Israel stretched out his right hande, & layed it vpo ye heade of Ephraim
ye yogest & his left hande vpo Manasses heade, & did so wyttingly wt his handes,
for Manasses was ye firstborne.
15 And he blessed Ioseph, & saide: The God before who my fathers Abraha & Isaac
haue walked: ye God yt hath fed me my lyfe longe vnto this daye:
16 the angell which hath delyuered me fro all euell, blesse these laddes, yt
they maye be called after my name, & after ye name of my fathers Abraha & Isaac,
yt they maye growe & multiplye vpon earth.
17 But wha Ioseph sawe yt his father layed ye right hade vpo Ephraims heade, it
displeased him, & he lift vp his fathers hande, to remoue it fro Ephraims heade
vnto ye heade of Manasses,
18 & sayde vnto him: Not so my father, this is ye firstborne, laye yi right hade
vpo his heade.
19 Neuertheles his father wolde not, & saide: I knowe it well my sonne, I knowe
it well, this shall be a people also, & shalbe greate: but his yonger brother
shal be greater the he, & his sede shal be full of people.
20 So he blessed them the same daye & saide: In ye shal Israel blesse, so yt it
shal be sayde: God set the as Ephraim & Manasses. And so he set Ephraim aboue
Manasses.
21 And Israel saide vnto Ioseph: Beholde, I dye, & God shall be wt you, & brynge
you agayne in to ye lande of youre fathers.
22 I haue geuen the a pece of londe, without ye brethren, which I gat with my
swerde and my bowe out of the hande of the Amorites.

Chapter 49

1 And Iacob called his sonnes, & sayde: Gather you, yt I maie tell you, what
shal happen vnto you in ye last times:
2 Come together, and heare ye childre of Iacob: Herken vnto Israel youre father.
3 Rube my first sonne, thou art my power and the begynnynge of my strength,
chefe in gouernaunce, & chefe in auctorite.
4 Thou passest forth swiftly as ye water. Thou shalt not be the chefest: For
thou hast clymmed vp vpon thy fathers bed, euen than defyledest thou my couch
with goynge vp.
5 Symeon and Leui brethren, their deedly weapens are perlous instrumentes.
6 In to their secretes come not my soule, and my worshipe be not ioyned with
their congregacion: for in their wrath they slew a man, and in their selfwyll
they houghed an oxe.
7 Cursed be their wrath, because it is so fearce: and their indignacion, because
it is so rigorous. I wil deuyde them in Iacob, and scater them in Israel
8 Iuda, thou art he. Thy brethren shall prayse the: for thy hade shal be in
thine enemies neck: thy fathers children shall stoupe vnto the.
9 Iuda is a yonge lyon, thou art come vp hye my sonne, fro the spoyle. He kneled
downe and couched himself as a lyon & as a lionesse: who wil rayse him vp?
10 The cepter shal not be remoued fro Iuda, ner a master fro his fete, tyll the
Worthye come, and vnto him shal the people fall.
11 He shall bynde his foale vnto the vyne, and his Asses colte to ye noble
braunch. He shal wash his garment in wyne, and his mantell in the bloude of
grapes.
12 His eyes are roudier then wyne, and his teth whyter then mylck.
13 Zabulon shal dwell in the hauen of the see, and in the porte of shippes, and
shal border vpon Sydon.
14 Isachar shal be a stronge Asse, & laye him downe betwixte ye borders.
15 And he saw rest, that it was good, and the lande, that it was pleasaunt. And
bowed downe his shulder to beare, and became a seruaut vnto trybute.
16 Dan shal be iudge in his people, as well as a trybe in Israel.
17 Dan shalbe a serpent in the waye, and an edder in the path, and byte the
horse in the heles, that his ryder maye fall backwarde.
18 LORDE I loke for thy saluacion.
19 As for Gad, a wapened hoost of men shal fall violently vpon him, but he shall
hurte them in the hele.
20 Of Asser cometh his fat bred, and he shal geue delicates vnto kynges.
21 Nepthali is a swift hynde, and geueth goodly wordes.
22 The fruteful sonne Ioseph, that florishinge sonne to loke vpon, the doughters
go vpo the wall.
23 And though the shoters angered him, stroue with him, and hated him,
24 yet his bowe bode fast, and the armes of his hades were made stroge by the
handes of ye Mightie in Iacob. Of him are come herdmen & stones in Israel.
25 Of yi fathers God art thou helped, & of the Allmightie art thou blessed, wt
blessynges of heauen from aboue, with blessinges of ye depe yt lyeth vnder, with
blessynges of brestes & wombes.
26 The blessinges promised vnto thy father and my fore elders go mightely, after
the desyre of the hyest in the worlde: these shal light on Iosephs heade, and on
the toppe of his heade, that was separate from his brethren.
27 Ben Iamin, a rauyshinge wolfe. In the mornynge shal he deuoure the praye, but
in the euenynge he shal deuyde the spoyle.
28 All these are the twolue trybes of Israel: and this is it that their father
spake vnto them, whan he blessed them, euery one with a sundrye blessynge.
29 And he commaunded them, and sayde vnto them: I shal be gathered vnto my
people, burye me with my fathers in ye caue which is in the felde of Ephron the
Hethite,
30 in the dubble caue that lyeth ouer against Mamre in ye lande of Canaa, which
Abraha bought with the felde, of Ephron the Hethite for a possession to burye
in.
31 There buryed they Abraha & Sara his wife, there buried they Isaac also &
Rebecca his wife: & their buried I Lea,
32 in the good of the felde & of the caue therin, which was bought of the
Hethites.
33 And whan Iacob had ended this commaundement vnto his children, he pluckte his
fete together vpon the bed, and died, and was gathered vnto his people.

Chapter 50

1 The fell Ioseph vpon his fathers face, and wepte, and kyssed him.
2 And Ioseph comauded his seruautes ye Phisicias, to embawme his father. And the
Phisicians embawmed Israel,
3 tyll fourtye dayes were ended (for so longe endured the dayes of embawminge) &
the Egipcians bewayled him seuentye dayes.
4 Now whan the mournynge dayes were ended, Ioseph spake vnto Pharaos housholde,
& sayde: Yf I haue founde fauor in youre sight, the speake vnto Pharao and saie:
5 My father hath taken an ooth of me, & sayde: Beholde, I dye, burye me in myne
owne graue, which I dygged for myself in the lade of Canaan. Therfore wyl I now
go vp, and burye my father, and come agayne.
6 Pharao saide: Go thy waye vp, and burye thy father, acordinge as thou hast
sworne vnto him.
7 So Ioseph wete vp, to burye his father. And there wete wt him all Pharaos
seruautes yt were the elders of his courte, and all ye elders of the lande of
Egipte,
8 & all Iosephs housholde, and his brethren, and his fathers housholde. Onely
their children, shepe & oxen left they in ye lade of Gosen,
9 & toke their iourney vp with him, vpo charettes and horses, and the company
was exceadinge greate.
10 Now whan these came to the playne of Atad yt lyeth beyonde Iordane, they made
there a very greate and bytter lamentacion, & he mourned for his father seue
dayes.
11 And wha the people in the lande (the Cananites) sawe the mournynge in the
playne of Atad, they sayde: The Egipcias make there greate lametacion. Therfore
is the place called: The lamentacion of the Egipcians, which lyeth beyonde
Iordane.
12 And his children dyd as he had comaunded them,
13 and caried him to ye lande of Canaan, and buried him in ye dubble caue, that
Abraham bought with the felde for a possession to bury in, of Ephron ye Hethite
ouer ageynst Mamre.
14 So Ioseph toke his iourney agayne in to Egipte with his brethren, and with
all those that wente vp with him to burye his father, whan they had buried him.
15 But Iosephs brethre were afrayed, wha their father was deed, and sayde:
Ioseph might happly haue indignacion at vs, and recompense vs all the euell that
we dyd vnto him,
16 therfore let they saye vnto him: Thy father commaunded before his death, and
sayde:
17 Thus shal ye saye vnto Ioseph: O forgeue thy brethren the offence and their
synne, that they dyd so euell vnto the. O forgeue now this trespace of vs the
seruauntes of thy fathers God. But Ioseph wepte, whan they spake so vnto him.
18 And his brethren wente, and fell downe before him, and sayde: Beholde, here
are we thy seruauntes.
19 Ioseph sayde vnto the: Feare ye not, for I am vnder God.
20 Ye thought euell ouer me, but God hath turned it vnto good, to do as it is
come to passe this daye, for the sauynge of moch people.
21 Therfore be not ye now afrayed, I wyl care for you and youre children. And he
comforted them, and spake louyngly vnto them.
22 Thus dwelt Ioseph in Egipte with his fathers house, and lyued an hudreth and
ten yeare,
23 and sawe Ephrayms children, vnto ye thirde generacion: In like maner the
children of Machir the sonne of Manasses, begat children also vpon Iosephs
lappe.
24 And Ioseph sayde vnto his brethren: I dye, and God wyl vyset you, and brynge
you out of this lande, to the lande that he sware vnto Abraham, Isaac and Iacob.
25 Therfore toke he an ooth of the childre of Israel, and sayde: Whan God shal
vyset you, the cary my bones fro hence.
26 So Ioseph dyed, wha he was an hudreth and ten yeare olde, and they embawmed
him, & layed him in a chest in Egipte.


Exodus

Chapter 1

1 These are ye names of the childre of Israel, that came with Iacob into Egipte:
euery one came in wt his house,
2 Ruben, Simeon, Leui, Iuda,
3 Isachar, Zabulo, Ben Iamin,
4 Dan, Nephtali, Gad and Aser.
5 And of all the soules that came out of the loynes of Iacob, there were
seuentie. As for Ioseph, he was in Egipte all ready.
6 Now wha Ioseph was deed, and all his brethren, and all they that lyued at that
tyme,
7 the children of Israel grewe, and increased, and multiplied, and became
exceadinge mightie, so yt the lande was full of them.
8 The came there a new kynge ouer Egipte, which knewe nothinge of Ioseph,
9 and sayde vnto his people: Beholde, the people of the children of Israel are
many, & mightier then we:
10 Vp, let vs deale wysely with them, yt there be not so many of them. For yf
there shulde ryse vp eny warre agaynst vs, they might ioyne them selues also
vnto oure enemies, and ouercome vs, & so get them out of the lande.
11 And he set worke masters ouer them, to kepe them vnder with burthens. (For
they buylded the cities Phiton and Raemses, for treasuries vnto Pharao.)
12 But the more they vexed them, the more they multiplied and grew.Therfore had
they indignacio at the children of Israel,
13 and the Egipcians compelled the children of Israel without mercy to do
seruyce,
14 and made their lyues bytter vnto them with greuous laboure in claye and
brycke, and with allmaner of bondage in ye felde, and with allmaner of laboure,
which they layed vpon them without mercy.
15 And the kynge of Egipte sayde vnto the mydwyues of the Hebrueswemen. (Of the
which one was called Siphra, and the other Pua:)
16 Whan ye helpe the wemen of the Hebrues, and se vpon the stole, that it is a
sonne, then slaye him: but yf it be a doughter, let her lyue.
17 Neuertheles the mydwyues feared God, & dyd not as the kinge of Egipte
commaunded them, but let the children lyue.
18 Then the kynge of Egipte called the mydwyues, and sayde vnto them: Wherfore
do ye this, that ye let the children lyue?
19 The mydwyues answered Pharao: The wemen of the Hebrues are not as the wemen
of Egipte, for they are sturdy wemen: or euer the mydwyues come at them, they
are delyuered.
20 Therfore God dealt well with the mydwyues. And the people multiplied, and
became exceadinge mightie.
21 And for so moch as the mydwyues feared God, he made them houses.
22 Then Pharao commauded all his people and sayde: All the sonnes that are
borne, cast in to the water, but let all the doughters lyue.

Chapter 2

1 And there wente forth a man of the house of Leui, and toke a doughter of Leui.
2 And the wife conceaued and bare a sonne. And whan she sawe yt it was a proper
childe, she hyd him thre monethes.
3 And whan she coude hyde him no longer, she toke an Arke of redes, and dawbed
it ouer with slyme and pitch, and layed the childe therin, and set it amonge the
redes by the waters brynke.
4 But his sister stode a farre of, to wete what wolde come of him.
5 And Pharaos doughter came downe, to wash herself in the water: And hir maydens
walked by the water syde: and whan she sawe the Arke amonge the redes, she sent
one of hir maydens, and caused it to be fett.
6 And whan she opened it, she sawe ye childe: and beholde the babe wepte. Then
had she pytie vpon it, and sayde: It is one of the Hebrues children.
7 Then sayde his syster vnto Pharaos doughter: Shal I go, and call the a nurse
of the Hebrues wemen, to nurse ye the childe?
8 Pharaos doughter sayde vnto her: Go thy waye. The mayde wente, and called the
childes mother.
9 Then sayde Pharaos doughter vnto her: Take this childe, and nurse it for me, I
wyll geue ye thy rewarde. The woman toke the childe, and nursed it.
10 And whan the childe was growne, she brought it vnto Pharaos doughter, and it
became hir sonne, and she called him Moses. For she sayde: I toke him out of the
water.
11 Vpon a tyme whan Moses was greate, he wente forth vnto his brethren, and
loked vpon their burthens, and sawe, that an Egipcia smote one of his brethren
ye Hebrues.
12 And he loked rounde aboute him: and whan he sawe that there was no man, he
slew the Egipcian, and buried him in the sonde.
13 The next daye he wente forth also, and sawe two men of the Hebrues stryuynge
together, and sayde to the vngodly: Wherfore smytest thou thy neghboure?
14 But he sayde: Who made the a ruler or iudge ouer vs? Wilt thou slaye me also,
as thou slewest the Egipcian? The was Moses afrayed, and sayde: How is this
knowne?
15 And Pharao herde of it, and sought for Moses, to slaye him. But Moses fled
from Pharao, and kepte him in the lande of Madian, and sat him downe by a wells
syde.
16 The prest Madian had seuen doughters, which came to drawe water, and fylled
the troughes, to geue their fathers shepe to drinke.
17 Then came the shepherdes, and droue the awaye. But Moses gat him vp, and
helped them, and gaue their shepe to drynke.
18 And whan they came to Reguel their father, he saide: How came ye so soone to
daie?
19 They sayde: A man of Egipte delyuered vs from ye shepherdes, and drew vnto
vs, and gaue the shepe to drynke.
20 He sayde vnto his doughters. Where is he? Wherfore let ye the man go, that ye
called him not to eate with vs?
21 And Moses was content to dwell with the man. And he gaue Moses his doughter
Zipora,
22 which bare him a sonne, and he called him Gerson, for he sayde: I am become a
straunger in a straunge lande.
23 And she bare him yet a sonne, whom he called Elieser, and sayde: The God of
my father is my helper, and hath delyuered me from Pharaos hade.But after this
in processe of tyme, the kynge of Egipte dyed. And the childre of Israel sighed
ouer their laboure, and cried.
24 And their crye ouer their labor, came before God. And God herde their
coplaynte, & remebred his couenaunt with Abraham Isaac and Iacob.
25 And God loked vpon the childre of Israel, and God knew it.

Chapter 3

1 Moses kepte the shepe of Iethro his father in lawe prest of Madian, & droue
the shepe on the backsyde of the wyldernes, and came to the mountayne of God,
Horeb.
2 And the angell of ye LORDE appeared vnto him in a flame of fyre out of the
bush. And he sawe that ye bush brent wt fyre, and yet was not consumed,
3 and saide: I wil go hence, and se this greate sight, why ye bush is not brent.
4 Whan the LORDE sawe, that he wente his waye to se, God called vnto him out of
the bush, and sayde: Moses, Moses. He answered: Here am I.
5 He sayde: Come not hither, put thy shues of thy fete, for the place where vpon
thou stondest, is an wholy groude.
6 And he sayde morouer: I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, ye God
of Isaac, and the God of Iacob. And Moses couered his face, for he was afrayed
to loke vpon God.
7 And the LORDE sayde: I haue sene the trouble of my people in Egipte & haue
herde their crye ouer those that oppresse them. I knowe their sorowe,
8 and am come downe to delyuer them from the power of the Egipcians, and to
carye them out of that lode, in to a good and wyde londe, euen in to a londe
that floweth with mylke and hony: namely, vnto the place of the Cananites,
Hethites, Amorites, Pheresites, Heuytes & Iebusites.
9 For so moch now as the complaynte of the children of Israel is come before me,
& I haue sene their oppression wherwith the Egipcians oppresse them:
10 Go now yi waye therfore, I wil sende the vnto Pharao, that thou mayest brynge
my people the children of Israel out of Egipte.
11 Moses sayde vnto God: Who am I, yt I shulde go vnto Pharao, and brynge the
children of Israel out of Egipte?
12 He sayde: I wyll be with the: & this shall be the token, yt I haue sent the.
Whan thou hast brought my people out of Egipte, ye shal serue God vpon this
mountayne.
13 Moses sayde vnto God: Beholde, whan I come to the childre of Israel, and saye
vnto them: The God of youre fathers hath sent me vnto you, & they saye vnto me:
What is his name? what shal I saye vnto them?
14 God saide vnto Moses: I wyl be what I wyll be. And he sayde: Thus shalt thou
saye vnto ye children of Israel: I wyl he hath sent me vnto you.
15 And God sayde morouer vnto Moses: Thus shalt thou saye vnto the children of
Israel: The LORDE God of youre fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, ye
God of Iacob hath sent me vnto you, this is my name for euer, and my memoriall
from childe to childes childe.
16 Go thy waye therfore, and gather the elders of Israel tother, and saye vnto
them: The LORDE God of youre fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the
God of Iacob hath appeared vnto me, and sayde: I haue vysited you, and sene what
is done vnto you in Egipte,
17 and haue sayde: I wil brynge you out of the trouble of Egipte, in to ye lande
of ye Cananites, Hethites, Amorites, Pheresites, Heuites & Iebusites: in to a
lode yt floweth with mylke and hony.
18 And yf they heare yi voyce, then shalt thou and the elders of Israel go in to
the kynge of Egipte, and saye vnto him: The LORDE God of ye Hebrues hath called
vs. Let vs go now therfore thre dayes iourney in the wyldernes, yt we maye do
sacrifice vnto the LORDE oure God.
19 But I knowe, that the kynge of Egipte wil not let you go, but thorow a
mightie hade.
20 For I will stretch out myne hande, & smyte Egipte wt all maner of wonders
which I will do therin: after yt shal he let you go.
21 And I wil geue this people fauoure in the sight of the Egipcians: so that
whan ye go forth, ye shal not go forth emptie:
22 but euery wife shall borowe of hir neghbouresse & of her that sogeourneth in
hir house, Iewels of syluer and golde and rayment: those shal ye put vpon youre
sonnes and doughters, and spoyle the Egipcians.

Chapter 4

1 Moses answered, & sayde: Beholde, they shall not beleue me, ner heare my
voyce, but shal saye: The LORDE hath not appeared vnto the.
2 The LORDE sayde vnto him: What is yt, that thou hast in thine hande? He saide
a staff.
3 He sayde: Cast it from the vpon the grounde. And he cast it fro him: then was
it turned to a serpent. And Moses fled fro it.
4 But ye LORDE saide vnto him: Stretch forth thine hande, & take it by the
tayle. Then stretched he forth his hande, and toke it, and it became a staff
agayne in his hande.
5 Therfore shal they beleue that ye LORDE God of their fathers, the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac ye God of Iacob hath appeared vnto the.
6 And the LORDE sayde furthermore vnto him: Thrust thine hade in to yi bosome.
And he thrust it in to his bosome, & toke it out: beholde, the was it leper like
snowe.
7 And he saide: Put it in to yi bosome agayne. And he put it agayne in to his
bosome, & toke it out: beholde, the was it turned againe as his flesh.
8 Yf they wil not beleue the, ner heare ye voyce of the first token, yet shal
they beleue the voyce of the seconde token.
9 But yf they wil not beleue these two tokens ner heare thy voyce, then take of
the water of the ryuer, and poure it vpon the drye londe: so shall the same
water yt thou hast take out of ye ryuer, be turned vnto bloude vpo ye drye
londe.
10 But Moses sayde vnto the LORDE: Oh my LORDE, I am a man yt is not eloquet,
from yesterdaye & yeryesterdaye, & sence the tyme yt thou hast spoken vnto thy
seruaunt: for I haue a slowe speach, & a slowe tunge.
11 The LORDE sayde vnto him: Who hath made the mouth of man? Or who hath made
the domme, or the deaf, or the seynge or ye blynde? Haue not I the LORDE done
it?
12 Go now thy waye therfore, I wil be wt thy mouth, & teach the what thou shalt
saye.
13 But Moses sayde: My LORDE, sende whom thou wilt sende.
14 Then was the LORDE very angrie at Moses, and saide: Do not I knowe then, yt
thy brother Aaron the Leuite is well spoken? And beholde, he shal go forth to
mete ye: & whan he seyth the, he shal reioyse from his hert.
15 Thou shalt speake vnto him, & put the wordes in his mouth: & I wil be with
thy mouth & his, and teach you what ye shall doo:
16 & he shall speake vnto the people for the. He shal be thy mouth, & thou shalt
be his God.
17 And take in thine hande this staff, wherwith thou shalt do tokens.
18 Moses wete, and came agayne vnto Iethro his father in lawe, and sayde vnto
him: Let me go (I praye the) that I maye turne agayne vnto my brethre, which are
in Egipte, and se whether they be yet alyue. Iethro sayde vnto him: Go thy waye
in peace.
19 The LORDE sayde also vnto him in Madian: Go yi waye, turne againe in to
Egipte, for ye me are deed, that sought after thy life.
20 So Moses toke his wife, and his sonnes, and caried them vpon an Asse, & wente
againe into the lande of Egipte, & toke the staff of God in his hande.
21 And the LORDE saide vnto Moses: When thou comest agayne in to Egipte, se yt
thou do all the wonders (before Pharao) which I haue put in yi hade. But I wil
harde his hert, yt he shall not let the people go.
22 And thou shalt saie vnto Pharao: Thus sayeth ye LORDE: Israel is my first
borne sonne,
23 & I saye vnto the: Let my sonne go, yt he maye serue me: Yf thou wilt not let
him go, then wil I slaye thy firstborne sonne.
24 And as he was by the waye in the Inne, the LORDE met him, and wolde haue
slayne him.
25 Then toke Zipora a stone, and circumcyded the foreskynne of hir sonne, and
touched his fete, and sayde: A bloudy brydegrome art thou vnto me.
26 The let he him go. But she sayde: A bloudy brydegrome, because of the
circumcision.
27 And the LORDE sayde vnto Aaron: Go mete Moses in the wildernes. And he wete,
& met him on the mount of God, and kyssed him.
28 And Moses tolde Aaron all the wordes of the LORDE, which had sent him: & all
the tokens yt he had charged him with all.
29 And they wete, & gathered all the elders of the childre of Israel.
30 And Aaron tolde all ye wordes, yt the LORDE had spoke vnto Moses: & dyd the
tokens before the people,
31 & the people beleued. And whan they herde yt the LORDE vysited the children
of Israel, and loked vpon their trouble, they bowed them selues, and worshipped.

Chapter 5

1 Afterwarde wente Moses & Aaron, & spake vnto Pharao: Thus sayeth the LORDE the
God of Israel: let my people go, yt they maye kepe holy daye vnto me in the
wildernes.
2 Pharao answered: What felowe is the LORDE, that I must heare his voyce, and
let Israel go?
3 I knowe not the LORDE, nether wil I let Israel go.They sayde: The God of the
Hebrues hath called vs. Let vs go now therfore thre dayes iourney in the
wildernes, & do sacrifice vnto the LORDE or God, yt there happen not vnto vs
pestilece or swerde.
4 The sayde ye kynge of Egipte vnto the: Why make ye ye people (thou Moses &
Aaron) to leaue their worke? Get you hece to yor laboure.
5 Pharao saide morouer: Beholde, ye people are to many in ye lande, and yet wil
ye byd them ceasse from their laboure.
6 The same daye therfore dyd Pharao comaunde the workmasters of the people, and
their officers, and sayde:
7 Ye shal not gather and geue the people eny more strawe, to burne bryck, as
yesterdaye and yeryesterdaye. Let them go, and gather them strawe them selues.
8 And the nombre of the brycke which they made yesterdaye & yeryesterdaye, shall
ye laye vpon them neuertheles, and mynish nothinge therof: for they are ydle.
Therfore crye they and saye: We wil go, and do sacrifice vnto oure God.
9 Let the men be kepte downe wt laboure, yt they maye haue to do, & not to turne
them selues to false wordes.
10 Then wente the workmasters of the people & their officers out, & spake vnto
the people: Thus sayeth Pharao: There shall no strawe be geuen you,
11 go youre waye youre selues, and get you strawe, where ye can fynde it. But of
youre labor there shall nothinge be mynished.
12 Then were the people scatred in all ye lande of Egipte, to gather stubble,
that they might haue strawe.
13 And the workmasters haistied them forwarde, & sayde: Fulfill yor daye worke,
like as whan ye had strawe.
14 And the officers of ye children of Israel, whom Pharaos worckmasters had set
ouer them, were beaten, & it was saide vnto them: Wherfore haue ye not fulfilled
yor appoynted daye worke to daye and yesterdaye, like as in tymes past?
15 Than wente the officers of the children of Israel, & coplayned vnto Pharao:
Wherfore wilt thou deale thus wt thy seruauntes?
16 Thy seruauntes haue no strawe geuen the, & yet must we make the brycke that
are appoynted vs. And beholde, thy seruauntes are beaten, & thy people are euell
intreated.
17 Pharao sayde: Ye are ydle, ydle are ye, therfore saye ye: we will go, and do
sacrifice vnto the LORDE.
18 Go now yor waye therfore, & worke: there shall no strawe be geuen you, but
the nombre of brycke shal ye delyuer.
19 Then sawe the officers of the children of Israel, yt it was not amended, for
it was sayde: ye shal mynish nothinge of the daye worke of the brycke.
20 And whan Moses & Aaron wente from Pharao, they came forth to mete them,
21 & sayde vnto them: The LORDE loke vpon you, & iudge it, for ye haue made the
sauoure of vs to stynke before Pharao and his seruauntes, and haue geuen them a
swerde in their handes, to slaye vs.
22 But Moses came agayne vnto the LORDE, and sayde: LORDE, wherfore dealest thou
so euell wt this people? Wherfore hast thou sent me?
23 For sence the tyme that I wente in vnto Pharao, to speake vnto him in thy
name, he hath dealt euell with this people, and thou hast not delyuered yi
people.

Chapter 6

1 The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Now shalt thou se, what I will do vnto Pharao, for
thorow a mightie hande must he let them go, thorow a mightie hande must he dryue
them from him out of his londe.
2 And God spake vnto Moses, & sayde vnto him: I am ye LORDE,
3 & I appeared vnto Abraham, Isaac & Iacob, an Allmightie God: but my name,
LORDE, haue I not shewed vnto them:
4 My couenaunt also haue I made with them, that I wil geue them the londe of
Canaan, the londe of their pilgremage, wherin they haue bene straungers.
5 Morouer I haue herde the complaynte of the children of Israel, whom ye
Egipcians oppresse with laboure, and haue remembred my couenaunt.
6 Therfore saye vnto the childre of Israel: I am the LORDE, & wil brynge you out
from yor burthens in Egipte, & wil rydd you from youre laboure, and wil delyuer
you thorow a stretched out arme & greate iudgmetes,
7 and will receaue you for my people, & will be yor God: so that ye shal knowe,
that I the LORDE am yor God, which brynge you out from the burthen of Egipte,
8 and will brynge you into the lande, ouer the which I haue lift vp my hande, to
geue it vnto Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, ye same wil I geue vnto you for a
possession. I the LORDE.
9 Moses tolde this vnto the childre of Israel. But they herkened not vnto him,
for very anguysh of sprete, & for sore laboure.
10 The spake the LORDE vnto Moses, & sayde:
11 Go thy waye, & speake vnto Pharao the kynge of Egypte, yt he let the childre
of Israel go out of his lande.
12 But Moses spake before ye LORDE, & saide: Beholde, ye childre of Israel herke
not vnto me, how shulde Pharao the heare me? And I am also of vncircumcised
lyppes.
13 So the LORDE spake vnto Moses & Aaron, & gaue the a commaundemet vnto the
childre of Israel, & vnto Pharao the kynge of Egipte, yt they shulde brynge the
childre of Israel out of Egipte.
14 These are ye heades of the house of their fathers. The children of Ruben the
first sonne of Israel, are these: Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, Charmi: These are the
generacions of Ruben.
15 The children of Simeon are these: Iemuel, Iamin, Ohad, Iachin, Zophar, and
Saul the sonne of the Cananitish woman: These are the generacions of Symeon.
16 These are the names of the childre of Leui in their generacios: Gerson,
Rahath and Merari: Leui was an hundreth and seuen & thirtie yeare olde.
17 The children of Gerson are these: Libni and Semei in their generacions.
18 The childre of Rahath are these: Amram, Iezear, Hebron, Usiel. Rahath was an
hundreth & thre & thirtie yeare olde.
19 The children of Merari are these: Maheli and Musi. These are ye generacions
of Leui in their kynreds.
20 And Amram toke his vncles doughter Iochebed to wife, which bare him Aaron &
Moses. Amram was an C. & vij. & thirtie yeare olde.
21 The childre of Iezear are these: Korah, Nepheg, Sichri.
22 The children of Vsiel are these: Misael, Elzaphan, Sithri.
23 Aaron toke Elizaba ye doughter of Aminadab Nahassons sisters to wife, which
bare him Nadab, Abihu, Eleasar, Ithamar.
24 The childre of Korah are these: Assir, Elkana, & Abiassaph. These are ye
generacios of ye Korahites.
25 Eleasar Aarons sonne toke one of the doughters of Putiel to wife, which bare
him Phineas. These are the heades amonge the fathers of the generacions of the
Leuites.
26 This is yt Aaron & Moses, vnto whom ye LORDE sayde: Bringe ye childre of
Israel out of the lande of Egipte wt their armies.
27 It is they (namely Moses & Aaron) yt spake vnto Pharao the kynge of Egipte,
yt they might brynge the children of Israel out of Egipte.
28 The same daie spake ye LORDE vnto Moses in ye lande of Egipte,
29 & sayde: I am ye LORDE, speake thou vnto Pharao ye kynge of Egipte, all yt I
saye vnto ye.
30 And he answered before ye LORDE: Beholde, I am of vncircumcised lippes, how
shall Pharao the heare me?

Chapter 7

1 The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Beholde, I haue made the a God ouer Pharao, & Aaro
yi brother shal be yi prophet.
2 Thou shalt speake all yt I comaude ye: but Aaron yi brother shal speake vnto
Pharao, yt he maye let the childre of Israel go out of his lande.
3 Neuertheles I wil harden Pharaos hert, yt I maye multiplye my tokens & wonders
in the londe of Egipte.
4 And Pharao shal not heare you, yt I maye shewe my hande in Egipte, & brynge
myne armyes, euen my people the childre of Israel out of ye lande of Egipte, by
greate iudgmetes.
5 And ye Egipcians shal knowe, yt I am the LORDE, whan I shal stretch out my
hande vpon Egipte, and brynge the children of of Israel out from amonge the.
6 Moses and Aaron dyd as the LORDE comauded them.
7 And Moses was foure score yeare olde, & Aaron thre & foure score yeare olde,
whan they spake vnto Pharao.
8 And ye LORDE sayde vnto Moses & Aaron:
9 Whan Pharao sayeth vnto you: Shew youre wonders, then shalt thou saye vnto
Aaron: Take thy staff, and cast it before Pharao, & it shal turne to a serpent.
10 Then wete Moses & Aaron in vnto Pharao, & dyd as the LORDE comaunded them.
And Aaron cast his staff before Pharao & before his seruauntes, & it turned to a
serpet.
11 Then Pharao called for ye wyse men & Sorcerers. And the Sorcerers of Egipte
also dyd like wyse with their Sorceries,
12 and euery one cast his staff before him, & they turned vnto serpentes. But
Aarons staff deuoured their staues.
13 So Pharaos hert was hardened, and he herkened not vnto them, euen as the
LORDE had sayde.
14 And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: The hert of Pharao is hardened, he refuseth
to let ye people go.
15 Get ye vnto Pharao in the mornynge, beholde, he shal come vnto ye water, mete
thou him vpo the waters brynke, & take ye staff which turned to a serpet, in
thine hande,
16 & saye vnto him: The LORDE God of the Hebrues hath sent me vnto the, &
sendeth ye worde: Let my people go, that they maye serue me in the wyldernesse:
but hither to thou woldest not heare.
17 Therfore thus sayeth the LORDE: Hereby shalt thou knowe, yt I am ye LORDE.
Beholde, wt the staff yt I haue in my hande, wil I smyte the water which is in
ye ryuer, & it shalbe turned in to bloude:
18 so that the fishes in the ryuer shall dye, & the ryuer shall stynke: & it
shall greue the Egipcians to drynke of ye water of the ryuer.
19 And ye LORDE spake vnto Moses: Saye vnto Aaron: Take yi staff, & stretch out
thine hade ouer ye waters of Egipte, ouer their ryuers & brokes & pondes, & ouer
all water poles, yt they maye be turned to bloude, & that there maye be bloude
in all ye lande of Egipte, both in vessels of wodd and stone.
20 Moses & Aaron dyd as ye LORDE comaunded them, & lift vp the staff, & smote
the water yt was in the ryuer, before Pharao & his seruauntes, & all the water
in the ryuer was turned into bloude,
21 & the fysh in the ryuer dyed, & the ryuer stanke, so yt the Egipcians coulde
not drynke of the water of ye ryuer, & there was bloude in all the lande of
Egipte.
22 And the Sorcerers also of Egipte, dyd likewyse with their Sorceries. But
Pharaos hert was hardened, & he herkened not vnto the, like as the LORDE had
sayde.
23 And Pharao turned himself, & wente home, & set not his hert there on.
24 All the Egipcias dygged roude aboute ye ryuer, for water to drinke: for they
coude not drynke of ye water out of the ryuer.
25 And this endured seuen dayes longe, that the LORDE smote the ryuer.

Chapter 8

1 The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Go yi waye to Pharao, & speake vnto him: Thus
saieth the LORDE: Let my people go, yt they maye serue me:
2 Yf thou wilt not let the go, beholde, I wil smyte all ye borders of yi lode wt
frogges,
3 so yt the ryuer shal scraule wt frogges: these shal clymme vp, & come in to
thine house, in to yi chamber, where thou slepest, vpon thy bed, and in to the
houses of thy seruauntes, amonge thy people, in to thine ouens, and vpon thy
dowe:
4 and the frogges shall come vp vpon the, and vpon thy people, and vpon all thy
seruauntes.
5 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses: Saie vnto Aaron: Stretch forth thine hande wt
thy staff ouer the streames, & ryuers, & pondes, and let frogges come vpon the
londe of Egipte.
6 And Aaron stretched his hade ouer the waters in Egipte, & there came vp
frogges, so yt the londe of Egipte was couered.
7 The Sorcerers also dyd likewyse, wt their Sorcerirs, & caused frogges to come
vpo ye lode of Egipte.
8 The called Pharao for Moses & Aaron, & sayde: Praye the LORDE for me, yt he
maye take awaye the frogges fro me & fro my people, & I will let ye people go,
yt they maye do sacrifice vnto the LORDE.
9 Moses sayde: Haue thou the honor before me, & appoynte me, wha I shal praye
for ye, for yi seruauntes and for thy people: yt the frogges maye be dryuen
awaye fro the & fro thy house, & remayne onely in the ryuer.
10 He sayde: Tomorow. He sayde: Euen as thou hast sayde, yt thou mayest knowe,
yt there is none like vnto the LORDE or God:
11 And the frogges shal be take from the, & from yi house, from thy seruauntes,
& from thy people, & remayne onely in the ryuer.
12 So Moses & Aaron wete from Pharao, & Moses cried vnto the LORDE for the
appoyntment ouer the frogges, which he had promysed vnto Pharao.
13 And ye LORDE dyd as Moses sayde. And the frogges dyed in ye houses, in ye
courtes, & vpon ye felde:
14 & they gathered the together, here an heape, & there an heape, & the lande
stanke of them.
15 But whan Pharao sawe yt he had gotten breth, his hert was hardened, and he
herkened not vnto the, euen as the LORDE had sayde.
16 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses: Saie vnto Aaron: Stretch out thy staff, &
smyte the dust vpon the earth, yt there maye be lyfe in the whole lode of
Egipte.
17 They dyd so. And Aaron stretched out his hande wt his staff, & smote the dust
vpon the earth, & there were lyse vpon men and vpon catell: All the dust of the
lande was turned vnto lyse in all the lande of Egipte.
18 The Sorcerers also assayde likewyse wt their Sorcerirs yt they might brynge
forth lyse, but they coude not. And ye lyse were vpon men & catell.
19 Then sayde ye Sorcerers vnto Pharao: It is the fynger of God. But Pharaos
hert was hardened, & he herkened not vnto the, euen as the LORDE had sayde.
20 And ye LORDE saide vnto Moses: Get ye vp tomorow by tymes, & stonde before
Pharao: beholde, he wil go vnto the water, & speake thou vnto him: Thus saieth
ye LORDE: let my people go, yt they maye serue me:
21 yf not, beholde, I wil cause cruell wormes (or flyes) to come vpon the, thy
seruauntes, yi people, & thy house, so yt all the Egipcians houses, & the felde,
and what theron is shall be full of cruell wormes:
22 & the same daye wil I separate the londe of Gosen, wherin my people are, so
yt no cruell worme shalbe there, that thou mayest knowe, that I am ye LORDE in
the myddest of the earth.
23 And I wil set a delyueraunce betwene my people and thyne. Tomorow shal this
token come to passe.
24 And the LORDE dyd so. And there came perlous cruell wormes in to Pharaos
house, in to his seruauntes houses, & vpon all the londe of Egipte: and the
londe was marred with noysome wormes.
25 The called Pharao for Moses & Aaron, & sayde: Go yor waye, & do sacrifice
vnto yor God in ye londe.
26 Moses sayde: It is not mete, yt we shulde so do, so shulde we offer ye
abhominacion of ye Egipcians vnto the LORDE or God. Beholde, yf we shulde offer
the abhominacion of ye Egipcians before their eyes, shulde they not stone vs?
27 Thre dayes iourney will we go in the wyldernes, and do sacrifice vnto the
LORDE oure God like as he hath sayde vnto vs.
28 Pharao sayde: I wil let you go, yt ye maie do sacrifice vnto the LORDE yor
God in the wyldernes (onely yt ye go no farther) & praye for me.
29 Moses sayde: Beholde, whan I am come forth from ye, I wil praye vnto ye
LORDE, yt the cruell wormes maye be taken from Pharao, & from his seruautes, &
fro his people, euen tomorow: onely disceaue me nomore, that thou woldest not
let the people go to do sacrifice vnto the LORDE.
30 And Moses wete out from Pharao, and prayed vnto the LORDE.
31 And the LORDE dyd as Moses sayde, & toke awaye the cruell wormes from Pharao,
from his seruauntes, and from his people, so yt there remayned not one.
32 But Pharao hardened his hert eue then also, and let not ye people go.

Chapter 9

1 The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Go in to Pharao, and speake vnto him: Thus sayeth
the LORDE God of ye Hebrues: let my people go, yt they maye serue me.
2 Yf thou wilt not, but holde them longer,
3 beholde, the hande of the LORDE shalbe vpon thy catell in the felde, vpon
horses, vpon Asses, vpon Camels, vpon oxen, vpon shepe with a very sore
pestilence.
4 And ye LORDE shall make a diuysion betwene the catell of the Israelites & the
Egipcians, so yt there shal nothinge dye of all that the children of Israel
haue.
5 And ye LORDE appoynted a tyme, and sayde: Tomorow shal the LORDE do this vpon
earth.
6 And the LORDE dyd the same on the morow. And there dyed of all maner of catell
of the Egipcians: but of ye catell of ye childre of Israel there dyed not one.
7 And Pharao sent thither, & beholde, there was not one of the catell of Israel
deed. But Pharaos hert was hardened, so yt he let not ye people go.
8 Then sayde ye LORDE vnto Moses & Aaron: Take youre handes full of asshes out
of the fornace, & let Moses sprenkle it towarde heauen before Pharao,
9 that it maye be dust in all the lande of Egipte, & that there maye be sores &
blaynes vpon men & vpon catell in all the lande of Egipte.
10 And they toke asshes out of ye fornace, & stode before Pharao, & Moses
sprenkled it towarde heaue. Then were there sores and blaynes vpon men & vpon
catell,
11 so that the Sorcerers might not stode before Moses by reason of the sores.
For there were sores vpo the Sorcerers as well as vpon all the Egipcians.
12 But the LORDE hardened Pharaos hert, so that he herkened not vnto them, eue
as the LORDE had sayde vnto Moses.
13 Then sayde the LORDE vnto Moses: Get the vp tomorow by tymes, & stonde before
Pharao, & speake vnto him: Thus sayeth ye LORDE God of the Hebrues: let my
people go, yt they maye serue me,
14 els wyll I at this tyme sende all my plages in to thine hert, & vpon thy
seruautes & vpon thy people: that thou mayest knowe, yt there is none like me in
all londes.
15 For I will now stretch out my hande, & smyte the & thy people wt pestilence,
so yt thou shalt be roted out from the earth.
16 Yet haue I stered ye vp for this cause, euen to shew my power vpon ye, and
that my name might be declared in all londes.
17 Thou holdest my people yet, & wilt not let them go,
18 beholde, tomorow aboute this tyme wyll I cause a mightie greate hayle to
rayne, soch as hath not bene in the londe of Egipte, sence the tyme that it was
grouded, hither to.
19 And now sende thou, & saue thy catell, & all yt thou hast in the felde: for
all men & catell that shalbe founde in the felde, & not brought in to the
houses, yf the hayle fall vpon them, they shall dye.
20 Now who so feared the worde of the LORDE amonge Pharaos seruauntes, caused
his seruauntes & catell to flye in to the houses:
21 but loke whose hertes regarded not the worde of ye LORDE, left their
seruauntes and catell in the felde.
22 Then sayde the LORDE vnto Moses: Strech out thy hande towarde heaue, that it
maye hayle vpon all the lande of Egipte, vpon men, vpon catell, & vpon all
herbes of the felde in the lande of Egipte.
23 So Moses stretched out his staff towarde heauen, and the LORDE caused it to
thonder & hayle, so yt the fyre ranne alonge vpon the earth. Thus the LORDE
hayled & rayned vpon the londe of Egipte,
24 so that the hayle & fyre wente so horrybly together, as neuer was in all the
lade of Egipte, sens the tyme that there were people therin.
25 And the hayle smote the whole lande of Egipte, all that was vpon ye felde,
both men & catell, & smote all the herbes vpon the felde, & brake all the trees
vpon ye felde,
26 saue onely in the lande of Gosen, where the childre of Israel were, there it
hayled not.
27 Then sent Pharao & called for Moses & Aaron, & sayde vnto them: Now haue I
synned, ye LORDE is righteous, but I & my people are vngodly.
28 Yet praye ye vnto the LORDE, that the thonder & hayle of God maye ceasse,
then wyl I let you go, that ye shal tary here no longer.
29 Moses sayde vnto him: Whan I am come out of the cite, I wyll stretch out myne
handes vnto the LORDE, so shal the thonder ceasse, & there shal be nomore hayle:
that thou mayest knowe, that the earth is the LORDES.
30 But I knowe, yt both thou & thy seruauntes feare not yet the LORDE God.
31 Thus the flax and the barlye were smytten: for the barlye was shot vp, & ye
flax was boulled:
32 but the wheate and ye rye were not smytten, for they were late sowen.
33 So Moses wente from Pharao out of ye cite, & stretched out his hades vnto ye
LORDE. And ye thoder & the hayle ceassed, & the rayne dropped not vpo the earth.
34 But wha Pharao sawe yt the rayne & thonder & hayle ceassed, he synned agayne,
and herdened his hert, he & his seruauntes.
35 So Pharaos hert was hardened, yt he let not the childre of Israel go, eue as
the LORDE had sayde by Moses.

Chapter 10

1 And the LORDE saide vnto Moses: Go in vnto Pharao, for I haue hardened his
hert & the hertes of his seruautes, yt I might do these my tokes amonge the,
2 & that thou mightest shewe it in the eares of thy children & of thy childers
children, what I haue done in Egipte, and how I haue shewed my tokens amoge the,
that ye maye knowe, how that I am the LORDE.
3 So Moses & Aaron wente in vnto Pharao, & spake vnto him: Thus sayeth ye LORDE
God of the Hebrues: How longe refusest thou to submyt thy self vnto me, to let
my people go, yt they maye serue me?
4 Yf thou wilt not let my people go, beholde, tomorow wil I cause greshoppers to
come vpon all places,
5 yt they maye couer the lande, so yt the lande can not be sene, & they shal
eate vp yt is left you & was delyuered fro the hayle: & shal eate vp all yor
grene trees vpon the felde,
6 & shal fyll thy house, all yi seruautes houses, & all the Egipcians houses:
soch as yi fathers & yi fathers fathers haue not sene, sens the tyme yt they
were vpon earth vnto this daye. And he turned him, & wente out from Pharao.
7 Then saide Pharaos seruauntes vnto him: How longe shall we be snared after
this maner? Let the men go, that they may serue ye LORDE their God. Knowest thou
not yet, yt Egipte is destroyed?
8 Moses & Aaron were brought agayne to Pharao, which saide vnto them: Go yor
waye, & serue ye LORDE yor God. But who are they yt shall go?
9 Moses sayde: We wil go wt yonge & olde, wt sonnes and doughters, with shepe
and oxe: for we haue a feast of the LORDE.
10 He sayde vnto the: Let it be so, the LORDE be with you: Shulde I let you go &
yor childre also? loke that ye haue not some myschefe in hade.
11 Not so, but go ye that are men, and serue the LORDE, for that was youre
desyre. And they thrust them out from Pharao.
12 The saide ye LORDE vnto Moses: Stretch out thine hande ouer ye londe of
Egipte, for the greshoppers, yt they maye come vpo ye londe of Egipte, & eate vp
all the herbes in the londe, wt all yt escaped the hayle.
13 Moses stretched out his staff ouer ye lande of Egipte, & the LORDE brought an
east wynde in to the londe all yt daye & all yt night, & in the mornynge, the
east wynde brought the greshoppers.
14 And they came ouer the whole lande of Egipte, and lighted in all places of
Egipte, so exceadinge many, that before tyme there were neuer soch, nether
shalbe here after:
15 for they couered the londe, and made it darcke. And they ate vp all the
herbes in ye londe, & all the frutes vpon the trees which remayned from ye
hayle, & left no grene thinge behinde in the trees & herbes vpon the felde in
all the lande of Egipte.
16 Then Pharao called for Moses & Aaron in all ye haist, & saide: I haue synned
against the LORDE yor God, & agaynst you:
17 forgeue me my synne this once also, & pray the LORDE yor God, yt he maye take
awaye fro me this death onely.
18 And he wete out from Pharao, & prayed vnto the LORDE.
19 The the LORDE turned a maruelous stroge west wynde, and toke vp the
greshoppers, & cast them in to the reed see, so that there was not one left in
all the quarters of Egipte.
20 But the LORDE hardened Pharaos hert, that he let not the childre of Israel
go.
21 The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Stretch out thine hade towarde heauen, that it be
so darck in the londe of Egipte, yt it maye be felt.
22 And Moses stretched out his hade towarde heauen, the was there a thicke
darcknesse in all the londe of Egipte thre dayes,
23 so yt in thre dayes no ma sawe another, nor rose vp from ye place where he
was. But wt the childre of Israel there was light in their dwellinges.
24 Then Pharao called for Moses, & sayde: Go yor waye & serue the LORDE: onely
leaue yor shepe & yor oxen here: let yor childre go wt you also.
25 Moses sayde: Thou must geue vs offringes and brentofferynges, that we maye do
sacrifice vnto the LORDE or God.
26 Oure catell shal go wt vs, and there shal not one hooffe be left behynde: for
we must take therof for the seruyce of the LORDE or God. Morouer we knowe not
wherwithall we shal serue ye LORDE, tyll we come thither.
27 But the LORDE hardened Pharaos hert, yt he wolde not let them go.
28 And Pharao sayde vnto him: Get the hence fro me, & bewarre, that thou come
nomore in my sight: For loke what daie so euer thou comest in my sight, thou
shalt dye.
29 Moses answered: Eue as thou hast sayde, I wil come nomore in thy sight.

Chapter 11

1 And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: I wil yet brynge a plage vpon Pharao and
Egipte: after yt shal he let you go from hence, & shal not onely let all go, but
also dryue you hence.
2 Therfore saye now vnto the people, yt euery man borowe of his neghboure, &
euery woman of his neghbouresse, Iewels of syluer & golde:
3 for the LORDE shal geue the people fauor in the sight of ye Egipcias. And
Moses was a very greate man in the lande of Egipte, in ye sight of Pharaos
seruauntes, & in the sight of the people.
4 And Moses sayde: Thus sayeth the LORDE: At mydnight wil I go out in the lande
of Egipte,
5 & all ye first borne in the lande of Egipte shall dye: from Pharaos first
sonne (yt sytteth vpon his seate) vnto the first sonne of the mayde seruaunte
which is behynde ye myll: & all the first borne amonge the catell:
6 & there shalbe a greate crie in all the lande of Egipte, soch as neuer was,
ner shalbe.
7 But amonge all the childre of Israel there shall not a dogg quatch wt his
tonge, fro men vnto catell, yt ye maye knowe, how yt the LORDE hath put a
differece betwixte Egipte & Israel.
8 The shal all these thy seruauntes come downe vnto me, & fal at my fote, &
saye: Get the out, thou & all the people that are vnder the. After that wyl I
departe. And he wete fro Pharao wt a wroth full displeasure.
9 The LORDE saide vnto Moses: Pharao herkeneth not vnto you, yt many woders maye
be done in ye lade of Egipte.
10 And Moses & Aaron dyd all these woders before Pharao: but ye LORDE hardened
his hert, yt he wolde not let ye childre of Israel go out of his londe.

Chapter 12

1 The LORDE sayde vnto Moses & Aaron in the londe of Egipte:
2 This moneth shal be with you ye first moneth & at it ye shall begynne the
monethes of the yeare.
3 Speake ye vnto all the congregacion of Israel, & saye: Vpon ye tenth daye of
this moneth let euery one take a labe (or a kydd) where a housholder is, to
euery house a labe.
4 But yf the housholde be to few for a lambe, the let him & his neghbor yt is
next vnto his house, take it acordinge to the nombre of ye soules, and counte to
the lambe, what euery man maye eate.
5 But it shal be a lambe without blemish, a male, & of a yeare olde. From amonge
the lambes & goates shal ye take it.
6 And ye shal kepe it vnto ye fourtene daye of the moneth. And euery man of the
congregacion of Israel shal slaye it aboute the eueninge.
7 And they shal take of his bloude, and stryke it on both the syde postes of the
dore, and on the vpperdore post of the house, that they eate it in.
8 And so shal they eate flesh ye same night, rosted at the fyre, & vnleuended
bred, and shal eate it with sowre sawse.
9 Ye shal not eate it rawe, ner sodden with water, but onely rosted at the fyre,
his heade wt his fete and pertenaunce.
10 And ye shal leaue nothynge of it ouer vntyll the mornynge: but yf eny thinge
be left ouer vntyll the mornynge, ye shal burne it with fyre.
11 Of this maner shal ye eate it: Ye shal be gyrded aboute youre loynes, and
haue youre shues vpon youre fete, and staues in yor handes, and ye shal eate it
with haist: for it is ye LORDES Passeouer.
12 For in the same night wil I go thorow the londe of Egipte, & smyte all the
firstborne in the lande of Egipte, from men vnto catell, & vpon all the goddes
of Egipte wyll I do execucion.
13 Euen I the LORDE. And the bloude shal be youre token, vpon the houses wherin
ye are: yt whan I se the bloude, I maye passe ouer, and that the plage happen
not vnto you, to destroye you, whan I smyte the londe of Egipte.
14 And this daye shall ye haue for a remembraunce, and ye shall kepe it holy for
a feast vnto the LORDE, ye & all youre posterities, for a perpetuall custome.
15 Seuen dayes shall ye eate vnleuended bred: namely, vpon the first daie shal
ye leaue of with leuended bred in youre houses. Who so euer eateth leuended bred
from the first daye vnto ye seuenth that soule shall be roted out from Israel.
16 The first daye shall be called holy amonge you, and the seuenth also. No
maner of worke shall ye do therin, saue what belongeth to the meate for all
maner of soules, that onely maye ye do for you.
17 And kepe you to leuended bred. For euen vpon that same daye wil I brynge
youre armies out of the londe of Egipte, therfore shall ye and all youre
posterities kepe this daye for a perpetuall custome.
18 Vpon the fourtene daye of the first moneth, at euen, shall ye eate vnleuended
bred, vnto the one and twentye daye of the moneth, at euen:
19 so that there be no leuended bred founde in youre houses seuen dayes. For who
so euer eateth leuended bred, that soule shall be roted out from the
congregacion of Israel, whether it be a straunger or borne in the londe.
20 Therfore eate no leuended bred, but onely vnleuended bred in all youre
dwellynges.
21 And Moses called all the Elders of Israel, and sayde vnto them: Chose out,
and take to euery housholde a shepe, and kyll Passeouer vnto the LORDE:
22 and take a bunch of ysope, and dyppe it in the bloude in the basen, and
stryke it vpon the vpperposte and vpon the two syde postes, and none of you go
out at the dore of his house vntyll ye mornynge,
23 for the LORDE wyll go aboute and plage the Egipcians. And whan he seyth the
bloude vpo the vpperposte, and vpon the two syde postes, he wyl passe ouer by
the dore, and not suffre the destroyer to come in to youre houses to plage.
24 Therfore kepe this custome for the and thy children for euer.
25 And whan ye be come into ye londe that the LORDE shal geue you, (as he hath
sayde) then kepe this seruyce.
26 And whan youre children saye vnto you: What seruyce is this, that ye haue?
27 Ye shal saye: It is the sacrifice of the LORDES Passeouer, which passed ouer
by the children of Israel in Egipte, whan he plaged the Egipcians, and saued
oure houses. Then the people bowed them selues, and worshipped.
28 And the children of Israel wente and dyd, as the LORDE had commaunded Moses
and Aaron.
29 And at mydnight the LORDE smote all the firstborne in the lande of Egipte:
from Pharaos first sonne (which sat vpon his seate) vntyll the first sonne of
the presoner that was in the preson, and all the firstborne of the catell.
30 Then Pharao arose ye same night, and all his seruauntes, and all the
Egipcians, & there was a greate crye in Egipte: for there was no house wherin
there was not one deed.
31 And he called for Moses and Aaron in ye night, and sayde: Get you vp, and
departe out fro my people, ye and the children of Israel: go youre waye, and
serue the LORDE, as ye haue sayde:
32 and take youre shepe and youre oxen with you, as ye haue sayde, and departe,
and blesse me also.
33 And the Egipcians were fearce vpon the people, to dryue them haistely out of
the londe, for they saide: we are all but deed.
34 And the people toke the rawe dowe, before it was leuended (for their foode)
bounde in their clothes vpon their shulders.
35 And the children of Israel had done as Moses sayde, and borowed Iewels of
syluer and golde, and clothes of the Egipcians:
36 the LORDE also had geuen the people fauoure in the sight of the Egipcians,
that they lent them, and so they spoyled the Egipcians.
37 Thus ye children of Israel toke their iourney from Raemses to Suchoth, sixe
hundreth thousande men of fote, besyde childre.
38 There wente with them also moch como people, and shepe, and oxen, and
exceadinge many catell.
39 And of the rawe dowe that they brought out of Egipte, they baked vnleueded
cakes: for it was not leuended, in so moch as they were thrust out of Egipte,
and coude not tary: nether had they prepared them eny other meate.
40 The tyme yt the children of Israel dwelt in Egipte, is foure hondreth and
thirtie yeares.
41 Whan the same were ended, the whole hoost of the LORDE wente out of the londe
of Egipte in one daye.
42 Therfore shall this night be kepte vnto the LORDE, because he brought them
out of the londe of Egipte: And the children of Israel shall kepe it vnto the
LORDE, they and their posterities.
43 And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses and Aaron: This is the maner of the kepynge of
Passeouer. There shal no strauger eate of it.
44 But who so is a bought seruaunt let him be circumcysed, & then eate therof.
45 A straunger and an hyred seruaut shal not eate of it.
46 In one house shal it be eate. Ye shal cary none of his flesh out of the
house, and ye shal not breake a bone of him.
47 The whole congregacion of Israel shal do it.
48 But yf there dwel a straunger with the, & wil holde passeouer vnto the LORDE,
let him cicumcyse euery one that is male, and then let him first come, and do
it, and be as one that is borne in the londe: for there shal no vncircumcysed
eate therof.
49 One maner of lawe be vnto him yt is borne in the londe, & vnto the strauger
yt dwelleth amoge you.
50 And all the childre of Israel dyd as the LORDE commaunded Moses & Aaron.
51 So vpo one daye the LORDE brought the childre of Israel out of the lode of
Egipte with their armyes.

Chapter 13

1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & saide:
2 Sanctifie vnto me euery firstborne, yt breaketh all maner of Matrices amonge
the childre of Israel, both of men & catell: for they are myne.
3 Then saide Moses vnto ye people: Thinke vpo this daye, in the which ye are
gone out of Egipte from the house of bodage, how yt ye LORDE brought you out fro
thence wt a mightie hade. Therfore shall ye eate no sowre dowe.
4 This daye are ye gone out, eue in ye moneth of Abib.
5 Now wha ye LORDE hath brought ye in to ye lande of ye Cananites, Hethites,
Amorites, Heuites & Iebusites, which he sware vnto yi fathers to geue ye (euen a
londe that floweth wt mylke & hony) then shalt thou kepe this seruyce in this
moneth.
6 Seue dayes shall thou eate vnleuended bred, & vpon the seuenth daye is the
LORDES feast:
7 therfore shalt thou eate vnleuended bred seue dayes, that there be no sowre
dowe, ner sowred bred sene in all thy quarters.
8 And thou shalt tell thy sonne at the same tyme, & saye: Because of that, which
ye LORDE dyd for me, whan I departed out of Egipte.
9 Therfore shalt it be a signe vnto ye in thine hande, and a token of
remembraunce before thine eyes, that the lawe of ye LORDE maye be in thy mouth,
how that ye LORDE brought the out of Egipte with a mightie hande:
10 Therfore kepe this maner yearly in his tyme.
11 Whan the LORDE now hath brought ye in to ye lande of the Cananites (as he
hath sworne vnto the and thy fathers) and hath geuen it the,
12 then shalt thou sunder out vnto the LORDE all that breaketh the Matrice, and
firstborne amonge thy catell, soch as is male.
13 The firstborne of the Asse shalt thou bye out with a shepe: but yf thou
redeme it not, then breake his neck. All the firstborne of men amonge thy
children shalt thou redeme.
14 And whan thy childe axeth the to daie or tomorow: What is this? Thou shalt
saye vnto him: The LORDE brought vs out of Egipte from the house of bondage wt a
mightie hande:
15 for whan Pharao was loth to let vs go, the LORDE slew all the firstborne in
the lande of Egipte, from the firstborne of men vnto ye firstborne of the
catell: therfore offer I vnto the LORDE all that breaketh ye Matrice, beynge a
male, and ye firstborne of my children I redeme.
16 And this shal be a signe vnto the in thine hande, and a token to thinke vpon
before thine eyes, how that the LORDE brought vs out of Egipte with a mightie
hande.
17 Now whan Pharao had let ye people go, God led them not the waye thorow the
lode of the Philistynes, which was ye nexte: for he thoughte: The people might
repet, wha they se warre, and so turne in agayne into Egipte.
18 Therfore led he the people aboute, euen the waye thorow the wyldernes by ye
reed see. And the childre of Israel wente harnessed out of the londe of Egipte.
19 And Moses toke Iosephs bones with him, for he toke an ooth of the children of
Israel, and sayde: God wyll surely vyset you, therfore cary awaye my bones with
you from hence.
20 So they toke their iourney fro Suchoth, & pitched their tetes in Etha in ye
edge of the wildernes.
21 And ye LORDE wete before the by daye in a piler of a cloude, to lede the ye
right waye: and by night in a piler of fyre, that he might shewe the light to
walke both by daie and night.
22 The piler of the cloude departed neuer from the people by daye, and the pyler
of fyre departed not from the by night.

Chapter 14

1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
2 Speake vnto the children of Israel, and byd them that they turne aboute, &
pitch their tentes before the valley of Hyroth, betwixte Migdol & the see
towarde Baal Zepho, and there pitch ye tentes right ouer by the see.
3 For Pharao shall saye of the children of Israel: They can not tell how to get
out of the londe, the wyldernesse hath shut them in.
4 And I wyll harden his hert, yt he shal folowe after them, & I wil get me
honoure vpon Pharao, and vpon all his power. And ye Egipcias shal knowe, yt I am
the LORDE. And they dyd so.
5 And whan it was tolde ye kinge of Egipte, yt ye people fled, his hert & his
seruauntes were turned agaynst ye people, & saide: Why haue we done this, that
we haue let Israel go, yt they shulde not serue vs?
6 And he bounde his charettes fast, and toke his people wt him,
7 and toke sixe hudreth chosen charettes, and the other charettes besyde that
were in Egipte, and the captaynes ouer all his:
8 for the LORDE hardened ye hert of Pharao kynge of Egipte, that he folowed
after the children of Israel. And the children of Israel wente out with an hye
hande.
9 And the Egipcians folowed after the, & ouertoke them (where they had pitched
by ye see) with horses and charettes, and horsme, and with his power, in the
valley of Hyrath towarde Baal Zephon.
10 And whan Pharao came nye them, the children of Israel lift vp their eyes, and
beholde, ye Egipcians wente behinde the, and they were sore afrayed, and cried
vnto the LORDE.
11 And sayde vnto Moses: Were there no graues in Egipte, yt thou hast brought vs
awaye to dye in the wyldernes? Wherfore hast thou done this vnto vs, that thou
hast caried vs out of Egipte?
12 Is not this it, that we sayde vnto the in Egipte? Leaue of, & let vs serue
the Egipcians: for it were better for vs to serue the Egipcians, then to dye in
the wyldernes?
13 Moses sayde vnto the people: Feare you not, stonde styll, and beholde, what a
saluacion the LORDE shall shewe vpon you this daye: for these Egipcians whom ye
se this daye, shall ye neuer se more for euer:
14 the LORDE shal fight for you, onely quyete youre selues.
15 The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Wherfore criest thou vnto me? Speake vnto ye
children of Israel, yt they go forwarde.
16 But lift thou vp yi staff, & stretch out thine hade ouer ye see, & parte it
asunder, yt the children of Israel maye go in thorow ye middest of it vpon the
drye grounde.
17 Beholde, I wyll harden ye hert of the Egipcians, yt they shall folowe after
you. Thus wyl I get me honoure vpon Pharao, & vpon all his power, vpo his
charettes and horsmen:
18 and the Egipcians shal knowe, that I am ye LORDE, whan I haue gotten me honor
vpon Pharao, vpon his charettes, and vpon his horsmen.
19 Then the angell of God yt wente before the armies of Israel, remoued, and gat
him behynde them: and the cloudy piler remoued also from before them, and stode
behinde the
20 and came betwixte the armies of the Egipcians and the armies of Israel. It
was a darcke cloude, and gaue light that night, so that all the night longe
these and they coude not come together.
21 Wha Moses now stretched forth his hade ouer ye see, the LORDE caused it to
passe awaye thorow a mightie eastwynde all that night, and made the see drye,
and ye water deuyded it self a sunder.
22 And the children of Israel wente in thorow the middest of ye see vpon the
drye grounde: and ye water was vnto them as a wall, vpon their right hande & vpo
their lefte.
23 And ye Egipcias folowed, & wente in after the, all Pharaos horses, &
charettes, & horsme, eue in to ye middest of ye see.
24 Now whan the mornynge watch came, the LORDE loked vpo the armies of the
Egipcians out the piler of fire and ye cloude, & troubled their armies,
25 and smote the wheles from their charettes, & ouerthrew them wt a storme. Then
sayde the Egipcians: Let vs flye from Israel, the LORDE fighteth for the agaynst
the Egipcians.
26 But ye LORDE saide vnto Moses: Stretch out thyne hande ouer the see, that ye
water maye come agayne vpon the Egipcians, vpon their charettes, and horsmen.
27 Then Moses stretched out his hande ouer the see, and the see came agayne
before daye in his course and strength, and the Egipcians fled agaynst it. Thus
the LORDE ouerthrew them in the myddest of the see,
28 so that the water came agayne, and couered ye charettes and horsmen, and all
Pharaos power which folowed after them in to the see, so that there remayned not
one of them.
29 But the children of Israel wente drye thorow ye myddest of the see, and the
water was vnto them as a wall vpon their right hande and vpon their lefte.
30 Thus the LORDE delyuered Israel in yt daye from the hande of the Egipcians.
And they sawe the Egipcians deed vpon ye see syde,
31 and the greate hande yt the LORDE had shewed vpon the Egipcians. And ye
people feared ye LORDE, and beleued him, and his seruaunt Moses.

Chapter 15

1 Then sange Moses and the childre of Israel this songe vnto the LORDE, and
sayde: I will synge vnto ye LORDE, for he hath done gloriously, horse & charet
hath he ouerthrowne in the see.
2 The LORDE is my strength, and my songe, and is become my saluacion. This is my
God, I wil magnifie him: He is my fathers God, I wil exalte him.
3 The LORDE is the right man of warre, LORDE is his name.
4 The charettes of Pharao & his power, hath he cast in to the see. His chosen
captaynes are drowned in the reed see,
5 ye depe hath couered them: they fell to the grounde as a stone.
6 Thy right hande (O LORDE) is glorious in power: thy right hade (O LORDE) hath
smytten the enemies.
7 And with thy greate glory thou hast destroyed thine aduersaries: thou sentest
out yi wrath, & it cosumed them, euen as stobble.
8 In the breth of thy wrath the waters fell together, the floudes wente vpon a
heape: The depes plomped together in ye myddest of the see.
9 The enemie thought: I will folowe vpon them, and ouertake them, and deuyde ye
spoyle, and coole my mynde vpon them. I wil drawe out my swerde, and my hande
shal destroye them.
10 Thou blewest with thy wynde, the see couered them, and they sancke downe as
leed in the mightie waters.
11 LORDE, who is like vnto the amonge ye goddes? Who is so glorious in holynes,
fearfull, laudable, and doinge wonders?
12 When thou stretchedest out yi right hande, the earth swalowed them vp.
13 Thou of yi very mercy hast led this people, whom thou hast delyuered, and
with yi strength thou hast brought them vnto the dwellynge of thy Sanctuary.
14 Whan ye nacions herde this, they raged, sorowe came vpon the Philistynes.
15 Then were ye prynces of Edom afrayed, tremblynge came vpo ye mightie of Moab,
all the indwellers of Canaan waxed faynte harted.
16 Let feare and drede fall vpon them thorow thy greate arme, that they maye be
as styll as a stone, tyll thy people (O LORDE) be gone thorow, tyll yi people
whom thou hast gotten, be gone thorow.
17 Brynge them in, and plante them vpon the mountayne of thy enheritaunce, vnto
ye place that thou hast made for thyne owne dwellynge: euen to yi teple (O
LORDE) which thy handes haue prepared.
18 The LORDE shal be kynge for euer & euer.
19 For Pharao wente in to the see with horses, and charettes, and horsmen, and
the LORDE made the see fall agayne vpon them. But the children of Israel wete
drye thorow the myddest of the see.
20 And Miriam the prophetisse, Aarons sister, toke a tymbrell in hir hande, and
all the women folowed out after her with timbrels in a daunse.
21 And Miriam sange before the: O let vs synge vnto the LORDE, for he hath done
gloriously, man and horse hath he ouerthrowne in the see.
22 Moses caused the children of Israel to departe out from the reed see, vnto
the wyldernes of Sur, & they wente thre dayes in ye wildernes, yt they founde no
water.
23 Then came they to Marath, but they coude not drinke ye water for bytternes,
for it was very bytter. Therfore was it called Marah, (yt is bytternes.)
24 Then ye people murmured against Moses, & sayde: What shal we drynke?
25 And Moses cried vnto ye LORDE, which shewed him a tre: this he put in ye
water, the was it swete. There he made the a statute, and a lawe, and tempted
them,
26 and sayde: Yf thou wylt herken vnto the voyce of ye LORDE yi God, & do that
which is right in his sighte, and geue eare vnto his commaundementes, & kepe all
his statutes, then wyl I laye vpon ye none of the sicknesses, that I layed vpon
Egipte, for I am the LORDE thy surgione.
27 And they came vnto Elim, where there were twolue welles of water, and
seuentie palme trees, and there they pitched by ye water syde.

Chapter 16

1 From Elim they toke their iourney, and the whole congregacion of the children
of Israel came in to the wyldernesse of Sin (which lyeth betwene Elim and Sinai)
vpon the fyftene daye of the seconde moneth, after that they were departed out
of the londe of Egipte.
2 And ye whole multitude of the children of Israel murmured agaynst Moses and
Aaron in ye wildernes,
3 and saide vnto them: Wolde God we had dyed in the londe of Egipte by the hande
of the LORDE, whan we sat by ye flesh pottes, and had bred ynough to eate: for
ye haue brought vs out in to this wyldernes, to cause this whole multitude dye
of honger.
4 The sayde ye LORDE vnto Moses: beholde I wyl rayne you bred from heauen, and
let the people go out, and gather daylie, what they nede, that I maye proue
whether they walke in my lawe or not.
5 But vpon the sixte daye they shal prepare the selues, that they maye brynge in
twyse as moch as they gather daylie.
6 Moses and Aaron saide vnto all the children of Israel: At euen ye shall knowe,
that the LORDE hath brought you out of the lode of Egipte,
7 and in the mornynge shall ye se the glory of the LORDE: for he hath herde
youre grudginges agaynst the LORDE. For what are we, that ye grudge agaynst vs?
8 Moses sayde morouer: At euen shall the LORDE geue you flesh to eate, and in
the mornynge bred ynough: because ye LORDE hath herde youre grudginges, that ye
haue grudged agaynst him. For what are we? Youre murmuringe is not agaynst vs,
but against the LORDE.
9 And Moses sayde vnto Aaron: Speake vnto the whole multitude of ye children of
Israel: Come forth before the LORDE, for he hath herde youre murmuringes.
10 And whyle Aaron spake thus vnto the whole congegacion of the childre of
Israel, they turned them towarde the wyldernes: and beholde, the glory of the
LORDE appeared in a cloude,
11 and the LORDE sayde vnto Moses:
12 I haue herde the murmuringe of ye children of Israel. Tell them: At euen
shall ye haue flesh to eate, and in the mornynge shal ye be fylled with bred, &
ye shall knowe, that I am the LORDE youre God.
13 And at euen the quayles came vp, and couered the tentes: and in the mornynge
the dewe laye rounde aboute the tentes.
14 And whan the dew was falle, beholde, there laye a thinge in the wildernes,
thynne and small, as the horefrost vpon the grounde.
15 And whan the children of Israel sawe it, they saide one to another: This is
Ma. For they wyst not what it was. But Moses sayde vnto them: It is the bred
that ye LORDE hath geue you to eate.
16 This is it that ye LORDE hath commauded: Euery one gather for himself as moch
as he eateth, and take a Gomor for euery heade, acordinge to the nombre of the
soules in his tente.
17 And the children of Israel dyd so, and gathered some more, some lesse.
18 But whan it was measured out with ye Gomor, he that gathered moch, had not
the more: and he yt gathered litle, wanted nothinge, but euery one gathered for
himself, as moch as he ate.
19 And Moses sayde vnto them: Let no ma leaue ought therof vntyll the mornynge.
20 But they harkened not vnto Moses. And some left of it vntill the morninge.
Then waxed it full of wormes and stanke. And Moses was angrie at them.
21 And euery mornynge they gathered for them selues, as moch as euery one ate:
but as soone as it was whote of the Sonne, it melted awaye.
22 And vpon the sixte daye they gathered twyse as moch of bred, two Gomors for
one. And all the rulers of the congregacio came in, and tolde Moses.
23 And he sayde vnto them: This is it, that the LORDE hath sayde: Tomorow is the
Sabbath of the holy rest of the LORDE: loke what ye wil bake, that bake: and
what ye wyll seeth, that seeth and that remayneth ouer, let it remayne, yt it
maye be kepte vntyll the morynynge.
24 And they let it remayne tyll the morow, as Moses commaunded. Then stanke it
not, nether was there eny worme therin.
25 The sayde Moses: Eate that to daye, for to daye is ye Sabbath of the LORDE,
to daye shal ye fynde none in the felde.
26 Sixe dayes shall ye gather it, but the seuenth daye is the Sabbath, wherin
there shal be none.
27 But vpon the seuenth daye there wente out some of the people to gather, and
founde nothinge.
28 Then sayde ye LORDE vnto Moses: How longe refuse ye to kepe my
commaundementes and lawes?
29 Beholde, ye LORDE hath geuen you the Sabbath, therfore vpon the sixte daye he
geueth you bred for two dayes: therfore let euery man now byde at home, and
noman go forth of his place vpon the seuenth daye.
30 So the people rested vpo ye seuenth daye.
31 And the house of Israel called it Man, and it was like Coriander sede, and
whyte, & had a taist like symnels with hony.
32 And Moses sayde: This is it that ye LORDE hath commaunded: Fill a Gomor
therof to be kepte for youre posterities, yt they maye se the bred, wherwith I
fed you, whan I brought you out of ye lande of Egipte.
33 And Moses sayde vnto Aaron: Take a cruse, and put a Gomor full of Man therin,
and laye it vp before the LORDE, to be kepte for youre posterities,
34 as the LORDE commaunded Moses. So Aaron layed it vp there for a testimony to
be kepte.
35 And the children of Israel ate man fourtye yeares, tyll they came vnto a
lande, where people dwelt: euen vntyll they came to ye borders of the lande of
Canaan ate they Man.
36 A Gomor is the tenth parte of an Epha.

Chapter 17

1 And the whole multitude of the children of Israel wete on their iourneys out
of the wyldernes of Sin (as the LORDE comaunded the) & pitched in Raphidim. Then
had the people no water to drynke.
2 And they chode wt Moses, & sayde: Geue vs water, yt we maye drynke. Moses
sayde vnto the: Why chyde ye wt me? Wherfore tepte ye ye LORDE?
3 But whan the people thyrsted there for water, they murmured agaynst Moses, &
sayde: Wherfore hast thou caused vs to come out of Egipte? to let vs, oure
children, and oure catell dye of honger?
4 Moses cried vnto the LORDE, and sayde: What shal I do wt this people? They are
allmost ready to stone me.
5 The LORDE saide vnto him: Go before the people, & take some of the elders of
Israel with ye, and take in thine hande thy staff, wherwith thou smotest the
water, and go thy waye:
6 Beholde, I wyl stonde there before the vpon a rock in Horeb, there shalt thou
smyte the rocke, so shall there water runne out, that the people maye drynke.
Moses dyd so before the elders of Israel.
7 Then was that place called Massa Meriba, because of the chydinge of the
children of Israel, and because they tempted ye LORDE, and sayde: Is the LORDE
amonge vs, or not?
8 Then came Ameleck, & fought agaynst Israel in Raphidim.
9 And Moses sayde vnto Iosua: Chose vs out men, go out, & fight against Amaleck,
tomorow wil I stode vpo the toppe of the hyll, & haue ye staff of God in my
hande.
10 And Iosua dyd as Moses bade him, & fought agaynst Amalek. Moses & Aaron & Hur
wente vp to ye toppe of the hyll.
11 And wha Moses helde vp his hade, Israel had the victory: but whan he let
downe his hande, Amalek had the victory.
12 But Moses hades were heuy, therfore toke they a stone, & layed it vnder him,
that he might syt vpon it. And Aaron & Hur stayed vp his hades, the one vpon the
one syde, and the other vpon ye other syde. So his handes were stedfast vnto ye
Sonne wente downe.
13 And Iosua discomfited Amalek, & his people thorow the edge of the swerde.
14 And ye LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Wryte this for a remebraunce in a boke, &
comytte it vnto ye eares of Iosua: for I wyll rote out Amalek from vnder heauen,
so that he shall nomore be remembred.
15 And Moses buylded an altare vnto the LORDE, and called it: The LORDE Nissi,
16 for he sayde: The battayll of the LORDE shalbe agaynst Amalek thorow an hande
vnder the defence of God from childe to childes childe.

Chapter 18

1 And whan Iethro ye prest in Madian Moses father in lawe herde of all yt God
had done wt Moses & his people of Israel, how yt the LORDE had brought Israel
out of Egipte,
2 he toke Zipora Moses wife, whom he had sent backe,
3 with her two sonnes. The one was called Gerson, for he saide: I am become a
straunger in a straunge londe.
4 And the other was called Eliaser, for he sayde: The God of my fathers hath
bene my helpe, and hath delyuered me from Pharaos swerde.
5 Now wha Iethro Moses father in lawe, and his sonnes and his wife came vnto him
in the wyldernes by the mount of God where he had pitched his tent,
6 he sent worde vnto Moses: I Iethro thy father in lawe am come vnto the, and yi
wife and both hir children with her.
7 Then wente Moses forth to mete him, and dyd obeysauce vnto him, and kyssed
him. And whan they had saluted ech other, they wente in to the tente.
8 Then Moses tolde his father in lawe all that the LORDE had done vnto Pharao
and the Egipcians for Israels sake, and all the trauayle that had happened them
by ye waye, and how the LORDE had delyuered them.
9 Iethro reioysed ouer all ye good that the LORDE had done for Israel, yt he had
delyuered them from the hade of the Egipcians.
10 And Iethro sayde: Praysed be the LORDE, which hath delyuered you from the
hande of the Egipcians and of Pharao, (and) that knoweth how to delyuer his
people from the Egipcians hande.
11 Now I knowe, that the LORDE is greater the all goddes, because they dealt
proudly wt them.
12 And Iethro toke brentofferynges, and offered vnto God. Then came Aaron and
all ye elders of Israel to eate bred with Moses father in lawe before God.
13 On the next morow sat Moses to iudge the people, and the people stode roude
aboute Moses from the mornynge vntyll ye euen.
14 But whan his father in lawe sawe all that he dyd with the people, he sayde:
What is this, that thou doest with the people? Wherfore syttest thou alone, and
all ye people stonde rounde aboute from the morninge vntyll the euen?
15 Moses answered him: The people come to me, & axe councell at God:
16 for whan they haue eny thinge to do, they come vnto me, that I maye iudge
betwixte euery one & his neghboure, and shewe them the statutes of God, and his
lawes.
17 His father in lawe sayde vnto him: It is not well that thou doest.
18 Thou weeriest thy self, and the people that is with the. This busynesse is to
sore for the, thou canst not perfourme it alone.
19 But herken vnto my voyce, I will geue the councell, and God shall be with
the. Be thou vnto the people to God warde, and brynge the causes before God,
20 and prouide them with statutes and lawes, that thou mayest shewe the the waie
wherin they shulde walke, and the workes that they shulde do.
21 But loke out amonge all the people, for honest men, that feare God, soch as
are true, & hate couetousnes: make these rulers ouer them, some ouer thousandes,
ouer hundredes, ouer fiftie, and ouer ten,
22 that they maye allwaye iudge the people. But where there is eny greate
matter, that they brynge the same vnto the, and iudge the small causes them
selues: so shall it be lighter for the, yf they beare the burthen with the.
23 Yf thou shalt do this, then mayest thou endure the thinge that God chargeth
the withall, and all this people maie go peaceably vnto their place.
24 Moses herkened vnto the voyce of his father in lawe, and dyd all that he
sayde.
25 And he chose honest men out of all Israel, and made them heades ouer the
people, some ouer thousandes, ouer hundredes, ouer fiftie, and ouer ten,
26 that they might allwaye iudge the people. As for soch causes as were herde,
they brought them vnto Moses, and iudged the small matters them selues.
27 So Moses let his father in lawe departe in to his owne londe.

Chapter 19

1 In the thirde moneth after that the children of Israel were gone out of the
londe of Egipte, they came the same daye in to the wyldernes of Sinai
2 (for they were departed from Raphidim, and wolde in to the wyldernes of Sinai)
and there they pitched in the wyldernes ouer against the mounte.
3 And Moses wente vp vnto God. And the LORDE called vnto him out of the mount,
and sayde: Thus shalt thou saye vnto the house of Iacob, and tell the children
of Israel:
4 Ye haue sene what I haue done vnto the Egipcians, and how I haue borne you
vpon Aegles wynges, & brought you vnto my self.
5 Yf ye wyll harken now vnto my voyce, and kepe my couenaunt, ye shalbe myne
owne before all people: for the whole earth is myne:
6 and ye shall be vnto me a presterly kingdome, and an holy people. These are
the wordes that thou shalt saye vnto the children of Israel.
7 Moses came and called for the elders of the people, and layed before them all
these wordes, that the LORDE had commaunded.
8 And all the people answered together, and sayde: All that the LORDE hath
sayde, wyll we do. And Moses tolde the wordes of the people vnto the LORDE
agayne.
9 And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Beholde, I wyll come vnto the in a thicke
cloude, that the people maye heare my wordes, which I speake vnto the, and
beleue the for euer. And Moses shewed the wordes of the people vnto the LORDE.
10 The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Go vnto the people, and sanctifie the to daye and
tomorow, yt they maye wash their clothes,
11 and be ready agaynst the thirde daye: for vpon the thirde daye shall the
LORDE come downe vpon mount Sinai before all the people.
12 And set markes rounde aboute the people, and saye vnto them: Bewarre, that ye
go not vp in to ye mount, ner touch ye border of it. For whosoeuer toucheth ye
mout, shal dye ye death.
13 There shal no hade touch it, but he shall either be stoned, or shot thorow:
whether it be beest or man, it shal not lyue. Whan the horne bleweth, then shal
they come vp vnto the mounte.
14 Moses wente downe from the mount vnto the people, and sanctified them. And
they wasshed their clothes.
15 And he sayde vnto them: Be ready agaynst the thirde daye, and no man come at
his wife.
16 Now whan the thirde daye came (and it was early) it beganne to thonder and
lighten, and there was a thicke cloude vpon the mount, and a noyse of a trompet
exceadinge mightie. And the people that were in the tentes, were afrayde.
17 And Moses brought the people out of the tentes to mete wt God, and they stode
vnder the mount.
18 But all mount Sinai smoked, because ye LORDE came downe vpo it with fyre. And
the smoke therof wente vp as the smoke of a fornace, so that the whole mount was
exceadinge terrible.
19 And the noyse of the trompet wete out, and was mightie. Moses spake, & God
answered him loude.
20 Now whan the LORDE was come downe vpon mount Sinai, euen vpon the toppe of
it, he called Moses vp vnto ye toppe of the mount. And Moses wente vp.
21 Then sayde the LORDE vnto him: Go downe, and charge the people, yt they
preasse not vnto the LORDE to se him, and so many of them perishe.
22 The rulers also that come nye vnto ye LORDE, shal sanctifie themselues, lest
the LORDE smyte the.
23 But Moses sayde vnto the LORDE: The people cannot come vp vpon mount Sinai,
for thou hast charged vs, & sayde: Set markes aboute the mount, and sanctifie
it.
24 The LORDE sayde vnto him: Go thy waye, get ye downe. Thou and Aaron with the
shalt come vp: but the rulers and ye people shal not preasse to come vp vnto ye
LORDE, lest he smyte the.
25 And Moses wente downe to the people, and tolde them.

Chapter 20

1 And the LORDE spake all these wordes, and sayde:
2 I am the LORDE thy God, which haue brought the out of the londe of Egipte from
ye house of bondage.
3 Thou shalt haue none other Goddes in my sight.
4 Thou shalt make the no grauen ymage ner eny symilitude, nether of it that is
aboue in heauen, ner of it that is beneth vpon earth, ner of it that is in the
water vnder the earth.
5 Worshipe them not, and serue them not: for I the LORDE thy God am a gelouse
God, vysitinge ye synne of the fathers vpon the children, vnto ye thirde and
fourth generacion, of them that hate me:
6 And do mercye vpo many thousandes, that loue me, and kepe my commaundementes.
7 Thou shalt not take the name of ye LORDE thy God in vayne. For the LORDE shal
not holde him vngiltie, that taketh his name in vayne.
8 Remembre the Sabbath daie, that thou sanctifie it.
9 Sixe dayes shalt thou laboure and do all thy worke:
10 But vpon the seuenth daye is the Sabbath of the LORDE thy God: thou shalt do
no maner worke in it, nether thou, ner thy sonne, ner thy doughter, ner thy
seruaunt, ner thy mayde, ner thy catell, ner thy straunger that is within thy
gates.
11 For in sixe dayes the LORDE made heauen and earth, and the see, and all that
therin is, and rested vpon the seuenth daye: therfore the LORDE blessed the
seuenth daye, & halowed it.
12 Honoure thy father and thy mother, that thou mayest lyue longe in the londe,
which the LORDE thy God shal geue the.
13 Thou shalt not kyll.
14 Thou shalt not breake wedlocke.
15 Thou shalt not steale.
16 Thou shalt beare no false wytnesse agaynst thy neghboure.
17 Thou shalt not lust after yi neghbours house. Thou shalt not lust after thy
neghbours wife, ner his seruaut, ner his mayde, ner his oxe, ner his Asse, ner
all that thy neghboure hath
18 And all the people sawe the thonder and the lightenynge, and the noyse of the
trompet, and how that the mountayne smoked, and were afrayed, and stackerd, &
stode afarre of,
19 and sayde vnto Moses: Talke thou with vs, we wil heare: and let not God talke
with vs, we might els dye.
20 And Moses sayde vnto the people: Be not afrayed, for God is come to proue
you, and that his feare maye be before youre eyes, yt ye synne not.
21 And the people stode afarre of. But Moses gat him in to the darcke cloude,
where in God was.
22 And the LORDE spake vnto him: Thus shalt thou saye vnto the children of
Israel: Ye haue sene, that I haue talked wt you from heauen:
23 therfore shal ye make nothinge with me: goddes of syluer and golde shal ye
not make you.
24 Make me an altare of earth, wher vpon thou mayest offer yi burntofferynges, &
peaceofferynges, thy shepe and thine oxen. For loke in what place so euer I make
ye remembraunce of my name, there wil I come vnto the, and blesse the.
25 And yf thou wilt make me an altare of stone, thou shalt not make it of hewen
stone: For yf thou lift vp thy tole vpon it, thou shalt vnhalowe it.
26 Morouer thou shalt not go vp vpon steppes vnto myne altare, that thy shame be
not discouered before it.

Chapter 21

1 These are the lawes, that thou shalt laye before them.
2 Yf thou bye a seruaunt that is an Hebrue, he shal serue the sixe yeares, in
the seuenth yeare shall he go out fre and lowse.
3 Yf he came alone, then shal he go out alone also: but yf he came maried, then
shall his wife go out with him.
4 Yf his master haue geue him a wife, & she haue borne him sonnes or doughters,
the shal the wife and ye children be the masters, but he shall go out alone.
5 Neuertheles yf the seruaunt saye: I loue my master, and my wife and children,
I wil not go out fre:
6 then let his master brynge him before the Goddes, and holde him to the dore or
post, and bore him thorow the eare with a botkin, and let him be his seruaunt
for euer.
7 Yf a man sell his doughter to be an handmayde, then shal she not go out as the
menseruauntes.
8 But yf she please not hir master, and he haue not maried her, then shal he let
her go fre: but to sell her vnto a strauge people he hath no auctorite, for so
moch as he hath despysed her.
9 Yf he promyse her vnto his sonne, then shal he do vnto her after the lawe of
doughters.
10 But yf he geue him another wife, then shall he mynishe nothinge of hir foode,
rayment, and dewtye of mariage.
11 Yf he do not these thre, then shal she go out fre, and paye nothinge.
12 He that smyteth a man that he dye, shall dye the death.
13 Yf he haue not layed wayte for him, but God let him fall in his hande
vnawares, then wil I appoynte the a place, where he shal flye vnto.
14 But yf a man presume vpon his neghboure, and slaye him with disceate, then
shalt thou take the same fro myne altare, that he maye be slayne.
15 Who so smyteth his father or mother, shall dye the death.
16 He that stealeth a man, and selleth him, so that he be founde by him, the
same shall dye the death.
17 Who so curseth father and mother, shal dye the death.
18 Yf men stryue together and one smyte another with a stone, or with his fist,
so that he dye not, but lyeth in bedd:
19 Yf he ryse, and go forth vpon his staff, the shall he that smote him, be
vngiltie: saue that he shal paye the losse of his tyme, and geue ye money for
healynge him.
20 He that smyteth his seruaunt or mayde with a staff, that he dye vnder his
handes, the same shall suffre vengeaunce therfore.
21 But yf he endure a daye or two, then shall he suffre no vegeaunce therfore,
for it is his money.
22 Yf men stryue, and hytt a woman with childe, so that ye frute departe from
her, and no harme happen vnto her, then shall he be punyshed for money, as moch
as the womans husbande layeth to his charge, and he shall geue it, acordinge to
the appoyntement of the dayes men.
23 But yf there come harme vnto her there thorow, then shal he paye soule for
soule,
24 eye for eye, toth for toth, hande for hande, fote for fote,
25 burnynge for burnynge, wounde for wounde, strype for strype.
26 Yf a man smyte his seruaunt or his mayde in the eye, and destroye it, he shal
let them go fre and lowse for the eye sake.
27 In like maner yf he smyte out a tothe of his seruaunt or mayde, he shall let
them go fre and lowse for the tothes sake.
28 Yf an oxe gorre a man or a woman, that he dye, then shall that oxe be stoned,
and his flesh not eaten: so is the master of the oxe vngiltie.
29 But yf the oxe haue bene vsed to push in tymes past, & it hath bene tolde his
master, and he hath not kepte him, and besydes that slayeth a man or a woman,
then shal ye oxe be stoned, and his master shal dye.
30 But yf there be money set vpon him, then, loke what is put vpon him, that
shall he geue, to delyuer his soule.
31 Likewyse shall he be dealte withall, yf he gorre a sonne or a doughter.
32 But yf he gorre a seruaunt or a mayde, then shall he geue their master
thirtie syluer Sycles: and the oxe shalbe stoned.
33 Yf a man open a well, or dygge a pytt, and couer it not, and there fall an
oxe or Asse therin,
34 then shall the owner of the pytt make it good with money, and restore it vnto
his master: but the deed carcase shalbe his owne.
35 Yf one mans oxe gorre another, that he dye, then shall they sell the lyuynge
oxe, and deuyde the money, and the deed carcase shal they deuyde also.
36 But yf it be knowne, that the oxe haue bene vsed to gorre afore, then shal he
paye his oxe for the other, & the deed carcase shal be his owne.

Chapter 22

1 Yf a man steale an oxe or shepe, and slaye it, or sell it, he shall restore
fyue oxen for an oxe, and foure shepe for a shepe.
2 Yf a thefe be taken breakinge in, & vpon that be smytten that he dye, then
shall not he that smote him, be giltie of his bloude.
3 But yf the sonne be gone vp vpo him, then hath he committed manslaughter, and
he shal dye. A thefe shall make restitucion. Yf he haue nothige, the let him be
solde for his theft.
4 But yf ye theft be founde by him alyue (from the oxe vnto the Asse or shepe)
then shall he restore dubble.
5 Yf a man hurte a felde or vynyarde, so yt he let his catell do harme in
another mans felde, the same shall make restitucion euen of the best of his owne
felde and vynyarde.
6 Yf a fyre come out, and take holde of ye thornes, so that the sheeues be
consumed, or the corne that stondeth yet vpon the felde, he that kyndled the
fyre shall make restitucion.
7 Yf a man delyuer his neghboure money or vessels to kepe, and it be stollen
from him out of his house: yf the thefe be founde, he shal restore dubble.
8 But yf the thefe be not founde, then shal the good man of the house be brought
before the Goddes (and shal sweare) that he hath not put his hande vnto his
neghbours good.
9 Yf one accuse another in eny maner of trespace, whether it be for oxe, or
Asse, or shepe, or rayment, what so euer it be that is lost: then shall both
their causes come before the Goddes: Loke whom the Goddes condempne, the same
shal restore dubble vnto his neghboure.
10 Yf a man delyuer vnto his neghboure an Asse, or oxe or shepe, or eny maner of
catell to kepe, and it dye, or be hurte, or dryuen awaye that no man se it,
11 then shall there an ooth of the LORDE go betwene them, that he hath not put
his hande vnto his neghbours good: and the owner of ye good shal accepte it, so
that the other shall not make it good.
12 Yf a thefe steale it from him, then shal he make restitucio vnto the owner
therof.
13 But yf it be rauyshed (of beastes) then shal he brynge recorde therof, and
not make it good.
14 Yf a man borowe ought of his neghboure, and it be hurte, or dye, so that the
owner therof be not by, then shall he make it good.
15 But yf the owner therof be by, then shal he not make it good, yf he hyred it
for his money.
16 Yf a man begile a mayde, that is not yet spoused, and lye with her, the same
shal geue her hir dowry, and take her to his wife.
17 But yf hir father refuse to geue her vnto him, the shall he weye there the
money, acordinge to the dowry of virgins.
18 Thou shalt not suffre a witch to lyue.
19 Who so lyeth wt a beest, shal dye the death.
20 Who so offreth to eny goddes, saue vnto the LORDE onely, let him dye without
redempcion.
21 Thou shalt not vexe ner oppresse a straunger, for ye youre selues were
straungers also in the londe of Egipte.
22 Ye shall truble no wyddowe ner fatherlesse childe.
23 Yf thou shalt trouble them, they shall crie vnto me, and I shall heare their
crye:
24 then shal my wrath waxe whote, so yt I shal sley you with the swerde, and
youre wyues shalbe wedowes, and youre children fatherlesse,
25 Yf thou lende money vnto my people that is poore by the, thou shalt not
behaue thyself as an vsurer vnto him, nether shalt thou oppresse him with vsury.
26 Yf thou take a garment of thy neghboure to pledge, thou shalt geue it him
agayne before the Sonne go downe:
27 for his raymet is his onely couerynge of his skynne: wherin he slepeth. But
yf he shall crie vnto me, I wyll heare him: for I am mercifull.
28 Thou shalt not speake euell of the Goddes, and the ruler of thy people shall
thou not blaspheme.
29 Thy drie and moist frutes shalt thou not kepe backe. Thy first sonne shalt
thou geue vnto me.
30 So shalt thou do also with thine oxen and shepe. Seuen dayes let it be with
the dame: Vpon the eight daye shalt thou geue it vnto me.
31 Ye shalbe holy people before me. Therfore shal ye eate no flesh, that is
torne of beestes in the felde, but cast it vnto the dogges.

Chapter 23

1 Thou shalt not accepte a vayne tale, that thou woldest manteyne the vngodly,
and be a false wytnesse.
2 Thou shalt not folowe the multitude vnto euell, ner answere at the lawe that
thou woldest (to folowe the multitude) turne a syde from the right.
3 Thou shalt not paynte a poore mas cause.
4 Yf thou mete thine enemies oxe or Asse, goinge astraye, thou shalt brynge the
same vnto him agayne.
5 Yf thou se the Asse of him that hateth the, lye vnder his burthen, thou shalt
not let him lye, but shalt helpe him vp.
6 Thou shalt not wraist the righte of thy poore in his cause.
7 Kepe the farre from false matters. The innocent and righteous shalt thou not
sley, for I iustifie not ye vngodly.
8 Thou shalt not take giftes: for giftes blinde euen them yt are sharpe of
sight, & wraist the righteous causes.
9 Ye shall not oppresse a straunger, for ye knowe the hert of straungers, for so
moch as ye youre selues also haue bene straungers in the londe of Egipte.
10 Sixe yeares shalt thou sowe thy londe, and gather in the frute therof:
11 In the seuenth yeare shalt thou let it rest and lye still, that the poore
amonge thy people maye eate therof: and loke what remayneth ouer, let ye beestes
of the felde eate it. Thus shalt thou do also with thy vynyarde and olyue trees.
12 Sixe dayes shalt thou do thy worke, but vpon the seuenth daye thou shalt kepe
holy daye, that thine oxe and Asse maye rest, and that the sonne of thy
handmayden and the straunger maye refresh them selues.
13 All that I haue sayde vnto you, that kepe. And as for the names of other
goddes, ye shall not remembre them, and out of youre mouthes shal they not be
herde.
14 Thre tymes in the yeare
15 shalt thou kepe feast vnto me: namely the feast of vnleuended bred shalt thou
kepe, that thou eate vnleuended bred seuen dayes ( like as I commaunded ye) in
the tyme of ye moneth Abib, for in the same wentest thou out of Egipte. (But
appeare not emptye before me.)
16 And ye feast whan thou first reapest thy labours, yt thou hast sowen vpon the
felde. And the feast of ingatherynge in the ende of ye yeare, whan thou hast
gathered in thy laboures out of the felde.
17 Thre tymes in the yeare shal euery male that thou hast, appeare before the
LORDE the Gouernoure.
18 Thou shalt not offre the bloude of my sacrifice with sowre dowe, and the fat
of my feast shal not remayne till the mornynge.
19 The first of the first frutes of thy felde shalt thou brynge in to the house
of the LORDE thy God. And shalt not seeth a kydd, whyle it is in his mothers
mylke.
20 Beholde, I sende an angell before the, to kepe the in the waye, and to brynge
the vnto the place, that I haue prepared.
21 Therfore bewarre of his face, and herken vnto his voyce, and anger him not,
for he shall not spare youre mysdedes, & my name is in him.
22 But yf thou shalt herken vnto his voyce, and do all that I shal tell the,
then wyl I be enemie vnto thy enemyes, and aduersary vnto thy aduersaries.
23 Now wha myne angell goeth before the, & bryngeth the vnto ye Amorites,
Hethites, Pheresites, Cananites, Heuites & Iebusites, & I shall haue destroyed
them:
24 then shalt thou not worshipe their goddes, ner serue them, nether shalt thou
do as they do, but shalt ouerthrowe their goddes, & breake the downe.
25 But ye LORDE yor God shal ye serue, so shal he blesse thy bred & thy water,
and I wyl remoue all sicknesse from the.
26 There shalbe nothinge baren ner vnfrutefull in thy londe, and I wil fulfill
the nombre of thy dayes.
27 I wil sende my feare before the, and sley all the people where thou comest, &
will make all thine enemies to turne their backes vpo the.
28 I wyll sende hornettes before ye, and dryue out the Heuytes, Cananites and
Hethytes before the.
29 In one yeare wyl I not cast the out before the, yt the londe become not
waist, & wylde beastes multiply agaynst ye:
30 By litle & litle wyll I dryue them out before the, tyll thou growe, & haue
the londe in possession.
31 And I wil set the borders of thy londe, euen from the reed see vnto ye see of
the Philistynes, & from the wyldernes vnto the water. For I wil delyuer the
indwellers of the londe in to thine hande, yt thou shalt dryue them out before
the.
32 Thou shalt make no couenaunt wt them ner with their goddes,
33 but let the not dwell in thy lande, that they make the not synne ageynst me.
For yf thou serue their goddes, it wil surely be thy decaye.

Chapter 24

1 And he sayde vnto Moses: Come vp vnto the LORDE thou & Aaron, Nadab and Abihu,
and the seuetie elders of Israel, & worshipe afarre of.
2 But let Moses onely come nye vnto the LORDE, and let not them come nye, and
let not the people also come vp with him.
3 Moses came and tolde the people all the wordes of the LORDE, & all the lawes.
Then answered all the people with one voyce, and sayde: All ye wordes that the
LORDE hath sayde, wyl we do.
4 Then wrote Moses all the wordes of ye LORDE, & gat him vp by tymes in the
mornynge, & buylded an altare vnder ye mount with twolue pilers, acordinge to
the twolue trybes of Israel:
5 & sent twolue yonge me of the children of Israel, to offre burntofferynges,
and peace offerynges theron of bullockes vnto the LORDE.
6 And Moses toke the half parte of the bloude, and put it in a basen, the other
half sprenkled he vpon the altare:
7 & toke the boke of ye couenaunt, & cried in the eares of the people. And whan
they had sayde: All yt the LORDE hath sayde, wil we do, & herken vnto him:
8 Moses toke the bloude, & sprenkled it vpon the people, & sayde: Beholde, this
is ye bloude of the couenaunt that the LORDE maketh wt you vpon all these
wordes.
9 Then wente Moses & Aaron, Nadab & Abihu, & the seuentye elders of Israel vp,
10 & sawe ye God of Israel. Vnder his fete it was like a stone worke of Saphyre,
& as the fashion of heaue, wha it is cleare,
11 & he put not his hade vpo the pryncipall of Israel. And whan they had sene
God, they ate & dronke.
12 And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Come vp vnto me vpon the mount, & remayne
there, yt I maye geue the tables of stone, & ye lawe & commaundemetes yt I haue
wrytten, which thou shalt teach the.
13 Then Moses gat him vp & his mynister Iosua, & wente vp into the mount of God,
14 & sayde vnto the elders: Tary ye here, tyll we come to you agayne: beholde,
Aaron and Hur are with you, yf eny ma haue a matter to do, let him brynge it
vnto them.
15 Now wha Moses came vp in to ye mout, a cloude mount:
16 & the glory of ye LORDE abode vpon mount Sinai, & couered it wt the cloude
sixe dayes, & vpon the seueth daye he called Moses out of ye cloude.
17 And ye fashion of ye glory of ye LORDE was like a cosumynge fyre vpon the
toppe of ye mount in the sight of the children of Israel.
18 And Moses wente in to the myddest of the cloude, and asceded vp in to the
mount, and abode vpon the mount fourtye dayes & fourtye nightes.

Chapter 25

1 And ye LORDE talked wt Moses & ayde:
2 Speake vnto ye childre of Israel, yt they geue me an Heue offerynge, & take
the some of euery man, that hath a fre wyllynge hert therto.
3 And this is the Heueofferynge that ye shal take of them: Golde, syluer,
brasse,
4 yalowe sylke, scarlet, purple, whyte twyned sylke, goates hayre,
5 reed skynnes of rammes, doo skynnes, Fyrre tre,
6 oyle for lampes, spyces for the anoyntynge oyle, and for swete incense.
7 Onix stones and set stones for the ouerbody cote and for the brestlappe.
8 And they shall make me a Sanctuary, that I maie dwell amonge them.
9 Like as I shal shewe ye a patrone of the Habitacion, and of all the ornamentes
therof, so shall ye make it.
10 Make an Arke of Fyrre tre two cubytes & a half longe, a cubyte & a half
brode, and a cubyte & an half hye:
11 this shalt thou ouerleye with pure golde within and without, & make an hye
vpo it a crowne of golde rounde aboute,
12 and cast foure rynges of golde, & put them in the foure corners of it, so
that two rynges be vpon the one syde, and two vpon the other syde.
13 And make staues of Fyrre tre, and ouer laye them with golde,
14 and put them in the rynges alonge by the sydes of the Arke, to beare it
withall:
15 and they shal abyde styll in the rynges, & not be take out.
16 And in ye Arke thou shalt laye the wytnesse, that I wyl geue the.
17 Thou shalt make a Mercyseate also of pure golde, two cubytes and a half
longe, and a cubyte & a half brode.
18 And thou shalt make two Cherubyns of beaten golde vpo both ye endes of the
Mercyseate,
19 yt the one Cherub maye be vpon the one ende, & the other vpon the other ende,
& so to be two Cherubyns vpon the endes of the Mercyseate.
20 And the Cherubyns shall sprede out their wynges ouer an hye, yt they maye
couer ye Mercyseate wt their wynges: & yt either their faces maye be right ouer
one agaynst another, and their faces shal loke vnto the Mercyseate.
21 And thou shalt set ye Mercyseate aboue vpon the Arke. And in the Arke thou
shalt laye the wytnesse, yt I shal geue the.
22 From yt place wyll I testifie vnto ye, and talke with the, namely, from ye
Mercyseate (betwixte the two Cherubyns) which is vpon the Arke of wytnesse, of
all that I wyl comaunde ye vnto the children of Israel.
23 Thou shalt make a table also of Fyrre tre, two cubites longe, and one cubyte
brode, and a cubyte and a half hye,
24 and ouerlaye it with pure golde, and make a crowne of golde rounde aboute it,
25 and an whope of an hade brede hye, and a crowne of golde vnto ye whope rounde
aboute.
26 And vnto it thou shalt make foure rynges of golde, on the foure corners in
the foure fete of it:
27 harde vnder the whope shall ye rynges be, to put in staues and to beare the
table wt all:
28 and thou shalt make the staues of Fyrre tre, & ouerlaye them with golde, yt
the table maye be borne therwith.
29 Thou shalt make also his disshes, spones, pottes, and flat peces of pure
golde, to poure out and in.
30 And vpon the table thou shalt all waye set shewbred before me.
31 Morouer thou shalt make a candelsticke of fyne beaten golde, where vpon shall
be the shaft with braunches, cuppes, knoppes, and floures.
32 Sixe braunches shall proceade out of the sydes of the candelsticke, out of
euery syde thre braunches.
33 Euery braunch shal haue thre cuppes, (like allmondes) thre knoppes, and thre
floures. These shalbe the sixe braunches of the candilsticke.
34 But the shaft of the candilsticke it self shal haue foure cuppes, knoppes and
floures,
35 and allwaie a knoppe vnder two braunches, of the sixe that proceade out of
the candilsticke.
36 For both the knoppes and braunches shall proceade out of the shaft, all one
pece of fyne beaten golde.
37 And thou shalt make seuen lampes aboue there on, that they maye geue light
one ouer agaynst another,
38 and snoffers and out quenchers of pure golde.
39 Out of an hundreth pounde weight of pure golde shalt thou make it, with all
this apparell.
40 And se that thou make it after the patrone that thou hast sene in the mount.

Chapter 26

1 The habitacion shalt thou make of ten curteynes, of whyte twyned sylke, of
yalowe sylke, of scarlet and purple. Cherubyms shalt thou make theron of broderd
worke.
2 And lenght of one curteyne shalbe eight and twentye cubytes ye bredth foure
cubytes: and all the ten shalbe like,
3 and shalbe coupled fyue and fyue together, one vnto the other.
4 And thou shalt make loupes of yalowe sylke by the edge of euery curtayne,
where they shalbe coupled together, that there maye be euer two and two fastened
together vpon their edges:
5 fiftie loupes vpon euery curteyne, that one maye fasten the other together.
6 And thou shalt make fiftie buttons of golde, wherwith the curteynes maye be
coupled together, one to the other, that it maye be one couerynge.
7 Thou shalt make a coueringe also of goates heyer for a tente ouer the
habitacion, of eleuen curteynes.
8 The length of one curteyne shalbe thirtie cubytes, the bredth foure cubytes.
And all the eleuen shalbe alike greate:
9 fyue shalt thou couple together by the selues, & sixe also by them selues, yt
thou mayest dubble the sixte curteyne in the fore front of the Tabernacle.
10 And vpon euery curteyne thou shalt make fiftie loupes vpo the edges of them,
that they maie be coupled together by the edges.
11 And fiftie buttons of brasse shalt thou make, and put the buttons into the
loupes, that the tent maye be coupled together, and be one couerynge.
12 As for the remnaunt of the curteynes of the tente, thou shalt let the halfe
parte hange ouer behynde ye tete,
13 vpon both the sydes a cubyte longe, yt the resydue maye be vpon the sydes of
the Tabernacle, & couer it vpon both the sydes.
14 Besydes this couerynge thou shalt make a couerynge of reed skynnes of rammes.
And aboue this a coueringe of doo skinnes.
15 Thou shalt make bordes also for the habitacion, of Fyrre tre, which shall
stonde:
16 one borde shalbe ten cubytes longe, & a cubyte & a half brode.
17 Two fete shal one borde haue, that one maye be set by the other. Thus shalt
thou make all the bordes for ye Tabernacle:
18 Twentye of them shal stode towarde the south,
19 which shal haue fourtye sokettes of syluer vnder them, two sokettes vnder
euery borde for his two fete.
20 Likewyse vpon the other syde towarde the north there shall stonde twentye
bordes also,
21 and fourtye sokettes of syluer, two sokettes vnder euery borde.
22 But behynde the habitacion towarde ye west thou shalt make sixe bordes,
23 and two bordes mo for the two corners of the habitacion,
24 that euery one of them both maye be coupled from vnder vp with his corner
borde, and aboue vpon the heade to come eauen together with a clape:
25 so that there be eight bordes with their syluer sokettes, wherof there shalbe
sixtene, two vnder euery borde.
26 And thou shalt make barres of fyrre tre, fyue for the bordes vpon the one
syde of the Tabernacle, and fyue for the bordes vpon the other syde of the
Tabernacle,
27 and fyue for the bordes behinde ye Tabernacle towarde the west.
28 And the barres shalt thou shute thorow ye myddest of the bordes, and faste
alltogether from ye one corner to ye other.
29 And thou shalt ouerlaye the bordes wt golde, and make their rynges of golde,
that the barres maye be put therin. And the barres shalt thou ouerlaye with
golde,
30 and so shalt thou set vp the Tabernacle, acordinge to ye fashion as thou hast
sene vpon ye mount.
31 And thou shalt make a vayle of yalow sylke, scarlet, purple, & whyte twyned
sylke. And Cherubyns shalt thou make theron of broderd worke,
32 and shalt hange it vpon foure pilers of Fyrre tre which are ouerlayed with
golde, hauynge knoppes of golde, and foure sokettes of syluer.
33 And the vayle shalt thou festen with buttons, and set the Arke of wytnesse
within the vayle, that it maye be vnto you a difference betwixte the holy and
the Most holy.
34 And thou shalt set the Mercy seate vpon the Arke of wytnesse in the Most
holy.
35 But set the table without the vayle, and the candelsticke ouer agaynst ye
table vpon ye south syde of the Tabernacle, that the table maie stonde on the
north syde.
36 And in the dore of the Tabernacle thou shalt make an hanginge, of yalow
sylke, purple, scarlet and whyte twyned sylke.
37 And for the same hanginge thou shalt make fyue pilers of Fyrre tre, ouerlayed
with golde, with knoppes of golde. And shalt cast fyue sokettes of brasse for
them.

Chapter 27

1 And thou shalt make an altare of Firre tre, fyue cubytes longe & brode, yt it
maye be foure square, & thre cubytes hye:
2 thou shalt make hornes vpon the foure corners of it, & shalt ouer laye it with
brasse.
3 Make ashpanes, shouels, basens, fleshokes, cole panes. All ye apparell therof
shalt thou make of brasse.
4 Thou shalt make a gredyron also like a nett, of brase, & foure brasen rynges
vpon the foure corners of it:
5 from vnder vp aboute the altare shalt thou make it, so that the gredyron reach
vnto ye myddest of the altare.
6 Thou shalt make staues also for the altare, of Fyrre tre, ouer layed with
golde,
7 and shalt put the staues in the rynges, that the staues maye be on both the
sydes of ye altare, to beare it withall.
8 And holowe with bordes shalt thou make it, like as it is shewed the in the
mount.
9 And to ye habitacion thou shalt make a courte, an hangynge of whyte twyned
sylke: vpo ye one syde an C. cubytes loge towarde the south,
10 & xx. pilers vpon xx. brasen sokettes, & the knoppes wt their whopes of
syluer.
11 Likewyse vpon ye north syde there shalbe an hanginge of an C. cubytes loge,
twenty pilers vpon twenty brasen sokettes, and their knoppes wt their whopes of
syluer.
12 But vpon the west syde the bredth of ye courte shal haue an hanginge of
fiftie cubites longe, & ten pilers vpon ten sokettes.
13 Vpo the east syde also shal the bredth of the courte haue fiftie cubytes,
14 so that the hangynge haue vpon one syde fyftene cubites, and thre pilers vpo
thre sokettes:
15 And vpon ye other syde fiftene cubytes also, and thre pilers vpo thre
sokettes.
16 And in the courte gate there shalbe an hangynge twenty cubytes brode, of
yalowe sylke, scarlet, purple, and whyte twyned sylke, wrought with nedle worke,
and foure pilers vpon their foure sokettes.
17 All the pilers rounde aboute the courte shall haue syluer whopes, & syluer
knoppes, & sokettes of brasse.
18 And the length of ye courte shal be an hudreth cubytes, the bredth fiftie
cubytes, the heygth fyue cubytes, of whyte twyned sylke and ye sokettes therof
shalbe of brasse.
19 All ye vessels also of the habitacion to all maner seruyce, and all the nales
of it, and all the nales of the courte shalbe of brasse.
20 Commaunde ye children of Israel, yt they bringe vnto ye the most cleare &
pure oyle oliue beaten, to geue lighte, yt it maye all waye be put in the lapes
21 in the Tabernacle of wytnes without the vayle, that hangeth before the
wytnesse. And Aaro and his sonnes shal dresse it from the euenynge vntyll ye
mornynge before the LORDE. This shalbe vnto you a perpetuall custome for youre
posterities amonge the children of Israel.

Chapter 28

1 And thou shalt take vnto the Aaron thy brother and his sonnes fro amonge the
childre of Israel, that he maye be my prest: namely Aaron & his sonnes Nadab,
Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar:
2 & thou shalt make holy clothes for Aaro yi brother, honorable and glorious,
3 & shalt speake vnto all them that are wise of hert, whom I haue fylled with
the sprete of wisdome, that they make garmentes to Aaron for his consecracion,
that he maye be my prest.
4 These are ye garmentes which they shal make: a brestlappe, an ouerbody cote, a
tunycle, an albe, a myter and girdell. Thus shal they make holy garmentes for yi
brother Aaro and his sonnes, that he maye be my prest.
5 They shal take therto golde, yalow silke, scarlet, purple, and whyte sylke.
6 The ouerbody cote shal they make of golde, yalow sylke, scarlet, purple, &
whyte twyned sylke of broderd worke,
7 that it maye be festened together vpon both the sydes by ye edges therof.
8 And his gyrdell vpo it shall be of ye same wormashippe & stuff, euen of golde
yalowe sylke, scarlet, purple, & whyte twyned sylke.
9 And thou shalt take two Onix stones, and graue in them the names of the
children of Israel.
10 Syxe names vpon the one stone, and the sixe other names vpon the other stone
acordinge to the order of their age.
11 This shalt thou do by the stonegrauers that graue signettes, so that ye
stones with the names of the children of Israel to be set rounde aboute with
golde:
12 and thou shalt put them vpon the two shulders of the ouerbody cote, that that
they maye be stones of remembraunce for the children of Israel, that Aaron maye
beare their names vpon both his shulders before the LORDE for a remembraunce.
13 Thou shalt make hokes of golde also,
14 and two wrethe cheynes of pure golde, and shalt fasten them vnto the hokes.
15 The brestlappe of iudgment shalt thou make of broderd worke, euen after the
worke of the ouerbody cote: of golde, yalow sylke, scarlet, purple, and whyte
twyned sylke.
16 Foure square shall it be and dubble, an hande bredth longe, and an
handebredth brode.
17 And thou shalt fill it with foure rowes full of stones. Let the first rowe be
a Sardis, a Topas, and a Smaragde.
18 The seconde: a Ruby, a Saphyre, and a Dyamonde.
19 The thirde: a Ligurios, an Achatt, and an Ametyst.
20 The fourth: a Turcas, an Onix, and a Iaspis. In golde shall they be sett in
all the rowes,
21 and shal stonde acordinge to ye twolue names of the children of Israel,
grauen of the stonegrauers, euery one with his name acordinge to the twolue
trybes.
22 And vpon the brestlappe thou shalt make wrethen cheynes by ye corners of pure
golde, and two golde rynges,
23 so, that thou faste the same two rynges vnto two edges of the brestlappe,
24 and put the two wrethe cheynes of golde in the same two rynges, that are in
two edges of the brestlappe.
25 But the two endes of ye two wrethen cheynes shalt thou fasten in the two
hokes vpon the ouerbody cote one ouer agaynst another.
26 And thou shalt make two other rynges of golde, and fasten them vnto ye other
two edges of ye brestlappe, namely to ye borders therof, wherwith it maye hange
on the ynsyde vpon the ouerbody cote.
27 And yet shalt thou make two rynges of golde, and fasten them vpon the two
edges beneth to the ouerbody cote, vpon the outsyde one ouer agaynst anothe,
where the ouerbody cote ioyneth together.
28 And the brestlappe shall be fastened by his rynges vnto the rynges of the
ouerbody cote with a yalow lace, that it maye lye close vpon the ouerbody cote,
and that the brestlappe be not lowsed from the ouerbody cote.
29 Thus shall Aaron beare the names of the children of Israel in ye brestlappe
of iudgment vpon his hert, whan he goeth into the Sanctuary, for a remembraunce
before the LORDE allwaye.
30 And in the brestlappe of iudgment thou shalt put light and perfectnesse, that
they be vpon Aaros hert, whan he goeth in before the LORDE, and that he maye
beare the iudgment of the children of Israel vpon his hert before the LORDE
allwaye.
31 Thou shalt make the tunykle also to the ouerbody cote all of yalow sylke,
32 and aboue in the myddest there shal be an hole, and a bonde folden together
rounde aboute the hole, that it rente not.
33 And beneth vpon the hemme thou shalt make pomgranates of yalow sylke,
scarlet, purple rounde aboute,
34 and belles of golde betwixte the same rounde aboute: that there be euer a
golden bell and a pomgranate, a golden bell and a pomgranate rounde aboute the
hemme of the same tunycle.
35 And Aaron shall haue it vpon him wha he mynistreth, that the soude therof
maye be herde, whan he goeth out and in at the Sanctuary before the LORDE, that
he dye not.
36 Thou shalt make a foreheade plate also of pure golde, and graue therin (after
the workmanshipe of the stone grauer): the holynes of the LORDE,
37 & with a yalow lace shalt thou fasten it vnto the fore front of the myter
38 vpon Aarons fore heade, yt Aaron maie so beare ye synne of the holy thinges,
which the childre of Israel halowe in all their giftes and Sanctuary. And it
shall be allwaye vpon his fore heade, that he maye reconcyle them before the
LORDE.
39 Thou shalt make an albe also of whyte sylke, and a myter of whyte sylke, and
a gyrdle of nedle worke.
40 And for Aarons sonnes thou shalt make cotes, gyrdles and bonetes, honorable
and glorious,
41 and shalt put them vpon thy brother Aaron and his sonnes, and shalt anoynte
them, and fyll their handes, and consecrate them, that they maye be my prestes.
42 And thou shalt make them lynnen breches, to couer the flesh of their
prenities, from the loynes vnto the thyes.
43 And Aaron and his sonnes shall haue them on, whan they go in to the
Tabernacle of wytnesse, or go vnto the altare to mynister in the Holy, that they
beare not their synne, and dye. This shalbe a perpetual custome for him, and his
sede after him.

Chapter 29

1 This is it also, that thou shalt do vnto them, that they maye be consecrated
prestes vnto me. Take a yonge bullocke, and two rammes without blemish,
2 vnleuended bred, & vnleuended cakes myxte wt oyle, and wafers of swete bred
tempered wt oyle: Of wheate floure shalt thou make them all,
3 and put them in a maunde, & brynge them in the maunde, with the bullocke & two
rammes.
4 And thou shalt brynge Aaron & his sonnes vnto the dore of the Tabernacle of
witnesse, & wash them wt water,
5 & take the garmentes, and put vpon Aaron the albe and the tunycle, & the ouer
body cote, & the brestlappe to ye ouer body cote, & shalt gyrde him on the out
syde vpon the ouer body cote,
6 and set the myter vpon his heade, and the holy crowne vpon the myter:
7 and shalt take the anoyntinge oyle, and poure it vpon his heade, and anoynte
him.
8 Thou shalt brynge forth his sonnes also,
9 & put the albes vpon them, and gyrde both Aaron & them with gyrdles, & set the
bonettes vpon their heades, that they maye haue the presthode for a perpetuall
custome. And thou shalt fyll the hades of Aaron and his sonnes,
10 and brynge forth the bullocke before the Tabernacle of wytnesse. And Aaron
and his sonnes shall laye their hades vpon the heade of the bullocke,
11 and thou shalt sley the bullocke before the LORDE, at the dore of the
Tabernacle of wytnesse,
12 and shalt take of his bloude, and put it vpon the hornes of the altare with
thy fynger, and poure all the other bloude vpon the botome of the altare.
13 And thou shalt take all the fat that couereth the bowels and the nett vpon
the leuer, and the two kydneys with the fat that is aboute them, and burne them
vpon the altare.
14 But the bullockes flesh, skynne and donge, shalt thou burne with fyre without
the hoost: for it is a synneofferynge.
15 The one ramme shalt thou take also, and Aaron with his sonnes shall laye
their handes vpon his heade.
16 Then shalt thou sleye him, and take of his bloude, and sprenkle it vpon the
altare rounde aboute.
17 But the ramme shalt thou deuyde in peces, and wash his bowels and his legges,
and laye them vpon the peces and the heade,
18 and burne the whole ramme vpon the altare: for it is a burntofferynge, and a
swete sauoure of the sacrifice vnto the LORDE.
19 As for the other ramme, thou shalt take him, and Aaron with his sonnes shall
laye their handes vpon his heade,
20 and thou shalt slaye him, and take of his bloude, and put it vpon the typpe
of the right eare of Aaron and his sonnes, and vpon ye thombe of their right
handes, and vpon the greate too of their right fete, and thou shalt sprenkle the
bloude vpon the altare rounde aboute,
21 and shalt take of the bloude vpon the altare and the anoyntinge oyle, and
sprenckle it vpon Aaron and his vestymentes, vpon his sonnes and their
vestymentes. So shall he and his clothes, his sonnes and their clothes be
consecrated.
22 Then shalt thou take the fat of the ramme, the rompe, and the fatt that
couereth ye bowels, the net vpon the leuer, and the two kydneys with the fatt
that is aboute them, and the right shulder (for it is a ramme of cosecracion)
23 and a symnel of bred, and an oyled cake, and a wafer out of the maunde of the
vnleuended bred that stondeth before ye LORDE,
24 and put all in to the handes of Aaron and of his sonnes, and waue it vnto the
LORDE.
25 The take it out of their handes, and burne it vpon the altare for a burnt
offeringe, to be a swete sauoure vnto ye LORDE. For it is the LORDES sacrifice.
26 And thou shalt take the brest of the ramme of Aaros consecracio, & shalt waue
it before ye LORDE, yt shal be his parte.
27 And thus shalt thou halowe ye Wauebrest & ye Heueshulder (yt are waued &
heaued) of ye ramme of the consecracion of Aaron & his sonnes:
28 And it shalbe a perpetuall custome for Aaro and his sonnes of ye children of
Israel: for it is an Heue offrynge, and the Heue offrynge shalbe the LORDES
dewtye of the children of Israel, in their deade offrynges and Heueoffrynges
which they do vnto the LORDE.
29 And the holy garmentes of Aaron shall his sonnes haue after him, that they
maie be anoynted therin, & yt their handes maye be fylled.
30 Loke which of his sonnes shalbe prest in his steade, the same shal put them
on seue dayes, that he maye go in to the Tabernacle of wytnesse, to mynister in
the Sanctuary.
31 But the ramme of consecracion shalt thou take, and seeth his flesh in an holy
place.
32 And Aaron with his sonnes shal eate the flesh of the same ramme with the bred
in the maunde, at the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse:
33 for there is an attonement made therwith, to fyll their handes, that they
maye be consecrated. A strauger shal not eate therof, for it is holy.
34 But yf eny of the flesh of the consecracion, and of the bred remaine vntyll
the mornynge, thou shalt burne it with fyre, and not let it be eaten, for it is
holy.
35 And thus shalt thou do with Aaron and his sonnes all that I haue commaunded
ye. Seuen dayes shalt thou fyll their handes,
36 and offer a bullocke daylie for a synne offeringe, because of them yt shalbe
reconciled. And thou shalt halowe the altare, whan thou reconcylest it: & shalt
anoynte it, that it maye be consecrated.
37 Seuen dayes shalt thou reconcyle the altare, & consecrate it, that it maye be
an altare of the Most holy. Who so wyll touch the altare, must be consecrated.
38 And this shalt thou do with the altare: Two lambes of one yeare olde shalt
thou offer euery daye vpon it:
39 the one lambe in the mornynge, and the other at euen.
40 And to one lambe a tenth deale of wheate floure, megled with ye fourth parte
of an Hin of beaten oyle, and ye fourth parte of an Hin of wine for a drynk
offerynge
41 With the other lambe at euen shalt thou do like as with ye meateofferynge and
drynkofferynge in the mornynge, for a swete sauoure of sacrifice vnto ye LORDE.
42 This is the daylie burntofferynge amonge youre posterities, at the dore of
the Tabernacle of wytnesse before the LORDE, where I will proteste vnto you, and
talke with the.
43 There wil I proteste vnto the children of Israel, and be sanctified in my
glory,
44 and wyl halowe the Tabernacle of wytnes and the altare, and consecrate Aaro
and his sonnes, to be my prestes.
45 And I wyl dwell amonge the children of Israel, & wyll be their God:
46 so yt they shal knowe, how that I am the LORDE their God, which brought them
out of the londe of Egipte, that I might dwell amonge them, euen I the LORDE
their God.

Chapter 30

1 Thou shalt make also an incense altare to burne incense, of Fyrre tre,
2 a cubyte longe & brode, eauen foure squared, and two cubytes hye with his
hornes,
3 & shalt ouerlaye it with pure golde, the rofe & the walles of it rounde
aboute, and the hornes therof, & a crowne of golde shalt thou make rounde aboute
it,
4 and two golde rynges on ether syde vnder the crowne, that there maie be staues
put therin, to beare it withall.
5 The staues shalt thou make of Fyrre tre also, and ouerlaye the with golde:
6 and shalt set it before the vayle, that hangeth before the Arke of wytnesse,
and before the Mercyseate yt is vpon the wytnesse, from whence I wyl proteste
vnto the.
7 And Aaron shal burne swete incense theron euery morninge, wha he dresseth the
lampes.
8 In like maner whan he lighteth the lampes at euen, he shall burne soch incense
also. This shal be the daylie incense before the LORDE amonge youre posterities.
9 Ye shall put no straunge incense therin, & offer no burntofferynge, ner
meatofferynge, nether drynkofferynge theron.
10 And vpon ye hornes of it shall Aaron reconcyle once in a yeare, with ye
bloude of the synneofferynge, which they shall offer that are reconcyled. This
shal be done amonge youre posterities for this is the most holy vnto the LORDE.
11 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
12 Whan thou nombrest the heades of the children of Israel, then shal euery one
geue vnto the LORDE the reconcylinge of his soule, yt there happe not a plage
vnto them, whan they are nombred.
13 Euery one that is tolde in the nombre, shall geue half a Sycle, after the
Sycle of the Sanctuary: one Sycle is worth twentye Geras. This half Sycle shal
be ye LORDES Heue offerynge.
14 Who so is in the nombre from twenty yeare and aboue, shal geue this Heue
offerynge vnto ye LORDE.
15 The riche shal not geue more, and the poore shal not geue lesse in the half
Sycle, which is geuen vnto the LORDE to be an Heue offerynge for the
reconcylinge of their soules.
16 And this money of recocilinge shalt thou take of the children of Israel, &
put it to the Gods seruyce of the Tabernacle of wytnes, that it maye be a
remembraunce vnto the children of Israel before the LORDE, that he maye let
himself be reconcyled ouer their soules.
17 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
18 Thou shalt make a brasen lauer also with a fote of brasse to wash, and shalt
set it betwixte the Tabernacle of witnesse and ye altare, and put water therin,
19 that Aaro and his sonnes maye wash their handes and fete therout,
20 whan they go in to the Tabernacle of wytnesse, or to the altare, to mynistre
vnto the LORDE with offerynge incense, yt they dye not.
21 This shalbe a perpetuall custome for him and his sede amonge their
posterities.
22 And ye LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
23 Take vnto the spyces of the best, fyue hundreth Sycles of Myrre, and of
Cynamo half so moch, euen two hundreth and fyftie,
24 and of Kalmus two hundreth and fiftye, and of Cassia fyue hundreth (after the
Sycle of the Sanctuary) & an Hin of oyle olyue,
25 and make an holy anoyntinge oyle, after the craft of the Apotecary.
26 And there wt shalt thou anonynte the Tabernacle of wytnesse, & the Arke of
wytnes,
27 the table with all his apparell, ye candilsticke with his apparell, the
altare of incense,
28 the altare of burntofferynges with all his apparell, & the lauer with his
fote:
29 and thus shalt thou consecrate them, that they maye be most holy: for who so
wil touch the, must be consecrated.
30 Thou shalt anoynte Aaron also, and his sonnes, and consecrate them to be my
prestes.
31 And thou shalt speake vnto the childre of Israel, and saye: This oyle shalbe
an holy oyntment vnto me amonge yor posterities:
32 It shal not be poured vpon mans body, nether shalt thou make eny soch like
it, for it is holy: therfore shal it be holy vnto you.
33 Who so maketh eny soch like, or geueth a strauger therof, the same shalbe
roted out from amonge his people.
34 And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Take vnto the spyces: Balme, Stacte, Galban,
and pure franckencense, of one as moch as of another,
35 and make incense therof (after the craft of the Apotecary) myngled together,
that it maye be pure & holy.
36 And thou shalt beate it to poulder, and shalt put of the same before the
wytnesse in the Tabernacle of wytnesse, from whence I wyll proteste vnto the,
37 but it shalbe holy vnto the for the LORDE.
38 Who so maketh soch to cense therwith, shalbe roted out from amoge his people.

Chapter 31

1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & saide:
2 I haue called by name Bezaleel the sonne of Vri ye sonne of Hur, of ye trybe
of Iuda,
3 and haue fylled him with ye sprete of God, with wysdome and vnderstodynge and
knowlege, and to worke
4 with all maner of connynge worke, in golde, syluer, brasse,
5 to graue stones connyngly, and to set them, to carue well in tymbre, and to
make all maner worke.
6 And beholde, I haue geuen him Ahaliab the sonne of Ahisamach of the trybe of
Dan, to be his companyon, and haue geuen wysdome in to the hertes of all that
are wyse, that they shall make all that I haue commaunded the:
7 the Tabernacle of wytnesse, the Arke of wytnesse, the Mercyseate theron, and
all the ornamentes of ye Tabernacle:
8 the table and his apparell, the candilsticke and all his apparell, the altare
of incense,
9 the altare of burntofferynges wt all his apparell, the lauer with his fote,
10 the mynistrynge vestimentes of Aaron ye prest, and the garmentes of his
sonnes to serue like prestes,
11 the anoyntinge oyle, and the incese of spyces for ye Sactuary. All that I
haue commaunded the, shal they make.
12 And the LORDE talked vnto Moses, and sayde:
13 Speake vnto the children of Israel, and saye: Kepe my Sabbath, for it is a
token betwene me and you, and youre posterities, that ye maye knowe, how that I
am the LORDE which haloweth you:
14 therfore kepe my Sabbath, for it shalbe holy vnto you. Who so vnhaloweth it,
shall dye the death: For who so doth eny worke therin, shalbe roted out from
amonge his people.
15 Sixe dayes shall men worke, but vpon the seuenth daye is the Sabbath the holy
rest of the LORDE. Who so doth eny worke vpon the Sabbath daye, shall dye the
death.
16 Therfore shal the children of Israel kepe the Sabbath, that they maye kepe it
also amonge their posterities for an euerlastynge couenaunt.
17 An euerlastynge token is it betwixte me and the children of Israel. For in
sixe dayes made the LORDE heaue & earth, but vpon ye seuenth daye he rested, and
was refreshed.
18 And whan the LORDE had made an ende of talkinge with Moses vpon the mount
Sinai, he gaue him two tables of witnesse, which were of stone, and wrytten with
the fynger of God.

Chapter 32

1 But whan the people sawe that Moses made loge taryenge to come downe fro the
mount, they gathered the together agaynst Aaron, & sayde vnto him: Vp, and make
vs goddes, to go before vs, for we can not tell what is become of this man
Moses, that brought vs out of Egipte.
2 Aaron sayde vnto them: Plucke of the golden earynges from the eares of youre
wyues, of yor sonnes, & of yor doughters, & brynge them vnto me.
3 Then all the people pluckte of their golden earynges from their eares, &
brought them vnto Aaron.
4 And he toke them of their handes, & fashioned it wt a grauer. And they made a
molten calfe, and sayde: These are thy goddes (O Israel) that brought the out of
the londe of Egipte.
5 Whan Aaron sawe that, he buylded an altare before him, and caused it be
proclamed, and sayde: Tomorow is the LORDES feast.
6 And they arose vp early in the mornynge, and offred burntofferynges, and
brought deadofferynges also: Then the people sat them downe to eate and drynke,
& rose vp to playe.
7 But the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Go get the downe, for thy people whom thou
broughtest out of the londe of Egipte,
8 haue marred all: they are soone gone out of the waie, which I commaunded them.
They haue made them a molten calfe, and haue worshipped it, & offred vnto it, &
sayde: These are thy goddes (O Israel) that brought the out of the lande of
Egipte.
9 And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: I se, that it is a styffnecked people,
10 and now suffre me, that my wrath maye waxe whote ouer them, & that I maye
consume them, so wil I make a greate people of the.
11 But Moses be sought the LORDE his God, & sayde: Oh LORDE, wherfore wil thy
wrath waxe whote ouer thy people, whom thou hast brought out of the lode of
Egipte wt greate power & a mightie hade?
12 Wherfore shulde the Egipcians speake, & saye: He hath brought the for their
myschefe, to slaye them in the mountaynes, and to destroye the vtterly from the
earth? O turne the from the fearcenesse of yi wrath, & be gracious ouer the
wickednesse of thy people.
13 Remembre thy seruautes Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, vnto who thou swarest by
thyne owne self, and saydest: I wil multiplye youre sede as the starres of
heauen, and all the londe that I haue promysed you, wil I geue vnto youre sede,
& they shall inheret it for euer.
14 Thus the LORDE repented of the euell, which he sayde he wolde do vnto his
people.
15 Moses turned him, & wente downe from the mount, and in his hande he had the
two tables of wytnesse, which were wrytte vpon both the sydes,
16 and were Gods worke, & the wrytinge was the wrytinge of God therin.
17 Now whan Iosua herde the noyse of ye people, as they shouted, he sayde vnto
Moses: This is a noyse of warre in the hoost.
18 He answered: It is not a noyse of them that haue the victory, and of them
that haue the worse, but I heare a noyse of synginge at a daunse.
19 Whan he came nye vnto the hoost, and sawe the calfe, and the daunsynge, he
was moued with wrath, and cast the tables out of his hande, and brake them
beneth the mount.
20 And he toke the calfe that they had made, and brent it with fyre, and stamped
it vnto poulder, and strowed it in the water, & gaue it vnto the children of
Israel to drynke,
21 & sayde vnto Aaron: What dyd this people vnto the, that thou hast brought so
greate a synne vpon them?
22 Aaron sayde: Let not the wrath of my lorde waxe fearce: thou knowest, that
this is a wicked people.
23 They sayde vnto me: Make vs goddes to go before vs, for we cannot tell what
is become of this man Moses, yt brought vs out of the londe of Egipte.
24 I sayde vnto them: Who so hath golde, let him plucke it of, and geue it me:
and I cast it in the fyre, therof came this calfe.
25 Now whan Moses sawe, that the people were naked (for Aaron, whan he set them
vp, made them naked to their shame)
26 he wete in to the gate of the hoost, and sayde: who so belongeth vnto the
LORDE, let him come hither vnto me. Then all the children of Leui gathered them
selues vnto him,
27 and he sayde vnto them: Thus sayeth the LORDE the God of Israel: Euery man
put his swerde by his syde, and go thorow in and out from one gate to another in
the hoost, and slaye euery man his brother, frende, & neghboure.
28 The children of Leui dyd, as Moses sayde vnto them. And there fell of the
people the same daye thre thousande men.
29 The sayde Moses: Cosecrate youre handes this daie vnto the LORDE, euery man
vpon his sonne and brother, that the prayse maye be geuen ouer you this daye.
30 On the morow Moses sayde vnto the people: Ye haue done a greate synnne. Now I
wil go vp vnto the LORDE, yf peraduenture I maye make an attonement for youre
synnes.
31 Now wha Moses came agayne vnto ye LORDE, he saide: Oh this people haue done a
greate synne, & haue made them goddes of golde.
32 Now for geue them their synne: yf not, the wype me out of yi boke, that thou
hast wrytten.
33 The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: What? Him that synneth against me, wil I wype out
of my boke.
34 Go thou yi waye therfore, and brynge ye people thither as I haue sayde vnto
the, Beholde, myne angell shall go before the. But in the daye of my visitacion
I wyll vyset their synnes vpon them.
35 So the LORDE plaged the people, because they made ye calfe which Aaron made.

Chapter 33

1 The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Go, departe hence, thou and the people, whom thou
hast brought out of the lande of Egipte, vnto ye londe that I sware vnto
Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, and sayde: vnto yi sede wil I geue it,
2 and I wyl sende an angell before the (and cast out the Cananites, Amorites,
Hethites, Pheresites, Heuites and Iebusites)
3 in to the londe that floweth with mylke and hony, for I wyll not go vp with
the: for thou art an hardnecked people, I might consume the by the waye.
4 Whan the people herde this euell tydinges, they sorowed, and no man put on his
best rayment.
5 And ye LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Speake vnto the children of Israel: Ye are a
styfnecked people, I must once come sodenly vpon the, and make an ende of the.
And now put of thy goodly araye from the, yt I maie knowe what to do vnto the.
6 So the children of Israel laied their goodly araye from the, euen before the
mount Horeb.
7 Moses toke the Tabernacle, & pitched it without afarre of from ye hoost, and
called it the Tabernacle of wytnesse. And who so euer wolde axe eny question at
the LORDE, wente out vnto the Tabernacle of wytnesse before the hoost.
8 And whan Moses wente out vnto the Tabernacle, all the people rose vp, and
stode euery one in his tent dore, and loked after Moses, tyll he was gone in to
the Tabernacle.
9 And whan Moses entred in to the Tabernacle, the cloudy pyler came downe, and
stode in the dore of the Tabernacle, and he talked with Moses..
10 And all the people sawe the cloudy piler stonde in the dore of the
Tabernacle, and rose vp, and worshiped, euery one in his tent dore.
11 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh vnto his
frende. And whan he turned agayne to the hoost, ye yonge ma Iosua ye sonne of
Nun his minister, departed not out of ye Tabernacle.
12 And Moses sayde vnto the LORDE: Beholde, thou saydest vnto me: Brynge ye
people vp, and lettest me not knowe, whom thou wilt sende wt me, & yet hast thou
sayde: I knowe the by name, and thou hast founde grace in my sight.
13 Let me knowe thy waye therfore, wherby I maye be certified, yt I fynde grace
in thy sight: And consydre yet, that this people is thy people.
14 He sayde: My presence shal go before the, there with wyll I lede the.
15 But he sayde vnto him: Yf thy presence go not, then cary vs not vp from
hence:
16 for wherby shal it be knowne, yt I and thy people haue founde fauoure in thy
sight, but in yt thou goest with vs? that I & thy people maye haue some
preemynence before all people that are vpon the face of the earth.
17 The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: I wyll do this also that thou hast sayde, for
thou hast foude grace in my sight, and I knowe the by name.
18 He sayde: Oh let me the se thy glory.
19 And he sayde: I wyl cause all my good go ouer before thy face, and wyl let
the name of ye LORDE be called vpon before the. And I shewe mercy, to whom I
shewe mercy: and haue compassion, on whom I haue compassion.
20 And he sayde morouer: Thou mayest not se my face, for there shall no ma lyue,
yt seyth me.
21 And ye LORDE sayde farthermore: beholde, there is a place by me, there shalt
thou stode vpon the rocke.
22 Now whan my glory goeth forth, I wil put ye in a clyfte of ye rocke, & my
hande shal holde styll vpo the, tyll I be passed by.
23 And whan I take awaye myne hande from the, thou shalt se my back partes, but
my face shal not be sene.

Chapter 34

1 And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Hew the two tables of stone, like as ye first
were, that I maye wryte in them the wordes, yt were in the first tables, which
thou brakest:
2 and be ready in the mornynge, that thou mayest come vp early vnto mout Sinai,
and stonde me vpon the toppe of the mount.
3 And let no man come vp with the, that there be no man sene thorow out all ye
mount: and let nether shepe ner oxen fede before the mount.
4 And Moses hewed two tables of stone, like as the first were, & arose early in
the mornynge, & wente vp vnto mount Sinai, as ye LORDE comaunded him, & toke ye
two tables of stone in his hade.
5 The came the LORDE downe in a cloude. And there he stepte vnto him, & called
vpo ye name of ye LORDE.
6 And whan ye LORDE passed by before his face, he cryed: LORDE LORDE, God,
mercifull & gracious, & longe sufferinge, and of greate mercy and trueth,
7 thou that kepest mercy in stoare for thousandes, and forgeuest wickednes,
trespace and synne (before whom there is no man innocent) thou that visitest the
wickednesse of the fathers vpon ye children and childers children, vnto the
thirde and fourth generacion.
8 And Moses bowed him self downe vnto the earth, and worshiped him,
9 and saide: LORDE, yf I haue founde grace in thy sight, the let the LORDE go
with vs (for it is an hard necked people) that thou mayest haue mercy vpon oure
wickednesses and synnes, and let vs be thyne inheritaunce.
10 And he sayde: Beholde, I make a couenaunt before all yi people, & wil do
wonders, soch as haue not bene done in all londes, and amonge all people. And
all ye people amoge whom thou art, shal se ye worke of ye LORDE, for a terryble
thinge shal it be, yt I wyl do wt the.
11 Kepe that I commaunde ye this daye. Beholde, I wyl cast out before the: ye
Amorites, Cananites, Hethites, Pheresites, Heuytes and Iebusites.
12 Bewarre, that thou make no couenaunt with the indwellers of the lande yt thou
commest in to, lest they be cause of yi ruyne in the myddest of the:
13 but their alters shalt thou ouerthrowe, & breake downe their goddes, and rote
out their groaues:
14 for thou shalt worshipe no other god. For ye LORDE is called gelous, because
he is a gelous God:
15 lest (yf thou make any agrement with the indwellers of the londe, and whan
they go a whoringe after their goddes, and do sacrifice vnto their goddes) they
call ye, and thou eate of their sacrifice,
16 and lest thou take of their doughters vnto thy sonnes to wyues, and the same
go a whoringe after their goddes,
17 & make thy sonnes go a whoringe after their goddes also. Thou shalt make ye
no goddes of metall.
18 The feast of swete bred shalt thou kepe. Seuen daies shalt thou eate
vnleueded bred, like as I comaunded the in the tyme of the moneth Abib: for in
the moneth Abib thou wentest out of Egipte.
19 All yt first breaketh the Matrix, is myne, soch as shalbe male amoge ye
catell, yt breaketh the Matrix, whether it be oxe or shepe.
20 But the first of thyne Asse shalt thou bye out wt a shepe: yf thou redeme it
not, then breake his necke. All the first borne of thy children shalt thou
redeme. And se that no man appeare before me emptye.
21 Sixe dayes shalt thou labor, vpon ye seueth daye shalt thou rest both from
plowinge and reapynge.
22 The feast of wekes shalt thou kepe with the firstlinges of the wheate
haruest: and the feast of yngaderynge at ye yeares ende.
23 Thryse in a yeare shal all yor men children appeare before the Souernoure,
euen the LORDE and God of Israel.
24 Whan I shal cast out the Heithen before the, & enlarge yi borders, there shal
no man desyre thy lode: for so moch as thou goest vp thre tymes in the yeare, to
appeare before ye LORDE thy God.
25 Thou shalt not offer the bloude of my sacrifice wt leueded bred. And the
offerynge of the Easterfeast shal not remayne ouer night vntill the mornynge.
26 The firstlinges of ye first frutes of thy lode shalt thou brynge in to the
house of the LORDE thy God. Thou shalt not seith a kydd, whyle it is yet in his
mothers mylke.
27 And the LORDE saide vnto Moses: wryte these wordes, for because of these
wordes haue I made a couenaunt with the & with Israel.
28 And he was there with the LORDE fourtye dayes and fourtye nightes, and ate no
bred, and dranke no water. And he wrote in the tables the wordes of the
couenaut, euen ten verses.
29 Now wha Moses came downe fro mout Sinai, he had the two tables of wytnesse in
his hande, & wyst not yt the skynne of his face shyned, because he had talked
with him.
30 And wha Aaron & all the childre of Israel sawe yt the skynne of his face
shyned, they were afrayed to come nye him.
31 The Moses called them. And they returned vnto him, both Aaron & all the
chefest of the cogregacion. And he talked wt them.
32 Afterwarde came all the children of Israel vnto him. And he comaunded the,
all yt the LORDE had sayde vnto him vpon the mount Sinai.
33 Now whan he had made an ende of talkynge wt the, he put a couerynge vpo his
face.
34 And whan he wete in before ye LORDE to talke wt him, he toke ye couerynge of,
till he wete out agayne. And whan he came forth & spake wt the childre of Israel
what was comaunded him,
35 the the childre of Israel sawe his face, how yt the skynne of his face
shyned: so he put the couerynge vpo his face agayne, tyll he wente in agayne to
talke with him.

Chapter 35

1 And Moses gathered all the cogregacion of ye childre of Israel together, and
sayde vnto them: This is it, yt the LORDE hath commaunded you to do:
2 Sixe dayes shall ye worke, but the seuenth daye shall ye kepe holy: a Sabbath
of the LORDES rest. Who so euer doeth eny worke therin, shall dye.
3 Ye shal kyndle no fyre vpon the Sabbath daye in all youre dwellynges.
4 And Moses sayde vnto ye whole congregacion of the children of Israel: This is
it, that the LORDE hath commaunded:
5 Geue from amonge you Heue offerynges vnto ye LORDE, so that euery one brynge
the LORDES Heue offerynge with a fre hert: golde, syluer, brasse,
6 yalowe sylke, scarlet, purple, whyte sylke, and goates hayre,
7 reed skynnes of rammes, doo skynnes, and Fyrre tre,
8 oyle for the lampes, and spyces for the anoyntinge oyle and for swete incense.
9 Onix stones, and stones to be set in ye ouerbody cote, and for the brestlappe.
10 And who so is wyse of hert amonge you, let him come, & make what the LORDE
hath commaunded:
11 namely,the Habitacion with the tent & couerynge therof, the rynges, bordes,
barres, pilers & sokettes:
12 The Arke wt the staues therof, the Mercyseate & the vayle:
13 the table with his staues & all his apparell: & the shewbred:
14 The cadilsticke of light and his apparell, and his lampes, & the oyle for the
lightes:
15 The altare of incense with his staues: The anoyntynge oyle and spyces for
incense: The hangynge before ye Tabernacle dore:
16 The alter of burntofferynges with his brasen gredyron, staues and all his
apparell: The lauer with his fote:
17 The hanginges of the courte, with the pilers and sokettes therof, & the
hangynge of the courte dore:
18 The nales of the habitacion and of ye courte with their coardes:
19 The mynistringe garmentes for the seruyce in the Holy, ye holy vestimentes of
Aaron the prest wt the vestimentes of his sonnes for ye prestes office.
20 Then wente all the congregacion of the childre of Israel out fro Moses,
21 & euery one brought the gift of his hert: & all that they wolde of fre will,
the same brought they for an Heue offerynge vnto the LORDE for ye worke of the
Tabernacle of witnesse, & for all the seruyce therof, & for the holy vestimetes.
22 Both men & wemen that were of a wyllynge hert, brought bracelettes, earynges,
rynges & gyrdels, and all maner Iewels of golde: Euery man also brought golde
for Waue offerynges vnto the LORDE.
23 And who so euer foude by him yalow sylke, scarlet, purple, whyte sylke,
goates hayre, reed skynnes of rames, and Doo skynnes, brought it.
24 And who so euer houe vp syluer & brasse, brought it for ye Heue offerynge
vnto the LORDE. And who so euer founde Fyrre tre by him, brought it for all
maner of worke of the Gods seruyce.
25 And soch wemen as were wyse herted, spanne with their hades, and brought
their sponne worke of yalow sylke, scarlet, purple, and whyte sylke.
26 And soch wemen as had hye vnderstondinge in wysdome, spanne goates hayre.
27 As for ye prynces, they brought Onix stones, and set stones, for ye ouerbody
coate, and for the brestlappe,
28 and spyces, and oyle for ye lightes, and for the anoyntinge oyle, and for
swete incense.
29 Thus the children of Israel brought fre wyllynge offerynges, both man and
weme, for all maner of worke, that the LORDE had commaunded by Moses, to be
made.
30 And Moses saide vnto the childre of Israel: Beholde, ye LORDE hath called by
name Bezaleel ye sonne of Vri, ye sonne of Hur of the trybe of Iuda,
31 & hath fylled him wt the sprete of God, that he maye haue wysdome,
vnderstondinge, & knowlege for all maner of worke,
32 to worke connyngly in golde, syluer & brasse,
33 to graue precious stones & to set them, to carue in wodd, to make all maner
of connynge workes,
34 and hath geue instruccion in his hert, both him and Ahaliab the sonne of
Ahisamach of ye trybe of Dan.
35 These hath he fylled wt wysdome of hert, to make all maner of worke, to
carue, to broder, to worke with nedle worke, with yalow sylke, scarlet, purple
and whyte sylke, and with weeuynge to make all maner of worke, and to deuyse
connynge workes.

Chapter 36

1 Then wrought Bezaleel & Ahaliab & all the wyse herted men, vnto whom the LORDE
had geuen wysdome & vnderstondinge to knowe, how they shulde make all maner
worke for the seruyce of the Sanctuary, acordinge vnto all yt the LORDE
commaunded.
2 And Moses called for Bezaleel & Ahaliab, & all the wyse herted men, vnto whom
the LORDE had geuen wysdome in their hertes, namely, all soch as wyllingly
offred them selues there, & came to laboure in the worke.
3 And they receaued of Moses all the Heue offerynges, that the children of
Israel had brought for the worke of the seruyce of the Sanctuary, that it might
be made: & euery morninge brought they their willinge offerynges vnto him.
4 Then came all the wyse men yt wrought in the worke of the Sanctuary, euery one
fro his worke that he made,
5 & sayde vnto Moses: The people bryngeth to moch, more the nede is for the
worke of this seruice, which the LORDE hath comaunded to make.
6 The commaunded Moses, that it shulde be proclamed thorow out the hoost: No man
brynge more to the Heue offerynge of the Sanctuary. Then were the people
forbydden to brynge:
7 for there was stuff ynough for all maner of worke, that was to be made, and to
moch.
8 So all ye wyse herted men amonge the yt wrought in ye worke of the Habitacion,
made ten curtaynes of whyte twyned sylke, yalow sylke, scarlet, purple, with
Cherubyns of broderd worke.
9 The legth of one curtayne was eight and twentye cubites, and the bredth foure
cubites, & were all of one measure:
10 & he coupled the curtaynes fyue & fyue together one to the other.
11 And made yalow loupes a longe by ye edge of euery curtayne, where they shulde
be coupled together:
12 fiftie loupes vpo euery curtayne, wherby one might be coupled to another.
13 And made fiftie buttons of golde, and with the buttons he coupled the
curtaynes together one to the other, that it might be one couerynge.
14 And he made xj. curtaynes of goates hayre (for the tent ouer the habitacion)
15 of thirtie cubytes longe, & foure cubytes brode, all of one measure,
16 & coupled fyue together by them selues, and sixe by them selues,
17 & made fiftie loupes a longe by ye edge of euery curtayne, wherby they might
be coupled together,
18 & made fiftie buttons of brasse, to couple ye tent together withall.
19 And made ouer ye tent a couerynge of reed skynnes of rammes, and ouer that a
couerynge of Doo skynnes.
20 And made stondinge bordes for the Habitacion, of Fyrre tre,
21 euery one ten cubytes longe, and a cubyte and a half brode,
22 & two fete vnto euery one, wherby one might be ioyned to another:
23 that on the south syde there stode twentye of the same bordes:
24 and made fourtye syluer sokettes there vnder, vnder euery borde two sokettes
for his two fete.
25 In like maner for the other syde of the Habitacion towarde the north, he made
twentye bordes
26 also with fourtye syluer sokettes, vnder euery borde two sokettes:
27 But behynde the Habitacion vpon the west syde, he made sixe bordes,
28 and two other for the corners of the Habitacion behynde,
29 that either of them both might be ioyned with his corner borde from vnder vp,
and aboue vpon the heade to come together with a clampe:
30 so that there were eight bordes, and sixtene sokettes of syluer, vnder euery
one two sokettes.
31 And he made barres of Fyrre tre, fyue for the bordes vpon the one syde of the
Habitacion,
32 and fyue vpon the other syde, and fyue behynde towarde the west:
33 and made the barres to shute thorow the bordes, from the one ende to the
other,
34 and euerlayde the bordes with golde. But their rynges made he of golde for
the barres, and ouerlayde ye barres with golde.
35 And made Cherubyns vpon the hangynge with broderd worke, of yalow sylke,
scarlet, purple, & whyte twyned sylke.
36 And made for the same, foure pilers of Fyrretre, and ouerlayed them with
golde, and their knoppes of golde, and cast foure sokettes of syluer for them.
37 And made an hanginge in the Tabernacle dore, of yalow sylke, scarlet, purple,
and whyte twyned sylke, of nedle worke,
38 and fyue pilers therto with their knoppes (& ouerlayed their knoppes and
whopes with golde) and fyue sokettes of brasse there to.

Chapter 37

1 And Bezaleel made the Arke of Fyrre tre, two cubites and a half loge, a cubyte
and a half brode, and a cubyte & a half hye,
2 and ouerlayed it with fyne golde within and without, and made a crowne of
golde vnto it rounde aboute,
3 and cast for it foure rynges of golde to the foure corners of it, vpon euery
syde two.
4 And made staues of Fyrre tre, and ouerlayed the with golde,
5 and put them in the rynges a longe by ye sydes of the Arke, to beare it
withall.
6 And he made ye Mercyseate of pure golde two cubytes and a half longe, and a
cubite and a half brode,
7 & made two Cherubyns of fyne beaten golde vpon the two endes of the
Mercyseate:
8 One Cherub vpon the one ende, and the other Cherub vpon the other ende:
9 and the Cherubyns spredde out their wynges aboue an hye, and couered ye
Mercyseate ther with: and their faces stode one ouer agaynst the other, and
loked vnto the Mercyseate.
10 And he made ye table, of Fyrre tre, two cubytes longe, a cubyte brode, and a
cubyte & a half hye,
11 and ouerlayed it with fyne golde, and made therto a crowne of golde rounde
aboute,
12 and made vnto it an whoope of an hande bredth hye, and made a crowne of golde
rounde aboute the whoope.
13 And for it he cast foure golde rynges, & put them in the foure corners by the
fete
14 harde by the whoope, that the staues might be therin, to beare the table with
all:
15 & made the staues of Fyrre tre, and ouerlayed the with golde, to beare the
staues withall.
16 And the vessels vpon the table made he also of fyne golde: the disshes,
spones, flat peces and pottes, to poure in and out withall.
17 And he made the candilsticke of fyne beaten golde, where vpon was the shaft
wt brauches, cuppes, knoppes, & floures:
18 Sixe braunches proceaded out of ye sydes therof, vpon either syde thre
brauches:
19 vpo euery brauch were thre cuppes like allmodes, wt knoppes and floures.
20 Vpon the candilsticke self were foure cuppes with knoppes and floures,
21 vnder euery two brauches a knoppe.
22 The knoppes & braunches therof proceaded out of it, and were all one pece of
fyne beaten golde.
23 And he made the seuen lampes with their snoffers & outquenchers of pure
golde.
24 Of an hudreth weight of golde made he it, and all the apparell therof.
25 He made also the altare of incense, of Fyrre tre, a cubyte longe and brode,
eauen foure squared, and two cubytes hye with the hornes of it,
26 and ouerlayed it with fyne golde, the toppe and the sydes of it rounde
aboute,
27 and the hornes therof, and made a crowne vnto it rounde aboute of pure golde,
& two golde rynges vnder the crowne on both the sydes, to put the staues therin,
and to beare it withall:
28 but the staues made he of Fyrre tre, and ouerlayed them with golde.
29 And he made the holy anoyntinge oyle, & the incense of pure spyces, after ye
craft of the Apotecary.

Chapter 38

1 And the altare of burntoffrynges made he of Fyrre tre, fyue cubytes loge &
brode, eauen foure squared, & thre cubites hye.
2 And made foure hornes, which proceaded out of the foure corners therof, and
ouerlaied it with brasse.
3 And he made all maner of vessels for the altare, cauldrons, shouels, basens,
fleshokes, and colepannes all of brasse.
4 And vnto the altare he made a brasen gredyron of net worke rounde aboute, from
vnder vp vnto the myddest of the altare,
5 & cast foure rynges in the foure corners of the brasen gredyron, for the
staues:
6 which he made of Fyrre tre, and ouerlayed them wt brasse,
7 and put them in the rynges by the sydes of the altare, to beare it withall,
and made it holowe with bordes.
8 And he made the Lauer of brasse, & his fote also of brasse vpon the place of
ye hoost, that laye before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse.
9 And he made the courte on ye south syde: hangynges an hundreth cubytes longe,
of whyte twyned sylke,
10 with the twetye pilers therof, and twentye sokettes of brasse: but the
knoppes and whopes of syluer.
11 In like maner vpon the north syde an hundreth cubytes with twentye pilers,
and twentye sokettes of brasse, but their knoppes & whoopes of syluer.
12 Vpon the west syde fiftie cubytes with ten pilers and te sokettes, but their
knoppes and whoopes of syluer.
13 Vpon the East syde fiftie cubytes.
14 Fiftene cubytes vpon either syde of the courte dore, wt thre pilers and thre
sokettes:
15 (Omitted Text)
16 So that all the hanginges of the courte were of whyte twyned sylke,
17 and the sokettes of the pilers were of brasse, & their knoppes and whoopes of
syluer: their heades were ouerlayed wt syluer, & all the pilers of the courte
were whooped aboute with syluer.
18 And the hangynge in ye courte gate made he wt nedle worke, of yalowe sylke,
scarlet, purple, & whyte twyned sylke, twentye cubytes longe, & fyue cubytes
hye, after the measure of the hanginges of the courte:
19 foure pilers also therto, & foure sokettes of brasse, and their knoppes of
syluer, and their heades ouerlayed, and their whoopes of syluer.
20 And all the nales of the Habitacion and of the courte rounde aboute, were of
brasse.
21 This is now the summe of the Habitacion of wytnesse (which was counted at the
comaundemet of Moses to ye Gods seruice of the Leuites vnder the hade of Ithamar
the sonne of Aaron the prest)
22 which Bezaleel the sonne of Vri, the sonne of Hur of the trybe of Iuda made,
all as the LORDE commaunded Moses.
23 And wt him Ahaliab ye sonne of Ahisamach of the trybe of Dan, a connynge
grauer, to worke nedle worke, wt yalow sylke, scarlet, purple, & whyte sylke.
24 All the golde yt was wrought in all this worke of the Sanctuary (which was
geuen to the Waue offerynge) is nyne & twenty hudreth weight, seuen hundreth &
thirtie Sycles, after ye Sycle of ye Sanctuary.
25 The syluer yt came of the congregacion, was fyue score hundreth weight, a
thousande, seuen hundreth, fyue and seuentye Sycles, after ye Sycle of the
Sanctuary:
26 so many heades so many half Sycles, after the Sycle of the Sanctuary, of all
that were nombred from twentye yeare olde and aboue, euen sixe hundreth
thousande, thre thousande, fyue hundreth and fiftye.
27 Of the fyue score hundreth weight of syluer, were cast the sokettes of the
Sanctuary, and the sokettes of the vayle, an hudreth sokettes of the fyue score
hundreth weight, an hundreth weight to euery sokett.
28 Of the thousande, seuen hundreth and fyue and seuentye Sycles were made the
knoppes of the pilers (and their heades ouerlayed) and their whoopes.
29 As for the Waue offerynge of brasse, it was seuentye hundreth weight, two
thousande and foure hundreth Sycles:
30 Wherof were made the sokettes in the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and
the brasen altare, and the brasen gredyron therto, and all the vessels of the
altare,
31 and the sokettes of ye courte rounde aboute, and the sokettes of ye courte
gate, all ye nales of the Habitacion, & all ye nales of ye courte rounde aboute.

Chapter 39

1 Of the yalowe sylke, scarlet, & purple, they made Aarons mynistringe
vestimentes, to do seruyce in the Sanctuary, as ye LORDE comaunded Moses.
2 And he made the ouer body cote, of golde, yalowe sylke, scarlet, purple, &
whyte twyned sylke,
3 and bett the golde in to thinne plates, and cut it in to wyres, that it might
be wrought amonge the yalowe sylke, scarlet, purple and whyte sylke,
4 & made it so, that ye ouerbody cote came together by the edges on both the
sydes.
5 And his gyrdel was after the same craft & worke: eue of golde, yalowe sylke,
scarlet, purple and whyte twyned sylke, as the LORDE commaunded Moses.
6 And they wrought two Onix stones, set rounde aboute with golde, grauen by the
stone grauer with the names of the childre of Israel:
7 and fastened them vpo the shulders of the ouerbody cote, that they might be
stones of remebraunce vnto the children of Israel, as the LORDE comaunded Moses.
8 And they made the brestlappe after the craft & worke of the ouerbody cote: of
golde, yalowe sylke, scarlet, purple, & whyte twyned sylke,
9 so that it was foure square & dubble, an hande bredth longe and brode,
10 and fylled it with foure rowes of stones. The first rowe was: a Sardis, a
Topas, and a Smaragde.
11 The secode: a Ruby, a Saphyre, and a Dyamonde.
12 The thirde: a Ligurios, an Achat, and an Amatist.
13 The fourth: a Turcas, an Onix & a Iaspis: closed rounde aboute with golde in
all the rowes.
14 And the stones stode after the twolue names of the children of Israel, grauen
by the stone grauer, euery one with his name, acordinge to the twolue trybes.
15 And vpon the brestlappe they made wrythen cheynes of pure golde,
16 and two hokes of golde, & two golde rynges, and fastened the two rynges vpon
the two edges of the brestlappe:
17 and ye two wrythen cheynes put they in the two rynges vpon the corners of the
brestlappe.
18 But the two endes of ye wrethen cheynes put they to the two hokes, & fastened
them vpon the corners of the ouerbody cote, one ouer agaynst another.
19 And they made two other rynges of golde, & fastened them to the other two
corners of the brestlappe by the edge of it, that it might hange vpon the out
syde of the ouerbody cote.
20 And they made yet two other golde rynges, which they put beneth vpon the two
corners of the ouerbody cote, one ouer agaynst another, where the ouerbody cote
ioyneth together,
21 that the brestlappe might be festened by his rynges vnto ye rynges of the
ouerbody cote with a yalowe lace, that it might lye close vpon ye ouerbody cote,
and not be lowsed from ye ouerbody cote, as the LORDE commaunded Moses.
22 And he made the tunycle vnto the ouerbody cote, wrought all of yalow sylke,
23 & the hole therof aboue in the myddest, & a bonde folde together rounde
aboute the hole, that it shulde not rente.
24 And beneth vpon ye hemme of it, they made pomgranates of yalow sylke,
scarlet, purple, & whyte twyned sylke:
25 & they made belles of pure golde, which they put betwixte ye pomgranates
rounde aboute vpon the hemme of the tunycle, a bell & a pomgranate,
26 a bell & a pomgranate rounde aboute, to do seruyce in, as the LORDE
commaunded Moses.
27 And they made albes also wrought of whyte sylke for Aaron & his sonnes,
28 & ye myter of whyte sylke, and the goodly bonettes of whyte sylke, and
breches of twyned whyte lynnen,
29 and the girdle of nedle worke euen of whyte twyned sylke, yalow sylke,
scarlet, and purple, as the LORDE commaunded Moses.
30 They made the fore heade plate also to ye holy crowne, of pure golde, and
wrote therin with grauen worke: the holynes of the LORDE,
31 and festened a yalowe lace theron, to tye it vnto the myter aboue, as the
LORDE comaunded Moses.
32 Thus the whole worke of ye Habitacion of ye Tabernacle of wytnesse, was
fynished. And the childre of Israel dyd all that the LORDE comaunded Moses,
33 & brought the Habitacion vnto Moses: the Tabernacle & all the apparell
therof, the buttons, bordes, barres, pilers, sokettes,
34 ye couerynge of reed skynnes of rammes, the couerynge of doo skynnes, & the
vayle,
35 ye Arke of wytnesse wt the staues therof, the Mercyseate,
36 the table & all his apparell, & the shewbred,
37 the candilsticke, wt the lampes prepared, and all his apparell, & oyle for
the lightes,
38 the golden altare, the anoyntinge oyle & incense, the hanginge in the
Tabernacle dore,
39 the brasen altare, & his brasen gredyron wt his staues, & all his apparell,
ye lauer wt his foote,
40 the hangynges of ye courte wt the pilers & sokettes therof, ye hanginge in
the courte gate wt his pilers & nales, & all the ordynaunce for the seruyce of
the Habitacion of ye Tabernacle of wytnesse,
41 ye mynistringe vestimetes of Aaro ye prest, to do seruyce in ye Sanctuary, &
the garmetes of his sonnes, yt they might execute ye prestes office.
42 Acordinge to all that ye LORDE comaunded Moses, eue so dyd the childre of
Israel in all this seruyce.
43 And Moses sawe all ye worke, yt they dyd it eue as ye LORDE had commaunded,
and he blessed them.

Chapter 40

1 And ye LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
2 In the fyrst daye of the first moneth shalt thou set vp ye Habitacio of ye
Tabernacle of wytnesse,
3 and shal put the Arke of wytnes therin, and hange the vayle before ye Arke.
4 And thou shalt bringe in the table, and garnish it, and brynge in the
cadilsticke, and put the lampes theron.
5 And ye golde altare of incense shalt thou set before ye Arke of wytnesse, &
hange vp the hanginge in the dore of the Habitacio.
6 But the altare of burntofferinges shalt thou set before the dore of the
Habitacion of the Tabernacle of wytnesse:
7 & the lauer betwixte the Tabernacle of wytnesse and the altare, and put water
therin,
8 & set the courte rounde aboute, and hange vp the hanginge in the courte gate.
9 And thou shalt take the anoyntynge oyle, and anoynte the Habitacion and all
that is there in, and shalt consecrate it, and all ye apparell therof, that it
maye be holy.
10 And thou shalt anoynte the altare of burntofferynges and all his vessels, and
consecrate it, that it maye be most holy.
11 The lauer also & his fote shalt thou anoynte & consecrate.
12 And thou shalt brynge Aaron & his sonnes vnto the dore of the Tabernacle of
wytnesse, and wash them with water,
13 & put the holy vestimentes vpon Aaron, and anoynte him, and consecrate him,
that he maye be my prest.
14 And thou shalt brynge his sonnes also, and put the albes vpon them,
15 and anoynte them, as thou hast anoynted their father, yt they maye be my
prestes. And this anoyntinge shall they haue for an euerlastinge presthode
amonge their posterities.
16 And Moses dyd all as the LORDE comaunded him.
17 Thus was the Tabernacle set vp in the seconde yeare vpon the first daye of
the first moneth.
18 And whan Moses reared it vp, he fastened ye sokettes and the bordes, and
barres, and set vp the pilers,
19 and spred out the tent ouer the Habitacion, and put the couerynge of the tent
aboue an hye, as the LORDE commaunded him.
20 And he toke the wytnesse, and layed it in the Arke, and put ye staues in the
Arke, and set the Mercyseate aboue vpon the Arke,
21 and brought the Arke in to the Habitacion, and hanged the vayle before the
Arke of wytnesse, as the LORDE commaunded him.
22 And he set the table in the Tabernacle of wytnesse, in the corner of the
Habitacion vpon the north syde without the vayle,
23 and prepared bred theron before ye LORDE as the LORDE commaunded him.
24 And he set in the candilsticke also, euen ouer agaynst the table, in the
corner of the Habitacion vpon the south syde,
25 and put the lampes theron before ye LORDE, as the LORDE commaunded him.
26 And the golden altare set he in also before the vayle,
27 and brent swete incense theron, as the LORDE commaunded him.
28 And hanged vp the hangynge in the Tabernacle dore.
29 As for the altare of burntofferynges, he set it before the dore of the
Habitacion of ye Tabernacle of wytnesse, and offred burntofferynges and
meateofferynges theron, as the LORDE commaunded him.
30 And the Lauer set he betwixte the Tabernacle of wytnesse and ye altare, and
put water therin to wash withall.
31 And Moses, Aaron and his sonnes washed their hades and fete ther at:
32 for they ought to wash the, whan they wente in to the Tabernacle of wytnesse,
or whan they wente vnto the altare, as the LORDE commaunded him.
33 And he set vp the courte rounde aboute the Habitacion and the altare, and
hanged vp ye hanginge in ye courte gate. Thus Moses fynished the whole worke.
34 Then a cloude couered ye Tabernacle of wytnesse, and the glory of the LORDE
fylled the Habitacion.
35 And Moses coulde not go in to the Tabernacle of wytnesse, whyle the cloude
abode theron, and the glory of ye LORDE fylled the Habitacion.
36 And whan the cloude remoued from the Habitacion, then wente the children of
Israel forth, as oft as they toke their iourney.
37 But yf the cloude remoued not, then toke not they their iourney, tyll the
daie that it remoued:
38 for in the daye tyme was the cloude of the LORDE vpon the Habitacion, & in
the night season was fyre therin, in ye sight of all ye house of Israel, in all
their iourneis.


Leviticus

Chapter 1

1 And the LORDE called Moses, and spake vnto him out of ye Tabernacle of
wytnesse, and sayde:
2 Speake vnto ye childre of Israel, & saie vnto them: Who so euer amoge you wyl
brynge an offerynge vnto the LORDE, let him brynge it of ye catell, euen of the
oxen, & of the shepe.
3 Yf he wyl brynge a burntofferynge of ye oxen (or greate catell) the let him
offre a male without blemysh, before ye dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse, to
reconcyle himself before the LORDE,
4 let him laye his hande vpon the heade of the burntofferynge, then shal he be
reconcyled, so yt God shalbe mercifull vnto him.
5 And he shall kyll the yonge oxe before ye LORDE: and ye prestes Aarons sonnes
shal brynge the bloude, and sprenkle it rounde aboute vpon the altare, that is
before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse.
6 And the skynne shalbe flayne from of the burntofferynge, and it shalbe hewen
in peces.
7 And the sonnes of Aaron the prest shal make a fyre vpon the altare,
8 and laye wod aboue theron: and ye peces, the heade, and the fatt shal they
laye vpon the wodd that lyeth vpon ye fyre on the altare.
9 But ye bowels & legges shal be wasshen with water, and the prest shal burne
alltogether vpon the altare for a burntsacrifice: this is an offerynge of a
swete sauoure vnto the LORDE.
10 Yf he wyl offre a burntsacrifice of the small catell, that is, of the lambes
or goates, then let him offre a male without a blemysh.
11 And he shall kyll it before the LORDE, euen at the corner of the altare on
the north syde before ye LORDE. And (the prestes) Aarons sonnes shal sprenkle
his bloude rounde aboute vpon ye altare,
12 and it shal be hewen in peces. And the prest shall laye them with the heade
and the fatt, vpon the wodd that lyeth vpon the fyre on the altare.
13 But the bowels and ye legges shal be wasshen with water. And ye prest shal
offre it alltogether, and burne it vpon ye altare for a burntsacrifice. This is
an offerynge of a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE.
14 But yf he wil offre a burntsacrifice of ye foules vnto the LORDE, then let
him offre it of the turtill doues or of ye yonge pigeons.
15 And the prest shal brynge it vnto the altare, and wrynge the neck of it a
sunder, that it maye be burnt vpon the altare, and let the bloude of it runne
out vpon the sydes of the altare,
16 and the croppe of it with the fethers shalbe cast vpon the heape of asshes
besyde the altare towarde the east,
17 and he shall deuyde the wynges of it, but not breake the cleane of. And thus
shall the prest burne it vpon the altare, euen vpon the wodd that lyeth vpo the
fyre, for a burntsacrifice. This is an offerynge of a swete sauoure vnto the
LORDE.

Chapter 2

1 Whan a soule wyll offre a meatofferynge vnto the LORDE, then shal it be of
fyne floure, and he shal poure oyle vpon it, and put frankencense theron,
2 & so brynge it vnto Aarons sonnes the prestes. Then shal one of them take his
handefull of the same floure, and oyle with all the frankecense, and burne it
for a remembraunce vpon the altare. This is an offeringe of a swete sauoure vnto
the LORDE.
3 As for ye remnaunt of the meatofferynge, it shalbe Aarons and his sonnes. This
shalbe ye most holy of the offerynges of the LORDE.
4 But yf he wyll brynge a meatofferynge of that which is baken in the ouen, then
let him take swete cakes of wheate, mixte with oyle, and vnleuended wafers
anoynted with oyle.
5 Neuertheles yf thy meatofferynge be enythinge of that which is fryed in the
panne, then shal it be of fyne swete floure myxte with oyle:
6 And thou shalt cut it in peces, & poure oyle theron: so is it a meatofferynge.
7 But yf thy meatofferinge be ought broyled on the gredyron, then shalt thou
make it of fyne floure with oyle.
8 And the meatofferynge that thou wilt make of soch thinges for the LORDE, shalt
thou brynge vnto ye prest, which shal brynge it vnto the altare,
9 & shal Heue vp the same meatofferynge for a remebraunce, and burne it vpon the
altare. This is an offerynge of a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE.
10 As for the remnaunt, it shal be Aarons and his sonnes. This shall be the most
holy of the offerynges of the LORDE.
11 All the meatofferynges that ye wil offre vnto the LORDE, shal ye make without
leue. For there shal no leue nor hony be burnt for an offerynge vnto the LORDE.
12 But for the offerynge of the firstlinges shal ye offer the vnto the LORDE.
Neuertheles they shal come vpon no altare for a swete sauoure.
13 All thy meatofferynges shalt thou salt. And thy meatofferynge shal neuer be
without ye salt of the couenaunt of thy God: for in all thy offerynges shalt
thou offre salt.
14 But yf thou wilt offre a meatofferynge of the first frutes vnto ye LORDE,
then shalt thou drye that which is grene, by the fyre, & beate it small, and so
offre the meatofferynge of thy first frutes.
15 And thou shalt put oyle vpon it, and laye frankecense theron, so is it a
meatofferynge.
16 And then shall the prest beate it, and burne of the oyle with all the
frankecense for a remembraunce. This is an offerynge vnto the LORDE.

Chapter 3

1 Bvt yf his offerynge be a deedofferinge of greate catell (whether it be oxe or
cowe) then shal he offre soch as is without blemysh before the LORDE,
2 & shal laie his hande vpon the heade of it, and kyll it before the dore of the
Tabernacle of wytnesse. And the prestes Aarons sonnes, shall sprenkle the bloude
rounde aboute vpon the altare,
3 and shal offre of ye deadofferynge vnto the LORDE: namely, all the fat that is
within,
4 and the two kydneyes with the fat that is theron vpon the loynes, and the nett
on the leuer vpo the kydneyes also.
5 And Aarons sonnes shal burne it vpon the altare for a burntofferynge, euen
vpon the wod that lyeth on the fyre. This is an offerynge of a swete sauoure
vnto the LORDE.
6 Yf his deadofferynge be of small catell, whether it be male or female, it shal
be without blemish:
7 Yf it be a lambe, then shall he brynge it before the LORDE,
8 & shal laye his hande vpon the heade of it, and sleye it before the Tabernacle
of wytnesse. And Aarons sonnes shal sprenkle his bloude rounde aboute vpon the
altare,
9 and so offre of the deadofferynge vnto the LORDE: namely, the fat of it, all
the rompe with the backe, and the fat that couereth the bowels, with all ye fat
that is within,
10 and the two kydneys with the fat that is theron vpon the loynes, & the nett
on the leuer vpon the kydneys also.
11 And the prest shal burne it vpon the altare, for ye meate of the offerynge
vnto ye LORDE.
12 But yf his offeringe be a goate, and bringeth it before the LORDE,
13 he shal laye his hande vpon the heade of it, and kyll it before the
Tabernacle of wytnesse. And Aarons sonnes shal sprekle the bloude rounde aboute
vpo the altare,
14 & shal offer therof a sacrifice vnto the LORDE: namely, the fat yt couereth
the bowels, and all the fat yt is within,
15 the two kydneys with the fat that is theron vpon the loynes, & the net on the
leuer vpon the kydneys.
16 And the prest shal burne it vpo the altare, for the meate of the sacrifice to
a swete sauoure.
17 All the fatt is the LORDES. Let this be a perpetuall lawe amonge yor
posterities in all youre dwellynges, that ye eate no fatt, ner bloude.

Chapter 4

1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
2 Speake vnto the childre of Israel, and saye: Whan a soule synneth thorow
ignoraunce in any commaundemet of the LORDE, which he ought not to do: As
namely,
3 yf a prest which is anoynted, synne, that he make the people do amysse, he
shall brynge for ye synne that he hath done, a yonge bullocke without blemysh
vnto the LORDE for a synofferynge.
4 And the bullocke shal he brynge to the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse
before the LORDE, & laie his hade vpo his heade, & kyll him before ye LORDE.
5 And ye prest yt is anoynted, shal take of his bloude, & brynge it in to the
Tabernacle of wytnesse.
6 And he shall dyppe his fynger in to the bloude, & sprenkle therwith seue tymes
before the LORDE, towarde the vayle of ye Holy.
7 And he shal put of the same bloude vpon the hornes of the altare of incense,
yt stondeth before ye LORDE in the Tabernacle of wytnesse: & all the bloude of
the bullocke shal he poure vpon the botome of the altare of burntofferinges, yt
stondeth at the entringe in of ye Tabernacle of wytnesse.
8 And all the fat of the synofferynge shal he Heue vp: namely, the fat yt
couereth the bowels, & all the fat yt is within,
9 ye two kydneys with the fatt that is theron vpon the loynes, and the net on
the leuer vpon the kydneys also
10 (like as he Heueth it from the oxe in the deadofferynge) and shall burne it
vpon the altare of burntofferynges.
11 But the skynne of the bullocke, and all the flesh, with the heade & legges, &
the bowels and the donge,
12 shal he cary alltogether out of the hoost, in to a cleane place, where ye
asshes are poured out, & shal burne it vpon wodd with fyre.
13 Whan the whole cogregacion of Israel synneth thorow ignorauce, & the dede be
hyd from their eyes, so yt they do ought agaynst eny of the comaundementes of
the LORDE, which they shulde not do,
14 & come afterwarde to the knowlege of the synne that they haue done, they shal
bringe a yonge bullocke for a synofferynge, and set him before ye dore of ye
Tabernacle of wytnesse.
15 And the Elders of the congregacion shall laye their handes vpon his heade
before the LORDE, & kyll ye bullocke before the LORDE.
16 And ye prest yt is anoynted shal brynge of ye bullockes bloude into the
Tabernacle of wytnesse,
17 & dyppe ther in with his fynger, and sprenkle therwith seuen tymes before the
LORDE, eue before the vayle of the Holy.
18 And shall put of the bloude vpon the hornes of the altare, yt stondeth before
the LORDE in the Tabernacle of wytnesse: & all ye other bloude shal he poure vpo
the botome of ye altare of burntofferynges, yt stondeth before the dore of ye
Tabernacle of wytnesse.
19 But all his fatt shal he Heue vp, & burne it vpo the altare:
20 & shal do with this bullocke, as he dyd with ye bullocke of the synofferinge:
Thus the prest shal make an attonement for them, & it shall be forgeuen them.
21 And the bullocke shall he brynge without the hoost, and burne him, as he
brent ye first bullocke. This shalbe ye synofferynge of the congregacion.
22 Whan a prynce synneth, & doth agaynst the comaundement of the LORDE his God,
yt he ought not to do, & offendeth ignorauntly, & commeth to the knowlege
23 of his synne yt he hath done, he shal bringe for his offeringe an he goate
without blemysh,
24 & laye his hande vpo the goates heade, & slaye him in ye place where ye
burntofferinges are slayne before ye LORDE.
25 The shal ye prest take of ye bloude of ye synofferinge wt his fynger, and put
it vpon the altare of burntofferynges, & poure the other bloude vpon the botome
of the altare of burntofferynges.
26 But all the fat of it shal he burne vpo the altare, like as the fat of the
healthofferynge. And so the prest shal make an attonement for his synne, and it
shal be forgeuen him.
27 Wha a soule of ye comon people synneth ignorauntly, doinge eny thinge agaynst
the comaundement of the LORDE, yt he ought not to do, & so offendeth,
28 & cometh to ye knowlege of the synne yt he hath done, he shal bringe for his
offerynge a she goate without blemysh, for the synne yt he hath done,
29 and shal laye his hande vpon the heade of the synofferynge, & slaye it in the
place of the burntofferynges.
30 And the prest shall take of the bloude wt his fynger, & put it vpon the
hornes of ye altare of burntofferynges, & poure all the bloude vpon the botome
of the altare.
31 But all the fat of it shal he take awaye, like as he taketh awaye the fat of
the deadofferynge, and shal burne it vpon the altare for a swete sauoure vnto
the LORDE. And so shal the prest make an attonemet for him, and it shal be
forgeuen him.
32 But yf he brynge a lambe for a synofferynge, then let him brynge a female
without blemysh,
33 and laye his hande vpon the heade of the synofferynge, & kyll it for a
synofferynge, in the place where the burntofferynges are slayne.
34 And the prest shal take of ye bloude wt his fynger, & put it vpon the hornes
of the altare of burntofferynges, & poure all the bloude vpon the botome of the
altare.
35 But all ye fatt therof shall he take fro it, like as he dyd the fat of the
lambe of the healthofferynge, & shal burne it vpon ye altare for the LORDES
sacrifice. And so ye prest shal make an attonement for the synne that he hath
done, and it shalbe forgeuen him.

Chapter 5

1 Whan a soule synneth, yt he heare a cursynge, and is wytnesse therof, or hath
sene it, or knowne it, & telleth it not, he is giltie of a trespace.
2 Or whan a soule toucheth eny vncleane thige, whether it be ye carion of an
vncleane beast, or catell, or worme, & was not awarre of it, he is vncleane, and
hath offended.
3 Or whan he toucheth an vncleane man (what vnclennesse so euer a man is defyled
withall) & was not awarre of it, & afterwarde cometh to ye knowlege therof, ye
same hath offended.
4 Or whan a soule sweareth, so yt he pronounceth wt his mouth to do euell or
good (what so euer it be that a man pronounceth wt an ooth) & was not awarre of
it, & afterwarde cometh to the knowlege therof, he hath offended in one of
these.
5 Now whan it so is, yt he hath offended in one of these, & is enfourmed therof,
what he hath synned,
6 he shal bringe vnto ye LORDE for his trespace of this his synne yt he hath
done, a female from the flocke, either a yewe or a she goate for a synofferynge:
so shal the prest make an attonement for him concernynge his synne.
7 But yf he be not able to brynge a shepe, then let him brynge vnto ye LORDE for
his offence that he hath done, two turtill doues or two yonge pigeons: one for a
synofferynge, the other for a burntofferynge,
8 and brynge them to the prest: Which shall make the first of a synofferynge,
and fyrst wringe the neck of it, so that he plucke it not cleane of,
9 and sprenkle with the bloude vpo the sydes of the altare, and let the resydue
of the bloude blede out vpon the botome of the altare: This is the synofferynge.
10 As for the other, he shal make it a burntofferynge, after the maner therof.
And thus shall the prest make an attonement for him concernynge the synne that
he hath done, & it shalbe forgeuen him.
11 But yf he be not able to brynge two turtill doues or two yonge pigeons, then
let him brynge his offerynge for his synne, a tenth deale of an Epha of fyne
floure for a synofferynge. But he shall put no oyle theron, ner laye frankecense
vpon it, for it is a synofferynge.
12 And he shal brynge it vnto the prest, & ye prest shal take his hadfull of it
for a remembraunce, and burne it vpon the altare for an offerynge vnto the
LORDE. This is a synofferinge.
13 And so shal the prest make an attoment for him, concernynge his synne that he
hath done, & it shalbe forgeuen him. And the remnaunt shall be the prestes, like
a meatofferynge.
14 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
15 Yf a soule trespace, so yt thorow ignorauce he offendeth in any thinge yt is
halowed vnto the LORDE, he shal brynge his trespaceofferinge vnto the LORDE,
euen a ramme from ye flocke without blemysh, worth two Sycles of syluer, after
the Sycle of the Sanctuary, for a trespace offerynge:
16 and loke what he hath offended in the halowed thinge, he shall make
restitucion, & geue the fifth parte more therto. And he shal delyuer it vnto ye
prest, which shall make an attonement for him wt the ramme of the trespace
offeringe, & it shalbe forgeuen him.
17 Whan a soule synneth, and doth ought agaynst eny comaundement of the LORDE,
yt he shulde not do, & is infourmed therof, he hath trespased, & is giltie of
the synne.
18 And he shall brynge from the flocke a ramme wt out blemysh (that is worth a
trespaceofferinge) vnto the prest, which shal make an attonement for him
concernynge his ignoraunce which he dyd, and was not awarre, and it shalbe
forgeuen him.
19 This is the trespaceofferynge, because he trespaced agaynst the LORDE.

Chapter 6

1 And ye LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde:
2 Whan a soule synneth, & trespaceth agaynst the LORDE, so that he denyeth vnto
his neghboure that which he gaue him to kepe, or that was put vnder his hande,
or that he hath violently taken awaye, or gotten vnrighteously,
3 or founde that was lost, and denyeth it with a false ooth, what so euer it be,
wherin a man synneth agaynst his neghboure. Now whan it commeth so to passe,
4 that he synneth after this maner, & trespaceth, he shal restore agayne that he
toke violently awaye, or gat wrongeously, or that was geuen him to kepe, or that
he hath founde,
5 or what so euer it be aboute ye which he hath sworne falsely, he shal restore
it againe whole alltogether, and geue the fifth parte more therto, euen to him
that it belonged vnto, the same daye that he geueth his trespace offerynge.
6 But for his trespace he shall brynge for the LORDE (euen vnto the prest) a
ramme from the flocke without blemysh, that is worth a trespace offerynge.
7 Then shall the prest make an attonement for him before the LORDE, and all that
he hath synned in, shalbe forgeuen him.
8 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
9 Commaunde Aaron and his sonnes, and saye: This is the lawe of the
burntofferynge. The burntofferynge shall burne vpon the altare all night vntyll
the mornynge. But the fyre of the altare onely shal burne theron.
10 And ye prest shal put on his lynen albe, and his lyuen breches vpon his
flesh, and shal take vp the asshes, that the fyre of the burntofferynge vpon the
altare hath made, and shall poure them besyde the altare.
11 Then shall he put of his rayment, and put on other rayment, and cary out the
asshes without the hoost, into a cleane place.
12 The fyre vpon the altare shal burne, and neuer go out. The prest shal kyndle
wod theron euery mornynge, and dresse the burntofferynge vpon it, and burne the
fat of the deedofferynges theron.
13 The fyre shall euer burne vpon the altare, and neuer go out.
14 And this is the lawe of the meatofferynge, which Aarons sonnes shall offre
before the LORDE vpon the altare.
15 One of them shall Heue his handfull of fyne floure of ye meatofferynge, and
of the oyle, and all the frankencense that lyeth vpon the meatofferynge, and
shall burne it vpon the altare for a swete sauoure a remembraunce vnto the
LORDE.
16 As for the remnaunt, Aaron and his sonnes shal eate it, and vnleuended shal
they eate it in the holy place, namely, in the courte of the Tabernacle of
witnesse.
17 With leue shal they not bake their porcion, which I haue geuen them of my
offerynges. It shalbe vnto them most holy, as the synofferynge and trespace
offerynge.
18 All the males amonge the children of Aaron shall eate of it. Let this be a
perpetuall lawe for youre posterities in the sacrifices of the LORDE. No man
shall touch it, excepte he be consecrated.
19 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
20 This shalbe the offerynge of Aaron and of his sonnes, which they shall offre
vnto the LORDE in the daie of their anoyntinge. The tenth parte of an Epha of
fyne floure for a meatofferynge daylie, the one half parte in the mornynge, the
other half parte at euen.
21 In the panne with oyle shall thou make it, and brynge it fryed, and in peces
shalt thou offer it for the swete sauoure of the LORDE.
22 And the prest which amonge his sonnes shalbe anoynted in his steade, shall do
this. This is a perpetuall dewtye vnto the LORDE. It shal be burnt alltogether:
23 for all the meatofferynges of the prest shalbe consumed with the fyre, and
not be eaten.
24 And ye LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde:
25 Speake vnto Aaron and his sonnes, and saye: This is the lawe of the
synofferynge: In the place where thou slayest ye bunrtofferynge, shalt thou
slaye the synofferynge also before the LORDE. This is most holy.
26 The prest that offereth the synofferynge, shal eate it in the holy place, in
the courte of ye Tabernacle of wytnesse.
27 No man shal touch ye flesh therof, excepte he be halowed. And yf eny garment
be sprenkled with the bloude of it, it shalbe washe in the holy place.
28 And the earthe pot that it is sodden in, shalbe broken. But yf it be a brasen
pot, it shalbe scoured, and resed with water.
29 All ye males amonge the prestes shall eate therof, for it is most holy.
30 Notwithstondinge all ye synofferynge whose bloude is brought in to the
Tabernacle of wytnesse to make an attonement, shall not be eaten, but burnt with
fyre.

Chapter 7

1 And this is the lawe of the trespace-offerynge, and it shal be most holy.
2 In the place where the burntofferynge is slayne, shall the trespaceofferynge
be slayne also, & there shall of his bloude be sprenkled rounde aboute vpon the
altare.
3 And all his fat shalbe offered: the rompe and the fat yt couereth the bowels,
4 the two kydneys with the fat yt is theron vpon the loynes, and the net on the
leuer vpon the kydneys also.
5 And the prest shal burne it vpon the altare for an offerynge vnto the LORDE.
This is a trespace offerynge.
6 All the males amonge the prestes shal eate it in the holy place, for it is
most holy:
7 euen as the synofferynge, so shall the trespace offerynge be also, they shall
both haue one lawe: and it shal be the prestes, that reconcyleth ther wt.
8 Loke which prest offereth eny mans burntofforynge, the skynne of the same
burntoffrynge that he hath offered, shalbe his.
9 And euery meatofferynge that is baken in the ouen, rosted vpon the gredyron,
or fryed in the panne, shal be the prestes yt offereth it.
10 And euery meatofferynge yt is myngled with oyle, or drye, shal belonge vnto
all Aaron sonnes, vnto one as well as another.
11 And this is ye lawe of the healthofferinge, that is offered vnto the LORDE,
12 Yf they wyll offre a sacrifice of thankesgeuynge, then shal they offre
vnleueded cakes megled with oyle, and swete wafers straked ouer with oyle, and
fryed cakes of fyne floure mengled with oyle.
13 This offerynge also shall they brynge vpon a cake of leuended bred, to the
thankofferynge of his healthofferynge:
14 and of them all he shall offre one for an Heueofferynge vnto the LORDE. And
it shalbe the prestes, that sprenkleth the bloude of the healthofferynge.
15 And the flesh of the thankofferynge in his healthofferynges, shalbe eaten the
same daye that it is offred, and there shall nothinge be left ouer vntyll the
mornynge.
16 And whether it be a vowe or a fre wylofferynge, it shalbe eaten the same daye
that it is offred: yf ought be left ouer vntyll the mornynge, yet maye it be
eaten.
17 But loke what remayneth vnto ye thirde daye of the flesh that is offred, it
shalbe brent with the fyre.
18 And yf eny man vpon the thirde daie eate of ye offred flesh of his
healthofferynge, he shall not be accepted that offred it. Nether shall it be
rekened vnto him, but it shalbe refused. And loke which soule eateth therof, the
same is giltie of a mysdede.
19 And the flesh that toucheth eny vncleane thinge, shal not be eaten, but burnt
with the fyre. But who so euer is cleane of body, shal eate of the flesh:
20 and the soule that eateth of ye flesh of ye healthofferynge which belongeth
vnto the LORDE, his vnclennes be vpon him, and he shalbe roted out from amonge
his people.
21 And whan a soule toucheth eny vncleane thinge, whether it be an vncleane man,
catell, or eny other abhominacion that is, and eateth of the flesh of the
burntofferynge, that belongeth vnto the LORDE, the same shalbe roted out from
amonge his people.
22 And the LORDE talketh with Moses, and sayde:
23 Speake vnto the children of Israel, & saye: Ye shall eate no fat of oxen,
lambes, and goates:
24 neuerthelesse the fat of it that dyeth alone, and of soch as is torne of
wylde beastes, that maye ye occupye to all maner of vses, but ye shall not eate
it.
25 For who so euer eateth the fat of ye beest that is geuen vnto the LORDE for
an offerynge, the same soule shalbe roted out from his people.
26 Morouer, ye shall eate no bloude, nether of catell, ner of foules, where so
euer ye dwell.
27 What soule eateth eny bloude, the same shall be roted out from his people.
28 And the LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde:
29 Speake vnto the children of Israel, and saye: Who so wyll offre his
healthofferynge vnto the LORDE, the same shall also brynge with all, that
belongeth vnto ye healthofferynge for the LORDE.
30 But he shall brynge it with his hande for the offerynge of the LORDE: namely
the fat vpon the brest shall he brynge, with the brest, to be a Waueofferynge
before the LORDE.
31 And the prest shall burne the fat vpon the altare, and the brest shalbe
Aarons and his sonnes.
32 And the right shulder shal they geue vnto the prest for a gift of their
healthofferynges.
33 And loke which of Aarons sonnes offreth the bloude of the healthofferynges,
and the fat, the same shall haue the right shulder for his parte.
34 For the Wauebrest and the Heueshulder haue I taken of the children of Israel,
and of their healthofferynges, and haue geuen them vnto Aaron the prest and vnto
his sonnes for a perpetuall dewtye.
35 This is the anoyntinge of Aaron and of his sonnes, of the offerynges of the
LORDE, in the daye wha Moses presented them to be prestes vnto the LORDE,
36 what tyme as the LORDE commaunded (in the daye whan he anoynted them) to be
geuen them of the children of Israel for a perpetuall dewtye, and vnto all their
posterities.
37 And this is the lawe of the burntofferynge, of the meatofferynge, of the
synofferynge, of the trespace offerynge, of the offerynge of consecracion, and
of the healthofferynges,
38 which the LORDE commaunded Moses vpon mount Sinai, in the daye whan he gaue
him in commaudement vnto the children of Israel, to offre their offerynges vnto
ye LORDE in the wyldernesse of Sinai.

Chapter 8

1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
2 Take Aaron and his sonnes wt him, & their vestimentes, & the anoyntinge oyle,
and a bullocke for a synofferynge, two rammes, and a maunde with vnleuended
bred,
3 and call the whole congregacion together, before the dore of the Tabernacle of
wytnesse.
4 Moses dyd as the LORDE commaunded him, and gathered the congregacion together
vnto the dore of ye Tabernacle of wytnesse,
5 and sayde vnto them: This is it, that the LORDE hath commaunded to do.
6 And he toke Aaron and his sonnes, and wasshed them with water,
7 and put the albe vpo him, and girde him with the girdell, and put vpon him the
yalowe tunycle, and put the ouerbody cote vpon him, and girde him vpon the
ouerbody cote,
8 & put the brestlappe theron, and in ye brestlappe light and perfectnesse:
9 And set the myter vpon his heade. And vpon the myter euen aboue his fore
heade, put he a plate of golde on the holy crowne: as ye LORDE comaunded Moses.
10 And Moses toke the anoyntinge oyle, & anoynted the Habitacion, and all that
was therin, and consecrated it,
11 and sprenkled therwith seue tymes vpon the altare, and anoynted the altare
with all his vessels, the lauer with his fote, that it might be consecrated:
12 and poured the anoyntinge oyle vpon Aarons heade, and anoynted him, yt he
might be consecrated.
13 And he brought Aarons sonnes, and put albes vpon them, and girde them with
the girdle, and put bonettes vpon their heades, as the LORDE commaunded him.
14 And he caused bringe a bullocke for a synoffrynge. And Aaron with his sonnes
layed their handes vpon his heade,
15 and then was he slayne. And Moses toke of the bloude, & put it vpon the homes
of the altare rounde aboute with his fynger, and purified the altare, and poured
the bloude vpon the botome of the altare, and consecrated it, that he might
reconcyle it.
16 And toke all the fat vpo the bowels, the nett vpon the leuer, and the two
kydneys with the fat theron, and burned it vpon the altare.
17 But the bullocke wt his skynne, flesh, & donge, burned he with fyre without
the hoost, as the LORDE commaunded him.
18 And he brought a ramme for a burntofferynge. And Aaron wt his sonnes layed
their handes vpon his heade,
19 & then was he slayne. And Moses sprenkled of ye bloude vpon the altare rounde
aboute,
20 hewed the ramme in peces, and burnt the heade, the peces, and the fatt.
21 And wasshed the bowels and the legges with water, and so burnt ye whole ramme
vpo the altare. This was a bruntofferynge for a swete sauoure, euen a sacrifice
vnto the LORDE, as the LORDE commaunded him.
22 He brought also the other ramme of the offerynge of the consecracion. And
Aaron with his sonnes layed their hades vpon his heade,
23 and then was it slayne. And Moses toke of his bloude, and put it vpon the
typpe of Aarons right eare, and vpon the thombe of his right hande, and vpon the
greate too of his right fote.
24 And he brought Aarons sonnes, and put of the bloude vpon the typpe of the
right eare of them, and vpon ye thombes of their righte handes, and vpon the
greate toes of their righte fete, and poured the resydue of the bloude vpon the
altare rounde aboute.
25 And he toke the fat and the rompe, and all the fat vpon the bowels, and the
nett vpon the leuer, the two kydneys with the fat theron, and the righte
shulder.
26 And out of the maunde of vnleuended bred before the LORDE, he toke an
vnleueded cake, and a cake of oyled bred, and a wafer, and layed them vpo the
fat, and vpon the right shulder,
27 and put alltogether vpon the handes of Aaron and of his sonnes, and waued it
for a Waueofferynge before the LORDE.
28 And afterwarde toke he all agayne from their hondes, and burned them on the
altare, euen vpon the burntofferinge: for it is an offerynge of consecracion for
a swete sauoure, euen a sacrifice vnto ye LORDE.
29 And Moses toke the brest, and waued it a Waueofferynge before the LORDE, of
the ramme of the offerynge of consecracion: the same was Moses parte, as the
LORDE commaunded Moses.
30 And Moses toke of ye anoyntinge oyle, & of the bloude vpon the altare, &
sprenkled it vpon Aaron & his vestimentes, vpon his sonnes & vpon their
vestimentes, and so cosecrated Aaron & his vestimentes, his sonnes and their
vestimentes with him.
31 And he sayde vnto Aaron & his sonnes: Seeth ye flesh before the dore of the
Tabernacle of wytnesse, & there eate it, & the bred in ye maunde of the
cosecracion offeringes, as it is comaunded me, & sayde: Aaron & his sonnes shall
eate it.
32 As for yt which remayneth of the flesh & bred, ye shal burne it with fyre.
33 And in seue dayes shall ye not departe from ye dore of the Tabernacle of
wytnesse, vntyll the daye, yt the dayes of yor consecracion offerynges be at an
ende: for seue dayes must yor handes be consecrated,
34 as it is come to passe this daye: The LORDE hath comaunded to do it, that ye
might be reconcyled.
35 And ye shal tary before the Tabernacle of wytnesse daye and night seuen dayes
longe, & shal kepe ye watch of ye LORDE, that ye dye not, for thus am I
comaunded.
36 And Aaron with his sonnes dyd all, that ye LORDE commaunded by Moses.

Chapter 9

1 And vpon the eight daye Moses called Aaron and his sonnes, and the Elders in
Israel,
2 and sayde vnto Aaron: Take vnto the a yonge calfe for a synofferinge, and a
ramme for a burntofferynge, both without blemysh, and brynge them before the
LORDE,
3 and speake vnto the children of Israel, and saye: Take an he goate for a
synofferynge: and a calf, and a shepe, both of a yeare olde, and without blemysh
for a burntofferynge:
4 and an oxe and a ramme for an healthofferynge, that we maye offre before the
LORDE: and a meatofferynge myngled with oyle. For to daye shal the LORDE appeare
vnto you.
5 And they toke what Moses commaunded before ye dore of the Tabernacle of
wytnesse, and the whole cogregacion came nye, and stode before the LORDE.
6 Then sayde Moses: This is it, which the LORDE commaunded that ye shulde do,
and then shall the glory of ye LORDE appeare vnto you.
7 And Moses sayde vnto Aaron: Go vnto ye altare, and offre thy synofferynge and
thy burntofferynge, and make an attonemet for the and for the people. Then offre
the peoples offerynge, and reconcyle them also, as the LORDE hath commaunded.
8 And Aaron wente vnto the altare, and slawe ye calfe for his synofferynge,
9 & his sonnes brought the bloude vnto him. And he dypte his fynger in the
bloude, and put it vpon the hornes of the altare, and poured ye bloude vpon ye
botome of the altare.
10 As for the fat and the kydneys & the net vpon the leuer of the synofferynge,
he burnt the vpon the altare, as the LORDE comaunded Moses.
11 The flesh also and the hyde burnt he wt fyre without the hoost.
12 Afterwarde he slewe the burntofferinge, and Aarons sonnes brought the bloude
vnto him, & he sprenkled it rounde aboute vpon the altare.
13 And they brought him the burntofferynge in peces, & the heade: & he burnt it
vpon the altare.
14 And he washed the bowels and the legges, and burnt them aboue vpon the
burntofferynge on the altare.
15 Then brought he the offerynge of the people, and toke the goate, that
synofferynge of the people, and slewe it, and made a synofferynge therof, as of
the fyrst.
16 And brought the burntofferynge, and dyd as the lawe is:
17 and brought the meatofferynge, and toke his handfull, and burnt it vpon the
altare, besyde the burntofferinge of the mornynge.
18 Afterwarde slewe he the oxe and the ramme for the healthofferynge of the
people. And his sonnes brought him the bloude, which he sprenkled vpon the
altare rounde aboute.
19 But the fat of the oxe & of the ramme, the rompe, and the fat that couereth
the bowels, & the kydneyes, & the net vpon the leuer,
20 all soch fat laied they vpon the brest, and burnt the fat vpon the altare.
21 But the brest and the right shulder waued Aaron for a Waueofferynge before
the LORDE, as the LORDE commaunded Moses.
22 And Aaron lift vp his hade ouer the people, and blessed them, and came downe
from the worke of the synofferynge, burntofferynge, and healthofferynge.
23 And Moses and Aaron wente in to the Tabernacle of wytnesse. And whan they
came out agayne, they blessed the people. Then appeared the glory of the LORDE
vnto all the people.
24 For there came a fyre from the LORDE, and vpon the altare it consumed the
burntofferynge and the fat. Whan all the people sawe that, they reioysed, and
fell vpon their faces.

Chapter 10

1 And ye sonnes of Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, toke ether of the his censoure, & put
fyre therin, & layed incense vpon it, and brought straunge fyre before the
LORDE, which he commauded them not.
2 Then wente there out a fyre from ye LORDE, and consumed them, so that they
dyed before the LORDE.
3 Then sayde Moses vnto Aaron: This is it, that the LORDE sayde: I wil be
sanctified vpo them that come nye me, and before all the people wil I be
glorified. And Aaron helde his peace.
4 Moses called Misael and Elzaphan the sonnes of Vsiel Aarons vncle, and sayde
vnto them: Go to, and cary youre brethren out of the Sanctuary, without the
hoost.
5 And they wente, and caried them forth in their albes without the hoost, as
Moses sayde.
6 Then sayde Moses vnto Aaron, & to his sonnes Eleasar and Ithamar: Ye shall not
vncouer youre heades, ner rente yor clothes, that ye dye not, and the wrath come
vpon the whole congregacion: Let youre brethre of the whole house of Israel
bewepe this burnynge, which the LORDE hath done.
7 As for you, ye shall not go out from the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse,
lest ye dye: for the anoyntinge oyle of the LORDE is vpon you. And they dyd as
Moses sayde.
8 The LORDE spake vnto Aaron, & sayde:
9 Thou & thy sonnes wt the shal drynke no wyne ner stronge drynke, whan ye go in
to the Tabernacle of wytnesse: that ye dye not. Let this be a perpetuall lawe
vnto all yor posterities:
10 yt ye maye haue knowlege to discerne, what is holy and vnholy, what is cleane
& vncleane:
11 & that ye maye teach the children of Israel all the lawes, which the LORDE
hath spoken vnto you by Moses.
12 And Moses sayde vnto Aaron, and vnto Eleasar and Ithamar his sonnes that were
left: Take the remnaunt of the meatofferynge in the sacrifices of ye LORDE, and
eate it without leuen besyde the altare, for it is most holy,
13 euen in the holy place shal ye eate it. For it is thy dutye and thy sonnes
dutye in the sacrifices of the LORDE: for thus am I commaunded.
14 But the Wauebrest and the Heueshulder shalt thou eate, and thy sonnes and thy
doughters with the in a cleane place. For this dutye is geuen vnto the and thy
children in the deedofferynges of the children of Israel.
15 For the Heueshulder and the Wauebrest to the offerynges of the fat, shalbe
brought in, that they maye be waued for a Waueofferinge before the LORDE.
Therfore is it thine and thy childrens for a perpetuall dutye, as the LORDE
commaunded.
16 And Moses sought for the goate of the synofferynge, and founde it burnt. And
he was angrie at Eleasar and Ithamar ye sonnes of Aaron, which were left alyue,
and sayde:
17 Wherfore haue ye not eaten the synofferynge in the holy place? for it is most
holy, & he hath geuen it you, that ye might beare ye synne of the cogregacion,
to make agremet for them before the LORDE.
18 Beholde, the bloude of it came not in to the Sanctuary: Ye shulde haue eaten
it in the Sanctuary, as I was commaunded.
19 Aaron sayde vnto Moses: Beholde, this daye haue they offred their
synofferynge & their burntofferynge before ye LORDE. And it is chaunsed me after
this maner. And shulde I eate of the synofferynge to daye, & be mery before the
LORDE?
20 Whan Moses herde that, he was content.

Chapter 11

1 And ye LORDE talked wt Moses & Aaron & sayde:
2 Speake vnto ye childre of Israel, and saye: These are the beestes which ye
shal eate amoge all ye beestes vpo earth:
3 What so euer hath hoffe, & deuydeth it in to two clawes, & cheweth cud amonge
the beestes, that shal ye eate.
4 But loke what cheweth cud & hath hoffe, & deuydeth it not, as the Camell, the
same is vncleane vnto you, & ye shal not eate it.
5 The Conyes chewe cud, but they deuyde not the hoffe in to two clawes, therfore
are they vncleane vnto you.
6 The Hare cheweth cud also, but deuydeth not ye hoffe in to two clawes,
therfore is he vncleane vnto you.
7 And the Swyne deuydeth ye hoffe in to two clawes, but cheweth not the cud,
therfore is it vncleane vnto you.
8 Of the flesh of these shall ye not eate, ner touch their carcases, for they
are vncleane vnto you.
9 These shall ye eate of all that are in the waters: What so euer hath fynnes
and scales in the waters, sees & ryuers, that shal ye eate.
10 But what so euer hath not fynnes and scales in the sees and ryuers, amonge
all yt moue in the waters, & of all that lyue in the waters, it shalbe an
abhominacion vnto you,
11 so that ye eate not of their flesh, and that ye abhorre their carcases.
12 For all that haue not fynnes & scales in the waters, shall ye abhorre.
13 And these shal ye abhorre amonge ye foules, so that ye eate them not: The
Aegle, the Goshauke, the Cormoraunte,
14 the Vultur, ye Ryce, and all his kynde,
15 and all Rauens wt their kynde:
16 the Estrich, ye Nightcrow, the Cocow, the Sparow hauke with his kynde,
17 the litle Oule, the Storke, the greate Oule,
18 ye Backe, the Pellycane, the Swanne, the Pye,
19 the Heron, ye Iaye with his kynde, the Lapwynge, and ye Swalowe.
20 And whatsoeuer crepeth amonge the foules, and goeth vpon foure fete, shalbe
an abhominacio vnto you.
21 Yet these shal ye eate of the foules that crepe and go vpon foure fete: euen
those that haue no knyes aboue vpon ye legges, to hoppe withall vpon earth.
22 Of these maye ye eate, as there is the Arbe with his kynde, and the Selaam
with his kynde, & the Hargol with his kynde, & the Hagab wt his kynde.
23 But what so euer els hath foure fete amonge the foules, it shalbe an
abhominacion vnto you,
24 and ye shal take it for vncleane. Who so euer toucheth the carcase of soch,
shall be vncleane vntill ye euen:
25 and who so euer beareth the carcase of eny of these, shall wash his clothes,
and shalbe vncleane vntyll the euen.
26 Therfore euery beest that hath hoffe, and deuydeth it not in to two clawes, &
cheweth not cud, shalbe vncleane vnto you. Who so euer toucheth soch, shalbe
vncleane.
27 And what so euer goeth vpon handes amonge ye beestes that go vpon foure fete,
shalbe vncleane vnto you. Who so euer toucheth the carcases of the, shalbe
vncleane vntyll euen.
28 And he yt beareth their carcase, shall wash his clothes, and be vncleane
vntyll the eue: For soch are vncleane vnto you.
29 These shalbe vncleane vnto you also, amonge the beestes that crepe vpon
earth: ye Wesell, the Mouse, the Tode, euery one with his kynde,
30 the Hedgehogge, the Stellio, the Lacerte, the Snale, and the Moule,
31 these are vncleane vnto you amonge all that crepe. Who so euer toucheth the
deed carcase of the, shalbe vncleane vntyll the euen.
32 And what so euer eny soch deed carcase falleth vpon, it shalbe vncleane, what
so euer vessell of wodd it be, or rayment, or skynne, or bagge. And euery
vessell that eny thinge is occupyed with all, shalbe put in the water, and is
vncleane vntyll the euen, and then shal it be cleane.
33 All maner of earthen vessell that eny soch carcase falleth in to, shal all be
vncleane that therin is, & ye shal breake it.
34 All meate which is eate, that eny soch water commeth in to, is vncleane: &
all maner of drynke that is dronke in all maner of soch vessell, is vncleane.
35 And what so euer eny soch carcase falleth vpo, it shalbe vncleane, whether it
be ouen or kettell, so shal it be broke, for it is vncleane, and shalbe vncleane
vnto you:
36 Neuertheles the fountaynes, welles, & poundes of water are cleane. But who so
euer toucheth their carcases, is vncleane.
37 And though the deed carcase of eny soch fell vpon the sede that is sowne, yet
is it cleane.
38 But whan there is water poured vpon the sede, and afterwarde eny soch deed
carcase falleth theron, then shall it be vncleane vnto you.
39 Whan a beest dyeth that ye maye eate, he that toucheth the deed carcase
therof, is vncleane vntyll euen.
40 Who so eateth of eny soch carcase, shall wash his clothes, and be vncleane
vntyll the euen. Likewyse he that beareth eny soch carcase, shal wash his
clothes, and be vncleane vntyll the euen.
41 What so euer crepeth vpon earth, shall be an abhominacion vnto you, and shall
not be eaten.
42 And what so euer crepeth vpon ye bely, or all that goeth vpon foure or mo
fete, amoge all that crepeth vpon earth, shall ye not eate, for it shalbe an
abhominacion vnto you.
43 Make not youre soules abhominable, and defyle you not in them, to stayne
youre selues:
44 for I am the LORDE youre God. Therfore shal ye sanctifie youre selues, that
ye maye be holy, for I am holy. And ye shal not defyle youre selues on eny maner
of crepynge beest, that crepeth vpon earth:
45 for I am the LORDE, which brought you out of the londe of Egipte, that I
might be youre God: therfore shal ye be holy, for I am holy.
46 This is the lawe ouer ye beestes and foules, & all maner of soules of
crepynge beestes in the waters, and all maner of soules yt crepe vpon earth:
47 that ye maie knowe to discerne what is vncleane & cleane, and what maner of
beestes are to be eaten, and which are not to be eaten.

Chapter 12

1 And the LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde:
2 Speake vnto the children of Israel, and saye: Whan a woman hath conceaued, and
beareth a manchilde, she shalbe vncleane seuen dayes, so longe as she suffreth
hir disease,
3 and in ye eight daye shal ye flesh of his foreskynne be cut awaie.
4 And she shal byde at home thre and thirtie dayes in ye bloude of hir
purifienge: she shal touch no holy thinge, ner come in to ye Sactuary, tyll the
daies of hir purifienge be out.
5 But yf she beare a maydechilde, the shal she be vncleane two wekes, so longe
as she suffreth hir disease, and sixe and thre score daies shall she byde at
home in the bloude of hir purifienge.
6 And whan the dayes of hir purifienge are out, for the sonne or for the
doughter, she shal brynge a lambe of one yeare olde for a burntofferynge, and a
yonge pigeon or a turtill doue for a synofferynge to the dore of ye Tabernacle
of wytnesse vnto ye prest,
7 which shal offre it before the LORDE, and make an attonemet for her, and so
shal she be clensed from hir bloudyssue. This is the lawe for her that beareth a
manchilde or mayde childe.
8 But yf she be not able to bringe a shepe, then let hir take two turtill doues,
or two yonge pigeons, the one for a burntofferynge, the other for a
synofferynge, then shall the prest make an attonement for her, so that she shal
be cleane.

Chapter 13

1 And ye LORDE spake vnto Moses & Aaron, & sayde:
2 Whan there ryseth vp eny thinge in the skynne of a mans flesh, whether it be a
scabbe or a glistrynge whyte (as though there wolde be a leprosy in ye skynne of
his flesh) he shal be brought vnto Aaron the prest, or to one of his sonnes
amonge ye prestes.
3 And whan the prest seyth the plage vpon the skynne of the flesh, that the
hayres are turned to whyte, and it seme deper in that place then the other
skynne of his flesh, then is it surely a leprosy, therfore shal the prest loke
vpon him, and iudge him vncleane.
4 But whan there is eny whyte plecke in the skynne of his flesh, and yet seme no
deper then the other skynne of the flesh, and the hayres be not turned to whyte,
the shal the prest shut him vp seuen dayes,
5 and on ye seuenth daye loke vpon him: yf the plage seme vnto him as afore, &
hath frett no deper in the skynne, then shall the prest shut him vp yet seuen
dayes mo.
6 And whan he loketh on him agayne vpon the seuenth daye, and fyndeth, that the
plage be darkish, and hath frett no deper in the skynne, the shal he iudge him
cleane, for it is but a skyrfe, and he shal wash his clothes, & then is he
cleane.
7 But whan the scabbe fretteth farther in the skynne (after that he is sene of
the prest, and iudged cleane) and he be now sene of the prest agayne:
8 whan the prest seyth the, yt the scabbe hath frett farther in the skynne, he
shal iudge him vncleane, for it is surely a leprosy.
9 Whan a plage of leprosy is vpo a man, he shalbe brought vnto the prest.
10 Whan he seyth and fyndeth, that there is whyte rysen vp in the skynne, and
the hayre turned vnto whyte, and there be rawe flesh in the sore,
11 the is it surely an olde leprosy in ye skynne of his flesh, therfore shal the
prest iudge him vncleane, and not shut him vp, for he is vncleane allready.
12 But whan the leprosy breaketh out in the skynne, and couereth the whole
skynne, from the heade vnto the fote, all that the prest can se,
13 So whan the prest loketh vpon it, and fyndeth, that ye leprosy hath couered
all the flesh, he shal iudge him cleane, for so moch as it is turned all in to
whyte vpon him, for he is cleane.
14 Notwithstodinge yf there be rawe flesh there, in the daye whan he is loked
vpon, the is he vncleane.
15 And whan the prest seyth ye rawe flesh, he shall iudge him vncleane, for he
is vncleane, & it is surely a leprosye.
16 But yf the rawe flesh chaunge agayne, and be turned in to whyte, then shall
he come vnto the prest.
17 And whan the prest loketh vpon him, and fyndeth, that the plage is turned to
whyte, he shall iudge him cleane, for he is cleane.
18 Whan there is a byle in the skynne of eny mans flesh, and healeth agayne,
19 and afterwarde in the same place there aryse vp eny whyte thinge, or a
glisterynge whyte somwhat reedish, he shal be sene of the prest.
20 So whan the prest, seyeth, that it appeareth to be lower then the other
skynne, and the hayre turned to whyte, then shall he iudge him vncleane, for it
is surely a plage of leprosye broken out of the byle.
21 But yf the prest se and fynde, that the hayres are not whyte, and it not
lower then the other skynne, and is darkysh, he shal shut him vp seuen dayes.
22 Yf it hath frett farther in the skynne, then shal he iudge him vncleane, for
it is surely a plage of leprosye.
23 But yf the glysterynge whyte abyde styll, and freate no farther, the is it
but a prynte of the byle, and the prest shal iudge him cleane.
24 Whan the skynne of eny mans flesh is hurt with fyre, and the prynte of the
burninge be reedysh or whyte,
25 and the prest loketh vpon him, and fyndeth the hayre turned to whyte vpon the
mark of the burnynge, & it apeare deper then the other skynne, the is there
surely a leprosy broke out of ye prynte of ye burnynge: therfore shal ye prest
iudge hi vncleane, for it is a plage of leprosye.
26 But yf the prest se and fynde, that ye hayre vpon the prynte of the burninge
is not turned vnto whyte, & is no lower then the other skynne, and is darkish
also, he shall shut him vp seuen dayes.
27 And vpon the seuenth daye he shall loke vpon him: yf it hath frett farther in
ye skynne, then shal he iudge him vncleane, for it is a leprosy.
28 But yf it stode styll vpo the mark of the burnynge, and frett no farther in
the skynne, and is darkysh, then is it a sore in ye mark of the burnynge, & the
prest shal iudge him cleane, for it is but the prynte of the burnynge.
29 Whan a man or woman is skyruye vpon the heade or beerd, and the prest seyth
the mark,
30 and fyndeth that it appeareth deper then the other skynne, and the hayre be
there golde and thynne, then shal he iudge him vncleane: for it is a skyrfe of
leprosy of the heade or of the beerde.
31 But yf the prest se that ye skyrfe apeare no deper the the skynne, and that
the hayre is not of a pale coloure, he shall shut him vp seue dayes.
32 And vpo the seuenth daye whan he loketh, and fyndeth, that the skyrfe hath
frett no farther, and there be no golden hayre there, and that the skyrfe
appeare no deper then the other skynne,
33 then let him be shauen: but so that he shaue not of the scabbe, and the prest
shall shut him vp yet seuen dayes moo.
34 And vpon the seueth daye wha he loketh, and fyndeth that the skyrfe hath
frett no farther in the skynne, and that it apeareth no deper then the other
skynne, then shall the prest iudge him cleane. And he shall wash his clothes,
for he is cleane.
35 But yf the scabbe freate farther in the skynne (after yt he is iudged cleane)
36 and the prest loketh, and fyndeth, that ye scabbe hath frett farther in the
skynne, then shal he seke nomore for golden hayres, for he is vncleane.
37 Neuerthelesse yf he se that the scabbe stondeth styll, & that pale hayres are
there rysen vp, then is ye scabbe hole, and he is cleane, therfore shall ye
prest iudge him to be cleane.
38 Wha there is eny glisteringe whyte vpo ye skynne of the flesh of a man or
woman,
39 and the prest seyth there that the glisterynge whyte vanysheth: then is it
but a whyte scabbe rysen vp in ye skynne, & he is cleane.
40 Whan the hayres fall out of the heade of a man or a woman, so that he is
balde, the same is cleane.
41 If they fall out of his fore heade, then is he fore heade balde & cleane.
42 But yf there be a whyte reedish sore in the balde heade, or balde fore heade,
then is there a leprosy rysen vp in the balde heade or balde foreheade:
43 therfore shal ye prest loke vpon him. And whan he fyndeth the whyte reedysh
sore rysen vp in his balde heade or balde foreheade, then shal ye skynne of the
flesh be as leporous,
44 therfore is he a leporous man and vncleane. And the prest shall iudge him
vncleane, because of ye same sore vpo his heade.
45 Who so now is leporous, his clothes shalbe rent, and the heade bare, & the
lippes moffled, and shall in eny wyse be called vncleane.
46 And as longe as the sore is vpon him, he shal be vncleane, dwell alone, and
haue his dwellinge without the hoost.
47 Whan the plage of leprosy is in a cloth, whether it be wollen or lynnen,
48 in the warpe or weft, whether it be lynnen or wollen, or in a skynne, or in
eny maner thynge that is made of skynne.
49 And whan ye plage is pale or reedish in the cloth or skynne, either in the
warpe or weft, or in eny maner thinge that is made of skynne, the same is surely
the plage of leprosy, therfore shall the prest loke vpon it.
50 And whan he seyth the plage, he shal shut it vp seuen dayes.
51 And vpon the seueth daye whan he seyth that ye plage hath frett farther in
the cloth, in the warpe or weft, in a skynne or in eny maner thinge that is made
of skynne, then is it a fretinge plage of leprosye, and is vncleane
52 .And the cloth shalbe burnt, either warpe or weft, whether it be wollen or
lynne, or eny thynge made of skynne, wherin is eny soch plage. For it is a plage
of leprosy, and shal be burnt wt fyre.
53 But yf the prest se that the plage hath frete no farther in ye cloth, either
in the warpe or weft, or eny thinge made of skynne,
54 then shal he commaunde to wash the thinge that the plage is in, and shall
shut it vp other seuen dayes.
55 And whan the prest seyth (after that the plage is wasshen) yt the plage is
not chauged before his eyes, and hath frett no farther also, yet is it vncleane,
& shalbe burnt wt fyre: for it is depe frete inwarde, and hath made skyrfes.
56 Neuertheles whan the prest seyth that the prynte is vanyshed after the
washinge of it, then shall he rente it out of the clothe, and of the skynne, out
of the warpe or weft.
57 But yf it appeare eny more in the clothe (either in the warpe, or in the
weft) or eny maner thinge made of skynne, then is it a waxinge plage: and with
fyre shal it be burnt that eny soch plage is in.
58 As for the cloth, either warpe or weft, or eny maner thynge made of skynne
that is wasshe, and the plage be departed from it, it shalbe wasshen once
agayne, & then is it cleane.
59 This is the lawe ouer the plage of leprosy in clothes, whether they be wollen
or lynne (ether in the warpe or in the weft) and in eny maner of thinge made of
sknne, to iudge them cleane or vncleane.

Chapter 14

1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
2 This is the lawe ouer ye leper, whan he shalbe clensed. He shall come vnto ye
prest,
3 and the prest shal go out of the hoost, and loke how the plage of leprosye is
healed vpon the leper.
4 And he shal commaunde him that is to be clensed, to take two lyuinge byrdes,
which are cleane, and Ceder wodd, and purple woll, and ysope:
5 and shall commaunde the one byrde to be kylled in an earthen vessell ouer
sprynginge water.
6 And he shall take the lyuynge byrde with the Ceder wodd, the purple woll, and
ysope, and dyppe them in the bloude of the slaine byrde vpon the springynge
water,
7 and sprenkle it seuen tymes vpon him that must be clensed from ye leprosy. And
so clense him, and let the lyuynge byrde flye at libertye in to the felde.
8 But he that is clensed, shal wash his clothes, and shaue of all his hayre, and
bathe him self with water, so is he cleane. Afterwarde let him go in to the
hoost, yet shall he tarye without his tent seuen dayes.
9 And vpon the seuenth daye shal he shaue of all ye hayre vpon his heade, vpo
his beerde, vpon his browes, so that all the hayre be shauen of, and he shall
wash his clothes and bathe his flesh in water, then is he cleane.
10 And vpo the eight daye shal he take two lambes without blemysh, and a shepe
of a yeare olde without blemysh, and thre tenth deales of fyne floure for a
meatofferynge, myngled with oyle, & a Logg of oyle.
11 The shall the prest presente him that is clensed and these thinges before the
LORDE, before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse,
12 and shal take ye one lambe, and offre it for trespace offerynge, with the
Logg of oyle, & shall waue them, before ye LORDE,
13 and afterwarde slaye the lambe, where the synofferynge and burntofferynge are
slayne, namely, in the holy place. For as the synofferynge, so is the trespace
offerynge the prestes also, for it is most holy.
14 And the prest shall take of the bloude of the trespace offerynge, and put it
vpon the typpe of ye right eare of him that is clesed, and vpon the thombe of
his right hande, and vpon the greate too of his right fote.
15 Afterwarde shall he take of the oyle out of the Logg, and poure it in to his
awne left hande,
16 and dyppe his right fynger in the oyle that is in his left hande, and
sprenkle the oyle with his fynger seuen tymes before the LORDE.
17 As for the remnaunt of the oyle in his hande, he shall put it vpon the typpe
of the right eare of him that is clensed, and vpon the thombe of his right
hande, & vpon the greate too of his right fote, euen aboue vpon the bloude of
the trespace offerynge.
18 But the remnaunt of the oyle in his hande, shall he poure vpon the heade of
him that is clensed, and make an attonement for him before the LORDE.
19 And he shall make the synofferynge, and reconcyle him that is clesed, because
of his vnclennesse. And afterwarde shall he sleye the burntofferynge,
20 and shal offre it vpon the altare with the meatofferynge, and make an
attonement for him, & than is he cleane.
21 But yf he be poore, and getteth not so moch with his hande, then let him take
one lambe for a trespaceofferynge to waue it, to make an attonement for him, and
a tenth deale of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge, and a Logg
of oyle,
22 & two turtyll doues, or two yonge pigeons which he is able to get with his
hande, let the one be a synofferynge, the other a burntofferynge:
23 and let him brynge them vpon the eight daye of his clensynge vnto the prest
before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse before the LORDE.
24 Then shall the prest take the lambe for the synofferynge, and the Logg of
oyle, and shall waue them all before the LORDE,
25 and sley the lambe of the trespace offerynge: and take of ye bloude of the
same trespaceofferynge, and put it vpon the typpe of the righte eare of him that
is clensed, and vpon the thombe of his right hande, and vpon the greate too of
his righte fote,
26 and poure of the oyle in to his awne lefte hande,
27 and with his right fynger sprenkle the oyle that is in his left hande, seuen
tymes before the LORDE.
28 As for the remnaunt of the oyle in his hande, he shal put it vpon the typpe
of the right eare of him that is clensed, and vpon the thombe of his right
hande, & vpon the greate too of his right fote, euen aboue vpo ye bloude of ye
trespaceofferynge.
29 The other oyle in his hade shal he poure vpo ye heade of him yt is clensed,
to make an attonement for him before the LORDE.
30 And afterwarde of the one of the turtill doues or yonge pigeons (acordinge as
his handes are able to get)
31 he shal make a synofferynge, of ye other a burntofferynge, with the
meatofferynge: and so shal the prest make an attonemet for him that is clensed
before the LORDE.
32 Let this be the lawe for the leper, which is not able with his hande to get,
that belongeth vnto his clensynge.
33 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses and Aaron, and sayde:
34 Whan ye are come in to the lande of Canaan, which I geue you to possesse: and
yf there happen a plage of leprosy in any house of youre possession,
35 then shal he that oweth the house, come and tell the prest, and saye: Me
thynke there is as it were a plage of leprosy in my house.
36 Then shal the prest commaunde to rydde all thynge out of the house or euer
the prest go in to se ye plage, lest all that is in the house be made vncleane.
Afterwarde shall ye prest go in, to se the plage.
37 Now whan he loketh, and fyndeth, yt there be holowe strakes yalowe or reedish
in the walles of the house, & they seme to be lower then the wall besyde,
38 then shall he go out at the dore of the house, and shut vp the house for
seuen dayes.
39 And vpon the seuenth daye whan he commeth, and seyth that the plage hath
fretten farther in the walles of the house,
40 the shall he commaunde to breake out the stones wherin the plage is, & to
cast the in a foule place without the cite,
41 & the house to be scraped within rounde aboute, and the dust yt is scraped
of, to be poured without ye cite in an vncleane place,
42 & to take other stones, and put them in the place of the other, and to take
other playster, and playster the house.
43 Whan the plage then commeth agayne, and breaketh forth in the house, after yt
the stones are broke out, the playster scraped of, and the house playsterd of
the new,
44 the shal the prest go in: and whan he seyth that the plage hath fretten
farther in the house, then is there surely a fretinge leprosy in the house, and
it is vncleane:
45 therfore shal the house be broken downe, both the stones, and ye tymber and
all the dust of the house, and shal be caried out of the cite in to an vncleane
place.
46 And who so goeth into the house, whyle it is shut vp, is vncleane vntyll ye
euen.
47 And he yt lyeth therin, or eateth therin, shal wash his clothes.
48 But yf the prest se (wha he goeth in) that this plage hath frett no farther
in the house, after that the house is new playsterd, the shal he iudge it to be
cleane, for the plage is healed.
49 And to a synofferinge for the house, he shal take two byrdes, Ceder wodd, &
purple woll, and ysope,
50 and slaye the one byrde in an erthen vessell vpon sprynginge water,
51 and shall take the Ceder wodd, the purple woll, the ysope, and the lyuinge
byrde, & dyppe them in the bloude of the slayne byrde vpon the sprynginge water,
and sprenkle the house with all seue tymes:
52 and so shal he purifie the house with the bloude of the byrde, with the
springinge water, with the lyuinge byrde, with the Ceder wodd, with the ysope,
and with the purple woll.
53 And the lyuynge byrde shall he let flye at libertye out of the towne in to
the felde, & make an attonement for the house, and then is it cleane.
54 This is the lawe ouer all maner plage of leprosye & skyrfe,
55 ouer ye leprosye of clothes and of houses,
56 ouer sores, scabbes, and glisterynge whyte,
57 that it maye be knowne, whan eny thinge is vncleane or cleane. This is ye
lawe of leprosy.

Chapter 15

1 And the LORDE talked with Moses and Aaron, and sayde:
2 Speake to the children of Israel, and saie vnto him: Whan a man hath a
runnynge yssue from out of his flesh, ye same is vncleane: but the is he
vncleane by the reason of this yssue,
3 whan his flesh is fretten of ye yssue or wounde.
4 Euery bed where on he lyeth, & what so euer he sytteth vpon, shalbe vncleane.
5 And he that toucheth his bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe him self with
water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen.
6 And he yt sytteth where he sat, shal wash his clothes, and bathe him self with
water, and be vncleane vntyll the eue.
7 Who so toucheth his flesh, shall wash his clothes, & bathe him self with
water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen.
8 Whan he spytteth vpon him that is cleane, ye same shal wash his clothes, and
bathe him self with water, & be vncleane vntyll the euen.
9 And the saddell and what so euer he rydeth vpo, shalbe vncleane.
10 And who so euer toucheth eny thinge that hath bene vnder him, shalbe vncleane
vntyll the euen. And who so beareth eny soch, shall wash his clothes, and bathe
him self with water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen.
11 And whom so euer he toucheth, and washeth not his handes first, the same shal
wash his clothes, and bathe him self with water, and be vncleane vntyll the
euen.
12 Whan he toucheth an erthen vessell, it shal be broken: but the treen vessell
shal be rensed wt water.
13 And wha he is cleane of his yssue, he shal nombre vij. dayes, after yt he is
made cleane, & wash his clothes, & bathe him self wt sprynginge water, the is he
cleane.
14 And vpon the eight daye shal he take two turtill doues or two yonge pigeos,
and brynge them before the LORDE before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse,
and geue them vnto the prest.
15 And the prest shal make of the one a synofferinge, of the other a
burntofferynge, and make an attonement for him before the LORDE, as concernynge
his yssue.
16 Whan a mans sede departeth from him in slepe, the same shal bathe all his
flesh wt water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen.
17 And all clothes, and euery skynne that is stained with soch sede, shall he
wash with water, & be vncleane vntyll the euen.
18 A woman, by whom soch one lyeth, shall bathe hir self wt water, and be
vncleane vntyll the euen.
19 Whan a woman hath the bloude yssue of hir flesh, she shalbe put a parte vij.
daies in to a sundrie place. Who so euer toucheth her, shal be vncleane vntyll
the eue.
20 And all that she lyeth vpon (as longe as she is put aparte) shalbe vncleane.
21 And that she sytteth vpo, shalbe vncleane. And who so euer toucheth hir bed,
shal wash his clothes, and bathe him self with water, and be vncleane vntyll the
euen.
22 And who so euer toucheth eny maner thinge that she hath sytten vpo, shal wash
his clothes, and bathe him self with water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen.
23 (Omitted Text)
24 And yf a man lye with her (whyle she is put a parte) he shalbe vncleane seuen
dayes, and the bed that he laye vpon, shalbe vncleane.
25 But whan a woman hath hir bloude yssue a longe season, not onely at the tyme
of hir naturall course, but also out of the tyme of hir naturall course, then
shall she be vncleane so longe as she hath the yssue: eue as she is at the tyme
whan she is put aparte,
26 so shall she be vncleane here also. What so euer she lyeth vpon all the tyme
of hir yssue, shalbe as hir bed, whan she is put aparte. And all that she
sytteth vpon, shalbe vncleane, as is hir vnclennesse, whan she is put aparte.
27 Who so euer toucheth eny of them, shal be vncleane, and shal wash his
clothes, and bathe him self with water, & be vncleane vntyll the euen.
28 But yf she be cleane of hir yssue, the shal she nombre seuen dayes,
afterwarde shall she be cleane:
29 and vpon the eight daye shall she take two turtill doues, or two yonge
pigeons, and brynge them vnto the prest before the dore of the Tabernacle of
wytnesse.
30 And the prest shall make of the one a synofferynge, of the other a
burntofferynge, and make an attonement for her before the LORDE, as concernynge
the yssue of hir vnclenesse.
31 Thus shal ye se that the childre of Israel kepe them selues from their
vnclenesse, that they dye not in their vnclennesse, whan they defyle my
habitacion, which is amoge you.
32 This is the lawe ouer him that hath a runnynge sore, & him whose sede
departeth from him in slepe, so that he is vncleane therof.
33 And ouer her that hath hir bloude yssue, and who so euer hath a runnynge
sore, whether it be man or woman, and whan a man lyeth with her that is
vncleane.

Chapter 16

1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses (after that Aarons two sonnes were deed, whan
they offered before the LORDE) & sayde:
2 Speake vnto Aaron thy brother, yt he go not at all tymes in to ye ynnermer
Sanctuary, within the vale before the Mercyseate, which is vpon the Arke, yt he
dye not: for I wyll appeare in a cloude vpon ye Mercyseate.
3 But herewithall shal he go in, euen with a yonge bullocke for a synofferynge,
and with a ramme for a burntofferynge,
4 and shal put on the holy lynnen albe, and haue lynnen breches vpon his flesh,
and gyrde him with a lynne girdell, and haue the lynnen myter vpon his heade.For
these are ye holy garmentes: & he shal bathe his flesh with water, & put them
on:
5 & of the cogregacion of the childre of Israel he shal take two he goates for a
synofferynge, and a ramme for a burntofferynge.
6 And Aaron shal brynge the bullocke his owne synofferynge, and make an
attonemet for himself and his house:
7 and afterwarde shall he take the two goates, and present them before the
LORDE, euen before the dore of the Tabernacle of witnesse,
8 and shall cast lottes ouer the two goates: the lot of the one goate for the
LORDE, and the other for the fre goate.
9 And the goate that ye LORDES lot fell vpon, shal he offre for a synofferynge.
10 But the goate, that the fre goates lot fell vpon, shal he present a lyue
before ye LORDE, to make an attonement for him, and to let the fre goate go into
ye wyldernes.
11 And so shal he brynge the bullocke of his synofferynge, and make an
attonement for him and his housholde, and shal kyll him.
12 And he shall take a censor full of coales from the altare that stondeth
before the LORDE, and his handfull of beaten incense, and brynge them in within
ye vayle,
13 and put the incense vpon the fyre before ye LORDE, that the cloude of the
incense maye couer the Mercyseate, which is vpon the witnesse, that he dye not.
14 And he shall take of the bloude of the bullocke, and sprenkle it with his
fynger towarde the Mercyseate on the foresyde. Seuen tymes
15 shall be sprenkle of the bloude thus with his fynger before the Mercyseate.
The shal he kyll the goate which is the peoples synofferynge, & brynge in of his
bloude within the vayle, & shall do with his bloude, as he dyd with the bloude
of the bullocke, and sprenkle therwith also on the foresyde towarde the
Mercyseate,
16 and so shal he reconcyle the Sactuary from the vnclennesse of the childre of
Israel, and fro their trespaces in all their synnes. Thus shal he do vnto the
Tabernacle of wytnesse, which is the habitacion with them amoge their
vnclennesses.
17 No man shalbe in the Tabernacle of witnesse, whan he goeth in to make an
attonement in the Sactuary, vntyll he go out: and so shall he make an attonement
for him self and his house, and for the whole congregacion of Israel.
18 And wha he goeth forth vnto the altare that stondeth before the LORDE, he
shal reconcyle it, and shal take of ye bullockes bloude, and of the goates
bloude, & put it vpon the hornes of the altare rounde aboute.
19 And with his fynger shal he sprekle of the bloude theron seuen tymes, and
halowe it, and consecrate it from the vnclennesse of the children of Israel.
20 And whan he hath made an ende of reconcylinge the Sanctuary, and the
Tabernacle of witnesse, and the altare, he shal bringe the lyuynge goate.
21 The shal Aaron laie both his hades vpo ye heade of him, & confesse ouer him
all the mysdedes of ye childre of Israel, & all their trespaces in their synnes,
& shal laye the vpo ye heade of the goate, & by some man yt is at hande, shal he
let him runne in to the wildernes:
22 yt the goate maye so beare all their mysdedes vpon him in to ye wyldernesse,
and he shal leaue him in the wyldernesse.
23 And Aaron shal go in to the Tabernacle of witnesse, and put of the lynnen
clothes, which he put on wha he wente in to ye Sactuary, and shal leaue them
there,
24 and bathe his flesh with water in the holy place, and put on his awne
rayment. And he shal go forth, and make his burntofferinge, and the
burntofferinge of the people, and make an attonement both for himself and for
the people,
25 and burne the fat of the synofferynge vpon the altare.
26 But he yt caried out the fre goate, shal wash his clothes, and bathe him self
with water, & then come in to the hoost.
27 The bullocke of the synofferynge, and ye goate of the synofferynge (whose
bloude was brought in to the Sanctuary to make an attonemet) shalbe caried out
of ye hoost, & brent with fyre, both their skynnes, flesh, and donge.
28 And he that burneth them, shal wash his clothes, and bathe him self with
water, and then come in to the hoost.
29 And this shalbe a perpetuall lawe vnto you: Vpon the tenth daye of the
seuenth moneth shal ye humble youre soules, and do no worke, whether it be one
of youre selues, or a straunger amonge you.
30 For in this daye is youre attonemet made, that ye maye be clensed from all
youre synnes before the LORDE:
31 therfore shall it be a fre Sabbath vnto you, and ye shal humble youre soules.
Let this be a perpetuall lawe.
32 But the prest that is anoynted, and whose hande was fylled to be prest in his
fathers steade, shal make this attonement, and shal put on the lynnen clothes,
namely the holy vestimetes,
33 so shal he recocyle the holy Sactuary, and the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and
the altare, and ye prestes, and all the people of the congregacion.
34 This shal be a perpetuall lawe vnto you, that ye reconcyle ye children of
Israel from all their synnes once a yeare. And Moses dyd, as the LORDE
commaunded him.

Chapter 17

1 And ye LORDE talked with Moses, & sayde:
2 Speake vnto Aaron & his sonnes, & to all ye childre of Israel, & saye vnto
them: This is it that ye LORDE hath commaunded:
3 What so euer he be of ye house of Israel, yt kylleth an oxe, or labe, or goate
in the hoost, or out of the hoost,
4 and bryngeth it not before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse, that it
maye be brought vnto the LORDE for an offerynge before the Habitacion of ye
LORDE, the same shal be giltie of bloude, as though he had shed bloude, and soch
a man shalbe roted out from amonge his people.
5 Therfore shall the children of Israel brynge their offerynges (that they wyll
offre vpon the wyde felde) before the LORDE, euen before the dore of the
Tabernacle of witnesse, vnto the prest, & there offre their healthofferynges
vnto the LORDE.
6 And the prest shal sprenkle the bloude vpon the altare of the LORDE before the
dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and burne the fat for a swete sauoure vnto
the LORDE:
7 and they shall offre their offerynges nomore vnto deuels, with whom they go a
whorynge. This shal be a perpetuall lawe vnto them amonge their posterities.
8 Therfore shalt thou saie vnto the: What man so euer he be of the house of
Israel, or a straunger also that is amonge you, which offereth a burntofferynge
or eny other offerynge,
9 and bringeth it not before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse to offre it
vnto the LORDE, he shal be roted out from amoge his people.
10 And what man so euer it be (either of the house of Israel, or a straunger
amonge you) that eateth eny maner of bloude, agaynst him wyll I set my face, and
wil rote him out from amonge his people:
11 for the soule of ye body is in the bloude, and I haue geuen it you for the
altare, that youre soules maye be reconcyled ther with:
12 For the bloude that is in the soule maketh attonement. Therfore haue I sayde
vnto the children of Israel: No soule amonge you shall eate bloude, no ner eny
straunger that dwelleth amonge you.
13 And what man so euer it be amonge you (whether he be of the house of Israel,
or a straunger amoge you) that at the huntynge taketh a beest or foule which
maye be eaten, he shall poure out the bloude of the same, & couer it with earth:
14 for all flesh lyueth in the bloude. And I haue sayde vnto the children of
Israel: Ye shall eate the bloude of no body: for the life of all flesh is in his
bloude. Who so euer eateth it, shalbe roted out.
15 And what so euer soule eateth that which dyed alone, or yt was torne of wylde
beestes (whether he be one of youre selues or a straunger) the same shal wash
his clothes, and bathe himself with water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen, and
then is he cleane.
16 But yf he wash not his clothes, nor bathe him self, then shal he beare his
synne.

Chapter 18

1 And the LORDE talked wt Moses, & saide:
2 Speake vnto the childre of Israel, & saye vnto them: I am the LORDE youre God,
3 Ye shall not do after ye workes of the lande of Egipte, wherin ye dwelt:
nether after the doynges of the lande of Canaan, in to the which I will brynge
you. Ye shal not walke after their customes,
4 but after my lawes shall ye do, & my statutes shall ye kepe, that ye maye
walke therin: for I am the LORDE youre God.
5 Therfore shal ye kepe my statutes and my lawes. For the man that doth the
same, shal liue therin, for I am the LORDE.
6 No ma shal come at his nexte kinswoma, to vncouer hir preuytie: for I am ye
LORDE.
7 Thou shalt not vncouer ye preuytie of yi father & of yi mother. It is thy
mother, therfore shalt thou not vncouer hir preuytie.
8 Thou shalt not vncouer ye preuytie of yi fathers wife, for it is yi fathers
preuytie.
9 Thou shalt not vncouer the preuytie of thy sister, which is the doughter of yi
father or of yi mother, whether she be borne at home or without.
10 Thou shalt not vncouer the preuytie of thy sonnes doughter, or of thy
doughters doughter, for it is thine awne preuytie.
11 Thou shalt not vncouer ye preuytie of yi fathers wiues doughter, which is
borne vnto him, and is thy sister.
12 Thou shalt not vncouer the preuytie of thy fathers sister, for it is thy
fathers nexte kynswoman.
13 Thou shalt not vncouer the preuytie of thy mothers sister, for it is yi
mothers nexte kynswoman.
14 Thou shalt not vncouer the preuytie of thy fathers brother, to take his wife,
for she is thine awnte.
15 Thou shalt not vncouer ye preuytie of yi doughter in lawe, for she is yi
sonnes wife, therfore shalt thou not vncouer hir preuitie.
16 Thou shalt not vncouer the preuytie of thy brothers wife, for it is thy
brothers preuytie.
17 Thou shalt not vncouer the preuytie of thy wife and of hir doughter also,
nether shalt thou take hir sonnes doughter or hir doughters doughter, to vncouer
their preuyties, for they are hir nexte kynswomen. And it is wickednesse.
18 Thou shalt not take a wife and hir sister also, to vncouer hir preuytie,
whyle she is yet alyue.
19 Thou shalt not go vnto a woman to vncouer hir preuytie, so longe as she hath
hir disease in hir vnclennesse.
20 Thou shalt not lye with thy neghbours wife to medle with her, for to defyle
thy self withall.
21 Thou shalt not geue of thy sede also, to be burnt vnto Moloch, lest thou
vnhalowe the name of thy God, for I am the LORDE.
22 Thou shalt not lye with mankynde as with womankynde, for yt is abhominacion.
23 Thou shalt lye with no maner of beest, to defyle yi self therwith. And no
woman shal haue to do wt a beest, for it is abhominacion.
24 Ye shal defyle youre selues in none of these thinges. For ye Heithen (whom I
wil cast out before you) haue stayned them selues in all these,
25 and the londe is defyled there thorow. And their wickednesse wyl I vyset vpo
them, so that the londe shal spue out the indwellers therof.
26 Therfore kepe ye my statutes and lawes, and do not one of these
abhominacions, nether one of youre awne selues ner the straunger amonge you
27 (for all soch abhominacions haue ye people of this lode done which were
before you, & haue defyled the lande)
28 that the lande spue not you out also, whan ye haue defyled it, as it spewed
out the Heythe, that were there before you.
29 For who so euer commytte these abhominacios, the same soules shalbe roted out
from amonge their people.
30 Therfore kepe ye my statutes, that ye do not after ye abhominable customes,
which were before you, that ye be not defyled therwith: For I am the LORDE youre
God.

Chapter 19

1 And the LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde:
2 Speake to the whole congregacion of the children of Israel, and saye vnto
them: Ye shall be holy, for I am holy, euen the LORDE youre God.
3 Euery one feare his father and his mother. Kepe my holy dayes: for I am the
LORDE youre God.
4 Ye shal not turne youre selues vnto Idols, & ye shal make you no goddes of
metall: for I am the LORDE youre God.
5 And whan ye wyll offre health offerynges vnto the LORDE, then shal ye offre
the, that he maye be mercifull vnto you,
6 and ye shal eate them the same daye that ye offre them, and on the morow: what
so euer is left on the thirde daye, shalbe burnt with fyre.
7 But yf eny man eate therof vpon the thirde daye, then is he vnholy, and shall
not be accepted,
8 and the same eater shal beare his synne, because he hath vnhalowed the
Sanctuary of the LORDE: and soch a soule shalbe roted out from amonge his
people.
9 Whan thou reapest thy londe, thou shalt not reape downe the vttemost borders
of it rounde aboute, ner gather it all cleane vp.
10 Euen so likewyse thou shalt not plucke thy vynyarde cleane also, ner gather
vp the grapes that are fallen downe, but shalt leaue them for ye poore and
straungers: for I am the LORDE youre God.
11 Ye shal not steale, nether lye, ner deale falsely one with another.
12 Ye shal not sweare falsely by my name, & so to vnhalowe the name of thy God:
for I am the LORDE.
13 Thou shalt do yi neghboure no wronge, ner robbe him. The workmas laboure shal
not byde with the vntyll the mornynge.
14 Thou shalt not curse the deaf. Thou shalt put no stomblynge blocke before ye
blinde, but shalt feare thy God: for I am the LORDE.
15 Ye shall not deale wrongeously in iudgment, nether shal ye accepte the
personne of the poore, ner honoure the parsonne of the greate, but thou shalt
iudge thy neghboure righteously.
16 Thou shalt let no preuy accuser go amoge ye people. Nether shalt thou stonde
agaynst yi neghbours bloude: for I am ye LORDE.
17 Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine hert, but shalt tell yi neghboure
his faute, that thou beare not synne for his sake.
18 Thou shalt not auenge thy self, ner beare euell will agaynst the childre of
thy people. Thou shalt loue thy neghboure, as thy self: for I am the LORDE.
19 My statutes shal ye kepe, that thou let not yi catell gendre with beestes of
another kynde: nether sowe thy felde with myngled sede. And let no garment come
vpon the, yt is mixte with wollen and lynnen.
20 Whan a man lyeth with a woman, and hath to do with her, which is a bonde
woman, and hath bene medled withall of another man, but not lowsed out, ner hath
optayned fredome, it shalbe punyshed, but they shal not suffre death, because
she was not fre.
21 But he shal brynge for his trespace vnto ye LORDE (euen before the dore of
the Tabernacle of wytnesse) a ramme for a trespace offerynge:
22 and the prest shal make an attonement for him with the trespace offerynge
before the LORDE, concernynge the synne that he hath done: so shall God be
mercifull vnto him, as concernynge his synne which he hath done.
23 What tyme as ye are come in to the londe and plante all maner trees wherof
men eate, ye shall circumcise the foreskynne of the same with their frutes: thre
yeares shall ye holde them for vncircumcysed, so that ye eate them not:
24 but in the fourth yeare shall all their frutes be holy and praysed vnto ye
LORDE.
25 In the fifth yeare shall ye eate the frutes, and gather them in: for I am ye
LORDE youre God.
26 Ye shal eate nothinge wt bloude. Ye shall not regarde ye foules cryenge, ner
chose out dayes.
27 Ye shal shaue no crownes vpo youre heade, nether shalt thou clyppe thy beerde
cleane off.
28 Ye shal rente out no markes in youre body (for eny that is deed) ner make
lettres vpo you: for I am the LORDE.
29 Thou shalt not holde thy doughter to whordome, that the londe fall not to
whordome, and waxe full of wickednesse.
30 Repe my holy dayes, and stonde in awe of my Sanctuary; for I am the LORDE.
31 Ye shal not turne yor selues to ye Soythsayers, and axe nothinge at the
expounders of tokes, that ye be not defyled by them: for I am the LORDE youre
God.
32 Thou shalt ryse vp before a graye heade, and shalt geue reuerence vnto the
aged. For thou shalt feare God: for I am ye LORDE.
33 Whan there dwelleth a straunger amonge you in youre londe, ye shall not vexe
him.
34 He shal dwell with you, euen as one that is at home amonge you, & thou shalt
loue him as yi self: for ye youre selues also were straungers in the lande of
Egipte. I am the LORDE youre God.
35 Ye shal not deale wrogeously in iudgmet, with meteyarde, with weight, with
measure:
36 A true balaunce, a true weight, a true Epha, a true Hin shalbe amoge you. For
I am the LORDE youre God, which brought you out of the londe of Egipte,
37 that ye shulde kepe & do all my statutes and lawes: for I am the LORDE.

Chapter 20

1 And the LORDE talked with Moses, and saide:
2 Tell the children of Israel: Who so euer he be amonge the children of Israel,
(or eny straunger that dwelleth in Israel) which geueth of his sede vnto Moloch,
the same shall dye the death: the people of the lande shal stone him,
3 & I wyll set my face agaynst that man, and wyll rote him out from amoge his
people, because he hath geuen of his sede vnto Moloch, and defyled my Sanctuary,
& vnhalowed my holy name.
4 And though the people of the londe loke thorow the fyngers vpon that man,
which hath geuen of his sede unto Moloch, so that they put him not to death,
5 yet wyl I set my face agaynst the same man, & agaynst his generacion: And him,
and all that go a whorynge with him after Moloch, wyll I rote out from amonge
their people.
6 If eny soule turne him to ye soythsayers and expounders of tokens, so that he
goeth a whorynge after them, I wyl set my face agaynst the same soule, and wyl
rote him out from amonge his people.
7 Sanctifie youre selues therfore, & be holy: for I am holy euen youre God.
8 And kepe ye my statutes, and do them: for I am ye LORDE that sanctifieth you.
9 Who so euer curseth his father or his mother, shall dye the death: his bloude
be vpon him, because he hath cursed his father or mother.
10 He that breaketh wedlocke with eny mas wife, shal dye the death (both the
aduouterer and ye aduouteresse) because he hath broken wedlocke with his
neghbours wife.
11 Yf eny man lye with his fathers wife, so yt he vncouer his fathers preuyte,
they shal both dye the death: their bloude be vpo the.
12 Yf eny man lye wt his doughter in lawe, they shall dye both of them, for they
have wrought abhominacion: their bloude be vpon them.
13 Yf eny man lye with the mankynde, as with womankynde, they haue wrought
abhominacion, & shal both dye the death: their bloude be vpon them.
14 If eny man take a wyfe, and hir mother therto, the same hath wrought
wickednes: he shalbe burnt with fyre, and so shal they also, that there be no
wickednes amoge you.
15 Yf eny man lye with a beest, he shall dye the death, and the beest shal be
slayne.
16 If a woman medle with a beest, so yt she haue to do wt it, thou shalt put her
to death, and the beest also, they shall dye the death: their bloude be vpon
them.
17 Yf eny man take his sister, his fathers doughter, or his mothers doughter,
and se hir preuyte, and she agayne se his secretes, it is a wicked thinge. They
shalbe roted out in the sight of their people. For he hath vncouered his sisters
preuyte, he shal beare his synne.
18 Yf a man lye with a woman in the tyme of hir sicknesse, and vncouer hir
secretes, & open vp hir founteyne, and she vncouer the fountayne of hir bloude,
they shall both be roted out from amonge their people.
19 Thou shalt not vncouer the preuytie of thy mothers sister, and of thy fathers
sister: for soch one hath vncouered his nexte kynswoman, and they shal beare
their synne.
20 Yf eny man lye with his vncles wyfe, the same hath vncovered the preuytie of
his uncle: they shall beare their synne, without children shal they dye.
21 Yf eny man take his brothers wyfe, yt is an vncleane thinge: they shalbe
without children, because he hath vncouered his brothers secretes.
22 So kepe now all my statutes & my lawes, & do them, yt the lode whither I
brynge you to dwell therin, spewe you not out.
23 And walke not ye in ye statutes of the Heithen, which I shal cast out before
you. For all soch thinges haue they done, & I haue abhorred the.
24 But I saye vnto you: Ye shall possesse their londe. For I wyll geue you to
enheritaunce a lode, that floweth with mylke and hony. I am the LORDE youre God,
which haue separated you from the nacions,
25 that ye also shulde separate the cleane beestes fro the vncleane, and the
vncleane foules from the cleane: & not to defyle youre soules vpon beestes, vpon
foules & vpon all that crepeth on the grounde: which I haue separated vnto you,
that they shulde be vncleane.
26 Therfore shall ye be holy vnto me: for I the LORDE am holy, which haue
separated you fro the nacions, that ye shulde be myne.
27 Yf a man or woman be a soythsayer or an expounder of tokens, the same shall
dye the death: they shalbe stoned, their bloude be vpon them.

Chapter 21

1 And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Speake to ye prestes ye sonnes of Aaron, &
saye vnto the: A prest shal defyle him self vpo no soule of his people,
2 but vpon his nexte kynne yt belongeth vnto him: as vpon his mother, vpo his
father, vpo his sonne, vpo his doughter, vpon his brother,
3 & vpon his sister, which is yet a virgin, & hath bene no mans wife (which
belongeth vnto him) vpon her maie he defyle himself.
4 Morouer he shal not defyle him self vpo eny ruler in his people, to vnhalowe
him self.
5 He shall make no crowne also vpon his heade, ner shaue of his beerd, nether
shall they cut out eny markes i their fleshe.
6 They shalbe holy vnto their God, and not vnhalowe ye name of their God: for
they offre the sacrifice of the LORDE, the bred of their God, therfore shal they
be holy.
7 They shal take no whore, ner one that is defyled, or yt is put awaye from hir
husbande, for he is holy vnto his God:
8 therfore shal he sanctifie him self, for he offreth the bred of thy God. He
shal be holy vnto the, for I am holy, even the LORDE that sanctifieth you.
9 Yf a prestes doughter fall to whoringe, she shalbe burnt with fyre, for she
hath shamed hir father.
10 He that is hye prest amonge his brethren, vpo whose heade the anoyntinge oyle
is poured, and his hande fylled (yt he might be arayed with the vestimentes)
shal not vncouer his heade, ner cut his clothes,
11 & shal come at no deed, & shal defyle him self nether vpon father ner mother.
12 He shall not go out of the Sanctuary, that he vnhalowe not the Sanctuary of
his God. For ye crowne of the anoyntinge oyle of his God is vpon him, for I am
the LORDE.
13 A virgin shal he take to wife,
14 but no wedowe, ner deuorsed, ner defyled, ner whore, but a virgin of his awne
people shal he take to wife,
15 yt he vnhalowe not his sede amonge his people. For I am ye LORDE, which
sanctifie him.
16 And ye LORDE talked wt Moses, & sayde:
17 Speake vnto Aaron, & saie: Yf there be a blemysh vpo eny of yi sede in yor
generacions, the same shal not preasse to offre the bred of his God:
18 For who so euer hath a blemysh vpon him, shal not come nere, whether he be
blynde, lame, with an euell fauoured nose, wt eny mysshappen membre,
19 or yt hath a broken fote or hande,
20 or is croke backed, or hath eny blemysh in the eye, or is gleyd, or is
skyrvye or scaulde, or hath his stones broken.
21 Who so euer now of the sede of Aaron ye prest hath eny blemysh vpo him, shal
not come nye to offre ye sacrifice of the LORDE. For he hath a deformyte.
Therfore shall he not preasse vnto the bred of his God, to offre it.
22 Notwithstondinge he shal eate of the bred of his God, both of the holy, & of
ye most holy:
23 but he shal not go into ye vayle, ner come nye the altare (for so moch as he
hath a blemysh vpo him) yt he vnhalowe not my Sactuary. For I am ye LORDE yt
sanctifieth the.
24 And Moses spake this vnto Aaron & to his sonnes, and to all the children of
Israel.

Chapter 22

1 And the LORDE talked with Moses, & sayde:
2 Speake vnto Aaron, & his sonnes, yt they absteyne from ye halowed thinges of
the childre of Israel, which they haue halowed vnto me, & yt they vnhalowe not
my holy name: for I am ye LORDE.
3 Saie now vnto them & their posterities: Who so euer he be of yor sede, yt
commeth nye vnto the holy thinges, which the childre of Israel halowe vnto the
LORDE, & so defyleth him self vpon the same, his soule shal perishe before my
face: for I am the LORDE.
4 Who so euer of the sede of Aaron is a leper, or hath a runnynge yssue, shall
not eate of the holy thinges, tyll he be clensed. Who so toucheth eny vncleane
thinge, or whose sede departeth from him by night,
5 or who so toucheth eny worme that is vncleane vnto him, or a ma yt is vncleane
vnto him,
6 & what so euer defyleth hi, loke what soule toucheth eny soch, is vncleane
vntyll the euen, & shall not eate of the holy thinges, but shall first bath his
flesh with water.
7 And wha ye Sonne is gone downe, and he cleane, then maye he eate therof, for
it is his foode.
8 Loke what dyeth alone, or is rent of wylde beestes, shall he not eate, yt he
be not vncleane theron: for I am ye LORDE.
9 Therfore shal they kepe my lawe, yt they lade not synne vpon them, & dye
therin, whan they vnhalowe them selues in it. For I am ye LORDE, yt halowe them.
10 A straunger shal not eate of the holy thinges, ner an housholde gest of the
prestes, ner an hyred seruaut.
11 But yf ye prest bye a soule for his money, ye same maye eate therof. And loke
who is borne in his house, maye eate of his bred also.
12 Neuertheles yf the prestes doughter be a straungers wife, she shal not eate
of the Heueofferinges of holynes.
13 But yf she be a wedowe, or deuorced, or haue no sede, & commeth agayne to hir
fathers house as a fore (whan she was yet a mayden in hir fathers house) then
shall she eate of hir fathers bred. But no strauger shal eate therof.
14 Who so els eateth of the halowed thynges, vnwyttingly, shal put ye fifth
parte there vnto, and geue it vnto the prest with the halowed thinge,
15 that they vnhalowe not ye halowed thinges of the children of Israel, which
they Heue vp vnto the LORDE,
16 lest they lade them selues with mysdoinge and trespace, wha they eate their
halowed thynges, for I am ye LORDE which halowe the.
17 And ye LORDE talked wt Moses, & saide:
18 Speake vnto Aaron & his sonnes, & to all ye childre of Israel: What so euer
Israelite or straunger in Israel wyll do his offerynge, whether it be their
vowe, or of fre wyl, that they wyll offre a burntofferynge vnto the LORDE,
19 to reconcyle them selues, it shal be a male, and without blemysh, of the
oxen, or lambes or goates.
20 What so euer hath eny blemish, shal they not offre, for they shal fynde no
fauoure therwith.
21 And who so wyl offre an health offeringe vnto the LORDE to separate out a
vowe, or of fre wyl, oxen or shepe, it shalbe without blemysh, yt it maye be
accepted. It shal haue no deformite.
22 Yf it be blynde, or broke, or wounded, or haue a wen, or skyrvye, or scabbed,
they shal offre none soch vnto the LORDE, ner put an offerynge of eny soch vpo
the altare of the LORDE.
23 An oxe or shepe yt hath mysshappe membres, or no rompe, mayest thou offre of
a fre wyll: but to a vowe it maye not be accepted.
24 Thou shalt offre also vnto the LORDE nothinge yt is brused, or broken, or
rent, or cutt out, & ye shal do no soch in youre londe.
25 Morouer ye shall offre no bred vnto youre God of a straungers hande: for it
is marred of him, and he hath a deformite, therfore shal it not be accepted for
you.
26 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
27 Wha an oxe, or labe, or goate is brought forth, it shal be seuen dayes with
the dame, and vpon the eight daye & therafter it maie be offered vnto the LORDE,
the is it accepted.
28 Whether it be oxe or lambe, it shall not be slayne with his yonge in one
daye.
29 But wha ye wil offre a thakoffringe vnto the LORDE yt it maye be accepted,
30 ye shal eate it the same daye, & kepe nothinge ouer vntyll the mornynge: for
I am the LORDE.
31 Therfore kepe now my commaundementes, and do them: for I am the LORDE,
32 yt ye vnhalowe not my holy name, & that I maye be halowed amonge the children
of Israel. For I am he that halowe you, eue ye LORDE,
33 which brought you out of ye lode of Egipte, yt I might be yor God: Euen I ye
LORDE.

Chapter 23

1 And the LORDE talked with Moses, & sayde:
2 Speake vnto ye children of Israel, and saye vnto them: These are ye feastes of
the LORDE, which ye shal call holy dayes.
3 Sixe dayes shalt thou worke, but the seuenth daie is the rest of the Sabbath,
and shalbe called holy. Ye shal do no worke therin, for it is the Sabbath of the
LORDE, where so euer ye dwell.
4 These are the feastes of the LORDE, yt are called holy, which ye shal call
youre feastes:
5 Upon ye fourtene daye of ye first moneth at euen, is the LORDES Easter.
6 And vpon ye fiftene daye of the same moneth is the feast of vnleueded bred of
the LORDE. Then shall ye eate vnleuended bred seuen dayes.
7 The first daie shalbe called holy amonge you, ye shal do no worke of bodage
therin,
8 seue daies shal ye offre vnto ye LORDE. The seueth daie shalbe called holy
likewise, wherin ye shal do no worke of bondage also.
9 And ye LORDE talked wt Moses, & sayde:
10 Speake to the childre of Israel, & saye vnto them: Whan ye come into the
lande yt I shall geue you, and reape downe youre haruest, ye shal brynge a shefe
of the first frutes of youre haruest vnto the prest,
11 the shall the shefe be waued before the LORDE, that ye maye be accepted: but
this shal the prest do the nexte daye after the Sabbath.
12 And ye same daie that yor shefe is waued, shal ye offre a burntofferinge vnto
the LORDE, of a lambe which is without blemysh and of one yeare olde,
13 wt the meatofferynge, two tenth deales of fyne floure mengled with oyle, for
an offerynge of a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE: & the drynk offerynge also, eue
the fourth parte of an Hin of wyne.
14 And ye shall eate nether bred, nor cakes, ner furmentye (of new corne) tyll
the same daye that ye brynge an offerynge vnto youre God. This shalbe a lawe
vnto youre posterities, where so euer ye dwell.
15 Then shal ye nombre (from the nexte daye after the Sabbath, whan ye brought
ye Waueshefe) seuen whole wekes,
16 vntyll the nexte daie after ye seueth weke, namely, fiftie daies, shal ye
nombre, and offre new meatofferynges vnto the LORDE.
17 And out of all youre dwellinges shal ye offre, namely, two Waue loaues of two
tenth deales of fyne floure leueded, and baken for the first frutes vnto ye
LORDE.
18 And with youre bred ye shal brynge seuen lambes of one yeare olde without
blemysh, and a yonge bullocke, and two rammes: this shalbe the LORDES
burntofferynge, meatofferynge, and drynkoffrynge. This is a sacrifice of a swete
sauoure vnto the LORDE.
19 Morouer ye shal offre an he goate for a synofferynge, and two lambes of a
yeare olde for an healthofferynge.
20 And ye prest shal waue it vpon the bred of the first frutes before the LORDE
with the two lambes: And they shalbe holy vnto the LORDE, and shalbe the
prestes.
21 And this daye shal ye proclame, for it shalbe called holy amonge you: no
seruyle worke shal ye do therin. A perpetuall lawe shall it be amonge yor
posterities, where so euer ye dwell.
22 Whan ye reape downe ye haruest of youre londe, ye shal not cut it cleane
downe vpo the felde, ner gather vp all, but shal leaue it for the poore and
straungers. I am the LORDE youre God.
23 And ye LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde:
24 Speake vnto the children of Israel, & saye: Vpon the first daye of the
seuenth moneth shal ye haue the holy rest of the remembraunce of blowinge,
25 wherin ye shal do no seruyle worke, and ye shal offre sacrifice vnto the
LORDE.
26 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
27 Vpon the tenth daye in this seuenth moneth is the daye of reconcylinge, which
shalbe an holy conuocacion wt you. Ye shal humble youre soules therin, and offre
vnto the LORDE,
28 and shal do no seruyle worke in this daye: for it is the daye of attonement,
that ye maye be reconcyled before the LORDE youre God.
29 For what soule so euer humbleth not him self vpon this daye, the same shalbe
roted out from amonge his people.
30 And what soule so euer doth eny worke this daye, the same wil I destroye from
amonge his people:
31 therfore shall ye do no worke. This shalbe a perpetuall lawe vnto youre
posterities, where so euer ye dwell.
32 It is the rest of youre Sabbath, that ye maye humble youre soules. Vpon the
nyenth daye of ye moneth at euen, shal ye kepe this holy daye from the euen
forth vntyll the eue agayne.
33 And the LORDE talked with Moses, & sayde:
34 Vpon the fiftene daye of the seuenth moneth, is the feast of Tabernacles
seuen dayes vnto the LORDE.
35 The first daye shalbe an holy couocacion: no seruyle worke shal ye do therin.
36 Seuen dayes shal ye offre vnto the LORDE. The eight daye shalbe an holy
conuocacion vnto you also, and ye shal offre vnto the LORDE: for it is the daye
of gatheringe together: No seruyle worke shall ye do therin.
37 These are the holy daies of the LORDE, which ye shall proclame and holde for
holy conuocacions, that ye maye offre vnto the LORDE burntofferynges,
meatofferynges, drynkofferynges and other offerynges, euery one acordinge to his
daye,
38 besyde ye Sabbathes of ye LORDE, and youre giftes, and vowes, and
frewylofferynges, that ye offre vnto the LORDE.
39 So vpon the fiftene daye of the seuenth moneth, whan ye haue brought in the
increase of the londe, ye shall kepe the LORDES feast seuen dayes longe. The
first daye shalbe kepte holy daye, and the eight daye shalbe kepte holy daye
also.
40 And vpon the first daie ye shal take of ye goodly frutefull trees, braunches
of palme trees, & bowes of thicke trees, and Wyllies of the broke, and seue
dayes shal ye be mery before ye LORDE youre God:
41 and thus shal ye kepe the feast vnto the LORDE seuen dayes in the yeare. This
shalbe a perpetuall lawe amonge youre posterities, that they kepe holy daye thus
in ye seuenth moneth.
42 Seuen dayes shal ye dwell in bothes. Who so euer is an Israelite borne, shal
dwell in bothes,
43 that they which come after you, maye knowe, how that I made ye children of
Israel to dwell in bothes, whan I brought them out of the lode of Egipte. I am
the LORDE youre God.
44 And Moses tolde the children of Israel these holy daies of the LORDE.

Chapter 24

1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
2 Comaunde the children of Israel, that they brynge pure oyle olyue beaten for
lightes, that it maye be allwaye put in the lampes,
3 without before the vayle of wytnesse in the Tabernacle of wytnesse. And Aaron
shall dresse it allwaye at euen & in ye mornynge before the LORDE. Let this be a
perpetuall lawe vnto youre posterities.
4 The lapes shal he dresse vpon the pure candilsticke before the LORDE
perpetually.
5 And thou shalt take fyne floure, and bake twolue cakes therof: two teth deales
shal euery cake haue,
6 & thou shalt laye them sixe on a rowe vpo the pure table before the LORDE.
7 And vpon the same shalt thou laye pure frankencense, that it maye be bred of
remembraunce for an offerynge vnto ye LORDE.
8 Euery Sabbath shal he prepare the before the LORDE allwaye, and receaue them
of the children of Israel for an euerlastinge couenaunt.
9 And they shalbe Aarons & and his sonnes, which shal eate them in the holy
place. For this is his most holy of the offerynges of the LORDE for a perpetuall
dewtye.
10 And there wente out an Israelitish womans sonne, which was the childe of a
man of Egipte (amonge the children of Israel) and stroue in ye hoost
11 with a man of Israel, & named the name of God blasphemously, & cursed. Then
brought they him vnto Moses. His mothers name was Selomith, the doughter of
Dibri, of the trybe of Dan.
12 And they put him in preson, tyll they were infourmed by the mouth of the
LORDE.
13 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
14 Brynge him that cursed, out of the hoost, and let all the that herde it, laye
their handes vpon his heade, and let the whole congregacion stone him.
15 And saye vnto the childre of Israel. Who so euer blasphemeth his God, shall
beare his synne:
16 and he that blasphemeth the name of the LORDE, shal dye the death. The whole
congregacio shal stone him. As the straunger, so shal he of the housholde be
also. Yf he blaspheme the name, he shal dye.
17 He that slayeth a man, shall dye ye death.
18 but he that slayeth a beest, shall paye for it. Soule for soule.
19 And he that maymeth his neghboure, it shall be done vnto him, euen as he hath
done:
20 broke for broke, eye for eye, tothe for tothe: euen as he hath maymed a a
man, so shal it be done vnto him agayne,
21 so that, who so slayeth a beest, shall paye for it: But he that slayeth a
man, shal dye.
22 There shal be one maner of lawe amonge you, to ye straunger as to one of
youre selues: for I am the LORDE youre God.
23 Moses tolde the children of Israel. And they brought him that had cursed, out
of ye hoost, and stoned him. Thus dyd the childre of Israel as the LORDE
comaunded Moses.

Chapter 25

1 And the LORDE talked with Moses vpon mount Sinai, and sayde:
2 Speake to the children of Israel, and saye vnto them: Whan ye come in to the
londe, yt I shal geue you, the londe shal rest vnto the LORDE,
3 so that thou sowe thy felde sixe yeares, and sixe yeares cut yi vynes, and
gather in the frutes.
4 But in the seuenth yeare the lode shal haue his Sabbath of rest for a Sabbath
vnto the LORDE, wherin thou shalt not sowe thy felde ner cut thy vynes.
5 Loke what groweth of it self after thy haruest, thou shalt not reape it. And
the grapes that growe without thy laboure, shalt thou not gather, for so moch as
it is the yeare of the londes rest:
6 But the rest of the londe shalt thou kepe for this intent, that thou mayest
eate therof, thy seruaunte, thy mayde, thy hyrelinge, thy gest, thy strauger
with the,
7 thy catell, and the beestes in thy londe. All the increase shal be meate.
8 And thou shalt nombre seuen of these yeare Sabbathes, that seuen yeares maye
be tolde seuen tymes, and so the tyme of the seuen yeare Sabbathes make nyne and
fourtye yeares.
9 Then shalt thou let the blast of the horne go thorow all youre londe, vpon the
tenth daye of the seuenth moneth, euen in ye daye of attonement.
10 And ye shal halowe the fiftieth yeare, and shall call it a fre yeare in ye
londe, for all them that dwell therin: for it is the yeare of Iubilye. Then
shall euery one amonge you come agayne to his possession and to his kynred:
11 for the fiftieth yeare is ye yeare of Iubilye. Ye shal not sowe ner reape it
that groweth of it self, ner gather the grapes, that growe without laboure.
12 For the yeare of Iubilye shall be holy amonge you. But loke what the felde
beareth, that shall ye eate.
13 This is the yeare of Iubilye, wherin ye shal come againe euery man to his
owne.
14 Now whan thou sellest ought vnto thy neghboure, or byest eny thinge of him,
there shal none of you oppresse his brother:
15 but acordinge to the nombre of the yeare of Iubilye shalt thou bye it of him:
and acordinge to the nombre of the yeares of increase shall he sell it vnto the.
16 Acordinge to the multitude of the yeares shalt thou rayse the pryce, & and
acordynge to the fewnesse of the yeares shalt thou mynish the pryce: for he
shall sell it vnto the acordinge to the nombre of the increase.
17 Therfore let no man defraude his neghboure, but feare yi God. For I am the
LORDE youre God.
18 Wherfore do after my statutes, and kepe my lawes, so yt ye do them that ye
maye dwell safe in the londe.
19 For the londe shal geue you hir frute, so that ye shal haue ynough to eate,
and dwell safe therin.
20 And yf ye wolde saye: What shall we eate in the seuenth yeare, in as moch as
we shal not sowe, ner gather in oure increase?
21 I wyll sende my blessynge vpon you in the sixte yeare,
22 that it shal brynge forth frute for thre yeare: so that ye shal sowe in ye
eight yeare, and eate of the olde frute vntyll the nyenth yeare, that ye maye
eate of the olde tyll new frutes come agayne.
23 Therfore shall ye not sell the londe for euer, for the lode is myne. And ye
are straungers and indwellers before me.
24 And in all youre lande shall ye geue the londe to lowse.
25 Whan thy brother waxeth poore, and selleth ye his possession, and his nexte
kynsma commeth to him, yt he maye redeme it: then shall he redeme that his
brother solde.
26 But whan a man hath none to redeme it, and ca get so moch with his hande as
to redeme one parte,
27 then shall it be rekened how many yeares it hath bene solde, and the remnaunt
shal be restored vnto him to whom he solde it, yt he maie come agayne to his
possession.
28 But yf his hande can not get so moch, as to haue one parte agayne, the shal
it yt he solde be styll in the hande of the byer vntyll ye yeare of Iubilye: In
ye same shal it go out, and returne to his owner agayne.
29 He that selleth a dwellinge house within the walles of the cite, hath an
whole yeare respyte to lowse it out agayne: that shall be the tyme, wherin he
maye redeme it.
30 But yf he redeme it not a fore the whole yeare be out then shal he that
bought it, and his successours kepe it for euer, and it shall not go out lowse
in the yeare of Iubylie.
31 Neuertheles yf it be an house in a vyllage that hath no wall aboute it, it
shall be counted like vnto the felde of the coutre, and maye be redemed and shal
go out fre in the yeare of Iubilye.
32 The cities of the Leuites, and the houses in the cities that their possession
is in, maye allwaye be redemed.
33 Who so purchaceth ought of the Leuites, shal leaue it in the yeare of
Iubilye, whether it be house or cite that he hath had in possession. For the
houses in the cities of the Leuites are their possession amonge the children of
Israel.
34 But the felde before their cities shal not be solde, for it is their awne for
euer.
35 Whan thy brother waxeth poore, and falleth in decaye besyde the, thou shalt
receaue him as a straunger, or gest, that he maye lyue by the:
36 and thou shalt take no vsury of him, ner more then thou hast geue, but shalt
feare thy God, that thy brother maye lyue besydes the.
37 For thou shalt not lende him yi money vpon vsury, ner delyuer him thy meate
vpon vauntage.
38 For I am the LORDE yor God, which haue brought you out of the lode of Egipte,
to geue you the lande of Canaan, and to be youre God.
39 Whan thy brother waxeth poore besyde the, and selleth himself vnto the, thou
shalt not holde him as a bode ma:
40 but as an hyred seruaunte and as a soiourner shall he be wt the, and serue
the vntyll ye yeare of Iubilye.
41 Then shal he departe lowse from the, & his childre with him, & shal returne
to his awne kinred, and to his fathers possession:
42 for they are my seruauntes, whom I brought out of the londe of Egipte.
Therfore shal they not be solde like bondmen.
43 And thou shalt not raigne ouer them with crueltie, but shalt feare thy God.
44 But yf thou wylt haue bode seruauntes and maydens, thou shalt bye them of the
Heithen, that are rounde aboute you:
45 of the children of the soiourners and straungers amonge you, and of their
generacions with you, and that are borne in youre londe, the same shal ye haue
for bonde seruautes,
46 & shal possesse them, & youre children after you for an euerlastinge
possession, these shalbe yor bondmen. But ouer youre brethren the children of
Israel, there shall none of you raigne ouer another with crueltie.
47 Whan a straunger or soiourner waxeth ryche by the, and thy brother waxeth
poore besyde him, & selleth him self vnto ye straunger or soiourner by the, or
to eny of his kynne, then shall he haue right
48 (after that he is solde) to be redemed agayne. And eny of his brethren maye
lowse him out:
49 or his vncle or his vncles sonne, or eny other kynsman of his kynred: Or yf
his awne hande getteth so moch, he shal lowse him self out,
50 and shal reken with him that bought him, from ye yeare that he solde him
self, vntyll the yeare of Iubilye. And ye money shal be counted acordinge to the
nombre of the yeares that he was solde, and his wages of the whole tyme shalbe
rekened withall.
51 Yf there be yet many yeares vnto ye yeare of Iubilye, then shal he (acordinge
to the same) geue the more for his delyueraunce, therafter as he is solde.
52 Yf there remayne but few yeares vnto the yeare of Iubilye, then shall he geue
agayne therafter for his redempcion.
53 And his wages from yeare to yeare shall he reken withall, and thou shalt not
let the other raigne cruelly ouer him in yi sight.
54 But yf he bye not him self out after this maner, then shal he go out fre in
the yeare of Iubilye, and his childre with him:
55 for the childre of Israel are my seruauntes, which I haue brought out of the
londe of Egipte. I am the LORDE youre God.

Chapter 26

1 Ye shall make you no Idols ner ymage, and ye shal reare you vp no piler, ner
set vp eny markstone in youre londe, to bowe youre selues therto. For I am the
LORDE youre God.
2 Kepe my Sabbathes, and stonde in awe of my Sanctuary. I am the LORDE.
3 Yf ye wyll walke now in my statutes, and kepe my commaundementes and do them,
4 the wyl I geue you rayne in due season, and ye londe shal geue hir increase,
and the trees of ye felde shal brynge forth their frute.
5 And the thresshinge tyme shall reache vnto the wyne haruest, and the wyne
haruest shal reache vnto the sowynge tyme. And ye shall eate yor bred in
plenteousnes, and shal dwell safe in youre londe.
6 I wil geue peace in youre londe, so that ye shall slepe, and no man shall make
you afrayed. I wyl ryd euell beestes out of youre londe, and there shall no
swerde go thorow youre londe.
7 Ye shal chace youre enemies, & they shal fall into ye swerde before you.
8 Fyue of you shal chace an hundreth: and an hundreth of you shal chace ten
thousande. For youre enemies shall fall in to the swerde before you.
9 And I wyl turne me vnto you, and wyl cause you to growe and increase, and wyl
set vp my couenanut with you.
10 And ye shal eate of the olde stoare, and shall let go the olde for
plenteousnesse of the new.
11 I will haue my dwellynge amonge you, and my soule shall not refuse you.
12 And I wyll walke amonge you, and wyl be youre God, and ye shalbe my people.
13 For I am the LORDE youre God, which brought you out of the londe of Egipte,
that ye shulde not be their bondmen. And I haue broke the cepter of youre yocke,
and caused you to go vp right.
14 But yf ye wil not harken vnto me, ner do all these commaundementes,
15 and wyl despyse my statutes, and yf youre soules refuse my lawes, yt ye wyll
not do all my commaundementes, & shal let my couenaunt stonde,
16 then wyll I do this agayne vnto you. I wyl vyset you shortly with swellynges
and feuers, which shal destroye ye eyes, & consume awaie ye hert. Ye shal sowe
youre sede in vayne, and youre enemies shal eate it vp.
17 And I wyl set my face agaynst you, and ye shal be slayne before youre
enemies. And they that hate you, shal haue dominion ouer And ye shall flye, wha
no man chaseth you.
18 But yf ye wyll not herken vnto me for all this, then wyl I make it yet seuen
tymes more, to punysh you for youre synnes,
19 that I maye breake ye pryde of youre strength, and wyl make youre heauen lyke
yron, and youre earth as brasse:
20 and youre trauaile and labor shal be but lost, so that youre londe shall not
geue hir increase, and the trees in the londe shal not brynge forth their frute.
21 Yf ye walke yet agaynst me, and wyll not harken vnto me, then wyl I make it
yet seuen tymes more, to punysh you because of youre synnes:
22 & wyl sende wylde beestes amoge you, which shal robbe you, and destroie youre
catell, and make you fewer, and youre hye waye shal be come waist.
23 But yf ye wyl not yet be refourmed here withall, and wyll walke contrary vnto
me,
24 then wyl I walke contrary vnto you also, & wyll punysh you yet seuen tymes
for youre synnes.
25 And I wyl brynge vpon you a swerde of vengeaunce, which shall auenge my
Testament. And though ye gather you together in to youre cities, yet wyll I
sende the pestilence amonge you, and wyll delyuer you in to the handes of youre
enemies.
26 For I wil destroye youre prouysion of bred, so yt ten wemen shall bake youre
bred in one ouen, and youre bred shal be delyuered out by weight. And whan ye
eate, ye shall not haue ynough.
27 Yf ye wyl not yet for all this harken vnto me, & wyl walke contrary vnto me,
28 then wyll I also walke cotrary vnto you in wrathfull displeasure, and wyll
punysh you seuenfolde because of youre synnes,
29 so that ye shal eate the flesh of youre sonnes and doughters.
30 And I wyl destroye youre hye altares, and rote out youre ymages, and wyll
cast youre bodies vpon the bodies of youre Idols, and my soule shall abhorre
you.
31 And youre cities wyll I make waist, and brynge youre churches to naught, and
wyll not smell youre swete odoures.
32 Thus wyll I make the londe desolate, so that youre enemies shall dwell
therin, and make it waist:
33 but you will I scater amonge the Heythen, and drawe out the swerde after you,
so that youre londe shal be waist, & youre cities desolate.
34 Then shall the londe reioyse in hir Sabbathes, as longe as it lyeth wayst,
and ye be in the enemies londe. Yee then shal the londe kepe holy daye, and
reioyse in hir rest,
35 as longe as it lieth wayst, because it coude not rest in youre Sabbathes,
whan ye dwelt therin.
36 And as for them that remayne of you, I wyll make them faynte harted in the
londe of their enemies, so that a shakynge leaf shall chace them. And they shall
flye from it, as though a swerde persecuted them, and shal fall noman folowynge
vpon them.
37 And they shall fall one vpon another (as it were before the swerde) and noman
yet chacynge them. And ye shall not be so bolde, as to withstonde youre enemies,
38 and shal perishe amonge the Heithen, and the londe of youre enemies shal eate
you vp.
39 And they that are left of you, shall pyne awaye in their mysdede, euen in the
enemies londe, and in the mysdedes of their fathers shall they consume awaye.
40 Then shall they knowlege their mysdedes, and the mysdedes of their fathers in
the trespace, wherwith they haue trespaced agaynst me, and walked contrary vnto
me.
41 Therfore wyll I also walke contrary vnto the, and wyll brynge them in to the
enemies londe. Then shal their vncircumcysed herte be tamed. And then shall they
ende their mysdedes.
42 And I shal thinke vpo my couenaut with Iacob, and vpon my couenaunt with
Isaac, and vpon my couenaunt with Abraham, and wyl thynke vpon the lode.
43 As for the londe, whan it shalbe left of them, it shal reioyse in hir
Sabbathes, euen then, whan it lyeth waist, and they tylle it not. And they shall
make attonement for their mysdedes, because they despysed my lawes, & their
soules refused my statutes.
44 Morouer I haue not so refused them, that they shulde be in the enemies londe:
nether haue I so vtterly abhorred them, that I wolde brynge them to naught, and
breake my couenaunt wt them: for I am ye LORDE their God.
45 And for their sake I wyl remebre my first couenaut, wha I brought them out of
ye londe of Egipte in the sight of the Heythen, yt I might be their God. Euen I
the LORDE.
46 These are the ordinaunces, statutes and lawes, which ye LORDE made betwixte
him and the children of Israel vpon mount Sinai, by the hande of Moses.

Chapter 27

1 And the LORDE talked with Moses, & sayde:
2 Speake to ye children of Israel, & saye vnto them: Yf eny man make a speciall
vowe vnto ye LORDE, so yt he pryse a soule, then shal this be the valuacion:
3 A ma of twentye yeare olde vnto the thre score yeare, shalt thou set at fiftie
syluer Sycles, after the Sycle of the Sanctuary:
4 but a woman at thirtie Sycles.
5 Yf it be fyue yeare olde vnto twentye yeare, thou shalt set it at twentye
Sycles, whan it is a man childe: but a woman at ten Sycles.
6 Yf it be a moneth olde vnto fiue yeare, thou shalt set it at fyue Sycles of
syluer, whan it is a machilde: but a woman at thre Syluer Sycles.
7 Yf he be thre score yeare olde and aboue, the shalt thou set him at fiftene
Sicles wha it is a ma a woma at te Sicles.
8 Yf he be to poore so to be set, the let him present himself to ye prest, & ye
prest shal value him. Neuertheles he shal value him, acordinge as ye hade of him
that vowed, is able to get.
9 But yf it be a beest yt maye be offred vnto ye LORDE, all yt is offred vnto ye
LORDE of soch, is holy:
10 it shal not be altered ner chaunged, a good for a bad, or a bad for a good.
Yf eny man chaunge it, one beest for another, then shal they both be holy vnto
ye LORDE.
11 But yf ye beest be vncleane which maye not be offred vnto ye LORDE, the shal
it be set, before ye prest,
12 and ye prest shal value it, whether it be good or bad, & it shal stonde at
the prestes valuynge.
13 But yf eny man wil bye it out, he shal geue the fifth parte more, to that it
was set at.
14 Whan eny ma sanctifieth his house vnto the LORDE for ye Sanctuary, the prest
shall value it, whether it be good or bad. And as the prest valueth it, so shal
it stonde.
15 But yf he yt sanctified it, wyl redeme it, he shal geue ye fifth parte of
syluer therto, aboue that it was set at: So shal it be his.
16 Yf eny man halowe a pece of lode of his heretage vnto the LORDE, it shalbe
set acordinge to yt it beareth. Yf it beare an Homer of barlye, it shalbe valued
at fiftye Sycles of syluer.
17 But yf he halowe his londe immediatly from the yeare of Iubilye forth, then
shal it be set acordinge to ye value therof.
18 Yf he haue halowed it after the yeare of Iubilye, then shal the prest reke
it, acordinge to ye yeares yt remayne vnto ye yeare of Iubilye, & therafter shal
he set it the lower.
19 But yf he yt sanctified the londe, wil redeme it agayne, then shal he geue
the fifth parte of syluer therto, aboue that it was set at:
20 So shal it be his. Yf he wil not lowse it out, but selleth it vnto another,
then shal he redeme it nomore:
21 but the same londe whan it goeth out fre in ye yeare of Iubilye, shal be holy
vnto the LORDE, as a dedicated felde, and shalbe the prestes inheritaunce.
22 Yf eny man halowe vnto the LORDE a felde, which he hath bought, and is not
his inheritaunce,
23 then shal ye prest reken it, what it is worth vnto the yeare of Iubilye, &
the same daye shall he geue the pryce that it is set at, vnto the LORDE for the
Sanctuary.
24 But in ye yeare of Iubilye it shal returne vnto him that bought it, yt it
maye be his inheritaunce in the londe.
25 All maner of prysinge shalbe made acordinge to the Sycle of the Sactuary. One
Sycle maketh xx. Geras.
26 The first borne amonge ye catell (which belongeth vnto the LORDE) shall no
man Sanctifie vnto the LORDE, whether it be oxe or shepe, for it is the LORDES
all ready.
27 But yf there be eny vncleane thinge vpon the beest, the shal it be lowsed out
therafter as it is worth, and the fifth parte shalbe geuen more therto. Yf he
wil not redeme it, the let it be solde, as it is worth.
28 There shall no dedicated thinge be solde ner bought out, yt eny man
dedicateth vnto ye LORDE, of all yt is his good, whether it be me, catell or
lode. For euery dedicated thige, is most holy vnto ye LORDE.
29 There shal no dedicated thige of ma be bought out, but shal dye the death.
30 All the tythes in the londe, both of the sede of the londe, & of ye frutes of
the trees, are the LORDES, & shal be holy vnto the LORDE.
31 But yf eny man wil redeme his tithes, he shall geue the fifth parte more
therto.
32 And all the tithes of oxen & shepe, & that goeth vnder the rod, the same is
an holy tythe vnto the LORDE.
33 It shall not be axed whether it be good or bad, nether shall it be chaunged.
But yf eny man chaunge it, then both it & that it was chaunged withall, shal be
holy, & not redemed.
34 These are the comaundementes, which ye LORDE gaue Moses in charge vnto
childre of Israel vpon mount Sinai.


Numbers

Chapter 1

1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses in ye wyldernesse of Sinai, in the Tabernacle
of witnesse, the first daye of the secode moneth in the seconde yeare, wha they
were gone out of the lade of Egipte, and sayde:
2 Take ye summe of the whole congregacion of the children of Israel, after their
kynredes & their fathers houses, with the nombre of the names, all that are
males, heade by heade,
3 fro twentye yeare and aboue, as many as are able to go forth in to ye warre in
Israel. And ye shal nombre them acordinge to their armyes thou and Aaron,
4 and of euery trybe ye shal take vnto you one captayne ouer his fathers house.
5 These are the names of the captaynes that shal stonde with you. Of Ruben,
Elizur the sonne of Sedeur.
6 Of Simeon, Selumiel the sonne of Zuri Sadai.
7 Of Iuda, Nahasson the sonne of Aminadab.
8 Of Isachar, Nathaneel the sonne of Zuar.
9 Of Zabulon, Eliab the sonne of Helon.
10 Amonge the children of Ioseph: Of Ephraim, Elisama ye sonne of Amihud. Of
Manasse, Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur.
11 Of Ben Iamin, Abidam ye sonne of Gedeoni.
12 Of Dan, Ahieser the sonne of Ammi Sadai.
13 Of Asser, Pagiel the sonne of Ochram.
14 Of Gad, Eliasaph ye sonne of Deguel.
15 Of Nephthali, Ahira the sonne of Enan.
16 These are the awncient men of the congregacion, the captaynes amonge the
trybes of their fathers, which were heades and prynces in Israel.
17 And Moses & Aaron toke them (like as they are there named by name)
18 and gathered the whole cogregacion together also, ye first daye of the secode
moneth, and rekened the after their byrth, acordinge to their kynreds and
fathers houses by their names, fro twetye yeare and aboue, heade by heade,
19 as the LORDE commaunded Moses, and nombred them in the wyldernes of Sinai.
20 The children of Ruben Israels first sonne, their kynreds & generacions after
their fathers houses, in ye nombre of their names heade by heade, all yt were
males, from twentye yeare & aboue, and were able to go forth to the warre,
21 were nombred to the trybe of Ruben, sixe and fourtye thousande, and fyue
hundreth.
22 The children of Simeon their kynreds & generacions after their fathers houses
in the nombre of the names heade by heade, all that were males from twetye yeare
and aboue, and were able to go forth to the warre,
23 were nombred to the trybe of Symeon, nyne and fiftye thousande and thre
hundreth.
24 The children of Gad their kynreds and generacions after their fathers houses
in ye nombre of the names, from twentye yeare and aboue, all that were able to
go forth to the warre,
25 were nombre to the trybe of Gad, fyue and fourtye thousande, sixe hundreth
and fiftie.
26 The children of Iuda their kynreds and generacions after their fathers houses
in ye nombre of the names, from twentye yeare and aboue, all that were able to
go forth to the warre,
27 were nombred to the trybe of Iuda, foure and seuentye thousande, & sixe
hundreth.
28 The children of Isachar their kynreds & generacions, after their fathers
houses in ye nombre of the names from twentye yeare & aboue, all that were able
to go forth to the warre,
29 were nombred to ye trybe of Isachar, foure and fiftye thousande and foure
hundreth.
30 The children of Zabulon their kynreds and generacions after their fathers
houses in the nombre of the names from twentye yeare & aboue, all that were able
to go forth to the warre,
31 were nombred to the trybe of Zabulon, seuen and fiftye thousande and foure
hundreth.
32 Iosephs children of Ephraim, their kynreds & generacions after their fathers
houses in ye nombre of the names, from twetye yeare and aboue,
33 all yt were able to go forth to ye warre, were nobred to the trybe of
Ephraim, fourtye thousande & fyue hundreth.
34 The children of Manasse their kynreds & generacions, after their fathers
houses in ye nombre of the names from twentye yeare & aboue, all yt were able to
go forth to the warre,
35 were nombred to the trybe of Manasse, two & thirtie thousande & two hundreth.
36 The childre of Ben Iamin their kynreds and generacions, after their fathers
houses, in the nombre of the names from twentye yeare & aboue, all that were
able to go forth to the warre,
37 were nombred to the trybe of Ben Iamin, fyue and thirtie thousande and foure
hundreth.
38 The children of Dan their kynreds and generacions after their fathers houses,
in the nombre of the names,
39 from twentye yeares and aboue, all that were able to go forth to the warre,
were nombred to the trybe of Dan, two and thre score thousande, and seuen
hundreth.
40 The children of Asser their kynreds & generacions, after their fathers houses
in the nombre of the names, from twentye yeare & aboue, all yt were able to go
forth to ye warre,
41 were nombred to the trybe of Asser, one & fourtye thousande and fyue
hundreth.
42 The childre of Nephthali, their kynreds and generacions after their fathers
houses in the nombre of the names, from twentye yeare & aboue, all that were
able to go forth vnto the warre,
43 were nombred to the trybe of Nephthali, thre and fiftie thousande and foure
hundreth.
44 These are they whom Moses and Aaron nombred with ye twolue prynces of Israel,
wherof euery one was ouer ye house of their fathers.
45 And the summe of the children of Israel after their fathers houses, from
twentye yeare and aboue (what so euer was able to go forth to the warre in
Israel)
46 was sixe C. thousande, thre thousande, fyue C. & fiftie.
47 But the Leuites after the trybe of their fathers, were not nombred amonge
them.
48 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and saide:
49 The trybe of Leui shalt thou not nombre, ner take the summe of them amonge ye
children of Israel:
50 but shalt appoynte them to the Habitacion of wytnesse, and to all ye apparell
therof, and to all that belongeth therto. And they shall beare the Tabernacle &
all the ordinaunce therof, and shal wayte vpon it, and shal pitch their tentes
rounde aboute it.
51 And whan men shal go on their iourney, the Leuites shal take downe ye
Tabernacle. And whan the hoost pitch their tetes, they shal set vp the
Tabernacle. And yf a straunger preasse nye vnto it, he shall dye.
52 The children of Israel shal pitch their tentes, euery one in his awne armye,
and by the baner of his awne companye.
53 But the Leuites shall pitch rounde aboute the Tabernacle of wytnesse, that
there come no wrath vpon ye congregacion of the children of Israel: therfore
shal the Leuites wayte vpon the Habitacion of wytnesse.
54 And the children of Israel dyd all, as the LORDE commaunded Moses.

Chapter 2

1 And ye LORDE spake vnto Moses and Aaron, & sayde:
2 The childre of Israel shal pitch rounde aboute ye Tabernacle of wytnesse,
euery one vnder his banner & tokens, after their fathers houses.
3 On the East syde shall Iuda pitch with his banner & hoost, their captayne
Nahasson the sonne of Aminadab.
4 And his armie in the summe, foure & seuentie thousande and sixe hundreth.
5 Nexte vnto him shal the trybe of Isachar pitch, their captayne Nathaneel the
sonne of Zuar:
6 and his armye in the summe, foure and fiftye thousande and foure hundreth.
7 The trybe of Zabulon also, their captayne Eliab the sonne of Helon:
8 his armye in the summe, seuen and fiftie thousande and foure hundreth.
9 So yt all they which beloge to ye hoost of Iuda, be in the summe an C. sixe
and foure score thousande, & foure hundreth be longinge to their armye, & they
shall go before.
10 On the South side shall lye the pauylions & baner of Ruben wt their hoost,
their captaine Elizur ye sonne of Sedeur:
11 & his armie in the summe, sixe & fourtie thousande, & fyue C.
12 Nexte vnto him shal the trybe of Simeon pitch, their captayne Selumiel ye
sonne of Zuri Sadai:
13 & his armie in ye summe, nyne and fiftie thousande, and thre hundreth.
14 The trybe of Gad also, their captayne Eliasaph ye sonne of Deguel:
15 & his armye in the summe, fyue & fourtye thousande, sixe hundreth & fiftie.
16 So that all they which belonge to the hoost of Ruben, be in the summe, an
hundreth, one & fiftie thousande, foure hudreth and fiftye, belonginge to their
armye. And they shall be the seconde in the iourney.
17 After that shall the Tabernacle of wytnesse go wt the hoost of the Leuites
eue in ye myddes amoge the hoostes: & as they lye in their tentes, so shal they
go forth also, euery one in his place vnder his baner.
18 On the West syde shall lye ye pauylions & baner of Ephraim wt their hoost:
their captayne shalbe Elisama sonne of Amihud,
19 and his armye in the summe, fourtye thousande and fyue hundreth.
20 Nexte vnto him shal ye trybe of Manasse pitch, their captayne Gamaliel the
sonne of Pedazur:
21 his armye in the summe, two and thirtie thousande & two hudreth.
22 The trybe of Ben Iamin also, their captayne Abidan the sonne of Gedeoni:
23 his armye in the summe, fyue and thirtie thousande & foure hundreth.
24 So yt all they which belonge to the hoost of Ephraim, be in the summe, an
hundreth thousande, eight thousande, & an hudreth, belonginge to his armie. And
they shal be the thirde in the iourney.
25 On the North syde shal lye ye pauylions & baner of Dan with their hoost:
their captayne Ahieser ye sonne of Ammi Sadai,
26 his armye in the summe, two and sixtye thousande and seue hundreth.
27 Nexte vnto him shal the trybe of Asser pitche: their captayne Pagiel ye sonne
of Ochran,
28 his army in the summe, one and fourtie thousande, and fyue hundreth.
29 The trybe of Nephthali also, their captayne Ahira the sonne of Enan:
30 his armye in the summe, thre & fiftye thousande & foure hudreth.
31 So yt all they which belonge to the hoost of Dan, be in the summe, an hudreth
thousande, seuen & fiftie thousande, & sixe hundreth. And they shalbe the last
in the iourney with their baners.
32 This is the summe of the children of Israel, after their fathers houses and
armyes with their hoostes: euen sixe hundreth thousande, & thre thousande, fyue
hudreth & fiftie.
33 But ye Leuites were not nombred in ye summe amonge the childre of Israel, as
ye LORDE comaunded Moses.
34 And ye childre of Israel dyd all as the LORDE comaunded Moses. And so they
pitched vnder their baners, & toke their iourney, euery one in his kynred,
acordinge to the house of their fathers.

Chapter 3

1 These are the generacions of Aaron & Moses, whan ye LORDE spake vnto Moses at
ye same tyme vpon mount Sinai.
2 And these are ye names of the sonnes of Aron. The firstborne, Nadab: then
Abihu, Eleasar & Ithamar.
3 These are ye names of the sonnes of Aaron, which were anoynted to be prestes,
& their handes fylled for ye presthode.
4 But Nadab & Abihu dyed before ye LORDE, wha they offred strauge fyre before ye
LORDE, in ye wildernesse of Sinai, & had no sonnes. But Eleasar and Ithamar
executed ye prestes office wt their father Aaron.
5 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
6 Bringe hither the trybe of Leui, and set them before Aaron the prest, yt they
maye serue wt him, & wayte vpon him
7 & vpo the whole congregacion before ye Tabernacle of witnesse, and execute the
seruyce of the habitacion,
8 and kepe all the apparell of the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and wayte vpon the
children of Israel, to mynistre in the seruyce of the habitacion.
9 And thou shalt geue ye Leuites vnto Aaron and his sonnes for a gift, vnto
euery one his awne, from amonge the children of Israel.
10 As for Aaron & his sonnes, thou shalt appoynte them to wayte on their prestes
office. Yf another preasse therto, he shal dye.
11 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and saide
12 Beholde, I haue take the Leuites fro amonge the childre of Israel, for all
the first borne that open the Matrix amonge the children of Israel, so that the
Leuites shalbe myne.
13 For the firstborne are myne, sence ye tyme that I smote all the first borne
in ye lande of Egipte, wha I sanctified vnto me all the first borne in Israel,
from me vnto catell, that they shulde be myne. I the LORDE.
14 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses in the wyldernesse of Sinai, and sayde:
15 Nombre the children of Leui after their fathers houses and kynreds, all that
are males of a moneth olde and aboue.
16 So Moses nombred them acordinge to the worde of the LORDE, as he had
commaunded.
17 And these were the children of Leui with their names: Gerson, Rahath, Merari.
18 The names of the children of Gerson in their kynreds, were: Libni and Semei.
19 The childre of Rahath in their kynreds were, Amram, Iezehar, Hebron and
Vsiel.
20 The children of Merari in their kynreds, were Maheli and Musi. These are the
kynreds of Leui after their fathers houses.
21 These are ye kynreds of Gerson: The Libnites and Semeites,
22 the summe was founde in nombre, seuen thousande and fyue hundreth, of all
that were males of a moneth olde and aboue.
23 And the same kynreds of the Gersonites shal pitche behinde the Habitacion on
the west syde:
24 Let Eliasaph the sonne of Lael be their ruler.
25 And they shal waite vpon the Tabernacle of wytnesse, of the habitacion, and
of the tent, and couerynges therof, and the hangynge in the dore of the
Tabernacle of wytnesse,
26 the hangynge aboute the courte, & the hangynge in ye courtedore, which
(courte) goeth aboute the habitacion and the altare, and the cordes of it, & all
that belongeth to the seruyce therof.
27 These are the kynreds of Rahath: The Amramites, the Iezeharites, the
Hebronites, and Vsielites,
28 all that were males of a moneth olde & aboue, in nombre eight thousande and
sixe hundreth, waytinge vpon the Tabernacle of the Sanctuary,
29 & shal pitch on the south syde of ye Habitacion:
30 Let Elisaphan the sonne of Vsiel be their ruler.
31 And they shal kepe the Arke, the table, the candilsticke, the altare and all
the vessels of the Sanctuary, to do seruyce in, and the vayle, and all that
belongeth to the seruice therof.
32 But the chefe of all the rulers of the Leuites, shalbe Eleasar the sonne of
Aron the prest, ouer them that are apoynted to kepe the watch of the Sanctuary.
33 These are ye kynreds of Merari: The Mabelites and Musites,
34 which were in nombre sixe thousande and two hudreth, all that were males of a
moneth olde and aboue:
35 Let Zuriel ye sonne of Abihail be their ruler, and they shall pitche vpon the
north syde of the Habitacion.
36 And their office shalbe to kepe the bordes, and barres, and pilers, and
sokettes of the Habitacion, and all the apparell therof and that serueth therto:
37 ye pilers also aboute ye courte, with the sokettes, and nales, and cordes.
38 But before the Habitacion and before ye Tabernacle on the East syde shal
Moses & Aaron & his sonnes pytche, that they maye wayte vpon the Sanctuary, &
the children of Israel. Yf eny other preasse therto, he shal dye.
39 All the Leuites in the summe, whom Moses and Aaron nombred after their
kynreds, acordinge to the worde of the LORDE, all that were males, of a moneth
olde and aboue, were two and twentye thousande.
40 And ye LORDE saide vnto Moses: Nombre all the first borne, that are males
amonge the children of Israel, of a moneth olde and aboue, and take the nombre
of their names.
41 And ye Leuites shalt thou take out vnto me the LORDE, for all ye first borne
of ye childre of Israel, & the catell of the Leuites for all the first borne
amonge the catell of ye children of Israel.
42 And Moses nombred all the first borne amoge the childre of Israel, as the
LORDE commaunded him.
43 And in the nombre of the names of all the first borne, that were males of a
moneth olde & aboue, in their summe, there were foude two and twentye thousande,
two hundreth, and thre and seuentye.
44 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
45 Take the Leuites for all ye first borne amonge the childre of Israel, & the
catell of ye Leuites for their catell, yt the Leuites maye be myne the LORDES.
46 But the redempcion money of the two hundreth thre & seuentye yt remayne of
the first borne of the children of Israel,
47 aboue the nombre of the Leuites, shalt thou take, euen fyue Sycles of euery
heade, after the Sycle of the Sanctuary (one Sycle is worth twentye Geras)
48 & the money yt remayneth ouer their nobre, shalt thou geue vnto Aaron and his
sonnes.
49 Then toke Moses ye redempcion money (that remayned ouer aboue the nombre of
the Leuites)
50 from ye first borne of the childre of Israel, euen a thousande, thre
hundreth, and fyue and thre score Sycles, after ye Sycle of the Sanctuary,
51 & gaue it vnto Aaron and his sonnes, acordinge to the worde of the LORDE, as
the LORDE commaunded Moses.

Chapter 4

1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses & Aaron,
2 & sayde: Take ye summe of the childre of Rahath from amonge the childre of
Leui, after their kynreds & fathers houses
3 from thirtie yeare and aboue vntill fiftye yeare, all that are mete for the
warre, that they maye do the worke in the Tabernacle of witnesse.
4 This shal be the office of the children of Rahath in the Tabernacle of
wytnesse, which is most holy.
5 Whan the hoost breaketh vp, Aaron and his sonnes shall go in, and take downe
the vayle, and couer the Arke of wytnesse therwith,
6 and laye the couerynge of doo skynnes vpon it, and sprede a whole yalowe
clothe aboue theron, and put his staues therin.
7 And vpon the shewe table they shal sprede a yalowe clothe also, and set ther
on the disshes, spones, flatpeces and pottes to poure out and in, and the daylie
bred shal lye vpon it,
8 and they shall sprede a purple clothe ther ouer, and couer it with a couerynge
of doo skynnes, and put the staues of it therin.
9 And they shal take a yalowe clothe, and couer the cadilsticke of light
therwith, and his lampes, with his snoffers and outquenchers, and all the oyle
vessels that belonge to the seruyce,
10 and aboute all this shal they put a couerynge of doo skynnes, and put it vpon
staues.
11 So shal they sprede a yalowe clothe ouer the golden altare also, and couer
the same with a couerynge of doo skynnes, and put it vpon staues.
12 All the vessels that they occupye in the Sanctuary, shal they take, and put a
yalowe clothe ther ouer, & couer them with a couerynge of doo skynnes, and put
them vpon staues.
13 They shal swepe the asshes also from the altare, and sprede a clothe of
scarlet ouer it, and set all his vessels theron,
14 that they occupye vpon it: colepames, fleshokes, shouels, basens, with all
the apparell of the altare, and they shal sprede a couerynge of doo skynnes
theron, and put his staues therto.
15 Now whan Aaron and his sonnes haue done this, and haue couered the Sanctuary
& all the ornametes therof, whan the hoost breaketh vp, then shal the children
of Rahath go in, that they maye beare it, and the Sanctuary shall they not
touche, lest they dye. This is the charge of the childre of Rahath in the
Tabernacle of wytnesse.
16 And Eleasar the sonne of Aaron ye prest, shal haue the office, to prepare the
oyle for the light, and the spyces for the incense, and the daylie
meatofferynge, and the anoyntinge oyle, to order the whole habitacion, & all
that therin is, in the Sanctuary and the ornamentes therof.
17 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses and Aaron, & sayde:
18 Ye shal not destroye the trybe of the kynred of the Rahathites amoge the
Leuites,
19 but this shal ye do with them, yt they maye lyue & not dye, yf they touche
the most holy. Aaron and his sonnes shal go in, and appoynte euery one vnto his
office & charge.
20 But they shal not go in, presumptuously to loke vpo ye Sanctuary, lest they
die.
21 And ye LORDE spake vnto Moses and Aaron & sayde:
22 Take the summe of the children of Gerson also, after their fathers house &
kynred,
23 from thirtye yeare & aboue, vntyll fiftye yeare, & appoynte them all yt are
mete for the warre, to haue an office in the Tabernacle of wytnesse.
24 This shalbe the office of the kynred of the Gersonites, eue to serue & to
beare.
25 They shal beare the curtaynes of the habitacion and of the Tabernacle of
wytnesse, and his couerynge and the coueringe of doo skynnes, that is aboue
theron, and the hanginge in the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse,
26 and the hanginge aboute the courte, which goeth aboute the habitacion and the
altare, and their cordes, and all the instrumentes yt serue for the, and all
that belongeth to their occupienge.
27 Acordinge vnto the worde of Aaron and of his sonnes, shal all the office of
the children of Gerson be done, what so euer they shall beare and occupye. And
ye shal se, that they wayte vpon all their charge.
28 This shal be ye office of ye kinred of ye childre of ye Gersonites in ye
Tabernacle of witnes. And their waytinge shal be vnder ye hade of Ithamar, the
sonne of Aaro the prest.
29 The children of Merari after their kynred and fathers house, shalt thou
appoynte also,
30 from thirtie yeare and aboue, vnto fiftie yeare, all that are mete for the
warre, yt they maye haue an office in the Tabernacle of wytnesse.
31 But vpon this charge shall they wayte acordinge to all their office in ye
Tabernacle of witnesse, that they beare the bordes of the Habitacion, and the
barres, and pilers, and sokettes:
32 the pilers of the courte also rounde aboute, and the sokettes and nales and
cordes, with all their apparell, acordynge to all their seruyce. And vnto euery
one shall ye appoynte his porcion of charge to waite vpon the apparell.
33 Let this be the office of the kynred of the children of Merari, all that they
shall do in the Tabernacle of wytnesse vnder the hande of Ithamar the sonne of
Aaron the prest.
34 And Moses and Aaron with the captaynes of the congregacion, nombred the
children of ye Rahathites, acordinge to their kynreds and houses of their
fathers,
35 from thirtie yeare and aboue, vntyll fyftye, all that were mete for the
warre, to haue offyce in the Tabernacle of wytnesse.
36 And the summe was, two thousande, seuen hundreth and fyftie.
37 This is the summe of the kynred of the Rahathites (which all had seruyce in
the Tabernacle of witnesse) whom Moses and Aaron nombred, acordynge to the worde
of the LORDE by Moses.
38 The children of Gerson were nombred also in their kynreds and fathers houses
39 from thirtie yeare and aboue vntyll fyftie, all that were mete for the warre,
to haue office in ye Tabernacle of witnesse,
40 and the summe was two thousande, syxe hundreth and thirtie.
41 This is ye summe of the kinred of the childre of Gerson, which all had to do
in the Tabernacle of wytnesse, whom Moses and Aaron nombred, acordinge to ye
worde of ye LORDE.
42 The children of Merari were nombred also acordinge to their kynreds and
fathers houses,
43 from thirtie yeare and aboue vntyll fyftye, all that were mete for the warre,
to haue office in the Tabernacle of witnesse,
44 & the summe was thre thousande, and two hundreth.
45 This is the summe of the kynred of the childre of Merari, whom Moses and
Aaron nombred, acordinge to the worde of the LORDE by Moses.
46 The summe of all the Leuites, whom Moses and Aaron with the captaynes of
Israel tolde, after their kinreds and fathers houses,
47 from thyrtie yeare and aboue vntyll fyftye, all that wente in to do euery one
his office, and to beare the burthen in ye Tabernacle of wytnesse,
48 was eight thousande fyue hundreth and foure score,
49 which were nombred acordinge to the worde of the LORDE by Moses, euery one to
his office & charge, as the LORDE commaunded Moses.

Chapter 5

1 And ye LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
2 Commaunde the children of Israel, yt they put out of the hoost all ye lepers,
and all that haue yssues, and that are defyled vpon the deed,
3 both men and wome shall they putt out of the hoost, that they defyle not their
tentes, wherin I dwell amonge them.
4 And ye children of Israel dyd so, and put them out of the hoost, as ye LORDE
had sayde vnto Moses.
5 And the LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde:
6 Speake vnto the children of Israel & saye vnto them: Whan a man or woman doth
a synne to eny body, and offendeth therwith agaynst the LORDE, then hath that
soule a trespace vpon it.
7 And they shall knowlege their synne, that they haue done, and shall make
amendes for their trespace, euen with the whole summe, and put ye fifth parte
more therto, and geue it vnto him, agaynst whom they haue trespaced.
8 But yf there be noman to make the amendes vnto for the offence yt he hath
trespaced agaynst him, then shal the reconcylynge be made vnto the LORDE for the
prest, besydes the ramme of the attonemet, wherwith he shalbe reconcyled.
9 Likewyse all the Heueofferynges of all that the children of Israel halowe vnto
the LORDE, and offre vnto the prest, shall be his.
10 And who so haloweth eny thinge, it shalbe his. And who so geueth the prest
eny thinge, it shal be his also.
11 And the LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde:
12 Speake to the children of Israel, and saye vnto them: Whan eny mans wife goth
asyde, and trespaceth agaynst him,
13 & eny ma lye with her fleshlye, and the thinge be yet hyd from his eyes, and
is not come to light that she is defiled, and he can brynge no witnesse agaynst
her (for she was not take therin)
14 and the sprete of gelousye kyndleth him, so that he is gelous ouer his wife:
whether she be vncleane or not vncleane,
15 then shal he brynge her vnto the prest, and brynge an offerynge for her, euen
the tenth parte of an Epha of barlye meele, and shal poure no oyle theron, ner
put frankensence vpon it: for it is an offerynge of gelousy, and an offeringe of
remembraunce, that remembreth synne.
16 Then shall the prest brynge her, and sett her before the LORDE,
17 and take of the holy water in an earthen vessell, and put of ye dust that is
on the floore of the habitacion, in to the water.
18 And he shal set the wife before ye LORDE, and vncouer hir heade, and the
offeringe of remembraunce which is an offeringe of gelousy, shall he laye vpon
hir handes. And the prest shal haue in his hande bytter cursinge water, and shal
coniure the wife, & saye vnto her:
19 Yf no man haue lye with the, and thou hast not gone asyde from thy hu?bande,
to defyle thy self, then shall not these bytter cursinge waters hurte the.
20 But yf thou hast gone asyde from thy hu?bande, so that thou art defyled, and
some other man hath lyen with the besyde thy hu?bande,
21 then shall the prest coniure the wife with this curse, and shal saye vnto
her: The LORDE sett the to a curse and a coniuracion amonge thy people, so that
the LORDE make thy thye rotte, and thy wombe to berst.
22 So go this cursed water in to thy body, that yi wombe berst, and thy thye
rotte. And the wife shal saye: Amen Amen.
23 So the prest shall wryte this curse in a byll, and wash it out with the
water,
24 and shall geue the wife of the bytter cursinge waters to drynke.
25 And wha the cursinge water is gone in her, so yt it is bytter vnto her then
shal the prest take the gelousy offerynge out of the wyues hande, and waue it
for a meatofferynge before the LORDE, and offre it vpon the altare:
26 namely, he shall take an handfull of the meatofferynge for hir remebraunce, &
burne it vpo the altare, & then geue the wife the water to drinke.
27 And wha she hath dronken the water, yf she be defyled and haue trespaced
agaynst hir hu?bande, then shal the cursinge water go in to her, and be so
bytter, that hir wombe shal berst, and hir thye shall rotte, and the wife shal
be a curse amonge hir people.
28 But yf the same wife be not defyled, but is cleane, then shall it do her no
harme, so that she maye be with childe.
29 This is the lawe of gelousy, whan a wyfe goeth asyde from hir hu?bande, and
is defyled:
30 Or whan ye sprete of gelousy kyndleth a man, so that he is gelous ouer his
wyfe, yt he brynge her before the LORDE, and that ye prest do all wt her
acordinge vnto this lawe.
31 And ye man shalbe giltlesse of the synne, but the wife shall beare hir
my?dede.

Chapter 6

1 And the LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde:
2 Speake vnto the children of Israel, and saye vnto them: Whan a man or woman
separateth them selues, to vowe a vowe of abstinence vnto the LORDE,
3 he shal absteyne from wyne and stroge drynke. Vyneger of wyne & of stronge
drynke shal he not drynke, ner that is pressed out of grapes: he shall nether
eate fresh ner drye grapes, so longe as his abstinence endureth.
4 Morouer he shall eate nothinge that is made of the vyne tre, from the wyne
cornels vnto the hulle.
5 As longe as the vowe of his abstynence endureth, there shall no rasoure come
vpon his heade, tyll the tyme be out which he absteyneth vnto the LORDE, for he
is holy. And he shall let the heer of his heade growe, and stonde bare openly.
6 All the tyme ouer yt he absteyneth vnto the LORDE, shal he go to no deed.
7 Nether shal he defyle him self at ye death of his father, of his mother, of
his brother, or of his sister. For the abstinence of his God is vpon his heade,
8 and ye whole tyme of his abstinence shall he be holy vnto the LORDE.
9 And yf it chaunce eny man to dye sodenly before him, then shal ye heade of his
abstynence be defyled. Therfore shal he shaue his heade in the daye of his
clensynge, that is vpon the seuenth daye:
10 and vpon ye eight daye shall he brynge two turtill doues, or two yonge
pigeons, vnto the prest before ye dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse.
11 And the prest shall make the one a synofferynge, and the other a
burntofferynge, and make an attonement for him, because he defyled himself vpon
ye deed, and so shal he halowe his heade the same daye,
12 that he maye holde out the tyme of his abstinence vnto the LORDE, and he
shall brynge a lambe of a a yeare olde for a trespaceofferynge. But ye daies
afore shal be but lost, because his abstinence was defyled.
13 This is the lawe of the absteyner. Whan the tyme of his abstinence is out, he
shal be brought before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse.
14 And he shal brynge his offeringe vnto the LORDE, euen an he lambe of a yeare
olde without blemysh for a burntofferinge, & a she lambe of a yeare olde without
blemysh for a synofferynge, and a ramme wt out blemish for an healthofferynge,
15 & a maude wt vnleuended cakes of fyne floure myngled with oyle, and swete
wafers anoynted with oyle, & their meatofferinges & drynkofferynges.
16 And the prest shall brynge it before the LORDE, and shal make his
synofferynge and his burntofferynge,
17 and ye ramme shal he make an healthofferynge vnto the LORDE, with ye maunde
of the vnleuended bred. His meatofferynge and drinkofferinge shal he make also.
18 And he shall shaue the heade of the absteyners abstinence before the dore of
the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and shall take the heade heer of his abstinence, and
cast it vpon the fyre that is vnder ye healthofferynge.
19 And the sodden shulder of the ramme shall he take, and an vnleuended cake out
of the maunde, and a swete wafer, and laye them vpon the handes of the
absteyner: (after that he hath shauen of his abstinence.)
20 And he shal Waue them before the LORDE. This is holy for the prest with the
Wauebrest, and Heueshulder. After that, maye the absteyner drynke wyne.
21 This is the lawe of the absteyner, which voweth his offeringe vnto the LORDE
for his abstynence, besydes that, which his hande can get. As he hath vowed, so
shall he do acordinge to the lawe of his abstinence.
22 And the LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde:
23 Speake vnto Aaron and his sonnes, and saye: Thus shal ye saye vnto the
childre of Israel, whan ye blesse them.
24 The LORDE blesse the, and kepe the.
25 The LORDE make his face to shyne vpo the, and be mercifull vnto the.
26 The LORDE lift vp his countenaunce vpon the, and geue the peace.
27 For they shal put my name vpo the children of Israel, that I maye blesse
them.

Chapter 7

1 And whan Moses had set vp the Habitacion and anoynted it, and sanctifyed it
with all the apparell therof: and had anoynted and halowed the altare also with
all his vessels,
2 Then offred the captaynes of Israel, which were the rulers in their fathers
houses. For they were the captaynes amonge ye kynreds, and stode ouer the that
were nombred.
3 And they brought their offerynges before the LORDE, sixe couered charettes,
and twolue oxen, for euery two captaynes a charett, and an oxe for euery one,
and brought them before the habitacion.
4 And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses:
5 Take it of them, that it maye serue for the mynistracion of the Tabernacle of
wytnesse, and geue it vnto the Leuites, vnto euery one acordinge to his office.
6 Then toke Moses the charettes and oxen, and gaue them vnto the Leuites.
7 Two charettes and foure oxen gaue he vnto ye children of Gerson acordinge to
their office:
8 and foure charettes and eight oxen gaue he vnto the children of Merari
acordinge to their office, vnder the hande of Ithamar the sonne of Aaron the
prest.
9 But vnto the children of Rahath he gaue nothynge, because they had an holy
office vpon them, and must beare vpo their shulders.
10 And the captaines offred to the dedicacion of the altare, in the daye whan it
was anoynted, and offred their giftes before the altare.
11 And ye LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Let euery captayne brynge his offerynge vpon
his daye to the dedicacion of the altare.
12 On the first daye, Nahasson the sonne of Aminadab, of the trybe of Iuda,
offred his gifte.
13 And his gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thyrtie Sycles: A
syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full
of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferinge:
14 And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense:
15 A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde
for a burntofferynge,
16 an he goate for a synofferynge:
17 And for an healthofferynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, and fyue
lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Nahasson the sonne of Aminadab.
18 On the seconde daye offred Nathaneel the sonne of Zuar, the captayne of
Isachar
19 his gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A
syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full
of fyne floure myngled with oile for a meatofferinge:
20 And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense:
21 A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a rame, a lambe of a yeare olde for
a burntofferynge,
22 an he goate for a synofferynge:
23 And for an healthofferynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, and fyue
lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Nathaneel the sonne of Zuar.
24 On the thirde daye, the captayne of the children of Zabulon, Eliab the sonne
of Helon.
25 His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A
syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full
of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge:
26 And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense:
27 A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde
for a burntofferynge,
28 an he goate for a synofferynge:
29 And for an healthofferinge two oxen, fyue rammes, fiue he goates, and fiue
lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Eliab the sonne of Helon.
30 On the fourth daye, the captayne of the children of Ruben, Elizur the sonne
of Sedeur.
31 His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A
syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full
of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge:
32 And a golde spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense:
33 A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde
for a burntofferinge,
34 an he goate for a synofferynge:
35 And for an healthofferynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, & fyue
lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Elizur the sonne of Sedeur.
36 On the fifth daye, the captayne of ye children of Simeon, Selumiel the sonne
of Zuri Sadai.
37 His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A
siluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full
of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferinge:
38 And a golde spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incese:
39 A bullocke from amoge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for
a burntofferinge,
40 & an he goate for a synofferynge:
41 And for an healthofferynge two oxe, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, and fiue
lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifts of Selumiel the sonne of Zuri Sadai.
42 On the sixte daye, the captayne of ye children of Gad, Eliasaph the sonne of
Deguel.
43 His gifte was a siluer charger, worth an hudreth & thirtie Sicles: A syluer
boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of ye Sanctuary) both full of fine
floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge:
44 And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense:
45 A bullocke from amonge ye greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for
a burntofferinge,
46 an he goate for a synnofferynge:
47 And for an health offerynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, and fyue
lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Eliasaph the sonne of Deguel.
48 On the seuenth daye the captayne of the children of Ephraim, Elisama, the
sonne of Amihud.
49 His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A
syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after ye Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full
of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge:
50 And a golde spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense:
51 A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a rame, a lambe of a yeare olde for
a burntofferynge,
52 an he goate for a synofferynge:
53 And for an healthofferynge two oxe, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, and fyue
lambes of a yeare olde. This is ye gifte of Elisama the sonne of Amihud.
54 On the eight daye, the caytayne of the children of Manasse, Gamaliel the
sonne of Pedazur.
55 His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A
syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of ye Sanctuary) both full
of fyne floure myngled wt oyle for a meatofferynge:
56 And a golde spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incese.
57 A bullocke from amoge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for
a burntofferynge,
58 an he goate for a synofferynge.
59 And for an healthofferynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, & fyue
lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur.
60 On the nyenth daye, the captayne of the children of Ben Iamin, Abidan the
sonne of Gedeoni.
61 His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A
syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full
of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge:
62 And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incese:
63 A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde
for a burntofferynge:
64 (Omitted Text)
65 And for an healthofferynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, and fyue
lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Abidan the sonne of Gedeoni.
66 On the tenth daye, the captayne of the children of Dan, Ahieser the sonne of
Ammi Sadai.
67 His gifte was a siluer charger, worth an hundreth & thirtie Sycles: A syluer
boule, worth seuentie Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sactuary) both full of fyne
floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge:
68 And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense:
69 A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde
for a burntofferynge,
70 an he goate for a synofferynge:
71 And for an healthofferynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, & fyue
lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Ahieser the sonne of Ammi Sadai.
72 On the eleuenth daye, the captayne of ye childre of Asser, Pagiel the sonne
of Ochra:
73 His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A
syluer boule, worth seuentie Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sactuary) both full
of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge:
74 And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incese:
75 A bullocke from the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for a
burntofferynge,
76 an he goate for a synofferynge:
77 And for an healthofferynge two oxe, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, and fyue
lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Pagiel the sonne of Ochran.
78 On the twolfte daye, the captayne of the children of Nephtali, Ahira the
sonne of Enan.
79 His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A
syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full
of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge:
80 And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense:
81 A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde
for a burntofferinge,
82 an he goate for a synnofferinge:
83 And for an health offeringe two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, and fyue
lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Ahira the sonne of Enan.
84 This is ye dedicacion of the altare, what tyme as it was anoynted, vnto the
which ye captaynes of Israel offered these twolue syluer chargers, twolue syluer
boules, twolue spones of golde:
85 euery charger conteynynge an hudreth and thirtie Sycles of syluer, and euery
boule seuentye Sycles. So that ye summe of all the syluer in the vessels, was
two thousande and foure hundreth Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary).
86 And the twolue spones of golde full of incense, conteyned euery one ten
Sycles, after the Sycle of the Sanctuary: So that the summe of the golde in the
spones, was an hundreth and twentye Sycles.
87 The summe of the catell for the burntofferinges, was twolue bullockes, twolue
rammes, twolue labes of a yeare olde with their meatofferinges: And twolue he
goates for synnofferinges.
88 And the summe of the catell for the healthofferinges, was foure and twetye
oxen, thre score rammes, and thre score he goates, thre score labes of a yeare
olde. This is the dedicacion of the altare, after that it was anoynted.
89 And whan Moses wente in to the Tabernacle of wytnes, yt he might be commoned
withall, he herde the voyce speakynge vnto him fro of the Mercy seate, which was
vpo the Arke of witnes betwixte the two Cherubins, from thence was he comoned
withall.

Chapter 8

1 And the LORDE talked with Moses, & sayde:
2 Speake to Aaron, & saye vnto him: Whan thou settest vp ye lapes, thou shalt
set the so, that they maye all seue geue light aboue vpo ye candilsticke.
3 And Aaron dyd so, & set ye lampes vpo ye candilsticke, as ye LORDE comaunded
Moses.
4 The worke of ye cadilsticke was of beate golde, both ye shaft & floures
therof: Acordynge to ye visio that the LORDE had shewed Moses, euen so made he
the candelsticke.
5 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
6 Take the Leuites fro amonge the children of Israel, & clense them.
7 But thus shalt thou do with them, that thou mayest clense them. Thou shalt
sprenkle purifienge water vpon them, and lett a rasure go ouer their whole body,
and washe their clothes, and then are they cleane.
8 Then shall they take a yonge bullocke, and his meatofferynge of fyne floure
myngled with oyle. And another yonge bullocke shalt thou take for a
synofferinge.
9 And thou shalt brynge the Leuites before the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and
gather together the whole congregacion of ye children of Israel,
10 and brynge the Leuytes before the LORDE. And the children of Israel shall
laye their handes vpon the Leuites.
11 And Aaron shal waue ye Leuites before the LORDE for the children of Israel,
that they maye mynistre in the seruyce of the LORDE.
12 And the Leuites shall laye their handes vpon the heedes of the bullockes, and
the one shalbe made a synnofferynge, the other a burntofferinge vnto the LORDE,
to make an attonement for the Leuites.
13 And thou shalt set the Leuites before Aaron and his sonnes, and waue them
before the LORDE,
14 and so shalt thou separate them from ye children of Israel, that they maye be
myne.
15 The shall they go in, that they maye do seruyce in the Tabernacle of
witnesse. Thus shalt thou clense the, & waue them:
16 for they are my gifte of the children of Israel, and I haue taken them vnto
me for all that openeth the Matrix, namely for the first borne of all the
children of Israel.
17 For euery first borne amonge the children of Israel is myne, both of men and
of catell, sens the tyme that I smote all the first borne in the lande of
Egipte, and sanctified them vnto myself,
18 and toke the Leuites for all the first borne amonge the childre of Israel,
19 and gaue them for a gifte vnto Aaro and his sonnes from amonge the children
of Israel, yt they shulde do the seruyce of the children of Israel in the
Tabernacle of witnesse, to make attonemet for the children of Israel, that there
be not a plage amonge the children of Israel, yf they wyll come nye ye
Sanctuary.
20 And Moses with Aaron and the whole congregacio of the childre of Israel, dyd
wt the Leuites all as the LORDE had commauded Moses.
21 And they purified the Leuites, and wa?shed their clothes. And Aaron waued
them before the LORDE, and made attoment for them, that they might be cleane.
22 After that wente they in, to do their office in the Tabernacle of witnesse
before Aaron and his sonnes: as the LORDE commauded Moses concernynge the
Leuites, euen so dyd they with them.
23 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses & sayde:
24 This is it that belongeth vnto the Leuites: From fyue and twentye yeare and
aboue, shal they go in to the office of the Tabernacle of witnesse.
25 But fro fyftie yeare forth, they shal ceasse from the waitinge of the seruyce
therof, and shall mynister nomore,
26 but shal appoynte their brethren to waite and to serue in the Tabernacle of
wytnesse: but the office shal not they execute. Thus shalt thou do with the
Leuites in their seruyces, that euery one maye wayte vpon his awne charge.

Chapter 9

1 Annd the LORDE spake vnto Moses in the wildernesse of Sinai, in ye first
moneth of the seconde yeare that they were departed out of the lande of Egipte,
& sayde:
2 Let the children of Israel kepe Easter in his season,
3 euen vpon the fourtene daye of this moueth at euen, in his season shall they
kepe it, acordynge to all the statutes & lawes therof.
4 And Moses spake to ye childre of Israel, yt they shulde kepe Easter.
5 And they kep Easter vpo the fourtene daye of the first moneth at euen in the
wildernes of Sinai. Acordinge to all that the LORDE comaunded Moses, euen so dyd
the children of Israel.
6 Then were there certayne men defyled of a deed man, so that they coulde not
kepe Easter vpon that daye: these came before Moses and Aaron the same daye,
7 and sayde vnto him: We are defiled of a deed ma: wherfore shulde we be
despysed, that we must not bringe oure giftes in his season amonge the children
of Israel?
8 Moses sayde vnto them: Stonde styll, I wil heare what the LORDE commaundeth
you.
9 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
10 Speake vnto the children of Israel, & saie: Wha eny man is defyled of a deed
coarse, or is gone farre from you ouer the felde, or is amonge youre kyn?folkes,
yet shall he kepe Easter,
11 but in the seconde moneth vpo ye fourtene daye at euen, and they shal eate it
with vnleuended bred and sowre sawse,
12 and shall leaue none of it vntyll the mornynge, ner breake eny bone therof,
and shal kepe it acordinge to all ye maner of ye Easter.
13 But he that is cleane, and not gone in a iourney, and is negligent to kepe
the Easter, the same soule shal be roted out from amoge his people: because he
brought not his gifte to the LORDE in his season, he shal beare his synne.
14 And whan there dwelleth a straunger amonge you, he shal kepe Easter also vnto
the LORDE, & shal holde it acordinge to ye ordinaunce and lawe of ye Easter.
This statute shal be vnto you alike, to the straunger as to him that is borne in
the londe.
15 And ye same daye yt the Habitacion was set vp, a cloude couered it vpo the
Tabernacle of witnesse, & at euen there was a symilitude of fyre vpon the
Habitacion vntill the mornynge.
16 So came it to passe allwaye, yt the cloude couered it by daye, & the
symilitude of fyre by night.
17 And whan the cloude was take vp from the Habitacion, then the children of
Israel wente on their iourney. And loke in what place the cloude abode, there
the childre of Israel pitched their tentes.
18 Acordinge to the worde of the LORDE toke the children of Israel their
iourney, and acordinge to his worde pitched they their tentes. So longe as the
cloude abode vpon the Habitacion, they laye styll.
19 And whan the cloude taried many dayes vpon the Habitacion, the childre of
Israel wayted vpon the LORDE, & wente not on their iourney.
20 And whan it chaunced that the cloude abode vpo ye Habitacion eny space of
dayes, then pitched they acordinge to the worde of the LORDE, & after the worde
of the LORDE wente they on their iourney.
21 Whan the cloude was there from the euenynge vntyll the mornynge, and so was
taken vp, then wete they on their iourney: and whether it was take vp by daye or
by night, they iourneyed.
22 But whan it taried vpon the habitacion two dayes, or a moneth, or a longe
season, then laye the children of Israel, and iourneyed not: and so whan it was
taken vp, they wente on their iourney.
23 For acordinge to the mouth of the LORDE they saye, and after the mouth of the
LORDE they iourneyed, so yt they kepte the LORDES watch, acordinge to the worde
of the LORDE by Moses.

Chapter 10

1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
2 Make the two trompettes of beaten syluer, that thou mayest vse them, to call
the cogregacion together, and whan the hoost shal breake vp.
3 Whan they blowe with both, then shall the whole congregacion gather them
selues together vnto the before the dore of the Tabernacle of witnesse.
4 Whan they blowe but with one, then the captaynes, the rulers ouer the
thousandes in Israel shal gather them selues together vnto the.
5 Whan ye trompe, then shal the hoostes that lye on the East syde, breake vp.
6 And whan ye trompe the seconde tyme, the hoostes that lye on the South syde,
shal breake vp. For ye shall trompe, whan they shal take their iourneys.
7 But whan ye congregacion is to be gathered together, ye shal blowe, and not
trompe.
8 This blowinge wt the trompettes shal the sonnes of Aaron the prest do. And it
shall be yor lawe for euer amonge youre posterities.
9 Whan ye go to a battayll in youre londe agaynst youre enemies yt vexe you, ye
shall trompe with the trompettes, that ye maye be remembred before the LORDE yor
God, and delyuered from youre enemies.
10 Like wyse whan ye are mery, and in youre feast dayes, & in youre new
Monethes, ye shal blowe with the trompettes ouer youre burntsacrifices &
healthofferinges, yt it maie be a remembraunce vnto you before youre God. I am
the LORDE youre God.
11 Vpon the twentye daye in the seconde moneth of the seconde yeare, arose the
cloude from the habitacion of witnesse.
12 And the childre of Israel wente on their iourney out of the wyldernesse of
Sinai, and the cloude abode in the wyldernesse of Paran,
13 First brake vp (acordinge to the worde of the LORDE by Moses.)
14 Namely, the baner of the hoost of Iuda wente forth first with their armies,
and ouer their hoost was Nahasson the sonne of Aminadab.
15 And ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children of Isachar was Nathaneel the
sonne of Zuar.
16 And ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children of Zabulon was Eliab the
sonne of Elon.
17 And the habitacion was taken downe, and the children of Gerson and Merari
bare the habitacion.
18 After that wente the baner of the hoost of Ruben with their armies, and ouer
their hoost was Elizur the sonne of Sedeur.
19 And ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children of Simeon was Selumiel the
sonne of Zuri Sadai.
20 And Eliasaph the sonne of Deguel ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children
of Gad.
21 Then wente the Rahathites forwarde also, and bare the Sanctuary, and caused
ye habitacion be set vp agaynst they came.
22 After that wente the baner of the hoost of the children of Ephraim with their
armies, and ouer their hoost was Elisama the sonne of Amihud.
23 And Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children
of Manasse.
24 And Abidan the sonne of Gedeoni ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children
of Ben Iamin.
25 After that wente the baner of the hoost of the children of Dan with their
Armyes, (and so were all the hoostes vp) and Ahieser the sonne of Ammi Sadai was
ouer their hoost.
26 And Pagiel ye sonne of Ochran, ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children of
Asser.
27 And Ahira the sonne of Enan ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children of
Nephthali.
28 Thus the childre of Israel wete forth with their armyes.
29 And Moses spake vnto his brother in lawe, Hobab the sonne of Raguel of
Madian: We go vnto the place, of the which ye LORDE sayde: I wil geue it you:
Come now with vs therfore, and we wil do ye best with the, for the LORDE hath
promysed good vnto Israel.
30 But he answered: I wil not go wt you, but wil go in to myne awne londe vnto
my kynred.
31 He sayde: Oh nay, leaue vs not: for thou knowest where is best for vs to
pytche in the wyldernesse, and thou shalt be oure eye.
32 And yf thou goest with vs, loke what good the LORDE doth vnto vs, the same
wil we do vnto the.
33 So they departed from the mount of the LORDE thre dayes iourney, & the Arke
of the LORDES couenaunt wente before them those thre dayes iourney, to shewe the
where they shulde rest.
34 And ye cloude of the LORDE was ouer them in the daye tyme, whan they wete out
of ye tetes.
35 And whan the Arke wente forth, Moses sayde: Aryse LORDE, let thine enemies be
scatered, and let them that hate the, flye before the.
36 And whan it rested, he sayde: Come agayne O LORDE vnto the multitude of the
thousandes of Israel.

Chapter 11

1 And whan ye people waxed vnpaciet, it displeased sore ye eares of ye LORDE.
And whan the LORDE herde it, his wrath waxed whote, & the fyre of ye LORDE burnt
amoge them, so yt it cosumed the vttemost of ye hoost.
2 The cryed the people vnto Moses. And Moses prayed vnto the LORDE. So ye fyre
quenched.
3 And the place was called Tabera, because the fyre of the LORDE burnt amonge
them.
4 Then the comon sorte of people yt was amoge them, fell a lustinge, and sat &
wepte wt the children of Israel, and sayde: Who wyll geue vs flesh to eate?
5 We remembre the fish, the we ate in Egipte for naught, & Cucumbers, Melouns,
lekes, onyons, & garleke:
6 But now is oure soule dryed awaye, oure eyes se nothinge then the Manna.
7 The Manna was like Coriader sede, and to loke vpon, like Bedellion.
8 And the people ranne here and there, & gathered it, & grounde it in Milles,
and beate it in morters, and baked it in panes, and made cakes of it, and it had
a taist like an oyle cake.
9 And whan ye dew fell vpon the tetes in the night, ye Manna fell therwith.
10 Now whan Moses herde the people wepe amoge their kynreds, euery one in his
tet dore, then the wrath of the LORDE waxed exceadinge whote. And it greued
Moses also.
11 And Moses sayde vnto the LORDE: Why vexest thou thy seruaunte? And why fynde
not I fauoure in yi sight, yt thou layest ye burthen of all this people vpo me?
12 Haue I the coceaued all this people, or begotten them, that thou shuldest
saye vnto me: Cary them in thine armes (as a nurse beareth a childe) vnto the
londe, that thou hast sworne vnto their fathers?
13 Where shal I get flesh, to geue all this people? They wepe before me, and
saye: Geue vs flesh, that we maye eate.
14 I am not able to beare all this people alone, for it is to heuy for me.
15 And yf thou wylt deale thus wt me: O kyll me then, yf I haue founde fauoure
in thy sight, that I se not my wrechednesse.
16 And the LORDE saide vnto Moses: Gather vnto me seuentye men amonge the Elders
of Israel, whom thou knowest yt they are the Elders in ye people and officers
ouer them, and brynge them before the Tabernacle of witnesse, and set them there
with the:
17 then wil I come downe, and talke with the euen there, & take of thy sprete
that is vpon the, and putt it vpon them, that they maye beare the burthen of the
people with the, yt thou beare not all alone.
18 And vnto ye people thou shalt saye: Sactifye yor selues agaynst tomorow, yt
ye maye eate flesh: for youre wepynge is come into the eares of the LORDE, ye
that saye: Who shal geue vs flesh to eate? for we were well at ease in Egipte.
Therfore shal the LORDE geue you flesh to eate,
19 not one daye, not two, not fyue, not ten, not twentye dayes longe,
20 but a moneth longe, tyll it go out at youre noses, and tyll ye lothe it: euen
because ye haue refused the LORDE, which is amonge you, and haue wepte before
him, & sayde: Wherfore wente we out of Egipte?
21 And Moses sayde: Sixe hundreth thousande fote men are there of the people
amoge whom I am, and thou sayest: I wyll geue you flesh to eate a moneth loge.
22 Shal the shepe and oxen be slayne to be ynough for them? Or shal all the
fishes of the see be gathered together, to be sufficient for them?
23 The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Is the LORDES hande shortened then? But now shalt
thou se, whether my wordes shall be fulfilled in dede, or no?
24 And Moses wete out, and tolde the people ye worde of the LORDE, and gathered
the seuentye men amonge the Eldest of the people, & set them rounde aboute the
Tabernacle.
25 Then came the LORDE downe in a cloude, & spake vnto him, & toke of the sprete
yt was vpon him, & put it vpon the seuentie Elders. And whan the sprete rested
vpon them, they prophecied, and ceassed not.
26 But in the hoost there remayned yet two men, of whom the one was called
Eldad, ye other Medad, & the sprete rested vpo them. For they were wrytten vp
also, & yet were they not gone out vnto the Tabernacle, and they prophecied in
the hoost.
27 Then ran there a lad, & tolde Moses, & sayde: Eldad and Medad prophecie in
the hoost.
28 Then answered Iosua ye sonne of Nun Moses seruaunte (whom he had chosen) and
sayde: My lorde Moses, for bydde them.
29 But Moses sayde vnto him: Art thou gelous for my sake? wolde God, yt all the
people of ye LORDE coulde prophecie, and that ye LORDE wolde geue them his
sprete.
30 So Moses and the Elders of Israel gat them to the hoost.
31 Then wente out the wynde from ye LORDE, & caused quayles to come from the
see, & scatred the ouer the hoost, here a dayes iourney, there a dayes iourney
rounde aboute ye hoost, two cubytes hye aboue ye earth.
32 Then the people stode vp all that daye and all yt night, and all the nexte
daye, and gathered quayles: and he that gathered the leest, gathered ten Homers,
& they kylled them rounde aboute the hoost.
33 But whyle ye flesh was yet betwene their tethe, & or euer it was vp, the
wrath of the LORDE waxed whote amonge the people, and slewe them with an
exceadinge greate slaughter.
34 Therfore is the same place called the graues of lust, because the voluptuous
people were buried there.
35 From the lustgraues toke the people their iourney vnto Hazeroth, and abode at
Hazeroth.

Chapter 12

1 And Miriam & Aaron spake agaynst Moses because of his wife the Morian which he
had taken, because he had take a Morian to wife,
2 and they sayde: Doth the LORDE speake onely thorow Moses? Speaketh he not also
by vs? And the LORDE herde it.
3 But Moses was a very meke man, aboue all men vpon earth.
4 And haistely spake the LORDE vnto Moses, and to Aaron, and to Miriam: Go out
ye thre vnto ye Tabernacle of wytnesse. And they wente out all thre.
5 Then came the LORDE downe in the cloudy piler, & stode in the dore of the
Tabernacle, & called Aaron & Miriam, & they both wete out.
6 And he sayde: Heare my wordes: Yf eny man be a prophet of the LORDE, vnto him
wil I shewe my self in a vision, or wil speake vnto him in a dreame.
7 But not so wt my seruaunt Moses, which is faithfull in all my house.
8 Mouth to mouth speake I vnto him, & he seyth the LORDE in his fashion, not
thorow darke wordes or licknesses: Wherfore were ye not afrayed then to speake
agaynst my seruaunt Moses?
9 And ye wrath of the LORDE waxed whote ouer them, & he turned him awaye,
10 and ye cloude also departed from the Tabernacle. And beholde, then was Miriam
become leporus, as it were snowe. And Aaron turned him vnto Miriam, and sawe
that she was leporous,
11 and sayde vnto Moses: Oh my lorde, put not the synne vpon vs, which we haue
foolishly committed and synned,
12 that she be not as one that commeth deed out of his mothers wombe: It hath
eaten vp half hir flesh allready.
13 But Moses cried vnto the LORDE, & sayde: Oh God, heale her.
14 The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Yf hir father had spytte in hir face, shulde she
not be ashamed seuen dayes? Let her be shut out of ye hoost seue dayes, after yt
let her be receaued agayne.
15 So Miriam was shut out of the hoost seue dayes, & the people wente no
farther, tyll Miriam was receaued againe.
16 Afterwarde departed the people from Hazeroth, and pitched in ye wildernesse
of Paran.

Chapter 13

1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
2 Sende forth men to spye out ye lande of Canaan (which I wil geue vnto ye
children of Israel) of euery trybe of their fathers a man, and let them all be
soch as are captaynes amonge them.
3 Moses sent the out of the wildernes of Paran, acordinge to the worde of the
LORDE, soch as were all heades amonge the children of Israel, and these are
their names:
4 Samma the sonne of Zacur, of the trybe of Ruben.
5 Saphat the sonne of Hori, of the trybe of Simeon.
6 Caleb ye sonne of Iephune, of the trybe of Iuda.
7 Igeal the sonne of Ioseph, of the trybe of Isachar.
8 Hosea the sonne of Nun, of ye trybe of Ephraim.
9 Palti the sonne of Raphu, of the trybe of Ben Iamin.
10 Gadiel the sonne of Sodi, of ye trybe of Zabulon.
11 Gaddi the sonne of Susi, of the trybe of Ioseph of Manasse.
12 Ammiel the sonne of Gemalli, of the trybe of Dan.
13 Sethur ye sonne of Michael, of the trybe of Asser.
14 Nahebi the sonne of Vaphsi, of the trybe of Nephtali.
15 Guel the sonne of Machi, of the trybe of Gad.
16 These are the names of the men, whom Moses sent forth to spye out the lande.
As for Hosea the sonne of Nun, Moses called him Iosua.
17 Now whan Moses sent the forth to spye out the lande of Canaan, he sayde vnto
the: Go vp southwarde, and get you vp to the mountaynes,
18 and loke vpon the londe how it is: and the people that dwell therin, whether
they be stronge or weake, fewe or many:
19 and what maner of lande it is that they dwell in, whether it be good or bad:
& what maner of cities they be that they dwell in, whether they be fenced with
walles, or not:
20 and what maner of lande it is, whether it be fatt or leane, and whether there
be trees therin, or not. Be of a good corage, and bringe of the frutes of the
londe. It was euen aboute the tyme, that grapes are first rype.
21 They wente vp, & spyed the lande, from ye wildernes of Zin; vntyll Rehob, as
me go vnto Hemath.
22 They wente vp also towarde the south, and came vnto Hebron, where Ahiman was,
and Sesai and Thalmai, the children of Enack (Hebron was buylded seuen yeare
before Zoan in Egipte.)
23 And they came to the ryuer of Escol, and there they cut downe a cluster of
grapes, and caused two to beare it vpon a staffe, pomgranates also and fygges.
24 The place is called the ryuer of Escol, because of the cluster of grapes,
which the children of Israel cut downe there.
25 And whan they had spyed out the lande, they turned bake againe after fourtye
daies,
26 and wente, and came to Moses and Aaron, & to the whole congregacion of ye
children of Israel in to ye wyldernesse of Paran, eue vnto Cades, and brought
them worde agayne, and to the whole congregacion, how it stode, and let them se
the frute of the lande,
27 and tolde them, and sayde: We came in to ye lande, whither ye sent vs, where
it floweth with mylke and hony, and this is the frute therof:
28 sauynge that stronge people dwell therin, and the cities are exceadinge
stronge and greate. And we sawe the children of Enack there also.
29 The Amalechites dwell in the south countre, the Hethites, and Iebusites and
Amorites dwell vpon the mountaynes, but the Cananites dwell by the see, and
aboute Iordane.
30 Howbeit Caleb stylled ye people that was agaynst Moses, and sayde vnto them:
Let vs go vp, and conquere the lande, for we are able to ouercome it.
31 But the men that wente vp with him, sayde: We are not able to go vp agaynst
that people, for they are to stronge for vs.
32 And of the lande that they had searched, they brought vp an euell reporte
amonge the childre of Israel, and saide: The lade that we haue gone thorow to
spye out, eateth vp the indwellers therof: and all the people that we sawe
therin, are men of greate stature.
33 We sawe giauntes there also, yee giauntes as the children of Enack: and we
semed in oure sighte as ye greshoppers, and so dyd we in their sighte.

Chapter 14

1 Then the whole cogregacion toke on, and cryed, and the people wepte yt night.
2 And all the childre of Israel murmured agaynst Moses and Aaron, and the whole
congregacion sayde vnto them: Oh that we had dyed in the lande of Egipte, or
that we might dye yet in this wyldernesse.
3 Wherfore bryngeth the LORDE vs in to this lande, that oure wyues shulde fall
thorow the swerde, and ouer children be a praye? Is it not better, that we go
agayne in to Egipte?
4 And they sayde one to another: Let vs make a captayne, and go into Egipte
agayne.
5 But Moses & Aaron fell vpo their faces before ye whole cogregacion of the
multitude of the childre of Israel.
6 And Iosua ye sonne of Nun, & Caleb ye sonne of Iephune (which also had spyed
out the lande) rente their clothes,
7 & spake to the whole cogregacion of the children of Israel: The londe yt we
haue walked thorow to spye it out, is a very good lande.
8 Yf the LORDE haue lust vnto vs, he shal brynge vs in to the same londe, & geue
it vs, which is a lade that floweth with mylke & hony.
9 But in anye wyse rebell not ye agaynst the LORDE, & feare not ye people of
this lande, for we wil eate the vp as bred. Their defence is departed fro them,
but the LORDE is wt vs, be not ye afrayed of them.
10 And all the people, bad stone them wt stones. Then appeared the glory of the
LORDE in the Tabernacle of witnesse vnto all the children of Israel,
11 & the LORDE sayde vnMoses: How longe shal this people blaspheme me? And how
longe wil it be, or they beleue me, for all the tokes that I haue shewed amonge
them?
12 I wil smyte them with pestilence & destroye the, & wil make of the a greater
& mightier people then this is.
13 But Moses sayde vnto ye LORDE: Then shal ye Egipcians heare it (for wt thy
power hast thou brought this people from amoge the)
14 so shal it be tolde the inhabiters of this lande also, which haue herde, yt
thou O LORDE art amonge this people, yt thou art sene from face to face, & that
thy cloude stondeth ouer them, and that thou goest before them in the cloudy
piler on the daye tyme, and in the fyrie piler on the night season.
15 Yf thou shuldest now slaye this people as one man, then the Heythen that haue
herde so good reporte of the, shulde saye:
16 The LORDE was not able to brynge the people in to the londe, that he sware
vnto them, therfore hath he slayne them in the wyldernes.
17 So let the power of the LORDE now be greate, acordinge as thou hast spoken
and sayde:
18 The LORDE is of longe sufferaunce and of greate mercy, and forgeueth synne
and trespace, and leaueth no man innocent, & vysiteth the my?dede of the fathers
vpon the children in to the thirde and fourth generacion.
19 O be gracious now vnto the synne of this people acordinge to thy greate
mercy, like as thou hast forborne this people also, euer from Egipte vnto this
place.
20 And the LORDE sayde: I haue forgeue it, as thou hast saide.
21 But as truly as I lyue, all ye worlde shalbe full of my glory.
22 For of all ye men that haue sene my glory & my tokens, which I dyd in Egipte
and in the wildernesse, and tempted me new ten tymes, & haue not herkened vnto
my voyce,
23 there shall not one se the londe that I sware vnto their fathers: nether shal
eny of them that haue blasphemed me, se it.
24 But my seruaut Caleb, because there is another maner sprete with him, &
because he hath folowed me, him wil I brynge in to the lande, which he hath gone
thorow, & his sede shal conquere it,
25 and ye Amalechites also and the Cananites, that dwell in the lowe countrees.
Tomorow turne you, and get you to the wyldernesse, in the waye towarde the reed
see.
26 And ye LORDE spake vnto Moses & Aaron, & sayde:
27 How loge shal this euell multitude murmur agaynst me?
28 For I haue herde the murmuringe of the childre of Israel, yt they haue
murmured agaynst me. Tell them therfore: As trulye as I lyue (sayeth ye LORDE) I
wil do vnto you, euen as ye haue spoken in myne eares:
29 Youre carcases shal lye in this wildernesse. And all ye that were nombred
from twentye yeare and aboue, which haue murmured agaynst me,
30 shall not come in to the lande (cocernynge the which I lift vp my hade, yt I
wolde let you dwell therin) saue Caleb ye sonne of Iephune, and Iosua the sonne
of Nun.
31 Youre children, of whom ye sayde: They shalbe a spoyle, them wyll I brynge
in, so yt they shal knowe the lande, which ye haue refused.
32 But ye with youre carcases shall lye in this wildernesse,
33 and yor children shal wander in this wildernesse fourtye yeares, & beare yor
whordome, tyll yor carcases be waisted in the wildernesse,
34 acordinge to the nombre of ye fourtye dayes, wherin ye spyed out the londe. A
daye for a yeare, so yt fourtye yeares ye shall beare youre my?dede, that ye
maye knowe what it is, whan I withdrawe my hande.
35 Euen I the LORDE haue sayde it, & wil do it in dede vnto all this euell
congregacion, that haue lift vp them selues agaynst me: In this wildernesse shal
they be consumed, and there shal they dye.
36 So there dyed and were plaged before the LORDE all the me, whom Moses sent to
spye out the lade, & came agayne, and made the whole cogregacion to murmur
agaynst it, because they brought vp a my?reporte of the lande,
37 that it was euell.
38 But Iosua the sonne of Nun, and Caleb ye sonne of Iephune were left alyue, of
the men that wente to spye out the lande.
39 And Moses spake these wordes vnto all the children of Israel. The toke the
people greate sorowe.
40 And they arose early in ye mornynge, and wente vp to the toppe of ye
mountayne, and sayde: Lo, here are we, and will go vp to the place, wherof the
LORDE hath sayde: for we haue synned.
41 But Moses sayde: wherfore go ye on this maner beyonde ye worde of the LORDE?
It shall not prospere with you:
42 go not vp (for ye LORDE is not amoge you) yt ye be not slayne before yor
enemies.
43 For the Amalechites and Cananites are there before you, & ye shal fall thorow
ye swerde, because ye haue turned yor selues from the LORDE, and the LORDE shal
not be with you.
44 But they were blynded to go vp to the toppe of the mountaine: neuertheles the
Arke of the LORDES couenaunt & Moses came not out of the hooste.
45 Then came downe ye Amalechites & Cananites which dwelt vpon that mountayne,
and smote them and hewed them, euen vnto Horma.

Chapter 15

1 And the LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde:
2 Speake to the childre of Israel, & saye vnto them: Whan ye come in to the
lande of youre dwellinge, which I shal geue you,
3 and wil do sacrifice vnto the LORDE, whether it be a burntofferynge, or an
offrynge for a speciall vowe, or a frewyll offerynge, or youre feast offerynges,
that ye maye make a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE, of oxen or of shepe.
4 He yt wil offre now his gifte vnto ye LORDE, shal brynge for the meatofferinge
a teth deale of fyne floure myngled with oyle of the fourth parte of an Hin,
5 and wyne for ye drynkofferynge the fourth parte of an Hin also: to the
burntofferinge, or eny other offeringe, whan a lambe is offred.
6 But wha there is a ramme offred, thou shalt make the meatofferynge two teth
deales of fyne floure myngled with oyle, of the thirde parte of an Hin,
7 and ye thirde parte of an Hin of wyne also for a drynkofferinge: this shalt
thou offre for a swete sauor vnto the LORDE.
8 But yf thou wilt offre an oxe for a burntofferynge, or for a speciall vowe
offerynge, or for an healthofferinge vnto the LORDE,
9 thou shalt brynge to the oxe, the meatoffrynge, euen thre tenth deales of fyne
floure mingled with half an Hin of oyle, & half an Hin of wyne for a
drynkoffrynge.
10 This is an offerynge of a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE.
11 Thus shalt thou do with an oxe, with a ramme, with a lambe, and with a goate.
12 Acordinge as the nombre of the offerynges is, therafter shall the nombre of
the meatofferynges and drynkofferynges be also.
13 He that is one of youre selues, shall do this, that he maye offre a sacrifice
of a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE.
14 And yf there dwell a straunger with you, or is amoge youre kyn?folkes, and
wil do an offerynge vnto the LORDE for a swete sauoure, the same shal do as ye
do.
15 Let there be one statute for the whole cogregacion, both vnto you and to the
straungers. A perpetuall statute shal it be vnto youre posterities, that the
straunger be eue as ye before ye LORDE.
16 One lawe, and one ordinaunce shalbe vnto you and to the straunger that
dwelleth with you.
17 And the LORDE talked with Moses, & sayde:
18 Speake to the children of Israel, and saye vnto them: Whan ye come in to the
lande, in to ye which I shal brynge you,
19 so that ye eate the bred of the londe, ye shal heue vp an Heueofferynge vnto
the LORDE,
20 namely, a cake of the firstlinges of youre dowe shall ye geue for an
Heueofferynge: as the Heueofferynge of the barne,
21 euen so shal ye geue the firstlinges of youre dowe also vnto the LORDE, for
an Heueofferynge amonge youre posterities.
22 And whan ye thorow ignoraunce ouer se eny of these commaundementes, which the
LORDE hath spoken by Moses,
23 and all yt the LORDE hath commaunded you by Moses (from the daye that the
LORDE beganne to commaunde for youre posterities)
24 and the cogregacion do ought ignorauntly, the shal the whole congregacion
offre a yonge bullocke from amonge the greate catell to a burntofferynge, for a
swete sauoure vnto the LORDE, with his meatofferynge and drynkofferynge as the
maner is, and an he goate for a synofferynge.
25 And so shal the prest make an attonement for the whole congregacion of the
children of Israel, and it shalbe forgeuen them: for it is an ignoraunce. And
they shal brynge these their giftes for an offerynge vnto the LORDE, and their
synofferynge before the LORDE for their ignoraunce,
26 and it shalbe forgeuen the whole congregacion of the childre of Israel, & the
straunger also yt dwelleth amonge you, for so moch as all the people is in soch
ignoraunce.
27 Yf one soule synne thorow ignoraunce, the same shal brynge a she goate of a
yeare olde for a synofferynge.
28 And the prest shall make an attonement for soch an ignoraunt soule with the
synofferinge for the ignoraunce before the LORDE, that he maye reconcyle him,
and it shal be forgeuen him.
29 And it shal be one lawe, (that ye shal do for ye ignoraunce) both vnto him
that is borne amonge the children of Israel, and to the straunger that dwelleth
amonge you.
30 But yf a soule do ought presumptuously, whether he be one of youre selues or
a straunger, he hath despysed the LORDE: ye same soule shalbe roted out from
amoge his people:
31 because he hath despysed the worde of the LORDE, and hath left his
commaundement vndone: that soule shall vtterly perishe, his synne shalbe vpon
him.
32 Now whyle the children of Israel were in the wyldernesse, they founde a man
gatherynge stickes vpon the Sabbath daye.
33 And they that founde him gatherynge stickes, brought him vnto Moses and
Aaron, and before the whole congregacion.
34 And they put him in preson, for it was not declared what shulde be done vnto
him.
35 The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: The man shall dye the death, the whole
congregacion shal stone him without the hoost.
36 Then the whole cogregacion brought him out of ye hoost, and stoned him that
he dyed, as ye LORDE commaunded Moses.
37 And ye LORDE sayde vnto Moses:
38 Speake to the childre of Israel, & saye vnto the, yt they make them gardes
vpon ye quarters of their garmentes amonge all yor posterities, and put yalowe
rybandes vpon the gardes in ye quarters.
39 And ye gardes shal serue you, yt ye maye loke vpon the, and remembre all the
comaundementes of the LORDE, & do them: that ye order not youre selues after ye
meanynge of youre awne hert, ner go awhorynge after youre awne eyes.
40 Therfore shal ye remembre and do all my commaundementes, and be holy vnto
youre God.
41 I am the LORDE youre God, which brought you out of the lande of Egipte, to be
yor God. Euen I the LORDE youre God.

Chapter 16

1 And Corah the sonne of Iezehar the sonne of Kahath, the sonne of Leui, with
Dathan and Abiram the sonne of Eliab, and On the sonne of Peleth, ye sonnes of
Rube,
2 tode vp agaynst Moses, with certayne men amonge the childre of Israel, two
hundreth & fyftie captaynes of the congregacion, councelers, & famous men.
3 And they gathered them selues agaynst Moses & Aaro & sayde vnto them: Ye make
to moch adoo, for all the congregacion is holy euery one, and the LORDE is
amonge them: Why lifte ye youre selues vp then aboue the congregacion of the
LORDE?
4 Whan Moses herde yt, he fell vpo his face,
5 & saide vnto Corah, & to all his company: Tomorow shal ye LORDE shewe who is
his, & who is holy to come vnto him. Who so euer he choseth, ye same shal come
vnto him.
6 This do: Take ye censors, thou Corah & all yi copanye,
7 & do fyre therin, & put incense theron tomorow before the LORDE: then whom so
euer the LORDE choseth, the same shal be holy. Ye make to moch a doo, ye
children of Leui.
8 And Moses sayde vnto Corah: Heare ye childre of Leui,
9 it not ynough vnto you, yt ye God of Israel hath separated you fro ye
multitude of Israel, yt ye shulde come nye him, to do the seruyce of the
dwellynge place of the LORDE, and stonde before the people to mynister vnto
them?
10 He hath caused the and all thy brethren the childre of Leui with the, to come
nye vnto him: and now ye seke the presthode also.
11 Thou and all thy copany conspyre agaynst the LORDE. What is Aaron, that ye
shulde murmur against him?
12 And Moses sent to call Datha & Abira ye sonnes of Eliab. But they saide: We
wil not come vp.
13 Is it to litle yt thou hast brought vs out of ye lande of Egipte (yt floweth
wt mylke & hony) to kyll vs in ye wildernesse: but thou must raigne ouer vs
also?
14 How goodly well hast thou brought vs in to a lande, that floweth wt milke and
hony, & geue vs feldes and vyniardes in possession? Wilt thou put out these mens
eyes? We will not come vp.
15 Then was Moses very wroth, & saide vnto ye LORDE: Turne ye not vnto their
meatofferinges. I haue not take so moch as an Asse fro the, nether haue I hurte
eny of the.
16 And Moses sayde vnto Corah: Tomorow be thou & all yi companye before ye
LORDE, thou, and they, & Aaron.
17 And take euery one his censer, and put incense therin, and come before the
LORDE, euery one with his censer (that is two hundreth and fiftye censers) and
both thou and Aaron take either his censer.
18 And euery one toke his censer, and put fyre therin, and layed incense theron,
and came before the dore of the Tabernacle of witnes, and Moses and Aaron also.
19 And Corah gathered ye whole congregacio agaynst the before the dore of the
Tabernacle of witnes. But ye glory of the LORDE appeared before ye whole
congregacion.
20 And ye LORDE spake vnto Moses & Aaron, & sayde:
21 Separate youre selues fro this congregacio, yt I maye shortly consume them.
22 And they fell vpon their faces, & sayde: O God, thou God of the spretes of
all flesh, yf one man haue synned, wilt thou therfore be wroth ouer the whole
congregacion?
23 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & saide:
24 Speake to the congregacio, and saye: Come vp from ye dwellynge of Corah, and
Dathan, and Abiram.
25 And Moses stode vp, & wente vnto Dathan & Abiram, & the Elders of Israel
folowed him,
26 & he spake to ye cogregacio, & saide: Departe fro ye tentes of these vngodly
me & touche nothinge yt is theirs, yt ye perishe not in eny of their sinnes.
27 And they gat them vp from the dwellynge of Corah, Dathan, & Abiram. But
Dathan and Abira came out, and stode in the dore of their tentes, with their
wyues, and sonnes and children.
28 And Moses sayde: Hereby shal ye knowe that the LORDE hath sent me, to do all
these workes, and that I haue not done them of myne awne hert.
29 Yf these men dye the comon death of all men, or be vysited as all men are
vysited, then hath not the LORDE sent me.
30 But yf the LORDE make a new thinge, and the earth open hir mouth, and swalowe
them with all that they haue, so yt they go downe quycke in to hell, the shal ye
knowe, that these men haue blasphemed the LORDE.
31 And wha he had spoke out all these wordes, ye groude cloue asunder vnder the,
32 & the earth opened hir wouth, & swalowed the, wt their houses, & all the me
yt were wt Corah, & all their substauce,
33 and they wente downe quycke in to the hell, with all that they had. And the
earth closed vpo them, & so they perished from amonge ye congregacio.
34 And all Israel yt were aboute the, fled at ye crye of the, for they sayde:
That ye earth swalowe not vs also.
35 Morouer the fyre came out fro the LORDE, and consumed the two hundreth and
fyftye men, that offred the incense.
36 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
37 Speake to Eleasar ye sonne of Aaron ye prest, yt he take vp ye censers out of
ye burninge, & scater ye fyre here & there
38 (For the censers of these synners are halowed thorow their soules) yt they
maye be beate in to thinne plates, & fastened vpon ye altare. For they are
offred before ye LORDE, & halowed: and they shalbe a token vnto ye childre of
Israel.
39 And Eleasar the prest toke ye brasen censers which they yt were burnt, had
offred, & bet the to plates, to fasten the vpon ye altare
40 for a remebraunce vnto ye children of Israel yt no straunger (and he that is
not of ye sede of Aaron) come nye to offre incense before the LORDE, yt it happe
not vnto him as vnto Corah and his companye, acordynge as the LORDE sayde vnto
him by Moses.
41 On the nexte morow murmured ye whole congregacion of ye childre of Israel
against Moses & Aaro, & saide: Ye haue slayne ye people of ye LORDE.
42 And whan the cogregacio was gathered agaynst Moses & Aaro, they turned the
towarde ye Tabernacle of witnes And beholde, the ye cloude couered ye
Tabernacle, & ye glory of ye LORDE appeared.
43 And Moses & Aaro wete in before ye Tabernacle of witnes.
44 And ye LORDE spake vnto Moses & sayde:
45 Get you out of this cogregacion, I wil shortly consume the. And they fell
vpon their faces.
46 And Moses sayde vnto Aaron: Take the ceser & put fyre therin fro of the
altare, & laye incese theron, & go soone to the cogregacion, & make an
attonement for them. For the wrath is gone out from the LORDE, and the plage is
begone amonge the people.
47 And Aaron dyd as Moses sayde, & ranne in the myddest amonge ye congregacio.
And beholde, ye plage was begone. And he burnt incese & made an attonemet for
the people,
48 & stode betwene the deed & the lyuynge, and the plage ceassed.
49 But there were fourtene thousande, and seue hundreth deed in the plage,
besydes them that dyed aboute the busynesse of Corah.
50 And Aaron came agayne vnto Moses before the dore of the Tabernacle of
witnesse. And the plage ceassed.

Chapter 17

1 And ye LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde
2 Speake to the children of Israel, & take of the twolue staues, of euery
captayne of his fathers house one, and wryte euery mans name vpon his staffe.
3 But Aarons name shalt thou wryte vpon the staffe of Leui. For euery heade of
their fathers house shal haue a staffe.
4 And laye the in the Tabernacle of witnesse, before the witnesse where I
testifie vnto you.
5 And loke whom I shall chose, his staffe shal florishe, yt I maye stylle the
grudginges of the children of Israel, which they grudge agaynst you.
6 And Moses spake vnto the childre of Israel, & all their captaynes gaue him
twolue staues, euery captayne a staffe, after ye house of their fathers. And
Aarons staffe was amonge their staues also.
7 And Moses layed the staues before the LORDE in the Tabernacle of witnesse.
8 On the morow wha Moses wete in to ye Tabernacle of witnesse, he foude yt Aaros
rodde of the house of Leui florished, and brought forth blossoms, & bare
allmondes.
9 And Moses brought forth all ye staues fro ye LORDE before all ye childre of
Israel, that they might se it. And they toke euery ma his staffe.
10 The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Bringe Aaros staffe againe before the wytnesse,
yt it maye be kepte for a toke to the children of rebellion, that their
murmuringes maye ceasse fro me, lest they dye.
11 Moses dyd as ye LORDE comaunded him.
12 And ye childre of Israel sayde vnto Moses: Beholde, we cosume awaie, we are
destroied, & perishe.
13 Who so cometh nye ye dwellynge place of ye LORDE, he dyeth. Shal we the
vtterly cosume awaie?

Chapter 18

1 And the LORDE sayde vnto Aaron: Thou & thy sonnes, & thy fathers house wt the
shal beare the my?dede of ye Sactuary: & thou & thy sonnes wt the, shall beare
the my?dede of yor presthode.
2 But thy brethren of the trybe of Leui yi father, shal come nye the, & be
ioyned vnto the, that they maye mynistre vnto ye. But thou & thy sonnes wt the,
shal mynistre before ye Tabernacle of witnesse.
3 And they shal wayte vpo ye seruyce & vpon ye seruyce of the whole Tabernacle.
But nye vnto the vessels of ye Sactuary & to the altare, shall they not come, yt
both they & ye dye not:
4 howbeit they shal be ioyned vnto the, to wayte vpo the mynistracion in the
Tabernacle of witnesse, in all the seruice of the Tabernacle. And there shal no
straunger come nye vnto you.
5 Therfore wayte now vpon the seruyce of the Sanctuary, and vpon the seruyce of
the altare, that there come no more wrath vpon the children of Israel.
6 For lo, I haue take yor brethre the Leuites fro amonge the children of Israel,
to be youre gifte, for a presente vnto ye LORDE, to do ye seruyce in ye
Tabernacle of witnes.
7 As for ye, and yi sonnes with the, ye shal waite vpon youre prestes office,
that ye maye ministre in all maner busynes of the altare, and within the vayle:
for yor prestes office geue I vnto you for a gifte to do seruyce. Yf a straunger
come nye, he shall dye.
8 And the LORDE sayde vnto Aaron: beholde, I haue geuen the my Heueofferynges:
And all that the children of Israel halowe, haue I geuen vnto the, and to thy
sonnes for a perpetuall dewtye.
9 This shalt thou haue of the most holy thinges that they offer. All their
giftes with all their meatofferinges, and with all their synofferynges, and wt
all their trespace offerynges, that they geue me, the same shal be most holy
vnto the and yi sonnes.
10 In the most holy place shalt thou eate it. All that are males shall eate
therof: For it shal be holy vnto the.
11 The Heue offerynge of their giftes in all the Waueofferynges of the children
of Israel, haue I geuen vnto the also, and to thy sonnes, and to thy doughters
for a perpetuall dewtye. Who so is cleane in thy house, shal eate therof.
12 All the fat of the oyle, and all ye fat of the wyne and corne of their
firstlinges, that they geue vnto the LORDE, haue I geuen vnto ye.
13 The first frutes of all that is in their londe, which they bringe vnto the
LORDE, shal be thine. Who so euer is cleane in thine house, shal eate therof.
14 All dedicate thinges in Israel shal be thine.
15 All that breaketh the Matrix amonge all flesh, which they brynge vnto the
LORDE, whether it be man or beest, shalbe thine. But so, that thou cause the
firstborne of ma to be redemed, and that thou cause the first borne of vncleane
beestes to be redemed also
16 (They shal redeme it whan it is a moneth olde, and shall geue it lowse for
money, euen for fyue Sycles, after the Sycle of the Sanctuary, which Sycle is
worth twentye Geras.)
17 But the first frutes of an oxe, or lambe, or goate shalt thou not cause to be
redemed for they are holy. Their bloude shalt thou sprenkle vpon the altare, and
their fat shalt thou burne for an offerynge of a swete sauoure vnto ye LORDE.
18 Their flesh shalbe thine, like as ye Wauebrest and ye right shulder is thine
also.
19 All the Heueofferinges that ye childre of Israel halowe vnto ye LORDE, haue I
geuen vnto the, & to thy sonnes, & to thy doughters with the for a perpetuall
dewtie. This shalbe a salted couenaut for euer before ye LORDE, vnto the and thy
sede with the.
20 And the LORDE sayde vnto Aaro: Thou shalt inheret nothinge in their londe,
ner haue eny porcio amonge them: for I am yi porcion, and thine enheritaunce
amoge the children of Israel.
21 Vnto the children of Leui haue I geuen all the tithes in Israel to
inheritaunce, for ye seruyce which they do vnto me in the Tabernacle of
witnesse,
22 that from hece forth the children of Israel come not nye the Tabernacle of
witnes, to lade them selues with synne, and to dye:
23 But the Leuites shal do the seruyce in the Tabernacle of witnes, & shal beare
their synne, for a perpetuall lawe amonge youre posterities. And they shall
inheret none inheritaunce amonge the children of Israel.
24 For ye tithes of the childre of Israel, which they Heue vnto ye LORDE, haue I
geuen vnto the Leuites for an heretage. Therfore haue I sayde vnto them, that
they shall inheret no inheritannce amonge the children of Israel.
25 And ye LORDE talked wt Moses, & saide:
26 Speake to the Leuites, & saye vnto them: Wha ye take of ye childre of Israel
ye tithes, yt I haue geuen you of the for yor inheritauce, ye shal take an
Heueofferinge of the same vnto the LORDE, euen the tenth of the tithe.
27 And the same yor Heueofferynge shall ye reken, as though ye gaue corne out of
the barne, and fullnesse out of the wynepresse.
28 Thus shal ye geue an Heueofferynge vnto the LORDE of all yor tithes, which ye
take of the children of Israel, yt ye maie geue the same Heueofferynge of ye
LORDE, vnto Aaro ye prest.
29 And all yt ye geue of ye tythes, & halowe vnto ye LORDE for a gifte, ye same
shall be his of the best.
30 And saye thou vnto them: Whan ye thus Heue vp ye fat therof, it shalbe
rekened vnto the Leuites as the increace of the barne, and as the increace of
the wine presse.
31 And ye maye eate it in all places, ye & yor children: for it is youre rewarde
for youre seruyce in the Tabernacle of witnesse:
32 and ye shal not lade synne vpon you in the same, whan ye Heue the fat therof,
and vnhalowe not the halowed thinges of the children of Israel, and ye shal not
dye.

Chapter 19

1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses & Aaro & sayde:
2 This custome shall be a lawe, which the LORDE hath comaunded, & sayde: Speake
vnto ye children of Israel, yt they brynge vnto ye a reed cow without spot,
wherin is no blemysh, & vpon who there came neuer yock:
3 and ye shal geue her vnto Eleasar the prest, which shall brynge her without
the hooste, and cause her to be slayne there before him.
4 And Eleasar ye prest shal take of hir bloude with his fynger, and sprenckle it
seuen tymet straight towarde the dore of the Tabernacle of witnesse, and cause
the cow to be burnt before him,
5 both hir?kynne and hir flesh, and hir bloude also with hir donge.
6 And the prest shal take Ceder wodd and ysope, and purple woll, and cast it vpo
the cow as she burneth,
7 & he shal washe his clothes, and bathe his body with water, and the go in to
the hoost, and be vncleane vntyll ye eue.
8 And he that burnt her, shal wash his clothes also with water, and bathe his
body in water, & be vncleane vntyll ye euen.
9 And one yt is cleane, shal gather vp the a?shes of ye cow, and poure them
without the hoost in a cleane place, that they maye be kepte there, for
sprenklinge water to the congregacion of the childre of Israel, for it is a
synofferinge.
10 And he that gathered vp the a?shes of the cow, shall wash his clothes, and be
vncleane vntyll the euen. This shalbe a perpetuall lawe vnto ye children of
Israel, and to the straungers that dwell amonge you.
11 Who so now toucheth a deed ma, shal be vncleane seuen dayes:
12 the same shall purifie himself herewith, on the thirde daye and on the
seuenth daie, and then shall he be cleane. And yf he puryfye not himself on the
thirde daye, & on the seuenth daye, the shall he not be cleane.
13 But wha eny ma toucheth a deed personne, and wil not purifie himself, he
defyleth the dwellynge of the LORDE, and the same soule shal be roted out of
Israel, because the sprenklinge water is not sprenkled vpon him: and he is
vncleane, as longe as he letteth not himself be pourged therof.
14 This is the lawe. Whan a ma dyeth in ye tente, who so euer goeth in to the
tente, and all yt is in the tente, shal be vncleane seue daies.
15 And euery open vessel that hath no lydd nor couerynge, is vncleane.
16 And who so euer toucheth one yt is slayne wt the swerde vpon ye felde, or eny
other deed, or a deed mans bone, or a graue, ye same is vncleane seue dayes.
17 So now for the vncleane personne, they shal take of ye a?shes of this
burntsynofferinge, & put springinge water theron in to a vessell,
18 and a cleane man shall take ysope, & dyppe it in the water, and sprenkle it
vpon the tente, and vpon all the vessels, and all the soules that are therin.
Likewyse also vpon him, yt hath touched a deed mans bone, or a slayne personne,
or a deed body, or a graue.
19 And he that is cleane, shal sprenkle vpon the vncleane, ye thirde daye, & the
seueth daie, & purifye him on ye seueth daye. And he shal washe his clothes, &
bathe him self wt water, and so at euen he shalbe cleane.
20 But he yt is vncleane, and wil not purifye him self, ye same soule shal be
roted out of ye cogregacion. For he hath defyled the Sanctuary of the LORDE, &
is not sprekled wt spreklinge water, therfore is he vncleane. And this shalbe a
perpetuall lawe vnto the. And he yt sprenkled wt the spreklinge water, shall
wash his clothes also.
21 And who so euer toucheth the spreklinge water, shal be vncleane vntill the
euen.
22 And what so euer he toucheth, shalbe vncleane: & loke what soule he toucheth,
shalbe vncleane vntill the euen.

Chapter 20

1 And the childre of Israel came wt the whole cogregacion into the wildernesse
of Zin in the first moneth, & the people abode at Cades. And there dyed Miriam,
& was buried there.
2 And the congregacion had no water, & they gathered them selues together
agaynst Moses & Aaron,
3 & the people chode with Moses, & sayde: Wolde God yt we had perished, whan
oure brethre perished before the LORDE.
4 Wherfore haue ye brought the congregacion of the LORDE in to this wildernesse,
yt we shulde dye here with oure catell?
5 And wherfore haue ye brought vs out of Egipte in to this place, where men can
not sowe, where are nether fygges, ner vynes, ner pomgranates, & where there is
no water to drynke?
6 And Moses & Aaron wete fro the congregacion vnto ye dore of ye Tabernacle of
witnesse, & fell vpon their faces. And the glory of the LORDE appeared vnto
them.
7 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
8 Take the staffe, & gather the cogregacion together, thou & thy brother Aaron,
& speake vnto the rocke before their eyes, & it shall geue his water. And thus
shalt thou prouyde the water out of the rocke, & geue the congregacion drynke,
and their catell also.
9 The toke Moses the staffe before ye LORDE, as he commaunded him,
10 & Moses & Aaron gathered the congregacion together before the rocke, & sayde
vnto the: Heare ye rebellions: Shal we prouyde you water out of this rocke?
11 And Moses lift vp his hande, & smote ye rocke wt the staffe two tymes. Then
came ye water out abudantly, so yt the cogregacion dranke, and their catell
also.
12 But the LORDE sayde vnto Moses & Aaron: Because ye beleued me not, to
sanctifye me before ye childre of Israel, ye shal not bringe this congregacion
in to the londe that I shal geue the.
13 This is ye water of strife, where the children of Israel stroue wt the LORDE
and he was sanctified vpon them.
14 And Moses sent messaungers fro Cades vnto ye kynge of ye Edomites: This worde
sendeth the yi brother Israel: Thou knowest all ye trauayle that happened vnto
vs,
15 how that oure fathers wente downe in to Egipte, & how we haue dwelt in Egipte
a longe tyme, & how the Egipcians dealte euell with vs & or fathers.
16 And we cryed vnto ye LORDE which herde oure voyce, and sent his angell, &
hath brought vs out of Egipte: And beholde, we are at Cades in ye cite without
the borders of yi londe.
17 O let vs go thorow thy londe, we wyl not go thorow ye feldes ner vynyardes,
ner drynke the water out of the foutaynes. We wyl go the hye strete, and turne
nether to ye right hande ner to ye lefte, tyll we be come past ye borders of thy
countre.
18 But the Edomite answered him: Thou shal not go by me, or I wyl come agaynst
ye with ye swerde.
19 The children of Israel saide vnto him: We wil go ye como hye waye, & yf we or
oure catell drynke of thy water, we wil paye for it: we wil do nothinge, but
passe thorow on fote onely.
20 But he sayde: Thou shalt not go thorow, And the Edomites came out against
them with a mightie people & a stroge hande.
21 Thus ye Edomites denied to graute Israel passage thorow the borders of the
lande. And Israel turned awaye from them.
22 And the children of Israel brake vp fro Cades, and came with the whole
congregacion vnto mount Hor.
23 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses & Aaron at mount Hor harde vpon the coastes of
ye lande of ye Edomites, & sayde:
24 Let Aaro be gathered vnto his people: for he shal not come in to ye lande yt
I haue geuen vnto ye children of Israel, because ye were dishobedient vnto my
mouth at the water of strife.
25 Take Aaron and Eleasar and his sonne, and brynge them vp vnto mount Hor,
26 and strype Aaron out of his vestimentes, and put the vpon Eleasar his sonne
and there shall Aaron be gathered (vnto his people) and dye.
27 Then dyd Moses as the LORDE comaunded him, and they wente vp vnto Mount Hor
in ye sight of the whole congregacion.
28 And Moses toke Aarons clothes, & put the vpon Eleasar his sonne. And Aaron
dyed there, euen aboue vpon the mount.
29 And Moses & Eleasar came downe from the mount. And whan the whole
congregacion sawe that Aaron was awaye, they mourned for him thirtie daies
thorow out the whole house of Israel.

Chapter 21

1 And whan Arad the kynge of the Cananites (which dwelt towarde the south)
herde, that Israel came in by ye waie yt the spyes had founde out, he fought
agaynst Israel, and toke some of them presoners.
2 Then vowed Israel a vowe vnto ye LORDE, and sayde: Yf thou wylt geue this
people vnder my hande, I wyll vtterly destroye their cities.
3 And the LORDE herde ye voyce of Israel, and delyuered them the Cananites, and
they vtterly destroyed them wt their cities also. And he called the place Horma.
4 Then departed they fro mount Hor on ye waye towarde the reed see, that they
might go aboute the lande of the Edomites. And the soules of the people faynted
by the waie
5 and they spake agaynst God and agaynst Moses: Wherfore hast thou brought vs
out of the lande of Egipte, to slaye vs in the wildernesse? For here is nether
bred ner water, and oure soule lotheth this lighte meate.
6 Than sent the LORDE fyrie serpentes amonge the people, which bote the peple,
so that there dyed moch people in Israel.
7 The came they vnto Moses, and sayde: We haue synned, because we haue spoken
agaynst the LORDE and agaynst the. Praye thou vnto the LORDE, that he take awaye
the serpentes from vs. And Moses prayed for the people.
8 Then sayde the LORDE vnto Moses: Make the a brasen serpente, and set it vp for
a token. Who so euer is bytten, and loketh vpon it, shal lyue.
9 Then made Moses a serpent of brasse, and set it vp for a token: and whan a
serpent had bytten eny man, he behelde the brasen serpente, and recouered.
10 And the children of Israel departed, and pitched in Oboth.
11 And from Oboth they wente on, and pitched in Igim by Abarim in the
wyldernesse ouer agaynst Moab, on the Eastsyde.
12 From thence departed they, & pitched by the ryuer of Sared.
13 From thence departed they, and pitched on this syde Arnon, which is in the
wyldernesse, and commeth out of the coastes of the Amorites. For Arnon is the
border betwixte Moab and ye Amorites.
14 Wherfore it is spoken in the boke of the warres of the LORDE: And go with
violence both on the ryuer of Arnon,
15 & on the founteyne of the riuer, which boweth downewarde to dwell at Ar, &
leaneth theron, to be the border of Moab.
16 And from thence they came to the well. This is the well, wherof the LORDE
spake vnto Moses: gather the people together, I wil geue them water.
17 Then sange Israel this songe, and they sange one after another ouer the well:
18 This is the well, that the prynces dygged: the nobles amonge the people haue
digged it thorow ye teacher and their staues. And from this wildernes they wente
vnto Mathana,
19 & from Mathana vnto Nahaliel, and from Nahaliel to Bamoth,
20 and fro Bamoth vnto the valley that lieth in ye felde of Moab at the toppe of
Pisga, and turneth towarde the wyldernesse.
21 And Israel sent messaungers vnto Siho the kynge of the Amorrites, & caused to
saye vnto him:
22 Let me go thorow ye lande, we wyl not turne in to ye feldes ner in to the
vynyardes: nether will we drynke the water of the welles, ye hye strete wil we
go, till we be past the borders of thy countre.
23 Howbeit Sihon wolde not geue the children of Israel licence to go thorow the
coastes of his londe, but gathered all his people together, and wente out
agaynst Israel in the wyldernesse. And whan he came to Iaheza, he fought agaynst
Israel.
24 Neuerthelesse Israel smote him with the edge of the swerde, and conquered his
lande from Arnon vnto Iabock, and vnto the children of Ammon. For the borders of
the children of Ammon were stroge.
25 So Israel toke all these cities, and dwelt in all the cities of ye Amorites,
namely at He?bon, and in the townes belonginge therto.
26 For He?bon the cite was Sihons the kynge of the Amorites, and he had foughten
before with the kynge of the Moabites, and conquered all his londe from him
vntyll Arnon.
27 Wherfore it is sayde in the prouerbe: Come vnto He?bon, let vs buylde and
prepare ye cite of Sihon.
28 For there is a fyre gone out of He?bon, and a flamme from the cite of Sihon,
which hath consumed Ar of ye Moabites, and the citisens of ye toppe of Arnon.
29 Wo vnto the Moab, thou people of Camos art vndone. His sonnes are put to
flighte, & his doughters brought captyue vnto Sihon the kynge of the Amorites.
30 Their glory is come to naught from He?bon vnto Dibon: waisted are they vnto
Nopha, which reacheth vnto Mediba.
31 Thus dwelt Israel in the lande of the Amorites.
32 And Moses sent out spyes vnto Iahesar, & they toke the townes belongynge
therto, & coquered the Amorites yt were therin.
33 And they turned, & wente vp the waye towarde Basan. Then Og the kynge of
Basan wete out agaynst them wt all his people, to fight in Edrei.
34 And ye LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Feare him not, for I haue geuen him wt his
lande & people in to thy hande, & thou shalt do with him, as thou dyddest with
Sihon the kynge of the Amorites, which dwelt at He?bon.
35 And they smote him, & his sonnes, & all his people (so yt there remayned
none) & coquered the londe.

Chapter 22

1 Afterwarde wete ye children of Israel, & pitched in ye felde of Moab beyonde
Iordane by Iericho.
2 And whan Balac ye sonne of Ziphor sawe all that Israel had done vnto the
Amorites,
3 and that the Moabites were sore afrayed of the people (yt was so greate) and
that the Moabites stode in feare of the children of Israel,
4 he sayde vnto ye Elders of the Madianites: Now shal this heape licke vp all
that is aboute vs, eue as an oxe licketh vp the grasse in the felde. (And Balac
ye sonne of Ziphor was kynge of the Moabites at that tyme.)
5 And he sent out messaungers vnto Balaam the sonne of Beor, which was an
interpreter. (The same dwelt by the water of the lande of ye children of his
people) that they shulde call him, and he caused to saye vnto him: Beholde,
there is come out of Egipte, a people, which couereth ye face of ye earth, and
lyeth ouer agaynst me.
6 Come now therfore, and curse me this people, for they are to mightie for me,
yf peraduenture I might be able to smyte them, and to dryue them out of the
lande. For I wote, that whom thou blessest, he is blessed: and whom thou
cursest, he is cursed.
7 And the Elders of the Moabites wente on with ye Elders of the Madianites, and
had the rewarde of ye soyth sayenge in their handes, and they came vnto Balaam,
& tolde him the wordes of Balaac.
8 And he saide vnto the: Tary here all night, & I will bringe you worde agayne,
euen as the LORDE shal saye vnto me. So ye prynces of ye Moabites abode with
Balaam.
9 And God came vnto Balaam, & sayde: What men are these, which are with ye?
10 Balaam sayde vnto God: Balac ye sonne of Ziphor the kynge of the Moabites
hath sent vnto me:
11 Beholde, there is a people come out of Egipte, and couereth the face of the
earth, come now therfore, & curse me the, yf peradueture I maye be able to
fighte with them, & to dryue the out.
12 But God sayde vnto Balaam: Go not with them, & curse not that people, for
they are blessed.
13 Then rose Balaam vp in the mornynge, & sayde vnto the prynces of Balac: Get
you vnto youre londe, for the LORDE wyll not suffer me to go with you.
14 And the prynces of ye Moabites gat the vp, came to Balac, & saide: Balaam
refuseth to come wt vs.
15 Then sent Balac yet a greater copany of prynces, & more honorable the they.
16 Whan they came to Balaam, they tolde him: Balac ye sonne of Ziphor sendeth ye
this worde: Oh refuse not to come vnto me,
17 for I wyll promote the vnto hye honoure, & wil do what so euer thou sayest
vnto me. Come I praye the, curse me this people.
18 Balaam answered, & sayde vnto ye seruautes of Balac: Yf Balac wolde geue me
his house full of syluer & golde, yet coulde I not go beyonde ye worde of the
LORDE my God, to do litle or greate.
19 Neuertheles tary ye here this night, yt I maye were, what the LORDE wil saye
more vnto me.
20 Then came God to Balaam by night, & saide vnto him: Yf the men are come to
call the, get the vp then, and go with the: but what I shal saye vnto the, that
shalt thou do.
21 Then rose Balaam vp in the mornynge, & sadled his Asse, & wente wt the
prynces of ye Moabites.
22 But the wrath of God waxed whote, because he wete. And the angell of ye LORDE
stode in the waye, to withstode him. But he rode vpo his Asse, & two seruauntes
wt him.
23 And ye Asse sawe ye angell of ye LORDE stodinge in ye waye, & his swerde
drawen in his hade. And ye Asse turned a syde out of ye waye, & wete in to the
felde. But Balaam smote her, yt she shulde go in the waye.
24 Then stode the angell of the LORDE in ye pathe by the vynyardes, where there
were walles on both the sydes.
25 And whan ye Asse sawe the angell of the LORDE, she wrenshed vnto the wall, &
thrust Balaams fote vnto the wall. And he smote her agayne.
26 The wete the angell of the LORDE farther, & stode in a narow place, where
there was no waye to turne, nether to the righte hade ner to ye lefte.
27 And whan the Asse sawe the angell of the LORDE, she fell downe vnder Balaam.
Then was Balaams wrath furious, & smote the Asse with a staffe.
28 Then opened the LORDE the mouth of ye Asse, and she sayde vnto Balaam: What
haue I done vnto the, that thou hast smytten me now thre tymes?
29 Balaam sayde vnto ye Asse: Because thou hast mocked me. Oh yt I had a swerde
now in my hande, I wolde kyll the.
30 The Asse sayde vnto Balaam: Am not I thine Asse, which thou hast rydden vpon
in yi tyme vnto this daye? Was I euer wonte to do so vnto the? He sayde: No.
31 Then opened the LORDE the eyes of Balaam, yt he sawe ye angell of the LORDE
stondinge in ye waye, & a drawe swerde in his hade. And he enclyned him selfe, &
bowed downe wt his face.
32 And the angell of the LORDE sayde vnto him: Wherfore hast thou smytte thine
Asse now thre tymes? Beholde, I am come out to resiste ye, for yi waye is
frowarde, & cotrary vnto me.
33 And ye Asse sawe me, & auoyded fro me thre tymes: or els yf she had not
turned asyde fro me, I had slayne the, & saued the Asse alyue.
34 Then sayde Balaam vnto ye angell of ye LORDE: I haue synned, for I wyst not,
that thou stodest in the waye agaynst me. And now yf it displease ye, I wil
turne agayne.
35 The angell of ye LORDE saide vnto him: Go with the me: but thou shalt speake
nothinge els, then yt I shal saye vnto ye. So Balaam wente forth wt the princes
of Balac.
36 Whan Balac herde yt Balaam came, he wente out to mete him (in the cite of the
Moabites yt lieth on the coaste of Arnon, which is on ye vttemost border)
37 & sayde vnto him: Dyd not I sende for ye to call the? Wherfore camest thou
not then vnto me? Thinkest thou yt I am not able to promote ye vnto honor?
38 Balaam answered him: Lo, I am come vnto ye But how can I saye eny thinge els,
the yt God putteth in my mouth? yt I must speake
39 So Balaam wente with Balac, and they came vnto the cite on the vttemost
border of his lande.
40 And Balac slewe oxen and shepe, and sent for Balaam, and for the prynces that
were with him.
41 And in the mornynge, Balac toke Balaam, and they wete vp to the hye place of
Baal, that from thece he might se vnto the vttemost parte of ye people

Chapter 23

1 . And Balaam sayde vnto Balac: Buylde me here seuen altares, and prouyde me
here seuen bullockes, and seue rammes.
2 Balac dyd as Balaam sayde. And both Balac and Balaam offred, on euery altare a
bullocke & a ramme.
3 And Balaam sayde vnto Balac: Stonde thou by yi burntofferynge, I wil go, yf
happly the LORDE wil mete me, & call me, yt I maye tell the, what so euer he
sheweth me. And he wente his waye, as he sayde.
4 And ye LORDE mett Balaam. And Balaam saide vnto him: Seuen altares haue I
prepared, and offred on euery altare a bullocke and a ramme.
5 The LORDE put ye worde in Balaams mouth, and sayde: Go agayne vnto Balac, and
saye on this wise.
6 And whan he came agayne vnto him, beholde, he stode by his burntofferynge,
with all ye prynces of the Moabites.
7 Then toke he vp his parable, & sayde: Balac the kynge of the Moabites hath
caused to fet me out of Syria from the moutaynes towarde the East, (& sayde:)
Come, curse me Iacob: come, defye me Israel.
8 How shall I curse, whom God curseth not? How shal I defye, whom ye LORDE
defyeth not?
9 For fro ye toppe of ye stonye rockes I se him, & from the hilles I beholde
him. Beholde, ye people shal dwell by theselues, & shal not be rekened amoge the
Heithe.
10 Who can tell the dust of Iacob, & the nombre of the fourth parte of Israel?
My soule die ye death of ye righteous, and my ende be as the ende of these.
11 The saide Balac vnto Balaam: What doest thou vnto me? I caused to set ye for
to curse myne enemies, & beholde, thou blessest the.
12 He answered & saide: Must I not kepe & speake yt, which the LORDE putteth in
to me mouth?
13 Balac saide vnto him: Come wt me yet vnto another place, fro whence thou
mayest se ye vttemost parte of them, & not se them all, and curse me them there.
14 And he toke him vp to a fre place, eue vnto the toppe of Pisga, & buylded
seuen altares, and offered on euery altare a bullocke & a ramme.
15 And he sayde vnto Balac: Stonde so by thy burntoffrynge, whyle I go yonder.
16 And the LORDE mett Balaam, & put the worde in his mouth, & sayde: Go agayne
vnto Balac, & saye on this wyse.
17 And whan he came to him agayne, beholde, he stode by his burntofferynge with
the prynces of the Moabites. And Balac sayde vnto him: What hath the LORDE
sayde?
18 And he toke vp his parable, & sayde: Ryse vp Balac & heare, marke my
testimony wt thine eares thou sonne of Ziphor.
19 God is not a man yt he shulde lye, ner a mans childe yt eny thinge shulde
repente him. Shulde he saye and not do? Shulde he speake & not make it good?
20 Beholde, I am brought hither to blesse, I blesse, & can not go backe there
fro.
21 There is no weerynesse sene in Iacob, nether eny laboure in Israel. The LORDE
his God is wt him, & the kynges trompet is amoge the.
22 God hath brought the out of Egipte, his stregth is as of an Vnicorne.
23 For there is no Sorcerye in Iacob, & no Soyth sayer in Israel. Whan the tyme
cometh, it shalbe saide vnto Iacob, & to Israel, what God doth.
24 Beholde, the people shall ryse vp as a Lyonesse, & heue vp him self as a
Lyon. He shal not lye downe, tyll he eate of the pray, and drynke the bloude of
the slayne.
25 Then sayde Balac vnto Balaam: Thou shalt nether curse him ner blesse him.
26 Balaam answered, & sayde vnto Balac: Haue I not tolde the: All yt the LORDE
speaketh, yt must I do?
27 Balac saide vnto him: Oh come, I wil brynge ye to another place, yf it maye
happly please God, yt thou mayest curse the there.
28 And he brought him vp to the toppe of mount Peor, yt boweth towarde the
wyldernesse.
29 And Balaam sayde vnto Balac: Buylde me here seuen altares, and prouyde me
seuen bullockes and seuen rammes.
30 Balac dyd as Balaam sayde, and offered on euery altare a bullocke vnd a
ramme.

Chapter 24

1 Now whan Balaam sawe yt it pleased the LORDE, that he shulde blesse Israel, he
wente not (as he dyd before) to seke witches, but set his face straight towarde
the wyldernesse,
2 lifte vp his eyes, and sawe Israel, how they laye acordinge to their trybes,
and the sprete of God came vpon him,
3 and he toke vp his parable, and sayde: Thus sayeth Balaam the sonne of Beor:
4 Thus sayeth the man whose eyes are opened: Thus sayeth he which heareth the
wordes of God, which sawe the vision of ye Allmightie: which fell downe, and his
eyes were opened.
5 How goodly are thy tetes O Iacob, and thy habitacions O Israel?
6 Euen as the brode valleys, as the gardens by the waters syde, as ye tentes
which the LORDE hath plated, & as the Ceder trees vpon ye water.
7 The water shal flowe out of his boket, and his sede shalbe a greate water. His
kynge shalbe hyer then Agag, & his kyngdome shalbe exalted.
8 God hath broughte hi out of Egipte, his strength is as of an vnicorne. He shal
eate vp the Heithen his enemies, and grynde their bones to poulder, and shute
thorow them with his arowes.
9 He hath layed him downe as a Lyon and as a Lyonesse. Who wyll rayse him vp?
Blessed be he, yt blesseth the: and cursed, that curseth the.
10 The was Balac furious i wrath against Balaam, & smote his hades together, &
sayde vnto him: I haue called the, yt thou shuldest curse myne enemies, and
beholde, thou hast blessed the now thre tymes:
11 & now get the hece to yi place. I thoughte yt I wolde promote the vnto
honoure, but the LORDE hath kepte the backe from that worshipe.
12 Balaam answered him: Tolde not I thy messaungers (whom thou sendedst vnto me)
& sayde:
13 Yf Balac wolde geue me his house full of syluer and golde, yet coulde I not
go beyonde the worde of the LORDE, to do either euell or good after myne awne
hert: but what ye LORDE speaketh, that must I speake also.
14 And now beholde, for so moch as I go to my people, come therfore, I wyll
shewe the what this people shal do vnto yi people after this tyme.
15 And he toke vp his parable, and sayde: Thus sayeth Balaam the sonne of Beor:
Thus sayeth ye man, whose eyes are opened:
16 Thus sayeth he which heareth the wordes of God, & yt hath the knowlege of ye
hyest, eue he yt sawe ye visio of ye Allmightie, & fell downe, & his eyes were
opened:
17 I shal se him, but not now: I shal beholde him, but not nie at hade. There
shal a starre come out of Iacob, & a cepter shall come vp out of Israel, and
shal smyte ye rulers of the Moabites, and ouercome all the children of Seth.
18 Edom shalbe his possession, and Seir shalbe his enemies possessio, but Israel
shal do manfully.
19 Out of Iacob shal come he yt hath dominion, and shall destroye the remnaunt
of the cities.
20 And wha he sawe ye Amalechites, he toke vp his parable, & sayde: Amalec the
first amoge the Heithe, but at ye last thou shalt perishe vtterly.
21 And whan he sawe the Kenites, he toke vp his parable, & sayde: Stroge is yi
dwellinge, and on a rocke hast thou put thy nest,
22 neuertheles thou shalt be a burninge vnto Kain, tyll Assur take ye presoner.
23 And he toke vp his parable agayne, & sayde: Alas, who shal lyue, wha God doth
this?
24 And shippes out of Citim shall subdue Assur and Eber. He himself also shal
perishe vtterly.
25 And Balaam gat him vp, and departed, and came againe vnto his place, and
Balac wente his waye also.

Chapter 25

1 And Israel dwelt in Sittim, and the people beganne to commytte whordome with
the doughters of the Moabites,
2 which called the people vnto the sacrifice of their goddes. And the people ate
and worshipped their goddes,
3 and Israel submytted him self vnto Baal Peor. Then the wrath of the LORDE
waxed whote vpon Israel,
4 and he sayde vnto Moses: Take all the rulers of the people, and hange them vp
vnto the LORDE agaynst ye Sonne, that the terryble wrath of the LORDE maye be
turned awaye from Israel.
5 And Moses sayde vnto the iudges of Israel: Euery man slaye his captayne, that
haue submytted them selues vnto Baal Peor.
6 And beholde, one of the childre of Israel wete in against his brethre, &
ioyned him self to a Madianitish woma, in ye sighte of Moses & of the whole
cogregacion of ye childre of Israel, which weped before the dore of ye
Tabernacle of wytnesse.
7 Whan Phineas ye sonne of Eleasar the sonne of Aaron ye prest sawe yt, he rose
vp out of the congregacion, & toke a swerde in his hande,
8 & wente after the man of Israel in to the whore house, & thrust the thorow,
both the man of Israel and the woman, eue thorow the bely of her. Then ceassed
the plage from the children of Israel,
9 and there were slayne in the plage foure and twentye thousande.
10 And ye LORDE spake vnto Moses, & saide:
11 Phineas the sonne of Eleasar the sonne of Aaron ye prest, hath turned my
wrath awaie from the childre of Israel thorow his gelousy for my sake amonge
them, yt I shulde not cosume the childre of Israel in my gelousy.
12 Wherfore saye: beholde, I geue him my couenaunt of peace,
13 and he shal haue it, & his sede after him, eue the couenaunt of an
euerlastinge presthode, because he was gelous for his Gods sake, and made an
attonement for the children of Israel.
14 The man of Israel that was slayne with the Madianitish woman, was called
Simri the sonne of Salu, a captayne of the house of the father of the
Simeonites.
15 The Madianitish woman also that was slayne, was called Co?bi, ye doughter of
Zur, which was a ruler of the people of a kynred amonge the Madianites.
16 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
17 Vexe the Madianites, & smyte them,
18 for they haue vexed you with their wyles, wherby they haue bigyled you thorow
Peor, and thorow their sister Co?bi the doughter of a captayne of ye Madianites,
which was slayne in the daye of the plage, for Peors sake, and the plage came
after.

Chapter 26

1 And whan the giltye bloude was shed, the LORDE sayde vnto Moses & vnto Eleasar
ye sonne of Aaron ye prest:
2 Take the summe of the whole cogregacion of the childre of Israel from twentye
yeare & aboue, after their fathers houses, all yt are able to go forth to the
warre in Israel.
3 And Moses & Eleasar the prest spake vnto them (in the felde of the Moabites
besyde Iordane ouer against Iericho)
4 namely vnto all the that were twentye yeare olde & aboue, as the LORDE
comaunded Moses. And these are ye childre of Israel, that came out of Egipte.
5 Ruben ye first borne sonne of Israel. The childree of Ruben were, Hanoch: of
whom cometh ye kynred of the Hanochites. Pallu: of whom cometh the kynred of the
Palluites.
6 Hesron: of whom cometh the kynred of the Hesronites. Carmi: of whom cometh ye
kynred of the Carmites.
7 These are the kynreds of the Rubenites. And the nombre of the was, thre &
fourtye thousande, seuen hundreth & thirtye.
8 But the childre of Pallu were, Eliab.
9 And the children of Eliab were Nemuel, and Dathan and Abiram. This is yt
Dathan & Abira, those famous men in the congregacion, which stode vp agaynst
Moses and Aaron in the copany of Corah, whan they rose vp agaynst the LORDE,
10 & the earth opened hir mouth, and swalowed the wt Corah, wha the copany dyed,
what tyme as the fyre consumed two hundreth & fiftye men, & they became a toke.
11 But the children of Corah dyed not.
12 The childre of Simeon in their kynreds were, Nemuel: of who cometh the kynred
of ye Nemuelites. Iamin: of whom cometh ye kynred of ye Iaminites. Iachin: of
who cometh the kynred of the Iachinites.
13 Sera: of whom cometh ye kynred of the Sarahites. Saul: of whom commeth the
kynred of the Saulites.
14 These are the kynreds of the Simeonites, two & xx.M. & two hundreth.
15 The childre of Gad in their kynreds were Zephon: of whom cometh ye kynred of
ye Zephonites. Haggi: of whom cometh the kynred of ye Haggites. Suni: of whom
cometh ye kynred of ye Sunites.
16 Aseni: of whom commeth ye kynred of the Asenites. Eri: of who cometh the
kynred of the Erinites.
17 Arod: of whom cometh the kynred of the Arodites. Ariel: of whom cometh ye
kynred of ye Arielites.
18 These are the children of Gad, in their nombre fourtye thousande and fyue C.
19 The children of Iuda, Er & Onan, which both dyed in the lade of Canaan.
20 But ye children of Iuda in their kyndreds, were, Sela: of whom cometh the
kynred of the Selanites. Phares: of whom cometh the kynred of the Pharesites.
Serah: of whom cometh ye kynred of ye Serahites.
21 The childre of Phares, were Hesron: of whom commeth the kynred of the
Hesronites. Hamul: of whom cometh the kynred of the Hamulites.
22 These are the kynreds of Iuda, in their nombre, sixe and seuentye thousande
and fyue hundreth.
23 The children of Isachar in their kynreds were, Thola: of whom commeth the
kynred of the Tholaites. Phuua: of whom cometh ye kynred of the Phuuaites.
24 Iasub: of who commeth the kynred of the Iasubites. Simron: of whom cometh the
kynred of ye Simronites.
25 These are the kynreds of Isachar, in nombre, foure and thre score thousande,
& thre hundreth.
26 The children of Zabulon in their kynreds were, Sered, of whom cometh the
kynred of ye Seredites. Elon: of whom cometh ye kynred of ye Elonites. Iahelel:
of whom cometh the kynred of the Iahelites.
27 These are ye kynreds of Zabulon, in their nobre, thre score thousande, and
fyue hundreth.
28 The children of Ioseph in their kynreds were, Manasses & Ephraim.
29 The childre of Manasse were, Machir: of whom commeth the kynred of the
Machirites. And Machir begat Gilead: of whom cometh ye kynred of ye Gileadites.
30 And these are ye childre of Gilead, Hieser: of whom cometh the kynred of ye
Hieserites. Helech: of whom cometh ye kynred of the Helechites.
31 Asriel: of whom commeth the kynred of the Asrielites. Siche: of whom cometh
the kynred of ye Sichemites.
32 Simida: of who cometh ye kynred of ye Simidites. Hepher: of whom cometh ye
kynred of ye Hepherites.
33 And Zelaphead was ye sonne of Hepher, & had no sonnes, but doughters, whose
names were: Mahela, Noa, Hagla, Milca and Thyrza.
34 These are the kynreds of Manasse, in their nombre, two and fiftye thousande
and seuen hundreth.
35 The childre of Ephraim in their kynreds were, Suthelah: of whom cometh ye
kynred of the Suthelahites. Becher: of whom cometh ye kynred of the Becherites.
Thahan: of whom cometh the kynred of the Thahanites.
36 The childre of Suthelah were, Eran: of whom cometh ye kynred of ye Eranites.
37 These are ye kynreds of the childre of Ephraim, in their nombre, two and
thirtie thousande and fyue hundreth. These are the childre of Ioseph in their
kynreds.
38 The childre of Ben Iamin in their kynreds were, Bela: of whom cometh ye
kynred of the Belaites. A?bel: of whom cometh ye kynred of the A?belites.
Ahiram: of whom cometh the kynred of the Ahiramites.
39 Supham: of whom cometh the kynred of the Suphamites. Hupham: of whom commeth
the kynred of the Huphamites.
40 And the childre of Bela were, Ard & Naeman: of whom commeth the kynred of the
Aroites & Naemanites.
41 These are the children of Ben Iamin in their kynreds, in nombre, fyue &
fourtye thousande and sixe hundreth.
42 The childre of Dan in their kynreds were, Suham: of whom cometh the childre
of ye Suhamites. These are ye kynreds of Dan in their generacions,
43 & they were all together in nombre, foure and thre score thousande & foure
hundreth.
44 The childre of Asser in their kynreds were, Iemna: of whom cometh the kynred
of the Iemnites. Iesui: of whom commeth the kynred of the Iesuites. Bria: of
whom cometh the kynred of the Bryites.
45 And ye childre of Bria, were Heber: of whom commeth the kynred of the
Hebrites. Melchiel: of who commeth the kynred of the Melchielites.
46 And the doughter of Asser was called Sarah.
47 These are the kynreds of the children of Asser, in their nombre, thre and
fiftye thousande and foure hundreth.
48 The childre of Nephtali in their kynreds were, Iaheziel: of whom cometh the
kynred of the Iahezielites Guni: of whom cometh ye kynred of ye Gunites.
49 Iezer: of whom cometh ye kynred of the Iezerites. Sillem: of who cometh ye
kynred of ye Sillemites.
50 These are ye kynreds of the childre of Nephtali in their generacions, in
their nombre, fyue & fourtye thousande and foure hundreth.
51 This is the summe of the children of Israel: sixe hundreth thousande, a
thousande seuen hundreth and thirtye.
52 And ye LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
53 Vnto these shalt thou deuyde the lode to enheritaunce, acordinge to the
nombre of ye names.
54 To many shalt thou geue the more enheritaunce, and to few the lesse, vnto
euery one shall be geue acordinge to their nombre:
55 yet shall the londe be deuyded by lott. Acordinge to ye names of the trybes
of their fathers shal they enheret it:
56 for after the lot shalt thou deuyde their enheritaunce, both betwixte many
and fewe.
57 And this is the summe of the Leuites in their kynreds. Gerson: of whom cometh
the kynred of the Gersonites. Rahath: of who cometh the kynred of the
Rahathites. Merari: of whom cometh ye kynred of ye Merarites.
58 These are ye kynreds of Leui, the kynred of ye Libnites, ye kynred of ye
Hebronites, ye kynred of the Mahelites, ye kynred of the Musites, the kynred of
the Corahites. Rahath begat Amram.
59 And Amrams wife was called Iochebed a doughter of Leui, which was borne him
in Egipte: And vnto Amram she bare Aaron & Moses, & Miriam their sister.
60 And vnto Aaron were borne Nadab, Abihu. Eleasar & Ithamar.
61 As for Nadab & Abihu, they dyed, whan they offred straunge fyre before ye
LORDE.
62 And the summe of the was thre & twentye thousande, all males fro fyue
monethes & aboue. For they were not nombred amoge the childre of Israel, for
there was no enheritaunce geuen the amonge the children of Israel.
63 This is ye summe of ye childre of Israel, who Moses & Eleasar the prest
nombred in the felde of the Moabites besyde Iordane ouer agaynst Iericho:
64 Amonge whom there was not one of the summe of those children of Israel, whom
Moses & Aaron the prest nombred in the wildernesse of Sinai.
65 For ye LORDE sayde vnto the, yt they shulde dye in the wildernesse. And there
was not one of them lefte, saue Caleb the sonne of Iephune and Iosua the sonne
of Nun.

Chapter 27

1 And the doughters of Zelaphead ye sonne of Hepher ye sonne of Gilead, the
sonne of Machir, the sonne of Manasse, amonge the kynreds of Manasse the sonne
Ioseph (whose names were, Mahela, Noa, Hagla, Milca, & Thirza)
2 came & stode before Moses & Eleasar the prest, & before the rulers & the whole
congregacion, euen before the dore of ye Tabernacle of witnesse, & sayde:
3 Oure father is deed in the wildernesse, & was not in the company of them yt
rose vp agaynst ye LORDE in the cogregacion of Corah: but dyed in his awne
synne, and had no sonnes.
4 Wherfore shulde or fathers name perishe then amonge his kynred, though he haue
no sonne? Geue vs a possession also amonge oure fathers brethren.
5 Moses broughte their cause before ye LORDE.
6 And the LORDE sayde vnto him:
7 The doughters of Zelaphead haue spoke righte. Thou shalt geue the a possession
to inheret amonge their fathers brethren, & shalt turne their fathers
enheritaunce vnto them.
8 And saye vnto the childre of Israel: Whan a ma dyeth & hath no sonne, ye shall
turne his enheritaunce vnto his doughter.
9 Yf he haue no doughter, ye shal geue it vnto his brethre.
10 Yf he haue no brethren, ye shal geue it vnto his fathers brethren.
11 Yf he haue no fathers brethre, ye shal geue it vnto his nexte kyn?folke which
beloge vnto him in his kynred, yt they maye possesse it. This shalbe an
ordynaunce and a perpetuall lawe vnto the children of Israel, as the LORDE
comaunded Moses.
12 And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Get the vp in to this mount Abarim, & beholde
the lode, which I shal geue vnto the childre of Israel.
13 And whan thou hast sene it, thou shalt be gathered vnto yi people as Aaron yi
brother was gathered:
14 for ye were dishobedient vnto my worde in the wyldernesse of Zin, in ye
strife of the cogregacion, whan ye shulde haue sanctified me, thorow the water
before them. This is the water of stryfe at Cades in the wyldernesse of Zin.
15 And Moses spake vnto the LORDE & sayde:
16 O let the LORDE God of the spretes of all flesh set a ma ouer the
congregacion,
17 which maye go in & out before them, & to leade the out & in, yt the
congregacion of the LORDE be not as the shepe without a shepherde.
18 And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Take vnto the Iosua the sonne of Nun, which
is a man in whom is the sprete, and put thine handes vpon him,
19 & set him before Eleasar the prest, and before the whole congregacion, and
geue him a charge in their sighte,
20 & beutyfye him with thy bewty, that the whole congregacion of the children of
Israel maye be obediet vnto him.
21 And he shal stonde before Eleasar the prest, which shall axe councell for him
after the maner of the lighte, before the LORDE. At the mouth of him shall both
he and all the children of Israel with him, and the whole congregacion go in and
out.
22 Moses dyd as the LORDE comaunded him, & toke Iosua, and set him before
Eleasar the prest, and before all the congregacion,
23 and layed his handes vpon him, and gaue him a charge, as the LORDE sayde vnto
Moses.

Chapter 28

1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
2 Comaunde ye childre of Israel, & saye vnto the: The offerynge of my bred which
is my offerynge of the swete sauoure, shal ye kepe in his due season, that ye
maie offre vnto me.
3 And saye vnto the: These are the offerynges that ye shal offre vnto the LORDE:
Lambes of a yeare olde which are without blemysh, euerydaye two for a daylie
burntofferynge:
4 the one lambe in the mornynge, the other at euen.
5 And therto a tenth deale of an Epha of fyne floure for a meatofferynge,
myngled with beate oyle of the fourth parte of an Hin,
6 this is a daylie burntofferynge, which ye offred vpon mout Sinai, for a swete
sauoure of a sacrifice unto the LORDE:
7 And the drynkofferinge of the same, ye fourth parte of an Hin to a lambe, and
this shalbe poured in the Sanctuary for a gifte vnto the LORDE.
8 The other lambe shalt thou prepare at eue (like as the meatofferynge in the
mornynge) & the drynkofferinge therof, for a sacrifice of a swete sauoure vnto
the LORDE.
9 On the Sabbath daye, two lambes of a yeare olde without blemysh, & two teth
deales of fyne floure myngled with oyle, & the drynk offerynge therof.
10 This is the burntofferynge of euery Sabbath, besyde the daylie
burntofferynge, wt his drynkofferinge.
11 And on the first daye of youre monethes ye shal offre a burntofferynge vnto
ye LORDE: two yonge bullockes, a ramme, seue lambes of a yeare olde without
blemysh,
12 and all waye thre tenth deales of fyne floure for a meatofferynge myngled
with oyle vnto euery bullocke: two tenth deales of fyne floure for a
meatofferynge myngled with oyle vnto the ramme:
13 and a tenth deale of fyne floure for a meatofferynge myngled with oyle vnto
euery lambe. This is the burntofferynge of a swete sauoure, a sacrifice unto ye
LORDE.
14 And their drynkofferynges shalbe, half an Hin of wyne vnto euery bullocke,
the thirde parte of an Hin to the ramme, ye fourth parte of an Hin to euery
lambe. This is the burntofferynge of euery moneth in the yeare.
15 There shalbe offered an he goate also for a synofferynge vnto the LORDE, to
the daylie burntofferynge with his drynkofferynge.
16 And on the fourtene daye of the first moneth is the Easter vnto the LORDE,
17 and on the fyftene daye of the same moneth is the feast. Seue dayes shal
vnleuended bred be eaten.
18 The first daye shalbe an holy conuocacion: No seruile worke shal ye do
therin,
19 and ye shal offre a burntofferynge vnto the LORDE: two yonge bullockes, one
ramme, seuen labes of a yeare olde without blemysh,
20 with their meatofferynge: thre tenth deales of fyne floure myngled with oile
to either bullocke, and two tenth deales to the ramme,
21 and one tenth deale to euery lambe amonge the seuen lambes.
22 And an he goate for a synofferinge, to make an attonement for you.
23 And these shal ye offre in the mornynge, besydes the burntofferynge, which is
a daylie burntofferynge.
24 After this maner shal ye offre ye bred euery daye seuen dayes longe for an
offeringe of a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE, to the daylie burntofferynge, and
drynkofferynge also.
25 And the seuenth daye shal be called an holy conuocacion with you: no seruyle
worke shal ye do therin.
26 And the daye of the fyrst frutes (wha ye offre the meatofferynge of the
moneth vnto ye LORDE in youre wekes) shal be an holy couocacion also:
27 No worke of bondage shal ye do therin. And ye shal offre a burntofferynge for
a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE: two yonge bullockes, a ramme, seuen lambes of a
yeare olde,
28 with their meatofferynges: thre tenth deales of fyne floure myngled with oyle
to euery bullocke, two tenth deales to the ramme,
29 and one tent deale to euery lambe of the seuen lambes.
30 And an he goate to make an attonement for you.
31 This shal ye do, besydes ye daylie burntofferynge with his meatofferynge and
his drynkofferinge. Without blemysh shal they be all.

Chapter 29

1 And the fyrst daye of the seuenth moneth shal be with you an holy couocacion.
No seruyle worke shal ye do therin, for it is the daye of youre trompet
blowinge.
2 And ye shal offre a burntofferinge for a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE: a yonge
bullocke, a ramme, seuen lambes of a yeare olde without blemish.
3 And their meatofferinges: thre tenth deales of fyne floure myngled wt oyle to
the bullocke, two tenth deales to ye rame,
4 and one tenth deale vnto euery lambe of ye seuen labes.
5 An he goate also for a synofferinge, to make an attonemrnt for you,
6 beside ye burntofferinge of ye moneth & his meatofferinge, & besyde ye daylie
burntofferynge wt his meatofferynge & with their drink offeringes, acordinge to
the maner of the for a swete sauor. This is a sacrifice vnto the LORDE.
7 The tenth daye of this seuenth moneth shalbe an holy conuocacion wt you also,
and ye shal humble youre soules, and do no seruyle worke therin,
8 but offre a burntofferynge vnto the LORDE for a swete sauoure: a yonge
bullocke, a ramme, seuen lambes of a yeare olde without blemish,
9 wt their meatofferinges: thre tenth deales of fine floure myngled with oyle to
the bullocke, two tenth deales to the rame,
10 & one tenth deale to euery one of the seuen lambes.
11 And an he goate for a synofferinge, besyde the synofferinge of the attonemet,
and ye daylie burntofferige wt his meatofferinge, and wt his drynkofferinge.
12 The fiftenth daye of the seuenth moneth shal be an holy couocacion wt you, no
seruyle worke shal ye do therin, and seue dayes shal ye kepe a feast vnto the
LORDE.
13 And ye shal offre the LORDE a burntofferinge for a sacrifice of a swete
sauoure vnto the LORDE: thirtene yonge bullockes, two rames, fourtene labes of a
yeare olde without blemish,
14 wt their meatofferynges: thre tenth deales of fyne floure myngled with oyle
to euery one of the thirtene bullockes, two tenth deales to ether of the two
rammes,
15 & one tenth deale to euery one of the fourtene lambes:
16 & an he goate for a synofferynge, besyde ye daylye burntofferynge with his
meatofferynge and his drynkofferynge.
17 On the seconde daye, twolue yonge bullockes, two rammes, fourtene lambes of a
yeare olde without blemysh
18 wt their meatoffeges and drinkofferynges to the bullockes, to the rammes and
to the lambes in ye nombre of them acordinge to the maner.
19 And an he goate for a synofferinge, besyde the daylie burntofferinge with his
meatofferinge, and with his drynkofferynge.
20 On the thirde daye, eleuen bullockes, two rammes, fourtene lambes of a yeare
olde wt out blemish,
21 with their meatofferinges, and drynkofferinges to the bullockes, to the
rammes and to the lambes in their nombre acordinge to the maner.
22 And an he goate for a synofferynge, besyde the daylye burntofferinge with his
meatofferynge and his drynkofferynge.
23 On the fourth daye, ten bullockes, two rames, fourtene lambes of a yeare olde
without blemysh,
24 with their meatofferynges and drynkofferynges, to the bullockes, to the
rames, and to the lambes in their nombre acordynge to the maner.
25 And an he goate for a synofferynge, besyde the daylie burntofferinge wt his
meatofferinge, & his drynk offeringe.
26 On the fifth daye, nyne bullockes, two rames, fourtene lambes of a yeare olde
without blemysh,
27 with their meatofferynges & drinkofferynges to the bullockes, to ye rammes &
to the lambes in their nombre acordynge to the maner.
28 And an he goate for a synofferinge, besyde ye daylie burntofferynge with his
meatofferynge and his drynkofferynge.
29 On the sixte daye, eight bullockes, two rames, fourtene labes of a yeare olde
without blemysh,
30 with their meatofferynges & drynkofferinges to the bullockes, to the rammes,
& to the lambes in their nombre acordinge to the maner.
31 And an he goate for a synofferinge, beside the daylie burntofferinge with his
meatofferynge and his drynkofferynge.
32 On the seuenth daye, seuen bullockes, two rammes, fourtene lambes of a yeare
olde wt out blemysh,
33 with their meatofferinges and drynkofferinges to the bullockes, to the
rammes, and to the lambes in their nombre acordynge to the maner.
34 And an he goate for a synofferynge, besyde the daylie burntofferinge with his
meatofferynge and his drynkofferynge.
35 On the eight daye shal ye gather the people together, No seruyle worke shall
ye do therin.
36 And ye shall offre a burntofferynge for a sacrifice of a swete sauoure vnto
ye LORDE. A bullocke, a ramme, seue lambes of a yeare olde without blemysh,
37 with their meatofferynges and drynkofferynges to ye bullocke to the ramme,
and to the lambes in their nobre acordinge to the maner.
38 And an he goate for a synofferinge, besyde the daylie burntofferynge with his
meatofferynge & his drinkofferynge.
39 These thinges shal ye do vnto ye LORDE in youre feastes, besyde that ye vowe
and geue of a frewyll for burntofferinges, meatofferynges, drynkofferynges and
healthofferinges.
40 And Moses tolde the children of Israel all that the LORDE commaunded him.

Chapter 30

1 And Moses spake vnto the rulers of the trybes of the children of Israel, and
saide: This is that the LORDE hath commauded:
2 Yf eny man make a vowe vnto the LORDE, or sweare an ooth, so that he binde his
soule, he shal not breake his worde, but do all that is proceaded out of his
mouth.
3 Yf a damsell make a vowe vnto ye LORDE, and bynde hirself, whyle she is in hir
fathers house, and vnmaried,
4 and hir vowe or bonde that she maketh ouer hir soule, commeth to hir fathers
eares, & he holde his peace therto, the all hir vowes & bondes yt she hath boude
hir self withall ouer hir soule, shal stode in effecte.
5 But yf hir father forbyd her ye same daye that he heareth it, the shal no vowe
ner bonde that she hath bounde hir self withall ouer hir soule, be of vayle. And
the LORDE shalbe mercifull vnto her, for so moch as hir father forbad her.
6 Yf she haue an hu?bande, & hath a vowe vpon her, or yf she haue letten go out
of hir lippes a bode ouer hir soule,
7 & hir hu?bande heare it, & holdeth his peace ther at, the same daye that he
heareth it, then hir vowe & bonde wherwith she hath boude hir self ouer hir
soule, shal stonde in effecte.
8 But yf hir hu?bande forbyd her the same daye that he heareth it, the is the
vowe lowse yt she hath vpo hir, & the bonde also that she hath letten go out of
hir lippes ouer hir soule, and the LORDE shalbe gracious vnto her.
9 The vowe of a wyddowe, & of her yt is deuorced, all yt she byndeth hir self
withall ouer hir soule, shal stonde in effecte vpo her.
10 Yf she vowe in hir hu?bades house, or binde hir self wt an ooth ouer hir
soule,
11 & hir husbande heare it, & holde his peace therto, and forbyddeth it not, the
shal all ye same vowe, & all yt she hath boude hir self wt all ouer hir soule,
stode i effecte.
12 But yf hir hu?bade disanulle it, ye same daye yt he heareth it, the is it of
no value yt is proceaded out of hir lippes, which she hath vowed or boude ouer
hir soule: for hir hu?bade hath made it lowse, & the LORDE shalbe gracious vnto
her.
13 And all vowes & oothes yt bynde to humble ye soule, maie hir hu?bade stablish
or breake, thus:
14 Yf he holde his peace therto fro one daie to another, then stablisheth he all
hir vowes & bondes, yt she hath vpon her, because he helde his peace, the same
daye yt he herde the.
15 But yf he disanulle the after yt he hath herde the, then shal he take awaie
hir mi?dede.
16 These are the statutes yt the LORDE comaunded Moses betwene a man & his wife,
& betwene the father & his doughter, whyle she is yet a damsell in hir fathers
house.

Chapter 31

1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
2 Auenge the childre of Israel of the Madianites, yt thou mayest afterwarde be
gathered vnto yi people.
3 The spake Moses vnto the people, & sayde: Harnesse some men amonge you to the
warre agaynst the Madianites (yt they maye auenge ye LORDE vpon the Madianites)
4 out of euery trybe a thousande, yt out of euery trybe of Israel ye maye sende
some to the battayll.
5 And from amonge the thousandes of Israel they toke one thousande out of euery
tribe, euen twolue thousande prepared vnto the battayll.
6 And Moses sent them with Phineas the sonne of Eleasar the prest in to the
battayll, and the holy vessels and ye trompettes to blowe in his hande.
7 And they fought agaynst ye Madianites as ye LORDE comaunded Moses, & slew all
ye males,
8 & the kynge of the Madianites slew they also amonge the other that were slaine
namely, Eui, Rekem, Zur, Hur and Reba, the fyue kynges of the Madianites. And
they slew Balaam the sonne of Beor wt the swerde.
9 And ye children of Israel toke the wemen of the Madianites presoners, & their
childre: all their catell, all their substaunce, and all their goodes spoiled
they,
10 and all their cities of their dwellynges & castels burnt they wt fyre.
11 And they toke all ye spoyles, & all yt they coulde catche men & catell,
12 and brought the vnto Moses & to Eleasar the prest, and to ye congregacion of
the children of Israel (namely ye presoners, and the catell yt were take, and
the good that was spoyled) in to the hoost in the felde of the Moabites, which
lyeth besyde Iordane ouer against Iericho.
13 And Moses and Eleasar the prest and all the captaines of ye congregacion,
wete out of the hoost to mete the.
14 And Moses was angrie at the officers of the hoost, which were captaynes ouer
thousandes and hudreds, yt came from the battayll,
15 and sayde vnto the: Haue ye saued all ye wemen alyue?
16 Beholde, haue not they (thorow Balaams busynes) turned awaye ye childre of
Israel to synne agaynst the LORDE vpo Peor, & their came a plage ouer the whole
cogregacion of ye LORDE?
17 Now therfore slaie all the males amoge ye childre, & kyll all ye wemen yt
haue knowne men & lyen wt them.
18 But all the wemen chidren yt haue knowne no me ner lien wt them, kepe those
alyue for youre selues.
19 And lodge ye without the hoost, all yt haue slayne any man, or touched the
slayne, that on the thirde and seuenth daie ye maie purifie yor selues and those
whom ye haue taken presoners.
20 And all the clothes, and all stuffe that is made of?kynnes, and all maner
furres, and all vessels of wod shal ye purifie.
21 And Eleasar the prest sayde vnto ye captaynes of the hoost, yt wente out to
the battayll: This is the statute of the lawe, which the LORDE comaunded Moses:
22 Golde, siluer brasse, yron, tynne and leed,
23 and all that suffreth the fyre, shall ye cause to go thorow the fyre, and
clense it, that it maye be purified with ye sprencklynge water. As for all soch
as suffreth not the fyre, ye shal cause it to go thorow ye water,
24 and shal washe yor clothes vpon the seuenth daye. and the shall ye be cleane.
After that shall ye come in to the hooste.
25 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
26 Take the summe of the spoyle of those that are taken, both of wemen and of
catell, thou and Eleasar the prest, and the chefe fathers of the congregacion,
27 and geue ye halfe vnto those that toke the warre vpon them, and wente out to
the battayll, and ye other halfe to the congregacion.
28 And of the men of warre that wente out to ye battayll, thou shalt heue vnto
the LORDE one soule of fyue hundreth, both of the wemen, oxen, Asses and shepe:
29 Of their halfe parte shalt thou take it, and geue it vnto Eleasar the prest
for an Heueofferynge vnto the LORDE.
30 But of the children of Israels halfe parte, thou shalt take one heade of
fyftie, both of the wemen, oxen, Asses and shepe, and of all the catell, and
shalt geue them vnto the Leuites, that wayte vpon the habitacio of the LORDE.
31 And Moses and Eleasar the prest dyd as the LORDE commaunded Moses.
32 And the spoyle and praye which ye men of warre had spoyled, was sixe hundreth
thousande and fyue and seuentye thousande shepe,
33 two and seuentye thousande oxen,
34 one & thre score thousande Asses:
35 and the wemen yt had knowne no men ner lyen wt them, were two and thirtie
thousande soules.
36 And the halfe parte which belonged vnto them that wente to the warre, was in
nobre thre hundreth thousande, and seuen and thirtie thousande, and fyue
hundreth shepe:
37 of the which the LORDE had sixe hundreth, & fyue and seuentye shepe.
38 Item sixe and thirtie thousande oxen: wherof the LORDE had two & seuentye.
39 Item thirtie thousande fyue hundreth Asses: wherof the LORDE had one & thre
score.
40 Item sixtene thousande soules of wemen: wherof the LORDE had two & thirtie.
41 And Moses gaue this heueofferynge of the LORDE vnto Eleasar the prest, as the
LORDE commaunded him.
42 As for the other halfe which Moses deuyded vnto the children of Israel fro
thorne; men of warre
43 (namely ye halfe that fell to the congregacion) it was also thre hundreth
thousande, and seuen and thyrtie thousande, & fyue hundreth shepe,
44 sixe and thirtie thousande oxen,
45 thyrtie thousande & fyue hundreth Asses,
46 and sixtene thousande wemen soules.
47 And of this halfe of the childre of Israel toke Moses one of euery fyftie,
both of the catell & of the wemen, and gaue them vnto ye Leuites, that waited
vpon the habitacio of the LORDE, as ye LORDE comauded Moses.
48 And the captaynes ouer ye thousandes of the hoost, namely they that were ouer
thousandes and ouer hundreds, came forth vnto Moses, and sayde vnto him:
49 Thy seruauntes haue taken ye summe of ye men of warre, that were vnder oure
hande, and there lacked not one:
50 therfore brynge we a present vnto the LORDE, what euery one hath foude of
Iewels of golde, cheynes, bracelettes, rynges, earinges, and taches, that oure
soules maye be reconcyled before the LORDE.
51 And Moses and Eleasar ye prest toke of them ye golde of all maner ornamentes.
52 And all the golde of the Heueofferynge that they Heued vnto the LORDE, was
sixtene thousande and seuen hundreth and fyftye Sycles, of the captaynes ouer
thousandes and hundreds.
53 For loke what euery one had spoyled, that was his awne.
54 And Moses wt Eleasar the prest toke the golde of the captaynes ouer
thousandes and hundreds, and broughte it in to the Tabernacle of witnesse for a
remembraunce of the children of Israel before the LORDE.

Chapter 32

1 The children of Ruben and the children of Gad had an exceadinge greate
multitude of catell, and sawe the londe of Iaeser and Gilead yt it was a mete
place for catell,
2 and came & spake vnto Moses and to Eleasar the prest, and to the captaynes of
the congregacion:
3 The londe of Atroth, Dibon, Iaesar, Nimra, He?bo, Eleale, Seban, Nebo, & Beon,
4 which the LORDE smote before ye congregacion of Israel, is a mete londe for
catell, and thy seruauntes haue many catell.
5 And they sayde morouer: Yf we haue founde fauoure before the, the geue thy
seruauntes this londe in possession, and we wyl not go ouer Iordane.
6 Moses sayde vnto them: Youre brethren shall go to the warre, and wyll ye tary
here?
7 Wherfore turne ye ye hertes of the children of Israel, that they shulde not go
ouer in to the londe that the LORDE shall geue them?
8 Thus dyd youre fathers also, whan I sent them out from Cades Bernea, to spye
out ye londe.
9 And whan they were come vp to ye ryuer of Escol, and sawe ye londe, they
turned the hertes of the children of Israel, so yt they wolde not into the londe
which ye LORDE wolde haue geuen them.
10 And the LORDE was wroth at the same tyme, & sware, & sayde:
11 These men yt are come out of Egipte, from twetye yeare olde & aboue, shall
not se the lande which I sware vnto Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, because they haue
not wholy folowed me:
12 saue Caleb ye sonne of Iephune ye Kenisite, & Iosua ye sonne of Nun: for they
haue wholy folowed ye LORDE.
13 So the LORDE was wroth wt Israel, & let the wander in the wildernesse fourtye
yeares, tyll all ye generacion yt had done euell before the LORDE, was consumed.
14 And beholde, ye are rysen vp in youre fathers steade, to increase the nombre
of synfull men, & to augmente yet the wrath & indignacion of the LORDE agaynst
Israel.
15 For yf ye turne you backe from folowinge him, he shal yet leaue them more in
the wildernes, & so shal ye destroye all this people.
16 Then stepte they to him, & sayde: we wyll but buylde shepefoldes here for
oure shepe & catell, & cities for or children:
17 As for oure selues, we will go ready armed before the children of Israel,
tyll we haue broughte them vnto their place: Oure childre shal remayne in the
fenced cities, because of ye indwellers of the londe.
18 We will not turne home agayne, tyll the children of Israel haue taken euery
one his inheritaunce in possession:
19 for we wyll not inheret with them beyonde Iordane: for or inheritaunce shal
fall vnto vs vpon this syde Iordane Eastwarde.
20 Moses sayde vnto them: Yf ye wil do this, that ye wil harnesse youre selues
to the warre before the LORDE,
21 then go ouer Iordane before the LORDE, who so euer is harnessed amonge you,
tyll he haue dryuen out his enemies before his face,
22 and vntyll the londe be subdued before the LORDE, then shal ye returne, & be
vngiltye before the LORDE, and before Israel, & so shal ye haue this londe in
possession before the LORDE.
23 But if ye will not do so, beholde, ye shal offende agaynst the LORDE, and be
sure, that youre synne shal fynde you out.
24 Buylde cities now therfore for youre children, and shepefoldes and stalles
for youre shepe and catell, and do as ye haue spoken.
25 The childre of Gad, & the childre of Ruben sayde vnto Moses: Thy seruauntes
shal do as my lorde hath comaunded.
26 Oure children, wyues, substaunce, & all or catell, shal be in ye cities of
Gilead.
27 But we yi seruauntes will go all harnessed for the warre vnto battaill before
ye LORDE, as my lorde hath saide.
28 The Moses comaunded Eleasar ye prest & Iosua the sonne of Nun, & the chefe
fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel,
29 and saide vnto them: Yf the children of Gad & the children of Ruben go ouer
Iordane wt you, all prepared to fight before the LORDE, & whan the londe is
subdued vnto you, the geue them the londe of Gilead in possessio.
30 But yf they go not ouer with you in harnes, then shal they inheret wt you in
ye lode of Canaa.
31 The children of Gad and the children of Rube answered, & sayde: As ye LORDE
hath spoken vnto yi seruauntes, so wyll we do:
32 we wil go harnessed before the LORDE in to ye lade of Canaan, and possesse
oure enheritaunce on this syde Iordane.
33 So Moses gaue vnto ye children of Gad and to the children of Ruben, and to
the halfe trybe of Manasse the sonne of Ioseph, ye kyngdome of Sihon kynge of
the Amorites and the kyngdome of Og the kynge of Basan, the londe with the
cities therof in all ye coastes of ye countre rounde aboute.
34 The ye children of Gad buylded Dibon, Araroth, Aroer, Atroth,
35 Sophan, Iaeser, & Iegabeha,
36 Bethnimra, & Betharan, stronge fenced cities, & shepe foldes.
37 The children of Ruben buylded He?bo, Eleale, Kiriathaim,
38 Nebo, Baal Meon, & turned ye names, & Sibamas & gaue names vnto ye cities
which they buylded.
39 And ye children of Machir the sonne of Manasse wente in to Gilead, &
conquered it, and droue out the Amorites yt were therin.
40 Then Moses gaue Gilead vnto Machir ye sonne of Manasse, & he dwelt therin.
41 Iair ye sonne of Manasse, wente and conquered the vyllagies therof, and
called them Hauoth Iair.
42 Nobah wente, and coquered Kenath, with the townes belonginge therto, and
called it Nobah, after his awne name.

Chapter 33

1 These are ye iourneys of the childre of Israel, which wete out of ye lande of
Egipte acordinge to their armies, by Moses & Aaro.
2 And Moses wrote their goige out as they iourneyed, after ye comaundement of ye
LORDE. And these (namely) are the yourneyes of their outgoinge.
3 They departed fro Raemses vpon ye fiftene daye of the first moneth (euen the
morow after the Easter) thorow an hye hande, so that all the Egipcians sawe,
4 and buried then their firstborne, whom the LORDE had slayne amonge them: for
the LORDE executed iudgment also vpon their goddes.
5 When they were departed from Raemses, they pitched in Sucoth. And fro Sucoth
6 they departed, & pitched their tentes in Etha, which lyeth in ye edge of ye
wildernes.
7 Fro Etham they departed, and abode in the valley of Hiroth (which lyeth
towarde Baal Zephon) & pitched ouer agaynst Migdol.
8 From Hyroth they daparted, & wente in thorow ye middes of the see into ye
wyldernes, and wente thre dayes yourney in the wildernes of Etham, & pitched in
Marah.
9 From Marah they departed, and came vnto Elim, where there were twolue welles
of water, and seuentye palme trees, & and there they pitched.
10 From Elim they departed, and pitched by the reed see.
11 From ye reed see they departed, and pitched in the wildernesse of Sin.
12 From the wildernes of Sin they departed, and pitched in Daphka.
13 Fro Daphka they departed, and pitched in Alus.
14 From Alus they departed, and pitched in Raphidim, where the people had no
water to drynke.
15 From Raphidim they departed and pitched in the wildernes of Sinai.
16 From Sinai they departed, and pitched at the Lustgraues.
17 Fro the Lustgraues they departed, and pitched in Hazeroth.
18 From Hazeroth they departed, & pitched in Rithma.
19 From Rithma they departed, and pitched in Rimon Parez.
20 From Rimon Parez they departed, and pitched in Libna.
21 From Libna they departed, and pitched in Rissa.
22 Fro Rissa they departed, & pitched in Kehelatha.
23 Fro Kehelatha they departed, & pitched in mout Sapher.
24 From mout Sapher they departed, & pitched in Harada.
25 Fro Harada they departed, pitched in Makeheloth.
26 From Makeheloth they departed, & pitched in Tahath.
27 From Tahath they departed, and pitched in Tharah.
28 From Tharah they departed, and pitched in Mitka.
29 From Mitka they departed, and pitched in Hasmona.
30 From Hasmona they departed, and pitched in Mosseroth.
31 From Mosseroth they departed, and pitched in Bne Iaekon.
32 From Bne Iaekon they departed, and pitched in Horgadgad.
33 From Horgadgad they departed, & pitched in Iathbatha.
34 From Iathbatha they departed, and pitched in Abrona.
35 From Abrona they departed, and pitched in Ezeon gaber.
36 From Ezeon gaber they departed, and pitched in ye wildernes of Zin, which is
Cades.
37 From Cades they departed, and pitched at mount Hor, on the border of the
londe of Edom.
38 Then Aaron the prest wente vp vnto mount Hor (acordynge to the commaundement
of the LORDE) and died there in the fourtyeth yeare, after yt the children of
Israel departed out of the londe of Egipte, in the first daie of the fifte
moneth,
39 wha he was an hundreth and thre and twentye yeare olde.
40 And Arad the kynge of the Cananites, which dwelt in the south countre of
Canaa herde yt the children of Israel came.
41 And from mount Hor they departed, and pitched in Zalmona.
42 From Zalmona they departed, and pitched in Phimon.
43 From Phimon they departed, and pitched in Oboth.
44 From Oboth they departed, and pitched in Igim by Abarim vpon the border of
the lode of ye Moabites.
45 From Igim they departed, and pitched in Dibon Gad.
46 From Dibo Gad they departed, and pitched in Almon Diblathama.
47 Fro Almon Diblathama they departed and pitched in the mountaynes of Abarim
ouer agaynst Nebo.
48 From the moutaynes of Abarim they departed, and pitched in ye felde of the
Moabites besyde Iordane ouer agaynst Iericho.
49 Fro Beth haiesmoth vnto the playne of Sitim laye they in the felde of the
Moabites.
50 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses in the felde of the Moabites, by Iordane ouer
agaynst Iericho, and sayde:
51 Speake to the children of Israel, and saie vnto them: Wha ye are come ouer
Iordane in the lande of Canaan,
52 ye shal dryue out all the inhabiters before youre face, and plucke downe all
their pilers, and all their ymages of metall, and destroye all their hye places:
53 that ye maye so take the londe in possession and dwell therin For I haue geue
you the londe to enioye it.
54 And the londe shall ye deuyde out by lott amonge youre kynreds. Vnto those
that are many, shall ye deuyde the more: And vnto them that are fewe, shall ye
deuyde the lesse. Euen as the lott falleth there vnto euery one, so shal he haue
it, acordinge to the trybes of their fathers.
55 But yf ye wyll not dryue out the inhabiters of ye lande before yor face, then
they who ye suffre to remayne, shall be come thornes in youre eyes, and dartes
in youre sydes, & shall vexe you in the londe where ye dwell.
56 Then wil it come to passe, that I shal do vnto you euen as I thought to do
vnto them.

Chapter 34

1 Annd the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
2 Commaunde the childre of Israel, and saye vnto them: Whan ye come into the
londe of Canaan, the londe yt falleth to youre inheritaunce, shall haue hir
borders in the londe of Canaan.
3 The South quarter shall begynne at the wyldernesse of Zin by Edom, so that
youre South quarter be from the edge of the Salt see, which lyeth towarde the
South:
4 and that ye same quarter fet a compasse from the South vp to Acrabim, & go
thorow Zimma: & that his outgoinge be from the South vnto Cades Barnea, & reache
vnto Hazor Adar, and go thorow Azmona,
5 and stretch out from Azmona vnto the ryuer of Egipte, and that the ende therof
be at the greate see.
6 But the West quarter shal be this: namely the greate see, let yt be youre
border towarde the West.
7 The North quarter shalbe this: Ye shall compasse from the greate see vnto
mount Hor.
8 And fro mount Hor ye shall compasse tyll a man come vnto Hemath, that the
outgoynge therof be the coast of Zedada,
9 and that the border of the same go out vnto Siphron, and that the goynge out
of it be at Hazor Enan. Let this be youre North quarter.
10 And youre East quarter shall ye copasse from Hazor Enan vnto Sephan,
11 & let the coaste go downe from Sephan and Ribla on the East syde of Ain. The
let it go downe, & reache vnto the syde of the see of Chinereth East warde,
12 and come downe by Iordane, so yt the goynge out of it be the Salt see. Let
this be youre londe with the borders therof rounde aboute.
13 And Moses commaunded the children of Israel, and sayde: This is youre londe
that ye shal deuyde out amonge you by lott, which the LORDE hath commaunded to
geue vnto the nyne trybes, and to the halfe trybe.
14 For the trybe of the children of Ruben after their fathers house, and the
trybe of the children of Gad acordinge to their fathers house, and the half
trybe of Manasse haue receaued their porcion.
15 hus the two trybes and the halfe trybe haue their enheritaunce allready, on
this syde Iordane, ouer agaynst Iericho, Eastwarde.
16 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
17 These are ye names of the men, which shal deuyde the londe amonge you.
Eleasar the prest, and Iosua the sonne of Nun.
18 And the captayne of euery trybe shal ye take, to deuyde the londe.
19 And these are the names of the men: Caleb the sonne of Iephune of the trybe
of Iuda.
20 Semuel the sonne of Ammihud of the trybe of Simeon.
21 Elidad ye sonne of Cislon of the trybe of Ben Iamin
22 Buki the sonne of Iagli of the trybe of the childre of Dan.
23 Hamuel the sonne of Ephod, of
24 Elizaphan the sonne of Parnach, of the trybe of the childre of Zabulon. the
trybe of the children of Manasse amonge the children of Ioseph.
25 Remuel the sonne of Siphthan, of the trybe of the children of Ephraim.
26 Palthiel the sonne of Asan, of the trybe of the childre of Isachar.
27 Abihud the sonne of Selomi, of ye trybe of the children of Asser.
28 Pedahel the sonne of Ammihud, of the trybe of the children of Nephtali.
29 These are they whom ye LORDE commaunded, that they shulde deuyde the
inheritaunce vnto the children of Israel in the londe of Canaan.

Chapter 35

1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses in the felde of the Moabites by Iordane ouer
agaynst Iericho, & sayde:
2 Commaunde the childre of Israel, that they geue vnto ye Leuites of the
inheritauce of their possession, cities to dwell in. The suburbes also aboute
the cities shal ye geue vnto the Leuites,
3 that they maye dwell in the cities, and in the suburbes to haue their catell,
and substaunce, and all their beestes.
4 The suburbes which ye geue vnto ye Leuites, shal reache fro the wall of ye
cite outwarde, a M. cubites rounde aboute.
5 Thus ye shal measure without the cite on ye East syde, two thousande cubites:
& on ye South syde, two thousande cubites: & on ye West syde, two thousande
cubites: & on ye North syde, two thousande cubites, so yt the cite be in the
myddes. This shal be their suburbes.
6 And amoge the cities which ye shal geue vnto the Leuites, ye shall geue the
sixe fre cities, that he which comitteth a slaughter, maie flye thither. Besydes
the same ye shal geue the yet two & fourtie cities:
7 so yt all ye cities which ye geue vnto ye Leuites, be eight & fourtye wt their
suburbes.
8 And of ye same ye shal geue the more, from the yt haue moch in possession
amonge the children of Israel: & the lesse from them, that haue litle in
possession. Euery one (acordinge to his enheritaunce that is deuyded vnto him)
shall geue of his cities vnto the Leuites.
9 And the LORDE talked wt Moses & saide:
10 Speake to the childre of Israel, & saye vnto the: Whan ye come ouer Iordane
into ye londe of Canaan,
11 ye shall chose out cities to be fre cities, yt who so comytteth slaughter
vnawarres, maye flye thither.
12 And soch fre cities shalbe amonge you because of the auenger of bloude, that
he which hath commytted slaughter, dye not, tyll he stonde in iudgment before
the congregacion.
13 And of these cities which ye shall geue, there shalbe sixe fre cities.
14 Thre shal ye geue on this side Iordane, and thre in the londe of Canaan.
15 These are the sixe fre cities, both for ye childre of Israel & for the
straungers, & for soch as dwell amoge you, yt who so euer hath slaine eny soule
vnawarres, maye flye thither.
16 He yt smyteth eny man wt an yron weapo, yt he dye, the same is a murthurer, &
shal dye the death.
17 Yf he cast at him wt a stone (wherwith enyman maye be slayne) yt he dye
therof, then is he a murthurer, and shal dye the death.
18 Yf he smyte him wt an handweapon of wodd (wherwith eny man maie be slayne)
that he dye, then is he a murthurer, and shal dye the death.
19 The auenger of bloude shal bringe ye murthurer to death. Whan he fyndeth him,
he shal slaye him.
20 Yf he thrust at him of hate, or cast ought at him with laienge of wayte, or
smyte him of envye wt his hande, that he dye,
21 then shal he that hath slayne him, dye the death: for he is a murthurer. The
auenger of bloude shal brynge him to death, as soone as he fyndeth him.
22 But yf he thrust him by chaunce, & not of envye, or hurle ought at him
without eny layenge of wayte,
23 or cast at him with a stone (wherof a man maye dye, & sawe it not) so yt he
dye, & is not his enemie, nether thought him eny euell,
24 the shal the cogregacion iudge betwene him yt hath comytted ye slaughter, and
the auenger of bloude, in soch cases.
25 And the cogregacion shal delyuer the deedslayer from the hande of ye auenger
of bloude, & shal let him come agayne to the fre cite, whither he was fled: &
there shall he abyde vnto ye death of the hye prest, which was anoynted with ye
holy oyle.
26 But yf the deedsleyer go out of the borders of his fre cite, that he was fled
vnto,
27 and the auenger of bloude fynde him without ye borders of his fre cite, and
kyll him, he shal not be gyltye of bloude.
28 For he shulde haue bydden in his fre cite vntyll ye death of the hye prest, &
after ye hye prestes death to come agayne vnto the londe of his enheritaunce.
29 This shalbe a statute of the lawe vnto you amoge youre posterities in all
youre dwellinges.
30 The deed slayer shal be slayne at ye mouth of witnesses. One witnesse shal
not answere ouer a soule to death.
31 And ye shal receaue none attonement ouer the soule of the deedslayer (for he
is giltye of death) but he shal dye the death.
32 And ye shal receaue none attonement of him, which is fled to the fre cite, yt
he shulde come agayne to dwell in the londe, tyll the hye prest dye.
33 And defyle not ye ye londe wherin ye dwell. For who so is giltye of bloude,
defyleth the londe: and the londe can not be reconcyled from the bloude that is
shed therin, but onely thorow the bloude of him that shed it.
34 Defyle not ye the londe that ye dwell in, wherin I dwell also. For I am the
LORDE, which dwell amoge ye children of Israel.

Chapter 36

1 And ye chefe fathers of the kynred of the childre of Gilead ye sonne of Machir
(which was the sonne of Manasse of the kynred of the children of Ioseph) came
forth, and spake before Moses, and before the captaynes amonge the chefe fathers
of the children of Israel,
2 and saide: Syr, the LORDE hath commaunded, that ye shulde geue the londe by
lott vnto the childre of Israel to inheret. And thou my lorde hast commaunded
thorow the LORDE, that the enheritaunce of or brother Zelaphead shulde be geue
vnto his doughters.
3 Now yf eny men out of the trybes of Israel take them to wyues, then shal oure
fathers enheritaunce be lesse: and as moch as they haue, shal come to ye
enheritaunce of the trybe that they come vnto. Thus shal the lott of oure
inheritaunce be mynished.
4 So whan the yeare of Iubilye commeth vnto the childre of Israel, then shal
their enheritaunce come to ye enheritaunce of the trybe, where they are. Thus
shal oure fathers enheritaunce be mynished, as moch as they haue.
5 Moses charged the childre of Israel (acordinge to the commaundement of the
LORDE) and sayde: The trybe of the children of Ioseph hath sayde righte.
6 This is it that ye LORDE commaundeth the doughters of Zelaphead, and sayeth:
Let them mary as they like best, onely that they mary in ye kynred of the trybe
of their father,
7 that the enheritaunce of the children of Israel fall not fro one trybe to
another. For euery one amonge the children of Israel shall cleue to the
enheritaunce of the trybe of his father:
8 & euery doughter that possesseth eny enheritaunce amonge the trybes of the
children of Israel, shal be maryed vnto one of the kynred of the trybe of hir
father: yt euery one amonge the children of Israel maye enioye his fathers
enheritaunce,
9 and that the enheritaunce fall not from one trybe to another: but that euery
one maye cleue to his awne enheritaunce amonge the trybes of the children of
Israel.
10 As the LORDE comaunded Moses, eue so dyd ye doughters of ye Zelaphead,
11 Mahela, Thirza, Hagla, Milca & Noa & were maried vnto their fathers brothers
sonnes,
12 of ye kynred of the children of Manasse the sonne of Ioseph. So their
enheritauce remayned in the trybe of the kynred of their father.
13 These are the commaundemetes & lawes, which ye LORDE commaunded by Moses vnto
the childre of Israel, in the felde of the Moabites by Iordane ouer agaynst
Iericho.


Deuteronomy

Chapter 1

1 These are the wordes that Moses spake vnto all Israel on the other syde
Iordane in the wildernesse, in the playne felde towarde the reed see, betwene
Paran, Thophel, Laban, Hazeroth, and Disahab,
2 eleuen daies iourney from Horeb, by the waye of mount Seir vnto Cades Bernea.
3 And it fortuned the first daye of the eleuenth moneth in the fortieth yeare,
that Moses spake vnto ye children of Israel acordinge vnto all as ye LORDE
commaunded him,
4 after he had smytten Sihon ye kynge of the Amorites which dwelt at Hesbon: and
Og the kynge of Basan, that dwelt at Astaroth, and at Edrei.
5 On the other syde Iordane in ye lande of the Moabites, beganne Moses to
declare this lawe, and sayde:
6 The LORDE or God spake vnto vs vpon mount Horeb, & sayde: Ye haue bene loge
ynough vpon this mountayne,
7 turne you, & departe hence, that ye maye come to the mountaynes of the
Amorites, and to all their neghbours in ye feldes, vpon mountaynes, and in the
valleys towarde the South and towarde the see syde, of the lande of Canaan: and
to mount Libanus, euen vnto the greate water Euphrates.
8 Beholde, I haue delyuered you the londe, go in, and take it in possession,
which the LORDE sware vnto yor fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, that he wolde
geue it vnto the, and their sede after them.
9 Then saide I vnto you at the same tyme: I am not able to beare you my self
alone,
10 for the LORDE youre God hath increased you, so that this daye ye are as ye
starres of heauen in multitude.
11 (The LORDE God of yor fathers make you yet many thousande tymes mo, & blesse
you, as he hath promysed you.)
12 How can I alone beare soche cobraunce, & charge, & stryfe amoge you?
13 Prouyde here men of wysdome & vnderstondinge, soch as are knowne amonge youre
trybes, the wil I set to be heades vnto you.
14 Then answered ye me, and sayde: It is a good thinge, that thou sayest thou
wilt do.
15 Then toke I ye heades of youre trybes, wyse and famous me, and set them ouer
you to be heades, ouer thousandes, ouer hundreds, ouer fiftye and ouer ten: and
officers amonge youre trybes.
16 And I charged your iudges at ye same tyme, & sayde: Heare youre brethre, &
iudge righteously betwene euery man and his brother, and the straunger.
17 Ye shall knowe no personne in iudgment, but shall heare the small as well as
the greate, and be afrayed of no man: for the Iudgment is Gods. But yf eny cause
be to harde for you, let it be broughte vnto me, yt I maye heare it.
18 Thus commaunded I you at the same tyme, all yt ye shulde doo.
19 Then departed we from Horeb, and walked thorow the whole wyldernesse (which
is greate and terryble as ye haue sene) by the waye to ye mountaynes of the
Amorites, as the LORDE oure God commauded vs, and came vnto Cades Bernea.
20 Then sayde I vnto you: Ye are come to ye mountaynes of ye Amorites, which the
LORDE or God shal geue vs.
21 Beholde, there the londe before the, which the LORDE thy God hath geue vnto
the: Go vp, & conquere it, as ye LORDE God of thy fathers hath sayde vnto the:
feare not, and be not discoraged.
22 Then came ye all vnto me, and sayde: Let vs sende men before vs, to spye vs
out the londe, and to brynge vs worde agayne, by what waye we shal go vp, and to
what cities we shal come.
23 That pleased me well, and I toke twolue men from amonge you, of euery trybe
one.
24 Which whan they were departed, and wente vp to hye countre, and came to the
ryuer Escol, they spyed it out,
25 and toke of the frute of ye londe with the, and broughte it downe vnto vs,
and broughte vs worde agayne, and sayde: It is a good londe, that the LORDE oure
God hath geuen vs.
26 But ye wolde not go vp, and were dishobedient vnto the mouth of the LORDE
youre God,
27 and murmured in youre tentes, and sayde: Because the LORDE hateth vs,
therfore hath be broughte vs out of the londe of Egipte, to delyuer vs in to the
handes of the Amorites, to destroye vs.
28 Whither shal we go vp? Oure brethren haue discoraged oure hertes, & saide:
The people is greater & of hyer stature the we, ye cities are greate, & walled
euen vp to heauen. Morouer we haue sene there the children of Enakim.
29 But I sayde vnto you: Feare not, and be not afrayed of them:
30 for the LORDE youre God goeth before you, and shall fighte for you, like as
he dealte with you in Egipte before youre eyes,
31 and in the wyldernesse: where thou sawest, that the LORDE thy God bare the
(euen as a man beareth his sonne) thorow out all the waye that ye haue walked,
tyll ye came to this place.
32 And yet for all this ye haue not beleued on the LORDE youre God,
33 which wente before you, to searche you out a place, where ye shulde pitch
youre tentes: by night in the fyre (to shewe you the waye, wherin ye shulde go)
& on the daye tyme in the cloude.
34 Whan the LORDE herde ye voyce of yor wordes, he was wroth, and swore, and
saide:
35 There shall none of this euell generacion se that good londe, which I sware
to geue vnto youre fathers,
36 excepte Caleb the sonne of Iephune, he shal se it. And vnto him wyl I geue
the londe that he hath trodde vpon, & to his children, because he hath perfectly
folowed the LORDE.
37 The LORDE was angrye wt me also for youre sakes, and sayde: Thou also shalt
not go in thither.
38 But Iosua ye sonne of Nun, which stondeth before the, he shal go in thither:
Corage him, for he shal deuyde the enheritaunce out vnto Israel.
39 And youre childre, of who ye sayde they shulde be a praye, and youre sonnes
which this daie vnderstonde nether good ner bad, they shal go in thither, vnto
them wil I geue it, and they shall enioye it.
40 But as for you, turne you, and take youre iourney to the wyldernesse, euen
the waye to the reed see.
41 Then answered ye, & sayde vnto me: We haue synned agaynst ye LORDE, we wil go
vp, and fighte, acordinge to all that the LORDE hath commaunded vs. Now whan ye
had prepared yor selues, euery one in his harnesse, & were at the poynte to go
vp to the mountaynes,
42 ye LORDE sayde vnto me: Speake vnto them, yt they go not vp, & that they
fighte not (for I am not amoge you) that ye be not smytten before youre enemies.
43 Whan I tolde you this, ye wolde not heare, & were dishobedient vnto the worde
of the LORDE, and were presumptuous, and wente vp to ye mountaines.
44 Then the Amorites that dwelt vpon the moutaynes, came out against you, and
chaced you, as Bees do, and smote you at Seir, euen vnto Horma.
45 Now whan ye came againe, and wepte before the LORDE, he wolde not heare youre
voyce, and enclyned not his eares vnto you.
46 So ye abode in Cades a longe season.

Chapter 2

1 Then turned we vs, and toke oure iourney to the wildernesse, euen the waye to
the reed see (as the LORDE sayde vnto me) and compassed mount Seir a longe
season.
2 And ye LORDE saide vnto me:
3 Ye haue copassed this mountayne now loge ynough, turne you Northwarde,
4 and commaude the people, and saye: Ye shal go thorow ye coastes of youre
brethren the children of Esau, which dwell at Seir: & they shal be afrayed of
you. But take diligente hede to youre selues,
5 that ye prouoke them not: for I wyl not geue you one fote bredth of their
londe. For mount Seir haue I geuen to the children of Esau to possesse.
6 Ye shal bye meate of them for moneye, that ye maye eate. And water shal ye bye
of them for money, that ye maye drynke.
7 For the LORDE thy God hath blessed the in all the workes of thy hondes. He
hath considered thy iourneyes thorow this greate wyldernesse: and this fortye
yeares hath the LORDE thy God bene with the, so that thou hast wanted nothinge.
8 Now whan we were departed from or brethren the children of Esau, that dwelt
vpon mount Seir, by the waye of the felde from Elath & Ezeon gaber, we turned
vs, & wente by the waye of the wyldernesse of ye Moabites.
9 Then sayde the LORDE vnto me: Thou shalt not vexe the Moabites, ner prouoke
the vnto battayll, for I wil not geue the of their londe to possesse.
10 For Ar haue I geuen vnto the children of Lot in possession. The Emims dwelt
there before tyme, which were a greate stronge people, & hye of stature, as the
Enakims:
11 and were taken for giauntes, like as ye Enakims. And ye Moabites called them
Emims.
12 The Horites also dwelt in Seir afore tyme, & ye children of Esau droue them
out, and destroyed them before them, & dwelt in their steade: like as Israel dyd
in ye lode of his possession, that the LORDE gaue them.
13 Get you vp now, & go ouer the ryuer Sared. And we wente ouer.
14 The tyme that we were goinge fro Cades Barnea, tyll we came ouer the ryuer
Sared, was eight & thirtye yeares: tyll all the men of warre were waysted out of
the hoost, as the LORDE sware vnto them.
15 The hande of the LORDE also was agaynst them, to destroye the out of the
hoost, tyll they were consumed.
16 And whan all the men of warre were cosumed, so yt they were deed amonge the
people,
17 the LORDE spake vnto me, and sayde:
18 This daie shalt thou go thorow the coast of ye Moabites by Ar,
19 & shalt come nye vnto ye children of Ammon, whom thou shalt not vexe ner
prouoke. For I wyll not geue the of the lode of the childre of Ammon to
possesse,
20 for I haue geue it vnto the childre of Lot in possession. It was take for a
lode of giauntes also, & giauntes dwelt therin afore tyme. And ye Ammonites
calle the Samsumims,
21 which was a people that was greate, many, and of hye stature, as the
Enakims.And these ye LORDE destroyed before the, and let them possesse the same,
so that they dwelt in their steade.
22 Like as he dyd with the childre of Esau, which dwell vpo mount Seir, whan he
destroyed the Horites before them: and let them possesse the same, so that they
haue dwelt in their steade vnto this daye.
23 And the Caphthorims came out of Caphther, and destroyed ye Auims (yt dwelt at
Hazarim euen vnto Gaza) & there dwelt they in their steade.
24 Get you vp now, and departe, and go ouer the ryuer Arnon. Beholde, I haue
geue Sihon ye kynge of the Amorites at Hesbon into thy hande: go to and
conquere, and prouoke him vnto battayll.
25 This daye wyll I begynne, so that all nacios vnder all the heauen, shal feare
& drede ye: In so moch yt wha they heare of the, they shal tremble and quake for
thy commynge.
26 Then sent I messaungers from ye wyldernesse of the East vnto Sihon the kynge
at Hesbon wt peaceble wordes, and caused to saye vnto him:
27 I wil go but thorow yi lode, I wil go alonge by the hye waye, I wil nether
turne to the righte hade ner to ye lefte.
28 Thou shalt sell me meate for money, that I maye eate: & water shalt thou sell
me for money, that I maye drinke. Onely let me go thorow by fote,
29 as the children of Esau (which dwell at Seir) dyd vnto me: and the Moabites
that dwell at Ar: vntyll I be come ouer Iordane, into the londe which the LORDE
oure God shal geue vnto vs.
30 But Sihon the kynge at Hesbon wolde not let vs go by him: for the LORDE yi
God herdened his mynde, & made his hert tough that he mighte delyuer him in to
thy hades, as it is come to passe this daye.
31 And ye LORDE sayde vnto me: Beholde, I haue begonne to delyuer Sihon with his
londe before the: go to and coquere, and possesse his lode.
32 And Siho came out wt all his people to fight agaynst vs at Iahza.
33 But the LORDE oure God delyuered him in to oure handes, so that we smote him
with his children and all his people.
34 Then toke we all his cities at the same tyme, and destroyed vtterly all the
cities, men, wemen, and children, and let none remayne:
35 saue the catell, which we caught to oure selues, & the spoyle of the cities
that we wanne
36 from Aroer, which lyeth vpon the ryuer syde of Arnon, and from the cite on
the ryuer vnto Gilead. There was no cite that coulde defende it selfe from vs:
the LORDE oure God delyuered vs all before vs.
37 But vnto the londe of the children of Ammon thou camest not, ner to all that
was on the ryuer Iabok, ner to ye cities vpo ye mountaines, ner vnto what so
euer the LORDE oure God forbad vs.

Chapter 3

1 And we turned vs, & wente vp ye waie vnto Basan. And Og ye kynge of Basan,
came out wt all his people to fight agaynst vs at Edrei.
2 But the LORDE sayde vnto me: Be not afrayed of him, for I haue delyuered him &
all his people wt his londe in to thy hande: & thou shalt do wt him, as thou
dyddest wt Sihon kynge of ye Amorites, which dwelt at Hesbon.
3 Thus ye LORDE oure God delyuered Og ye kynge of Basan in to oure handes also
with all his people: so that we smote him, tyll there was nothinge left ouer
vnto him.
4 Then wanne we at the same tyme all his cities, & there was not one cite that
we toke not from him, euen thre score cities, the whole region of Argob in the
kyngdome of Og at Basan.
5 All these cities were stroge, with hye walles, gates, and barres, besyde many
other vnwalled townes.
6 And we vtterly destroyed them, as we dyd with Sihon the kynge at Hesbon. All
the cities destroyed we vtterly, and the men, wemen, and children.
7 But all the catell and spoyle of the cities caughte we for oureselues.
8 Thus toke we at the same tyme the londe out of the honde of the two kynges of
the Amorites beyonde Iordane, from the ryuer of Arnon vnto mount Hermon
9 (which the Sidons call Sirion, but the Amorites call it Senir)
10 all the cities vpon the playne, and all Gilead, and all Basan vnto Salcha and
Edrei, the cities of the kyngdome of Og at Basan.
11 For onely Og the kynge of Basan remayned ouer of the giauntes. Beholde, his
yron bed is here at Rabath amonge the children of Ammon, nyne cubites longe, and
foure cubites brode, after the cubite of a man.
12 This londe conquered we at the same tyme, from Aroer that lyeth on ye ryuer
of Arnon. And vnto the Rubenites and Gaddites I gaue halfe mount Gilead with the
cities therof:
13 but ye remnaunt of Gilead, & all Basan the kyngdome of Og, gaue I vnto the
halfe trybe of Manasse. The whole region of Argob with all Basan was called the
giauntes londe.
14 Iair the sonne of Manasse toke all the region of Argob vnto the coastes of
Gessuri and Maachati, and Basan called he Hauoth Iair after his awne name, vnto
this daye:
15 But vnto Machir I gaue Gilead.
16 And vnto the Rubenites and Gaddites I gaue one parte of Gilead vnto the ryuer
of Arnon (at the myddes of the ryuer is ye border) and vnto the ryuer Iabok,
which is the border of the children of Ammon:
17 the felde also, and Iordane (which is the coaste) from Cinereth vnto the see
in the felde, namely, ye Salt see vnder mount Pisga, Eastwarde.
18 And I commaunded you at the same tyme, and sayde: The LORDE youre God hath
geuen you this londe to take possession of it, Go youre waye forth therfore
harnessed before youre brethren the children of Israel, all ye that be mete for
the warre.
19 As for youre wyues, and children and catell (for I knowe that ye haue moch
catell) let them remayne in youre cities, which I haue geuen you,
20 vntyl the LORDE youre God haue broughte yor brethren to rest also as well as
you, that they also maye take possession of the londe, which ye LORDE youre God
shal geue the beyonde Iordane: and then shal ye turne agayne to youre awne
possession, which I haue geuen you.
21 And I warned Iosua at the same tyme, and sayde: Thine eyes haue sene all that
the LORDE youre God hath done vnto these two kynges: eue so shal the LORDE do
also vnto all ye kyngdomes whither thou goest.
22 Feare them not, for the LORDE youre God shal fighte for you.
23 And I besoughte the LORDE at the same tyme, & sayde:
24 O LORDE LORDE, thou hast begonne to shewe yi seruaunte thy greatnesse and thy
mightie hade. For where is there a God in heauen & earth, that can do after yi
workes and after thy power?
25 O let me go & se yt good londe beyonde Iordane, yt goodly hye countre, and
Libanus.
26 But the LORDE was angrie with me for youre sakes, and wolde not heare me, but
sayde vnto me: Be content, speake nomore to me of this matter.
27 Get the vp to the toppe of mount Pisga, and lifte vp thine eyes towarde the
west, and towarde the north, and towarde the south, and towarde ye east: and
beholde it with thine eies, for thou shalt not go ouer this Iordane.
28 And geue Iosua his charge, and corage him, and bolde him, for he shal go ouer
Iordane before the people, and shal deuyde vnto them the londe, that thou shalt
se.
29 And so we abode in the valley ouer agaynst the house of Peor.

Chapter 4

1 And now herken Israel vnto the ordinauces and lawes, which I teach you that ye
do them, yt ye maye lyue, and come in, & take possession of the londe, which the
LORDE God of yor fathers geueth vnto you.
2 Ye shal put nothinge vnto the worde which I commaunde you, nether do oughte
there from, that ye maye kepe the commaundementes of the LORDE youre God, which
I commaunde you.
3 Youre eyes haue sene what the LORDE hath done wt Baal Peor: all them that
walked after Baal Peor, hath the LORDE thy God destroied from amonge you.
4 But ye that cleue vnto the LORDE yor God, are all aliue this daye.
5 Beholde I haue taughte you ordinauces and lawes, soch as the LORDE my God
commaunded me, that ye shulde do eue so in the londe, into ye which ye shal
come, to possesse it.
6 Kepe them now therfore and do them: for that is youre wysdome and
vnderstondinge in the sight of all nacions, which wha they haue herde all these
ordinaunces, shall saye: O what a wyse and vnderstondinge folke is this? and how
excellent a people?
7 For where is there so excellent a nacion, that hath goddes so nye him, as the
LORDE oure God is nye vnto vs, as oft as we call vpon him?
8 And where is there so excellent a nacion, that hath so righteous ordinaunces
and lawes, as all this lawe which I laye before you this daye.
9 Take hede to thy selfe now, and kepe well thy soule, that thou forget not the
thinges which thine eyes haue sene, and that they departe not out of thy hert
all the dayes of thy life. And thou shalt teach them thy children and thy
childers children,
10 the daye wha thou stodest before the LORDE thy God by mount Horeb, whan the
LORDE sayde vnto me: Gather me the people together, that I maye make them heare
my wordes, which they shal lerne, that they maye feare me all the dayes of their
life vpon earth, & that they also maye teach their children.
11 And ye came nye, & stode vnder ye mount. But the mount burnt euen vnto the
myddes of heauen, and there was darknesse, cloudes, and myst.
12 And ye LORDE spake vnto you out of the myddes of the fyre. The voyce of his
wordes ye herde, neuerthelesse ye sawe no ymage, but herde the voyce onely.
13 And he declared vnto you his couenaunt, which he comaunded you to do, namely,
the ten verses, and wrote them vpon two tables of stone.
14 And the LORDE commmauded me at the same time, to teach you ordinaunces &
lawes that ye might do ther after in the londe, in to the which ye go to
possesse it.
15 Kepe well youre soules therfore, for ye sawe no maner of ymage, in the daye
wha the LORDE spake vnto you out of the fyre vpon mount Horeb, that ye destroye
not youre selues,
16 and make you eny ymage, that is like a man, or woman,
17 or beest vpon earth, or fethered foule vnder the heauen,
18 or worme vpon the grounde, or fysshe in the water vnder ye earth:
19 yt thou lifte not vp thine eyes towarde heauen, and se the Sonne and the
Moone & the starres, and the whole hoost of heaue, and be disceaused, and worsh
ppe, and serue them: which the LORDE yi God hath made to serue all nacios vnder
ye whole heaue.
20 But you hath the LORDE taken, and broughte you out of the yron fornace,
namely, out of Egipte, that ye shulde be the people of his enheritaunce, as it
is come to passe this daye.
21 And the LORDE was angrie with me for youre sakes, so that he sware, yt I
shulde not go ouer Iordane, ner come in to that good londe, which the LORDE thy
God shall geue the to enheritaunce.
22 As for me, I must dye in this londe, and shal not go ouer Iordane: But ye
shal go ouer, and shall haue that good lode in possession.
23 Take hede therfore vnto youre selues, that ye forget not the conuenaunt of
the LORDE youre God, and that ye make no ymages of eny maner of fashion as the
LORDE thy God hath commaunded.
24 For the LORDE thy God is a consumynge fyre and a gelous God.
25 Yf whan ye haue begotten children, and childers children, and haue dwelt in
the londe, ye marre youre selues, & make you ymages of eny maner of fashion, and
do euell in the sighte of ye LORDE youre God, to prouoke him:
26 I call heauen and earth to recorde ouer you this daie, that ye shall shortly
perishe fro the londe, in to ye which ye go ouer Iordane to possesse it. Ye shal
not dwell longe therin, but shal vtterly be destroyed.
27 And ye LORDE shal scater you amonge ye nacions and ye shall be left a small
people amoge ye Heythen, whyther the LORDE shall brynge you.
28 There shal ye serue goddes, which are ye workes of mens handes, euen wodd &
stone, which nether se ner heare, ner eate ner smell.
29 But yf thou seke the LORDE yi God there thou shalt finde him, yee yf thou
seke him wt thy whole hert and with all yi soule.
30 Whan thou shalt be strately troubled, & wha all these thinges shal come vpo
the in ye latter dayes, then shalt thou turne agayne to ye LORDE thy God, and be
obedient vnto his voice.
31 For ye LORDE yi God is a mercifull God, he shal not forsake the, ner destroye
the: nether shall he forget the couenaunt with thy fathers, which he sware vnto
them.
32 For axe after the tymes past, which haue bene before the, sens the daie yt
God created man vpon earth, from one ende of the heaue vnto the other, whether
there was euer eny soch greate thinge done, or eny soch like herde,
33 that a people hath herde ye voyce of God speake out of the fyre (as thou hast
herde) & yet liued.
34 Or whether God assaied to go & take vnto him a people out of ye myddes of a
nacion, thorow tentacions, thorow tokens, thorow wonders, thorow warre, & thorow
a mightie hande, & thorow a stretched out arme, and thorow greate visios,
acordinge vnto all as the LORDE youre God hath done with you in Egipte before
thine eyes.
35 Thou hast sene it yt thou mightest knowe that the LORDE is God, and that
there is none other but he onely.
36 Out of heauen made he the to heare his voyce, that he might nurtoure the: and
vpon earth he shewed the his greate feare, & out of ye fyre thou herdest his
wordes:
37 because he loued yi fathers, & chose their sede after the. And he brought ye
out wt his presence thorow his mightie power out of Egipte,
38 to dryue out (before the) nacions greater and mighter then thou, and to
bringe ye in, yt he might geue the their lode to enheritaunce, as it is come to
passe this daye.
39 Therfore shalt thou knowe this daye, & turne it into thine herte, that the
LORDE is God aboue in heauen, and beneth vpon earth, and that there is no mo.
40 Kepe his ornaunces therfore and commaundementes, which I commaunde the this
daie, the shal it go well wt the and thy children after the, so that thy life
shal longe endure in ye londe, which the LORDE the God geueth the thy life
longe.
41 Then separated Moses thre cities beyonde Iordane, towarde the Sonne rysinge,
42 yt he might flye thither, which had slayne his neghboure vnawarres, & hated
him not afore tyme, yt he might flye in to one of these cities, & lyue.
43 Bezer in ye wildernes in the playne countre amonge the Rubenites, & Ramoth in
Gilead amoge ye Gaddites, & Golan in Basan amonge the Manassites.
44 This is the lawe which Moses layed before the children of Israel:
45 these are the testimonies, ordinaunces, & lawes, yt Moses spake vnto the
children of Israel (after they were departed out of Egipte)
46 beyonde Iordane in the valley ouer agaynst the house of Peor, in ye londe of
Sion kynge of ye Amorites which dwelt at Hesbon, whom Moses & the childre of
Israel smote after they were departed out of Egipte,
47 & conquered his lade, & the londe of Og kynge of Basan, two kynges of the
Amorites which were beyonde Iordane towarde the Sonne rysinge
48 fro Aroer (which lyeth vpon ye ryuer syde of Arnon) vnto mount Sion, which is
Hermon:
49 & all ye playne felde beyonde Iordane eastwarde vnto the see in ye plaine
felde vnder mount Pisga.

Chapter 5

1 And Moses called all Israel, & sayde vnto the: Heare Israel the ordinaunces &
lawes which I speake in yor cares this daye: lerne them, & kepe the so, that ye
do therafter.
2 The LORDE oure God made a couenaunt with vs at Horeb:
3 he made not this couenaunt with oure fathers, but with vs, that are here this
daie, and lyue euery one.
4 He talked with vs face to face out of the fyre vpo the mount.
5 I stode at the same tyme betwixte the LORDE and you, that I mighte shewe you
the worde of the LORDE. For ye were afrayed of the fyre, & wente not vp to the
mount, and he sayde:
6 I am the LORDE thy God, which haue brought the out of the londe of Egipte, out
of the house of bondage.
7 Thou shalt haue none other goddes in my sighte.
8 Thou shalt make the no grauen ymage of eny maner of licknesse of the thinges
yt are aboue in heauen, & beneth vpon earth, & in the water vnder the earth.
9 Thou shalt not honor them, ner serue the. For I ye LORDE yi God am a gelous
God, vysitinge the synne of the fathers vpo the children, vnto the thirde and
fourth generacion, of the yt hate me:
10 & shewe mercye vpon many thousandes yt loue me, and kepe my commaundementes.
11 Thou shalt not take ye name of ye LORDE yi God in vayne: For ye LORDE shal
not holde him vngiltie, yt taketh his name in vaine.
12 Kepe ye Sabbath daye, that thou sanctifye it, as the LORDE thy God hath
commauded the.
13 Sixe daies shalt thou laboure, and do all thy worke,
14 but vpon the seuenth daye it is the Sabbath of the LORDE thy God: No maner
worke shalt thou do in it, thou, and thy sonne, and thy doughter, and thy
seruaunt, and thy mayde, and thine oxe, and thine Asse, and all thy catell, and
the straunger which is within thy gates, that thy seruaunt and thy mayde maye
rest as well as thou.
15 For thou shalt remebre, that thou thyself also wast a seruaunte in the londe
of Egipte, and how that the LORDE thy God brought the out from thence with a
mightye hande, and a stretched out arme. Therfore hath the LORDE yi God
commaunded ye to kepe the Sabbath daye.
16 Honoure thy father and thy mother, as the LORDE thy God hath commaunded the
that thou mayest lyue longe vpo earth, and that it maye go well with the in the
londe, which the LORDE thy God shall geue the.
17 Thou shalt not kyll.
18 Thou shalt not breake wedlocke.
19 Thou shalt not steale.
20 Thou shalt beare no false witnes against thy neghboure.
21 Thou shalt not lust after yi neghbours wyfe.Thou shalt not lust after thy
neghbours house, londe, seruaunt, mayde, oxe, Asse, or what so euer he hath.
22 These are the wordes that the LORDE spake to all youre congregacion, vpon the
mount out of the fyre of the cloude and darknesse with a greate voyce, and added
nothinge therto. And he wrote them vpon two tables of stone, and delyuered the
vnto me.
23 But whan ye herde the voyce out of the darknes, and sawe the mount burne wt
fyre, ye came vnto me all ye rulers amonge youre trybes, and youre Elders
24 and sayde: Beholde, the LORDE oure God hath shewed vs his glory & his
greatnes, and we haue herde his voyce out of ye fyre. This daye haue we sene,
that God maie talke with a man, and he yet lyue.
25 And now wherfore shulde we dye, that this fire shulde cosume vs? Yf we shulde
heare the voyce of the LORDE oure God eny more, we shulde dye.
26 For what is all fleshe, that it shulde be able to heare ye voyce of the
lyuynge God speakynge out of ye fyre, as we haue done, and yet lyue?
27 Go thou and heare all yt the LORDE oure God sayeth, and tell us. All yt the
LORDE sayeth vnto the, that will we heare and do.
28 Whan the LORDE herde the voyce of yor wordes which ye spake vnto me, he sayde
vnto me: I haue herde ye voyce of the wordes of this people, which they haue
spoken vnto ye. It is all good that they haue spoken.
29 But who shal geue them soch an herte, yt they maye feare me, & kepe all my
comaundementes as longe as they lyue, yt it maye go well with them, and with
their childre for euer?
30 Go & saye vnto them: Get you in to yor tentes agayne.
31 But thou shalt stonde here before me, that I maye tell the all the
commaundementes, and ordinauces and lawes which thou shalt teach them yt they
maye do therafter in the lode, which I shal geue the to possesse.
32 Take hede now therfore that ye do, as the LORDE yor God hath commaunded you,
and turne not asyde nether to ye right hande ner to the lefte:
33 but walke in all ye wayes which the LORDE youre God hath commaunded you, that
ye maie lyue, and that it maie go well with you, and yt ye maye lyue longe in ye
londe which ye shall haue in possession.

Chapter 6

1 These are the commaundementes, ordinaunces & lawes which ye LORDE yor God hath
comaunded, yt ye shulde lerne them, & do them, in the londe whyther ye go to
possesse it,
2 that thou mayest feare the LORDE yi God, & kepe all his ordinauces &
commaundementes, which I commaunde the, thou and yi children, and yi childers
children all ye dayes of youre life, that ye maye lyue loge.
3 Thou shalt heare (O Israel) & take hede, yt thou do therafter, yt it maye go
well with ye, & that thou mayest multiplye greatly, as ye LORDE God of yi
fathers hath promysed the a londe yt floweth wt mylke & hony.
4 Heare O Israel, the LORDE oure God is one LORDE onely.
5 And thou shalt loue the LORDE thy God wt all thy hart, with all yi soule, &
with all thy mighte.
6 And these wordes, which I commaude the this daie, shalt thou take to hert,
7 & shalt whet them vpon yi children, and shalt talke of them, wha thou syttest
in thyne house, & whan thou walkest by the waie: whan thou lyest downe, & wha
thou rysest vp.
8 And thou shalt bynde them for a signe vpon thine hande, and they shall be a
token of remebraunce before thine eyes,
9 and thou shalt wryte them vpon the postes of thine house, and vpon thy gates.
10 Now whan ye LORDE yi God shal bringe the in to ye londe wherof he sware vnto
yi fathers Abraham, Isaac, & Iacob, and shal geue the greate & goodly cities,
which thou hast not buylded:
11 and houses full of all goodes, which thou hast not filled: & digged welles
which thou hast not digged: and vynyardes and olyue trees, which thou hast not
plated, so yt thou eatest and art full:
12 then bewarre that thou forget not the LORDE, which brought the out of the
londe of Egipte, fro the house of bondage:
13 but thou shalt feare the LORDE thy God, and him onely shalt thou serue, and
sweare by his name.
14 And ye shal not folowe the other goddes of the nacions which are aboute you
15 (for the LORDE thy God is a gelous God in the myddest of the) that the wrath
of the LORDE thy God waxe not whote ouer the, and destroye the from the earth.
16 Ye shal not tempte ye LORDE youre God, as ye tempted him at Massa:
17 but kepe the commaundementes of the LORDE yor God, and his witnesses, & his
ordinaunces, which he hath commaunded the,
18 that thou mayest do that which is right & good in ye sighte of the LORDE, yt
thou mayest prospere, and yt thou mayest go in & conquere that good londe, which
the LORDE sware vnto yi fathers,
19 that he maye chace out all thine enemies before the, as the LORDE hath sayde.
20 Now whan thy sonne axeth the todaye or tomorow, and sayeth: What meane these
witnesses, ordinaunces and lawes, that the LORDE oure God hath comaunded you?
21 Then shalt thou saye vnto thy sonne: We were Pharaos bondmen in Egipte, and
the LORDE brought vs out of Egipte with a mightie hande,
22 and the LORDE did greate & euell tokens & wonders in Egipte vpo Pharao and
all his house before oure eyes,
23 and brought vs from thence, to bringe vs in and to geue vs ye londe, that he
sware vnto oure fathers.
24 And therfore hath the LORDE commaunded vs to do acordinge vnto all these
ordinaunces, that we might feare the LORDE oure God, that we might prospere all
the dayes of oure life, as it is come to passe this daye.
25 And it shall be righteousnes vnto vs before the LORDE oure God, yf we kepe
and do all these commaundementes, as he hath commaunded vs.

Chapter 7

1 Whan ye LORDE yi God bringeth the in to ye londe where in to thou shalt come
to possesse it, & roteth out ma nacions before the: the Hethites, Girgosites
Amorites, Cananites, Pheresites, Heuites, and Iebusites, seue nacions which are
greater and mightier then thou:
2 and whan the LORDE thy God delyuereth the before ye, that thou mayest smyte
them, thou shalt vtterly destroye them, so that thou make no couenaunt with
them, nor shewe them fauoure, and shalt make no mariages with them:
3 Ye shall not geue youre doughters vnto their sonnes, ner take their doughters
vnto youre sonnes.
4 For they will make youre sonnes departe fro me, to serue straunge goddes: then
shall the wrath of the LORDE waxe whote vpon you, and destroye you shortly.
5 But thus shal ye do with them: Ye shal ouerthrowe their altares, breake downe
their pilers, cut downe their groues, & burne their ymages with fyre.
6 For thou art an holy people vnto the LORDE thy God. The hath the LORDE thy God
chosen, that thou shuldest be his awne peculier people, from amonge all nacions
that are vpon the earth.
7 It was not because of the multitude of you aboue all nacions, that ye LORDE
had lust vnto you and chose you. (For ye were the leest amonge all nacions)
8 but because he loued you, and that he mighte kepe the ooth, which he sware
vnto youre fathers, he broughte you out with a mightie hade, and delyuered you
fro the house of bondage, out of the hande of Pharao kynge of Egipte.
9 Thou shalt vnderstonde now therfore, that the LORDE thy God is a mightie and
true God, which kepeth couenaunt and mercy vnto them that loue him, and kepe his
comaundementes, euen thorow out a thousande generacions:
10 And rewardeth them that hate him, before his face, that he maye destroye
them: and wyll not be longe in tarienge to rewarde them (before his face) that
hate him.
11 Kepe now therfore the commaundementes, and ordinaunces and lawes, which I
commaunde the this daye, that thou do therafter.
12 And yf ye shall heare these lawes and kepe them, and do therafter, then shal
the LORDE thy God also kepe the couenaunt and mercy with the, which he sware
vnto thy fathers:
13 and shal loue the, blesse the, and multiplye the: he shal blesse the frute of
yi wombe, and the frute of thy londe, thy corne, wyne and oyle, the frute of thy
kyne, and the frute of thy shepe, in the londe that he sware vnto yi fathers to
geue the.
14 Blessed shalt thou be aboue all nacions, there shal no vnfrutefull personne
be in the, ner amonge thy catell.
15 The LORDE shall put from the all maner of dysease, and shal brynge vpon the
none of ye euell sicknesses of Egipte, which thou hast sene, but shall put them
vpon all those that hate the.
16 Thou shalt brynge to naught all the nacions, which the LORDE thy God shal
delyuer the. Thine eye shall not spare them, and their goddes shalt thou not
serue, for that shalbe thy decaye.
17 Yf thou shalt saye in thyne hert: These nacios are mo then I, how ca I dryue
them out?
18 Feare them not. Remembre what the LORDE thy God did vnto Pharao and to all
the Egipcians,
19 thorow greate tentacions (which thou hast sene with thine eyes) thorow tokens
and woders, thorow a mightie hande and a stretched out arme, wherwith the LORDE
thy God brought the out. Euen so shall the LORDE thy God do vnto all ye nacions
of who thou art afrayed.
20 The LORDE yi God also shal sende hornettes amonge them, vntyll they that
remayne and hyde them selues from the, be destroyed.
21 Be not thou afrayed of them: for the LORDE thy God is in the myddes of the,
euen the mightie and fearfull God.
22 He (euen the LORDE thy God) shall rote out the nacions before the by litle
and litle. Thou canst not consume them at one time, yt the beestes of the felde
increase not vpon the.
23 The LORDE thy God shall delyuer them before the, and shall smite them with a
greate slaughter, tyll they be destroyed.
24 And he shal delyuer their kynges in to thine hade, and thou shalt destroie
their names from vnder heauen. There shal noman make the resistaunce before the,
vntyll thou haue destroyed them.
25 The ymages of their goddes shalt thou burne with fyre, & shalt not desyre the
syluer or golde that is on them or to take it vnto the, that thou snare not thy
self therin: for it is abhominacion vnto the LORDE yi God.
26 Therfore shalt thou not brynge the abhominacion in to thine house, yt thou be
not damned as it is, but shalt vtterly defye it, and abhorre it, for it is
damned.

Chapter 8

1 All the commaundementes which I commaunde ye this daye, shal ye kepe, so yt ye
do therafter, that ye maye lyue and multiplye, and come in, and take possession
of the lande, which ye LORDE sware vnto youre fathers:
2 and thynke vpon all ye waie thorow the which the LORDE thy God hath led the
this fortye yeares in the wyldernesse, that he mighte chasten the, and proue
the, to wete whath were in thyne herte, whether thou woldest kepe his
comaundemetes or no.
3 He chastened the, and let the hunger, and fed the with Manna (which thou and
thy fathers knewe not) to make the knowe, that man lyueth not by bred onely, but
by all that proceadeth out of the mouth of the LORDE.
4 Thy clothes are not waxed olde vpon the, and thy fete are not swolle this
fortye yeare.
5 Vnderstonde therfore in thine hert, that as a man nurtoureth his sonne, euen
so hath the LORDE thy God nurtured the.
6 Kepe therfore the commaundementes of the LORDE thy God, that thou walke in his
wayes, and feare him.
7 For the LORDE thy God bryngeth the in to a good londe: A londe where in are
ryuers of water, fountaynes and sprynges, which flowe by the hilles and valleys:
8 A londe wherin is wheate, barlye, vines, fygge trees, and pomgranates: A londe
wherin growe Olyue trees and honye:
9 A londe where thou shalt not eate bred in scarcenes, and where thou shalt
lacke nothinge: A lode where ye stones are yron, where thou shalt dygge brasse
out of hilles:
10 That wha thou hast eaten and art fylled, thou mayest praise the LORDE thy
God, for that good londe, which he hath geuen the.
11 Bewarre now therfore, that thou forget not the LORDE thy God, that thou
woldest not kepe his commaundementes, and his ordinaunces, and lawes, which I
commaunde the this daye:
12 that (whan thou hast eaten & art fylled, and hast buylded goodly houses, &
dwellest therin,
13 and whan thy beestes and shepe, and syluer, and golde, and all yt thou hast,
increaseth)
14 thine hert ryse not then, and thou forget the LORDE thy God (which brought
the out of the londe of Egipte, fro ye house of bondage,
15 and led ye thorow this greate & terrible wyldernes, where were serpentes that
spouted fyre, and Scorpions, & drouth, and where there was no water, and brought
the water out of the hard flynte,
16 and fed the in the wyldernesse with Manna wherof yi fathers knewe not, that
he might chasten the, and proue the) to do the good afterwarde)
17 and lest thou saye in thine hert: My power and the mighte of myne awne hande
hath done me all this good:
18 But that thou thynke vpon the LORDE thy God. For it is HE, which geueth the
power to exercyse strength, that he maye perfourme the couenaunt, which he sware
vnto thy fathers, as it is come to passe this daye.
19 But yf thou shalt forget the LORDE thy God, and folowe other goddes, and
serue them, and worshipe the, I testifye ouer you this daye, that ye shal
vtterly perishe.
20 Euen as the Heythen whom ye LORDE destroyeth before youre face, so shall ye
perishe also, because ye are not obedient vnto the voyce of the LORDE youre God.

Chapter 9

1 Heare O Israel, This daie shalt thou go ouer Iordane, that thou maiest come in
to conquere the nacions, which are greater and mightier then thou, greate
cities, walled vp vnto heauen,
2 a greate people and of an hye stature, namely the childre of Enakim, whom thou
hast knowne, and of whom thou hast herde saye: Who is able to stonde agaynst the
children of Enakim?
3 Therfore shalt thou knowe this daye, that the LORDE yi God goeth before the, a
cosumynge fyre. He shal destroye the, and shall subdue them before the, and shal
driue them out, & shortly shall he brynge the to naught, as the LORDE hath
promysed the.
4 Now whan the LORDE thy God hath expelled them out before the, saye not thou
the in thine hert: The LORDE hath brought me in to take possession of this lande
for myne awne righteousnes sake, where as ye LORDE yet dryueth out the Heithen
before the, because of their vngodlynes.
5 For thou commest not in to take their londe in possession, for thine awne
righteousnes sake, and because of thy right hert: but the LORDE dryueth out
these Heythen, for their awne vngodlynesse sake, and that he maye perfourme the
worde, which the LORDE hath sworne vnto yi fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob.
6 Vnderstonde now therfore, that the LORDE yi God geueth not the this londe to
possesse it, for thine awne righteousnes sake. For thou art a styffnecked
people.
7 Remembre and forget not, how thou displeasedest the LORDE thy God in the
wildernesse. Sence ye daye that thou departedst out of the londe of Egipte, tyll
ye came vnto this place, haue ye bene dishobedient vnto the LORDE.
8 For in Horeb ye angred the LORDE, so that of wrath he wolde haue destroyed
you,
9 whan I was gone vp to ye mount, to receaue the tables of stone, namely the
tables of the couenaunt which the LORDE made wt you, and I abode fortye dayes &
fortye nightes vpon the mount, and ate no bred, & dranke no water:
10 and the LORDE gaue me ye two tables of stone, wrytten with the fynger of God,
and in them was acordinge to all the wordes, which the LORDE sayde vnto you vpon
the mount out of the fyre, in the daye of the gatheringe together.
11 And after the fortye dayes and fortye nightes, ye LORDE gaue me ye two tables
of stone, namely ye tables of the couenaunt,
12 and sayde vnto me: vp, & get ye downe quyckly from hence, for thy people whom
thou broughtest out of Egipte, haue marred the selues, they are soone gone out
of the waye, which I commaunded them, and haue made them a molten ymage.
13 And the LORDE saide vnto me: I se this people, that it is a styffnecked
people:
14 let me alone, that I maye destroye them, and put out their name from vnder
heaue. I wyl make of the a people mightier and greater the this is.
15 And as I turned me, & wente downe fro the mount which brent wt fyre, & had ye
two tables of the couenaunt in both my hades,
16 I loked, & beholde, ye had synned agaynst ye LORDE yor God, so yt ye had made
you a molten calfe, & were soone turned out of ye waie which the LORDE had
commaunded you.
17 Then toke I the two tables, & cast them out of both my handes, & brake the
before youre eyes,
18 & I fell before the LORDE (euen as at the first tyme) fortye dayes & fortye
nightes, & nether ate bred, ner drake water, because of all youre synnes which
ye had synned, whan ye dyd soch euell in the sighte of the LORDE, to prouoke him
vnto wrath.
19 For I was afrayed of the wrath and indignacion, wherwith the LORDE was angrie
wt you, euen to haue destroyed you. And the LORDE herde me at that tyme also.
20 Morouer the LORDE was very angrie wt Aaron, so that he wolde haue destroyed
him, but I made intercession for Aaron also at ye same tyme.
21 As for youre synne (namely, the calfe that ye had made) I toke it, and burnt
it with the fyre, and smote it a sunder, & grynde it in peces, euen vnto dust,
and cast the dust in to the broke that descended from the mount.
22 Ye displeased the LORDE also, at Tabera, and at Massa, and at the lustgraues,
23 and wha he sent you from Cades Barnea, and sayde: Go vp, and conquere the
londe which I haue geuen you. And ye were disobedient vnto the mouth of the
LORDE youre God, and beleued not on him, and herkened not vnto his voyce:
24 for ye haue bene disobediet vnto the LORDE, as longe as I haue knowne you.
25 The fell I before ye LORDE fortye daies and fortye nightes, which I laye
there. For ye LORDE sayde, he wolde destroye you.
26 But I made intercession vnto the LORDE, and sayde: O LORDE LORDE, destroye
not yi people and thine enheritaunce, which thou thorow thy greate power hast
delyuered, and broughte out of Egipte with a mightie hade.
27 Remembre thy seruauntes Abraham, Isaac and Iacob. Loke not vpon the
stubburnesse, and vngodlynesse and synne of this people
28 (that the londe wherout thou hast broughte vs, saye not: The LORDE was not
able to bringe them in to the lande, that he promysed them, and because he hated
them, therfore hath he broughte them out, to destroye the in the wyldernesse:)
29 For they are thy people & thine enheritaunce, which thou hast broughte out wt
thy greate power, and with thy stretched out arme.

Chapter 10

1 At the same tyme sayde the LORDE vnto me: Hew ye two tables of stone like vnto
the first, and come vp vnto me in to the mount, and make ye an Arke of wod,
2 and in the tables I wyll wryte the wordes, that were in the first, which thou
brakest, and thou shalt laye them in the Arke.
3 So I made an Arke of Fyrre tre, and hewed two tables of stone (like as the
first were) & wente vp into the mount, and ye two tables were in my hande.
4 Then wrote he in ye tables (acordinge as the first wrytinge was) the ten
verses, which the LORDE spake vnto you out of the fyre vpon the mountayne, at
the tyme of the gatheringe together. And the LORDE gaue the vnto me.
5 And I turned me, & wente downe from the mount, and layed the tables in the
Arke which I had made, that they mighte be there, as the LORDE commaunded me.
6 And the childre of Israel departed from Beroth & Bue Iackan vnto Mosera (there
dyed Aaron, & there was he buried: & Eleasar his sonne became prest in his
steade.)
7 Fro thence they departed from Gadgad. From Gadgad to Iathbath, a londe of
ryuers of water.
8 At the same season the LORDE separated out the trybe of Leui, to beare the
Arke of the LORDES couenaunt, and to stonde before the LORDE, to mynister vnto
him, and to prayse his name vnto this daye.
9 Therfore shal the Leuites haue no porcion ner enheritaunce with their
brethren: for the LORDE is their enheritaunce, as the LORDE thy God hath
promysed them.
10 But I taried vpo the mount (like as afore) euen fortye dayes and fortye
nightes, and the LORDE herde me at that tyme also, and wolde not destroye the.
11 But he sayde vnto me: Vp, & get the forth, yt thou mayest go before the
people, yt they maye come in, and coquere the lode, which I sware vnto their
fathers to geue them.
12 Now Israel, what requyreth the LORDE thy God of the, but yt thou feare the
LORDE thy God, and that thou walke in all his wayes, & loue him, & serue the
LORDE yi God with all thy hert, & with all thy soule:
13 and yt thou kepe the comaundementes of ye LORDE, & his ordinaunces, which I
comaunde the this daye, yt thou mayest prospere?
14 Beholde, the heauen & the heauen of all heaues and the earth, and all yt is
therin, is ye LORDES yi God.
15 Yeth hath he had a pleasure vnto yi fathers, to loue the: and hath chosen
their sede after the, namely you, aboue all nacions, as it is come to passe this
daye.
16 Circumcyse therfore ye foreskynne of yor hert, & be nomore styffnecked.
17 For the LORDE yor God is God of all goddes, & LORDE ouer all lordes, a greate
God, mightie & terryble, which regardeth no personne, & taketh no giftes
18 and doeth righte vnto the fatherlesse and wedowe, and loueth the straunger,
to geue him fode & rayment.
19 Therfore shal ye loue a strauger, for ye youre selues also were straungers in
the londe of Egipte.
20 Thou shalt feare the LORDE thy God, him onely shalt thou serue, vnto him
shalt thou cleue & sweare by his name.
21 He is thy prayse & yi God, which hath done for ye these greate & terryble
thinges, yt thine eyes haue sene.
22 Thy fathers wete downe into Egipte wt seuentye soules, but now hath ye LORDE
thy God made the as ye starres of heauen in multitude.

Chapter 11

1 Therfore shalt thou loue the LORDE yi God, & kepe his comaundemetes, his
ordinaunces, his lawes, & his preceptes all yi life loge.
2 And vnderstode this daye, that which youre childre knowe not: Which haue not
sene the nurtoure of the LORDE yor God, & his greatnesse, & his mightie hande, &
his stretched out arme,
3 & his tokens and actes which he dyd amonge the Egipcias, vnto Pharao the kynge
of Egipte, & to all his londe,
4 & what he dyd to the power of ye Egipcians, & vnto their horses & charettes,
whan he broughte the waters of the reed see vpo them, as they folowed after you,
& how ye LORDE hath broughte them to naught vnto this daye:
5 & what he dyd vnto you in the wildernesse, vntyll ye came vnto this place:
6 what he dyd vnto Dathan and Abiram the children of Eliab the sonne of Ruben,
how the earth opened hir mouth and swalowed them with their housholdes & tetes
all their good that they had in the myddes amonge all Israel.
7 For youre eyes haue sene the greate workes of ye LORDE, which he hath done.
8 Therfore shal ye kepe all the commaundementes which I commaunde you this daye,
that ye maye be stronge to come in, and to conquere the londe, whither ye go to
possesse it,
9 & that ye maye lyue longe in the londe, which the LORDE sware vnto youre
fathers, to geue vnto them and to their sede, eue a londe that floweth with
mylke and hony:
10 For the londe whither thou commest in, to possesse it, is not as the londe of
Egipte, whence ye came out, where thou sowedest thy sede, and waterdest it at
thy fote as a garden of herbes:
11 but it hath hilles and valleys, which drynke water of the rayne of heauen,
12 a londe that the LORDE thy God careth for. And the eyes of the LORDE thy God
are allwaye therin from the begynnynge of the yeare vnto the ende,
13 Yf ye shal herken therfore vnto my commaundementes, which I commaunde you
this daye, yt ye loue the LORDE youre God, and serue him, with all youre hert
and with all youre soule
14 then wyl I geue rayne vnto youre lode in due season, early and late, that
thou mayest gather in thy corne, thy wyne and thine oyle:
15 and I wyll geue grasse vpon thy felde for thy catell, that ye maye eate & be
fylled.
16 But bewarre, yt youre hert be not disceaued, that ye go asyde, & serue other
goddes, & worshipe them,
17 and then the wrath of the LORDE waxe whote vpo you, and he shut vp the heaue,
that there come no rayne, and the earth geue not hir increase, & ye perishe
shortly from the good lode, which the LORDE hath geuen you.
18 Put vp therfore these my wordes in youre hertes and in youre soules, and
bynde the for a signe vpon youre handes, yt they maye be a token of remembraunce
before yor eyes:
19 and teach them youre children, so that thou talke therof, whan thou syttest
in thine house, or walkest by the waye: whan thou lyest downe, and whan thou
rysest vp:
20 and wryte them vpon the postes of thine house, and vpon thy gates,
21 that thou and thy children maye lyue longe in the londe, which the LORDE
sware vnto thy fathers to geue them, as longe as the dayes of heauen endure vpon
earth.
22 For yf ye shal kepe all these commaundementes which I commaunde you, so that
ye do therafter, that ye loue the LORDE youre God, and walke in all his wayes,
and cleue vnto him,
23 then shall the LORDE dryue out all these nacions before you, so that ye shall
coquere greater and mightier nacions then ye youre selues are.
24 All the places that the soles of youre fete treade vpon, shalbe yours, from
the wyldernes, and fro mount Libanus, and from the water Euphrates vnto ye
vttemost see shal youre coastes be.
25 Noman shal be able to wtstonde you. The LORDE youre God shal let the feare
and drede of you come vpon all ye londes wherin ye go, like as he hath promysed
you.
26 Beholde, I laye before you this daye the blessynge and the curse.
27 The blessynge, yf ye be obedient vnto the commaundementes of the LORDE youre
God, which I commaunde you this daye.
28 The curse, yf ye wyl not be obedient to the commaundementes of the LORDE
youre God, but turne out of the waye, which I comaunde you this daye, so that ye
walke after other goddes, whom ye knowe not.
29 Whan ye LORDE yi God hath broughte the in to the londe, whither thou commest
in to possesse it, then shalt thou geue the blessynge vpon mount Grisim, and the
curse vpon mount Ebal,
30 which are beyonde Iordane the waye towarde the goinge downe of the Sonne, in
the lode of the Cananites, which dwell in ye playne felde ouer agaynst Gilgal,
besyde the Oke groue of More.
31 For ye shal go ouer Iordane, that ye maye come in to take possession of the
londe, which the LORDE youre God hath geuen you, to conquere it, and to dwell
therin.
32 Take hede now therfore, that ye do acordinge vnto all the ordinaunces and
lawes, which I laye before you this daye.

Chapter 12

1 These are the ordinaunces and lawes which ye shal kepe, that ye do therafter
in the londe, which the LORDE God of thy fathers hath geuen the to possesse, as
longe as ye lyue vpon earth.
2 Destroye all the places, wherin ye Heithen (who ye shal conquere) haue serued
their goddes, whether it be vpo hye mountaynes, vpo hilles, or amonge grene
trees.
3 And ouerthrowe their altares, and breake downe their pilers, and burne their
groues with fyre, and hewe downe the ymages of their goddes, & brynge the names
of them to naught out of the same place.
4 Ye shal not do so vnto the LORDE youre God:
5 but the place which ye LORDE youre God shal chose out of all yor trybes (that
he maye let his name dwell there) shal ye seke,
6 and come thither, and thither shal ye brynge youre burntsacrifices, & youre
other offerynges, and youre tithes and the Heueofferynges of youre handes, and
youre vowes, and youre fre wyll offerynges, and the firstborne of youre oxen and
shepe:
7 and there shall ye eate before the LORDE youre God, and reioyse ouer all that
ye and youre houses haue geue with youre handes, because the LORDE thy God hath
blessed the.
8 Ye shall do none of the thinges, yt we do here this daye, euery man what
semeth him good in his awne eyes.
9 For ye are not yet come to rest, ner to ye enheritauce which the LORDE thy God
shal geue the.
10 But ye shal go ouer Iordane, and dwell in the londe yt the LORDE youre God
shall deuyde out vnto you, & he shal geue you rest from all youre enemies rounde
aboute, and ye shal dwell safe.
11 Now whan the LORDE thy God hath chosen a place, to make his name dwell there,
ye shall brynge thither all yt I haue commaunded you, namely, yor burnt
sacrifices, youre other offerynges, youre tythes, the Heueofferynges of youre
handes, & all youre fre vowes, which ye shall vowe vnto ye LORDE:
12 and there shal ye eate, and reioyse before the LORDE youre God, ye and youre
sonnes, and youre doughters, and youre seruauntes, and youre maydes, and the
Leuites that are within youre gates, for they haue no porcion ner inheritauce
with you.
13 Take hede vnto thy selfe, that thou offer not thy burntofferynges in what so
euer place thou seyst:
14 but in the place which ye LORDE shall haue chosen in one of thy trybes, there
shalt thou offer thy burntofferynges, and do all that I commaunde the.
15 Notwtstondinge thou mayest kyll and eate flesh within all thy gates, after
all the desyre of thy soule, acordynge to the blessynge of the LORDE thy God,
which he hath geue the: both the cleane and vncleane maye eate it, as of the Roo
and herte,
16 onely the bloude shalt thou not eate, but poure it out as water vpon the
earth.
17 But within thy gates mayest thou not eate of the tythes of thy corne, of thy
wyne, & of thy oyle, ner of ye first borne of thine oxen and of thy shepe, or of
eny of thy vowes which thou hast vowed, or of thy frewylofferinges, or
Heueofferinges of thy handes:
18 but before the LORDE thy God shalt thou eate them, in the place which the
LORDE thy God choseth, thou & thy sonne, and thy doughter, thy seruaunt, thy
mayde, and the Leuite that is within yi gates, & thou shalt reioyse before ye
LORDE thy God, ouer all yt thou puttest thine hande vnto.
19 And bewarre, that thou forsake not the Leuite, as longe as thou lyuest vpon
the earth.
20 But whan the LORDE thy God shal enlarge thy bordes of thy londe (as he hath
promysed the) and thou saye: I wil eate flesh (for so moch as thy soule longeth
to eate flesh) then eate flesh acordinge to all the desyre of thy soule.
21 But yf the place that the LORDE thy God hath chosen (to let his name be
there) be farre from the, then kyll of yi oxen and of thy shepe, which the LORDE
hath geuen the, as he hath commaunded the, and eate it within thy gates
acordinge to all ye desyre of thy soule.
22 Euen as a Roo or Hert is eaten, maiest thou eate it: both the cleane and
vncleane maie eate it indifferently.
23 Onely bewarre, that thou eate not the bloude: for the bloude is the life.
Therfore shalt thou not eate the life wt the flesh,
24 but shalt poure it out like water vpon the earth,
25 yt thou mayest prospere, and yi children after the, whan thou hast done that
which is righte in the sighte of the LORDE.
26 But whan thou halowest oughte that is thine, or makest a vowe, thou shalt
take it, and brynge it vnto the place, that the LORDE hath chosen,
27 and do thy burntofferynges with the flesh and bloude vpon the altare of the
LORDE thy God. The bloude of thine offrynge shalt thou poure vpon the altare of
the LORDE thy God, and eate the flesh.
28 Take hede, and heare all these wordes, which I commaunde the, yt it maye go
well with the, and thy children after ye for euer, whan thou hast done yt which
is righte and acceptable in the sighte of the LORDE thy God.
29 Whan the LORDE yi God hath roted out the Heithen before the, whither thou
commest into conquere them, & whan thou hast coquered them, & dwelt in their
londe,
30 bewarre then, yt thou fall not in the snare after the, whan they are
destroyed before the: & that thou axe not after their goddes, & saye: Eue as
these nacions haue serued their goddes, so wil I do also.
31 Thou shalt not do so vnto the LORDE thy God. For all that is abhominacion
vnto the LORDE, & that he hateth, ye same haue they done vnto their goddes. For
they haue burnt euen their sonnes and their doughters with fyre vnto their
goddes.
32 All that I commaunde you, shal ye kepe, that ye do therafter. Ye shal put
nothinge therto, ner take ought there from.

Chapter 13

1 Yf there ryse vp a prophet or dreamer amonge you, and geue the a token or a
wonder,
2 and that token or wonder which he spake of, come to passe, and then saye: Let
vs go after other goddes (whom thou knowest not) and let vs serue the:
3 Thou shalt not herken vnto the wordes of soch a prophet or dreamer. For ye
LORDE youre God proueth you, to wete whether ye loue him with all youre hert, &
with all youre soule.
4 For ye shall walke after the LORDE youre God, and feare him, and kepe his
commaundementes, & herken vnto his voyce, and serue him, and cleue vnto him.
5 As for that prophet or dreamer, he shal dye: because he hath spoken to turne
you awaye from the LORDE youre God (which broughte you out of the londe of
Egipte, and delyuered you from the house of bondage) to thrust the out of the
waye, which the LORDE thy God commaunded the to walke in, and so shalt thou put
awaie the euell from the.
6 Yf thy brother, the sonne of thy mother, or thine awne sonne, or thy doughter,
or the wyfe in thy bosome, or thy frende which is vnto the as thine owne soule,
entyse the secretly, and saye: Let vs go and serue other goddes (whom thou
knowest not, ner yet thy father)
7 which are amonge the nacions rounde aboute you, whether they be nye vnto the
or farre from the, from the one ende of the earth vnto the other:
8 consente not vnto him, and herke not vnto him. Thine eye also shal not pytie
him, and thou shalt haue no compassion vpon him, ner kepe him secrete, but shalt
cause him to be slayne:
9 thine hade shalbe first vpon him, to cause him to be slayne, and then the
handes of all the people.
10 He shalbe stoned to death, because he wente aboute to thrust the awaye from
the LORDE thy God, which broughte the out of the londe of Egipte from the house
of bodage:
11 yt all Israel maye heare, and feare him, and do nomore soch euell amonge you.
12 Yf thou hearest in eny cite which ye LORDE thy God hath geue the to dwell in,
13 that it is sayde: There are certayne men, the children of Belial, gone out
from amonge you, and haue disceaued the inhabiters of their cite, and sayde: let
vs go, and serue other goddes, whom ye knowe not.
14 Then shalt thou seke, make search, and enquere diligently. And yf it be
founde of a trueth, that it is so in dede, yt soch abhominacion is wroughte
amonge you,
15 then shalt thou smyte the indwellers of the same cite and their catell, with
the edge of the swerde, and damne the cite with all that is therin:
16 and all the spoyle therof shalt thou gather together in the myddes of the
stretes of it, and burne with fyre, both the cite and all the spoyle therof
together vnto the LORDE yi God, that it maye lye vpon a heape for euer, and
neuer be buylded eny more.
17 And let nothinge of the damned thinge cleue vnto thy hande, that the LORDE
maye be turned from the indignacion of his wrath, and graunte the mercy, and
haue compassion on the, and multiplye the (as he hath sworne vnto thy fathers)
18 because thou has herkened vnto ye voyce of the LORDE thy God, to kepe all his
commaundementes, which I commaunde the this daye, so that thou doest the thinge
which is righte in the sighte of the LORDE thy God.

Chapter 14

1 Ye are the children of the LORDE youre God, Cut not youre selues therfore, &
make you no baldnesse betwene youre eyes ouer eny deed.
2 For thou art an holy people vnto the LORDE thy God. And the LORDE hath chosen
the to be his awne peculier people, from amoge all the nacions that are vpon the
earth.
3 Thou shalt eate no abhominacion.
4 These are the beestes which ye shal eate: Oxen, shepe, Goates,
5 Hert, Roo, Bugle, wylde goate, Unicorne, Origen, and Camelion.
6 And euery beest that deuydeth his clawe, & cheweth cudd, shal ye eate.
7 Neuertheles these shal ye not eate of them that chewe cudd, and deuyde not the
hoffe in to two clawes: The Camell, the hayre, & the conye, for though they
chewe cudd, yet deuyde they not the hoffe, therfore shal they be vncleane vnto
you.
8 The swyne, though he deuyde the hoffe, yet cheweth he not cudd, he shall be
vncleane vnto you: ye shall not eate of the flesh of the, and their deed
carcases shal ye not touche.
9 This is it that ye shall eate of all that is in the waters: All that hath
fynnes and scales, shall ye eate.
10 But what so euer hath no fynnes ner scales, that shal ye not eate, for it is
vncleane vnto you.
11 Eate of all cleane foules.
12 But these are they, wherof ye shal not eate: The Aegle, ye Goshauke, the
Cormoraunte,
13 the Ixion, the Vultur, the Kyte with his kynde,
14 & all Rauens in their kynde,
15 the Estriche, the Night crowe, the Cocow, the Sparow hauke with his kynde,
16 the litle Oule, the greate Oule, ye Backe,
17 the Bytture, the Swanne, the Pellicane, the Pye,
18 the Storke, the Heron, the Iaye wt his kynde, the Lapwynge, ye Swalowe:
19 And all foules yt crepe, shal be vncleane vnto you, and ye shal not eate
them.
20 (Omitted Text)
21 Ye shall eate of nothinge yt dyeth alone: thou mayest geue it vnto ye
straunger within yi gate, that he eate it, or sell it to a straunger. For thou
art an holy people vnto ye LORDE thy God. Thou shalt not seeth a kydd, whyle it
yet sucketh his mother.
22 Thou shalt separate out the tythe all the increase of thy sede, yt cometh out
of yi felde euery yeare:
23 & shalt eate it before ye LORDE yi God ( in ye place which He choseth, yt his
name maye dwell there) namely of ye tythes of thy corne, of thy wyne, of thy
oyle, & the first borne of thine oxen, and of thy shepe, yt thou mayest lerne to
feare the LORDE thy God, all thy life longe.
24 But yf the waye be to moch for ye, and the place, which ye LORDE thy God hath
chosen to set his name there, be to farre from the: & thou canst not cary it
that ye LORDE thy God hath blessed the withall,
25 Then geue it for money, & take ye money in thyne hande, and go vnto the place
which the LORDE thy God hath chosen,
26 and geue the money for all that thy soule desyreth, whether it be oxe, shepe,
wyne, stronge drynke, or for what so euer thy soule desyreth, and eate there
before the LORDE thy God, and be mery, thou and thine housholde,
27 and ye Leuite that is within thy gates. Thou shalt not forsake him, for he
hath no porcion nor inheritaunce with the.
28 In the thirde yeare shalt thou brynge forth all the tithes of thine increase
of the same yeare, and shalt laye it within thy gates.
29 The shal the Leuite (which hath no porcion ner enheritaunce with the) and ye
straunger, and the fatherlesse, and the wedowe, which are within thy gates, come
and eate, and fyll them selues, that the LORDE thy God maye blesse the in all
the workes of yi handes which thou doest.

Chapter 15

1 In the seueth yeare shalt thou make a Fre yeare. This is ye maner of the Fre
yeare.
2 Who so euer ledeth oughte with his hande vnto his neghboure, shal not requyre
it of his neghboure or his brother: for it is called the Fre yeare vnto the
LORDE.
3 Of a strauger mayest thou requyre it: but vnto him that is thy brother, shalt
thou remytte it.
4 There shall be no begger amoge you: for the LORDE shal blesse ye in the lode
which the LORDE yi God shal geue ye to inheritaunce to take it in possession,
5 onely yt thou herke vnto the voyce of the LORDE yi God, & kepe all these
comaundemetes which I comaunde the this daye,
6 that thou maiest do therafter. For the LORDE yi God shal blesse the, as he
hath promysed the. The shalt thou lende vnto many nacions, & shalt borowe of
noman. Thou shalt raigne ouer many nacions, & noman shal reigne ouer ye.
7 Whan one of thy brethre is waxed poore in eny cite within thy londe, which ye
LORDE yi God shal geue ye, thou shalt not harden thine hert, ner withdrawe thine
hande from thy poore brother:
8 but shalt open thine hande vnto him, and lende him, acordinge as he hath nede.
9 Bewarre, that there be not a poynte of Belial in thine hert, that thou woldest
saye: The seuenth yeare, the yeare of Fredome is at honde. For yf thou lokest
not fredly vpo thy poore brother, and geuest him nothinge then shall he crye
ouer the vnto the LORDE, and it shall be synne vnto the:
10 But thou shalt geue him, and let it not greue thine hert that thou geuest
him. For because of it, shall the LORDE thy God blesse the in all thy workes,
and in all that thou puttest thine hande vnto.
11 The londe shal neuer be without poore, therfore commaunde I the and saye,
that thou open thine hande vnto thy brother, which is neady and poore in thy
londe.
12 Yf thy brother an Hebrue or Hebruesse be solde vnto the, he shal serue the
sixe yeare, in the seuenth yeare shalt thou let him go Fre.
13 And wha thou deliuerest him fre, thou shalt not let him go from the emptye,
14 but shalt geue him of thy shepe, of thy corne, and of yi wyne, so that thou
geue him of that, which the LORDE thy God hath blessed the withall.
15 And remembre that thou also wast a seruaunte in the lode of Egipte, and how
that the LORDE thy God delyuered the, therfore commaunde I the this thinge to
daye.
16 But yf he saye vnto the: I wyll not go out awaye from the, for I loue ye and
thine house (in so moch as he is well at ease with the)
17 then take a botkyn, and bore him thorow his eare to the dore, and let him be
thy seruaunt for euer. And with thy mayde shalt thou do likewyse.
18 And let it not seme greuous vnto the, to let him go fre from the (for he hath
serued the sixe yeares as a dubble hyred seruaunt) then shall the LORDE thy God
blesse the in all that thou doest.
19 All the first borne that come of thine oxen and shepe, yt are males, shalt
thou halowe vnto the LORDE thy God. Thou shalt not plowe with the firstborne of
thine oxe, and shalt not clyppe the firstborne of thy shepe:
20 Before the LORDE thy God shalt thou eate the euery yeare, in the place that
the LORDE choseth, thou and thine housholde.
21 But yf it haue a deformyte, so that it is lame or blynde, or hath eny other
euell blemysh, thou shalt not offre it vnto ye LORDE thy God,
22 but shalt eate it within thine awne gates) whether thou be vncleane or
cleane) euen as the Roo and Hert.
23 Onely se that thou eate not of the bloude therof, but poure it out as water
vpon the grounde.

Chapter 16

1 Obserue the moneth Abib, yt thou offre Easter vnto the LORDE yi God: for in
the moneth Abib the LORDE thy God broughte ye out of Egipte by nighte.
2 And for the Easter vnto ye LORDE thy God, thou shalt offre oxen & shepe, in ye
place which ye LORDE shal chose, yt his name maye dwell there.
3 Thou shalt eate no leuended bred in yt feast. Seuen dayes shalt thou eate the
vnleuended bred of thy tribulacion: For with soroufull haist camest thou out of
the londe of Egipte, that thou mayest remebre the daye of thy departinge out of
ye londe of Egipte, all yi life longe.
4 In seue dayes shal there no leueded bred be sene within all thy coastes: & of
the flesh that is offred ye first daye at euen, there shal nothinge be lefte
ouer night vntyll the mornynge.
5 Thou mayest not offre Easter wt in eny of thy gates, which the LORDE thy God
hath geuen the:
6 but in the place which the LORDE thy God hath chosen, that his name maye dwell
there, there shalt thou offre this Easter, at euen whan the Sonne is gone downe,
euen in the same season that thou camest out of Egipte:
7 and thou shalt dighte it, and eate it in the place that the LORDE thy God hath
chosen, and then turne the on the morowe, & go home in to thy tente.
8 Sixe dayes shalt thou eate vnleuended bred, and on the seuenth daye is the
gatheringe together of the LORDE thy God. Thou shalt do no worke therin.
9 Seuen wekes shalt thou nombre vnto ye, and begynne to nombre whan the syccle
begynneth in the corne,
10 and thou shalt kepe the Feast of wekes vnto the LORDE thy God, that thou geue
a frewylofferynge of thine hande, acordinge as the LORDE thy God hath blessed
the,
11 and shalt reioyse before the LORDE thy God, thou and thy sonne, thy doughter,
thy seruaunt, thy mayde, and the Leuite that is within thy gates, ye straunger,
the fatherlesse, and the wedowe, that are amonge you, in the place which ye
LORDE thy God hath chosen, that his name maye dwell there.
12 And remembre, yt thou wast a seruaunte in Egipte, so that thou kepe and do
these ordynaunces.
13 The feast of Tabernacles shalt thou kepe seuen dayes, whan thou hast gathered
in the frutes of thy barne & of thy wyne presse,
14 and thou shalt reioyse in thy feast, thou and thy sonne, thy doughter, thy
seruaunte, thy mayde, the Leuite, the straunger, the fatherlesse, and the wedowe
that are within yi gates.
15 Seuen dayes shalt thou kepe ye feast vnto the LORDE thy God, in the place
that he hath chosen. For the LORDE thy God shal blesse the in all thy frutes and
in all the workes of thine hades. Therfore shalt thou be glad.
16 Thre tymes in the yeare shal all thy males appeare before the LORDE thy God
(in the place that he shall chose) namely, in the feast of vnleuended bred, in
the feast of wekes, and in the feast of Tabernacles. He shal not appeare emptie
before the LORDE,
17 but euery one after the gifte of his hande, acordinge to the blessinge that
the LORDE thy God hath geuen the.
18 Ivdges & officers shalt thou ordeyne within all yi gates, which ye LORDE thy
God geueth the amoge thy trybes, yt they maye iudge the people with righteous
iudgment.
19 Thou shalt not wrest the lawe. Thou shalt knowe no personne also, ner take
giftes. For giftes blynde the eyes of ye wyse, & peruerte ye righteous causes.
20 Loke what righte is, yt shalt thou folowe, that thou mayest lyue & possesse
the londe, which the LORDE thy God shal geue the.
21 Thou shalt plante no groue (of what so euer trees it be) nye vnto the altare
of the LORDE thy God, which thou makest the.
22 Thou shalt set the vp no piler, which ye LORDE yi God hateth.

Chapter 17

1 Thou shalt offre vnto the LORDE thy God no oxe or shepe, that hath a blemish
or eny euell fauourednesse on it: for that is abhominacion vnto the LORDE thy
God.
2 Yf there be founde amonge you (within eny of thy gates which the LORDE yi God
shal geue ye) a man or woman, that worketh wickednesse in ye sighte of the LORDE
thy God, so that he transgresseth his couenaute and goeth,
3 and serueth other goddes, & worshippeth them, whether it be Sone or Mone, or
eny of the hooste of heauen, which I haue not commaunded,
4 and it is tolde the, & thou hearest of it, Then shalt thou make diligent
search therfore. And yf thou fyndest that it is so of a trueth, that soch
abhominacion is wroughte in Israel,
5 then shalt thou brynge forth the same man or ye same woma (which haue done
soch euell) vnto thy gates and shalt stone them to death.
6 At the mouth of two or thre witnesses shal he dye, that is worthy of death. At
the mouth of one witnes shal he not dye.
7 The handes of the witnesses shal be the first to kyll him, and the ye handes
of all the people, that thou mayest put awaye the euell from the.
8 Yf a matter be to harde for the in iudgmet betwixte bloude and bloude,
betwixte plee and plee, betwixte stroke and stroke, and yf there be matters of
stryfe within thy gates then shalt thou ryse, and go vp vnto ye place that ye
LORDE thy God hath chosen:
9 and shalt come to the prestes the Leuites, & to the iudge which shalbe at that
tyme, and shalt axe. They shal shewe the how to iudge,
10 and thou shalt do therafter, as they saye vnto the, in ye place which the
LORDE hath chosen: and thou shalt take hede that thou do acordinge vnto all yt
they teach the.
11 Acordinge to the lawe yt they teach the, & after the iudgment that they tell
ye, shalt thou do so that thou turne not asyde from ye same, nether to the
righte hande ner to the lefte.
12 And yf eny man deale presumptuously, so that he herkeneth not vnto the prest
(which stondeth to do seruyce vnto the LORDE thy God) or to the Iudge, the same
shal dye: and thou shalt put awaye the euell from Israel,
13 that all ye people maye heare, and feare, and be nomore presumptuous.
14 Whan thou art come in to ye londe which the LORDE thy God shal geue the, &
takest it in possession, and dwellest therin, and shalt saie: I wil set a kinge
ouer me, as all the nacions haue aboute me,
15 the shalt thou set him to be kynge ouer the, whom the LORDE thy God shal
chose. One of thy brethren shalt thou sett to be kynge ouer the. Thou mayest not
set a strauger ouer the, which is not thy brother.
16 Onely let him not haue many horses, yt he brynge not ye people againe in to
Egipte thorow ye multitude of horses, for as moch as ye LORDE hath sayde vnto
you, that from hence forth ye shulde come nomore this waye agayne.
17 He shall not haue many wyues also, that his hert be not turned awaye. Nether
shal he gather him syluer and golde to moch.
18 And whan he is set vpon the seate of his kingdome, he shal take of the
prestes the Leuites this seconde lawe, and cause it be wrytten in a boke,
19 and that shall he haue by him, and he shall rede therin all the dayes of his
life, that he maye lerne to feare ye LORDE his God, to kepe all the wordes of
this lawe, all these ordinauces, so that he do therafter.
20 He shall not lifte vp his herte aboue his brethren, and shall not turne asyde
from the commaundement, nether to the right hade ner to the lefte, that he maye
prologe his dayes in his kyngdome, he and his children in Israel.

Chapter 18

1 The prestes, the Leuites, all the trybe of Leui shal haue no parte ner
enheritaunce wt Israel. The offerynges of ye LORDE & his enheritaunce shal they
eate.
2 Therfore shal they haue no inheritaunce amonge their brethren, because the
LORDE is their enheritauce, as he hath saide vnto the
3 This shalbe ye prestes dutye of the people, & of the that offre, whether it be
oxe or shepe, so that they geue vnto the prest the shulder and both the chekes,
and the brest.
4 And the first frutes of thy corne, of thy wyne and of thy oyle, and the first
of thy shepe sheringe.
5 For the LORDE thy God hath chosen him out of all thy trybes, to stonde and
mynyster in the name of the LORDE, he and his sonnes all the dayes of their
life.
6 Yf a Leuite come out of eny of thy gates or out of eny place of all Israel,
where he is a gest, and cometh with all the desyre of his soule (vnto the place
which the LORDE hath chosen)
7 to mynister in the name of the LORDE his God, like as all his brethren ye
Leuites, which stonde there before the LORDE,
8 the shal he haue like porcion of meate with the other: besydes that which he
hath of the solde good of his fathers.
9 Whan thou commest in to ye londe which the LORDE thy God shal geue ye, thou
shalt not lerne to do ye abhominacions of these nacions,
10 that there be not founde amonge you, yt maketh his sonne or doughter go
thorow the fyre, or a prophecier, or a choser out of dayes, or that regardeth
the foules cryenge,
11 or a witch, or a coniurer, or soythsayer, or an expounder of tokens, or yt
axeth eny thinge of the deed.
12 For who so euer doth soch, is abhominacion vnto the LORDE: and because of
soch abhominacions doth the LORDE yi God dryue the out before the.
13 But thou shalt be perfecte with the LORDE yi God.
14 For these nacios whom thou shalt conquere, whom the LORDE thy God hath geuen
the, herken to the chosers out of dayes, and to the soythsayers: but so shalt
not thou do vnto the LORDE thy God.
15 A prophet, like vnto me, shall the LORDE thy God raise the vp euen out of
the, & from amonge thy brethren, vnto him shal ye herke,
16 acordinge as thou desyredest before the LORDE thy God in Horeb, (in the daye
of ye gatheringe together) & saydest: Let me heare the voyce of the LORDE my God
nomore, and se nomore this greate fyre, that I dye not.
17 And ye LORDE saide vnto me: They haue well spoken.
18 I wil rayse them vp a prophet from amonge their brethren like vnto the, and
wyl put my wordes in his mouth, & he shal speake vnto them all that I shal
comaunde him.
19 And who so euer wyl not herken vnto my wordes, which he shal speake in my
name, of him wil I requyre it.
20 But yf a prophete presume to speake ought in my name, which I haue not
comauded him to speake: and he that speaketh in ye name of other goddes, yt same
prophete shal dye.
21 But yf thou saye in thine hert: How can I knowe what worde the LORDE hath not
spoken?
22 Euen whan the prophete speaketh in the name of ye LORDE, and the thinge
foloweth not, and commeth not to passe, ye same is the worde, yt the LORDE hath
not spoke. The prophet hath spoke it presumtuously, therfore be not afrayed of
him.

Chapter 19

1 Whan ye LORDE thy God shall haue roted out ye nacios, whose londe ye LORDE thy
God shal geue the, so yt thou hast conquered them, and dwellest in their cities
and houses,
2 thou shalt appoynte the out thre cities in the myddes of the lode, yt the
LORDE thy God shal geue ye to possesse.
3 Thou shalt prepare the waye, and parte the coastes of yi londe (which ye LORDE
thy God shal deuyde out vnto the) in to thre partes, that whosoeuer hath
commytted a slaughter, maye flie thither.
4 And this shalbe the cause, that whosoeuer hath committed a slaughter, maye
flye thyther, and lyue.
5 Yf eny man smyte his neghboure vnawarres, and hath not hated him in tyme
passed (as whan a man goeth vnto the wod with his neghboure to hew downe tymber,
and he turneth his hande wt the axe to hewe downe the wod, and the yron slyppeth
from the helue, and hytteth his neghboure, that he dyeth) the same shal flye in
to one of these cities, that he maye lyue,
6 lest the auenger of bloude folowe after the deedsleyer, whyle his hert is
whote, and ouertake him, whyle the waye is so farre, and slaye him, where as yet
no cause of death is in hi, for so moch as he hated him not in tyme passed.
7 Therfore commaunde I the, that thou appoynte out thre cities.
8 And whan the LORDE yi God enlargeth thy borders, as he hath sworne vnto thy
fathers, & geueth the all the lode which he promysed thy fathers to geue
9 (so that thou kepe all these comaundementes, and do yt I commaunde the this
daye, yt thou loue the LORDE thy God, and walke in his wayes all yi life longe)
the shalt thou adde yet thre cities vnto these thre,
10 that innocent bloude be not shed in thy londe (which the LORDE yi God geueth
the to enheritaunce) and so bloude come vpon the.
11 But yf eny man beare hate agaynst his neghboure, and layeth waite for him,
and ryseth agaynst him, and smyteth him that he dye, and flyeth in to one of
these cities,
12 then shall the Elders of the same cite sende thither, and cause him to be
fetched from thence, and delyuer him in to the handes of the auenger of bloude,
that he maye dye:
13 thine eye shal not pitie him, and the giltye bloude shalt thou put awaye fro
Israel, that thou mayest prospere.
14 Thou shalt not remoue thy neghbours marck, which they of olde tyme haue set
in thine enheritaunce, that thou enheretest in the londe, which the LORDE thy
God hath geuen the to possesse it.
15 One witnesse shal not stonde vp alone agaynst a man, ouer eny trespace or
synne, what maner of synne so euer it be, yt a man can do, but in the mouth of
two or thre witnesses shal euery matter be stablished.
16 But yf an vnrighteous wytnesse stonde vp agaynst eny man, to testifye eny
trespace vpon him,
17 then shall both the men that stryue together, stonde before the LORDE, before
the prestes and Iudges, which shall be at the same tyme.
18 And the iudges shall make diligent inquisicion: & yf the witnesse be founde
false, and hath geue false witnesse agaynst his brother,
19 then shall ye do vnto him, euen as he thoughte to do vnto his brother: that
thou mayest put awaye the euell from the that
20 other maye heare and feare, and take nomore vpon them to do soch wicked
poyntes amonge you.
21 Thine eye shall not pitie him. Soule for soule, eye for eye, tothe for tothe,
hande for hande, fote for fote.

Chapter 20

1 Whan thou goest out to battayll agaynst thine enemies, and seyst horses and
charettes of the people more then thou, be not afrayed of them: for the LORDE
thy God which brought ye out of the londe of Egipte, is with the.
2 Now wha ye are come nye vnto the battayll, the prest shal steppe forth, &
speake to the people,
3 and saye vnto the: Heare Israel: Ye go this daye in to the battayll agaynst
youre enemies, let not yor hert faynte. Feare not, be not afrayed, ner a drede
of them.
4 For the LORDE youre God goeth with you, to fyghte for you agaynst youre
enemies, yt he maye saue you.
5 And the captaynes shal speake to ye people, and saye: Who so hath buylded a
new house, and hath not dedicate it, let him go, and byde in his house, that he
dye not in ye battayll, and another dedicate it.
6 Who so hath planted a vynyarde, and hath not yet made it comen, lett him go,
and byde at home, that he dye not in the battayll, and another make it comen.
7 Who so hath spoused a wyfe, and hath not yet brought her home, let him go, and
byde at home, yt he die not in the battayll, & another brynge her home.
8 And the captaines shal speake further vnto the people, and saye: He that
feareth and hath a faynte hert, lett him go, and byde at home, that he make not
his brethrens hert fainte also, like as his hert is.
9 And whan the captaynes haue made an ende of speakinge vnto the people, they
shall set the rulers of the hoost before the people in the fore fronte.
10 Whan thou commest nye vnto a cite to fight against it, thou shalt offre them
peace
11 Yf they answere the peaceably, and open vnto the, then shal all ye people yt
is founde therin, be tributaries vnto the, and serue ye.
12 But yf they wyl not deale peaceably wt the, and wyll warre with the, then
besege it:
13 and whan the LORDE thy God delyuereth it in to thy hande, thou shalt smyte
all the males that are therin, with the edge of the swerde:
14 saue the wemen and the children. As for the catell, and all that is in the
cite, and all the spoyle, thou shalt take them vnto thy selfe, and eate the
spoyle of thine enemies, which the LORDE thy God hath geuen the.
15 Thus shalt thou do vnto all the cities, that are very farre from the, and are
not of the cities of these nacions.
16 But in the cities of these nacions, which the LORDE thy God shall geue the to
enheritauce, thou shalt leaue nothinge alyue that hath breth,
17 but shalt vtterly destroye the, namely the Hethites, Amorites, Cananites,
Pheresites, Heuites, & Iebusites, as the LORDE thy God hath commaunded the,
18 yt they teache you not to do all ye abhominacions, which they do vnto their
goddes, & so ye to synne agaynst the LORDE youre God.
19 Whan thou must lye a longe season before a cite, against the which thou
makest warre to take it, thou shalt not destroye ye trees therof that thou
woldest hew them downe wt the axe, for thou mayest eate therof: and therfore
shalt thou not hew them downe. For it is but wodd vpon the felde, and no man,
and can not come & be bullworkes agaynst the.
20 But the trees which thou knowest yt me eate not of, those shalt thou
destroye, and rote out, and make bullworkes therof, agaynst the cite that
warreth with the, tyll thou haue ouercome it.

Chapter 21

1 Whan there is one slayne founde in ye londe which ye LORDE yi God shall geue
ye to possesse it, & lyeth in ye felde, & it is not knowne who hath slaine him,
2 then shal thy Elders & iudges go forth, and meet from the slayne vnto the
cities that lye rounde aboute.
3 Loke which cite is the nexte, ye Elders of the same shal take a yoge cowe,
which hath not bene laboured, ner hath drawe in the yocke,
4 & they shal brynge her in to a valley, where as is nether earinge nor sowinge,
and strike of hir heade there in the valley.
5 Then shal the prestes ye children of Leui come forth. ( For the LORDE thy God
hath chosen them, to serue him, and to prayse his name: and at their mouth shal
all plees and strypes be tryed.)
6 And all the Elders of the same cite shall come forth vnto the slayne, & wash
their handes ouer ye yonge cowe, whose heade is stricken of in the valley,
7 and shal answere and saie: Oure hades haue not shed this bloude, nether haue
oure eyes sene it.
8 Be mercifull (O LORDE) vnto thy people of Israel, who thou hast delyuered,
laye no innocent bloude vnto thy people of Israels charge: then shall they be
reconcyled from the bloude.
9 Thus shalt thou put awaye the innocent bloude from the, in that thou doest the
thinge whis is righte in the sighte of ye LORDE.
10 Wha thou goest forth to warre against thine enemies, & the LORDE thy God
delyuereth them in to thine handes, so that thou cariest awaye their presoners,
11 and seist amoge the captyues a bewtyfull woman, & hast a desyre vnto her to
take her to thy wife,
12 the brynge her home to thine house, and let her shaue hir heade, and pare hir
nayles,
13 and put of hir clothes that she was taken presoner in, and let her sit in
thine house, and mourne for hir father and mother a moneth longe after that lye
with her, and mary her, and let her be thy wife.
14 But yf thou haue no fauoure vnto her, then shalt thou let her go whither she
wyll, and not to sell her, ner to make cheuesaunce of her, because thou hast
dishonoured her.
15 Yf a man haue two wyues, one that he loueth, and one that he hateth, and they
beare him children, both the beloued and the hated,
16 so that the firstborne be hirs that is hated, and the tyme commeth that he
dealeth out the inheritaunce vnto his children, then can he not make the sonne
of ye beloued firstborne before the firstborne sonne of the hated,
17 but he shall knowe the sonne of the hated for ye first sonne, so that he geue
him dubble of all that is at hande: for the same is ye begynnynge of his
strength, & the firstbyrthrighte is his.
18 Yf eny man haue a stubborne and dishobedient sonne, which herkeneth not vnto
the voyce of his father, and mother, and whan they teach him nurtoure, wyll not
folowe them,
19 then shall his father and mother take him, and brynge him to ye Elders of
their cite, and to the gate of the same place,
20 and saye vnto the Elders of the cite: This oure sonne is stobburne and
dishobediet, and herkeneth not vnto oure voyce, and is a ryoter and a dronkarde.
21 Then shal all the men of ye same cite stone him to death: and thus shalt thou
put awaye the euell fro the, that all Israel maye heare and feare.
22 Yf a man haue commytted a synne yt is worthy of death, and is put to death,
so that he is hanged on tre,
23 then shal not his body remayne all night on tre, but thou shalt burye him the
same daye ( For cursed is he of God that is hanged) that thou defyle not thy
londe, which the LORDE thy God geueth the to enheritaunce.

Chapter 22

1 Yf thou se thy brothers oxe or shepe, go astraie, thou shalt not withdrawe thy
selfe from them, but shalt brynge the againe vnto yi brother.
2 But yf yi brother be not nye vnto the, & thou knowest him not, then shalt thou
take the in to thine house, yt they maye be wt the, tyll ye brother axe after
them, & then delyuer him the agayne.
3 In like maner shalt thou do with his Asse, wt his rayment, & with euery lost
thinge of yi brother, which he hath lost, & thou hast founde it: thou mayest not
withdrawe thyselfe.
4 Yf thou se thy brothers oxe or Asse fallen downe by the waye, thou shalt not
wt drawe thy selfe from him, but shalt helpe him vp.
5 A woman shall not weere yt which pertayneth to a man, nether shal a man put on
womans raymet. For who so euer doth soch, is abhominacion vnto ye LORDE yi God.
6 Yf thou chaunce vpon a byrdes nest by ye waye in a tre, or on the grounde,
with yonge or with egges, and the dame syttinge vpon the yonge or vpon the
egges, thou shalt not take the dame with the yonge,
7 but shalt let the dame flye, and take the yonge, that thou mayest prospere and
lyue longe.
8 Whan thou buyldest a new house, make a battelment aboute thy rofe, that thou
lade not bloude vpon thine house, yf eny man fall therof.
9 Thou shalt not sowe thy vynyarde with dyuerse sedes, that thou halowe not (to
the full offerynge) the sede which thou hast sowne, with the increase of the
vynyarde.
10 Thou shalt not plowe with an oxe and an Asse together at one tyme.
11 Thou shalt not weere a garmet, yt is mixte with wollen and lynnen together.
12 Thou shalt make gardes vpon the foure quarters of thy garment, wherwith thou
couerest thy selfe.
13 Yf a man take a wife, and hate her whan he hath lyen with her,
14 and layeth eny shamefull thinge vnto hir charge, and bryngeth vp an euell
name vpon her, and sayeth: I toke this wife, & whan I came to her, I founde her
not a mayde.
15 Then shall the father and mother of the damsell take her, and brynge forth
the tokens of the damsels virginite before the Elders of the cite, euen vnto the
gate.
16 And ye damsels father shal saie vnto ye Elders: I gaue this man my doughter
to wyfe. Now hateth he her,
17 and layeth a shamefull thinge to hir charge, and sayeth: I founde not thy
doughter a mayde. And lo, these are the tokens of my doughters virginite. And
they shal sprede out the clothe before the Elders of the cite.
18 So shal the Elders of the cite take that man, and chastice him,
19 and put a pennaunce vpon him of an hundreth Sycles of syluer, and geue the
same vnto the father of the damsell, because he hath brougte vp an euell name of
a mayde in Israel, and he shall haue her to wyfe, so yt he maye not forsake her
all his life longe.
20 But yf it be of a trueth, that the damsell is not founde a virgin,
21 the shal she be brought forth vnto the dore of hir fathers house, and the me
of the cite shal stone her to death, because she hath wrought foly in Israel,
and played the whore in hir fathers house. And so shalt thou put awaye the euell
from the.
22 Yf a man be founde lienge with a woma that hath a maried husbande, they shal
dye both the man, & the woma that he hath lien withall. And so shalt thou put
awaye euell from Israel.
23 Yf a mayde be handfested to eny man, & another man getteth her in the cite, &
lyeth with her,
24 ye shal brynge them both out vnto the gate of the cite, and stone them both,
yt they dye. The damsell, because she cryed not, beynge in the cite. The man,
because he hath brought his neghbours wife to shame. And thou shalt put awaye
the euell from the.
25 But yf a man get an handfested damsell vpon the felde, and take her, and lye
wt her, then the man that laye with her, shal dye alone,
26 and vnto the damsell thou shalt do nothinge: for she hath done no synne
worthy of death. It is like as yf a man rose against his neghboure, and slewe
him, euen so is this also.
27 For he founde her in the felde, and the handfested damsell cryed, and there
was no man to helpe her.
28 Yf a man fynde a mayde that is not hadfested, and take her, and lye with her,
and be founde,
29 then shal he that laye with her, geue hir father fyftie Sycles of syluer, and
shall haue her to wyfe, because he hath shamed her: he maye not forsake her all
his life loge.
30 Noma shal take his fathers wife, ner vncouer his fathers couerynge.

Chapter 23

1 There shal none that hath his stones broken or yt is gelded, come in to the
cogregacion of the LORDE.
2 There shal no whores childe also come in to the cogregacion of ye LORDE, no
not after ye tenth generacio, but shal neuer come in to ye cogregacio of ye
LORDE.
3 The Ammonites & Moabites shal not come in to ye cogregacio of ye LORDE, no not
after ye tenth generacion, but shall neuer come in,
4 because they met you not wt bred & water in ye waye, wha ye came out of
Egipte. And besides yt, they hired agaynst you Balaa ye sonne of Beor, ye
interpreter out of Mesopotamia, to curse ye.
5 But ye LORDE yi God wolde not heare Balaam, and turned the curse to a
blessynge vnto the: because the LORDE yi God loued the.
6 Thou shalt wysh him nether prosperite ner health all thy life longe for euer.
7 Thou shalt not abhorre an Edomite: for he is thy brother. An Egipcian shalt
thou not abhorre, for thou wast a straunger in his londe.
8 The children whom they beget in the thirde generacion, shal come in to the
congregacion of ye LORDE.
9 Wha thou goest out to fighte agaynst thine enemies, kepe the from all
wickednesse.
10 Yf there be eny man amonge you which is vncleane, so that eny thinge is
chaunced to him by nighte, the same shal go out of ye hoost
11 vntyll he haue bathed himselfe with water before euen: and whan the Sonne is
gone downe, he shall come in to the hoost agayne.
12 And without the hoost thou shalt haue place to resorte vnto for necessyte,
13 & thou shalt haue a shouell vnder the gyrdle: and whan thou wilt set ye downe
without, thou shalt dygge therwith: and whan thou hast done thine easement, thou
shalt couer that which is departed from the.
14 For the LORDE thy God walketh in thine hooste, to delyuer the, and to geue
thine enemies before the. Therfore shall thy hooste be holy, that he se no
vncleane thinge in the, and so turne himselfe from the.
15 Thou shalt not delyuer vnto his master the seruaunt, which is escaped fro him
vnto the.
16 He shall dwell with the in the place that he choseth within eny of thy gates,
for his wealth, and thou shalt not vexe him.
17 There shal be no whore amonge ye doughters of Israel, nether whorekeper
amonge the sonnes of Israel.
18 Thou shalt not bringe ye hyre of an whoore ner the price of a dogg in to the
house of the LORDE yi God for eny maner of vowe: for they both are abhominacion
vnto the LORDE thy God.
19 Thou shalt occupye no vsury vnto yi brother, nether with money, ner with
fode, ner with eny maner thinge that vsury maye be vsed withall.
20 (Vnto a strauger thou maiest lende vpo vsury, but not vnto thy brother) yt
the LORDE thy God maye blesse the in all yt thou takest in hade, in the lode
whither thou commest in to possesse it.
21 Whan thou makest a vowe vnto ye LORDE yi God, to shalt not be slacke to
perfourme it: for the LORDE thy God shal requyre it of the, and it shal be synne
vnto the.
22 Yf thou leaue vowinge, then is it no synne vnto the.
23 But that which is proceaded out of yi lyppes shalt thou kepe, and do
therafter, acordinge as thou hast vowed vnto the LORDE of a frewyll, which thou
hast spoken wt thy mouth.
24 Whan thou goest in to thy neghtours vyniarde, thou mayest eate of the grapes
acordinge to thy desyre, tyll thou haue ynough. But thou shalt put none in to
thy vessell.
25 Whan thou goest in thy neghbours cornefelde, thou mayest plucke the eares
with thine hande, but with a syccle mayest thou not reape therin.

Chapter 24

1 Whan a man taketh a wife, and marieth her, and she findeth no fauoure in his
eyes because of eny vnclennesse, the shal he wryte a byll of deuorcemet, and
geue it her in hir hade, and sende her out of his house.
2 Yf whan she is gone out of his house, she go, and be another mans wyfe,
3 and the same seconde man hate her also, & wryte a byll of deuorcement, and
geue it her in hir hande, and sende her out of his house: Or yf the same seconde
man dye, which toke her to wife,
4 then hir first husbande that put hir awaie, maie not take hir againe to be his
wife, in so moch as she is defyled, for that is abhominacion before the LORDE:
that thou make not the londe to synne, which the LORDE thy God hath geuen the to
enheritauce.
5 Whan a man hath newly taken a wyfe, he shall not go awarre fare, nether shall
he be charged withall. He shal be fre in his house one yeare longe, that he maye
be mery wt his wife which he hath taken.
6 Thou shalt no take ye nethermost and vppermost mylstone to pledge, for he hat
set ye his lyuynge to pledge.
7 Yf eny man be founde that stealeth one of his brethren, from amonge the
childre of Israel, and setteth him to pledge, or selleth him soch a thefe shal
dye, that thou maiest put awaye the euell from the.
8 Kepe the from the plage of leprosie, that thou obserue diligently and do
acordynge vnto all that the prestes the Leuites teach the, as I haue commaunded
them, yt shal ye obserue and do therafter.
9 Remembre what the LORDE thy God dyd vnto Miriam by the waye, whan ye were come
out of Egipte.
10 Yf thou lendest yi brother eny dett, thou shalt not go into his house, and
take a pledge,
11 but shalt stonde without: and he, to who thou lendest, shal brynge out his
pledge vnto the.
12 But yf it be a poore body, thou shalt not lye downe to slepe, with his
pledge,
13 but shalt delyuer him his pledge agayne, whan the Sonne goeth downe, that he
maye slepe in his awne rayment, and blesse the, so shall the same be rekened
vnto the for righteousnes before the LORDE thy God.
14 Thou shalt not withdrawe the hyre of ye nedye and poore amonge thy brethren,
or straunger that is in thy londe,
15 or within thy gates, but shalt geue him his hyre the same daye, that the
Sonne go not downe theron, for so moch as he is nedye, and his life susteyned
therwith: that he call not vpon the LORDE agaynst the, and it be synne vnto the.
16 The fathers shal not dye for the children, ner the childre for the fathers,
but euery one shal dye for his awne synne.
17 Thou shalt not wrest the righte of the straunger and of the fatherlesse. And
ye wedowes rayment shalt thou not take to pledge:
18 For thou shalt remembre, that thou wast a seruaunte in Egipte, and how that
ye LORDE thy God delyuered the from thence, therfore commaunde I the to do this.
19 Whan thou hast reaped downe thine haruest in the felde, and hast forgotten a
shefe in the felde, thou shalt not turne agayne to fetch it, but it shal be for
the straunger, ye fatherlesse and the wedowe, that the LORDE thy God maye blesse
the in all the workes of thy handes.
20 Whan thou hast plucked thine Olyue trees, thou shalt not plucke them vp
cleane afterwarde: it shal be for the straunger, the fatherlesse and the wedowe.
21 Whan thou hast gathered thy vynyarde, thou shalt not gather it vp cleane
afterwarde: it shalbe for the straunger, the fatherlesse and the wedowe.
22 And thou shalt remembre, that thou wast a seruaunt in the londe of Egipte:
therfore comaunde I the to do this.

Chapter 25

1 Whan there is a stryfe betwene men, they shalbe brought before ye lawe and
iudged: and the iudges shall iustifye the righteous, and condemne the vngodly.
2 And yf the vngodly haue deserued strypes, the iudge shall commaunde to take
him downe, and they shall beate him before him, acordynge to the measure and
nombre of his trespace.
3 Whan they haue geue him fortye strypes, they shall beate him nomore, lest (yf
there be mo strypes geuen him) he be beaten to moch, and thy brother be horrible
before thine eyes.
4 Thou shalt not mosell the mouth of the oxe, that treadeth out the corne.
5 Whan brethren dwell together, and one of them dye with out children, then
shall not ye wife of the deed take a straunge man without, but hir kynsman shal
go in vnto her, and take her to wyfe:
6 and the first sonne that she beareth, shal he set vp after the name of his
brother which is deed, that his name be not put out of Israel.
7 But yf the man wyl not take his kynswoman, then shal his kinswoman go vp vnder
the gate to the Elders, and saye: My kynsman refuseth to stere vp a name vnto
his brother in Israel, and wyl not marye me.
8 Then shal the Elders of the cite call him, and comen with him. Yf he stonde
then and saye: I wyl not take her,
9 then shal his kynswoman steppe forth vnto him before the Elders, and lowse a
shue fro his fote, and spyt in his face, and shal answere, and saye: Thus shal
it be done vnto euery man, that wyl not builde his brothers house.
10 And his name shalbe called in Israel, the vnshodd house.
11 Yf two men stryue together, and the wyfe of one renne to, to delyuer hir
husbande from the hande of him that smyteth him, & put forth hir hande, and take
him by the secretes,
12 then shalt thou cut of hir hande, and thine eye shal not pitie her.
13 Thou shalt not haue in yi bagg two maner of weightes, a greate and a small.
14 Nether shalt thou haue in thyne house dyuerse measures, a greate and a small.
15 Thou shalt haue a perfecte and iust weighte, and a perfecte and iust measure,
that thy life maye be longe in the londe, which the LORDE yi God shal geue the.
16 For who so euer doth soch (yee all they that do euell) are abhominacion vnto
the LORDE thy God.
17 Remebre what the Amalechites did vnto the by the waye, wha ye were departed
out of Egipte,
18 how they buckled with the by the waye, and smote thy hynmost, euen all that
were feble, which came after the whan thou wast weerye and fainte, and they
feared not God.
19 Now wha the LORDE thy God bryngeth the, to rest fro all thine enemies rounde
aboute in the londe which the LORDE thy God geueth the for inheritaunce to
possesse, then shalt thou put out the remembraunce of the Amalechites from vnder
heauen. Forget not this.

Chapter 26

1 Whan thou commest into the londe that the LORDE thy God shal geue the to
inheritaunce, and enioyest it, and dwellest therin,
2 thou shalt take of all maner first frutes of the londe, that come out of thy
grounde, which the LORDE thy God geueth the, & shalt put them in a maunde, and
go vnto the place which the LORDE thy God shal chose (yt his name maye dwell
there)
3 and thou shalt come vnto the prest which shalbe at that tyme, and saye vnto
him: I knowlege this daye vnto the LORDE thy God, that I am come in to the
londe, which ye LORDE sware vnto oure fathers to geue vs.
4 And the prest shal take the maunde out of thine hande, and set it downe before
the altare of the LORDE thy God.
5 Then shalt thou answere and saye before the LORDE thy God: The Syrians wolde
haue destroyed my father, which wete downe in to Egipte, and was a strauger
there with a small folke, and became there a nacio greate, mightie & full of
people.
6 But the Egipcias intreated vs euell, and troubled vs, and layed an harde
bondage vpo vs.
7 Then cried we vnto ye LORDE, the God of oure fathers. And the LORDE herde oure
cryenge, and loked on oure aduersite, laboure, and oppressio,
8 & brought vs out of Egipte with a mightie hande, and a stretched out arme, and
with greate terryblenesse thorow tokens and woders,
9 and hath broughte vs vnto this place and hath geuen vs this londe, that
floweth with mylke and hony.
10 Therfore brynge I now the first frutes of the londe, which the LORDE hath
geuen vs. And thou shalt leaue them before the LORDE thy God, and geue thankes
before the LORDE thy God,
11 and reioyse ouer all the good, that the LORDE yi God hath geuen the, and
thyne house: thou and the Leuite, and the straunger that is with the.
12 Whan thou hast brought together all ye tythes of thine increase in the thirde
yeare, which is a yeare of tithes, thou shalt geue it vnto the Leuite, to the
straunger, to the fatherlesse, and to the wedowe, that they maie eate within yi
gates, and be filled.
13 And thou shalt saye before the LORDE thy God: I haue broughte that halowed
is, out of my house, and haue geuen it vnto the Leuyte, the straunger, the
fatherlesse, and the wedowe, acordinge to all thy commaundement which thou hast
comaunded me. I haue not transgressed thy commaundementes, ner forgotten them.
14 I haue not eaten therof in my heuynesse, ner taken awaye therof in
vnclennesse. I haue not geue therof vnto the deed. I haue bene obedient vnto the
voyce of the LORDE my God, and haue done all as he hath commaunded me.
15 Loke downe from thy holy habitacion, from heauen, and blesse thy people of
Israel, and ye londe that thou hast geuen vs, as thou swarest vnto oure fathers,
a londe that floweth with mylke and hony.
16 In the daye whan the LORDE thy God commaunded the, to do acordynge vnto all
these ordinauces and lawes, that thou shuldest kepe them and do therafter with
all thy hert and with all thy soule.
17 The same daye maydest thou a promysse vnto the LORDE, that he shulde be thy
God, and yt thou woldest walke in all his wayes, and kepe his ordynaunces, his
commaundementes, and his lawes, and to herken vnto his voyce.
18 And the LORDE promysed the vpo the same daye, that thou shuldest be his awne
peculier people, like as he hath sayde vnto the (so yt thou kepe all his
commaundementes)
19 and that he wolde make the hye in prayse name and honoure aboue all nacions
which he hath made yt thou mayest be an holy people vnto ye LORDE thy God, as he
hath sayde vnto the.

Chapter 27

1 And Moses with ye Elders of Israel, commaunded the people, & sayde: Kepe all
the commaundementes which I commaunde you this daye.
2 And what time as ye go ouer Iordane, in to the londe yt ye LORDE thy God shal
geue the, thou shalt set vp greate stones, and playster them with playster,
3 and wryte vpon them all the wordes of this lawe: (whan thou art come ouer) yt
thou mayest come in to the londe, which the LORDE thy God shall geue the, a
londe yt floweth with milke and hony, as ye LORDE God of thy fathers hath
promysed the.
4 Now whan ye go ouer Iordane, ye shall set vp these stones (wherof I comaunde
you this daye) vpon mount Eball, and playster them with playster:
5 and there shalt thou buylde vnto the LORDE thy God an altare of stone,
whervpon thou shalt lifte no yron.
6 Of whole stones shalt thou builde this altare vnto the LORDE thy God, and
offre burntofferinges theron vnto the LORDE thy God:
7 and thou shalt offre healthofferinges, and eate there, and reioyse before the
LORDE thy God:
8 and vpon the stones thou shalt wryte all the wordes of this lawe manyfestly
and well.
9 And Moses with the prestes and Leuites spake vnto all Israel, and sayde: Take
hede and heare O Israel: This daye art thou become the people of the LORDE thy
God,
10 that thou mayest be obedient vnto the voyce of the LORDE thy God, and do
acordinge vnto all his commaundementes and ordinaunces, which I comaunde the
this daye.
11 And Moses charged the people the same daye, and sayde:
12 These shal stonde vpon mount Grisim to blesse the people, whan ye are gone
ouer Iordane: Simeon, Leui, Iuda, Isachar, Ioseph, and Ben Iamin.
13 And these shal stonde vpon mount Eball to curse: Ruben, Gad, Asser, Zabulon,
Dan & Nephtali.
14 And the Leuites shal begynne, and saye vnto euery man of Israel, wt a loude
voyce:
15 Cursed be he, that maketh eny carued Idoll or molten ymage (an abhominacion
of the LORDE, a worke of the handes of ye craftesman) and putteth it in a
secrete place. And all the people shal answere and saye, Amen.
16 Cursed be he, that curseth his father and mother. And all the people shall
saye, Amen.
17 Cursed be he, yt remoueth his neghbours mark. And all the people shal saye,
Amen.
18 Cursed be he, that maketh a blynde man go out of his waye. And all the people
shal saye, Amen.
19 Cursed be he, that wresteth ye righte of ye straunger, of the fatherlesse, &
wedowe. And all the people shal saye, Amen.
20 Cursed be he, that lyeth with his fathers wife, to vncouer his fathers
couerynge. And all the people shal saye, Amen.
21 Cursed be he, yt lyeth wt eny maner beest. And all the people shal saye,
Amen.
22 Cursed be he, yt lyeth wt his sister, which is the doughter of his father or
of his mother. And all the people shal saye, Amen.
23 Cursed be he, yt lyeth with his mother in lawe. And all the people shal saye,
Amen.
24 Cursed be he that slayeth his neghboure secretly. And all the people shal
saye, Amen.
25 Cursed be he, that receaueth giftes to slaye the soule of innocent bloude.
And all the people shal saye, Amen.
26 Cursed be he, that contynueth not in all ye wordes of this lawe, to do them.
And all ye people shal saye, Amen.

Chapter 28

1 And yf thou shalt herken vnto ye voyce of the LORDE thy God, to obserue and do
all his commaundementes which I comaunde ye this daye, then shall the LORDE thy
God set ye an hye aboue all nacions vpo earth,
2 and all these blessynges shal come vpon the, and ouertake the, because thou
hast bene obedient vnto the voyce of the LORDE thy God.
3 Blessed shalt thou be in the towne, and blessed in the felde.
4 Blessed shalbe the frute of thy body, the frute of thy grounde, and the frute
of thy catell, and the frute of thine oxen, and the frute of thy shepe.
5 Blessed shal be yi baskett, & thy stoare.
6 Blessed shalt thou be wha thou goest in, and blessed whan thou goest out.
7 And thine enemies that ryse vp agaynst the, shal ye LORDE cause to be smytten
before thy face. They shal come out agaynst the one waye, & flye before the
seuen wayes.
8 The LORDE shal commaunde the blessynge to be with ye in thy cellers, and in
all that thou takest in hande, and shal blesse the in ye londe that the LORDE
thy God hath geue the.
9 The LORDE shal set the vp to be an holy people vnto himselfe (as he hath
sworne vnto the) yf thou kepe the commaundementes of the LORDE thy God:
10 so that all nacions vpon earth shal se, that thou art called after the name
of the LORDE: & they shal be afrayed of you.
11 And ye LORDE shal make ye plenteous in goodes, in the frute of yi wombe, in
the frute of thy catell, & in the frute of thy grounde, in the londe that the
LORDE sware vnto thy fathers, to geue the.
12 And the LORDE shal open vnto ye his good treasure, euen the heauen, to geue
rayne vnto thy londe in due season, and to prospere all the workes of thine
handes. And thou shalt lede vnto many nacios, but thou shalt borowe of no man.
13 And ye LORDE shal set the before, and not behynde: & thou shalt be aboue
onely, and not benethe, yf thou be obedient vnto the commaundementes of ye LORDE
thy God, which I commaunde the this daye to kepe and to do them:
14 & yf thou bowe not asyde from eny of these wordes, which I commaunde ye this
daye, either to the righte hande or to the lefte, yt thou woldest walke after
other goddes to serue them.
15 But yf thou wylt not herken vnto the voyce of the LORDE thy God, to kepe and
to do all his commaundementes and ordinaunces, which I commaunde ye this daie,
then shall all these curses come vpon the, and ouertake the.
16 Cursed shalt thou be in the towne, and cursed in ye felde:
17 cursed shal thy basket be, and thy stoare.
18 Cursed shall be the frute of thy body, the frute of thy londe, the frute of
thine oxen, and the frute of thy shepe.
19 Cursed shalt thou be whan thou goest in, and cursed wha thou goest out.
20 The LORDE shal sende in to the, consuminge, and complayninge, and cursynge,
in all that thou takest in hande to do, tyll he haue destroyed the & shortly
broughte to the naughte, because of thy wicked inuencions, in that thou hast
forsaken me.
21 The LORDE shall make the pestylence to byde longe with the, tyll he haue
consumed the out of the londe, into the which thou commest to possesse it.
22 The LORDE shall smyte the with swellynge, feuers, heate, burnynge, venome,
drouth, and palenesse, & shall persecute the, tyll he haue destroyed the.
23 Thy heauen, that is ouer thy heade, shalbe of brasse, and the earth vnder
the, of yron.
24 The LORDE shall geue thy londe dust for rayne, and asshes from heauen vpon
the, vntyll thou be broughte to naught.
25 The LORDE shall cause the be smytten before thine enemyes. Thou shalt come
out one waye agaynst them, and seuen wayes shalt thou flye before them, and
shalt be scatered amoge all the kyngdomes vpon earth.
26 Thy carcase shalbe meate vnto all maner foules of the ayre, and to all the
beestes vpon earth, and there shalbe no man to fraye them awaye.
27 The LORDE shal smyte the with ye botches of Egipte, with the Emorodes, with
scalle, and maungynesse, that thou shalt not be healed therof.
28 The LORDE shall smyte the with madnesse, blyndnesse and dasynge of hert.
29 And thou shalt grope at the noone daye, as ye blynde gropeth in darknesse,
and shalt not prospere in thy waye.And thou shalt suffre vyolence and wronge all
thy lifelonge, & no man shal helpe ye.
30 Thou shalt spouse a wife, but another shal lye with her. Thou shalt buylde an
house, but another shall dwell therin. Thou shalt plante a vynyarde, but shalt
not make it comen.
31 Thine oxe shalbe slayne before thine eyes, but thou shalt not eate therof.
Thine asse shalbe violently taken awaye (euen before yi face) and shal not be
restored ye againe. Thy shepe shalbe geuen vnto thine enemies, and no man shal
helpe the.
32 Thy sonnes and thy doughters shalbe geuen vnto another nacion, and thine eyes
shal se it, and dase vpon them all the daye longe, and thy hande shal not be
able to delyuer them.
33 The frute of yi londe and all yi laboure, shall a nacion eate, which thou
knowest not: and thou shalt but onely be he that shalbe oppressed and suffre
wronge, all the dayes of thy life.
34 And thou shalt be cleane besyde thy selfe for the sighte, which thine eyes
shal se.
35 The LORDE shal smyte the with a myscheuous botch in ye knees & legges, so
that thou canst not be healed, euen from the sole of thy fote vnto the crowne of
thy heade.
36 The LORDE shal brynge the and thy kynge (which thou hast set ouer the) vnto a
nacion, whom thou knowest not, nether thy fathers: and there shalt thou serue
other goddes, euen wodd and stone:
37 and thou shalt go to waist, and become a byworde, & a laughinge stocke amoge
all nacions, whither ye LORDE hath caryed the.
38 Thou shalt cary out moch sede in to ye felde, and shalt gather but litle in:
for the greshoppers shal destroye it.
39 Thou shalt plante vynyardes and dresse the, but thou shalt nether drynke of
the wyne, ner gather of ye grapes: for ye wormes shal consume it.
40 Thou shalt haue Olyue trees in all yi coastes, but shalt not be anoynted with
the oyle: for thyne Oliue trees shalbe roted out.
41 Thou shalt get sonnes and doughters, and yet not haue them: for they shal be
caried awaye captiue.
42 All thy trees and frutes of thy londe shall be marred with blastinge.
43 The straunger that is with ye, shal clymme vp ouer the, and be allwaye aboue
the: but thou shalt come downe alowe, and lye euer beneth.
44 He shal lende vnto the, but thou shalt not lende him. He shalbe before, but
thou shalt be behynde.
45 And all these curses shall come vpon the, and folowe the, and ouertake ye,
tyll thou be destroyed, because thou herkenest not vnto ye voyce of the LORDE yi
God, to kepe his commaundemetes and ordinaunces, which he hath commaunded the.
46 Therfore shal there be tokens and wonders vpon the, & vpon thy sede for euer,
47 because thou hast not serued ye LORDE thy God with a ioyfull and good hert,
whan thou haddest abundaunce of all thinges.
48 And therfore shalt thou serue thine enemye, which the LORDE shal sende vpon
the, in hunger and thyrst, in nakednesse, and neade of all thinge: & he shal put
a yocke of yron vpon thy necke, vntyll he haue broughte the to naughte.
49 The LORDE shal brynge a nacion vpon the from farre, euen from the ende of ye
worlde, as a flyenge Aegle: a people, whose speache thou canst not vnderstonde,
50 an harde fauoured people, which regarde not the personne of the olde, ner
haue compassion on the yonge.
51 And they shal eate vp ye frute of thy catell, & the frute of thy londe, tyll
they haue destroyed the, and shall leaue the nothinge in corne, wyne, oyle, in
the frute of ye oxen and shepe, vntyll they haue broughte the to naughte:
52 and shal laye sege vnto the wt in all thy gates, tyll they cast downe thy hye
and stronge walles, wherin thou trustest thorow out all thy londe. And thou
shalt be beseged within all thy portes, thorow out all thy londe which the LORDE
thy God hath geuen the.
53 Thou shalt eate the frute of thine awne body, the flesh of thy sonnes and of
thy doughters, which the LORDE yi God hath geue the, in that straytnesse and
sege, wherwith thine enemye shall besege the:
54 so that it shal greue the man yt afore hath lyued tenderly and in
voluptuousnes amonge you, to loke vpon his brother and vpon his wife yt lyeth in
his bosome, and on the sonne that is left ouer of his sonnes,
55 lest he shulde geue eny of them of the flesh of his children that he eateth,
in as moch as there is nothinge left him in that straytnesse and sege, wherwith
thine enemye shal besege ye within all thy gates.
56 And the woman that afore hath lyued so tenderly and voluptuously amonge you,
that she durste not set the sole of hir fote vpon the grounde for tendernes and
voluptuousnes, shal be greued to loke vpon hir husbande that lieth in hir
bosome, and on hir sonne, and on hir doughter:
57 euen because of hir doughters which she hath norished betwixte hir legges in
hir lappe, and because of hir sonnes that she hath borne: For she shall eate
them secretly for very scarcenesse of all thinges, in the straytnesse and sege,
wherwith thine enemye shal besege ye within thy gates.
58 Yf thou wilt not be diligent to do all the wordes of this lawe which are
wrytten in this boke, that thou mayest feare this glorious and fearfull name,
euen the LORDE thy God,
59 then shal the LORDE entreate ye wonderously, with plages vpon ye and thy
sede, yee with greate and continuall plages,
60 with euell and contynuall sicknesses, and shal brynge vpo ye all ye
sicknesses of Egipte (wherof thou wast afrayed) and they shal cleue vnto the.
61 Therto all maner sicknesses and all maner plages, which are not wrytten in
the boke of this lawe, shal the LORDE thy God cause to come vpon the, vntyll he
haue destroyed the.
62 And there shal be left but a fewe people of you, which afore were as the
starres of heauen in multitude: because thou hast not herkened vnto the voyce of
the LORDE thy God.
63 And as ye LORDE reioysed ouer you afore, to do you good, and to multiplye
you, eue so shall he reioyse ouer you, to destroye you, and to brynge you to
naughte, and ye shalbe waysted from of the londe, whither thou goest now to
possesse it.
64 For the LORDE shal scater the amonge all nacions, from the one ende of the
worlde vnto another, and there shalt thou serue other goddes, whom thou knowest
not, ner yet thy fathers, euen wodd and stone.
65 And amonge those same nacions shalt thou haue no quyetnesse, nether shal the
sole of yi fote haue eny rest: for the LORDE shal geue the there a fearfull
hert, and dasynge of eyes, and a troubled soule
66 so that thy life shal hage before the: Night and daye shalt thou feare, and
shalt haue no trust in thy life.
67 In the mornynge thou shalt saye: Who shall geue me the euenynge? And at euen
shalt thou saye: Who shal geue me the mornynge? For the very greate feare of
thine hert, which shal make the afrayed: and for the sighte of thine eyes which
thou shalt se.
68 And the LORDE shal brynge the agayne in to Egipte by shippe fulles, euen
thorow the waye wherof I sayde vnto ther Thou shalt se it nomore: and there shal
ye be solde vnto youre enemies for bonde seruauntes and bonde maidens, and there
shalbe no man to bye you.

Chapter 29

1 These are ye wordes of the couenaunt, which the LORDE comaunded Moses to make
wt the children of Israel in the londe of the Moabites, besyde ye couenaunt
which he made with them in Horeb.
2 And Moses called all Israel, and sayde vnto them: Ye haue sene all that the
LORDE dyd before youre eyes in the londe of Egipte, vnto Pharao with all his
seruautes, and all his londe,
3 the greate tentacions which thine eyes haue sene, that they were greate tokes
and wonders.
4 And yet vnto this daye hath not the LORDE geuen you an hert that
vnderstondeth, eyes that se, & eares that heare.
5 He hath caused you to walke fortye yeares in the wyldernesse. Youre clothes
are not waxed olde vpon you, nether is thy shue waxed olde on thy fote.
6 Ye haue eaten no bred, and dronken no wyne, ner stronge drynke, that ye mighte
knowe, that he is ye LORDE youre God.
7 And whan ye came vnto this place, Sihon the kynge of Hesbon, and Og ye kynge
of Basan, came out agaynst vs vnto battayll, and we smote them,
8 and toke their londe, and gaue it to enheritaunce vnto ye Rubenites and
Gaddites, and to the halfe trybe of the Manassites.
9 Kepe now therfore the wordes of this couenaunt, and do therafter, that ye maye
haue vnderstondinge in all that ye do.
10 Ye stonde this daye all before the LORDE youre God, the chefe rulers of youre
trybes, youre Elders, youre officers, euery man in Israel,
11 youre children, youre wyues, ye straungers that are in thine hoost, from the
hewer of yi wodd vnto ye drawer of yi water:
12 that thou shuldest enter in to the couenaunt of the LORDE thy God, and in to
the ooth which the LORDE thy God maketh with the this daye,
13 that he mighte set the vp this daye to be a people vnto himself, and that he
mighte be thy God, as he hath sayde vnto the, and as he sware vnto yi fathers,
Abraham, Isaac and Iacob.
14 For I make not this couenaunt and this ooth with you onely,
15 but both with you yt are here this daye, and stonde with vs before the LORDE
oure God, and also with them that are not here with vs this daye.
16 For ye knowe how we haue dwelt in the londe of Egipte, and how we came thorow
the myddes of the Heythen, whom ye passed by,
17 and sawe their abhominacions and their Idols, wodd and stone, syluer and
golde, which were with them:
18 Lest there be amoge you man or woman, or an housholde, or a trybe, which
turneth awaye his hert this daye from the LORDE oure God, to go and to serue ye
goddes of these nacions: and lest there be amonge you some rote, that beareth
gall & wormwodd:
19 so that though he heare the wordes of this curse, he blesse him selfe yet in
his hert, and saye: Tush, it shal not be so euell. I wil walke after the
meanynge of myne awne hert, that the dronken maye perishe with the thyrstie.
20 Then shall not the LORDE be mercifull vnto him, but his wrath and gelousy
shall smoke ouer soch a man, and all the curses that are wrytten in this boke,
shall lighte vpon him: and the LORDE shal put out his name from vnder heauen,
21 and shall separate him vnto euell out of all the trybes of Israel, acordinge
vnto all the curses of the couenaunt, that is wrytten in the boke of this lawe.
22 So the posterities of youre childre which shal ryse vp after you, and the
straungers that come out of farre countrees, shall saye (whan they se the plages
of this londe, and the diseases wherwith the LORDE hath smytten it)
23 that he hath brent vp all their londe with brymstone and salt, so yt it
cannot be sowne, ner is frutefull, nether groweth there eny grasse therin, Like
as Sodom, Gomor, Adama and Zeboim are ouerthrowne, which the LORDE ouerthrewe in
his wrath and anger.
24 Then shall all nacions saye: Wherfore hath the LORDE done thus vnto this
londe? What greate wrothfull displeasure is this?
25 Then shalt it be sayde: Euen because they haue forsaken the couenaunt of ye
LORDE God of their fathers (which he made with them whan he broughte them out of
the londe of Egipte)
26 and they wete, and serued other goddes, and worshipped the, euen soch goddes
as they knewe not, and whom he had not deuyded vnto them.
27 Therfore the wrath of the LORDE waxed whote ouer this londe, to brynge vpon
it all the curses that are wrytten in this boke.
28 And the LORDE thrust them out of their londe wt greate wrath, indignacion &
displeasoure & hath cast them into another londe, as it is come to passe this
daye.
29 These are the secretes of the LORDE oure God, which are opened vnto vs and
oure children for euer, yt we shulde do all the wordes of this lawe.

Chapter 30

1 Now whan all this commeth vpon the, whether it be the blessinge or ye curse
which I haue layed before the, and thou goest in to thine hert, beynge amoge the
Heithen, whither the LORDE thy God hath thrust the,
2 and thou turnest vnto the LORDE yi God, so that thou herkenest vnto his voyce,
thou and thy children with all yi hert and with all thy soule, in all that I
commaunde the this daye,
3 then shal the LORDE thy God turne thy captiuyte, and haue compassion vpon the,
and shal gather thy congregacion agayne from amonge all the nacions, whither the
LORDE thy God hath scatered the.
4 And though thou werest thrust out vnto the vttemost partes of the heauen, yet
shall the LORDE thy God gather the from thence, and from thece shal he fetch
the,
5 and shal brynge the in to the londe, which thy fathers haue possessed, and
thou shalt enioye it, and he shal do the good, and multiplye the aboue thy
fathers.
6 And the LORDE thy God shall circumcyse thine hert, and the hert of thy sede,
that thou mayest loue the LORDE yi God with all thy hert and with all yi soule,
that thou mayest lyue.
7 But all these curses shall the LORDE thy God laye vpon thine enemyes, and vpon
them that hate the and persecute the.
8 But thou shalt turne, and herken vnto the voyce of the LORDE, to do all his
commaundementes, which I commaunde the this daye.
9 And the LORDE thy God shal make the plenteous in all the workes of thine
hades, in the frute of thy body, in the frute of thy catell, in the frute of thy
londe to good. For the LORDE shall turne, to reioyse ouer the to good, as he
reioysed ouer thy fathers,
10 so that thou herken vnto the voyce of the LORDE thy God (to kepe his
commaundementes and ordinaunces, which are wrytten in the boke of this lawe) and
turne vnto the LORDE thy God with all thy hert and with all thy soule.
11 For the commaundement which I commaunde ye this daye, is not to wonderfull
for the, ner to farre,
12 ner yet in heauen, that thou neadest to saye: Who wil go vp for vs in to
heauen, and brynge it vnto vs, that we maie heare it and do it?
13 Nether is it beyonde the see, that thou neadest to saye: Who wyll go ouer the
see for vs, and fetch it vs, that we maye heare it, and do it?
14 For the worde is very nye vnto the, eue in thy mouth and in thine hert, that
thou do it.
15 Beholde, I haue layed before you this daye, life and good, death and euell.
16 For I comaunde the this daye, to loue the LORDE thy God, and to walke in his
wayes, and to kepe his commaundementes, ordinaunces, and lawes, that thou mayest
lyue and multiplye, and that the LORDE thy God maye blesse the in the londe,
whither thou goest to possesse it.
17 But yf thou turnest awaye thine hert, so that thou wilt not heare, but fall a
waye, to worshipe other goddes and to serue them,
18 I certifye you this daye, that ye shal perishe, & not lyue longe in the
londe, whither thou goest ouer Iordane to possesse it.
19 I take heauen and earth this daye to recorde ouer you: I haue layed before
you life and death, blessinge and cursinge, that thou mayest chose life, and
that thou and thy sede maye lyue,
20 yt ye maye loue the LORDE youre God, and herken vnto his voyce, and cleue
vnto him: (For he is thy life and thy loge age) that thou mayest dwell in the
londe, which the LORDE sware vnto thy fathers Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, to geue
them.

Chapter 31

1 And Moses wente, & spake these wordes to all Israel,
2 and saide vnto them: I am this daye an hundreth and twetye yeare olde, I can
nomore go out and in: the LORDE also hath sayde vnto me: Thou shalt not go ouer
this Iordane.
3 The LORDE thy God himselfe shall go before the ouer Iordane: and HE himselfe
shal destroye these nacions before the, that thou mayest conquere them: and
Iosua he shall go ouer before the. as the LORDE hath sayde.
4 And the LORDE shal do vnto them, as he dyd vnto Sihon and Og the kynges of the
Amorites and vnto their lode, which he destroyed.
5 Now whan the LORDE shal deliuer the before you, ye shal do vnto them acordynge
vnto all the commaundementes which I haue commaunded you.
6 Be manly and stroge, feare not, and be not afrayed of them. For the LORDE thy
God himselfe shal go with the, and shal not fayle the, ner forsake the.
7 And Moses called Iosua, and sayde vnto him before all Israel: Be stronge and
bolde, for thou shalt brynge this people in to the londe, which the LORDE hath
sworne vnto their fathers to geue them, and thou shalt parte it amonge them by
lott.
8 But the LORDE himselfe that goeth before you, euen HE shal be with the, and
shal not fayle the, ner forsake the: Feare not, and be not afrayed.
9 And Moses wrote this lawe, and delyuered it vnto the prestes the children of
Leui ( which bare the Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE) and vnto all the
Elders of Israel.
10 And he commaunded them, and sayde: At the ende of seuen yeares, in the tyme
of the Fre yeare, in the feast of Tabernacles
11 whan all Israel come to appeare before the LORDE thy God, in the place that
he shall chose, thou shalt cause this lawe to be proclamed before all Israel in
their eares,
12 namely, before the congregacion of the people, both of men, wemen, children,
and thy straungers which are within thy gates: that they maye heare and lerne to
feare the LORDE their God, and be diligent to do all the wordes of this lawe:
13 and that their children also which knowe nothinge, maye heare and lerne to
feare the LORDE yor God, all youre lyue dayes which ye lyue in the londe,
whither ye go ouer Iordane to possesse it.
14 And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Beholde, thy tyme is come that thou must die,
call Iosua, and stonde in the Tabernacle of witnesse, that I maye geue him a
charge. Moses wente with Iosua, and stode in the Tabernacle of witnesse.
15 And the LORDE appeared in the Tabernacle in a cloudy pyler and the same
cloudy pyler stode in the dore of the Tabernacle.
16 And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Beholde, thou shalt slepe with yi fathers,
and this people wyll ryse vp, and go a whoringe after straunge goddes of the
londe in to the which they come, and wyll forsake me, and breake the couenaunt
which I haue made wt them.
17 And then shall my wrath waxe whote agaynst them, at the same tyme, & I shal
forsake the, and hyde my face fro them, that they maye be consumed. And so whan
moch aduersite & trouble commeth vpo the, they shal saye: Is not all this euell
come vpo me, because God is not with me?
18 But I shal hyde my face at the same tyme because of all the euell that they
haue done, in that they haue turned vnto other goddes.
19 Wryte now therfore this songe, & teach it the children of Israel, and put it
in their mouth, that this songe maye be a witnesse vnto me amonge the children
of Israel.
20 For I wil brynge them in to the londe which I sware vnto their fathers, that
floweth with mylke and hony. And whan they eate, and are full and fatt, they
shal turne vnto other goddes, and serue them, and blaspheme me, and breake my
couenaunt.
21 And so whan moch myschefe and tribulacion is come vpon them, this songe shall
answere before them for a witnesse. It shall not be forgotten out of the mouth
of their sede: for I knowe their ymaginacion, that they go aboute euen now,
before I brynge them in to the londe, which I sware vnto them.
22 So Moses wrote this songe at the same tyme, and taughte it the children of
Israel.
23 And the LORDE gaue Iosua the sonne of Nun a charge, and sayde: Be stronge and
bolde, for thou shalt brynge the children of Israel in to the londe, which I
sware vnto them, and I wil be with the.
24 Now whan Moses had wrytten out all the wordes of this lawe in a boke,
25 he commaunded the Leuites (which bare the Arke of the LORDES couenaunt) and
sayde:
26 Take the boke of this lawe, and laye it by the syde of the Arke of the
couenaunt of the LORDE youre God, that it maye be there a wytnesse agaynst the:
27 for I knowe thy stubburnesse and thy harde neck. Beholde, whyle I am yet
alyue wt you this daye, ye haue bene disobedient vnto the LORDE: how moch more
after my death?
28 Gather now vnto me all the Elders of youre trybes, and youre officers, yt I
maye speake these wordes in their eares, and take heauen and earth to recorde
agaynst them.
29 For I am sure that after my death ye shall marre youre selues, and turne
asyde out of the waye, which I haue commaunded you: and so shall mysfortune
happen vnto you herafter, because ye haue done euell in the sighte of the LORDE,
in prouokynge him thorow the workes of youre handes.
30 So Moses spake out the wordes of this songe euen to the ende, in the eares of
all the congregacion of Israel.

Chapter 32

1 Herken (O ye heauens) I wyll speake: and let the earth heare the wordes of my
mouth.
2 My doctryne droppe as doth the raine, and my speach flowe as doth the dew.
Euen as the rayne vpon the grasse, and as the droppes vpon the herbe.
3 For I wyl call vpon the name of the LORDE, geue ye the glory vnto oure God.
4 Perfecte are the workes of the Stone, for all his wayes are righteous. God is
true, and no wickednes is there in him, righteous and iust is he.
5 The frowarde and ouerthwarte generacion hath marred them selues to himwarde
and are not his children, because of their deformyte.
6 Thankest thou the LORDE yi God so, thou foolish and vnwyse people? Is not he
thy father and thy LORDE? Hath he not made the, and prepared the?
7 Remembre the dayes that are past, considre the yeares of the generacions afore
tyme. Axe thy father, he shall shewe the: thine elders, they shal tell the.
8 Whan the most Hyghest deuyded ye nacions and scatred the children of men. Then
set he the borders of the nacions acordinge to the nombre of the children of
Israel.
9 For the LORDES parte is his folke, Iacob is the meetlyne of his enheritaunce.
10 He founde him in the wyldernesse, euen in the drye deserte where he roared.
He led him aboute, and gaue him vnderstondinge: He kepte him as the aple of his
eye.
11 As an Aegle stereth vp hir nest, and flotereth ouer hir yonge: Euen so
stretched he out his fethers, and toke him and bare him on his wynges.
12 The LORDE onely was his gyde, & there was no straunge God with him.
13 He caried him ouer ye heigth of the earth, and fed him with the increase of
the felde. He caused him sucke hony out of the rocke, and oyle out of the harde
stone.
14 Butter of the kyne, and mylke of the shepe, with the fat of the lambes, and
rammes of the sonnes of Basan, and he goates with the fat of the kydneys, and
wheate: And gaue him drynke of the very bloude of grapes.
15 And whan he was fat and had ynough, he waxed wanton. He is fat, and thicke,
and smothe, & hath letten God go, that made him, and despysed the rocke of his
saluacion.
16 He hath prouoked him to indignacion, thorow straunge goddes, and thorow
abhominacion hath he angred him.
17 They offred vnto felde deuels, & not vnto their God. Vnto goddes whom they
knewe not, eue vnto new goddes, yt came newly vp, whom their fathers honoured
not.
18 Thy rocke that begat ye, hast thou despysed: and hast forgotten God that made
the.
19 And whan the LORDE sawe it, he was moued vnto wrath ouer his sonnes and his
doughters.
20 And he sayde: I wyll hyde my face from them, I wyll se what their ende shal
be: for it is a frowarde generacion, they are childre in whom is no fayth.
21 They haue prouoked me in it that is not God: wt their vanites haue they
angred me. And I agayne wil prouoke them, by those that are no people: by a
foolish nacion wil I anger them.
22 For the fyre is kyndled in my wrath, and shal burne vnto ye nethermost hell,
and shal consume the londe with the increase therof, and set the foundacions of
ye mountaynes on fyre.
23 I wil heape myscheues vpo them, I wil spende all myne arowes at them.
24 They shal pyne awaye thorow honger, & be consumed of the feuers, and of
bytter sicknesses. I wil sende amonge them ye tethe of beestes, and furious
serpentes.
25 Without shall the swearde robbe them, & feare in the chambers, both the yonge
man and yonge woman, the suckynge children wt the gray headed man.
26 I wyll saye: Where are they? I shall make their remembraunce to ceasse from
amonge men.
27 Yf the wrath of the enemies were not gathered, lest their enemies shulde be
proude, & might saie: Oure hande is hye, and: The LORDE hath not done all this.
28 For it is a people, wherin is no councell, and there is no vnderstondinge in
them.
29 O that they were wyse & vnderstode this, that they wolde cosidre what shulde
happe vnto them her after.
30 How cometh it, yt one shall chace a thousande of them, and yt two shal put
ten thousande to flyghte? Is it not so, euen because their rocke hath solde
them, and because the LORDE hath geuen them ouer?
31 For oure rocke is not as their rocke, of this are oure enemies iudges
themselues.
32 Their vyne is of the vyne of Sodom, and of the feldes of Gomorra: their
grapes are the grapes of gall, they haue bytter clusters.
33 Their wyne is the poyson of Dragons, & the furious gall of Adders.
34 Is not this hid with me, and sealed vp in my treasures?
35 Vengeaunce is myne, and I wyll rewarde in due season. Their fote shall slyde,
for the tyme of their destruccio is at honde, and the thinge that is to come
vpon them, maketh haiste.
36 For the LORDE shall iudge his people, and shal haue compassion on his
seruauntes. For he shal considre that their power is awaie, and that it is gone
with them, which were shut vp and remayned ouer.
37 And he shal saye: Where are their goddes, their rocke wherin they trusted?
38 Of whose sacrifices they ate ye fatt, and dranke the wyne of their
drynkofferinges? Let them ryse vp and helpe you, and be youre proteccion.
39 Se now that I I am, and that there is none other God but I.I can kyll and
make alyue: what I haue smytten, that can I heale: and there is noman able to
delyuer out of my hande.
40 For I wil lifte vp my hande to heauen, & wyl saye: I lyue euer.
41 Yf I whet ye edge of my swerde, and my hande take holde of iudgment, then
wyll I auenge me on myne enemies, and rewarde them that hate me.
42 I wil make myne arowes dronken with bloude, and my swerde shal eate flesh
ouer ye bloude of the slayne, and ouer the captyuite, and in that the enemies
heade shall be discouered.
43 Reioyse ye Heythen with his people: for he wil auenge the bloude of his
seruauntes, and wyl auenge him on his enemies, & wil be mercifull vnto the londe
of his people.
44 And Moses came and spake all the wordes of this songe in the eares of the
people, he and Iosua the sonne of Nun.
45 Now wha Moses had made an ende of speakinge all these wordes vnto all Israel,
46 he sayde vnto the: Take to hert all ye wordes, which I testifye vnto you this
daye, that ye commaunde youre children, to obserne and do all the wordes of this
lawe.
47 For it is no vaine worde vnto you, but it is yor life: & this worde shal
prolonge youre life in ye londe, whither ye go ouer Iordane to conquere it.
48 And ye LORDE spake vnto Moses ye same daie, & sayde:
49 Get the vp to this mount Abarim, vpon mount Nebo, which lyeth in ye londe of
the Moabites ouer agaynst Iericho, & beholde the londe of Canaan, which I shall
geue vnto the children of Israel in possessio.
50 And dye thou vpon the mount, whan thou art come vp, and be gathered vnto thy
people, like as Aaron thy brother dyed vpon mount Hor, and was gathered vnto his
people:
51 Because ye trespaced agaynst me amonge the children of Israel by the water of
stryfe at Cades in the wildernesse of Zin, and sanctified me not amonge the
children of Israel.
52 For thou shalt se the londe ouer against the, which I geue vnto ye children
of Israel but thou shalt not come in to it.

Chapter 33

1 This is the blessynge, wherwith Moses the man of God blessed ye childre of
Israel before his death,
2 and saide: The LORDE came from Sinai, and rose vp vnto the from Seir. He
appeared fro mount Paran, and came wt many thousande sayntes. At his righte
hande is there a lawe of fyre for them:
3 O how loued he the people? All his sayntes are in his hande, they shall set
them selues downe at thy fete, and receaue of thy wordes.
4 Moses commaunded vs the lawe, which is the enheritaunce of the congregacion of
Iacob.
5 And he was in the fulnesse of the kynge, & helde ye rulers of ye people
together, with the trybes of Israel.
6 Let Ruben lyue, and not dye, and his people be fewe in nombre.
7 This is the blessynge of Iuda. And he sayde: LORDE heare the voyce of Iuda,
and brynge him vnto his people: Let his hades multiplye him, and let him be
helped fro his enemies.
8 And vnto Leui he sayde: Thy perfectnes and yi lighte be acordinge vnto the man
of thy mercy, who thou hast tempted at Massa, whan ye stroue by the water of
stryfe.
9 He that sayeth vnto his father and to his mother: I se him not: and to his
brother, I knowe him not: and to his sonne, I wote not of him, those haue
obserued thy wordes, and kepte yi couenaunt:
10 they shal teach Iacob thy iudgmentes, and Israel thy lawe: they shal laie
incense before thy nose, & burntofferinges vpon thine altare.
11 LORDE, blesse thou his power & accepte the workes of his handes: smyte the
loynes of them yt ryse vp agaynst him, & of them that hate him, that they lifte
not vp them selues.
12 And to Ben Iamin he saide: The beloued of the LORDE shal dwell in hope on
him: All the daye longe shal he wayte vpon him, and shal dwell betwene his
shulders.
13 And to Ioseph he sayde: His londe lieth in the blessynge of the LORDE, there
are noble frutes of heauen, of the dew, and of the depe that lyeth beneth:
14 There are noble frutes of the increase of the Sonne, and noble rype frutes of
ye monethes:
15 And of ye toppes of the mountaynes of olde, and of the hilles allwaye,
16 and of the noble frutes of ye earth, and of the fulnesse therof. The good
will of him that dwelleth in the busshe, come vpon the heade of Ioseph, and vpon
ye toppe of his heade that was separated fro amonge his brethren.
17 His bewtye is as a firstborne oxe, and his hornes are as ye hornes of an
Vnicorne: with the same shal he pusshe the nacions together, euen vnto the endes
of the worlde. These are the thousandes of Ephraim, and the thousandes of
Manasse.
18 And vnto Zabulon he sayde: Reioyse Zabulon of thy outgoynge: but reioyse thou
Isachar of thy tentes.
19 They shall call the people vnto ye hyll, and there shal they offre ye
offeringes of righteousnes. For they shal sucke the abundaunce of the see, and
the treasures hyd in the sonde.
20 And to Gad he sayde: Blessynge haue Gad, which maketh rowme. He dwelleth as a
lyon, and spoyleth the arme and the toppe of the heade.
21 And he sawe his begynnynge, that ye heape of the teachers laye hydd there,
and came with the rulers of the people, and executed the righteousnesse of the
LORDE, and his iudgment on Israel.
22 And to Dan he sayde: Dan a yonge lyon, he shal flowe from Basan.
23 And to Nephtali he saide: Nephtali shal haue abundaunce of pleasure, & shalbe
full of the blessynge of the LORDE: his possession shalbe towarde the west and
south.
24 And to Asser he sayde: Asser be blessed wt sonnes, accepted be he with his
brethren, and dyppe his fote in oyle.
25 Yron and brasse be on thy shues. Thyne age be as thy youth.
26 There is no God as the God of the iust. He that sytteth vpon heauen, be thy
helpe. And his glory is in the cloudes,
27 that is the dwellynge of God from the beginnynge, and vnder the armes of the
worlde. And he shal dryue out thyne enemye before the, and saye: Be destroyed.
28 And Israel shall dwell safe alone. The eye of Iacob shalbe vpon ye londe
where corne and wine is, heauen also shal droppe with dewe.
29 Happye art thou Israel, who is lyke vnto the? O thou people yt art saued by
the LORDE, which is thy helpe, shylde, and the swerde of thy glorye. Thyne
enemies shal pyne awaye, and thou shalt treade vpon the height of them.

Chapter 34

1 And Moses wente from the felde of ye Moabites vp vnto mount Nebo, vpo ye toppe
of mout Pisga ouer agaynst Iericho. And the LORDE shewed him all the londe of
Gilead vnto Dan,
2 and all Nephtali, and the londe of Ephraim and Manasse, and all the londe of
Iuda, vnto ye vttemost see,
3 and towarde the south, and the region of the playne of Iericho the cite of the
palme trees euen vnto Zoar.
4 And the LORDE sayde vnto him: This is the londe that I sware vnto Abraham,
Isaac and Iacob, and sayde: I wyll geue it vnto thy sede. Thou hast sene it with
thine eyes, but thou shalt not go ouer thither.
5 So Moses ye seruaunt of the LORDE died there in the londe of the Moabites,
acordinge vnto the worde of ye LORDE.
6 And he buried him in a valley, in the londe of the Moabites ouer agaynst the
house of Peor. And noman knewe of his graue vnto this daye.
7 And Moses was an hundreth and twentye yeare olde whan he dyed: his eyes were
not dymme, and his chekes were not fallen.
8 And the children of Israel weped for Moses in ye felde of the Moabites thirtie
daies, and the dayes of the wepynge and mournynge for Moses were fulfilled.
9 And Iosua the sonne of Nun was filled with ye sprete of wysdome ( for Moses
had layed his hande vpon him) and the children of Israel herkened vnto him, and
dyd as the LORDE commaunded Moses.
10 And there arose no prophet more in Israel, like vnto Moses, whom the LORDE
knewe face to face
11 in all tokens and wonders (which the LORDE sent him to do in ye londe of
Egipte, vnto Pharao, and to all his seruautes, and his londe)
12 and in all this mightie hande and greate visions which Moses dyd in the
sighte of all Israel.


Joshua

Chapter 1

1 After the death of Moses the seruaunt of the LORDE, spake the LORDE vnto Iosua
ye sonne of Nun Moses mynister:
2 My seruaunt Moses is deed, vp now, and go ouer this Iordane, thou and all this
people in to the londe that I haue geuen the children of Israel.
3 All the places that the soles of youre fete shal treade vpon, haue I geuen
vnto you, as I sayde vnto Moses:
4 From the wyldernesse and this Libanus vnto the greate water Euphrates: all the
londe of the Hethites vnto the greate see towarde the west, shal be youre
border.
5 There shall noman be able to withstonde ye all thy life longe. And like as I
was with Moses, so wil I be with the also. I will not fayle the nether forsake
the.
6 Be stronge and bolde: for vnto this people shalt thou deuyde ye londe, which I
sware vnto their fathers, to geue it them.
7 Be stroge therfore and very bolde, that thou mayest kepe and do euery thynge
acordinge to the lawe, that Moses my seruaunt commaunded the. Turne not asyde
from it, nether to the righte hande ner to the lefte, yt thou mayest deale
wysely whither so euer thou goest.
8 And let not the boke of this lawe departe out of thy mouth, but exercyse thy
selfe therin daie and nighte, that thou mayest kepe and do euery thinge
acordinge to it that is wrytte therin: Then shalt thou prospere in thy waies,
and deale wysely.
9 Lo, I haue commaunded the to be stronge and bolde. Feare not, and be not
afrayed: for the LORDE thy God is with ye, whither so euer thou goest.
10 Then commaunded Iosua the officers of the people, and sayde:
11 Go thorow the hoost, and charge ye people, and saye: Prepare you vytayles,
for ouer thre dayes shal ye go ouer this Iordane, that ye maye come in and take
possession of the londe, which the LORDE youre God shal geue you.
12 And to the Rubenites, Gaddites, and to the halfe trybe of Manasse, sayde
Iosua:
13 Thynke vpon the worde, that Moses the seruaunt of ye LORDE spake vnto you,
and sayde: The LORDE yor God hath brought you to rest, and geuen you this londe.
14 Let youre wyues and children and catell remayne in ye londe, that Moses gaue
you on this syde Iordane: But ye youre selues (as many as be fightinge men) shal
go forth before youre brethren in harnesse, and helpe them,
15 tyll the LORDE haue broughte youre brethren to rest also as well as you: that
they also maye take possession of the londe, which the LORDE yor God shal geue
them: Then shal ye turne agayne in to the londe of youre possession, that ye
maye enioye it, which Moses the seruaunt of the LORDE hath geuen you on this
syde Iordane towarde ye Easte.
16 And they answered Iosua and sayde: All that thou hast commaunded vs, wyll we
do: and whither so euer thou sendest vs, we wyl go thither.
17 Like as we haue obeyed Moses, so wyl we be obedient also vnto the: Onely that
the LORDE thy God be with ye, like as he was with Moses.
18 Who so euer disobeyeth thy mouth, and herkeneth not vnto thy wordes in all
that thou hast commaunded vs, shal dye: Onely be thou stronge and bolde.

Chapter 2

1 Iosua the sonne of Nun sent out two spyes preuely from Setim, and sayde vnto
them: Go youre waye, loke vpon the londe and Iericho. They wente forth, and came
in to ye house of an harlot, called Rahab, and laye there.
2 Then was it tolde the kynge of Iericho: Lo, there are men come in this nighte
from the childre of Israel, to spye the londe.
3 Then sent the kynge of Iericho vnto Rahab, saynge: Delyuer the men forth that
are come vnto the in to thy house, for they are come to spye out the whole
londe.
4 Now as for the two men, the woman had hyd them, and sayde: There came men in
vnto me in dede, but I knewe not whence they were.
5 And at the shuttinge in of the gate whan it was darcke, they wente out, so yt
I can not tell whither they be gone: folowe soone after them, for ye shal
ouertake them.
6 But she had caused them to clymme vp vnto the house toppe, and hyd them vnder
the stalkes of flaxe, that she had prepared her vpo the toppe of the house.
7 How beit the men folowed after them in ye waye towarde Iordane, euen vnto the
ferye: and whan they that folowed vpon them were gone forth, the gate was shut.
8 And or euer the men layed them downe to slepe, she wente vp to them vnto the
house toppe,
9 and sayde vnto the: I knowe that the LORDE shal delyuer you the londe, for the
feare of you is fallen vpon vs, and all the inhabiters of the londe are
discoraged at youre commynge.
10 For we haue herde, how the LORDE dryed vp the water in the reed see before
you, wha ye departed out of Egipte: and what ye dyd vnto the two kynges of the
Amorites, Sihon and Og beyonde Iordane, how ye roted them out, and destroyed
them.
11 And sence we herde therof, oure hert hath failed vs, nether is there a good
stomacke more in eny man, by the reason of youre commynge. For the LORDE yor God
is both the God aboue in heaue and beneth vpon earth.
12 Sweare now then vnto me euen by the LORDE (for so moch as I haue dealte
mercifully with you) that ye wyl also shewe mercy vpon my fathers house: and
geue me a true token,
13 that ye wyl let my father lyue, and my mother, my brethren, and my sisters,
and all that they haue, and delyuer oure soules from death.
14 The men sayde vnto her: Yf we shewe not mercy and faithfulnesse vpon the,
whan the LORDE geueth vs the londe, then let oure soule dye for you, so farre as
thou betrayest not oure deuyce.
15 Then let she them downe thorow the wyndowe by a coarde: for hir house was in
the wall of the cite, and in the wall was hir dwellynge.
16 And she sayde vnto them: Go youre waye vp to the mountaynes, lest they mete
you that folowe vpon you: and hyde youre selues there thre dayes, tyll they be
come againe yt folowe after you: and then get you youre waye.
17 But the men sayde vnto her: As for this ooth that thou hast taken of vs, we
wyll be discharged of it
18 whan we come in to ye londe, excepte thou knyttest in the wyndowe ye lyne of
this rosecoloured rope (yt thou hast lette vs downe with all) & gatherest vnto
ye in to the house, thy father, thy mother, yi brethren & all thy fathers house.
19 And loke who so euer goeth out at the dore of thy house, his bloude be vpon
his owne heade, and we giltlesse. But of all those yt are in yi house, yf a
hande be layed vpon the, their bloude shalbe vpo or heade.
20 And yf thou bewrayest eny of this deuyce of ours, the wil we be discharged of
the ooth yt thou hast take of vs.
21 She sayde: Let it be so as ye saye, and she let the go. And they wente their
waye. And she knyt the rose coloured lyne in the wyndowe.
22 They wente on their waye, and came to the mountaynes, and remayned there this
dayes, tyll they that folowed vpon them were come agayne: for they soughte them
thorow euery strete, & yet they founde them not.
23 So the two men turned agayne, and departed from the mountaynes, and passed
ouer (Iordane) and came to Iosua the sonne of Nun, and tolde him euery thinge,
as they had founde it,
24 & they sayde vnto Iosua: The LORDE hath geue vs all the londe in to oure
handes, and all they that dwell in the londe, are sore afrayed of vs.

Chapter 3

1 And Iosua rose vp early, and they departed from Setim, & came vnto Iordane, he
and all the children of Israel, and remayned there all night, afore they wete
ouer.
2 But after thre dayes wente the officers thorow ye hoost,
3 and commaunded the people, and sayde: Whan ye se the Arke of ye couenaunt of
the LORDE youre God, and the prestes from amoge the Leuites bearinge it, departe
ye then out of youre place, and folowe after
4 (but so, that there be rowme betwene you and it by two thousande cubites, &
that ye come not nye it) yt ye maye knowe what waye ye shulde go: for ye neuer
wente that waye afore.
5 And Iosua sayde vnto the people: Halowe youre selues, for tomorow shal yi
LORDE bringe wonderous thinges to passe amoge you.
6 And vnto the prestes he sayde: Beare ye the Arke of ye couenaut, and go before
the people. Then bare they the Arke, and wente before the people.
7 And the LORDE sayde vnto Iosua: This daye wyl I begynne to make the greate in
the sighte of all Israel, that they maie knowe, how that like as I was with
Moses, so am I with the also.
8 And commaunde thou the prestes that beare the Arke, and saye: Whan ye come
before in the water of Iordane, stonde styll.
9 And Iosua sayde vnto the children of Israel: Come hither, & heare the worde of
the LORDE youre God.
10 He sayde morouer: By this shal ye perceaue, that the lyuynge God is amonge
you, and that he shall dryue out before you ye Cananites, Hethites, Heuites,
Pheresites, Girgosites, Amorites and Iebusites.
11 Beholde, the Arke of the couenaunt of him yt hath domynion ouer all londes,
shall go before you in Iordane.
12 Take now therfore twolue men out of ye trybes of Israel, out of euery trybe
one.
13 And whan the soles of the fete of the prestes that beare ye Arke of the LORDE
the gouernoure of all londes, are set in the water of Iordane, then shal ye
water of Iordane withdrawe it selfe from the water that floweth from aboue, that
it maye stonde on a heape.
14 Now whan the people departed out of their tentes, to go ouer Iordane, & the
prestes bare the Arke of the couenaunt before the people,
15 and came into Iordane, & dypte their fete before in the water (as for Iordane
on all his banckes it was full of all maner waters of the londe)
16 then the water that came downe fro aboue, stode straight vp vpon one heape,
very farre from the cite of Adom, that lyeth on the syde of Zarthan: But the
water that ranne downe to the see (euen to the salt see) fell awaye, and
decreased. So ye people wente thorow ouer agaynst Iericho.
17 And the prestes that bare the Arke of the LORDES couenaunt, stode drye in ye
myddes of Iordane, readye prepared: & all Israel wete thorow drye shod, vntyll
ye whole people were all come ouer Iordane.

Chapter 4

1 And ye LORDE sayde vnto Iosua: Take you twolue men, out of euery trybe one, &
comaunde them, & saye:
2 Take vp twolue stones out of Iordane,
3 from the place where the fete of the prestes stode in their araye: & cary them
with you, yt ye maie leaue them in ye lodginge, where ye shal lodge this night.
4 The Iosua called twolue me which were prepared of the children of Israel, out
of euery trybe one,
5 & sayde vnto the: Go youre waye ouer before the Arke of the LORDE youre God in
the myddes of Iordane, & take euery man a stone vpon his shulder, after the
nombre of the trybes of ye children of Israel,
6 yt they maye be a token amonge you. And whan youre children are their fathers
here after, and saye: What do these stones there?
7 That ye maye then saye vnto them, how that the water of Iordane claue in
sunder before the Arke of the LORDES couenaunt, whan it wente thorow Iordane, &
that these stones are set for a perpetuall remembraunce vnto the children of
Israel.
8 Then dyd the children of Israel as Iosua commaunded them, and bare twolue
stones out of the myddes of Iordane (as the LORDE had sayde vnto Iosua)
acordinge to the nombre of the trybes of the children of Israel, and broughte
the same with them in to the lodginge, and lefte them there.
9 And Iosua set vp twolue stones in ye myddes of Iordane, where ye fete of the
prestes stode, that bare ye Arke of the couenaunt: and there they be yet vnto
this daye.
10 As for ye prestes that bare ye Arke, they stode in the myddes of Iordane,
vntyll all was perfourmed that the LORDE charged Iosua to saye vnto ye people
acordinge as Moses gaue Iosua in commaundemet. The people also made haist, and
wente ouer.
11 Now whan all the people was gone ouer, the Arke of the LORDE wente ouer also,
and the prestes wente before the people.
12 And the Rubenites, & Gaddites, and ye halfe trybe of Manasse wente harnessed
before the childre of Israel, like as Moses had sayde vnto the:
13 Aboute a fortye thousande men ready harnessed to the warre, wente before the
LORDE to the battayll, vpon ye felde of Iericho.
14 In that daye the LORDE made Iosua greate in the sighte of all Israel: and
like as they feared Moses, so stode they in awe of him, all his life longe.
15 And the LORDE sayde vnto Iosua:
16 Commaunde the prestes which beare the Arke of witnesse, that they come vp out
of Iordane.
17 So Iosua comaunded the prestes, & sayde: Come vp out of Iordane.
18 And whan the prestes yt bare the Arke of the couenaut of ye LORDE were come
out of Iordane, and trode with the soles of their fete vpon the drye londe, ye
water of Iordane came agayne in to his place, and flowed (like as afore tyme)
vpon all his banckes.
19 It was ye tenth daye of the first moneth, whan the people came vp out of
Iordane: & they pitched their tentes in Gilgall vpon ye East syde of ye cite of
Iericho.
20 And ye twolue stones which they had taken out of Iordane, dyd Iosua set vp at
Gilgall,
21 & saide vnto the children of Israel: Whan youre children are their fathers
herafter, & saie: What meane these stones?
22 Ye shall tell the, & saye: Israel wete drye thorow Iordane,
23 what tyme as ye LORDE yor God dryed vp ye water of Iordane before you, vntyll
ye were ouer: like as the LORDE yor God dyd in the reed see, which he dryed vp
before vs, yt we mighte go thorow:
24 that all the people vpon earth mighte knowe the hade of the LORDE, how
mightie it is, to the intent that ye shulde allwaye feare the LORDE youre God.

Chapter 5

1 Now whan all the kynges of ye Amorites that dwelt beyonde Iordane westwarde,
and all the kynges of ye Cananites by the see syde herde, how ye LORDE had dryed
vp the water of Iordane before the children of Israel, tyll they were come ouer
their hert fayled them, nether was there eny more corage in them at the presence
of the children of Israel.
2 At the same tyme sayde ye LORDE vnto Iosua: Make the knyues of stone, &
circumcyse the children of Israel agayne the seconde tyme.
3 Then Iosua made him knyues of stone, and circumcysed the childre of Israel
vpon the toppe of the foreskynnes.
4 And the cause why Iosua circumcysed all the males of the people yt were come
out of Egipte, is this: for all the men of warre dyed in ye wildernesse by the
waye, after they were departed out of Egipte:
5 for all the people that came forth, were circumcysed. But all the people that
were borne in ye wyldernesse by the waye (after they departed out of Egipte)
were not circumcysed:
6 for the children of Israel walked fortye yeares in the wyldernesse, vntyll all
the people of the men of warre that came out of Egipte, were consumed, because
they herkened not vnto the voyce of the LORDE, like as the LORDE sware vnto
them, that they shulde not se the londe, which the LORDE sware vnto their
fathers to geue vnto vs, euen a londe that floweth with mylke & honye:
7 their children which were come vp in their steade, dyd Iosua circumcyse: for
they had the foreskynne, and were not circumcysed by the waye.
8 And whan all the people were circumcysed, they abode in their place, eue in ye
tetes, tyll they were whole.
9 And ye LORDE saide vnto Iosua: To daie haue I turned ye shame of Egipte awaye
from you, & the same place was called Gilgall vnto this daye.
10 And whyle the children of Israel laye thus at Gilgall, they kepte Easter the
fourtenth daye of the moneth at eue in the felde of Iericho.
11 And they ate of the corne of the lode the seconde daye of the Easter: namely,
vnleuended bred, & fyrmentye of yt yeare, eue the same daye.
12 And vpon the morow, the Manna fayled, whan they ate of the corne of ye londe,
so that the children of Israel had nomore Manna, but ate of the corne of the
londe of Canaan the same yeare.
13 And it fortuned that wha Iosua was by Iericho, he lifte vp his eyes, & was
awarre, that there stode a ma agaynst him, and had a naked swerde in his hande.
And Iosua wete to him, & sayde vnto him: Art thou one of vs, or of oure enemies?
14 He sayde: No, but I am the prynce of the LORDES hoost, and now am I come.
Then fell Iosua downe to the earth vpon his face, & worshipped him, and sayde
vnto him: What sayeth my LORDE vnto his seruaunt?
15 And the prynce ouer the LORDES hoost sayde vnto him: Put yi shues of yi fete,
for the place whervpo thou stondest, is holy. And Iosua dyd so.

Chapter 6

1 As for Iericho, it was shut & kepte because of the childre of Israel, so that
no man mighte go out ner in.
2 But the LORDE sayde vnto Iosua: Beholde, I haue geuen Iericho with ye kynge
and men of warre therof, in to yi hande.
3 Let all the men of warre go once rounde aboute ye cite, and do so sixe dayes.
4 But vpon the seuenth daye let the prestes take the seuen trompettes of the
yeare of Iubilye before the Arke, and go the same seuenth daye seuen tymes
aboute the cite, and let the prestes blowe the trompettes.
5 And whan the horne of the yeare of Iubilye bloweth and maketh a sounde, so
that ye heare the trompettes, all the people shal make a greate shoute, then
shal the walles of the cite fall downe, and ye people shal fall in, euery one
straight before him.
6 Then Iosua the sonne of Nun called ye prestes, and sayde vnto them: Beare ye
the Arke of the couenaunt, and let seuen prestes take the seuen trompettes of
the yeare of Iubilye before the Arke of the LORDE.
7 But vnto the people he sayde: Get you hence, and go roude aboute the cite: and
let him that is harnessed, go before the Arke of the LORDE.
8 Whan Iosua had spoken this vnto the people, the seuen prestes bare the seuen
trompettes of the yeare Iubilye before the Arke of the LORDE, and wente & blew
the trompettes, and the Arke of the LORDES couenaut folowed after them:
9 and who so was harnessed, wente before the prestes that blewe the trompettes,
and the multitude folowed the Arke. And all was full of ye noyse of the
trompettes.
10 But Iosua commaunded the people, and sayde: Ye shall make no shoute, ner let
youre voyce be herde, nether shall ye geue one worde out of youre mouth, vntyll
the daye yt I saye vnto you: Make a shoute, then make a shoute.
11 So the Arke of the LORDE wente once rounde aboute the cite, and came agyne in
to ye hooste, & remayned therin:
12 for Iosua vsed to ryse vp early in the mornynge. And the prestes bare the
Arke of the LORDE:
13 so dyd the seuen prestes beare the seuen trompettes of the yeare of Iubilye
before ye Arke of the LORDE, and wente and blewe the trompettes: and who so was
harnessed, wente before the, but ye multitude folowed ye Arke of the LORDE. And
all was full of the noyse of the trompettes.
14 The seconde daye wente they once aboute the cite also, and came agayne into
the hoost. Thus dyd they sixe dayes.
15 But vpon the seueth daye whan the mornynge sprynge arose, they gat them vp
early, and wente after the same maner seuen tymes aboute ye cite, so that vpon
the same one seuenth daye they wente seuen tymes aboute the cite.
16 And at the seueth tyme whan the prestes blewe the trompettes, Iosua sayde
vnto the people: Make a shoute, for ye LORDE hath delyuered you the cite:
17 Howbeit this cite, & all that is therin, shalbe damned vnto the LORDE: onely
the harlot Rahab shal lyue, & all that are with her in ye house, for she hyd the
messaungers, whom we sent forth.
18 Onely bewarre of it that is damned, lest ye damne youre selues (yf ye take
ought of it which is damned) and make the hoost of Israel to be damned, and
brynge it into mysfortune.
19 But all the syluer and golde, with the ornametes of brasse & yron, shalbe
sanctified vnto the LORDE, that it maye come to the LORDES treasure.
20 Then made the people a greate shoute, and the prestes blewe the trompettes
(for whan the people herde the noyse of the trompettes, they made a greate
shoute) and the walles fell, and ehe people clymmed vp in to the cite, euery one
straight before him.
21 Thus they wanne ye cite, and destroyed all that was in the cite with the edge
of the swerde, both man and woman, yonge and olde, oxe, shepe, and Asse.
22 But Iosua sayde vnto ye two men which had spyed out the londe: Go in to the
house of the harlot, and bringe out the woman fro thence with all that she hath,
acordynge as ye haue sworne vnto her.
23 Then ye yonge men (the spyes) wente in, and brought forth Rahab with hir
father and mother, & brethren, and all that she had, and all hir kynred, and
caused her to dwell without the hoost of Israel.
24 As for the cite, they brent it with fyre, & all that was therin: onely the
syluer and golde, and the ornamentes of brasse and yro put they vnto the
treasure in the house of ye LORDE:
25 but Iosua let the harlot Rahab lyue, with hir fathers house, and all that she
had: & she dwelt in Israel vnto this daie, because she had hyd the messaungers
who Iosua sent vnto Iericho to spye.
26 At the same tyme sware Iosua, and sayde: Cursed be that man before the LORDE,
which setteth vp this cite of Iericho & buyldeth it: Whan he laieth ye foundacio
therof, let it cost him his first sonne: And wha he setteth vp the gates of it,
let it cost him his yogest sonne.
27 Thus the LORDE was with Iosua, so that he was spoken of in all londes.

Chapter 7

1 But the children of Israel had comytted a sinne in the thinge yt was damned:
for Achan the sonne of Charmi the sonne of Sabdi the sonne of Serah, of ye trybe
of Iuda, toke some of it yt was daned. Then was the wrath of the LORDE fearce
ouer the children of Israel.
2 Now whan Iosua sent out men from Iericho vnto Hai, which lyeth besyde Bethaue
on ye eastsyde of Bethel, he sayde vnto the: Go vp, and spye the londe. And whan
they had gone vp, and spyed out Hai,
3 they came agayne to Iosua, and sayde vnto him: Let not all the people go vp,
but vpon a two or thre thousande, that they maye go vp and smyte Hai, lest all
the people weerye them selues there, for they are but fewe.
4 So there wente vp, of the people vpon a thre thousande men, and they fled
before the men of Hai,
5 and they of Hai smote vpon a syxe and thyrtie men of them, and chaced them
from the porte vnto Sebarim, and smote them downe the waye. Then was the hert of
the people discoraged, and became like water.
6 As for Iosua he rente his clothes, and fell vpon his face vnto the earth
before the Arke of the LORDE, vntill the eueninge, with the Elders of Israel,
and cast dust vpon their heades.
7 And Iosua sayde: Oh LORDE LORDE, wherfore hast thou broughte this people ouer
Iordane, to delyuer vs in to the handes of the Amorites to destroye vs? O that
we had taried beionde Iordane, as we begane.
8 Oh my LORDE, what shal I saye, whyle Israel turneth his backe vpon his
enemies?
9 Wha the Cananites heare of this, they shal compasse vs rounde aboute, yee and
rote out oure names from of the earth. What wylt thou do then vnto thy greate
name?
10 Then sayde the LORDE vnto Iosua: Stode vp, why lyest thou so vpon thy face?
11 Israel hath offended, and trasgressed ouer my couenaunt, which I commaunded
the. They haue taken also of the thinge that was damned, and haue stollen, and
dyssembled, and layed it amonge their ornamentes.
12 The children of Israel are not able to stonde before their aduersaries, but
must turne their backes vpon their enemies: for they are a cursed. I wyll no
more be with you from hece forth yf ye put not out the damned from amonge you.
13 Stonde vp, and sanctifie the people, and saye: Sanctifie yor selues agaynst
tomorow for thus sayeth the LORDE God of Israel: There is a damned thinge in the
O Israel, therfore canst thou not stonde before thine enemies, tyll ye put awaye
the damned from amonge you.
14 And ye shall ryse vp early, one trybe after another: and loke which trybe so
euer the LORDE taketh, the same shall come forth, one kynred after another: and
loke which kynred the LORDE taketh, the same shall come forth, one house after
another. And loke what house the LORDE taketh, the same shal come forth, one
housholder after another.
15 And who so euer is founde in ye curse, the same shalbe burnt in the fyre with
all that he hath: because he hath gone beyonde the couenaunt of the LORDE, and
committed folye in Israel.
16 Then Iosua gat him vp by tymes in the mornynge, and brought forth Israel, one
trybe after another, and ye trybe of Iuda was taken.
17 And whan he had brought forth the kynreds in Iuda, ye kinred of the Serahites
was taken. And whan he had brought forth the kynred of the Serahites, one
housholde after another, Sabdi was taken.
18 And wha he had brought forth his house, one housholder after another, Achan
the sonne of Charmi ye sonne of Sabdi the sonne of Serah of the trybe of Iuda,
was taken.
19 And Iosua sayde vnto Achan: My sonne, geue the glory vnto the LORDE the God
of Israel, and geue him the prayse, and tell me, what thou hast done, and hide
nothinge fro me.
20 Then answered Achan vnto Iosua, and sayde: Verely I haue synned agaynst ye
LORDE God of Israel, thus & thus haue I done:
21 I sawe amoge ye spoiles a costly Babilonish garment, and two hudreth Sycles
of syluer and a tunge of golde, worth fiftye Sycles in weight, vnto the which I
had a lust, and toke it: and beholde, it is hyd in the grounde in my tente, and
the syluer vnder it.
22 Then Iosua sent messaungers thither, which ranne to the tente, and beholde,
it was hyd in his tente, and the siluer vnder it.
23 And they toke it out of the tente, and broughte it vnto Iosua, and to all the
children of Israel and poured it before the LORDE.
24 Then Iosua and all Israel with him, toke Achan the sonne of Serah with the
siluer, the garment and golde tunge, his sonnes and doughters, his oxen and
asses, and shepe, and all that he had broughte they in to ye valley of Achor.
25 And Iosua sayde: For so moch as thou hast troubled vs, the LORDE trouble the
this daye. And all Israel stoned him, and burned him with fyre with all that he
had.
26 And whan they had stoned him, they made ouer him a greate heape of stones,
which remayneth vnto this daye. (So the LORDE turned from the rigorousnes of his
wrath.) Therfore is the same place called ye valley of Achor vnto this daye.

Chapter 8

1 And ye LORDE saide vnto Iosua: Feare not, and be not afrayed. Take all the men
of warre with the, and ryse, and get the vp vnto Hai. Beholde, I haue geuen in
to thy hande, the kynge of Hai with his people in his cite & countre.
2 And thou shalt do with Hai and the kynge of it, as thou dyddest with Iericho
and the kynge therof, sauynge that ye shal deale amoge you their spoyle &
catell: but set thou a preuy watch behynde the cite.
3 Then Iosua arose, and all ye men of warre, to go vp vnto Hai: and Iosua chose
thirtie thousande fightinge men, and sent them out by night
4 and commaunded them, and sayde: Take hede, ye shal be ye preuye watch behynde
the cite, but go not to farre from the cite, and se that ye be redye
alltogether.
5 As for me and all the people that is with me, we wyll make vs to the cite. And
whan they come forth agaynst vs ( as afore) we wyll flye before them,
6 that they maye folowe out after vs, tyll we haue prouoked them forth of the
cite: for they shal thinke that we flye before them, like as at ye first.
7 And whyle we flye before them, ye shal get you vp out of the preuy watch, and
wynne the cite. For ye LORDE youre God shal delyuer it in to youre handes.
8 But whan ye haue wonne the cite, set fyre vpon it, doinge acordinge vnto the
worde of the LORDE. Beholde, I haue commaunded you.
9 So Iosua sent them awaye, & they wente vnto the place of the preuy watch, and
laye betwixte Bethel and Hai, on the west syde of Hai. But Iosua abode that
night amoge the people.
10 And in the mornynge he arose early, and set the people in order, and wente vp
with the Elders of Israel before the people towarde Hai:
11 and all the men of warre that were with him, wente vp, & gat them forth, and
came ouer agaynst the cite, and pitched their tentes on the north syde of Hai,
so yt there was but a valley betwene him and Hai.
12 He had taken aboute a fyue thousande men, and set them in the hynder watch
betwene Bethel and Hai, on the west syde of the cite,
13 and they ordred the people of the whole hoost that was on the north syde of
the cite, so that the vttemost of the people reached vnto the west ende of the
cite. So Iosua wente the same nighte in to the myddes of the valley.
14 But whan the kynge of Hai sawe that, he made haist, and gat him vp early, and
the men out of the cite, to mete Israel to ye battayll, with all his people,
euen righte before the felde: for he wyst not that there was a preuy watch
behynde him on the backe syde of the cite.
15 But Iosua and all Israel were feble before them, and fled by the waye to ye
wyldernesse.
16 Then cried all the people in the cite, that they shulde folowe vpon them, and
they folowed after Iosua and russhed out of the cite,
17 so that there remayned not one man in Hai and Bethel, which wente not out to
folowe vpon Israel, and they lefte the cite stondinge open, that they mighte
persecute Israel.
18 The sayde ye LORDE vnto Iosua: Reach out the speare that thou hast in thine
hande, towarde Hai: for I wyll delyuer it in to thy hande. And whan Iosua
reached out the speare that was in his hande, towarde ye cite,
19 ye hinder watch brake vp out of their place, and ranne (whan he had stretched
out his hande) and came in to the cite, and wanne it, and made haist, & set fyre
vpon it.
20 And the men of Hai turned them, and loked behynde them, and the smoke of the
cite wente vp towarde heauen, and they had no place to flie vnto, nether hither
ner thither: and the people that fled towarde the wyldernes turned aboute, to
folowe vpon them.
21 And whan Iosua and all Israel sawe, yt the hynder watch had wonne the cite
(for ye smoke of the cite ascended) they turned againe, and smote the men of
Hai.
22 And they in the cite came forth also agaynst them, so yt they came in the
myddes amonge Israel on both the sydes, and they slewe them, so that there was
not one man of them left ouer or escaped:
23 and they toke the kynge of Hai alyue, and broughte him vnto Iosua.
24 And wha Israel had slayne all the inhabiters of Hai, which had folowed vpon
them in the felde and in the wildernesse: and whan they were all fallen thorow
the edge of the swerde, tyll they were destroied, the turned all Israel vnto
Hai, and smote it with the edge of ye swerde.
25 And of all them which fell that daye fro man vnto woma, there were twolue
thousande, all men of Hai.
26 But Iosua withdrue not his hande (wherwith he reached out the speare) tyll
all the inhabiters of Hai were vtterly destroyed,
27 sauynge the catell and the spoyle of ye cite, dyd Israel parte amonge them
selues, acordinge vnto the worde of the LORDE, which he comaunded Iosua.
28 And Iosua burned vp Hai and made an heape therof for euer, which is there yet
vnto this daye.
29 And the kynge of Hai caused he to be hanged on a tre vntyll the euen. But wha
the Sonne was gone downe, he commaunded to take his body from the tre, and to
cast it vnder the gate of the cite, and made vpon him a greate heape of stones,
which is there yet vnto this daye.
30 Then buylded Iosua an altare vnto the LORDE God of Israel vpon mount Ebal
31 acordinge as Moses the seruaunt of ye LORDE commaunded the children of
Israel, as it is wrytten in the boke of the lawe of Moses euen an altare of
whole stone, whervpon there was no yron lifted: and he offred burntofferinges
and healthofferinges,
32 and there vpon the stones he wrote the seconde lawe of Moses, which he wrote
before the childre of Israel.
33 And all Israel with their Elders and officers and iudges, stode on both the
sydes of the Arke, right ouer agaynst the prestes yt bare the Arke of the
couenaunt of the LORDE, the straunger as well as one of them selues, the one
halfe besyde mount Grysim, and the other halfe beside mount Ebal, as Moses the
seruaunt of the LORDE commaunded afore, to blesse the people of Israel.
34 Afterwarde caused he to proclame all the wordes of the lawe of the blessynge
and cursynge, as it is wrytten in the boke of the lawe.
35 There was not one worde that Moses commaunded, but Iosua caused it to be
proclamed before all the congregacion of Israel, and before the weme, and
children, and straugers which walked amonge them.

Chapter 9

1 Now whan all the kynges that were beyonde Iordane vpon the mountaynes, and in
the lowe countrees, & in all the hauens of the greate see, and besyde mount
Libanus, herde this (namely, ye Hethites, Amorites, Cananites, Pheresites,
Heuites and Iebusytes)
2 they gathered the selues together with one acorde, to fighte agaynst Iosua,
and agaynst Israel.
3 But whan the inhabiters of Gibeon herde, what Iosua had done with Iericho and
Hai,
4 they dealte craftely, wete on their waie, and made a message, and toke olde
sackes vpon their asses, and olde rente wyne botels,
5 and olde mended shues vpon their fete, and put on olde and peced garmentes,
and all ye bred of their vytayles was harde and moulde,
6 and they wente vnto Iosua in to ye hoost at Gilgall, and sayde vnto him, and
to euery man in Israel: We are come out of a farre countre, therfore make now a
couenaunt wt vs.
7 Then sayde euery man in Israel vnto ye Heuyte: Peraduenture thou dwellest
amonge vs, how can I then make a couenaunt with the?
8 They saide vnto Iosua: We are yi seruautes. Iosua sayde vnto them: What are
ye, & whence come ye?
9 They sayde: Thy seruauntes are come out of a very farre countre, because of
the name of the LORDE thy God: for we haue herde the reporte of him, and all
that he dyd in Egipte,
10 and all that he dyd vnto the two kynges of the Amorites beyode Iordane, Sihon
the kynge at Hesbo, and Og the kynge of Basan, which dwelt at Astaroth.
11 Therfore sayde oure Elders and all the inhabiters of oure countre: Take fode
with you for youre iourney, and go mete them, and saye vnto them: We are youre
seruautes, therfore make now a bonde with vs:
12 This oure bred that we toke out of oure houses for oure foode, was new whan
we toke or iourney towarde you: but now lo, it is harde & moulde.
13 And these bottels fylled we new, and lo, they are rete. And these oure
clothes and shues are waxed olde, by ye reason of the sore longe iourney.
14 Then the captaynes toke their vytayles, and axed not the mouth of the LORDE.
15 And Iosua made peace with them, and set vp a couenaunt with them, that they
shulde be saued alyue, and the rulers of the congregacion sware vnto them.
16 But thre dayes after that they had made a couenaunt with them, they herde,
that they were their neghbours, and dwelt amonge them:
17 For as the children of Israel wente forth on their iourney, they came on the
thirde daye vnto their cities, which are called Gibeon, Caphira, Beeroth, and
Cirath Iearim,
18 and smote the not, because that the rulers of the congregacisn had sworne
vnto them by the name of the LORDE the God of Israel. But whan all the
congregacion murmured agaynst the rulers,
19 all the rulers sayde vnto the whole congregacion: We haue sworne vnto them by
the LORDE the God of Israel, therfore maye we not touch them.
20 But this wil we do vnto them: Let them lyue, that there come no wrath vpon
vs, because of the ooth that we haue made vnto them.
21 And the rulers sayde vnto them: Let them lyue, that they maye be hewers of
wodd and bearers of water for the whole congregacion, as the rulers haue sayde
vnto them.
22 Then Iosua called them, and commened with them, and sayde: Wherfore haue ye
disceaued vs, and sayde, that ye were farre from vs, where as ye dwell amonge
vs?
23 Therfore shall ye be cursed, so that of you there shall not ceasse seruauntes
to hew wodd and to beare water for the house of my God.
24 They answered Iosua, & sayde: It was tolde thy seruauntes, that the LORDE thy
God commaunded Moses his seruaunt, that he shulde geue you the whole lode, and
that he wolde destroye all the inhabiters of the londe before you: therfore were
we sore afrayed of oure lyues before you, and thus haue we done.
25 But now lo, we are in thy handes: loke what thou thinkest good and righte to
do vnto vs, that do.
26 And he dyd euen so vnto them, and delyuered them from the children of Israels
hade, that they shulde not slaye them.
27 So vpo the same daye Iosua made them hewers of wodd and water bearers for the
congregacion, and for the altare of the LORDE vnto this daye, in the place that
he shall chose.

Chapter 10

1 Whan Adonisedech the kynge of Ierusalem herde, that Iosua had wonne Hai, and
damned it, and done vnto Hai and ye kynge of it, like as he dyd vnto Iericho and
to the kynge therof, and that they of Gibeon had made peace with Israel, and
were come vnder them, they were sore afrayed.
2 For Gibeon was a greate cite, like as one of the kynges cities, and greater
then Hai, and all the citesyns therof were men of armes.
3 Therfore sent he vnto Hoham the kynge of Hebron, and to Pirea the kynge of
Iarmuth, and to Iaphia the kynge of Lachis, and to Debir the kynge of Eglon, and
caused to saie vnto them:
4 Come vp vnto me, and helpe me, that we maie smyte Gibeon, for they haue made
peace with Iosua and the children of Israel.
5 Then came the fyue kynges of the Amorites together, and wente vp, the kynge of
Ierusalem, the kynge of Hebron, ye kynge of Iarmuth, the kynge of Lachis, the
kynge of Eglon, with all their armies, & layed sege vnto Gibeon, and foughte
agaynst it.
6 Howbeit they of Gibeon sent vnto Iosua to Gilgall, and caused to saye vnto
him: Withdrawe not thine hande from thy seruauntes, come vp soone vnto vs:
delyuer and helpe vs, for all the kynges of the Amorites that dwell vpon the
mountaynes, are gathered together agaynst vs.
7 Iosua wente vp from Gilgall, and all the warryers and all the men armes with
him.
8 And the LORDE sayde vnto Iosua: Feare them not, for I haue geue them in to thy
hande. There shall not one of them be able to stonde before the.
9 So Iosua came sodenly vpon them, for all that night wente he vp from Gilgall.
10 And the LORDE discomfyted the before Israel, and smote them with a greate
slaughter at Gibeon: & they chaced them the waie downe to Beth Horon, and smote
them vnto Aseka and Makeda.
11 And whan they fled before Israel, the waye downe to Bethoron, the LORDE
caused a greate hayle from heauen to fall vpon them, vnto Aseka, so that they
dyed: & many mo of them dyed of the hayle, then the children of Israel slewe
with the swerde.
12 Then spake Iosua vnto the LORDE (the same daye that the LORDE gaue ouer the
Amorites before the children of Israel) and sayde in the presence of Israel:
Sonne, holde styll at Gibeon, and thou Moone in the valley of Aialon.
13 Then the Sonne helde styll, and ye Moone stode, vntyll the people had auenged
the selues on their enemies. Is not this wrytten in the boke of the righteous?
Thus the Sonne stode styll in the myddes of heauen, and dyfferred to go downe
for the space of a whole daye after.
14 And there was no daye like vnto this (nether before ner after) whan the LORDE
herkened vnto the voyce of one man: for the LORDE fought for Israel.
15 And Iosua wente agayne to Gilgall in to the tetes, and all Israel with him.
16 As for the fyue kynges, they were fled, and had hyd the selues in the caue at
Makeda.
17 Then was it tolde Iosua: We haue foude the fyue kynges hyd in the caue at
Makeda.
18 Iosua sayde: Rolle greate stones then before the hole of the caue, and set
men there to kepe them.
19 As for you, stonde not ye styll, but folowe after youre enemies, and smyte
them behynde, and let them not come in their cities, for the LORDE youre God
hath delyuered the in to youre hande.
20 And whan Iosua and ye children of Israel had ended the sore greate slaughter
vpo them, so yt they were brought to naught, the remnaunt of them came in to the
stronge cities.
21 So all the people came agayne to the hoost vnto Iosua to Makeda in peace, and
no man durst moue his tunge agaynst the children of Israel.
22 Iosua sayde: Open the mouth of the caue, and brynge the fyue kynge forth vnto
me.
23 They dyd so, and broughte the kynges vnto him out of the caue: the kinge of
Ierusalem, the kynge of Hebro, the kynge of Iarmuth, the kynge of Lachis, the
kinge of Eglon.
24 Whan these fyue kynges were broughte forth vnto him, Iosua called euery man
of Israel, and sayde vnto the rulers of the men of warre that wente with him:
Come forth and treade vpon the neckes of these kynges with youre fete. And they
came forth, and trode vpon their neckes with their fete.
25 And Iosua saide vnto them: Be not afrayed, and feare not: be stronge and
bolde, for thus shal the LORDE do vnto all yor enemies, agaynst whom ye fighte.
26 And Iosua smote them afterwarde, and put them to death, and hanged them vpon
fyue trees. And they hanged styll vpon the trees vntyll the euenynge.
27 But whan the Sonne was gone downe, he commaunded to take them of from the
trees: and they cast them in the caue, wherin they had hyd them selues, & before
the hole of the caue they layed greate stones, which are there yet vnto this
daye.
28 The same daye wanne Iosua Makeda also, and smote it with the edge of the
swerde, and the kynge therof, and damned it, and all the soules that were
therin, and let none remayne escaped: and dyd vnto the kynge of Makeda as he dyd
vnto the kynge of Iericho.
29 Then Iosua and all Israel with him departed fro Makeda vnto Lybna, & foughte
agaynst it.
30 (And the LORDE gaue it with ye kynge therof into the hande of Israel) and
smote it and all the soules that were therin, with the edge of the swerde, and
let not one remayne in it: and dyd vnto the kinge therof as he had done vnto the
kynge of Iericho.
31 Afterwarde wente Iosua and all Israel with him from Lybna vnto Lachis, and
layed sege vnto it, and fought agaynst it.
32 And the LORDE delyuered Lachis also in to the hande of Israel, so that they
wanne it vpon the seconde daye, and smote it with ye edge of the swerde, and all
the soules that were therin, acordinge to all as he had done vnto Lybna.
33 At the same tyme Horam ye kynge of Gazer wente vp, to helpe Lachis. But Iosua
smote him with all his people, tyll there remayned not one.
34 And Iosua wente with all Israel from Lachis, vnto Eglon, and layed sege vnto
it, and fought agaynst it,
35 and wanne it the same daye, and smote it with the edge of the swerde, and
damned all the soules that were therin the same daye, acordynge vnto all as he
had done vnto Lachis.
36 After that wente Iosua with all Israel from Eglon vnto Hebron, and foughte
agaynst it,
37 and wanne it, and smote it with ye edge of the swerde, and the kynge of it,
and all the cities therof, and all the soules that were therin, and let not one
remayne, acordynge vnto all as he had done vnto Eglon: and damned it, and all
the soules that were therin.
38 Then turned Iosua agayne with all Israel towarde Debir, and fought agaynst
it,
39 and wanne it, with the kinge of it, and all ye cities therof, and smote them
with the edge of the swerde, and damned all ye soules that were therin, and let
not one remayne ouer. Euen as he had done vnto Hebro and Lybna with their
kynges, so dyd he also vnto Debir, and the kynge therof.
40 Thus Iosua smote all the londe vpon the mountaynes, and towarde the south,
and in the lowe countrees, and by the ryuers, with all their kynges, and let not
one remaine ouer and damned all that had breth, as the LORDE God of Israel had
commaunded.
41 And Iosua smote them from Cades Bernea vnto Gaza, and all the londe of Gosen
vnto Gibeon,
42 and toke all these kynges with their lode at one tyme: for the LORDE God of
Israel foughte for Israel.
43 And Iosua wente agayne with all Israel to the tentes vnto Gilgal.

Chapter 11

1 Whan Iabin the kynge of Asor herde this, he sent vnto Iabob the kynge of Madon
and to the kynge of Samron, and to the kynge of Achsaph,
2 and to the kynges that dwelt towarde the north vpon the mountaynes, and in the
playne on the southsyde of Cineroth, and in the lowe countrees, and in the
lordshippes of Dor by the see syde:
3 and to the Cananites towarde ye east and west, to ye Amorites, Hethites,
Pheresites, and Iebusites, vpon the mountaynes and to the Heuites, vnder mount
Hermon in the londe of Mispa.
4 These wete out with all their armies, a greate people, as many as ye sonde of
the see, and exceadinge many horses and charettes.
5 All these kinges gathered the selues, and came, and pitched together by ye
water of Meram, to fighte with Israel.
6 And the LORDE sayde vnto Iosua: Feare them not, for tomorow aboute this tyme
wil I delyuer them all slayne, before the children of Israel: thou shalt lame
their horses, and burne their charettes with fire.
7 And Iosua came sodenly vpon them, and all the men of warre with him by the
water of Merom, & fell vpon them.
8 And the LORDE delyuered them in to ye handes of Israel, and they smote them,
and chaced them vnto greate Sido and to the warme water, and to the playne of
Mispa towarde ye east: and smote them, vntyll there remayned not one.
9 Then dealte Iosua with them as ye LORDE had saide vnto him, & lamed theis
horses, & brent their charettes.
10 And he turned backe at the same tyme, & wanne Hasor, & smote ye kynge of it
wt the swerde (for Hasor was afore tyme ye head cite of all these kyngdomes)
11 and smote all the soules that were therin wt the edge of the swerde, and
damned it, & let nothinge remayne that had breth, & damned Hasor with fyre.
12 All the cities of these kyngdomes wane Iosua also, and smote the with the
edge of the swerde, and damned them, acordinge as Moses the seruaunt of the
LORDE commaunded.
13 Howbeit the cities that stode vpon the hilles, dyd not the children of Israel
burne with fyre: but Hasor onely dyd Iosua burne.
14 And all the spoyles of these cities and the catell, dyd the children of
Israel deale amonge them, but smote all the men with the edge of the swerde,
tyll they had destroyed them, and let nothinge remayne that had breth.
15 As the LORDE commaunded his seruaunt Moses, and as Moses commaunded Iosua,
euen so dyd Iosua, so that there was nothinge vndone of all that the LORDE
comaunded Moses.
16 So Iosua toke all this lode vpon ye moutaynes, & all yt lyeth towarde the
south, & all the londe of Gosen, and the lowe countre, & the playne felde, and
the mountayne of Israel with the valley therof,
17 from the mountayne that parteth the londe vp towarde Seir, vnto Baalgad, in
the playne of mout Libanus beneth mount Hermon. All their kynges toke he, and
smote them, and put the to death.
18 Howbeit he warred a longe season with these kynges.
19 Yet was there not one cite, that yelded it selfe peaceably vnto the children
of Israel (excepte the Heuites, which dwelt at Gibeon) but they wanne them all
with battayll.
20 And this was done so of the LORDE that their hert was so hardened, to come
against the children of Israel with battayll, yt they mighte be daned, & no
fauoure to be shewed vnto them, but to be destroyed, as the LORDE commaunded
Moses.
21 At the same tyme came Iosua, and roted out the Enakims from ye mountayne,
from Hebron, from Debir, from Anab, from euery mountayne of Iuda, and from euery
mountayne of Israel, and damned the with their cities,
22 and let none of the Enakims remayne in the londe of the children of Israel,
saue at Gasa, at Gath, at Asod, there remayned of them.
23 Thus Iosua conquered all the londe acordinge vnto all as the LORDE sayde vnto
Moses, & gaue it vnto Israel to enheritaunce, vnto euery trybe his porcion, and
ye londe rested from warre.

Chapter 12

1 These are ye kynges of the londe, who the childre of Israel smote, & conquered
their lode, beyonde Iordane, eastwarde, fro the water of Arnon, vnto mount
Hermon, and vnto all ye playne felde towarde the east:
2 Sihon the kynge of the Amorites, which dwelt at Hesbon, and had dominion from
Aroer that lieth by the water syde of Arnon, and vnto the myddes of ye water:
and ouer halfe Gilead, vnto the water of Iabok, which is the border of the
childre of Ammon:
3 and ouer the playne felde, vnto the see of Cynneroth eastwarde, and vnto the
see of the playne felde, namely the Salt see towarde the east, the waye vnto
Beth Iesimoth: and from the south beneth by the ryuers of mount Pisga.
4 And the border of Og the kynge of Basan, which remayned yet of Raphaim, and
dwelt at Astaroth and Edrei,
5 and had the dominion ouer mout Hermon, ouer Salcha, and ouer all Basan vnto
the border of Gessuri & Maachati, & of halfe Gilead, which was the border of
Sihon the kynge at Hesbon.
6 Moses the seruaunt of the LORDE and the childre of Israel smote them. And
Moses the seruaunt of ye LORDE gaue it vnto the Rubenites, Gaddites and to the
halfe trybe of Manasse in possession.
7 These are the kynges of the lode, whom Iosua & the children of Israel smote on
this syde Iordane westwarde, fro Baalgad vpo the playne of mount Libanus, vnto
ye mout that parteth the londe vp towarde Seir, & that Iosua gaue vnto the
trybes of Israel in possession, vnto euery one his parte,
8 what so euer was in ye moutaynes, valleyes, playne feldes, by the ryuers, in
ye wyldernesses & towarde the south, the Hethites, Amorites, Cananites,
Pheresites, Heuites, and Iebusites.
9 The kynge of Iericho, the kynge of Hai, which lyeth besyde Bethel,
10 the kynge of Ierusalem, the kynge of Hebron,
11 the kynge of Iarmoth, the kynge of Lachis,
12 the kynge of Eglon, the kynge of Geser,
13 the kynge of Debir, the kynge of Geder,
14 the kynge of Horma, the kynge of Arad,
15 ye kynge of Libna, the kynge of Adulla,
16 the kynge of Makeda, the kynge of Bethel,
17 the kynge of Tapnah, the kynge of Hepher,
18 the kynge of Aphek, the kynge of Lasaron,
19 the kynge of Madan, the kynge of Hasor,
20 the kynge of Simron Meron, the kynge of Achsaph,
21 the kynge of Tahenah, the kynge of Megido,
22 the kynge of Cades, the kynge of Iakneam by Carmel,
23 the kynge in the lordshippes of Dor, the kynge of the Heithen at Gilgall,
24 the kynge of Thirza. These are one and thirtie kynges.

Chapter 13

1 Now whan Iosua was olde and wel stricken in age, the LORDE sayde vnto him:
Thou art olde & well aged,
2 and there remayneth yet moch of the londe to conquere, namely all Galile of
the Philistynes, and all Gessuri,
3 from Sihor which floweth before Egipte, vnto the border of Ekron, northwarde,
which is rekened vnto the Cananites: fyue lordes of the Philistynes, namely, the
Gasites, the Asdodites, the Ascalonites, the Gethites, the Ekronites & the
Hauites.
4 But from the north it is all ye londe of the Cananites, and Maara of the
Sidonians vnto Aphek, euen vnto the border of the Amorites.
5 Morouer the londe of the Giblites eastwarde, from Baalgad vnder mount Hermon,
tyll a ma come vnto Hamath.
6 All they that dwell vpon the mount, from Libanus vnto the warme waters, and
all the Sidonians. I wyl dryue them out before the children of Israel: Onely let
them be dealte out amonge Israel, as I haue commaunded the.
7 Deuyde thou this lode now to enheritauce amonge the nyne trybes and ye halfe
trybe of Manasse.
8 For the Rubenites & Gaddites with ye halfe trybe of Manasse, haue receaued
their enheritauce, which Moses gaue the beyonde Iordane Eastwarde, acordinge as
Moses the seruaunt of the LORDE gaue them the same,
9 from Aroer which lieth vp by the water syde of Arnon, and the cite in the
myddes of the water, & all the coastes of Medba vnto Dibon,
10 and all the cities of Sihon the kynge of the Amorites, which, dwelt at
Hesbon, vnto the border of the children of Ammon:
11 and Gilead and ye border of Gessuri and Maachati, and all mout Hermon, and
all Basan vnto Salcha:
12 all ye kyngdome of Og at Basan, which dwelt at Astaroth and Edrei, that
remained yet ouer of Raphaim. But Moses smote them and droue them out.
13 The children of Israel droue not out the Gessurites & Maachathites, but both
Gessur and Maachat dwelt amonge the childre of Israel vnto this daye.
14 But vnto ye trybe of the Leuites he gaue no enheritaunce: for the offeringe
of the LORDE God of Israel is their enheritaunce, acordinge as he hath promysed
them.
15 So Moses gaue vnto the trybe of ye children of Ruben after their kynreds,
16 so that their border was Aroer, which lyeth vpon the water syde of Arnon, and
the cite in the myddes of the same water, with all the playne felde vnto Medba:
17 Hesbon, and all the cities therof which lye in the playne felde: Dibon,
Bamoth Baal, & Beth Baal Meon,
18 Iahza, Kedemoth, Mephaath,
19 Kiriathaim, Sibama, Zeretha Sahar, vpon mount Emek,
20 Beth Peor: the ryuers by Pisga, and Beth Iesimoth,
21 and all the cities vpon the playne, and all the realme of Sihon kynge of the
Amorites, which dwelt at Hesbon, whom Moses smote with the prynces of Madian,
Eui, Rekem, Zur, Hur, & Reba, the mightie men of kynge Sihon, which were
inhabiters of the londe.
22 And Balaam the sonne of Beor the prophecier, dyd the children of Israel kyll
with the swerde amonge the other that were slayne:
23 and the border of ye childre of Ruben was Iordane. This is the enheritaunce
of the children of Ruben amonge their kynreds, cities and vyllages.
24 Vnto the trybe of the children of Gad amonge their kynreds gaue Moses,
25 so that their border was, Iahesar and all the cities in Gilead, and the halfe
londe of the children of Ammon, vnto Aroer, which lyeth before Rabbath:
26 and from Hesbon vnto Ramath Mispe & Betomim: and fro Mahanaim vnto the border
of Debir.
27 But in the valley, Beth Haram, Beth Nimra, Suchoth and Zaphon (which remayned
yet of the realme of Sihon kynge of Hesbon) and was by Iordane, vnto the edge of
the see of Cyneroth, on this syde Iordane eastwarde.
28 This is the inheritaunce of the children of Gad in their kynreds, cities &
vyllagyes.
29 Vnto the halfe trybe of the children of Manasse after their kynreds, gaue
Moses,
30 so that their border was fro Mahanaim, all Basan, all the kyngdome of Og
kynge of Basan, and all the townes of Iair which lye in Basan, namely thre score
cities.
31 And halfe Gilead, Astaroth, Edrei, the cities of the kyngdome of Og at Basan,
vnto the children of Machir the sonne of Manasse. This is the halfe porcion of
the children of Machir after their kynreds.
32 This is it that Moses dealte out vpon the felde of Moab beyonde Iordane ouer
agaynst Iericho eastwarde.
33 But vnto ye trybe of Leui gaue Moses no enheritaunce: for the LORDE God of
Israel is their enheritaunce, as he hath promysed them.

Chapter 14

1 This is it that the children of Israel haue enhereted in the londe of Canaan,
which Eleasar the prest, and Iosua the sonne of Nun, and the chefe of the
fathers amonge the trybes of the children of Israel parted out amonge them.
2 But by lot dyd they deuyde it out amoge them, acordinge as the LORDE comaunded
Moses to geue vnto the nyne trybes and ye halfe:
3 for vnto the two trybes and the halfe dyd Moses geue enheritaunce beyonde
Iordane. But vnto the Leuites he gaue no enheritaunce amonge them.
4 For of the childre of Ioseph there were two trybes, Manasses and Ephraim.
Therfore gaue they the Leuites no porcion in the londe, but cities, to dwell
therin, and suburbes for their catell and goodes.
5 Euen as the LORDE comaunded Moses, so dyd the childre of Israel, and deuyded
the londe.
6 Then came forth the children of Iuda to Iosua at Gilgall: and Caleb ye sonne
of Iephunne the Kenisite sayde vnto him: Thou knowest what ye LORDE sayde vnto
Moses the man of God, concerninge me and the in Cades Bernea.
7 I was fortye yeare olde, whan Moses the seruaunt of the LORDE sent me out from
Cades Bernea, to spye out the londe, and I broughte him worde agayne, euen as I
had it in my hert.
8 Howbeit my brethren that wente vp with me, discoraged the hert of the people:
but I folowed ye LORDE my God vnto the vttemost.
9 Then sware Moses vnto me the same daye, and sayde: The londe whervpon thou
hast troden with thy fote, shalbe thine enheritaunce and thy childrens for euer,
because thou hast folowed the LORDE my God vnto the vttemost.
10 And now hath the LORDE letten me lyue, acordinge as he sayde. It is now fyue
and fortie yeare sence ye LORDE spake this vnto Moses, wha Israel walked in the
wildernesse. And now lo, this daie am I fyue and foure score yeare olde
11 and am yet as stronge to daye, as I was in that daye whan Moses sent me out:
euen as my strength was then, so is it now also to fighte, and to go out and in.
12 Geue me now therfore this mountayne, wherof the LORDE spake in that daye, and
thou herdest it the same daye: for now the Enakims dwell theron, and it hath
greate and stronge cities: yf happly the LORDE wyl be with me, that I maye dryue
the out, as he hath sayde.
13 Then Iosua blessed him, and so gaue Hebron vnto Caleb the sonne of Iephune.
14 Therfore was Hebron the enheritaunce of Caleb the sonne of Iephune the
kenisite, vnto this daye, because he folowed the LORDE God of Israel vnto the
vttemost.
15 But afore tyme was Hebron called Kiriatharba, & greate people were there
amonge the Enakims. And the lode ceassed from warre.

Chapter 15

1 The lot of the trybe of the children of Iuda amonge their kynreds, was ye
coaste of Edom by the wyldernesse of Zin, which borderth southwarde on the edge
of the south coutrees.
2 Their south borders were from the vttemost syde of the salt see, that is, from
the coast that goeth southwarde,
3 and commeth out from thece towarde ye eastsyde of Acrabbim, and goeth forth
thorow Zinna, and yet goeth vp from the south towarde Cades Bernea, and goeth
thorow Hesron, and goeth vp to Adara, & fetcheth a compase aboute Carcaa,
4 & goeth thorow Asmona, and commeth forth to the ryuer of Egipte, so that the
see is the ende of ye border. Let this be youre border southwarde.
5 But the east border is from the salt see to the vttemost parte of Iordane.
6 The border northwarde, is from the see coast which is on ye edge of Iordane,
and goeth vp vnto Beth Hagla, and stretcheth out from the north vnto Betharaba,
and commeth vp vnto the stone of Bohen the sonne of Ruben,
7 and goeth vp vnto Debir from ye valley of Achor, and from the north coaste
that is towarde Gilgall, which lyeth ouer agaynst Adumim vpwarde, which is on
the north syde of the water. Then goeth it vnto ye water of Ensemes, and commeth
out vnto the well of Rogell.
8 Then goeth it vp to the valley of the sonne of Hinnam, a longe besyde the
Iebusite that dwelleth from ye southwarde, that is Ierusalem: and commeth vp
vnto the toppe of the mount which lyeth before the valley of Hinnam from the
westwarde, that borderth on the edge of the valley of Raphaim towarde the north.
9 Then commeth it from the toppe of the same mount vnto the water well of
Nephtoah, and commeth out vnto the cities of mount Ephron, and boweth towarde
Baala, that is Kiriath Iarim,
10 and fetcheth a copasse aboute from Baala westwarde vnto mount Seir, and goeth
by the north syde of the mount Iarim, that is Chessalon: and cometh downe to
Bethsemes, and goeth thorow Thimna,
11 and breaketh out on the north syde of Acron, and stretcheth forth towarde
Sicron, and goeth ouer mount Baala, and commeth out vnto Iabueel: so that their
vttemost border is the see.
12 The weste border is the greate see. This is the border of the children of
Iuda rounde aboute in their kynreds.
13 Caleb the sonne of Iephune had his porcion geue him amoge the children of
Iuda (as the LORDE comaunded Iosua) namely Kiriatharba of the father of Enak,
that is Hebron.
14 And Caleb droue from thence the thre sonnes of Enak, Sesai, Ahiman, and
Thalmas begotten of Enak.
15 And from thece he wente vp to the inhabiters of Debir. (As for Debir, it was
called Kiriath Sepher afore tyme.)
16 And Caleb sayde: Who so smyteth Kiriath Sepher and wynneth it, I wyll geue
him my doughter Achsa to wyfe.
17 Then Athniel the sonne of Kenas the brother of Caleb wanne it: and he gaue
him his doughter Achsa to wife.
18 And it fortuned whan they wente in, that she was counceled of hir housbande,
to axe a pece of londe of hir father. And she fell downe from the asse. Then
sayde Caleb vnto her: What ayleth the?
19 She sayde: Geue me a blessynge, for thou hast geue me a south (and drye)
londe: geue me welles of water also. Then gaue he her welles aboue and beneth.
20 This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of Iuda amonge their kynreds.
21 And the cities of the trybe of the children of Iuda, from one to another by
the coastes of the Edomites towarde the south, were these: Cabzeel, Eder, Iagur,
22 Kina, Dimona, Adada,
23 Kedes, Hazor, Iethnam,
24 Siph, Telem, Bealot,
25 Hazor Hadatha, Kirioth Hezron that is Hasor:
26 Ama, Sema, Molada,
27 Hazor Gadda, Hesmon, Beth palet,
28 Hazer Sual, Beer Seba, Bisiothia,
29 Baala, Iim, Azem,
30 Eltholad, Chesil, Harma,
31 Ziklag, Madmanna, San Sana,
32 Lebaoth, Silhim, Am, Rimo. These are nyne and twentye cities & their
vyllages.
33 But in the lowe countrees was Esthaol, Zaren, Asna,
34 Saroah, Engannim, Thapua, Enam,
35 Iarmoth, Adullam, Socho, Aseka,
36 Saaraim, Adithaim, Gedera, Giderothim. These are fourtene cities & their
vyllages.
37 Zena Hadasa, Migdal Gad,
38 Dilean, Mispa, Iakthiel,
39 Lachis, Bazekath, Eglo,
40 Chabon, Lachma, Chithlis,
41 Gedoroth, Beth Dagon, Naama, Makeda. These are sixtene cities and their
vyllages.
42 Libna, Ether, Asen,
43 Iephthah, Asua, Nezib,
44 Keila, Achsib, Maresa. These are nyne cities and their vyllages.
45 Ekron with his doughters and vyllages.
46 From Ekron vnto the see, all that reacheth vnto Asdod and the vyllages
therof.
47 Asdod with the doughters and vyllages therof. Gasa with hir doughters and
vyllages vnto the water of Egipte. And the greate see is his border.
48 But vpon the mount was Samir, Iatir, Socho,
49 Danna, Kiriath Sanna, that is Debir:
50 Anab, Esthemo, Annim,
51 Gosen, Holon, Gilo. These are eleuen cities and their vyllagies.
52 (Omitted Text)
53 (Omitted Text)
54 (Omitted Text)
55 Maon, Carmel, Siph, Iuta,
56 Iesrael, Iakdea, Sanoah,
57 Kain, Gibea, Thimna. These are ten cities and their vyllages.
58 Halhul, Bethzur, Gedor,
59 Maarath, Beth Anoth, Elthekon. These are sixe cities and their vyllages.
60 Kiriath Baal (that is Kiriath Iearim) Harabba, two cities & their vyllages.
61 And in the wyldernesse was Betharaba, Middin, Sechacha,
62 Nibsan, and the Salt cite, and Engaddi. These are sixe cities and their
vyllagies.
63 But the Iebusites dwelt at Ierusalem, and the children of Iuda coude not
dryue them awaye. So the Iebusites remayne with the children of Iuda at
Ierusalem vnto this daye.

Chapter 16

1 And the lot fell vnto the children of Ephraim fro Iordane ouer agaynst
Iericho, vnto the water on the east syde of Iericho, and the wyldernesse, yt
goeth vp from Iericho thorow the mountayne of Bethel,
2 and commeth out from Bethel vnto Lus, and goeth thorow the coast of
Arciataroth,
3 and stretcheth downe westwarde vnto ye coaste of Iaphleti to ye border of the
lower Bethoron, and vnto Gaser: and the ende therof is by the greate see.
4 This the children of Ioseph (Manasses & Ephraim) receaued to enheritaunce.
5 The Border of the children of Ephraim amonge their kynreds of their
enheritaunce from the east, was Ataroth Adar vnto the vpper Bethoron,
6 & goeth out westwarde by Michmethath that lyeth towarde the north, there
fetcheth it a compasse towarde the east syde of the cite Thaenath Silo, and
goeth there thorow from the east vnto Ianoha,
7 and commeth downe from Ianoha vnto Ataroth and Naaratha, and bordreth on
Iericho, and goeth out at Iordane.
8 From Thapuah goeth it westwarde vnto Naalkama, and the out goinge of it is at
the see. This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of the children of Ephraim amonge
their kynreds.
9 And all the borders, cities with their vyllages of the childre of Ephraim laye
scatred amonge the enheritaunce of the children of Manasse.
10 And they droue not out ye Cananites, which dwelt at Gaser. So ye Cananites
remayned amoge Ephraim vnto this daye, and became tributaries.

Chapter 17

1 And the lot fell vpo the trybe of Manasse (for he is Iosephs first sonne) and
it fell vpon Machir the first sonne of Manasse ye father of Gilead: for he was a
ma of armes, therfore had he Gilead and Basan.
2 It fell also vnto the other children of Manasse, namely vnto ye childre of
Abieser, the children of Helek, the children of Asriel, the children of Sechem,
the children of Hepher, and the children of Semida: These are the childre of
Manasse the sonne of Ioseph, males, amonge their kynreds.
3 But Zelaphead the sonne of Hepher the sonne of Gilead, the sonne of Machir,
the sonne of Manasse, had no sonnes, but doughters, and their names are these:
Mahala, Noa, Hagla, Milca, Tirza,
4 and they came before Eleasar the prest, and before Iosua the sonne of Nun, and
before the rulers, and sayde: The LORDE commaunded Moses, to geue vs
enheritaunce amonge oure brethren. And so they had enheritaunce geuen them
amonge their fathers brethren, acordinge to the commaundement of the LORDE.
5 There fell vpon Manasse ten meetlynes without the londe of Gilead and Basan,
which lyeth beyode Iordane.
6 For ye doughters of Manasse receaued enheritaunce amonge his sonnes: but the
other children of Manasse had the londe of Gilead.
7 And the border of Manasse was fro Asser forth vnto Michmethath, that lyeth
before Sichem, and reacheth vnto the righte syde of them of En Tapuah:
8 for the londe of Tapuah fell vnto Manasse, and the border of Manasse is vnto
the childre of Ephraim.
9 Then commeth it downe to Nahelkana towarde the south syde of the ryuer cities,
which are Ephraims amonge the cities of Manasse. But from the north is the
border of Manasse by the ryuer, and goeth forth by the see syde,
10 south warde vnto Ephraim, and to Manasse northwarde, and the see is his
coaste. And it shal border on Aser from the north, and on Isachar from the
easte.
11 So (amoge Isachar and Asser) Manasses had Beth Sean and the townes therof,
and Ieblaam and the townes therof, and them of Dor and their townes, and them of
En Dor and their townes, & them of Taanach and their townes, and them of Mageddo
and their townes, and the thirde parte of (the cite) Nophet.
12 And the children of Manasse coude not dryue awaye the inhabiters of these
cities, but the Cananites beganne to dwell in the same londe.
13 Howbeit whan the children of Israel were able, they made the Cananites
tributaries, and droue them not out.
14 Then spake the children of Ioseph vnto Iosua, and sayde: Wherfore hast thou
geue me but one porcion and one meetlyne of enheritaunce, and I am yet a greate
people, as the LORDE hath blessed me so largely?
15 Then sayde Iosua vnto them: For so moch as thou art a greate people, go vp
therfore into ye wodd, and make thy selfe rowme there in the londe of the
Pheresites and Raphaim, seynge mout Ephraim is to narowe for the.
16 Then sayde the children of Ioseph: We shal not be able to attayne vnto the
mountaynes, for there are yron charettes amonge all the Cananites, that dwell in
the londe of Emek, by whom lyeth Beth Sean and the vyllages therof, and Iesrael
in Emek.
17 Iosua sayde vnto the house of Ioseph, euen to Ephraim and Manasses: Thou art
a greate people, & for so moch as thou art so greate, thou must not haue one
lot,
18 but the mountayne where ye wod is, shal be thine: rote yt out for ye, so
shall it be the outgoinge of thy porcion, whan thou dryuest out the Cananites,
which haue yro charettes, & are mightie.

Chapter 18

1 And all the multitude of the children of Israel gathered them selues together
vnto Silo, and they set vp ye Tabernacle of witnesse, and the londe was subdued
vnto them.
2 But there were yet seuen trybes of the childre of Israel, vnto whom they had
not deuyded their enheritaunce.
3 And Iosua sayde vnto the children of Israel: How longe are ye so slowe, to go
and coquere the londe, which the LORDE God of youre fathers hath geuen you?
4 Chose you thre men out of euery trybe, yt I maye sende them, and that they
maye get them vp and go thorow the londe, and descrybe it acordinge to the
enheritaunces therof, and come vnto me.
5 Deuyde the londe in seuen partes. Iudas shal remayne vpon his borders of the
south syde, and the house of Ioseph shal remayne vpon his borders of the north
parte:
6 but descrybe ye the londe in seuen partes, and brynge them vnto me, then shal
I cast ye lot for you before the LORDE oure God.
7 For the Leuites haue no porcion amonge you, but the presthode of the LORDE is
their enheritaunce. As for Gad & Ruben and ye halfe trybe of Manasse, they haue
receaued their enheritaunce beyonde Iordane eastwarde, which Moses the seruaunt
of the LORDE gaue them.
8 Then the men gat vp, to go their waye. And whan they were aboute to go for to
descrybe the londe, Iosua commaunded them, and sayde: Go youre waye, and walke
thorow the londe, and descrybe it, and come agayne vnto me, that I maye cast ye
lot for you before the LORDE at Silo.
9 So the men departed, and wente thorow the londe, and descrybed it in seuen
partes vpon a letter acordinge to the cities, and came to Iosua in to the hoost
at Silo.
10 Then Iosua cast the lot ouer them at Silo before the LORDE, and there
distributed the londe amonge the children of Israel, vnto euery one his parte.
11 And the lot of the trybe of the children of Ben Iamin fell acordinge to their
kynreds, and the border of their lot wente out betwene the children of Iuda &
the children of Ioseph.
12 And their border was on ye north quarter of Iordane, and goeth vp from the
north syde of Iericho, and commeth vp to the mountayne westwarde, and goeth out
by the wyldernesse of Bethauen,
13 and goeth from thece towarde Lus, euen by the south syde of Lus (that is
Bethel) and commeth downe vnto Ataroth Adar by the mountayne which lyeth on ye
south syde of the lower Bethoron.
14 Then boweth it downe, and fetcheth a compasse vnto the south west quarter
from the mount that lyeth ouer agaynst Bethoron towarde the south, and goeth out
vnto Kiriath Baal, yt is Kiriath Iearim, a cite of the children of Iuda. This is
the west border.
15 But the south border is from Kiriath Iearim forth, and goeth out towarde the
west, and commeth forth vnto ye water well of Nepthoah:
16 and goeth downe by the edge of the mount, that lyeth before the valley of the
sonne of Hinnam: and goeth downe thorow the valley of Hinnam on ye south syde of
the Iebusites, and commeth downe to the well of Rogell,
17 and stretcheth from the northwarde, and commeth out vnto EnSemes, and commeth
forth to the heapes that lye vp towarde Adumim, and cometh downe vnto the stone
of Bohen the sonne of Ruben,
18 and goeth a longe besyde ye playne felde which lyeth north warde, and commeth
downe vnto ye playne felde,
19 and goeth besyde Beth Hagla that lyeth towarde the north, and his ende is at
the north border of the Salt see, vnto ye edge of Iordane southwarde. This is
the south border.
20 But Iordane shal be the ende of the east quarter. This is the enheritaunce of
ye children of Ben Iamin in their borders rounde aboute, amonge their kynreds.
21 The cities of the trybe of the children of Ben Iamin amoge their kynreds are
these: Iericho, Beth Hagla, Emek Rezig,
22 Betharaba, Zemaraim, Bethel,
23 Auim, Haphar, Aphra,
24 Caphar Amonai, Aphni, Gaba: these are twolue cities and their vyllages.
25 Gibeon, Rama, Beeroth,
26 Mispa, Caphira, Moza,
27 Rekem, Ieerpeel, Thareala,
28 Zela, Eleph, and the Iebusites, that is Ierusalem, Gibeath, Kiriath: these
are fourtene cities and their vyllages. This is the enheritaunce of the children
of Ben Iamin in their kynreds.

Chapter 19

1 Then fell the seconde lot of the trybe of the children of Simeon acordinge to
their kynreds, and their enheritaunce was amonge the enheritaunce of ye children
of Iuda.
2 And to their enheritaunce they had Beer Seba, Molada,
3 Hazar Sual, Baala, Azem,
4 El Tholad, Bethul, Harma,
5 Ziklag, Betha Markaboth, Hazar Sussa,
6 Beth Lebaoth, and Saruhen: these are thirtene cities & their vyllages.
7 Ain, Rimon, Ether, Asan: these are foure cities and their vyllages.
8 And all ye vyllages that lye aboute the cities vnto Balath Beer Ramath towarde
the south. This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of the children of Simeon in
their kynreds:
9 for the enheritaunce of the children of Simeon is vnder the porcion of the
children of Iuda. For so moch as the enheritaunce of the children of Iuda was to
greate for them, therfore inhereted the children of Simeon amonge their
enheritaunce.
10 The thirde lot fell vpon the childre of Zabulon after their kynreds. And the
border of their enheritauce was vnto Sarid,
11 & goeth vp westwarde to Mareala, & bordreth vpon Dabaseth, and reacheth vnto
the ryuer that floweth ouer agaynst Iakneam:
12 & turneth from Sarid eastwarde vnto the border of Cisloth Thabor, and cometh
out vnto Dabrath, and reacheth vp to Iapia,
13 and from thece goeth it westwarde thorow Githa Hepher, and Itha Razim, and
commeth out towarde Rimon, Hamthoar Hanea,
14 & fetcheth a compasse aboute from the north vnto Nathon, & the goynge out of
it is in ye valley Iephtha El,
15 Ratath, Nahalal, Simron, Iedeala, & Bethlehem: These are twolue cities and
their vyllages.
16 This is the enheritauce of the childre of Zabulon in their kynreds: these are
their cities and vyllages.
17 The fourth lot fell vpo the childre of Isachar after their kynreds,
18 & their border was Iesraela, Chessulloth, Sunem,
19 Hapharaim, Sion, Anaharath,
20 Raabith, Rision, Abez,
21 Kemeth, En Ganim, Enhada, Beth Pazez,
22 & bordreth vpon Thabor, Sahazima, Beth Semes, and ye outgoinge of it was at
Iordane. These are sixtene cities and their vyllages.
23 This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of the children of Isachar in their
kynreds, cities and vyllages.
24 The fifth lot fell vpon the trybe of the children of Asser, after their
kynreds.
25 And their border was Helkath, Hali, Beten, Achsaph,
26 Alamelech, Amead, Miseal, and borderth on Carmel vnto the see, and on Sihor,
and Libnath,
27 and turneth towarde the east vnto Beth Dagon, and bordreth on Zabulon, and on
the valley of Iephtael, and towarde the north syde of Beth Emek and Negiel: &
commeth out vnto Cabul on the lefte syde
28 of Ebron, Rehob, Hamon and Cana, vnto greate Sidon.
29 And turneth towarde Rama, vnto the stronge cite of Zor, and turneth towarde
Hossa, and goeth out vnto the see, after ye meetlyne towarde Achsib,
30 Vma, Aphek, Rehob. These are two and twentye cities and their vyllages.
31 This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of the children of Asser in their
kinreds cities and vyllages.
32 The syxte lot fell vpon the children of Nephtali in their kynreds.
33 And their border was fro Heleph Elon thorow Zaanaim, Adai Nekeb, Iabne El
vnto Lakum, and goeth out vnto Iordane,
34 and turneth westwarde to Asnoth Thabor, and cometh out from thence vnto
Hukok, and bordreth on Zabulon towarde the south, and on Asser towarde the west,
and on Iuda by Iordane towarde the east:
35 and hath stronge cities, Zidimzer, Hamath Rakath, Chinnaret,
36 Adama, Rama, Hazor,
37 Kedes, Edrei, En Hazor,
38 Iereon, Migdal Elhare, Beth Anath, Beth Sames. These are nyentene cities and
their vyllages.
39 This is the enheritaunce of ye trybe of the children of Nephtali in their
kynreds, cities, and vyllages.
40 The seuenth lot fell vpon the trybe of the children of Dan after their
kynreds.
41 And the border of their enheritaunce was Zarea, Esthaol, Irsames,
42 Saalabin, Aialon, Iethla,
43 Elon, Thimnata, Ekron,
44 Eltheke, Gibetho Baalath,
45 Iehud, Bnerbarak, Gat Rimon,
46 Me Iarkon, Rakon with the border by Iapho,
47 and on the same goeth the border of the children of Dan out. And the children
of Da wente vp, and foughte agaynst Lesem, and wanne it, and smote it with the
edge of the swerde, and toke it in possession, & dwelt therin, and called it
Dan, after ye name of their father.
48 This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of the children of Dan in their
kynreds, cities, and vyllages.
49 And wha ye lode was all parted out with the borders therof, the children of
Israel gaue Iosua the sonne of Nun, an enheritaunce amonge them,
50 and (acordynge to the commaundement of the LORDE) they gaue him ye cite that
he requyred, namely, Thimnath Serah, vpon mout Ephraim: there buylded he the
cite, and dwelt therin.
51 These are the enheritaunces which Eleasar the prest and Iosua ye sonne of
Nun, and the chefest of the fathers amonge ye tribes, deuided out by lot vnto
the childre of Israel at Silo before the LORDE, euen before the dore of the
Tabernacle of wytnes, and so they ended the deuydinge out of the londe.

Chapter 20

1 And the LORDE spake vnto Iosua, and sayde:
2 Speake to the children of Israel: Geue amonge you fre cities, wherof I spake
vnto you by Moses,
3 that a deedsleyer which sleyeth a soule vnawarres and vnwittingly, maye flye
thither, yt they maye be fre amoge you from the avenger of bloude.
4 And he that flyeth to one of those cities, shal stonde without before the
porte of the cite, and shewe his cause before the Elders of the cite, then shall
they take him to them in to the cite, and geue him place to dwell with them.
5 And yf the auenger of bloude folowe vpon him, they shall not delyuer the
deedslayer in to his handes, for so moch as he hath slayne his neghboure
vnawarres, and was not his enemye afore:
6 but he shall dwell in ye cite, tyll he stonde before the congregacion in
iudgment, vntyll the hye prest dye, which shall be at that tyme. Then shall the
deedsleyer returne, and go vnto his awne cite, and vnto his house to the cite,
from whence he was fled.
7 Then appoynted they Kedes in Galile vpon mount Nepthali, and Sechem vpon mount
Ephraim, and Kiriatharba, that is Hebron vpon mout Iuda.
8 And beyode Iordane on the east syde of Iericho, they gaue Beser in the
wildernes vpon the playne out of the trybe of Ruben, and Ramoth in Gilead out of
the trybe of Gad, and Golan in Basan out of the trybe of Manasse.
9 These were the cities appoynted for all ye children of Israel, and for the
straungers which dwelt amonge them, that whosoeuer had slayne a soule vnawarres,
might flye thither, that he shulde not be put to death by the auenger of bloude,
tyll he had stonde before the congregacion.

Chapter 21

1 Then the chefe fathers amonge the Leuites came forth vnto Eleasar the prest
and to Iosua the sonne of Nun, and to ye awncient fathers amoge the trybes of
the children of Israel,
2 and spake vnto them at Silo in the londe of Canaan, and sayde: The LORDE
commaunded by Moses, that we shulde haue cities geuen vs to dwell in, and the
suburbes of the same for oure catell.
3 Then the children of Israel gaue of their enheritaunce these cities and the
suburbes therof, vnto the Leuites, acordynge to the commaundement of the LORDE.
4 And the lot fell vpon the kynred of the Kahathites, and the children of Aaron
the prest amonge the Leuites, had by the lott thyrtene cities of the trybe of
Iuda, of the trybe of Simeon, and of the trybe of Ben Iamin.
5 The other childre of Kahath of the same kynred, had by the lot ten cities, of
the trybe of Ephraim, of the trybe of Dan, and of the halfe trybe of Manasse.
6 But the children of Gerson of the same kynred had by the lot thyrtene cities,
of the trybe of Isachar, of the trybe of Asser, of ye trybe of Nepthali, and of
the halfe trybe of Manasse at Basan.
7 The children of Merari of their kynred had twolue cities, of the trybe of
Ruben, of the trybe of Gad, and of the trybe of Zabulon.
8 So the children of Israel gaue these cities and their suburbes vnto the
Leuites by lott, as the LORDE commaunded by Moses.
9 Of the trybe of the children of Iuda, and of the trybe of the children of
Simeon, they gaue these cities (which they named by name)
10 vnto the children of Aaron of the kynred of the Kahathites amonge the
children of Leui: for the first lot was theyrs.
11 So they gaue them Kiriatharba, which was the fathers of Enak, that is Hebron
vpon the mount Iuda, and the suburbes therof rounde aboute.
12 But the felde of the cite and the vyllages therof, gaue they vnto Caleb the
sonne of Iephune for his possession.
13 Thus gaue they vnto the children of Aaron the prest, the fre cite of the deed
sleyers, Hebron and the suburbes therof, Libna and the suburbes therof,
14 Iathir and the suburbes therof, Esthuma and the suburbes therof,
15 Holon and the suburbes therof, Debir and the suburbes therof,
16 Ain and the suburbes therof, Iuta and the suburbes therof, Beth Semes and the
suburbes therof, euen nyne cities of these two trybes.
17 But of the trybe of Ben Iamin they gaue foure cities, Gibeon and ye suburbes
therof, Gaba, and the suburbes therof,
18 Anathot and the suburbes therof, Almon and the suburbes therof:
19 so that all the cities of the children of Aaron the prest were thirtene with
their suburbes.
20 The kynreds of the other children of Kahath the Leuites, had by their lott
foure cities, of the trybe of Ephraim,
21 and they gaue the the fre cite of the deedsleiers, Seche and the suburbes
therof vpon mount Ephraim Gaser and the suburbes therof,
22 Kibzaim and the suburbes therof, Bethron and the suburbes therof.
23 Of the trybe of Dan foure cities, Eltheke and ye suburbes therof, Gibthon and
the suburbes therof,
24 Aialon and the suburbes therof, Gath Rimon and the suburbes therof.
25 Of the halfe trybe of Manasses two cities, Thaenach and the suburbes therof,
Gath Rimon and the suburbes therof:
26 so that all the cities of the other children of ye kynred of Kahath, were ten
with their suburbes.
27 But vnto the children of Gerson amonge the kynreds of the Leuites were geuen,
Of the halfe trybe of Manasse two cities, the fre cite for the deedslayer, Gola
in Basan and the suburbes therof, Beasthra, and the suburbes therof.
28 Of the trybe of Isachar foure cities, Kision and the suburbes therof, Dabrach
and the suburbes therof,
29 Iarmuth and the suburbes therof, Engannim and the suburbes therof.
30 Of the trybe of Asser foure cities, Miseal, Abdon,
31 Helkath and Rehob with the suburbes therof.
32 Of the trybe of Nephtali thre cities, the fre cite Kedes (for the deedsleyer)
in Galile, Hamoth, Dor, and Karthan with the suburbes therof:
33 so that all the cities of the kynred of the Gersonites were thirtene wt their
suburbes.
34 Vnto the kynreds of Merari the other Leuites were geuen, Of the trybe of
Zabulon foure cities, Iakneam, Kartha,
35 Dimna and Nahalal wt ye suburbes therof.
36 Of the trybe of Ruben foure cities, Bezer, Iahza,
37 Kedemoth and Mephaat with their suburbes.
38 Of the trybe of Gad foure cities, the fre cite for the deedsleyer, Ramoth in
Gilead, Mahanaim,
39 Hesbon and Iaeser with their suburbes:
40 so that all the cities of the children of Merari amonge their kynreds of ye
other Leuites, were twolue.
41 Thus all the cities of the Leuites amonge ye possession of the children of
Israel, were eight and fortye with their suburbes.
42 And these cities were so dealte out, that euery one had their suburbes rounde
aboute, the one as the other.
43 Thus the LORDE gaue the children of Israel all the londe, which he had sworne
vnto their fathers to geue: & they toke possession of it, and dwelt therin.
44 And the LORDE gaue the rest before all those yt were aboute them like as he
sware vnto their fathers, & none of their enemies stode agaynst the, but all
their enmies delyuered he in to their hande.
45 And their myssed nothinge of all the good that the LORDE had promysed vnto
the house of Israel, it came euery whyt.

Chapter 22

1 Then Iosua called ye Rubenites and Gaddites, and ye halfe trybe of Manasse,
2 and sayde vnto them: Ye haue kepte all, that Moses the seruaunt of the LORDE
commaunded you, and haue herkened vnto my voyce in all yt I haue commauded you.
3 Ye haue not forsaken youre brethre a longe season, vnto this daye, and haue
wayted vpon the commaundement of the LORDE youre God.
4 For so moch now as the LORDE youre God hath broughte youre brethre to rest, as
he promysed them, turne you now, and go youre waye to youre tentes in to the
londe of youre possession, which Moses the seruaunt of the LORDE gaue you beyode
Iordane.
5 But take diligent hede now, that ye do acordinge to the commaundement and lawe
which Moses the seruaunt of the LORDE hath commaunded: That ye loue the LORDE
youre God, and walke in all his wayes, and kepe his commaundementes, and cleue
vnto him, and serue him with all youre hert and with all youre soule.
6 So Iosua blessed them, and let them go. And they wente vnto their tentes.
7 Vnto the halfe trybe of Manasse had Moses geuen possession at Basan: vnto the
other halfe gaue Iosua amonge their brethren on this syde Iordane westwarde. And
whan he let them go to their tentes and blessed them,
8 he sayde vnto them: Ye come home agayne with greate good vnto youre tetes,
with exceadynge moch catell, syluer, golde, brasse, yron and rayment, distribute
therfore the spoyle of youre enemyes amonge youre brethren.
9 So the Rubenites, Gaddites, and the halfe trybe of Manasse returned, and wente
from the children of Israel out of Silo (which lyeth in the londe of Canaan) to
go in to the countre of Gilead to the londe of their possession, that they
mighte possesse it, acordynge to the commaundement of the LORDE by Moses.
10 And whan they came vnto the heapes by Iordane, which lye in the londe of
Canaan, the same Rubenites, Gaddites, and the halfe trybe of Manasses buylded
there besyde Iordane, a fayre greate altare.
11 But whan the children of Israel herde saye: Beholde, the children of Ruben,
the children of Gad, and the halfe trybe of Manasse haue buylded an altare ouer
agaynst the londe of Canaan vpon the heapes by Iordane on this syde the children
of Israel,
12 they gathered them selues together with the whole congregacion at Silo, to go
vp agaynst the with an armye.
13 And (in the meane season) they sent to them in to the londe of Gilead,
Phineas the sonne of Eleasar the prest,
14 and with him ten chefe prynces amonge the houses of their fathers, out of
euery tribe in Israel one.
15 And they came to the children of Ruben, to the children of Gad, and to the
halfe trybe of Manasse in the londe of Gilead, and sayde:
16 Thus sayeth the whole congregacion of the LORDE vnto you: What trespace is
this, yt ye haue trespaced agaynst the God of Israel, that ye shulde turne backe
from ye LORDE this daye, to builde you an altare, for to fall awaye from the
LORDE?
17 Haue we not ynough of the wickednesse of Peor? from the which we are not yet
clensed this daye, and there came a plage amonge the congregacion of the LORDE:
18 and ye turne you backe this daye from the LORDE, and this daye are ye fallen
awaye from the LORDE, that he maye be wroth to daye or tomorow at the whole
congregacion of the LORDE.
19 Yf the londe of youre possession be vncleane, then come ouer in to the londe
that the LORDE possesseth, where the dwellynge of the LORDE is, and take
possessions amonge vs, and fall not awaye from the LORDE and from vs, to builde
you an altare without the altare of the LORDE oure God.
20 Did not Achan the sonne of Serah trespace in the thinge that was damned, and
the wrath came ouer ye whole congregacion of Israel and he wente not downe alone
for his mysdede?
21 Then answered the children of Ruben, and the children of Gad, and the halfe
trybe of Manasse, and sayde vnto the heades and prynces of Israel:
22 The mightie God ye LORDE, the mightie God the LORDE knoweth, and Israel
knoweth also, yf this be a trangressynge or trespacynge agaynst the LORDE, then
let it not helpe vs this daye:
23 Yf we haue buylded the altare, because we wolde turne awaye backe from the
LORDE, to offre burntofferynges or meatofferinges theron, or to make eny
deedofferynges vpon it, then let the LORDE requyre it:
24 And yf we haue not done it rather for very feare of this thinge, and sayde:
To daye or tomorow mighte youre children saye vnto oure children: What haue ye
to do with the LORDE the God of Israel?
25 The LORDE hath set Iordane for a border betwene vs and you ye children of
Ruben and Gad, ye haue no porcion in the LORDE: By this shulde youre children
make oure children to turne awaye from the feare of the LORDE.
26 Therfore sayde we: Let vs make oure children an altare, not for sacrifice,
ner for burntofferinge,
27 but that it maye be a toke betwene vs and you, and oure posterities, that we
maye serue the LORDE in his sighte with oure burntofferinges, deedofferinges,
and other offeringes: and yt youre children to daye or tomorow neade not to saye
vnto oure children: Ye haue no parte in the LORDE.
28 And we sayde: But yf they shulde speake so vnto vs, or to oure posterities to
daye or tomorow, then maye we saye: Beholde the symilitude of ye altare of the
LORDE, which oure fathers made, not for sacrifyce, ner for burntofferynge, but
for a wytnesse betwene vs and you.
29 God forbydde, that we shulde fall awaye from the LORDE, to turne backe from
him this daye, and to buylde an altare for sacrifice, for burntofferinge and for
eny presente, without ye altare of the LORDE oure God, that stondeth before his
Habitacion.
30 But whan Phineas the prest, and the chefe of the congregacion, the prynces of
Israel which were with him, herde these wordes, that the children of Ruben, Gad,
and Manasse had spoken, they pleased them well.
31 And Phineas the sonne of Eleasar the prest sayde vnto the children of Rube,
Gad and Manasse: This daye we knowe, that ye LORDE is amonge vs, in that ye haue
not trespaced agaynst the LORDE in this dede. Now haue ye delyuered the children
of Israel out of the hande of the LORDE.
32 Then Phineas the sonne of Eleasar the prest, and the rulers returned out of
the londe of Gilead, from the children of Ruben and Gad, vnto ye londe of Canaa
to the children of Israel, and brought them worde agayne of the matter.
33 Then were the children of Israel well cotente with the thinge. And they
praysed the God of Israel, and sayde nomore that they wolde go vp agaynst them
with an armye, to destroye the londe that the childre of Ruben and Gad dwelt in.
34 And ye childre of Ruben and Gad called the name of the altare: This altare be
witnesse betwene vs, that the LORDE is God.

Chapter 23

1 And after a longe season, whan the LORDE had broughte Israel to rest from all
their enemies rounde aboute: and Iosua was now olde and well stricken in age,
2 he called all Israel and their Elders, heades, iudges, and officers, and sayde
vnto them: I am olde and well aged,
3 and ye haue sene all that the LORDE youre God hath done vnto all these nacions
in youre sighte. For the LORDE youre God himself hath foughte for you.
4 Beholde, I haue parted amonge you ye renaunt of the nacions by lot, vnto euery
trybe his enheritaunce from Iordane forth, and all the nacions whom I haue roted
out vnto the greate see westwarde.
5 And the LORDE youre God shal thrust them out before you, and dryue them awaye
from you, that ye maye haue their londe in possession, as the LORDE youre God
hath promysed you.
6 Be stroge now therfore, that ye maye obserue and do all that is wrytten in the
boke of the lawe of Moses: so that ye turne not asyde from it, nether to the
righte hande ner to the lefte:
7 that ye come not amonge ye remnaunt of these nacios, which are with you: And
se that ye make no mencion ner sweare by the names of their goddes, nether serue
them, ner bowe youre selues vnto them:
8 But cleue vnto the LORDE youre God, as ye haue done vnto this daye:
9 the shal the LORDE dryue awaye greate and mightie nacions before you, like as
there hath no man bene able to stonde before you vnto this daye.
10 One of you shall chace a thousande: for the LORDE youre God fighteth for you,
acordinge as he promysed you.
11 Take diligent hede therfore vnto youre soules, that ye loue the LORDE youre
God.
12 But yf ye turne backe, and cleue vnto these other nacions, and make mariages
with them, so that ye come amoge them, and they amonge you,
13 be ye sure then, that the LORDE youre God shall nomore dryue out all these
nacions before you, but they shall be vnto you a snare and net, and prickes in
youre sydes, and thornes in youre eyes, vntyll he haue destroyed you from the
good lode, which the LORDE youre God hath geuen you.
14 Beholde, this daye do I go the waye of all the worlde, and ye shal knowe euen
from all youre hert and from all youre soule, that there hath not fayled one
worde of all the good that the LORDE youre God promysed you.
15 Now like as all the good is come that the LORDE youre God promised you: euen
so shal the LORDE cause all euell to come vpon you, tyll he haue destroied you
from this good londe, which the LORDE youre God hath geuen you:
16 yf ye transgresse ye couenaunt of the LORDE youre God, which he hath
commaunded you. And yf ye go yor waye and serue other goddes, and worshipe the,
then shall the wrath of the LORDE waxe whote ouer you, & shall shortly destroye
you out of the good londe, yt he hath geuen you.

Chapter 24

1 Iosua gathered all the trybes of Israel together vnto Sichem, and called the
Elders of Israel, the heades, iudges and officers. And wha they were come before
God,
2 he sayde vnto all the people: Thus sayeth the LORDE the God of Israel: Yor
fathers dwelt afore time beyode ye water, Abraha & Nahor wt Tarah their father &
serued other goddes.
3 Then toke I yor father Abraham beyonde the water, & caused him to walke in the
londe of Canaan, & multiplied his sede, and gaue him Isaac,
4 and vnto Isaac I gaue Iacob and Esau, and gaue Esau mout Seir to possesse As
for Iacob, & his childre, they wente downe in to Egipte.
5 Then sent I Moses and Aaron, and plaged Egipte as I haue done amonge the.
6 After yt brought I you and youre fathers out of Egipte. And whan ye came to ye
see, and the Egipcians folowed vpon youre fathers with charettes and horse men
vnto the reed see,
7 then cryed they vnto the LORDE, which put a darcknesse betwene you and the
Egipcians, and broughte the see vpon them, and ouerwhelmed them. And youre eyes
haue sene what I dyd to ye Egipcians, & ye dwelt in ye wildernes a loge season.
8 And I broughte you in to ye londe of the Amorites, which dwelt beionde
Iordane: & wha they fought agaynst you, I delyuered them into yor hande, that ye
mighte haue their countre in possession, and I destroyed them before you.
9 Then Balac the sonne of Ziphor the kynge of the Moabites gat him vp, and
foughte agaynst Israel: and he sente and bad call Balaam the sonne of Beor, to
curse you,
10 neuertheles I wolde not heare him, but I blessed you, and delyuered you out
of his hande.
11 And whan ye wente ouer Iordane, and came vnto Iericho, the citesyns of
Iericho foughte agaynst you, the Amorites, Pheresites, Cananites, Hethites,
Girgosites, Heuites, & Iebusites: howbeit I delyuered the into youre hande.
12 And I sent hornettes before you, which droue them out before you, namely the
two kynges of ye Amorites: not thorow thy swerde, ner thorow thy bowe.
13 And I haue geuen you a londe whervpon ye bestowed no laboure, and cities
which ye haue not buylded, that ye might dwell therin, and that ye might eate of
the vynyardes and olyue trees which ye haue not planted.
14 Feare the LORDE now therfore, and serue him perfectly and in the trueth, and
let go the goddes, whom youre fathers serued beyonde the water and in Egipte,
and serue ye ye LORDE.
15 But yf ye like not to serue the LORDE, the chose you this daye whom ye wyll
serue: the God whom youre fathers serued beionde ye water, or ye goddes of the
Amorites, in whose lode ye dwell. As for me and my house, we wyll serue the
LORDE.
16 Then answered the people, and saide: God forbidde, that we shulde forsake the
LORDE, & serue other goddes.
17 For the LORDE oure God brought vs and oure fathers out of the londe of Egipte
fro the house of bondage, and did soch greate tokens before oure eyes, and
preserued vs all ye waye that we wente, and amonge all the nacions, whom we
trauayled by.
18 And the LORDE thrust out before vs all the people of the Amorites that dwelt
in the londe. Therfore wyll we also serue the LORDE, for he is oure God.
19 Iosua sayde vnto the people: Ye can not serue the LORDE: for he is an holy
God, mightie, and gelous, which spareth not youre trangressions and synnes.
20 But yf ye forsake the LORDE, and serue a straunge god, then shall the LORDE
turne him, and do you euell, and consume you, after that he hath done you good.
21 The people sayde vnto Iosua: Not so, but we will serue the LORDE.
22 Then sayde Iosua vnto the people: Ye are witnesses ouer youre selues, that ye
haue chosen you the LORDE, to serue him. And they sayde: Yee.
23 Then put awaye from you (sayde he) the straunge goddes yt are amonge you, and
enclyne youre hert vnto the LORDE the God of Israel.
24 And the people sayde vnto Iosua: We wyll serue the LORDE oure God, and be
obedient vnto his voyce.
25 So Iosua made a couenaunt with the people ye same daye, and laied statutes &
lawes before them at Sichem.
26 And Iosua wrote this acte in the boke of the lawe of God, and toke a greate
stone, & set it vp there vnder an oke, which was in ye Sanctuary of ye LORDE,
27 and sayde vnto all the people: Beholde, this stone shall be witnesse ouer
you: For it hath herde all the wordes of the LORDE, which he hath spoken vnto
vs, and shall be a witnesse ouer you, that ye denye not youre God.
28 So Iosua let the people go euery one to his enheritauce.
29 And it fortuned after these actes, yt Iosua the sonne of Nun ye seruaut of
the LORDE dyed, whan he was an hundreth and ten yeare olde,
30 and was buried in the border of his enheritauce at Thimnath Serah, which
lyeth on the mount Ephraim, on the north side of mount Gaas.
31 And the children of Israel serued the LORDE as longe as Iosua lyued, and the
Elders (that lyued longe after Iosua) which knewe all the workes of ye LORDE,
that he had done vnto Israel.
32 The bones of Ioseph, which the children of Israel had broughte out of Egipte,
buried they at Sichem, in the pece of the londe, yt Iacob boughte of the
children of Hemor ye father of Sichem for an hundreth pens, and was the
enheritaunce of the children of Ioseph.
33 Eleasar the sonne of Aaron died also, and they buried him at Gibeath, which
was Phineas his sonnes, that was geuen him vpon mount Ephraim.


Judges

Chapter 1

1 After the death of Iosua the children of Israel axed the LORDE, and sayde: Who
shall go vp & be or captayne of warre against ye Cananites?
2 The LORDE sayde: Iuda shall go vp. Beholde, I haue delyuered the londe in to
his hande.
3 Then sayde Iuda vnto his brother Simeon: Go vp wt me in to my lot, and let vs
fighte against the Cananites, then wyl I go agayne with the in to yi lot: So
Simeon wente with him.
4 Now whan Iuda wente vp the LORDE delyuered the Cananites and Pheresites in to
their hades, & they slewe te thousande me at Besek:
5 & they foude Adoni Besek at Besek, & foughte agaynst him, and slewe the
Cananites and Pheresites.
6 But Adoni Besek fled, and they folowed after him: and whan they had ouertaken
him, they cut of the thobes of his handes and fete.
7 Then sayde Adoni Besek: Thre score and ten kynges wt the thombes of their
hades & fete cut of, gathered vp the meate yt was lefte vnder my table. Now as I
haue done, so hath God rewarded me agayne. And he was broughte vnto Ierusale,
where he dyed.
8 But ye childre of Iuda foughte agaynst Ierusalem, and wane it, and smote it
with the edge of the swerde, and set fyre vpon the cite.
9 Then wente the children of Israel downe, to fighte agaynst ye Cananites, yt
dwelt vpon the mount, and towarde the south, and in the valleys.
10 And Iuda wente agaynst the Cananites, which dwelt at Hebron. (As for Hebron,
it was called Kiriatharba afore tyme) and they smote Sesai, & Achiman, and
Thalmai.
11 And from thence he wente agaynst ye inhabiters of Debir (but Debir was called
Kiriath Sepher aforetyme.)
12 And Caleb sayde: He yt smyteth Kiriath Sepher, & wynneth it, I wyl geue him
my doughter Achsa to wife.
13 Then Athniel the sonne of Kenas, Calebs yongest brother wane it. And he gaue
him his doughter Achsa to wife.
14 And it fortuned yt whan they wete in, she was counceled of hir housbande, to
axe a pece of londe of hir father. And she fell from the asse. The sayde Caleb
vnto her: What ayleth ye?
15 She sayde: Geue me a blessynge, for thou hast geuen me a south & drye londe,
geue me also a watery londe. Then gaue he her a londe that was watery aboue and
beneth.
16 And the childre of ye Kenyte Moses brother in lawe, wente vp out of the palme
cite, with the children of Iuda in to the wyldernesse of Iuda, that lyeth on ye
south syde of the cite Arad: and wente their waye, & dwelt amonge the people.
17 And Iuda wente with his brother Simeon, & they smote the Cananites at
Zephath, & damned them, & called the name of the cite Horma.
18 Iuda also wanne Gasa with the borders therof, & Ascalon with hir borders, &
Accaron with the coastes therof.
19 And the LORDE was wt Iuda, so that he conquered the mountaynes: but them that
dwelt in the valley coulde he not conquere, because they had yron charettes.
20 And acordinge as Moses had sayde, they gaue Hebron vnto Caleb, which droue
out the thre sonnes of Enak.
21 Howbeit ye children of Ben Iamin droue not out ye Iebusites which dwelt at
Ierusalem, but ye Iebusites dwelt amonge the children of Ben Iamin at Ierusalem
vnto this daye.
22 Likewyse the children of Ioseph wete vp also vnto Bethel, & the LORDE was wt
the.
23 And the house of Ioseph spyed out Bethel (which afore tyme was called Lus)
24 and the watch men sawe a man goinge out of the cite, and saide vnto him:
Shewe vs where we maye come in to the cite, & we wyll shewe mercy vpon the.
25 And whan he had shewed them where they mighte come in to the cite, they smote
ye cite wt the edge of the swerde: but they let the man go & all his frendes.
26 Then wete the same man vp in to ye countre of the Hethites, & buylded a cite,
and called it Lus, & so is the name of it yet vnto this daye.
27 And Manasses droue not out Beth Sean wt the vyllages therof, ner Thaenah with
the vyllages therof, ner the inhabiters of Dor with the vyllages therof: ner the
inbiters of Iebleam wt the vyllages therof, ner the inhabiters of Mageddo wt the
vyllages therof, and ye Cananites beganne to dwell in the same londe.
28 But whan Israel was mightie, he made the Cananites tributaries, and droue
them not out.
29 In like maner Ephraim droue not out ye Cananites that dwelt at Gaser, but the
Cananites dwelt amonge them at Gaser.
30 Zabulon also droue not out the inhabiters of Kitron and Nahalol, but ye
Cananites dwelt amonge them, & were tributaries.
31 Asser droue not out ye inhabiters of Aco, & ye inhabiters of Sidon, of
Ahelab, of Achsib, of Helba, of Aphik & of Rehob,
32 but ye Asserites dwelt amoge the Cananites that dwelt in the lode, for they
droue the not out.
33 Nephtali droue not out ye inhabiters of Beth Semes, ner of Beth Anath, but
dwelt amonge the Cananites which dwelt in the londe: howbeit they of Beth Semes
and of Beth Anath were tributaries.
34 And the Amorites subdued the childre of Dan vpon the mountaine, and suffred
them not to come downe in to the valley.
35 And the Amorites beganne to dwell vpo mount Heres at Aiolon and at Saalbim.
Howbeit ye hande of ye house of Ioseph was to sore for them, and they became
tributaries.
36 And the border of the Amorites was, as a ma goeth vp towarde Acrabim, and
from the rocke, & from the toppe.

Chapter 2

1 But there came vp a messauger of ye LORDE from Gilgall vnto Bochim, and sayde:
I haue caried you vp hither out of Egipte, and broughte you in to the londe that
I sware vnto youre fathers, & saide: I wyl neuer breake my couenaunt wt you,
2 that ye shulde make no couenaunt with the indwellers of this londe, but breake
downe their altares: Neuertheles ye haue not herkened vnto my voyce. Wherfore
haue ye done this?
3 Then saide I morouer: I wil not dryue them out before you, that they maye be a
fall vnto you, and their goddes a snare.
4 And whan ye messaunger of the LORDE had spoken these wordes vnto all the
children of Israel, the people lefte vp their voyce, & wepte,
5 and called ye name of the place Bochim, and offred there vnto the LORDE.
6 For whan Iosua had sente awaye ye people, and the childre of Israel were gone,
euery one to his enheritauce, for to take possession of the londe,
7 the people serued the LORDE as longe as Iosua lyued and ye Elders, which lyued
longe after Iosua, and yt sawe all the greate workes of the LORDE, which he dyd
for Israel.
8 Now whan Iosua the sonne of Nun, the seruaunt of the LORDE, was deed (whan he
was an hudreth and ten yeare olde)
9 they buried him in ye border of his inheritaunce at Timnath Heres vpon mount
Ephraim on the north syde of mount Gaas.
10 And whan all the same generacion was gathered vnto their fathers, there came
vp after them another generacion, which knew not the LORDE, ner the workes that
he had done for Israel.
11 Then wroughte the children of Israel euell before the LORDE, and serued
Baalim,
12 and forsoke ye LORDE the God of their fathers (which broughte them out of the
londe of Egipte) and folowed other goddes & the goddes of the nacions that dwelt
rounde aboute them, & worshipped them, & displeased the LORDE:
13 for they forsoke ye LORDE euer more and more, and serued Baal and Astaroth.
14 Then ye wrath of the LORDE waxed whote vpo Israel, & he delyuered the in to
ye handes of those yt spoyled the, that they mighte spoyle them, & solde the in
to the handes of their enemies roude aboute, & they were not able to withstonde
their enemies eny more,
15 but what waye so euer they wolde out, ye hade of the LORDE was agaynst the to
their hurte (euen as the LORDE sayde and sware vnto them) and they were sore
oppressed.
16 Now whan the LORDE raysed them vp iudges, which helped them out of the hande
of soch as spoyled the,
17 they folowed not the iudges nether, but wente a whoringe after other goddes,
& worshipped them, and were soone gone out of ye waye yt their fathers walked
in, to heare the comaundementes of the LORDE, & dyd not as they dyd.
18 But whan ye LORDE raysed vp iudges vnto them, the LORDE was with ye iudge,
and helped them out of the hande of their enemies, as longe as the iudge lyued.
For the LORDE had pitie of their complaynte, which they made ouer those yt
subdued the and oppressed them.
19 Neuertheles whan the iudge dyed, they turned backe, and marred all more the
their fathers, so that they folowed other goddes to serue them and to bowe them
selues vnto them: they wolde not fall from their purposes, ner from their
obstinate waye.
20 Therfore waxed the wrath of the LORDE allwaie so whote ouer Israel, that he
sayde: For so moch as the people haue transgressed my couenaunt, which I
commaunded their fathers, & folowe not my voyce,
21 I wil from hence forth dryue out none of the Heythen, who Iosua lefte behynde
him, wha he dyed,
22 that by them I maye proue Israel, whether they wil kepe the waye of the
LORDE, to walke therin, as their fathers dyd, or not.
23 Thus the LORDE suffred all these nacions, so that in a shorte tyme he droue
them not out, whom he had not geuen ouer in to Iosuas hande.

Chapter 3

1 These are the nacions, whom the LORDE suffred to remayne, yt by them he mighte
proue Israel, which had no vnderstondinge in the warres of Canaan:
2 onely because yt the trybes of the childre of Israel might knowe & lerne to
warre, which afore had no knowlege therof,
3 namely: The fyue lordes of ye Philistynes, & all the Cananites, & Sidonians, &
the Hethites yt dwelt vpon mount Libanus, fro mount Baal Hermon, vntyll a man
come vnto Hemath.
4 The same remayned, that Israel mighte be proued by them, that it mighte be
knowne whether they wolde herken to the commaundementes of the LORDE, which he
commaunded their fathers by Moses.
5 Now whan the children of Israel dwelt thus amoge the Cananites, Hethites,
Amorites, Pheresites, Heuites & Iebusites,
6 they toke their doughters to wyues, & gaue their doughters vnto their sonnes,
& serued their goddes,
7 and wroughte wickednes before the LORDE, & forgat the LORDE their God, &
serued Baalim & Astaroth.
8 Then ye wrath of ye LORDE waxed whote ouer Israel, & he solde the vnder the
hade of Cusan Risathaim kynge of Mesopotamia, & so ye childre of Israel serued
Cusan Risathaim viij. yeare.
9 The cried the childre of Israel vnto the LORDE, & the LORDE raysed the vp a
sauior which delyuered the, namely Athniel ye sonne of Kenas, Calebs yongest
brother.
10 And the sprete of the LORDE came vpon him, & he was iudge in Israel, & wente
out a warre fare. And ye LORDE delyuered Cusan Risathaim the kynge of Syria in
to his hade, so yt his hande was to stroge for him.
11 Then was the londe in rest fortye yeares. And Athniel the sonne of Kenas
dyed.
12 But the children of Israel dyd yet more euell before the LORDE. Then the
LORDE strengthed Eglon the kynge of ye Moabites agaynst ye childre of Israel,
because they wrought wickednesse before ye LORDE.
13 And he gathered vnto him ye childre of Ammon, & the Amalechites, & wete and
smote Israel, and conquered the cite of the palme trees.
14 And the children of Israel serued Eglon ye kynge of ye Moabites eightene
yeare.
15 The cried they vnto the LORDE. And the LORDE raysed the vp a sauioure, namely
Ehud the sonne of Gera ye sonne of Iemini, which was a man that mighte do
nothinge with his righte hande. And wha the childre of Israel sent a present by
him vnto Eglon the kynge of the Moabites,
16 Ehud made him a two edged dagger of a spanne longe, & gyrded it vnder his
garmet vpo his righte thye,
17 & broughte ye present vnto Eglon the kynge of ye Moabites. As for Eglon, he
was a very fat man.
18 And whan he had delyuered the presente, he let the people go that had caried
the present,
19 and he himselfe turned backe from the Idols at Gilgall, & caused to saye thus
(vnto the kynge:) I haue a secrete thinge to tell the O kynge. And he commaunded
to kepe sylence, & all they that stode aboute him, wente out from him.
20 And Ehud came in vnto him. He sat in a syled Sommer perler, which was for him
selfe alone. And Ehud saide: I haue somwhat to saye vnto the of God. The rose he
vp fro his seate.
21 But Ehud put forth his lefte hande, & toke the dagger from his righte thye, &
thrust it in to his bely,
22 so yt the hefte wente in also after the blade, & the fatt closed the hefte:
for he drue not ye dagger out of his bely, & ye fylthines departed fro him.
23 But Ehud gat him out at the backe dore, & put to ye dore after him, and
lockte it.
24 Now whan he was gone, his seruauntes came in, and sawe that the dore of the
Sommer perler was lockte, and they sayde: peraduenture he is gone to the preuye
in the syled Sommer perler.
25 But whan they had wayted so loge tyll they were ashamed (for no man opened
the perler dore) they toke the keye, and opened it. Beholde, then laye their
lorde deed vpo the earth.
26 As for Ehud, he was gotten awaye, whyle they made so longe tariege, & he
wente ouer by the Idols, and ranne his waye vnto Seirath.
27 And whan he came in he blewe ye trompet vpo mount Ephraim, and the children
of Israel wente with him from the mount, and he before them,
28 and he saide vnto them: Folowe me, for the LORDE hath delyuered the Moabites
youre enemies in to yor hande. And they folowed him, & wanne ye ferye of
Iordane, yt goeth towarde Moab, & suffred no man to go ouer,
29 and at ye same tyme they smote of the Moabites vpo a ten thousande men, all
nobles and men of armes, so that there escaped not one.
30 Thus were the Moabites broughte vnder the hande of the children of Israel at
that tyme, and the londe was in rest foure score yeares.
31 Afterwarde was Samgar ye sonne of Anath, which slewe sixe hundreth
Philistynes with an oxes gadd, and delyuered Israel also.

Chapter 4

1 But the children of Israel dyd yet more euell before ye LORDE, whan Ehud was
deed.
2 And the LORDE solde the in to the hande of Iabin the kynge of the Cananites,
which dwelt at Hazor, & the chefe captayne of his hooste was Sissera, and he
dwelt at Haroseth of the Heythen.
3 And the childre of Israel cried vnto the LORDE: for he had nyne hudreth yron
charettes, and subdued the children of Israel by violence twentye yeare.
4 At ye same tyme was Iudgesse in Israel the prophetisse Debbora, the wyfe of
Lapidoth,
5 and she dwelt vnder ye palme of Debbora betwene Rama & Bethel, vpon mount
Ephraim, and the children of Israel came vp vnto her to the lawe.
6 She sent forth, & called for Barak the sonne of Abi Noam of Kedes Nephtali,
and sayde vnto him: Hath not ye LORDE the God of Israel comaunded the: Go thy
waye, and get the vp vnto mount Thabor, & take wt the ten thousande men of the
children of Nephtali & Zabulon?
7 For I wil make Sissera the chefe captayne of Iabins hoost to come to the vnto
ye water of Cyson, with his charettes and with his multitude, and I wyll delyuer
him in to thy hande.
8 Barak sayde vnto her: Yf thou wilt come wt me, I wil go: but yf thou wilt not
come with me, I wil not go.
9 She sayde: I wyll go with the: neuerthelesse the prayse shal not be thine in
this iourney that thou goest, but ye LORDE shal delyuer Sissera in to a womas
hande. So Debbora gat hir vp, and wente with Barak vnto Kedes.
10 Then Barak called Zabulon and Nephtali vnto Kedes, and wete on fote wt ten
thousande men. And Debbora wente wt him also.
11 As for Heber the Kenyte he was departed from the Kenytes from the children of
Hobab Moses brother in lawe, and had pitched his tent by ye Oke of Zaanaim
besyde Kedes.
12 Then was it tolde Sissera, yt Barak the sonne of Abi Noa, was gone vp vnto
mout Thabor:
13 & he gathered all his charettes together, nyne C. yron charettes, & all the
people yt was with him from Haroseth of the Heythe, vnto the water Cyson.
14 Debbora sayde vnto Barak: Vp, this is the daie wherin the LORDE hath
delyuered Sissera in to yi hande: for ye LORDE shal go forth before ye. So Barak
wente fro mount Thabor, and ye ten thousande men after him.
15 But the LORDE discomfited Sissera wt all his charettes & hoost, & made the
afrayed of the edge of the swerde before Barak, so yt Sissera leapte of his
charet, & fled on fote.
16 Neuerthelesse Barak folowed vpon the charettes & the hoost vnto Haroseth of
the Heythen, & all Sisseras hoost fell thorow ye edge of the swerde, so yt not
one escaped.
17 As for Sissera, he fled on fote vnto the tente of Iael, ye wife of Heber ye
Kenite. For there was peace betwene kynge Iabin at Hasor, & the house of Heber
the Kenite.
18 Iael wete forth to mete Sissera, & sayde vnto him: Turne in my lorde, turne
in to me, & be not afrayed. And he turned in vnto her in to the tente, & she
couered him with a garmet.
19 He sayde vnto her: I praye ye geue me a litle water to drynke, for I am a
thyrst. The opened she a mylke pot, & gaue him to drynke, and couered him.
20 And he sayde vnto her: Stode in the tente dore, & yf one come & axe, is there
eny man here? saye Noman.
21 Then Iael the wife of Heber toke a nale of the tente, and an hammer in hir
hande, & wente in preuely vnto him, & smote the nale in thorow the temples of
his heade, so yt he sancke to ye earth. As for him, he was fallen on a slomber,
and weery, and so he dyed.
22 But wha Barak folowed after Sissera, Iael wente for to mete him, and sayde
vnto him: Come hither, I wil shewe the the man, whom thou sekest. And whan he
came in vnto her, he sawe Sissera deed, & the nale stickinge in his temples.
23 Thus God broughte downe Iabin the kynge of the Cananites before the children
of Israel at that tyme,
24 the hande of the children of Israel wente & subdued Iabin ye kynge of the
Cananites, tyll they had roted him out.

Chapter 5

1 Then Debbora and Barac the sonne of Abi Noam, sange at the same tyme, and
sayde:
2 Now that ye are come to rest, ye quyete men in Israel, prayse ye LORDE, amonge
soch of the people as be fre wyllinge.
3 Heare ye kynges, & herken to ye prynces: I wyl, I wyl synge to the LORDE, euen
vnto the LORDE ye God of Israel wil I playe.
4 LORDE, whan thou wentest out from Seir, & camest in from the felde of Edom, ye
earth quaked, the heauen dropped, and the cloudes dropped with water.
5 The hilles melted before the LORDE, Sinai before the LORDE the God of Israel.
6 In the tyme of Sanger the sonne of Anath: In the tyme of Iael the wayes
fayled: and they that shulde haue gone in pathes, walked thorow croked wayes.
7 There was scarcenesse, there was scarcenesse of housbande men in Israel,
vntyll I Debbora came vp, vntyll I came vp a mother in Israel.
8 God hath chosen a new thinge. He hath ouercome ye portes in battayll: and yet
was there sene nether shylde ner speare amonge fortye thousande in Israel.
9 My hert loueth ye teachers of Israel: ye yt are frewyllinge amonge the people,
prayse the LORDE.
10 Ye that ryde vpo fayre Asses, ye that syt in iudgment and geue sentence, ye
that go by the waye, prayse the LORDE.
11 Wha ye archers cried betwene ye drawers of water, then was it spoke of ye
righteousnes of the LORDE, of the righteousnes of his husbande men in Israel:
then ruled the people of the LORDE vnder the gates.
12 Vp Debbora vp, get the vp, get the vp, & rehearse a songe. Arise Barak, &
catch him yt catched the, thou sonne of Abinoam.
13 Then had the desolate the rule with the mightie of the people. The LORDE had
ye dominion thorow the giauntes.
14 Out of Ephraim was their rote against Amalek, and after him Ben Iamin in thy
people. Out of Machir haue teachers ruled, and out of Zabulo are there become
gouernours thorow the wrytinge penne.
15 And out of Isachar there were prynces with Debbora, and Isachar was as Barak
in ye valley, sent with his people on fote: As for Ruben, he stode hye in his
awne consayte, and separated him selfe from vs.
16 Why abodest thou betwixte the borders, whan thou herdest the noyse of the
flockes? because Ruben stode hye in his awne cosayte, and separated him selfe
from vs.
17 Gilead abode beyonde Iordane, and why dwelt Dan amonge the shippes? Asser sat
in the hauen of the see, and taried in his porcions.
18 But Zabulons people ioperde their life vnto death: Nephtali also in the toppe
of ye felde of Merom.
19 The kynges came & foughte, then foughte ye kynges of the Cananites at Thaanah
by the water of Megiddo, but spoyle of money broughte they not there from.
20 From heaue were they foughte agaynst, the starres in their courses foughte
with Sissera.
21 The broke Cyson ouerwhelmed them, the broke Kedumim, yee the broke Cyson. My
soule treade thou vpon the mightie.
22 Then made the horse fete a russhinge together, for the greate violence of
their mightie horse men.
23 Curse the cite of Meros (sayde ye angell of the LORDE) curse the citesyns
therof, because they come not to helpe ye LORDE, to helpe the LORDE to the
giauntes.
24 Blessynge amonge wemen haue Iael the wife of Heber the Kenite: blessinge haue
she in the tente amonge the wemen.
25 Whan he axed water, she gaue him mylke, & broughte forth butter in a lordly
disshe.
26 She toke holde of the nale wt hir hande, & the smyth hammer with hir righte
hande, and smote Sissera, cut of his heade & pearsed and bored thorow his
temples.
27 He bowed him selfe downe at hir fete, he fell downe, and laye there. He sanke
downe, and fell at hir fete: whan he had soncke downe, he laye there destroyed.
28 His mother loked out at the wyndowe, & cried piteously thorow the trallace:
Why tarieth his charet out so loge, that he cometh not? Wherfore do the wheles
of his charet make so longe tarienge?
29 The wysest amoge his ladies answered, & sayde vnto her:
30 Shulde they not finde & deuide the spoyle, vnto euery man a fayre mayde or
two for a pray, & partye coloured garmetes of nedle worke to Sissera for a
spoyle, partye coloured garmentes of nedle worke aboute the necke for a pray?
31 Thus all thine enemies must perishe O LORDE: but they that loue the, shal be
euen as the Sonne rysinge vp in his mighte. And the londe had peace fortye
yeares.

Chapter 6

1 And whan the children of Israel dyd euell in the sighte of the LORDE, the
LORDE delyuered them vnder the hande of the Madianites vij. yeares.
2 And wha the hande of the Madianites was to mightie ouer the children of
Israel, the children of Israel made them clyffes in ye mountaynes, and caues and
holdes, to defende them selues from ye Madianites.
3 And whan Israel sowed eny thinge, ye Madianites and Amalechites, and the
children towarde the south came vp vpon them, and pitched their tetes agaynst
them,
4 and destroyed the increase of the londe downe vnto Gasa, & let nothinge
remayne ouer of the beestes in Israel, nether shepe, ner oxen, ner asses.
5 For they came vp with their catell and tentes, as it had bene a greate
multitude of greshoppers (so that nether they ner their camels mighte be
nombred) and fell in to the londe, that they mighte destroye it.
6 Thus was Israel exceadinge small before the Madianites. Then cried the
children of Israel vnto the LORDE.
7 But whan they cried vnto the LORDE because of ye Madianites,
8 ye LORDE sent the a prophet, which sayde vnto the: Thus saieth the LORDE the
God of Israel: I caried you out of Egipte, & broughte you out of ye house of
bondage,
9 & delyuered you from the hande of the Egipcians, & from the hade of all them
that oppressed you, and I haue thrust them out before you, & geuen you their
lode
10 and sayde vnto you: I am the LORDE youre God. Feare not ye the goddes of the
Amorites, in whose londe ye dwell: neuertheles ye haue not herkened vnto my
voyce.
11 And there came an angell of the LORDE, & sat him downe vnder an Oke at Aphra,
which belonged vnto Ioas the father of ye Esrites, and his sonne Gedeon was
throsshinge wheate in the barne, that he mighte flye awaye before the
Madianites.
12 Then appeared vnto him the angell of ye LORDE, and sayde vnto him: The LORDE
with ye thou mightie giaunte.
13 But Gedeon sayde vnto him: Syr, yf the LORDE be wt vs, wherfore is all this
then happened vnto vs? And where are all the wonders, which oure fathers tolde
vs, & sayde: The LORDE brought vs out of Egipte? But now hath the LORDE forsaken
vs, and delyuered vs in to the hande of the Madianites.
14 The LORDE turned him vnto him, & sayde: Go thy waye in this thy strength,
thou shalt delyuer Israel out of the hande of ye Madianites. I haue sent the.
15 But he sayde: My LORDE, wherwithall shal I delyuer Israel? Beholde, my kynred
is the smallest in Manasse, & I am the leest in my fathers house?
16 The LORDE sayde vnto him: I will be wt the, so yt thou shalt smyte the
Madianites, euen as though they were but one man.
17 He sayde vnto him: Yf I haue foude grace in thy sighte, then make me a token,
that it is thou, which speakest with me:
18 go not awaye, tyll I come to ye, and brynge a meatofferynge, to set before
the. He sayde: I wyll tary, tyll thou comest agayne.
19 And Gedeon wete, and made ready a kydd, and an Epha of vnleuended floure, and
layed the flesh in a maunde, and put the broth in a pot, and broughte it forth
vnto him vnder the Oke, and came nye.
20 But the angell of God sayde vnto him: Take the flesh and the vnleuended bred,
& set it vpon the stonye rocke that is here, and poure the broth theron. And he
dyd so.
21 Then the angell of the LORDE stretched out the staffe that he had in his
hande, and with the ende of it he touched the flesh and the vnleuended floure:
and the fyre came out of the rocke, and consumed the flesh and the vnleuended
floure. And the angell of the LORDE vanyshed out of his sighte.
22 Now wha Gedeon sawe that it was an angell of ye LORDE, he sayde: O LORDE
LORDE, haue I thus sene an angell of ye LORDE face to face?
23 The LORDE sayde vnto him: Peace be with the, feare not, thou shalt not dye.
24 The Gedeon buylded an altare there vnto ye LORDE, & called it: The LORDE of
peace. The same stondeth yet vnto this daye at Apra, yt belogeth vnto the father
of ye Esrites.
25 And in ye same night sayde ye LORDE vnto him: Take a fedd bullocke fro amoge
thy fathers oxen, & another bullocke of seuen yeare olde, and breake downe the
altare of Baall which is thy fathers, and cut downe the groue that stondeth by
it,
26 and buylde thou an altare vnto the LORDE yi God aboue vpon the toppe of this
rocke, and make it ready, and take the other bullocke, and offre a
burntofferynge with the wodd of the groue that thou hast hewen downe.
27 Then toke Gedeon ten men of his seruauntes, and dyd as ye LORDE sayde vnto
him: but he was afrayed to do this by daye tyme, for his fathers house and the
people in ye cite, and so he dyd it by nighte.
28 Now whan the people in the cite rose vp early in the mornynge, beholde, Baals
altare was broken, and the groue hewen downe by it, and the other bullocke a
burntofferynge vpon the altare that was buylded,
29 & one sayde vnto another: Who hath done this? And whan they soughte & made
searche, it was sayde: Gedeon the sonne of Ioas hath done it.
30 The sayde the people of ye cite vnto Ioas: Brynge forth yi sonne, He must
dye, because he hath broken Baals altare, and hewen downe the groue therby.
31 But Ioas sayde vnto all them that stode by him: Wyl ye stryue for Baal? Wil
ye delyuer him? He yt stryueth for him, shal dye this mornynge. Yf he be God,
let him auege him selfe, because his altare is broken downe.
32 From yt daye forth was he called Ierubaal, because it was sayde: Let Baal
auenge him selfe, that his altare is broken downe.
33 Whan ye Madianites now & ye Amalechites, & the childre towarde the south had
gathered the selues together, & were passed thorow (Iordane) & had pitched their
tentes in the valley of Iesrael,
34 the sprete of the LORDE endued Gedeon, & he caused the trompet to be blowne,
& called (the house of) Abieser, that they shulde folowe him:
35 & he sent messaungers vnto all Manasse, & called them, yt they shulde folowe
him also: and he sent messaungers likewyse vnto Asser & Zabulon & Nephtali,
which came vp to mete him.
36 And Gedeon sayde vnto God: Yf thou wilt delyuer Israel thorow my hande, as
thou hast saide,
37 the wil I laye a flese of woll in the courte: yf ye dew be onely vpon ye
flese, & drye vpon all the grounde, then wyll I perceaue, that thou shalt
delyuer Israel thorow my hande, as thou hast sayde.
38 And it came so to passe. And whan he rose vp early on the morow, he wrage ye
dew out of the flese, and fylled a dysshe full of water.
39 And Gedeon sayde vnto God Be not wroth at me, that I speake yet this one
tyme. I wyl proue yet but once with the flese, let it be drye onely vpon the
flese, and dew vpon all the grounde.
40 And God dyd so the same nighte: so that it was drye onely vpon the flese, and
dew vpon all the grounde.

Chapter 7

1 Then Ierubaal (that is Gedeon) gat him vp early, and all the people that was
with him, and pitched their tentes besyde the well of Harod, so that he had the
hoost of the Madianites on the north side behynde the hyll of More in the
valley.
2 But the LORDE sayde vnto Gedeon: The people that be with ye are to many for me
to delyuer Madian into their hande, lest Israel boost them selues agaynst me,
and saye: My hande hath delyuered me.
3 Cause a proclamacion now to be made in the eares of the people, and saye: He
that feareth, and is afrayed, let him turne backe, and get him soone fro mount
Gilead. Then returned there of the people aboute a two and twenty thousande so
that there was left but ten thousande.
4 And the LORDE sayde vnto Gedeon. The people are yet to many: brynge them downe
to the water, there wyl I proue them for ye: and of whom I saye that he shal go
wt the, the same shal go with the: but of who I saie that he shal not go with
the, the same shall not go.
5 And he broughte the people vnto ye water. And the LORDE sayde vnto Gedeon:
Whosoeuer licketh of the water with his tuge, as a dogg licketh, make him stonde
asyde and lykewyse who soeuer falleth downe vpo his knees to drynke.
6 Then was the nombre of them that had licked out of the hande to the mouth,
thre hundreth men.
7 And the LORDE sayde vnto Gedeon: Thorow the thre hudreth which haue licked,
wyl I delyuer you, and geue ouer the Madianites in to thy hade: As for the other
people, let them go euery one vnto his place.
8 And they toke vytayles with them for ye people, and their trompettes: but the
other Israelites let he go, euery one vnto his tente. And he strengthed himselfe
with the thre hundreth men, and the Madianites hoost laye before him beneth in
the valley.
9 And the same night sayde the LORDE vnto him: Vp, and go downe in to the hoost,
for I haue geuen them ouer in to thy hande.
10 But yf thou be afrayed to go downe, then let yi seruaunt Pura go downe with
the vnto the hoost,
11 yt thou maiest heare what they saie: after that shalt thou be bolde, and thy
honde stronge, that thou mayest go downe in to the hoost. Than wente Gedeon
downe with his sernaunt vnto ye uttemost parte of ye watchme of armes yt were in
ye hoost.
12 And ye Madianites and Amalechites, and all the children of the south, had
layed them selues beneth in the valley, as a multitude of greshoppers, and their
Camels were not to be nombred for multitude, eue as the sonde on ye see shore.
13 Now whan Gedeon came, beholde, one tolde another his dreame, & sayde:
Beholde, I haue dreamed a dreame: Me thoughte a bake barlye lofe came rollinge
downe to ye hoost of ye Madianites: and whan it came to the tente, it smote it,
and ouerthrew it, and turned it vpsyde downe, so that the tente fell.
14 Then answered the other: That is nothinge els then ye swerde of Gedeon the
sonne of Ioas ye Israelite: God hath geue ouer the Madianites with all the hoost
in to his hande.
15 Whan Gedeon herde this dreame tolde, & the interpretacion of it, he
worshipped, and came agayne in to the hoost of Israel, and sayde: Up, for the
LORDE hath delyuered ye hoost of the Madianites in to youre hade.
16 And he deuyded the thre hundreth men in to thre partes, and gaue euery one a
trompet in his hande, and emptye pytchers, and lampes therin,
17 and sayde vnto them: Loke vnto me, and do ye eue so, and beholde, wha I come
to the vttemost parte of the hoost, euen as I do, so do ye also.
18 Whan I blowe ye trompet, and all that are wt me, then shal ye blowe ye
tropettes also rounde aboute all the hoost, and saye: Here the LORDE & Gedeon.
19 Thus came Gedeon and the thre hundreth men with him vnto the vttemost parte
of ye hoost (aboute the tyme whan the mydwatch begynneth) and waked vp the
watchme, and blewe with the trompettes, and smote asunder the pitchers in their
handes.
20 So all the thre companies blewe with ye trompettes, and brake the pitchers.
But the lampes helde they in their lefte hande, and the trompettes in their
righte hade, so that they blewe, and cried: Here the swerde of the LORDE and
Gedeon.
21 And euery one stode in his place aboute the hoost. Then ranne all the hoost,
and cried and fled.
22 And whyle the thre hundreth men blewe the trompettes, ye LORDE broughte it so
to passe, that euery mans swerde in all ye hoost was agaynst another, and the
hoost fled vnto Bethsitha Zereratha, and vnto the border of the playne of
Mehohab besyde Tabath.
23 And ye men of Israel of Nephtali, of Asser, & of Manasse cried, and folowed
vpon the Madianites.
24 And Gedeon sent messaungers vp vnto all mount Ephraim, sayenge: Come downe
against the Madianites, and stoppe the water from them vnto Beth Bara and
Iordane. And then cryed all they that were of Ephraim, and stopped the water
from them vnto Bethbara and Iordane,
25 and toke two prynces of the Madianites Oreb and Zeb, and slewe Oreb vpon the
rocke of Oreb, and Zeb in the wynepresse of Zeb, and folowed vpon the
Madianites, and broughte the heades of Oreb and Zeb, vnto Gideon ouer Iordane.

Chapter 8

1 And the men of Ephraim sayde vnto him: Wherfore hast thou done this vnto vs,
that thou hast not called vs, wha thou wentest forth to fight agaynst ye
Madianites? and they chode sore with him.
2 But he sayde vnto them: What haue I done now that is like youre acte? Is not
the aftergadderynge of Ephraim better then the whole haruest of Abieser?
3 God hath delyuered ye prynces of the Madianites Oreb and Zeb in to youre
hande, how coulde I do that ye haue done? Whaa he had sayde this, their blast
was swaged from him.
4 Now whan Gedeon came vnto Iordane, he wente ouer with the thre hundreth me
that were with him, and they were weery, and folowed vpon their chace.
5 And he sayde vnto the men of Sucoth: I praye you geue the people that are with
me, some loaues of bred (for they are weery) that I maye folowe vpon Zebea and
Salmana the kinges of the Madianites.
6 But the rulers of Sucoth sayde: Are the handes of Zebea and Salmana in thy
handes allready, that we must geue bred vnto thy men of warre?
7 Gedeon sayde: Well, whan the LORDE delyuereth Zebea and Salmana in to my hade,
I wyll thresshe youre flesh with thornes of the wyldernesse and with breares.
8 And from thence he wente vp vnto Penuel, and spake euen so vnto them. And the
me of Penuel gaue him like answere as they of Sucoth.
9 And he sayde also vnto the men of Penuel: Yf I come peaceably agayne, I wil
breake downe this tower.
10 As for Zebea and Salmana, they were at Karkar, and their hoost with them vpon
a fyftene thousande, which were all that were lefte of the whole hoost of the
children of the Easte: for there were fallen an hundreth and twentye thousande,
that coulde drawe the swerde.
11 And Gedeon wente vp by the waye, where they dwell in the tentes on the east
side of Nobah and Iakbeha, & smote the hoost, for the hoost was carelesse, and
mystrusted nothinge.
12 And Zebea and Salmana fled, but he folowed after them, and toke ye two kynges
of the Madianites Zebea and Salmana, and put all the hoost in feare.
13 Now whan Gedeon ye sonne of Ioas came agayne fro the battayll out of ye east,
14 he toke a lad of the men of Sucoth, & examyned him, which wrote him vp the
names of the rulers of Sucoth, and their Elders, eue threscore and seuentene
men.
15 And he came to the men of Sucoth, & sayde: Beholde, here is Zebea & Salmana,
cocernynge who ye laughed me to scorne, & sayde: Are the handes of Zebea and
Salmana in thy hades all ready, that we must geue bred vnto thy men which are
weery?
16 And he toke the Elders of the cite, and thornes out of the wildernes, and
breres, and caused ye men of Sucoth to be torne therwith.
17 And the tower of Penuel brake he downe, and slewe the men of the cite.
18 And he saide vnto Zebea and Salmana: What maner of me were they who ye slewe
at Thabor? They sayde: They were euen like the, & goodly men, as yf they had
bene a kynges childre.
19 He sayde: They were my brethren, euen my mother sonnes: As truly as the LORDE
lyueth, yf ye had lette them lyue, I wolde not slaye you.
20 And he saide vnto his first borne sonne Iether: Stonde vp, & slaye them.
Howbeit the lad drue not out his swerde, for he was afrayed, for so moch as he
was yet but a lad.
21 Zebea & Salmana sayde: Stonde thou vp, & slaye vs, for as the man is, soch is
also his stregth. So Gedeon arose, and slewe Zebea and Salmana, and toke the
ornamentes that were aboute their Camels neckes.
22 Then sayde certayne in Israel vnto Gedeon: Be thou lorde ouer vs, thou and
thy sonne, and thy sonnes sonne, for so moch as thou hast delyuered vs from ye
hande of ye Madianites.
23 Neuertheles Gedeon saide vnto them: I wil not be lorde ouer you, nether shal
my sonne be lorde ouer you, but the LORDE shalbe lorde ouer you.
24 Gedeon sayde vnto them: One thinge I desyre of you, Euery man geue me the
earinge that he hath spoyled. (For in so moch as ye men were Ismaelites, they
had earinges.)
25 They sayde: Them wyll we geue the. And they spred out a cloth, and euery man
cast the earinge theron that he had spoyled.
26 And the golden earynges which he requyred, had in weight, a thousande and
seuen hundreth Sycles of golde, besyde the spanges and cheynes, and scarlet
rayment which the kynges of the Madianites dyd weere, and besyde the neckbandes
of their Camels.
27 And Gideon made a cote armoure therof, and set it in his cite at Aphra. And
all Israel wente there a whoringe after it, and it turned to an occasion of
fallinge vnto Gedeon and his house.
28 Thus were ye Madianites brought downe before the children of Israel, and
lifte vp their heade nomore: and the londe was in rest fortye yeares, as loge as
Gedeon lyued.
29 And Ierubaal the sonne of Ioas wete & dwelt in his house.
30 And Gedeon Had thre score & ten sonnes, which were come out of his thye: for
he had many wyues.
31 And his concubyne which he had at Siche, bare him a sonne also, whom he
called Abimelech.
32 And Gideon the sonne of Ioas dyed in a good age, & was buried at Aphra in ye
sepulcre of his father Ioas the father of the Esrites.
33 But whan Gedeon was deed, the childre of Israel turned backe, and wente
awhoringe after Baalim, and made a couenaunt wt Baal Berith, yt he shulde be
their God.
34 And ye childre of Israel thoughte not on ye LORDE their God, which had
delyuered them fro the hande of their enemies rounde aboute:
35 and they shewed not mercy vnto the house of Ierubaal Gedeon, acordinge to all
the good that he had done vnto Israel.

Chapter 9

1 Abimelech the sonne of Ierubaal, wente vnto Siche to his mothers brethren, &
spake vnto them, & to all the kynred of his mothers fathers house, and sayde:
2 I praye you speake in the eares of all the men at Sichem: What is better for
you, that thre score and ten men all children of Ierubaal shulde be lordes ouer
you, or that one man shulde be lorde ouer you? Remembre also that I am youre
bone and youre flesh.
3 Then spake his mothers brethre all these wordes for him, in ye eares of all ye
men at Sichem. And their hert enclyned to Abimelech, for they thoughte: He is
oure brother:
4 and gaue him thre score and ten syluerlinges out of ye house of Baal Berith.
And wt them Abimelech hyred men that were vagabundes and of light condicions,
which folowed him.
5 And he came to his fathers house vnto Aphra, and slew his brethren the
children of Ierubaal, euen thre score men and te vpon one stone. But Iotham the
yongest sonne of Ierubaal remayned ouer, for he was hydd.
6 And all the men of Sichem, and all the house of Millo gathered them selues
together, and wente and made Abimelech kynge by the Oke that stondeth at Sichem.
7 Whan this was tolde Iotham, he wente, and stode vpon the toppe of mount
Grisim, and lifte vp his voyce, cried, and sayde: Heare me ye men of Sichem,
that God maye heare you also
8 The trees wente to anointe a kinde ouer them, and sayde vnto the Olyue tre: Be
thou oure kynge.
9 But the Olyue tre answered them: Shall I go and leaue my fatnesse (which both
God and men commende in me) and go to be puft vp aboue the trees?
10 Then sayde the trees vnto the fygge tre: Come thou and be kynge ouer vs.
11 But the fygge tre sayde vnto the: Shal I leaue my swetnes and my good frute,
and go to be puft vp aboue the trees?
12 Then sayde the trees vnto the vyne: Come thou and be oure kinge.
13 But the vyne sayde vnto them: Shal I leaue my swete wyne, which reioyseth God
and men, and go to be puft vp aboue the trees?
14 The sayde all the trees vnto the thorne busshe: Come thou, and be kynge ouer
vs.
15 And the thorne busshe sayde vnto the trees: Yf it be true, yt ye anoynte me
to be kynge ouer you, the come, and put youre trust vnder my shadowe. Yf no,
then go fyre out of the thorne busshe, & cosume ye Ceder trees of Libano.
16 Yf ye haue done right now and iustly, yt ye haue made Abimelech to be kynge:
and yf ye haue done well vnto Ierubaal and to his house, and haue done vnto him
as he deserued vnto you.
17 Which (euen my father) foughte for youre sakes, and ioperde his lyfe, to
delyuer out of the Madianites hade,
18 eue you, which are rysen vp this daye agaynst my fathers house, & haue slaine
his childre, thre score personnes & ten vpon one stone, and haue made you a
kynge (euen Abimelech the sonne of his handmaide) ouer the men at Sichem, for so
moch as he is youre brother.
19 Yf ye haue done right now and iustly vnto Ierubaal and his house this daye,
then reioyse ouer Abimelech, and let him reioyse ouer you.
20 Yf no, then go fyre out from Abimelech, and cosume the men of Sichem and the
house of Millo: And fyre go out also fro the men of Sichem, and from the house
of Millo, and consume Abimelech.
21 And Iotha (whan he had spoken this out) fled, and gat him out of the waye,
and wente vnto Ber, and dwelt there because of his brother Abimelech.
22 Now whan Abimelech had reigned thre yeare ouer Israel,
23 God sent an euell mynde betwene Abimelech and the men of Sichen (for the men
of Sichem despysed Abimelech,
24 and rehearsed the wronge done to the sonnes of Ierubaal, and their bloude,
and layed it vpon Abimelech their brother which slewe them, and vpon the men of
Sichem that strengthed his hande therto, that he mighte slaye his brethren.
25 And the men of Sichem set an hynder watch vpon the toppes of the mountaynes,
and spoyled all them that walked nye them by the waye, and it was tolde
Abimelech.
26 But there came Gaal the sonne of Ebed and his brethren, and entred into
Sichem, and the men of Sichem put their trust in him,
27 and wete out in to the felde, and gathered their vynyardes, and pressed them,
and made a daunse, and wente in to their gods house, and ate and dranke, and
cursed Abimelech.
28 And Gaal ye sonne of Ebed sayde: Who is Abimelech? and what is Sichem, that
we shulde serue him? Is he not the sonne of Ierubaal, and hath set Sebul his
seruaut ouer the men of Hemor the father of Sichem? Wherfore shulde we serue
him?
29 Wolde God the people were vnder my hade, yt I mighte put downe Abimelech. And
it was tolde Abimelech: Increace thine hooste, and departe.
30 For Sebul the chefe ruler of the cite, whan he herde the wordes of Gaal ye
sonne of Ebed, he was wrothfully displeased,
31 and sente message secretly to Abimelech, and caused to saye vnto him:
Beholde, Gaal the sonne of Ebed and his brethren are come to Sichem, and make
the cite to be agaynst the.
32 Arise therfore by nyght, thou and thy people that is with the, and laye wayte
for the in the felde:
33 and tomorow whan the Sonne aryseth, get the vp soone, and fall vpon the cite:
and yf he and the people that is with him come out vnto the, the deale with him,
as thyne hande fyndeth.
34 Abimelech stode vp by night, and all the people that was with him, and layed
wayte for Sichem with foure companies of men of warre.
35 And Gaal the sonne of Ebed we out and stode at the dore of the gate of the
cite. But Abimelech gat him vp out of the hinder watch, and the people that was
with him.
36 Now whan Gaal sawe the people, he sayde vnto Sebul: Beholde, there commeth a
people downe from the toppe of ye mount. Sebul saide vnto him: Thou seist ye
shadowe of the mountaines as though they were me.
37 Gaal spake yet more and sayde: Beholde, there commeth a people downe from ye
myddes of the londe, & one bonde of men cometh by the waye to ye witch Oke.
38 The sayde Sebul: Where is now yi mouth yt sayde: Who is Abimelech, that we
shulde serue him? Is not this ye people, whom thou hast refused? Go forth now,
and fighte with him.
39 Gaal wente forth before the citesyns of Sichem, and foughte with Abimelech.
40 But Abimelech chaced him, so that he fled, and there fell many slayne euen
vnto the gate of the cite.
41 And Abimelech abode at Aruma. But Sebul droue awaye Gaal and his brethren, so
that they must not remayne at Sichem.
42 Vpon the morowe wente the people forth into ye felde. Wha this was tolde
Abimelech,
43 he toke the people, and parted them into thre bodes of men, and wayted for
the in the felde. Now whan he sawe yt the people wete out of the cite, he rose
agaynst the, and smote them.
44 Abimelech and ye company of men that was with him, fell vpon them, and stepte
vnto the dore of the porte: but the other two companies fell vpon all them that
were in the felde, and slewe them.
45 The foughte Abimelech agaynst the cite all ye same daye, and wanne it, and
slewe the people that was there in, and brake downe ye cite, and sowed salt
theron.
46 Whan all the men of the tower of Sichem herde this, they wente in to a
stronge holde of ye house of their God Berith.
47 But whan Abimelech herde, that all the men of the tower of Sichem had
gathered the selues together,
48 he wente vp vnto mount Zelmon, and all the people that was with him, and toke
an axe in his hade, and hewed downe a braunch of a tre, and toke it vp, & layed
it vpon his shulder, and sayde vnto all the people that was with him: As ye haue
sene me do, make ye haist, and do euen so as I.
49 Then all the people hewed downe euery one a brauch, and folowed Abimelech:
and they layed them to the holde, and set fyre vpon them agaynst them and the
holde: and all the men of the tower of Sichem dyed thorow the smoke and fyre,
vpon a thousande men and wemen.
50 As for Abimelech, he wete vnto Thebetz, and layed sege vnto it, and wanne it.
51 But in the myddes of the cite, there was a stronge tower, vnto the which all
the men and wemen, and all the citesyns of the cite fled, and shutt it after
them, and clymmed vp to the toppe of the tower.
52 Then came Abimelech vnto the tower, and soughte agaynst it, and came nye vnto
the dore of the tower, that he might burne it with fyre.
53 But a woman cast a pece of a mylstone vpon Abimelechs heade, and brake his
brane panne.
54 Then Abimelech in all the haist, called the seruaunt that bare his wapen, and
sayde vnto him: Drawe out thy swerde, and kyll me, that it be not sayde of me: A
woman hath slayne him. Then his seruaunt thrust him thorow, and he dyed.
55 Whan the Israelites which were with him, sawe, yt Abimelech was deed, they
gatt them awaye euery one vnto his awne place.
56 Thus God recompenced Abimelech the euell that he had done vnto his father,
wha he slewe his threscore and ten brethren:
57 likewyse all the euell of the men of Sichem, dyd God rewarde them vpon their
heade: and so the curse of Iotham ye sonne of Ierubaal came vpon them.

Chapter 10

1 After Abimelech there rose vp another sauioure in Israel, Thola a man of
Isachar, and the sonne of Pua, the sonne of Dodo. And he dwelt at Samir vpo the
mount Ephraim,
2 and iudged Israel thre and twentye yeare, and died, and was buried at Samir.
3 After him stode vp one Iair a Gileadite, and iudged Israel two and twentye
yeare,
4 and hath thirtie sonnes, rydinge vpon thirtie asses foales: and had thirtie
cities, whose names are Hauoth Iair (that is, the cities of Iair) vnto this
daye, and lye in Gilead.
5 And Iair dyed, and was buried at Camon.
6 But the children of Israel wrought wickednes in the sighte of the LORDE, and
serued Baalim and Astaroth, and the goddes of Siria, and the goddes of Sidon,
and the goddes of Moab, and the goddes of ye children of Ammon, and the goddes
of the Philistines, and forsoke ye LORDE, and serued him not.
7 Then was ye wrath of ye LORDE fearce vpon Israel, and he gaue the ouer vnder
the hade of the Philistynes, and of the children of Ammo.
8 And they vexed and oppressed ye children of Israel eightene yeare longe, all
the children of Israel that were beyonde Iordane in the londe of the Moabites,
which lyeth in Gilead.
9 The children of Ammon also wente ouer Iordane, and fought agaynst Iuda, Ben
Iamin, and agaynst the house of Ephraim, so that Israel was very sore troubled.
10 Then cryed the children of Israel vnto the LORDE, and sayde: We haue synned
agaynst the, for we haue forsaken oure God, & serued Baalim.
11 But the LORDE sayde vnto the childre of Israel: Did not the Egipcias, the
Amorites, the children of Ammon, ye Philistines,
12 the Sidonians, the Amalechites and Maonites oppresse you, and I helped you
out of their hande, whan ye cryed vnto me?
13 Yet haue ye forsaken me, and serued other goddes? Therfore wyll I helpe you
nomore
14 Go youre waye, and crye vpon the goddes whom ye haue chosen, let them helpe
you in the tyme of youre trouble.
15 But the childre of Israel sayde vnto the LORDE: We haue synned, do thou vnto
vs what pleaseth the, onely delyuer vs at this tyme.
16 And they put the straunge goddes fro them, and serued the LORDE, And his
soule had pytie on the mysery of Israel.
17 And the children of Ammon called them selues together, and pitched in Gilead:
But the children of Israel gathered them selues together also, and pitched at
Mispa.
18 And ye people of the chefest of Gilead sayde amoge them selues: Who so euer
begynneth to fight agaynst the children of Ammon, shalbe heade ouer all them
that dwell in Gilead.

Chapter 11

1 Iephthae a Gileadite was a valeaut man of armes, but an harlottes childe.
Gilead begat Iephthae.
2 But whan the wyfe had borne children vnto Gilead, and the same wyues childre
were waxe greate, they thrust out Iephtae, and sayde vnto him: Thou shalt not be
heire in oure fathers house, for thou art another womas sonne.
3 The fled he from his brethre, and dwelt in the londe of Tob. And there
resorted vnto him vagabudes, and wete out with him.
4 And after a certayne tyme foughte the children of Ammon with Israel.
5 Now wha the childre of Ammon foughte thus with Israel, the Elders wente from
Gilead to fetch Iephthae out of the londe of Tob,
6 and sayde vnto him: Come, and be oure captayne, and fight agaynst the children
of Ammon.
7 But Iephthae sayde vnto the Eldes of Gilead: Are not ye they that hate me and
haue thrust me out of my fathers house, and now come ye to me whan ye are in
trouble?
8 The Elders of Gilead sayde: Therfore come we now againe vnto the, that thou
mayest go with vs, and fighte agaynst the children of Ammon, and be oure
captayne ouer all that dwell in Gilead.
9 Iephthae sayde vnto the Elders of Gilead: Yf ye fetch me agayne to fighte
agaynst the childre of Ammon, and the LORDE delyuer them before me shal I then
be youre heade?
10 The Elders of Gilead saide vnto Iephthae: The LORDE be hearer betwene vs, yf
we do not as thou hast sayde.
11 So Iephthae wete with the Elders of Gilead. And the people made him heade and
duke ouer them. And Iephthae spake all this before the LORDE at Mispa.
12 Then sente Iephthae messaungers to the kynge of the children of Ammon, and
caused to saye vnto him: What hast thou to do with me, that thou comest vnto me
to fight agaynst my londe?
13 The kynge of the childre of Ammo answered Iephthaes messaungers Because that
Israel toke awaye my londe (whan they departed out of Egipte) from Arnon vnto
Iabock, and vnto Iordane: geue it me agayne now therfore peaceably.
14 But Iephthae sent yet mo messaungers to ye kynge of the children of Ammon,
15 which sayde vnto him: Thus sayeth Iephthae: Israel hath taken no londe,
nether from the Moabites ner from the children of Ammon:
16 for when they departed out of Egipte, Israel walked thorow the wyldernes vnto
the reed see, and came to Cades,
17 and sent messaungers to the kynge of the Edomites, and sayde: Let me go
thorow thy londe. But the kynge of ye Edomites wolde not heare the. They sent
lykewyse vnto the kynge of the Moabites, which wolde not also. Thus Israel abode
in Cades,
18 and compased the lode of the Edomites and Moabites, and came on the eastsyde
of the londe of the Moabites and pitched beyonde Arnon, and came not within the
coaste of the Moabites. For Arnon is the border of the Moabites.
19 And Israel sent messaungers vnto Sihon the kynge of the Amorites at Hesbon,
and caused to saye vnto him: Let me go thorow thy londe vnto my place.
20 Neuertheles Sihon wolde not trust Israel to go thorow the border of his
londe, but gathered all his people, and pitched at Iahza, and foughte with
Israel.
21 Howbeit the LORDE God of Israel gaue Sihon with all his people in to Israels
hade, so that they slewe them. Thus Israel conquered all the londe of the
Amorites that dwelt in ye same countre.
22 And they toke possessio of all the borders of the Amorites, from Arnon vnto
Iabok, & from ye wyldernesse vnto Iordane.
23 So ye LORDE God of Israel droue awaye the Amorites before his people of
Israel, and wilt thou coquere them?
24 Is it not so, yf thy God Camos gaue the oughte to possesse, woldest thou not
possesse it? What so euer the LORDE oure God hath geue vs before vs to possesse,
that shal we conquere and take in possession.
25 Hast thou better right (thinkest thou) the Balac the sonne of Ziphor, the
kynge of ye Moabites? Dyd he euer go to lawe or fighte agaynst Israel?
26 Though Israel haue dwelt now vpo a thre hudreth yeare in Hesbon, and in the
vyllages therof, in Aroer and in the vyllages therof, and in all the cities that
lye by Arnon. Why dyd not ye rescue it at the same tyme?
27 I haue not offended the, & thou doest me euell to fighte agaynst me? The
LORDE geue sentence this daie betwene Israel and the children of Ammon.
28 Neuertheles the kynge of the children of Ammon wolde not heare ye wordes of
Iephthae, which he sent vnto him.
29 Then came ye sprete of the LORDE vpon Iephthae, and he wente thorow Gilead
and Manasse, and thorow Mispa which lieth in Gilead, and fro Mispa that lieth in
Gilead, vnto ye children of Ammon.
30 And Iephthae vowed a vowe vnto the LORDE, and sayde: Yf thou wilt delyuer the
childre of Ammon in to my hande,
31 what so euer commeth (first) out at the dore of my house in my waye, whan I
returne agayne peaceably from the childre of Ammon, that same shalbe the LORDES,
and I wyl offre it for a burtnofferynge.
32 So Iephthae wente vpon the children of Ammon, to fighte against them. And ye
LORDE gaue them in to his hande,
33 and he smote the from Aroer tyll thou comest vnto Minnith, euen twentye
cities, and vnto the playne of ye vynyardes a very greate slaughter, and thus
were the children of Ammon subdued before the children of Israel.
34 Now whan Iephthae came to Mispa vnto his house, beholde, his doughter wente
out to mete him with tabrettes and daunces: and she was his onely childe, & he
had els nether sonne ner doughter.
35 And whan he sawe her, he rente his clothes, & sayde: Alas my doughter, thou
makest my hert soroufull, and discomfortest me: for I haue opened my mouth vnto
the LORDE, and can not call it agayne.
36 She sayde: My father, yf thou hast opened thy mouth vnto the LORDE, then do
vnto me as it is proceaded out of yi mouth, acordinge as the LORDE hath aueged
the of thyne enemies the children of Ammon.
37 And she sayde vnto hir father: Do this for me, geue me leue to go downe vpo
the mountaynes two monethes, that I maye bewepe my virginite with my playfeeres.
38 He sayde: Go thy waye. And he let her go two monethes. Then wente she with
her playefeeres, and bewayled hir mayden heade vpon the mountaynes.
39 And after two monethes she came agayne vnto hir father. And he dyd vnto her
acordinge as he had vowed. And she had neuer bene in daunger of eny man. And it
was a custome in Israel,
40 that the doughters of Israel shulde go euery yeare, and mourne for the
doughter of Iephthae the Gileadite, foure dayes in the yeare.

Chapter 12

1 And they of Ephraim made insurreccion, & wente northwarde, & sayde vnto
Iephthae: Wherfore wetest thou to the battayll agaynst the children of Ammon, &
hast not called vs, that we mighte go with the? We wil burne thy house and the
with fyre.
2 Iephthae sayde vnto the: I and my people had a greate matter with ye children
of Ammon, and I cried vpon you, but ye helped me not out of their handes.
3 Now whan I sawe yt there was no helper, I put my soule in my honde, and wente
agaynst the children of Ammon, and the LORDE delyuered them in to my hande.
Wherfore come ye vp to me, to fighte agaynst me?
4 And Iephthae gathered all the men in Gilead, & foughte agaynst Ephraim. And
the men in Gilead smote Ephraim, because they sayde: Ye Gileadites are as they
yt fle awaye before Ephraim, (and dwell) amoge Ephraim & Manasse.
5 And the Gileadites toke ye ferye of Iordane from Ephraim. Now wha one of ye
fugityue Ephraites dyd saye: Let me go ouer, ye men of Gilead sayde: Art thou an
Ephraite? yf he answered: No,
6 they bad him saye: Schiboleth, & he sayde: Siboleth, & coulde not speake it
righte: then they toke him, & slew him at ye ferye of Iordane, so yt the same
tyme there fell of Epraim two & fortye M.
7 Iephthae iudged Israel sixe yeares. And Iephthae ye Gileadite dyed, & was
buried in one of the cities of Gilead.
8 After him iudged Israel one Ebzan of Bethleem,
9 which had thirtie sonnes and as many doughters: and his thirtie doughters gaue
he forth to mariage, and thirtie doughters toke he from without for his sonnes,
and iudged Israel seuen yeare,
10 and died, and was buried at Bethleem.
11 After him iudged Israel one Elon a Zabulonite, & he iudged Israel ten yeare,
12 & was buried at Aialon in the londe of Zabulon.
13 After him iudged Israel one Abdo a sonne of Hillel, a Pirgathonite
14 which had fortye sonnes, & thirtie neuies ( which rode vpo seuentye Asses
foales) and he iudged Israel eighte yeare,
15 and dyed, & was buried at Pirgathon in the londe of Ephraim vpon the mount of
the Amalechites.

Chapter 13

1 And the children of Israel wroughte more euell before the LORDE, & the LORDE
gaue them ouer into the hades of the Philistynes fortye yeares.
2 But there was a man at Zarga, of one of ye kynreds of the Danites, named
Manoah, and his wife was vnfrutefull & bare him no children.
3 And the angell of the LORDE appeared vnto ye woman, & sayde vnto her: Beholde,
thou art baren, & bearest not: but thou shalt conceaue, & beare a sonne.
4 Take hede therfore, yt thou drynke no wyne ner stronge drynke, and yt thou
eate no vncleane thinge,
5 for thou shalt conceaue, and beare a sonne, vpo whose heade there shal come no
rasoure: for ye childe shal be a Nazaree of God, euen from his mother wombe, and
shall begynne to delyuer Israel out of the hande of the Philistynes.
6 Then came ye woman and tolde hir husbande, & sayde: There came a ma of God
vnto me, & his proporcion was to loke vpon as an angell of God, very terrible,
so yt I axed him not whence he came, & whither he wolde: nether tolde he me his
name.
7 But he sayde vnto me: beholde, thou shalt conceaue & beare a sonne: drynke no
wyne therfore ner stroge drynke, & eate no vncleane thinge: for the childe shal
be called a Nazaree of God, euen fro his mother wombe vnto his death.
8 Then Manoah prayed the LORDE, & sayde: Oh LORDE, let ye man of God whom thou
hast sent, come to vs agayne, yt he maye enfourme vs what we shall do vnto the
childe which shalbe borne.
9 And God herde the voyce of Manoah, & the angell of God came to his wife
agayne. But she sat in ye felde, and his husbade Manoah was not wt her.
10 The ranne she in all the haist, & tolde hir husbande, & saide vnto him:
beholde, ye man hath appeared vnto me, yt came to me to daye.
11 Manoah gat him vp, & wente after his wife, and came to the man, and sayde
vnto him: Art thou ye man that spake to the woman? He sayde: Yee.
12 And Manoah sayde: wha it commeth to passe that thou hast sayde, what shal be
the maner and worke of ye childe:
13 The angell of the LORDE sayde vnto Manoah: He shal kepe him from all that I
tolde the woman:
14 he shal not eate that which commeth of the vyne, and shal drynke no wyne ner
stronge drynke, and eate no vncleane thinge: & all that I haue comaunded her,
shal he kepe.
15 Manoah sayde vnto ye angell of the LORDE: let vs holde the here (I praye the)
we will prepare a kydd for the.
16 Neuertheles ye angell of the LORDE answered Manoah: Though thou kepest me
here, yet wyll I not eate of thy bred. But yf thou wilt make a burntofferynge
vnto the LORDE, thou mayest offre it. (For Manoah wist not that it was an angell
of the LORDE.)
17 And Manoah sayde vnto the angell of the LORDE: What is thy name, that we maye
prayse ye, whan it commeth now to passe, that thou hast sayde?
18 But the angell of the LORDE sayde vnto him: Why axest thou after my name,
which is wonderfull?
19 Then toke Manoah a kyd and a meatofferynge, & layed it vpo a rocke vnto the
LORDE, which doth ye wonders him selfe. But Manoah and his wife behelde it.
20 And wha the flamme wente vp from ye altare towarde heauen, the angell of the
LORDE asceded vp in the flamme of the altare. Whan Manoah & his wife sawe yt,
they fell downe to ye earth vpo their faces.
21 And the angell of ye LORDE appeared nomore vnto Manoah & his wife. The knewe
Manoah, that it was an angell of the LORDE,
22 and he sayde vnto his wife: We must dye the death, because we haue sene God.
23 But his wife answered him: Yf the LORDE wolde haue slaine vs, he had not
receaued the burtnofferynge and meatofferynge of oure handes: nether had he
shewed vs all these thinges, ner letten vs heare soch as is now come to passe.
24 And the woman broughte forth a sonne, and called his name Samson. And the
childe grewe, and the LORDE blessed him.
25 And the sprete of the LORDE begane to be wt him in the tentes of Dan, betwene
Zarga and Esthaol.

Chapter 14

1 Samson wente downe vnto Thimnath, & there he sawe a woman amoge the doughters
of ye Philistynes.
2 And whan he came vp, he tolde his father & his mother, & sayde: I haue sene a
woman amoge the doughters of the Philistynes, I praye you geue me the same to
wife.
3 His father & his mother sayde vnto him: Is there not a woman amonge the
doughters of yi brethren, & in all yi people, but thou must go & take a wife
amoge the Philistynes, which are vncircumcised? Samson sayde vnto his father:
Geue me this woma, for she pleaseth myne eyes.
4 But his father & his mother knewe not yt it came of the LORDE, & that he
soughte an occasion agaynst the Philistynes. For the Philistynes reigned ouer
Israel at ye same tyme.
5 So Samson wente downe with his father and with his mother vnto Thimnath. And
whan they came to the vynyardes of Thimnath, beholde, there came a yonge
rearinge lyon against him.
6 And the sprete of the LORDE came vpon him, and he rente him in peces, euen as
a kydd is parted a sunder, and yet had he nothinge at all in his hade, and he
tolde it not vnto his father & his mother.
7 Now whan he came downe, he spake wt the woman, and she pleased Samsons eyes.
8 And after certayne dayes he came agayne, to receaue her, & wente out of ye
waye, that he mighte se ye deed carcas of the lyon: and beholde, in ye lyons
carcas there was a swarme of beyes, and hony:
9 and he toke of it in his hande, and ate therof by the waye: and wete vnto his
father and to his mother, and gaue them to eate also. But he tolde them not,
that he had taken the hony out of the lyons carcas.
10 And whan his father came downe to the woman, Samson made a feast there, as
the yonge men vsed to do.
11 And whan they sawe him, they gaue him thirtie companyons to be with him.
12 Samson sayde vnto them: I wil expresse a darke sentence vnto you, yf ye
expounde me the same with in these seuen dayes of the feast, I wyll geue you
thirtye shertes, and thirtie chaunge of raymente.
13 But yf ye can not expounde it, then shall ye geue me thirtie shertes, &
thirtie chaunge of rayment. And they sayde vnto him: Shewe forth thy ryddle, let
vs heare it.
14 He sayde vnto them: Meate wente out from the deuourer, and swetenesse from
the mightie. And in thre dayes they coulde not expounde the ryddle.
15 Vpon the seuenth daye they sayde vnto Samsons wife: Persuade thy husbade,
that he tell vs what the ryddle meaneth, or els we shal burne the and thy
fathers house with fyre. Haue ye called vs hither, to brynge vs to pouerte?
16 Then wepte Samsons wife before him, and sayde: Thou art displeased at me, and
louest me not: thou hast expressed a darke sentence vnto the children of my
people, and hast not tolde it me. But he sayde vnto her: Beholde, I haue not
tolde it vnto my father and mother, and shulde I tell it the?
17 And she wepte before him those seuen dayes, whyle they had ye feast. But on
the seueth daye he tolde it her, for she was so importune vpon him. And she
expounded the darke sentence vnto the children of her people.
18 Then sayde the men of the cite vnto him vpon the seuenth daye oreuer the
Sonne wente downe: What is sweter then hony? What is strouger then the lyon? But
he sayde vnto the: Yf ye had not plowed wt my calfe, ye shulde not haue founde
out my ryddle.
19 And the sprete of ye LORDE came vpon him, and he wente downe vnto Ascalon,
and slewe thirtie men of them, & toke their spoyles, and gaue chaunge of rayment
vnto the, yt had expounded the ryddle. And he was wrothfully displeased, & wente
vp vnto his fathers house.
20 As for Samsons wife, she was geuen vnto one of his companyons, which belonged
vnto him.

Chapter 15

1 It fortuned after certaine daies aboute the wheate haruest tyme, yt Samson
visited his wife wt a kydd. And wha he thoughte, I wyl go to my wife in to the
chamber, hir father wolde not let him in,
2 and sayde: I thoughte thou wast displeased at her, and I gaue her vnto thy
frende. But she hath a yonger sister which is more beutyfull then she, let ye
same be thine for her.
3 The sayde Samson vnto the: I haue once gotte a righte occasion agaynst the
Philistynes, I wyl do you displeasure.
4 And Samson wete and catched thre hundreth foxes, and toke fyre brandes, and
festened one tayle to another, and put euer a fyre brande betwene two tayles,
5 and kynled the same with fyre, and let them go amonge the Philistynes corne,
and thus he brent ye stoukes and the stondinge corne, and ye vynyardes, and the
olyue trees.
6 Then sayde the Philistynes: Who hath done this? And they sayde: Samson the
husbande of the Thimnites doughter, because he toke awaye his wife from him, and
gaue hir vnto his frende. Then wente the Philistynes vp, and brent her and hir
father also with fyre.
7 But Samson sayde vnto them: I can suffre you to do this, neuertheles I wyl be
aueged vpon you my selfe, and then wyl I leaue of.
8 And he smote them sore both vpo the shulders & loynes: and wete downe, & dwelt
in the stone clyffe at Eram.
9 Then wente the Philistynes vp, and layed sege vnto Iuda, & pitched at Lechi.
10 But they of Iuda sayde: Wherfore are ye come vp against vs? They answered: we
are come vp to bynde Samson, yt we maye do vnto him, as he hath done vnto vs.
11 Then wete there thre M. men of Iuda downe to the stone clyffe of Etam, &
sayde vnto Samson: Knowest thou not that the Philistynes raigne ouer vs?
Wherfore hast thou done this then vnto vs? He sayde: As they dyd vnto me, so
haue I done vnto the agayne.
12 They sayde vnto him: We are come downe to bynde the, & to delyuer ye into the
hade of the Philistynes. Samson sayde vnto the: Then sweare & promyse me, yt ye
wyll not slaye me.
13 They answered him: We wyll not kyll the, we wil but bynde the, & delyuer the
in to their hande, & wyl not slaye ye. And they bounde him with two new coardes
& caried him from the stone.
14 And whan he came vnto Lechi, the Philistynes shouted, and rane vnto him. But
ye sprete of ye LORDE came vpon him, & the coardes aboute his armes were like
thredes burnt in the fyre, so yt the bondes were lowsed from his hondes.
15 And he founde the cheke bone of a deed asse: then put he forth his hande, and
toke it, & slewe a thousande men therwith:
16 And Samson sayde: With an olde asses cheke bone, yee eue with the cheke bone
of an asse haue I slayne a thousande men.
17 And whan he had sayde yt, he cast ye cheke bone out of his hande, & called
the place Ramath Lechi.
18 But wha he was sore a thyrst, he called vpo the LORDE, & saide: Soch greate
health hast thou geue by the hade of thy seruaunt, but now must I dye a thyrst,
& fall in to ye hande of ye vncircucised.
19 The God opened a gometothe in ye chekebone, so yt water wete out: & whan he
dranke, his sprete came agayne, & he was refresshed. Therfore vnto this daye it
is yet called ye well of ye cheke bone of him yt made intercession.
20 And he iudged Israel in the tyme of the Philistynes twetye yeare.

Chapter 16

1 Samson wente vnto Gasa, & there he sawe an harlot, & laye with her.
2 The was it saide vnto the Gasites: Samson is come hither. And they compased
him aboute, & caused to laye wayte for him preuely, & watched all the nighte in
the gate of ye cite, & all that nighte they helde them styll, & sayde: Abyde,
tomorow whan it is lighte, we wyll slaye him.
3 But Samson laye vnto mydnighte, then rose he at mydnighte, & toke holde on
both ye syde portes of ye gate of the cite, wt both the postes, & lifte them out
with the barres, & layed them vpon his shulders, & bare them vp to ye toppe of
ye mount ouer agaynst Hebron.
4 After this he fell into the loue of a woman by ye broke of Sorek, whose name
was Dalila,
5 vnto whom the prynces of the Philistynes came vp, and sayde vnto her: Persuade
him, and loke wherin he hath soch greate stregth, & how we maye ouercome him, yt
we mighte bynde him & subdue him, so wyll we geue the euery man a M. and an C.
syluerlinges.
6 And Dalila sayde vnto Samson: I praye the tell me, wherin thy greate stregth
is, & how thou mightest be bounde to be subdued.
7 Samson sayde vnto her: Yf I were bounde with seue roapes of fresh senowes,
which are not yet dryed vp, I shulde be weake, and as another man.
8 The the prynces of the Philistynes broughte vp vnto her seuen new roapes,
which were not yet dryed vp. And she bounde him therwith.
9 (But there was wayte layed for him besyde her in the chamber) and she sayde
vnto him: The Pilistynes vpon the Samson. Neuertheles he brake the roapes in
sunder, eue as a twyned threde breaketh, whan it hath catched the heate of the
fyre. And it was not knowne wherin his strength was.
10 Then sayde Dalila vnto Samson: beholde, thou hast begyled me & dyssembled
with me: tell me yet, wherwithall mayest thou be bounde?
11 He answered her: Yf they bounde me with new coardes, wherwith no labor hath
bene done, I shulde be feble, & as another man.
12 Then toke Dalila new coardes, & bounde him withall, and sayde: The
Philistynes vpo the Samson (but there was wayte layed for him in the chamber.)
And he brake them from his armes, euen as it had bene a threde.
13 Dalila sayde vnto him: Yet hast thou begyled me & dessembled wt me: O tell me
yet, wherwithall mightest thou be bounde? He answered her: Yf thou playtest seue
hayrie lockes of my heade together in a fyllet,
14 and fastenest them in with a nayle (I shulde be weake.) And she saide vnto
him: The Philistynes vpo the Samson. But he awaked out of his slepe, & drue out
ye playted hayrie lockes with the nale and the fyllet.
15 The sayde she vnto him: How cast thou saye yt thou louest me, where as thine
hert is not yet with me? Thre tymes hast thou disceaued me, and not tolde me
wherin thy greate strength is.
16 So whan she was euery daye importune vpon him wt her wordes, & wolde not let
him haue rest, his soule was faynte euen vnto the death,
17 & he shewed her his whole hert, & sayde vnto her: There came neuer rasoure
vpon my heade, for I am a Nazaree of God fro my mothers wombe. Yf I were shauen,
my strength shulde departe fro me, so that I shulde be weake, and as all other
men.
18 Now whan Dalila sawe that he had opened all his hert vnto her, she sent &
called for the prynces of the Philistynes, & sayde: Come yet once vp, for he
hath opened his whole hert vnto me. The came the prynces of the Philistynes vp
vnto her, & broughte the money wt them in their handes.
19 And she made him to slepe vpon hir lappe, & called one which shoue of the
seue hayrie lockes of his heade. And she beganne to vexe him. The was his
strength departed fro him.
20 And she sayde vnto him: The Philistynes vpon the Samson. Now wha he awoke out
of his slepe, he thoughte: I wil go forth as I haue done aforetyme, & ease my
selfe, & knewe not yt the LORDE was departed from him.
21 But the Philistynes toke him, & put out his eyes, and broughte him downe to
Gasa, & bounde him wt fetters, and made him to grynde in the preson.
22 But the heer of his heade beganne to growe agayne, where it was shauen of.
23 Whan ye prynces of the Philistynes were gathered together, to make a greate
sacrifice vnto Dagon their god, and to be ioyfull, they sayde: Oure god hath
delyuered Samson or enemye in to or hande.
24 Like wyse whan ye people sawe him, they praysed their god, & sayde: Oure god
hath delyuered in to oure handes oure enemye, yt destroyed oure londe, & slewe
many of vs.
25 Now whan their hert was ioyfull, they sayde: Let vs fetch Samson, that he
maye make some pastyme before vs. Then fetched they Samson out of the preson, &
he made pastyme before them. And they set him betwene two pilers.
26 But Samson sayde vnto the lad yt led him by the hande: Let me touche the
pilers wher vpon the house stondeth, yt I maye leane ther vnto.
27 As for ye house, it was full of men & wemen. All the prynces of the
Philistynes were there also, and vpon the rofe were aboute a thre thousande men
and wemen, which behelde what pastyme Samson made.
28 But Samson called vpon the LORDE, & sayde: O LORDE LORDE, thynke vpon me, &
strength me but this once O God I beseke the, yt for both myne eyes I maye auege
me on the Philistynes.
29 And he toke holde of ye two mydpilers, that the house stode vpon & was holden
by, the one in his righte hade, & ye other in his lefte,
30 & saide: My soule dye wt the Philistynes, & he bowed him selfe mightely. Then
fell the house vpon the prynces & vpon all the people that were therin, so that
there were mo of ye slayne which dyed in his death, the he slewe whyle he lyued.
31 Then came his brethren downe and all his fathers house, and toke him, and
caried him vp, and buried him in the graue of his father Manoah betwene Zarga
and Esthaol. He iudged Israel twentye yeare.

Chapter 17

1 There was a man vpo mount Ephraim, named Micha
2 which sayde vnto his mother: The thousande and hundreth syluerlinges which
thou hast taken vnto the, & sworne, and spoken of before myne eares: beholde, ye
same money is by me, I haue taken it vnto me. Then sayde his mother: The
blessinge of the LORDE haue thou my sonne.
3 So he gaue his mother the thousande & hundreth syluerlinges agayne. And his
mother saide: That money haue I sanctified vnto the LORDE wt my hande for my
sonne, to make a molten ymage: therfore I geue it the agayne.
4 Neuertheles he delyuered ye money agayne vnto his mother. Then toke his mother
two hundreth syluerlinges, & put them forth to ye goldsmyth, which made a molten
ymage, yt was afterwarde in Michas house.
5 And thus the man Micha had a gods house, & made an ouerbody cote, & Idols, and
fylled ye handes of one of his sonnes, yt he mighte be his prest.
6 At yt tyme was there no kynge in Israel, & euery man dyd the thinge yt was
righte in his awne eyes.
7 There was a yoge man of Bethleem Iuda, amoge the kynreds of Iuda, and he was a
Leuite, and was a straunger there.
8 The same wente out of the cite of Bethleem Iuda, to walke whither he coulde.
And wha he came vp to mount Ephraim vnto the house of Micha, to go on his
iourney,
9 Micha axed him: Whence comest thou? He answered him: I am a Leuite of Bethleem
Iuda, and am walkynge where I can.
10 Micha sayde vnto him: Tary with me, thou shalt be my father and my prest, I
will geue the euery yeare ten syluerlinges and thy appoynted raymet, and meate
and drynke: and the Leuite wete on.
11 And the Leuite agreed to abyde with the man: and he helde the yonge ma, as
one of his owne sonnes.
12 And Micha fylled the Leuites hande, that he mighte be his prest, and so he
was in Michas house.
13 And Micha sayde: I am sure the LORDE wyll do me good now, that I haue a
Leuite to my prest.

Chapter 18

1 At that tyme was there no kynge in Israel. And ye trybe of ye Danites soughte
them an enheritaunce to dwell in, for vnto that daie there was no enheritaunce
fallen vnto them amonge the trybes of Israel.
2 And the childre of Dan sent out of their kynreds fyue captaynes (which were
men of armes) from Zarga and Esthaol, to spye and search out the londe. And they
sayde vnto them: Go youre waie, and search out the londe. And they came vp to
mount Ephraim in to ye house of Micha, and taried there all nighte.
3 And whyle they were there wt Michas hussholde, they knewe ye voyce of the
yonge man the Leuite, and sayde vnto him: Who broughte ye hither? What makest
thou here? and why woldest thou come hither?
4 He answered the: Thus & thus hath Micha done vnto me, & hath hyred me to be
his prest.
5 They sayde vnto him: O axe at God, yt we maye perceaue, whether oure iourney
which we go, shal prospere well or not.
6 The prest answered them: Go youre waye in peace, youre iourney yt ye go, is
before the LORDE.
7 Then the fyue men wente their waye, & came vnto Lais, and sawe that the people
which was therin, dwelt sure, euen as ye Sidonians, at rest, and carelesse, and
that there was no lorde in the londe to vexe them, and were farre from the
Sidonias, and had nothinge to do with eny man.
8 And they came to their brethre to Zarga and Esthaol. And their brethren saide
vnto them: How is it wt you?
9 They sayde: Arise, let vs go vp vnto them, for we haue sene the londe, yt it
is a very good londe: make haist therfore, & be not slacke to go, that ye maye
come to take possession of the londe.
10 Whan ye come, ye shall come to a carelesse people, and the londe is wyde: for
God hath delyuered this place in to yor hande, where nothinge wanteth of all yt
is vpon earth.
11 Then wente there thence out of the kynreds of Dan from Zarga and Esthaol,
sixe hundreth men ready wapened to ye battayll,
12 and wente vp, and pitched at Kiriath Iearim in Iuda: therfore called they the
same place, ye hoost of Dan, vnto this daye, which is behinde Kiriath Iearim.
13 And fro thence they wete vp vnto mout Ephraim, and came to the house of
Micha.
14 Then answered the fyue men that wete out to spye the londe of Lais, & sayde
vnto their brethren: Knowe ye not that in these houses there is an ouerbody
cote, Idols, & molten ymages? Now maye ye loke what ye haue to do.
15 They departed thence, and came to the house of the yonge man the Leuite in
Michas house, and saluted him fredly.
16 But the sixe hundreth men, which were of ye children of Dan, stode ready
harnessed before ye gate.
17 And the fyue men that were gone out to spye ye londe, wete vp, and came
thither, and toke the ymage, the ouerbody cote, & the molten Idols. In the meane
whyle stode ye prest at the gate, with the sixe hundreth readye harnessed.
18 Now wha these were come in to Michas house, and toke the ymage, the ouerbody
cote, and the molten Idols, the prest sayde vnto them: What do ye?
19 They answered him: Holde thy peace, and laye thine hande vpon thy mouth, and
go with vs, yt thou mayest be oure father & prest. Is it better for the to be
prest in one mans house, then amonge a whole trybe & kynred in Israel?
20 This pleased the prest well, & he toke both the ouerbody cote, and the Idols,
and the ymage, and came in amonge the people.
21 And whan they turned them and wente thence, they sent their children, and
catell, and soch precious thynges as they had, before them.
22 Whan they were come farre now from the house of Micha, the men yt were in
Michas houses gathered the together by Michas house, & folowed ye childre of
Dan, and cried vpon the childre of Dan.
23 They turned their faces aboute, and sayde vnto Micha: What ayleth the, yt
thou makest soch a crienge?
24 He answered: Ye haue taken awaye my goddes, and the prest, & are goinge yor
waie, and what haue I behynde? What is here? And yet ye saye vnto me: What
ayleth the?
25 But the childre of Dan saide vnto him: Let not thy voyce be herde amoge vs,
that some wrothfull me thrust not at the, and so yi soule and the soule of yi
house be destroyed.
26 So the childre of Dan wete on their waye. And Micha, whan he sawe yt they
were to stronge for him, turned backe, and came agayne to his house.
27 But they toke that Micha had made, & the prest whom he had, & came vnto Lais,
to a quyete carelesse people, and slewe them with the edge of the swerde, and
burnt the cite with fyre,
28 and there was no man to delyuer them: for they laye farre fro Sidon, and had
to do with no man. And they laye in the valley, which is besyde Beth Rehob. Then
buylded they the cite, & dwelt therin,
29 & called it Dan, after name of their father Dan, whom Israel begat. And ye
cite was called Lais afore tyme.
30 And the children of Dan set vp the ymage for them, and Ionathan ye sonne of
Gerson the sonne of Manasse, & his sonnes were prestes amoge the trybe of ye
Danites, vnto the tyme yt they were led awaye captyue out of the londe.
31 And thus they set amonge the the ymage of Micha, which he had made, as loge
as ye house of God was at Silo.

Chapter 19

1 At the same tyme was there no kynge in Israel, and there was a man of Leui,
which was a strauger besyde mout Ephraim, and had taken him a cocubine of
Bethleem Iuda to wife.
2 And wha she had played the harlot besyde him, she ranne fro him to hir fathers
house vnto Bethleem Iuda, & was there foure monethes longe.
3 And hir husbade gat him vp, & wente after her, to speake fredly wt her, & to
fetch her againe, & had a seruaunt & a couple of asses wt him. And she led him
in to hir fathers house. But whan the damsels father sawe him, he was glad, &
receaued him:
4 & his father in lawe, yt the damsels father kepte him, so yt he taried thre
dayes wt him: thus they ate and droke, and remayned there all nighte.
5 But on ye fourth daye he gat him vp early, & wolde go his waye. Then sayde ye
damsels father vnto his sonne in lawe: Refresh thine hert first wt a morsell of
bred, and then shal ye go.
6 And they sat them downe, & ate and dronke both together: Then sayde the
damsels father vnto the man: Oh tarye all nighte, yt we waie refresh thine hert.
7 But ye ma arose, & wolde nedes go. And his father in lawe constrayned him to
tarye all nighte.
8 On the fifth daye in the mornynge he gat him vp, and wolde be gone. Then sayde
the damsels father: I praye the conforte thine hert, & let vs tary tyll ye daye
be farther past, and so they ate both together.
9 And the man gat him vp, and wolde go with his concubyne and with his seruaunt.
But his father in lawe the damsels father, saide vnto him agayne: Lo, the daye
is spente, & it begynneth to be euen, tary all night: beholde, here is lodginge
yet this daye, abyde here this night, it shal refresh thine hert: tomorow by
times get you vp, and go youre waye vnto thy tent.
10 Neuerttheles the man wolde not tary, but gat him vp, and wete his waye, and
came ouer agaynst Iebus (that is Ierusalem) and his couple of asses lade, and
his concubyne with him.
11 Now whan they were come nye vnto Iebus, the daye fell fast awaye. And ye
seruaut saide vnto his master: I praie you go on, and let vs turne in to this
cite of the Iebusites, and tarye therin allnight.
12 Not withstondinge his master sayde vnto him: I wil not turne in to ye cite of
the aleauntes, that are not of the children of Israel, but I wyl go ouer vnto
Gibea.
13 And he sayde vnto his seruaut: Go thou before, that we maye come to some
place, and tarye at Gibea or at Ramah allnight.
14 And they wente on and walked, and the Sonne wente downe vpon the harde by
Gibea, which lyeth in the trybe of BenIamin:
15 and they turned in there, yt they mighte come in, and tarye at Gibea all
nighte. But whan he came in, he sat him downe in ye strete of the cite: for
there was noman that wolde lodge them in his house that night.
16 And beholde, then came there an olde ma from his worke out of the felde in
the eueninge: and he was also of mount Ephraim, and a strauger at Gibea: but ye
me of that place were ye childre of Iemini.
17 And whan he lifte vp his eies, & sawe the straunger in the strete he sayde
vnto him: Whither wilt thou go? & whence comest thou?
18 He answered him: We are goinge on oure iourney from Betlee Iuda, vntyll we
come besyde mount Ephraim, whece I am, and wente vnto Bethleem Iuda, and now I
go vnto ye house of ye LORDE & no ma wil harbarow me.
19 We haue strawe and proueder for oure asses, and bred and wyne for me and thy
handmayden, and for the yonge man which is with thy seruaunt, so yt we wante
nothinge.
20 The olde man sayde: Peace be with the: what soeuer thou wantest, thou findest
it wt me, onely tarye not in the strete all nighte.
21 And he broughte him in to his house, and gaue the asses prouender: and they
washed their fete, and ate & dronke.
22 And wha their hert was now ioyfull, the men of the cyte, the children of
Belial, came, and compased the house rounde aboute, and russhed at ye dore, and
sayde vnto ye olde man, which was the good man of ye house: Bringe out the ma
which is come in to thy house, that we maye knowe him.
23 But the good man of the house wente forth to them, and sayde vnto them: Oh no
my brethren, do not so wickedly, consideringe this man is come in to my house:
Oh do not soch folye.
24 Beholde, I haue a doughter yet a virgin, and this man hath a cocubine, those
wil I brynge forth vnto you, that ye maye humble them, and do with them as ye
lyke: but do not soch foly vnto this man.
25 Neuertheles the men wolde not herken vnto him. Then toke ye man his concubine
and broughte her forth vnto them: and they knewe her, and dealte shamefully with
her all yt night vntill the mornynge. And whan the mornynge brake on, they let
her go.
26 Then came the woman early in the mornynge, and fell downe at the dore of the
mas house that her lorde was in, and laye there tyll it was light.
27 Now whan hir lorde rose vp in the mornynge, and opened the dore of the house,
and wente forth to go on his iourney, beholde, his concubyne laye at the dore of
the house, and hir handes vpon the thresholde.
28 He saide vnto her: stonde vp, let vs go, Neuertheles she gaue him no answere.
The toke he her vp vpon his asse, gat him vp, and wente vnto his place.
29 Now whan he came home, he toke a swerde, and helde his concubyne, and cut her
wt the bones and all in to twolue peces, and sent them in to all the coastes of
Israel.
30 Who so euer sawe it, sayde: Soch a thinge hath not bene done ner sene, sence
the tyme that ye children of Israel departed out of the londe of Egipte, vnto
this daye. Now as concernynge this, take youre advysement, and geue yor
councell, and shew it forth.

Chapter 20

1 Then wente the children of Israel out and gathered a congregacion together as
one man, fro Dan vntill Bersaba, and from the londe of Gilead vnto the LORDE to
Mispa:
2 and there came together of all the quarters of the people, and of all the
trybes of Israel in to the congregacion of the people of God, foure hundreth
thousande fote men that drue out ye swerde.
3 But the children of BenIamin herde, how that ye children of Israel were gone
vp vnto Mispa. And the children of Israel sayde: Tell vs, how happened this
euell?
4 Then answered the Leuite the husbande of the woman that was slayne, and sayde:
I came to Gibea in BenIamin with my concubyne, to tary there allnight,
5 then the cytesins of Gibea gat them vp agaynst me, and compased me aboute in
the house by night, and thoughte to slaye me, and defyled my cocubyne, so that
she dyed:
6 then toke I my cocubyne, and cut her in peces, and sent the peces in to euery
countre of the inheritaunce of Israel: for they haue done an abhominacion and
folye in Israel.
7 Beholde, here are ye children of Israel: aduyse you well, and take this matter
in hande.
8 So all the people gat them vp as one ma, and sayde: Noma shal go in to his
tente, ner departe to his house,
9 but this wil we do now agaynst Gibea: Let vs cast lot,
10 and take ten men of an hundreth, and an hundreth of a thousande, and a
thousande of ten thousande, out of all ye trybes of Israel, yt they maie take
fode for ye people, to come & do with Gibea BenIamin, acordynge to their folye
which they haue done in Israel.
11 Thus all the men of Israel beynge confederate, gathered them selues together
as one man vnto the cite:
12 and the trybes of Israel sent men vnto all the kinreds of BenIamin, and
caused to saye vnto them: What maner of wickydnes is this, that is done amonge
you?
13 Delyuer here therfore the men the children of Belial at Gibea, that we maye
put them to death, and do awaye the euell out of Israel. Neuertheles the
children of BenIamin wolde not folowe the voyce of their brethren the children
of Israel,
14 but gathered them selues out of ye cities vnto Gibea, to go forth in battayll
agaynst the children of Israel.
15 And the same daye were there nombred of the children of BenIamin out of the
cities, sixe and twentye thousande men, that drue the swerde, beside the
citesyns of Gibea of whom there were tolde seue hundreth chosen men.
16 And amoge all this people there were chosen out seuen hundreth men, which
vsed not the right hande but the lefte, and yet wt the slynge coulde they touch
an heer, and not mysse.
17 But the men of Israel, beside them of BeIamin, were nobred foure hudreth
thousande, which drue the swerde, & were all men of armes.
18 And the children of Israel arose, and wente vp to the house of God (in Silo)
and axed at God, and sayde: Who shall go vp for vs to beginne the battayll with
ye children of BenIamin? The LORDE saide: Iuda shall begynne.
19 So the children of Israel gat the vp in ye mornige, & pitched ouer agaist
Gibea,
20 & euery man of Israel wete out to fighte with Ben Iamin, and set them selues
in araye to fighte agaynst Gibea.
21 Then fell the children of Ben Iamin out of Gibea, and slewe the same daye
amonge Israel two & twentye thousande to the grounde.
22 But the people of the men of Israel comforted them selues, and made them
ready to fighte yet more in the same place, after they had prepared them selues
the daye afore.
23 And the children of Israel wente vp, and wepte before the LORDE vntyll the
euenynge, and axed at the LORDE, & sayde: Shall we go enymore to fighte with
oure brethren the children of Ben Iamin? The LORDE sayde: Go vp vnto them.
24 And whan the children of Israel gat them vp to the childre of Ben Iamin on ye
next daye,
25 the Ben Iamites fell out of Gibea agaynst them the same daye, and slewe yet
eightene thousande of ye children of Israel to the grounde, which all drue the
swerde.
26 Then wente all the children of Israel vp, and all the people, and came to the
house of God, and wepte, and taried there before the LORDE, & fasted that daye
vntyll the euen, and offred burntofferynges and deedofferinges before the LORDE.
27 And the children of Israel axed at the LORDE (the Arke of the couenaunt of
God was there at that tyme,
28 and Phineas the sonne of Eleasar the sonne of Aaron stode before him at the
same tyme) & they sayde: Shal we go forth eny more to fighte with oure brethren
the childre of Ben Iamin, or shal we leaue of? The LORDE sayde: Go vp, tomorow
wyll I delyuer them in to youre handes.
29 And the children of Israel set a preuy watch agaynst Gibea rounde aboute,
30 and so the children of Israel wente vp to the children of Ben Iamin on the
thirde daye, and set them selues in araye agaynst Gibea like as the other two
tymes afore.
31 The came the children of Ben Iamin out agaynst the people, & brake out of the
cite, & beganne to slaye certayne wounded of the people (like as the other two
times afore) in the felde vpon two stretes: wherof one goeth towarde Bethel, the
other vnto Gilead vpon a thirtye men in Israel.
32 Then thought the childre of Ben Iamin: They are smytten before vs like as
afore. But the childre of Israel sayde: Let vs flye, that we maie prouoke them
out of the cite in to the hye stretes.
33 Then all the men of Israel gat them vp from their place, and prepared them
selues vnto Baal Thamar. And the hinder watch of Israel brake out of their
place, from ye caue of Gaba,
34 and came vnto Gibea, twentye thousande chosen men out of all Israel, so that
it was a sore battayll: but they knewe not that the euell shulde happen vnto
them.
35 Thus the LORDE smote BenIamin before the children of Israel, so that the same
daye the children of Israel destroyed fyue & twentye thousande and an hundreth
men in Ben Iamin, which all drue the swerde.
36 For whan the childre of BenIamin sawe that they were smitten, the men of
Israel gaue them rowme (to flye). For they trusted to the watch, which they had
sett by Gibea.
37 And the watch made haist also, & brake forth vnto Gibea, and wente vpon it,
and smote all the cite with the edge of ye swerde.
38 They were appoynted betwene them selues the men of Israel and the hynder
watch, to fall vpon them with the swerde, whan the smoke of the cite arose.
39 Now whan the men of Israel turned them in the battayll, and Ben Iamin beganne
to smyte the wounded in Israel vpon a thirtie men, and thoughte, they are
smytten before vs, like as in the battayll afore,
40 then beganne there a piler of smoke to arise vp from the cite. And BenIamin
loked behinde them: and beholde, the flamme of ye cite wente vp vnto heauen.
41 And the men of Israel turned them, and were fearce vpon ye men of BenIamin:
for they sawe that the euell wolde happen vnto them.
42 And they turned them before the men of Israel in the waye to the wyldernesse,
but the battayll folowed vpon them. And them of the cite destroyed they amoge
them.
43 And they compased BenIamin rounde aboute, and folowed vpon them vnto Mennah,
and trode them downe tyll afore Gibea eastwarde.
44 And there fell of BenIamin eightene thousande men, which were all men of
armes.
45 Whan the remnaunt of BenIamin sawe that, they turned them and fled towarde
the wildernesse vnto the stonye rocke of Rimon. But in the same strete they
slewe fyue thousande men, and folowed vpon them vnto Gideom, and slewe two
thousande of the:
46 and so there fell the same daye of BenIamin fyue and twenty thousande men
which drue ye swerde, and were all me of armes.
47 Onely sixe hundreth men turned backe, and fled towarde the wyldernesse vnto
the stonye rocke of Rimon, and abode in the rocke of Rimon foure monethes.
48 And the men of Israel came agayne to the children of BenIamin, and smote them
that were in the cite with ye edge of the swerde, both me and catell and all
that was founde: and what soeuer was foude in the cite, they cast it in to the
fyre.

Chapter 21

1 The men of Israel had swore at Mispa, and sayde: Noman shal geue his doughter
to the BenIamites to wife.
2 And the people came to the house of God (in Silo) & abode there before God
vntill the euenynge, and lifte vp their voyce, and wepte sore,
3 and sayde: O LORDE God of Israel, wherfore is this come to passe in Israel
this daye?
4 But on the morow the people gat the vp early, and builded there an altare, and
offred burntofferinges and deedofferynges.
5 And the children of Israel sayde: Where is there eny ma of the trybes of
Israel, that is not come vp with the congregacion vnto the LORDE? For there was
a greate ooth made, that who so came not vp to Mispa vnto the LORDE, shulde dye
the deeth.
6 And the children of Israel were sory for BenIamin their brother, and sayde:
This daye is there one trybe lesse in Israel.
7 How wyll we do that the remnaunt maye haue wyues? For we haue sworne by the
LORDE, that we wyl not geue the wyues of oure doughters.
8 And they saide: Where is there eny ma of the trybes of Israel, that is not
come vp to the LORDE vnto Mispa?
9 And beholde, there was not one man of the citesyns of Iabes in Gilead.
10 Then sent the congregacion twolue thousande men of armes thither, and
commaunded them, and sayde: Go youre waye, and smite the citesyns of Iabes in
Gilead with the swerde, the wemen also and the children,
11 but so that ye do after this maner: Se that ye damne all them that are males,
and all the wemen that haue lyen with men.
12 And amonge the citesins of Iabes in Gilead they foude foure hundreth damsels,
which were virgins, and had lyen with noman: those they broughte in to the hoost
vnto Silo, which lyeth in the londe of Canaan.
13 Then sent the whole congregacion, and caused to talke with the children of
BenIamin, which were in the stonie rocke of Rimo and called vnto them frendly.
14 So the children of BenIamin came agayne at the same tyme, and thy gaue them
wemen which they had of the wemen of Iabes in Gilead, and founde no mo after
that maner.
15 Then were the people sory for BenIamin, that ye LORDE had made a gappe in the
trybes of Israel.
16 And the Elders of the congregacio sayde: What wil we do, that the remnaunt
maye haue wyues also? for the weme in Ben Iamin are destroied,
17 and they sayde: The enheritaunce of them of BenIamin that are escaped, must
nedes remayne, that there be not a trybe destroyed out of Israel:
18 & we cannot geue them oure doughters to wiues. For the children of Israel
haue sworne and sayde: Cursed be he that geueth a wyfe to the BenIamites.
19 And they sayde: Beholde there is a yearly feast of the LORDE at Silo, which
lieth on the northsyde of the Gods house, and on the eastside of the strete as a
ma goeth from Bethel vnto Sichem, and lieth on the south side of Libona.
20 And they commaunded the children of BenIamin, & sayde: Go youre waye, and
wayte in the vynyardes.
21 And whan ye se that the doughters of Silo go forth by copanyes to daunse, get
you out of the vynyardes, and euery man take him a wyfe of the doughters of
Silo, and go youre waye in to the lode of BenIamin.
22 As for their fathers and brethren, whan they come to lawe with vs, we wyll
saye vnto them: Be fauourable to them, for they haue not taken the in battaill:
but ye gaue the not vnto them by time, and it is youre faute.
23 The children of BenIamin did so, and acordinge to their nombre toke them
wyues from the daunse, whom they caught by violence, and wente their waye, &
dwelt in their awne inheritaunce, and buylded cities and dwelt therin.
24 The children of Israel also gat them vp from thence at the same time, euery
one to his trybe and to his kinred, and departed thece, euery man to his awne
inheritaunce.
25 At yt time was there no kynge in Israel, and euery man dyd ye thinge yt was
right in his awne eies.


Ruth

Chapter 1

1 In ye tyme whan the Iudges ruled, there was a derth in the londe. And there
wente a ma from Bethlee Iuda to take his iourney into the londe of the Moabites
wt his wife and two sonnes,
2 which man was called EliMelech, and his wife Naemi, & his two sonnes, the one
Mahelon, and the other Chilion: these were Ephrates of Bethleem Iuda. And whan
they came in to the londe of ye Moabites, they dwelt there.
3 And Eli Melech Naemis husbande dyed, & she was left behinde wt hir two sonnes,
4 which toke Moabitish wyues: the one was called Arpa, the other Ruth. And whan
they had dwelt there ten yeare,
5 they dyed both, Mahelon and Chilion, so that the woman remayned desolate of
both hir sonnes and hir husbande.
6 Then gat she her vp wt both hir sonnes wyues, & wente agayne out of the lode
of ye Moabites (for she had herde in the londe of the Moabites, yt the LORDE had
visited his people & geuen them bred)
7 & so she departed from ye place where she was, & both hir sonnes wyues wt her.
And as they wete by the waye to come agayne into the londe of Iuda,
8 she sayde vnto both hir sonnes wyues: Go yor waye, & turne backe ether of you
to hir mothers house: the LORDE shewe mercy vpon you, as ye haue done on the yt
are deed & on me.
9 The LORDE graunte you, yt ye maie fynde rest ether of you in hir husbades
house (whom ye shal get) and she kyssed them. Then lift they vp their voyce, and
wepte,
10 & sayde vnto her: We wil go with the vnto yi people.
11 But Naemi sayde: Turne agayne my doughters, why wolde ye go with me? How can
I haue children eny more in my body, to be youre husbandes?
12 Turne agayne my doughters, and go youre waye, for I am now to olde to take an
husbande. And though I shulde saye: I hope this night to take an husbande & to
brynge forth children,
13 yet coulde ye not tary tlll they were growne vp: for ye shulde be to olde, so
that ye coulde haue no husbandes. No my doughters, therfore am I sory for you,
for ye hade of the LORDE is gone forth ouer me.
14 Then lifte they vp their voyce, and wepte yet more, and Arpa kyssed hir
mother in lawe (and turned backe againe) but Ruth abode styll by her.
15 Neuertheles she sayde: Beholde, thy syster in lawe is turned backe vnto hir
people and to hir god, turne thou againe also after thy sister in lawe.
16 Ruth answered: Speake not to me therof, that I shulde forsake the, and turne
backe from the: whithersoeuer thou goest, thither wil I go also: and loke where
thou abydest, there wil I abide also: Thy people is my people, & thy God is my
God.
17 Loke where thou diest, there wil dye, and euen there wil I also be buried.
The LORDE do this and that vnto me, death onely shal departe vs.
18 Now whan she sawe, that she was stedfastly mynded to go with her, she spake
nomore to her therof.
19 So they wente on both together, till they came vnto Bethleem. And whan they
were come in to Bethleem, the whole cite was moued ouer them, and sayde Is not
this Naemi?
20 Neuerthelesse she sayde vnto them: call me not Naemi, but Mara: for the
Allmightie hath made me very sory.
21 I departed full, but the LORDE hath brought me home agayne emptye. Why call
ye me then Naemi? wha the LORDE hath broughte me lowe, and the Allmightie hath
made me sory?
22 It was aboute the tyme of the begynninge of the barlye haruest, whan Naemi
and his sonnes wife Ruth ye Moabitysse, came agayne from the londe of the
Moabites vnto Bethleem.

Chapter 2

1 There was a kinsman also of ye kynred of EliMelech Naemis husbande, whose name
was Boos, which was an honest man.
2 And Ruth the Moabitisse saide vnto Naemi: Let me go in to ye felde, & gather
eares of corne, after him, in whose sight I shal finde fauor. She sayde vnto
her: Go yi waie my doughter.
3 She wete on, & came & gathered after ye reapers in ye feld. And it fortuned
that the same felde was the enheritaunce of Boos, which was of the kynred of
Elimelech,
4 and beholde, Boos came from Bethleem, and sayde vnto the reapers: The LORDE be
with you. They answered: The LORDE blesse the.
5 And Boos sayde vnto his yongman which had the ouersight of ye reapers. Whose
damsell is this?
6 The yonge man that was set ouer ye reapers, answered and sayde: It is the
damsell the Moabitisse, which came agayne with Naemi from the londe of the
Moabites.
7 And she sayde: Let me plucke vp and gather (I praie the) betwene the sheues
after the reapers: and thus is she come, and hath stonde here euer sence the
mornynge, and within a litle whyle she wolde haue bene gone home agayne.
8 Then sayde Boos vnto Ruth: Hearest thou my doughter? Thou shalt not come vpon
another mans londe to gather, and go not awaye from hence, but tary with my
dasels,
9 and loke where they reape in ye felde, go thou after them: for I haue
comaunded my seruauntes that no man touch the. And yf thou be a thyrst, go thy
waye to the vessell & drynke, where my seruauntes drawe.
10 Then fell she downe vpon hir face, and bowed hir self downe to the earth, and
sayde vnto him: How haue I founde this fauoure in yi sighte, that thou woldest
knowe me, which am yet a straunger?
11 Boos answered and sayde vnto her: It is tolde me alltogether, what thou hast
done vnto thy mother in lawe after thy husbades death, how that thou hast left
yi father and thy mother, and thy natiue countre, and art come to a people, whom
thou hast not knowne afore.
12 The LORDE recompence the thy doinge, and thy rewarde be parfecte wt the LORDE
God of Israel, vnto whom thou art come to put thy trust vnder his wynges.
13 She sayde: let me fynde fauoure (syr) before thyne eyes, for thou hast
comforted me, and spoken frendly vnto thy handmayde, where as I am not yet like
one of yi handmaydes.
14 Boos sayde vnto her: Whan it is eatinge tyme, come hither, and eate of the
bred, and dyppe thy morsell in the vyneger. And she sat hir downe besyde the
reapers. And he set parched corne before her, and she ate, & was satisfyed, and
lefte ouer.
15 And wha she rose to gather, Boos commaunded his seruauntes, and sayde: Let
her gather betwene the sheues also, and do her no dishonestye:
16 and cast of the sheues vnto her, and let it lye that she maye gather it vp,
and se that noman reproue her for it.
17 So she gathered in the felde vntyll euen and she shaked out what she had
gathered, and it was allmost an Epha of barlye:
18 and she toke it vp, and came in to the cite, and shewed hir mother in lawe
what she had gathered. She toke forth also, and gaue her of that which was left,
wherof she was satysfyed.
19 The sayde hir mother in lawe vnto her Blessinge haue the man that hath knowne
the, where thou hast gathered and laboured this daye. She tolde hir mother in
lawe by whom she had laboured, and sayde: The mans name, by whom I haue wroughte
to daye, is Boos.
20 Naemi sayde vnto hir doughter in lawe: The blessynge of the LORDE haue he,
for he hath not lefte of to be mercifull vnto the lyuynge and to the deed. And
Naemi sayde vnto her: The same man belongeth vnto vs, and is oure nye kynsman.
21 Ruth the Moabitisse saide: He saide morouer vnto me: Thou shalt resorte vnto
my seruauntes, tyll they haue made an ende of all my haruest.
22 Naemi sayde vnto Ruth hir doughter in lawe: It is better my doughter, that
thou go forth with his damsels, lest eny man withstode the in another felde.
23 Thus she kepte herselfe with Boos damsels, so that she gathered vntill the
barlye haruest and the wheate haruest was out, and came againe to hir mother in
lawe.

Chapter 3

1 And Naemi hir mother in lawe sayde vnto her: My doughter, I wyll prouyde rest
for the, that thou maiest prospere.
2 Boos oure kynsman, by whose damsels thou hast bene, casteth vp barlye now this
night in his barne.
3 Bathe thyselfe therfore, and moffell the, and put on thy clothes, and go downe
vnto the barne, so yt noma knowe the, tyll they haue all eaten and dronken.
4 Whan he layeth him downe then to sleape, mark ye place where he lyeth downe,
and come thou, and take vp the couerynge at his fete, and laye the downe, so
shall he tell the what thou shalt do.
5 She sayde vnto her: what so euer thou saiest vnto me, I wil do it.
6 She wente downe to the barne, & dyd all as hir mother in lawe had comaunded
her.
7 And wha Boos had eate & dronke, his hert was mery, & he came and layed him
downe behynde a heape of sheues. And she came secretly, and toke vp the
coueringe at his fete, and layed hir downe.
8 Now wha it was midnight, the man was afrayed, and groped aboute him, and
beholde, a woman laye at his fete.
9 And he sayde: Who art thou? She answered: I am Ruth thy handmayden, sprede yi
wynges ouer thy hadmayden: for thou art the nexte kynsman.
10 He sayde: The LORDES blessinge haue thou my doughter. Thou hast done a better
mercy here after then before, yt thou art not gone after yonge men, nether riche
ner poore.
11 Feare not now my doughter: All yt thou hast sayde, will I do for the: for all
the cite of my people knoweth, yt thou art a vertuous woma.
12 Trueth it is now, yt I am a nye kynsma, but there is one nyer then I.
13 Tarye thou allnighte. Tomorow yf he take the, well: yf he like not to take
ye, then wil I take ye my selfe, as truly as ye LORDE lyueth. Slepe thou tyll ye
mornynge. And she slepte at his fete vntyll ye morow.
14 And she rose vp or euer one coulde knowe another. And he thoughte thus: That
no ma knowe now yt there hath come a woman in to the barne,
15 and he sayde: Reach me the cloke yt thou hast on the, & holde it forth. And
she helde it forth. And he meet her sixe measures of barlye, and layed it vpon
her, & she wente in to the cite,
16 & came to hir mother in lawe, which sayde: How is it wt the my doughter? And
she tolde her all yt the ma had done vnto her,
17 & sayde: These sixe measures of barlye gaue he me, for he sayde: Thou shalt
not come emptye vnto yi mother in lawe.
18 She sayde: Abyde my doughter, tyll thou se what ye matter wil growe to: for
the man wilt not ceasse, tyll he brynge it to an ende this daye.

Chapter 4

1 Boos wente vp to ye gate, and sat him downe there: & beholde, whan ye nye
kynsman wente by, Boos spake vnto him, & sayde: Come & syt the downe here (and
called him by his name.) And he came & sat him downe,
2 & he toke ten men of the Elders of ye cite, & sayde: Syt you downe here. And
they sat the downe.
3 The sayde he to the nye kynsman: Naemi which is come againe fro the lode of
the Moabites offreth to sell ye pece of londe, yt was oure brothers Eli Melech,
4 therfore thoughte I to shewe it before thine eares, & to tell the: Yf thou
wilt redeme it, then bye it before the citesyns & before the Elders of my
people: but yf thou wylt not redeme it, then tell me, yt I maie knowe: for there
is no nye kynsma excepte thou, and I nexte after the. He sayde: I wil redeme it.
5 Boos saide: In the daye yt thou byest the lode out of ye hande of Naemi, thou
must take Ruth also the Moabitisse the wife of the deed, that thou mayest rayse
vp a name to ye deed in his inheritaunce.
6 The sayde he: I can not redeme it, lest I happlye destroye myne awne
enheritaunce. Redeme thou yt I shulde redeme, for I can not redeme it.
7 But this was an olde custome in Israel concernynge the redemynge & chauginge,
yt all matters mighte be stable, the one put of his shue, & gaue it vnto ye
other: yt was the testimony in Israel.
8 And the nye kynsman sayde vnto Boos: Bye thou it, & he put of his shue.
9 And Boos sayde vnto the Elders and to all the people: Ye are witnesses this
daie, yt I haue boughte out of the hande of Naemi, all that belonged to Eli
Melech, and all that was Chilions and Mahelons:
10 And Ruth the Moabitisse Mahelons wife, take I to wife, that I maye rayse vp a
name vnto ye deed in his inheritaunce, and that his name be not roted out from
amonge his brethren, and out of the gate of his place: Of this are ye witnesses.
11 And all the people that was in the gate with the Elders, saide: We are
witnesses. The LORDE make the woman that commeth in to thy house, as Rachel and
Lea ( which both haue buylded vp the house of Israel) that she maye be an
ensample of vertue in Ephrata, and haue an honorable name in Bethleem.
12 And thy house be as ye house of Phares ( who Thamar bare vnto Iuda) thorow
the sede, that the LORDE shall geue the of this damsell.
13 So Boos toke Ruth, and she became his wife. And whan he laye with her, the
LORDE graunted her yt she conceaued, and bare a sonne.
14 The sayde the wemen vnto Naemi: Praysed be the LORDE, which hath not suffred
a kynsman to ceasse from the at this tyme, that his name maye contynue in
Israel:
15 he shal restore thy life agayne, and prouyde for thine age. For yi sonnes
wife which hath loued the, hath borne him that is better vnto the, then seuen
sonnes.
16 And Naemi toke the childe, and layde it vpon hir lappe, and became the norse
of it,
17 and hir neghbours gaue him a name & sayde: There is a childe borne vnto
Naemi, and they called his name Obed. The same is the father of Isai, which is
ye father of Dauid.
18 This is ye generacion of Phares. Phares begat Hesrom.
19 Hesrom begat Aram. Aram begat Aminadab.
20 Aminadab begatt Naasson. Naasson begat Salmon.
21 Salmo begat Boos. Boos begat Obed.
22 Obed begat Isai. Isai begat Dauid.


1 Samuel

Chapter 1

1 There was a man of Ramathaim Sophim of mount Ephraim, whose name was Elcana ye
sonne of Ieroham, ye sonne of Elihu, ye sonne of Tohu, ye sonne of Zuph, yt was
an Ephrate.
2 And he had two wyues, ye one was called Anna, ye other Peninna. As for
Peninna, she had children, but Anna had no childre.
3 And ye same man wete vp fro his cite at his tyme, to worshippe and to offer
vnto the LORDE Zebaoth at Silo. There were the prestes of the LORDE Ophni and
Phineas, the two sonnes of Eli.
4 Now whan it came vpon a daye that Elcana offred, he gaue partes vnto his wife
Peninna, and to all his sonnes and doughters.
5 But vnto Anna he gaue one deale heuely, for he loued Anna. Neuertheles the
LORDE had closed hir wombe,
6 & hir aduersary cast her in the tethe with hir vnfrutefulnes, because the
LORDE had closed hir wombe:
7 thus dyd she euery yeare, whan they wente vp to the house of the LORDE, and
thus she prouoked her. So she wepte, and ate nothinge.
8 But Elcana hir husbande sayde vnto her: Wherfore wepest thou? and why eatest
thou not? And wherfore is thine hert so greued? Am not I better vnto the then
ten sonnes?
9 Then stode Anna vp, whan she had eaten and dronken at Silo. But Eli the prest
sat vpon a stole by the poste of the temple of the LORDE.
10 And she was full of heuynes in hir herte, and prayed vnto the LORDE, and
wepte,
11 and vowed a vowe, and sayde: O LORDE Zebaoth, yf thou wilt loke vpon the
aduersite of thy handmayden, and thynke vpon me, and not forget thy handmayden,
and wilt geue thy handmayden a sonne, I wil geue him vnto the LORDE all his life
longe, and there shal no rasoure come vpon his heade.
12 And wha she had prayed longe before ye LORDE, Eli toke hede to hir mouth,
13 for Anna spake in hir hert, hir lippes onely moued, but hir voyce was not
herde. Then thoughte Eli she had bene dronken,
14 and sayde vnto her: How longe wilt thou be dronken? Let come from the the
wyne that thou hast by the.
15 Neuertheles Anna answered and sayde: No my lorde, I am a soroufull woman,
wyne and stronge drynke haue I not dronken but haue poured out my hert before ye
LORDE.
16 Counte not thy handmayden a doughter of Belial: for out of my heuy thoughte
and sorow haue I spoken hitherto.
17 Eli answered her, and sayde: Go yi waye in peace, the God of Israel shal
graunte ye thy peticion that thou hast desyred of him.
18 She sayde: Let thy handmayden fynde fauoure in thy sighte. So the woman wente
hir waye and ate, and loked nomore so soroufully:
19 and on ye morow they gat them vp by tymes. And whan they had worshipped
before ye LORDE, they returned, and came home vnto Ramatha. And Elcana laye with
Anna his wife, and the LORDE remembred her.
20 And after certayne dayes, she coceaued and bare a sonne, and called his name
Samuel, for I haue desyred him (sayde she) of the LORDE.
21 And whan the man Elcana wente vp with all his housholde to offre sacrifice
and his vowe vnto the LORDE at soch tyme as ye custome was,
22 Anna wente not vp, but sayde vnto hir husbande: (I wil not go vp) tyll ye
childe be weened: then will I brynge him, that he maye appeare before the LORDE,
and cotynue there for euer.
23 Elcana hir husbande sayde vnto her: The do as thou thynkest best, tary tyll
thou haue weened him: but the LORDE perfourme that he hath spoken. So the woman
abode, and gaue hir sonne sucke, tyll she weened him.
24 And whan she had weened him, she broughte him vp with her, with thre
bullockes, with an Ephi of fyne floure, and a bottell of wyne, and broughte him
in to ye house of the LORDE at Silo. Neuertheles the childe was yet but yonge.
25 And they slewe a bullocke, and broughte the childe vnto Eli.
26 And she sayde: O my lorde, as truly as thy soule lyueth my lorde, I am the
woman that stode here by ye, and made intercession vnto the LORDE,
27 whan I prayed for this childe. Now hath ye LORDE graunted me my peticion,
which I desyred of him,
28 therfore haue I geuen him ouer vnto the LORDE, as longe as he is lent vnto
the LORDE. And they worshipped ye LORDE there.

Chapter 2

1 And Anna prayed, and sayde: My hert reioyseth in the LORDE, & my horne is
exalted in the LORDE. My mouth is opened wyde vpo myne enemies, for I am glad of
thy saluacion.
2 There is no man holy as the LORDE, for without the is nothinge, and there is
no coforte like vnto oure God.
3 Let go yor greate boostinge of hye thynges, let go out of youre mouth that
olde byworde: for the LORDE is a God yt knoweth all thinges, & he hath set all
workes in order.
4 The bowe of the mightie is broken, and the weake are gyrded aboute with
strength.
5 They that were fylled afore, are solde for bred: and they that were hongrie,
are satisfied: vntyll the baren bare seuen, and tyll she that had many childre,
was become weake.
6 The Lorde slayeth, and geueth life: he ledeth vnto hell, and bryngeth out
agayne.
7 The LORDE maketh poore and maketh riche: He bryngeth lowe and exalteth.
8 He taketh vp the neady out of the dust, and lifteth vp ye poore out of the
myre, that he maye set them amonge the prynces, and to let them inheret the
seate of honoure: for the foundacions and corners of the worlde are the LORDES,
and he hath set the compase of the earth theron.
9 He shall preserue the fete of his sayntes, but ye vngodly shal be put to
sylece in darcnesse. For there is no ma that can do oughte of his owne power.
10 The LORDES enemies shal be put in feare before him, he shal thoder vpo the in
heaue. The LORDE shall iudge the endes of the worlde, & shal geue stregth vnto
his kynge, & shall exalte the horne of his anoynted.
11 Elcana wente his waye to Ramath vnto his house. And the childe became the
LORDES mynister before Eli the prest.
12 But Elis sonnes were the childre of Belial, and knewe not the LORDE,
13 ner the dutye of the prestes vnto the people: but whan eny man wolde offre
oughte, the prestes boye came, whyle the flesh was seethinge, and had a thre
forked fleshoke in his hande,
14 and thrust it in to the cauldron, or ketell, or panne, or pot: and loke what
he drue forth with the fleshoke, that toke the prest therof. Thus dyd they vnto
all Israel, which came thither vnto Silo.
15 Like wyse, or euer they burned the fatt, the prestes lad came, and sayde vnto
him that broughte the offerynge: Geue me the flesh, that I maye roste it for the
prest, for he wyl receaue no sodden flesh of ye, but rawe.
16 Yf eny man sayde then vnto him: Let the fat burne as it oughte to do this
daye, and afterwarde take what thine hert desyreth, then sayde he vnto him: Thou
shalt geue it me euen now: yf no, I wyll take it from the by violece.
17 Therfore was the synne of ye childre very greate before the LORDE, for ye
people spake euell of ye meatofferynge of ye LORDE.
18 But Samuel was a mynister before the LORDE, and the childe was gyrded with an
ouer body cote of lynnen.
19 His mother also made him a litle cote of sylke, and broughte it vp vnto him
at couenient tymes, wha she wente vp with hir husbande to offer ye offerynge in
due season.
20 And Eli blessed Elcana & his wife, and sayde: The LORDE geue the sede of this
woman, for this good that thou hast lent vnto the LORDE. And they wete vnto
their place.
21 And the LORDE vysited Anna, so that she coceaued and bare thre sonnes and two
doughters: but the childe Samuel grewe vp with the LORDE.
22 As for Eli, he was very olde, and herde of all that his sonnes dyd vnto all
Israel, and how they laye with the wemen that serued God before the dore of the
tabernacle of witnesse,
23 and he sayde vnto them: wherfore do ye this? For I heare of youre euell
conuersacion of all this people.
24 Not so my childre, this is no good reporte that I heare, ye cause the people
of the LORDE to offende.
25 Yf eny ma synne agaynst a man, the iudge ca redresse it. But yf eny ma synne
agaynst ye LORDE, who can redresse it? Neuertheles they herkened not vnto the
voyce of their father, for the LORDES wyll was to slaye them.
26 But the childe Samuel wente and grewe vp, & was accepted of the LORDE & of
me.
27 There came a man of God to Eli, and sayde vnto him: Thus sayeth the LORDE: I
shewed my selfe vnto thy fathers house, whan they were yet in Egipte vnder ye
house of Pharao,
28 and chose him there vnto my selfe before all the trybes of Israel, for the
presthode, that he shulde offer vpon myne altare, and burne incense, and weere
the ouerbody cote before me, and vnto thy fathers house I gaue all the
offeringes of the children of Israel.
29 Why layest thou thy selfe then agaynst my sacrifices and meatofferinges,
which I commaunded (to offer) in the habitacion: and thou honourest thy sonnes
more then me, that ye mighte fede youre selues with the firstlinges of all the
meatofferynges of my people of Israel?
30 Therfore sayeth the LORDE God of Israel: I haue spoken, that thy house and
thy fathers house shulde walke before me for euer. But now sayeth the LORDE:
That be farre fro me. But who so euer honoureth me, him wil I honor also: as for
those yt despyse me, they shal not be regarded.
31 Beholde, the tyme shal come, that I wyll breake thyne arme in two, and the
arme of thy fathers house, so that there shal no oldeman be in thy house.
32 And thou shalt se thine aduersaries in the habitacion, in all the good of
Israel, and there shal neuer be olde man in thy fathers house.
33 Yet wyll I not rote out euery man of the fro myne altare, but yt thyne eyes
maye be consumed, & that yi soule maye be sory: & a greate multitude of thy
house shal dye, whan they are come to be men.
34 And this shalbe a token vnto the, that shal come vpon thy two sonnes Ophni
and Phineas: They shall both dye in one daye.
35 But vnto my selfe I wyll rayse vp a faithfull prest, which shal do acordinge
as it is in my hert & in my soule: vnto him wyll I buylde a sure house, that he
maye allwaye walke before myne anoynted.
36 And who so euer remayneth of thy house, shall come and worshipe him for a
syluer peny and for a pece of bred, and shall saye: I praye the leaue me to one
prestes parte, that I maye eate a morsell of bred.

Chapter 3

1 And whan the childe Samuel mynistred vnto the LORDE vnder Eli, the worde of ye
LORDE was deare at the same tyme, nether was there eny sure & manifest vision.
2 And it fortuned at the same tyme, that Eli laye in his place, and his eyes
beganne to be dymme, so that he coulde not se.
3 And Samuel had layed him downe in ye temple of the LORDE (where the Arke of
God was) before ye lampe of God was put out.
4 And the LORDE called Samuel. He answered: Beholde, here am I.
5 And he ranne vnto Eli, & sayde: Beholde, here am I, thou hast called me. But
he saide: I haue not called the, go thy waye agayne, and laye the downe to
slepe. And he wente his waye, and layed him downe to slepe.
6 The LORDE called againe: Samuel. And Samuel arose, & wente vnto Eli, & sayde:
Beholde, here am I, thou hast called me. Neuertheles he sayde: My sonne, I haue
not called the. So thy waye agayne, and laye the downe to slepe.
7 As for Samuel, he knewe not the LORDE as yet, & the worde of ye LORDE was not
yet shewed vnto him.
8 And ye LORDE called Samuel ye thirde tyme. And he arose, & wente vnto Eli, &
sayde: Beholde, here am I, thou hast called me. Then perceaued Eli yt the LORDE
called ye childe,
9 & he sayde vnto him: Go thy waye agayne, & laye the downe to slepe: and yf the
LORDE call the eny more, then saye: Speake LORDE, for yi seruaunt heareth.
Samuel wete his waye, and layed him downe in his place.
10 The came ye LORDE, & stode, and called like as afore: Samuel, Samuel. And
Samuel sayde: Speake (LORDE) for thy seruaunt heareth.
11 And the LORDE saide vnto Samuel: Beholde, I do a thinge in Israel, yt who so
euer shall heare it, both his eares shal glowe.
12 In yt daie will I rayse vp vpon Eli all yt I haue spoke cocernynge his house.
I will take it in hande, & perfourme it:
13 for I haue tolde him, yt I wilbe Iudge ouer his house for euer, because of
the wickednes, yt he knewe how shamefully his childre behaued the selues, and
hath not once loked sowerly therto.
14 Therfore haue I sworne vnto ye house of Eli, yt this wickednes of ye house of
Eli shall not be recocyled nether wt sacrifice ner wt meatoffringe for euer.
15 And Samuel laye vnto ye morow, & opened the dores of the house of the LORDE.
But Samuel was afrayed to tell the vysion vnto Eli.
16 Then Eli called him & sayde: Samuel my sonne. He answered: Beholde, here am
I.
17 He sayde: What is ye worde yt the LORDE hath spoke vnto the? hyde it not fro
me. God do this & that vnto ye, yf thou hyde oughte fro me, of all that he hath
talked wt the.
18 Then Samuel tolde him alltogether, & hyd nothinge from him. He sayde: It is
the LORDE, let him do what pleaseth him.
19 Samuel grewe vp, & the LORDE was wt him, & there fell none of all his wordes
vpo the earth.
20 And all Israel fro Dan vnto Bersaba, knewe yt Samuel was faithfull to be a
prophet of the LORDE.
21 And the LORDE appeared agayne at Silo: for the LORDE shewed him selfe vnto
Samuel at Silo, thorow the worde of the LORDE.

Chapter 4

1 And all Israel spake of Samuel. And Israel wente forth to the battayll against
the Philistynes, & pitched besyde the. Helpe stone: As for the Philistynes, they
pitched at Aphek,
2 and prepared them selues agaynst Israel. And whan the battayll beganne, the
hoost was deuyded, so that Israel was smytte before the enemies, & in the edge
in the felde they slewe aboute a foure thousande men.
3 And whan the people came in to the hoost, the Elders of Israel sayde: Wherfore
hath the LORDE caused vs to be smytten this daie before the Philistynes? Let vs
take vnto vs the Arke of the LORDES couenaunt from Silo, & let it come amoge vs,
that it maye helpe vs from the hande of oure enemies.
4 And the people sent vnto Silo, & caused to fet thece the Arke of ye couenaunt
of the LORDE Zebaoth, that sytteth vpon the Cherubins. And with the Arke of the
couenaunt of God there were the two sonnes of Eli, Ophni and Phineas.
5 And whan the Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE came in to the hoost, all
Israel shouted wt a greate shoute, so that the earth sounded withall.
6 But whan the Philistynes herde ye noyse of ye shoute, they sayde: what noyse
is this of soch greate shoutinge in the tentes of the Hebrues? And whan they
perceaued yt the Arke of the LORDE was come in to the hoost,
7 they were afrayed & sayde: God is come in to the hoost. And they sayde
morouer: Wo vnto vs, for it hath not bene thus afore tyme.
8 Wo vnto vs. Who wil delyuer vs fro the hande of these hye goddes? These are
the goddes that smote Egipte wt all maner of plages in the wyldernesse.
9 Be stronge now and manly ye Philistynes, that ye serue not the Hebrues as they
haue serued you. Be manly and fighte.
10 Then foughte the Philistynes, & Israel was smytten, & euery one fled vnto his
tete, & there was a very greate slaughter, so that there fell of Israel thirtye
thousande fote me,
11 & the Arke of God was take, & the two sonnes of Eli, Ophni and Phineas dyed.
12 Then rane there one of Ben Iamin out of the fore fronte of the battayl, &
came vnto Silo the same daye, & had his clothes rente, and had earth vpo his
heade.
13 And whan he came in, Heli sat vpon the seate, that he mighte loke towarde the
waye: for his herte was fearfull aboute ye Arke of God. And whan the man came in
to the cite, he tolde it forth: and all the cite cried.
14 And whan Eli herde ye noyse of the cryege, he axed: What noyse of busynes is
this? The man came haistely, and tolde Eli.
15 (As for Eli, he was fourescore and eightene yeare olde, and his eyes were
dymme, so that he coulde not se.)
16 The man sayde vnto Eli: I come and am fled this daye out of the hoost. He
sayde: How is it my sonne?
17 Then answered the tydinge bringer, & sayde: Israel is fled before the
Philistynes, and a greate slaughter hath there bene amonge the people, & thy two
sonnes Ophni & Phineas are deed, yee & the Arke of God is take awaye.
18 Whan he had made mencion of the Arke of God, he fell downe bacwarde from the
seate by the gate, and brake his neck, and dyed: for he was olde, & an heuy man.
He iudged Israel fortie yeares.
19 The wife of his sonne Phineas was wt childe, & shulde shortly be delyuered,
whan she herde the tydinges yt the Arke of God was taken, and yt hir brother in
lawe and hir husbade were deed, she bowed hir selfe and trauayled: for hir payne
came vpon her.
20 And whan she was now at the poynte of death, the wemen that stode by her,
sayde: Feare not, thou hast a yoge sonne. But she gaue no answere, nether
regarded it,
21 and she called the childe Icabod, and sayde: The glory is gone from Israel,
because the Arke of God was taken awaye, and hir brother in lawe and hir
husbande.
22 And she sayde morouer: The glory is gone from Israel, for the Arke of God is
take awaye

Chapter 5

1 As for the Arke of God, the Philistynes toke it and broughte it from the stone
of helpe vnto A dod
2 in to the house of Dagon, and set it besyde Dagon.
3 And whan they of Asdod rose vp early on the morowe, they founde Dagon lyenge
on his face vpon the earth, before the Arke of the LORDE. But they toke vp
Dagon, and set him agayne in his place.
4 Neuertheles whan they rose vp early on the nexte morowe, they founde Dagon
lyenge on his face agayne vpon the earth before the Arke of the LORDE: but his
heade and both his hades hewen of vpon the thresholde, so that the block laie
there onely.
5 Therfore the prestes of Dagon, and all they that go in to his house, treade
not vpo the thressholde of Dagon at Asdod vnto this daye.
6 But the hande of the LORDE was heuy vpon them of Asdod, and destroyed them,
and smote Asdod and all the borders therof in secrete places.
7 Whan the men of Asdod sawe that they were so plaged, they sayde: Let not the
Arke of the God of Israel tary with vs, for his hande is to harde vpo vs & vpon
or god Dagon.
8 And they sent forth and gathered all the prynces of the Philistynes vnto them,
and sayde: What shal we do with the Arke of the God of Israel? Then answered
they of Geth: Let the Arke of the God of Israel be borne aboute.
9 And they caried the Arke of the God of Israel rounde aboute. But wha they bare
it aboute, there was a very greate rumoure in the cite thorow the hande of the
LORDE, and smote the people of the cite, from the smallest vnto the greatest,
and destroyed them in the secrete places.
10 Then sent they the Arke of the LORDE vnto Ekron. But wha the Arke of the
LORDE came vnto Ekron, they of Ekron cried: They haue caried the Arke of God
aboute vnto me, to slaye me and my people.
11 Then sente they forth, and gathered all ye prynces of the Philistynes
together, and sayde: Sende awaye the Arke of the God of Israel agayne vnto hir
place, that it slaye not me & my people: for there is a very greate rumoure with
the deed in all the cite, and the hande of God is there.
12 And the people that dyed not, were smytten in secrete places, so that the
noyse of the cite wete vp vnto heauen.

Chapter 6

1 Thus was the Arke of the LORDE in the londe of the Philistynes seuen monethes.
2 And the Philistynes called their prestes and soythsayers, and sayde: What shal
we do with the Arke of the LORDE? Shewe vs, wher with shal we sende it vnto hir
place?
3 They sayde: Yf ye wyll sende awaye the Arke of the God of Israel, sende it not
awaye emptye, but geue a trespace offerynge: so shal ye be made whole, and ye
shal knowe, why his hande departeth not from you.
4 They sayde: What is the trespace offeringe that we shall geue him? They
answered: Fyue hynder partes of golde, and fyue golden myce, acordinge to the
nombre of the fyue prynces of ye Philistynes. For there hath bene one maner of
plage vpon you all, and vpon youre prynces.
5 Therfore must ye make youre hynder partes of one fasshion and youre myce,
which haue destroyed youre londe, that ye maye geue the God of Israel the
honoure: peraduenture his hade shal be the lighter vpon you and vpon youre God,
and vpon youre londe.
6 Why harden ye youre hert, as the Egipcians and Pharao hardened their hert?
Whan he shewed him selfe vpon them dyd not they let them departe to go their
waye?
7 Go to now therfore, and make a new cart, and take two mylke kyne, vpon ye
which there neuer came yock, and yocke them to ye cart, and let their calues
tary behynde them at home:
8 and take ye the Arke of the LORDE and laye it vpon the cart: and the Iewels of
golde that ye geue him for a trespace offeringe put in a coffer beside it, &
sende it awaye and let it go.
9 And loke well: yf it go the waie of hir awne coaste BethSemes, the hath he
done vs all this greate euell: Yf no, then shal ye knowe that his hande hath not
touched vs, but yt it is happened vnto vs by chauce.
10 The men dyd so, and toke two yonge mylke kyne, and yocked them to a cart, and
helde their calues at home,
11 and layed the Arke of the LORDE vpon the cart, and the coffer with the golden
myce, and with the ymages of their disease.
12 And the kyne wente straight waye vnto BethSemes vpon one hye strete, and
wente on bleatynge, and turned nether to the righte hande ner to the lefte. And
the prynces of the Philistynes wente after them vnto ye coast of BethSemes.
13 The BethSamites were euen reapynge downe their wheate haruest in the valley,
and lyfte vp their eyes, and sawe the Arke, and reioysed to se it.
14 The cart came in to the felde of Iosua the BethSemite, and there it stode
styll. And there was a greate stone, and they claue the tymber of the cart, and
offred the kyne vnto the LORDE for a burntofferynge.
15 But the Leuites toke downe the Arke of the LORDE, and the coffer that was by
it, wherin the Iewels of golde were, and set the vpon the greate stone. The men
of BethSemes offred burntofferynges, and other offerynges also vnto the LORDE
the same daye.
16 And whan the fyue prynces of the Philistynes had sene it, they departed
agayne the same daye towarde Ekron.
17 These are the golden diseases, that the Philistynes offred for a trespace
offerynge vnto the LORDE: Asdod one, Gasa one: Ascalon one, Gath one, and Ekron
one:
18 and golden myce, acordynge to the nombre of all the cities of the Philistynes
amonge the fyue prynces, from the walled cite vnto the vyllage, and vnto the
greate playne felde, whervpon they set the Arke of the LORDE (which was) vnto
this daye vpon the felde of Iosua the BethSemite.
19 And certaine of BethSames were slaine because they had sene ye Arke of the
LORDE, and he slewe fyftye thousande and seuentye men of the people. Then
mourned the people, because the LORDE had done so greate a slaughter in the
people.
20 And the men at BethSemes sayde: Who maye stode before the LORDE so holy a
God? And to who shal he go fro vs?
21 And they sent messaungers to ye inhabiters of Kiriath Iearim, saiege: The
Philistynes haue brought the Arke of God agayne, come downe, & fetch it vp vnto
you.

Chapter 7

1 So the men of Kiriath Iearim came downe, & fetched vp ye Arke of ye LORDE, &
brought it in to ye house of Abinadab at Gibea, & they consecrated Eleasar his
sonne, yt he might kepe ye Arke.
2 And fro yt daye that the Arke of ye LORDE abode at KiriathIearim, ye tyme
extended forth so longe tyll it came to twentye yeares: and all the house of
Israel wepte after the LORDE.
3 But Samuel sayde vnto all the house of Israel: Yf ye turne you withall youre
hert vnto the LORDE, then put awaye from you the straunge goddes and Astaroth,
and directe youre hert vnto the LORDE and serue him onely, so shall he delyuer
you out of the hande of the Philistynes.
4 Then the childre of Israel put awaye Baalim and Astaroth from them, and serued
the LORDE onely.
5 Samuel saide: Gather all Israel together vnto Mispa, that I maye praye for you
vnto the LORDE.
6 And they came together vnto Mispa, and drue water, & poured it out before the
LORDE, and fasted the same daye, and there they sayde: We haue synned vnto the
LORDE. So Samuel iudged the children of Israel at Mispa.
7 But whan the Philistynes herde that ye children of Israel were come together
vnto Mispa, the prynces of the Philistynes wete vp against Israel. Whan ye
childre of Israel herde that, they were afrayed of ye Philistynes,
8 & sayde vnto Samuel: Ceasse not to crye vnto the LORDE oure God for vs, yt he
maie helpe vs out of the hande of ye Philistynes.
9 Samuel toke a fat lambe, & offred an whole burntofferynge vnto the LORDE, &
cried vnto the LORDE for Israel, and the LORDE herde him.
10 And whyle Samuel was offerynge ye burnt sacrifice, ye Philistines came to
fight agaynst Israel. But the LORDE thondred a thonder vpon the Philistynes the
same daye & discofyted the, so yt they were smytte before Israel.
11 The wente ye men of Israel forth, & chaced ye Philistynes, & smote them till
vnder BethCar.
12 Then toke Samuel a stone, & set it vp betwene Mispa & Sen, & called it ye
Help stone, & sayde: Hither to hath the LORDE helped vs.
13 Thus were the Philistynes brought downe, & came nomore within the border of
Israel. And ye hade of ye LORDE was against the Philistynes, as longe as Samuel
lyued.
14 So Israel gat the cities agayne, that the Philistynes had conquered, fro
Ekron vnto Gath, with the borders therof, those did Israel rescue out of the
hande of the Philistynes: & Israel had peace wt the Amorites.
15 Samuel iudged Israel as loge as he liued,
16 & wete aboute euery yeare vnto Bethel & Gilgal & Mispa: & wha he had iudged
Israel in all these places,
17 he came agayne vnto Ramath for there was his house, & there he iudged Israel,
& builded an altare there vnto ye LORDE.

Chapter 8

1 Bvt whan Samuel waxed olde, he set his sonnes to be iudges ouer Israel.
2 His firstborne sonne was called Ioel & the secode Abia, & they were iudges at
Bersaba.
3 Neuertheles his sonnes walked not in his wayes, but enclyned vnto couetousnes,
& toke giftes, & wraysted the lawe.
4 Then all ye Elders in Israel gathered the selues together, & came to Ramath
vnto Samuel,
5 & saide vnto him: Beholde, thou art waxen olde, & thy sonnes walke not in yi
wayes, set a kynge now ouer vs therfore, to iudge vs, as all ye Heithe haue.
6 The was Samuel displeased wha they sayde: Geue vs a kynge, to iudge as. And
Samuel prayed before the LORDE.
7 The LORDE saide vnto Samuel: Herken vnto the voice of the people in all yt
they haue sayde vnto the. For they haue not refused the, but me, yt I shulde not
be kinge ouer them.
8 They do vnto the as they haue done euer, sence the daie yt I brought them out
of the londe of Egipte vnto this daye, and haue forsaken me, and serued other
goddes.
9 Herke now therfore vnto their voyce. Yet testifye vnto them, and shewe them
the lawe of the kynge that shall raigne ouer them.
10 And Samuel tolde all the wordes of the LORDE vnto ye people, that requyred a
kinge of him.
11 This shal be the lawe of the kynge yt shal raigne ouer you: Yor sonnes shall
he take for his charettes, and for horsmen to runne before his charettes,
12 and to be rulers & captaynes, to be plowemen to tyll his londe and to be
reapers in his haruest, and to make his harnesse, and soch thinges as belonge to
his charettes.
13 As for yor doughters, he shall take the, to be Apotecaries, cokes and bakers
14 Youre best londe and vynyardes, and oyle gardens shall he take, and geue vnto
his seruauntes:
15 Of youre sedes also and viniardes shal he take the Tithes, & geue vnto his
chaberlaynes and seruauntes.
16 And youre seruautes and youre maydes, and youre best yonge men, and youre
asses shal he take, and do his busynes withall.
17 Of youre flockes shal he take the Tithes, and ye shal be his seruautes.
18 Whan ye shal crye then at the same tyme ouer youre kynge, whom ye haue chosen
you, the LORDE shall not heare you at the same tyme.
19 Neuerthelesse the people refused to heare the voyce of Samuel, and sayde: Not
so, but there shall be a kynge ouer vs,
20 yt we maye be as all other Heithe, yt or kynge maie iudge vs, & go forth
before vs, and gouerne oure warres.
21 The herkened Samuel vnto all yt ye people sayde, & tolde it before ye eares
of the LORDE.
22 The LORDE sayde vnto the: Herken thou vnto their voyce, and make them a
kynge. And Samuel sayde vnto the men of Israel: Go youre waye euery one vnto his
cite.

Chapter 9

1 There was a man of Ben Iamin named Cis, the sonne of Abiel, the sonne of Zeor,
the sonne of Bethorah, ye sonne of Apiah, the sonne of a man of Iemini, a
valeaunt man,
2 which had a sonne named Saul, which was so goodly a yonge man, that there was
not a goodlier amonge the children of Israel, higher by the heade then all the
people.
3 Cis the father of Saul had lost his asses, and he sayde vnto Saul his sonne:
Take one of the children with the, get the vp, go thy waye, aud seke the asses.
4 And he wente his waye thorow mount Ephraim, and thorow the lode of Solisa, and
founde them not. They wente thorow the lode of Saalim, & there they were not.
They passed thorow ye lode of Iemini, & foude the not.
5 But wha they came in to the londe of Zuph, Saul sayde vnto the childe that was
with him: Come, let vs go home agayne, lest my father let go the asses, and take
care for vs.
6 He sayde: Beholde, here is an honorable man of God in this cite, all that he
sayeth, commeth to passe. Let vs go thither now, perauenture he maye shewe vs
oure waye which we go.
7 But Saul saide vnto his childe: Though we shulde go, what brynge we the man?
For the bred is gone out of or walet, and els haue we no gifte to brynge the man
of God, what haue we?
8 The childe answered agayne, and sayde: Beholde, I haue the fourth parte of a
syluer Sycle by me, ye same wyll we geue the man of God, that he maye shewe vs
oure waye.
9 (Afore tyme in Israel, whan a man wente to axe councell at the LORDE, he
sayde: Come, let vs go to the Seer: for they that now are called prophetes, were
called Seers afore tyme).
10 Saul sayde vnto his childe: Thou hast well spoken, come let vs go. And whan
they wente vnto the cite where the man of God was,
11 and came vp to the cite, they founde damsels which were gone forth to drawe
water, vnto them they sayde: Is the Seer here?
12 They answered them and sayde: Yee. Beholde, he is there, make haist, for he
came in to the cite this daye, because the people haue a sacrifice to do to daye
in the hye place.
13 Whan ye come in the cite, ye shal fynde him, afore he go vp to the hye place
for to eate: for the people wyll not eate tyll he come. For he shall blesse the
offerynge, then shal they eate that are called. Therfore go yor waie vp, for eue
now shal ye finde him
14 And whan they came vp to the cite, and were euen in the myddes of the cite,
beholde, Samuel came forth in their waye, and wolde go vp to the hye place.
15 ( But the LORDE had opened Samuels eare the daye afore, or euer Saul came,
and sayde:
16 Tomorow aboute this tyme wyll I sende a man vnto the out of the lode of
BenIamin, him shalt thou anoynte to be prynce ouer my people of Israel, that he
maye delyuer my people from the hande of the Philistynes: for I haue loked vpon
my people, and their crye is come before me.)
17 Now whan Samuel behelde Saul, the LORDE answered him: lo, yt is the man of
whom I tolde the, that he shulde raigne ouer my people.
18 Then came Saul vnto Samuel vnder ye gate, and sayde: Tell me (I praye the)
where is the Seers house?
19 Samuel answered Saul, and sayde: I am the Seer. Go vp before me vnto the hye
place: for ye shall eate with me to daye, tomorow wyll I lett the go, and all
that is in thyne hert, wyll I tell the:
20 and as for the Asses which were lost thre dayes agoo, care not thou for them,
for they are founde. And to whom shall belonge all that is pleasaunt in Israel?
Shall it not belonge vnto the and to all thy fathers house?
21 Saul answered: Am not I a sonne of Iemini, and of the smallest trybe, and my
kynred the leest amonge all the kynreds of ye trybe of BenIamin? Why speakest
thou so the vnto me?
22 Samuel toke Saul & his childe & brought them in to the perler where they
shulde eate, and satt them aboue those that were called, of whom there were
aboute a thirtie men.
23 And Samuel sayde vnto the coke: Geue me the porcion that I gaue the, and bad
the kepe it by the.
24 Then the coke toke vp a shulder, and bare it forth, and set it before Saul.
And (Samuel) sayde: Beholde, this is left, laye it before the, and eate: for it
was kepte for the agaynst this tyme, whan I called the people. Thus Saul ate
with Samuel the same daye.
25 And whan they were gone downe from the hye place vnto the cite, he talked
with Saul in the chamber.
26 And they rose vp early on the morow. And whan the mornynge sprynge arose,
Samuel called Saul in the chamber, and sayde: Vp, yt I maye sende the thy waye.
And Saul gat him vp: & they both wete forth together, he and Samuel.
27 And whan they came downe to the ende of the cite, Samuel sayde vnto Saul:
Speake vnto ye childe, that he go on forth before vs, but stode thou styll now,
that I maie shewe the what God hath sayde:

Chapter 10

1 Then toke Samuel a glasse of oyle, and poured it vpo his heade, and kissed
him, and sayde: Seist thou that the LORDE hath anoynted the, to be the prince
ouer his enheritauce?
2 Whan thou goest now fro me, thou shalt fynde two men besyde Rachels graue in
the coast of BenIamin at Zelzah, which shal saie vnto the: The asses are founde,
whom thou wentest to seke: and beholde, thy father hath put the asses out of his
mynde, and taketh thoughte for the, and sayeth: What shall I do for my sonne?
3 And whan thou goest on forth from thence, thou shalt come to the Oke of
Thabor, there shall thre men fynde the, which go vp vnto God towarde Bethel: one
beareth thre kiddes, another thre loaues of bred the thyrde a bottel with wyne:
4 and they shall salute the, and geue the two loaues, which thou shalt take of
their hande.
5 After that shalt thou come to the hyll of God, where the Philistynes watch is:
and wha thou comest there in to the cite, there shall mete the a company of
prophetes commynge downe from the hye place, and before them a Psaltery, and
tabret, a pype and a harpe, and they them selues prophecienge.
6 And the sprete of the LORDE shall come vpon the, and thou shalt prophecye with
them, and shalt be chaunged in to another man.
7 Whan these tokens now come vnto the, then do what so euer commeth vnder thyne
hande: for God is with the.
8 Thou shalt go downe before me vnto Gilgall: Beholde, thither wyl I come downe
vnto the, that thou mayest offre burntofferynges and deedofferynges. Seuen dayes
shalt thou tarye till I come to the, and shewe the what thou shuldest do.
9 And whan he turned his shulder to go from Samuel, God chaunged him another
hert, and all these tokes came the same daye.
10 And whan they came vnto the hill, beholde, there met him a company of
prophetes and the sprete of God came vpon him, so that he prophecyed amonge
them.
11 But wha they which knewe him before, sawe him that he prophecied with the
prophetes, they sayde all amonge them selues: What is happened vnto the sonne of
Cis? Is Saul also amonge the prophetes?
12 And one yt was there, answered and sayde: Who is their father? Hereof came
the prouerbe: Is Saul also amonge the prophetes?
13 And wha he had left of prophecienge, he came vp to the hyll.
14 Sauls vncle sayde vnto him and to his childe: Whither wente ye? They
answered: To seke the asses. And whan we sawe that they were awaye, we came vnto
Samuel.
15 Then sayde Sauls vncle: Tell me, what sayde Samuel vnto you?
16 Saul answered his vncle: He tolde vs, yt the asses were foude. But of ye
kyngdome he tolde him nothinge what Samuel had sayde.
17 Samuel called the people together vnto the LORDE to Mispa,
18 and spake vnto the children of Israel: Thus saieth ye LORDE the God of
Israel: I broughte Israel out of Egipte, and delyuered you from the hande of ye
Egipcians, and from the hande of all the kyngdomes that oppressed you.
19 But now haue ye refused yor God, which hath helped you out of all youre
sorowes and troubles, & ye haue saide vnto him: Set a kinge ouer vs. Well,
stonde ye now before ye LORDE acordinge to youre trybes and kynreds.
20 Now whan Samuel had brought forth all the trybes of Israel, the trybe of
BenIamin was taken.
21 And whan he had broughte forth the trybe of BenIamin with his kynreds, the
kynred of Matri was take, & Saul the sonne of Cis was take. And they sought him,
but they founde him not.
22 Then axed they further at the LORDE, whether he was for to come thither. The
LORDE answered: Beholde, he hath hyd him selfe amonge ye vessels.
23 Then ranne they thither, and fetched him. And whan he stode amonge the
people, he was hygher by the heade then all the people.
24 And Samuel sayde vnto all the people: There se ye him whom the LORDE hath
chosen, for in all the people there is none like him. Then gaue all the people a
shoute, and sayde: God saue the new kynge.
25 Samuel tolde the people all the lawe of the kyngdome, and wrote it in a boke,
and layed it before the LORDE. And Samuel let all the people go, euery one to
his awne house.
26 And Saul wente home also vnto Gibea, and there wente with him one parte of
the hoost, whose hertes God had touched.
27 But the childre of Belial sayde: What shal this felowe helpe vs, and despysed
him, & broughte him no presente. But he made him as though he herde it not.

Chapter 11

1 Nahas ye Ammonite wete vp & layed sege vnto Iabes in Gilead. And all the men
of Iabes sayde vnto Nahas: Be at one with vs, & we wyll serue the.
2 But Nahas ye Ammonite answered them: I wil make a couenauut with you, of this
condicion, that I maye thrust out all youre right eyes, and put you to shame
amonge all Israel.
3 Then sayde all the Elders of Iabes vnto him: Geue vs seuen dayes respyte, that
we maye sende messaungers into all ye coastes of Israel: Yf there be then no
sauioure, we wyl go forth vnto the.
4 So the messaungers came vnto Gibea of Saul, and spake this before the eares of
the people. Then all ye people lifte vp their voyce, and wepte.
5 And beholde, Saul came after the oxen out of the felde, and sayde: What ayleth
the people that they wepe? So they tolde him the earande of the men of Iabes.
6 Then came the sprete of God vpon him, whan he had herde these wordes, and his
wrath was sore moued,
7 and he toke a couple of oxen, and hewed them in sunder, and sent them in to
all the coastes of Israel by the messaungers, sayenge: Who so euer goeth not
forth after Saul and Samuel, his oxen shalbe thus dealte withall. Then fell the
feare of the LORDE vpon the people, so that they wente forth like as one man,
8 and they were tolde at Basek, and of the childre of Israel there were thre
hundreth thousande men, and thirtie thousande of the children of Iuda.
9 And they spake vnto the messaungers that were come: Saye thus to the men of
Iabes in Gilead: Tomorow shal ye haue helpe, whan ye Sonne is at the whotest.
Whan ye messaungers came and tolde this to the men of Iabes, they were glad.
10 And the men of Iabes sayde: Tomorow wyll we come forth vnto you, that ye maye
do vnto vs, what so euer it pleaseth you.
11 And on ye nexte morow Saul set the people in thre partes, and came in to the
hoost aboute the mornynge watch, and smote the Ammonites tyll the daye was at
the whotest. As for those yt remayned, they were so scatred, that two of them
abode not together.
12 Then sayde the people vnto Samuel: Where are they that sayde: Shulde Saul
raigne ouer vs? Delyuer vs here the men, that we maye put them to death.
13 But Saul sayde: There shal noman dye this daye, for to daye hath the LORDE
geuen health in Israel.
14 Samuel sayde vnto the people: Come, let vs go vnto Gilgall, and renue the
kyngdome there.
15 Then wente all the people vnto Gilgall, and there they made Saul kinge before
the LORDE at Gilgal, and offred deedofferinges before the LORDE. And Saul with
all the men of Israel reioysed there greatly.

Chapter 12

1 Samuel sayde vnto all Israel: Beholde, I haue herkened vnto youre voyce in all
that ye sayde vnto me, and haue made a kynge ouer you.
2 And now lo, there goeth youre kynge before you. As for me, I am waxen olde and
graye heered, and my sonnes are with you: and I haue gone before you fro my
youth vp vnto this daye.
3 Beholde, here am I: answere ye agaynst me before the RORDE and his anoynted,
yf I haue taken eny mans oxe or asse, yf I haue done eny man violence or wronge,
If I haue oppressed eny ma, yf I haue receaued a gifte of eny mans hande, and
kepte it secretly, I wil restore it you agayne.
4 They saide: Thou hast done vs nether violence ner wronge, nether oppressed,
ner taken ought of eny mans hande.
5 He sayde: The LORDE be witnesse agaynst you, and so be his anoynted this daye,
that ye haue founde nothinge in my hade. They saide: Yee they shalbe witnesses.
6 And Samuel sayde vnto the people: The LORDE which made Moses and Aaron, and
broughte youre fathers out of the londe of Egipte (is here present.)
7 Stode forth now therfore, that I maye iudge you before the LORDE ouer the
righteousnes of the LORDE, which he hath done for you and youre fathers.
8 Whan Iacob was come in to Egipte, youre fathers cryed vnto the LORDE. And he
sent Moses and Aaron to brynge youre fathers out of Egipte, and to cause them
for to dwell in this place.
9 But whan they forgat the LORDE their God, he solde them vnder the power of
Sissera, the captayne at Hazor and vnder the power of the Philistynes and vnder
the power of the kinge of the Moabites, which foughte agaynst them.
10 But they cried vnto the LORDE, and sayde: We haue synned, in that we haue
forsaken the LORDE, and serued Baalim and Astaroth. But now deliuer vs from the
hande of oure enemies, and we wyl serue the.
11 Then the LORDE sent Ierubaal, Bedan, Iephthae, and Samuel, & delyuered you
from youre enemies rounde aboute, and caused you to dwell safe.
12 But whan ye sawe that Nahas the kynge of the children of Ammon came agaynst
you ye sayde vnto me: Not thou, but a kynge shal raigne ouer vs, where as
notwithstodinge youre God was youre kynge.
13 Now, there haue ye youre kynge, who ye haue chosen and desyred: for lo, the
LORDE hath set a kinge ouer you.
14 Yf ye shal feare the LORDE now, and serue him, and herken vnto his voice, and
not be dishobedient vnto the mouth of the LORDE, then shall both ye and youre
kynge that raigneth ouer you, folowe ye LORDE youre God.
15 But yf ye herken not vnto ye voyce of the LORDE, but be dishobedient vnto his
mouth, then shal the hande of the LORDE be agaynst you, and agaynst youre
fathers.
16 Stonde forth now also, and beholde this greate thinge, that the LORDE shal do
before youre eyes.
17 Is not now the wheate haruest? Yet wyll I call vpo the LORDE, so that he shal
cause it thonder and rayne, that ye shall knowe and se the greate euell, which
ye haue done in the sight of the LORDE, in that ye haue desyred to haue a kynge.
18 And whan Samuel called vpon the LORDE, the LORDE caused it to thoder and
raine the same daye. Then all the people feared the LORDE greatly and Samuel,
19 and they sayde all vnto Samuel: Praie thou vnto the LORDE thy God for thy
seruauntes, that we dye not: for beside oure sinnes we haue done this euell
also, that we haue desyred vnto vs a kinge.
20 Samuel sayde vnto the people: Feare not, ye haue done all this euell in dede.
Neuertheles departe not backe from the LORDE, but serue the LORDE with all youre
hert,
21 and go not asyde after vanite, for it profyteth you nothinge, and can not
delyuer you, in so moch as it is but a vayne thinge.
22 For the LORDE shall not forsake his people because of his greate names sake:
for the LORDE hath begonne to make you a people vnto him selfe.
23 But God forbyd that I shulde synne so vnto the LORDE, to ceasse from prayenge
for you, and from teachinge you the good & righteous waye.
24 Feare ye the LORDE therfore, and serue him faithfully with all yor hert: for
ye haue sene, how greate thinges he doth vnto you.
25 But yf ye do wickedly, both ye & youre kynge shal perishe.

Chapter 13

1 Saul had bene kynge one yeare, and wha he had raigned ouer Israel two yeares,
2 he chose him thre thousande me out of Israel: two thousande were with Saul at
Michmas vpon the mount of Bethel, and one thousande with Ionathas at Gibea of
BenIamin. As for the other people, he let them go euery one vnto his tente.
3 But Ionathas smote ye Philistynes in their awne watch, which was at Gibea.
That came to ye Philistynes eares. And Saul caused to blowe the trompes in all
the londe, & to saye: Let the Hebrues heare.
4 And all Israel herde saye: Saul hath smytten the Philistynes watch, for Israel
stanke before the Philistynes. And all the people cried after Saul vnto Gilgal.
5 Then the Philistynes gathered them selues together to fighte wt Israel,
thirtie thousande charettes, sixe thousande horsmen, and other people besyde, in
nombre as the sonde by the See shore, and wente vp, and pitched at Michmas on
the eastsyde of Bethauen.
6 Whan the men of Israel sawe that mysfortune laye vpon the neckes of the (for
the people was come therto) they crope in to caues and dennes, in to rockes, and
holes and welles.
7 But the Hebrues wente ouer Iordane in to ye lande of Gad and Gilead. As for
Saul he was yet at Gilgal, and all the people were fayntharted after him.
8 Then taried he seuen dayes acordinge to the tyme apoynted of Samuel. And whan
Samuel came not vnto Gilgal, the people were scatered abrode from him.
9 Then sayde Saul: Brynge me hither a burntofferinge and deedofferinges. And he
offred a burntofferynge.
10 But whan he had made an ende of the burntofferynge beholde, Samuel came. Then
wente Saul forth to mete him, that he might salute him.
11 But Samuel sayde: What hast thou done? Saul answered: I sawe that the people
was scatered abrode fro me, and thou camest not in due season: and the
Philistynes were gathered together at Michmas.
12 Then sayde I. Now shall the Philistynes come downe to me vnto Gilgal, and I
haue not besoughte the face of the LORDE: & so I boldened my selfe, & offred a
burntofferynge.
13 Samuel sayde vnto Saul: Thou hast done foolishly, and not kepte the
commaundement of the LORDE thy God, which he commaunded the. For (yf thou
haddest not done this) he had prospered thy kyngdome vpo Israel for euer:
14 but now shall not thy kyngdome contynue. The LORDE hath soughte him out a man
after his owne hert: him hath the LORDE commaunded to be prynce ouer his people,
for thou hast not kepte yt the LORDE commaunded ye.
15 And Samuel arose, and wente vp from Gilgal vnto Gibea Ben Iamin. And Saul
nombred the people that was founde with him, vpon a sixe hundreth men.
16 Saul & his sonne Ionathas, and ye people that was with them, taried at Gibea
Ben Iamin: but ye Philistynes had pitched their tentes at Michmas.
17 And out of the hoost of the Philistynes there wente thre bondes of men to
destroye: one turned the waye towarde Ephra in to the londe of Sual:
18 another turned towarde the waye of Bethoron: the thirde turned towarde the
waye, that reacheth to the valley of Zeboim vnto the wyldernes.
19 But there was not a smyth founde in all the lode of Israel: for ye
Philistynes thoughte: The Hebrues mighte happly make swerdes and speares.
20 And all Israel were fayne to go downe to the Philistynes, whan eny man had a
plowshare, a mattock, an axe, or a sythe to sharpe:
21 and the edges of the plowshares, and mattockes, & forckes, and axes, were
laboured, and the poyntes blont.
22 Now whan the daye of the battayll came, there was nether swerde ner speare
founde in the hande of all the people, that was with Saul and Ionathas: but for
Saul and Ionathas his sonne there was somwhat founde.
23 And ye Philistynes watch wete out ouer by Michmas.

Chapter 14

1 It fortuned at ye same tyme, yt Ionathas sayde vnto his lad which was his
wapen bearer: Come, let vs go ouer to the Philistynes watch yt lyeth aboue, & he
tolde not his father.
2 Saul dwelt at ye ende of Gibea vnder a Pomgranate tre, which was in the
suburbe. And the people yt were by him, were vpon a sixe hundreth men.
3 And Ahia the sonne of Achitob the brother of Icabod, the sonne of Phineas ye
sonne of Eli ye prest of the LORDE at Silo, wayre the ouerbody cote. But the
people knewe not that Ionathas was gone.
4 Betwene the passages where Ionathas soughte to go ouer vnto the Phylistynes
watch, there were two hye rockes, the one on the one syde, the other on the
other: the one was called Bozez, the other Senne.
5 And ye one laye on the north syde towarde Michmas, and the other on the south
syde towarde Gaba.
6 And Ionathas sayde vnto his wapen bearer: Come, let vs go ouer to ye watch of
these vncircumcised, peraduenture the LORDE shall worke with vs, For it is no
harde matter for the LORDE to helpe by many or by fewe.
7 Then answered him his wapen bearer: Do all that is in thine hert, go on thy
waie, beholde, I am with the, euen as thine hert wyll.
8 Ionathas sayde: Well than, Whan we are gone ouer to the men, and come within
the sighte of them,
9 yf they saye: stonde styll, tyll we come to you, then wyll we stonde styll in
oure place, and not go vp to them.
10 But yf they saye: Come vp to vs, we wyll go vp to them, the hath the LORDE
delyuered them in to oure hande, and this shalbe a token for vs.
11 Now whan they came both in the sighte of the Philistynes watch, the
Philistynes sayde: Se, ye Hebrues are gone out of their holes, that they were
crepte in to.
12 And the men in the watch answered Ionathas and his wape bearer, and sayde:
Come vp to vs, and we wyll teach you what the matter is. Then sayde Ionathas to
his weapen bearer. Come vp after me, the LORDE hath delyuered them into Israels
hande.
13 And Ionathas clamme vp with handes and fete, and his wapen bearer after him.
And Ionathas smote them downe before him, and his wape bearer slewe behynde him,
14 so that the first slaughter that Ionathas and his wapen bearer dyd, was vpo a
twentye men, with in the length of halue an aker of londe, which a pare of oxen
maye tyll in one daye.
15 And there came a fearfulnes and flight in the hoost vpon the felde, and
amonge all the people of the watch: and vpon the destroyers there came a
fearfulnes also and flight, so that the londe was in a rumoure, and there came a
flight thorow God.
16 And Sauls watchme at Gibea Be Iamin sawe, that ye multitude gat them awaye,
and ranne to and fro.
17 Saul sayde vnto the people that was with him: Tell and se which of vs is gone
awaye. And whan they nombred, beholde, Ionathas & his wapen bearer was not
there.
18 Then saide Saul vnto Ahia: Brynge hither the Arke of God (for at that tyme
was the Arke of God with the children of Israel.)
19 And whyle Saul was yet speakynge to the prest, the multitude in the
Philistynes hoost gat vp, ranne, and was greate. And Saul sayde vnto the prest:
Withdrawe thine hande.
20 And Saul cried, and all the people that was with him, and came to the
battayll. And beholde, euery mans swerde was agaynst another, and there was a
very greate rumoure.
21 The Hebrues also that were with ye Philistynes afore, and had gone vp with
them in the hoost on euery syde, ioyned them selues vnto Israel which were with
Saul and Ionathas.
22 And all the men of Israel which had hyd the selues vpon mount Ephraim, whan
they herde that the Philistynes fled, folowed after them in the battayll.
23 Thus ye LORDE helped Israel at that tyme, and ye battayll lasted vnto
Bethauen.
24 And whan the men of Israel came forth, Saul charged all the people the same
daye, and sayde: Cursed be euery man, which eateth bred vntyll euen, that I maye
auenge me on myne enemies. Then all the people taisted no bred.
25 And all the people of the londe came in to the wodd. But there laye hony vpon
the felde:
26 and whan the people came in to the wodd, beholde, the hony flowed, but no man
put of it to his mouth with his hade: for the people were afraied because of the
ooth.
27 As for Ionathas he had not herde, that his father had charged the people, and
he put forth his staff that he had in his hande, and dypped the ende of it in ye
hony combe, and turned his hande to his mouth, and his eyes were lighted.
28 Then answered one of the people, and sayde: Thy father hath charged the
people, and sayde: Cursed be euery ma that eateth oughte this daye. Neuertheles
the people were faynte.
29 Then sayde Ionathas: My father hath troubled the londe: Se how lighte myne
eyes are become, because I haue taisted a litle of this hony.
30 Yf the people this daie had eate of the spoyle of their enemies that they
founde, the slaughter shulde haue bene greater agaynst the Philistynes.
31 Yet smote they the Philistynes the same daye fro Michmas vnto Aialon, and the
people were very weery.
32 And ye people turned to the spoyles, and toke shepe and oxen, and calues, and
slewe them vpon the earth, and ate them with the bloude.
33 Then was it tolde Saul: Beholde, the people synne agaynst the LORDE, in that
they eate bloude. He sayde: Ye haue done euell: roll vnto me now a greate stone.
34 And Saul sayde morouer: Go abrode amoge the people, and saye vnto them, that
euery one brynge me his oxe and his shepe, and slaye them here, that ye maye
eate, and not to synne agaynst the LORDE with eatynge of bloude. Then broughte
all the people euery one his oxe with his hade the same nighte, and slewe them
there.
35 And Saul buylded an altare vnto ye LORDE. This is the first altare that he
buylded vnto the LORDE.
36 And Saul sayde: Let vs go downe after the Philistynes, by nighte, and spoyle
them tyll it be cleare mornynge, that we let none escape. They answered: Do what
so euer pleaseth the. But the prest sayde: Let vs go nye here vnto God.
37 And Saul axed at God. Shal I go downe here after ye Philistines? & wilt thou
delyuer the in to Israels hande? Neuertheles he answered him not at that tyme.
38 Then sayde Saul: Let all the armyes of the people come hither, and make
search and se, in whom is this synne at this tyme.
39 For as truly as God the Sauioure of Israel lyueth, & though it be in my sonne
Ionathas, he shal dye. And no man answered him of all the people.
40 And he sayde vnto all Israel: Be ye on the one syde, I & my sonne Ionathas
wyl be on this syde. The people sayde vnto Saul: Do as it pleaseth the.
41 And Saul sayde vnto the LORDE the God of Israel: Do thou that right is. The
was Ionathas and Saul taken: but the people wente forth fre.
42 Saul sayde: Cast the lot ouer me and my sonne Ionathas. So Ionathas was take.
43 And Saul sayde vnto Ionathas: Tell me, what hast thou done? Ionathas tolde
him, & sayde: I taisted a litle hony with the staff that I had in my hande, and
beholde, must I dye therfore?
44 The sayde Saul: God do this and that vnto me, Ionathas thou must dye the
death.
45 But the people sayde vnto Saul: Shulde Ionathas dye, that hath done so greate
health in Israel this night? God forbyd. As truly as the LORDE lyueth, there
shal not one heer of his heade fall vpon ye earth: for with God hath he wroughte
at this tyme. So the people delyuered Ionathas, that he dyed not.
46 Then wente Saul vp from the Philistynes: and the Philistynes wente vnto their
place.
47 But whan Saul had coquered the kyngdome ouer Israel, he foughte against all
his enemyes rounde aboute, against the Moabites, agaynst the childre of Ammon,
agaynst the Edomites, agaynst the kynge of Zoba, agaynst ye Philistynes: and
whither so euer he turned him, he gat ye victory.
48 And he made an hoost, and smote ye Amalechites, and delyuered Israel from the
hande of all those that spoyled them.
49 Saul had these sonnes: Ionathas, Isui, and Malchisua. And these were ye names
of his two doughters: the firstborne Merob, & ye yogest Michol.
50 And Sauls wife was called Ahinoam, the doughter of Ahimaas. And his chefe
captaynes name was Abner, the sonne of Ner, Sauls vncle.
51 Cis was ye father of Saul. But Ner ye father of Abner was the sonne of Abiel.
52 There was a mightie sore warre against the Philistynes, as loge as Saul
lyued. And where Saul sawe a man that was stronge and mete for ye warre, he toke
him to him.

Chapter 15

1 Samuel sayde vnto Saul: The LORDE sent me to anoynte the for to be kynge ouer
his people of Israel: heare now therfore the voyce of the wordes of the LORDE.
2 Thus sayeth ye LORDE Zebaoth: I haue remembred what Amaleck dyd vnto Israel, &
how he layed wayte for him in ye waye, whan he wente out of Egipte:
3 Go yi waye now therfore, and smyte the Amalechites, & damne them with all that
they haue, & spare him not: but slaye both man and woman, children & sucklynges,
oxen & shepe, Camels and asses.
4 Saul commaunded the people the same, and nombred them at Talaim, two hudreth
thousande fote men, & ten thousande men of Iuda.
5 And whan Saul came to the cite of the Amalechites, he set an hynder watch by
the ryuer,
6 and sayde vnto ye Kenites: Get you hence, departe, and go downe from ye
Amalechites, yt I smyte you not with them, for ye shewed mercy vnto all the
children of Israel, wha they departed out of Egipte. So the Kenites gat them
awaye from amonge the Amalechites.
7 Then smote Saul the Amalechites from Heuila vnto Sur (which lyeth ouer against
Egipte)
8 & toke Agag the kynge of ye Amalechites alyue, & damned all ye people wt the
edge of the swerde.
9 Neuertheles Saul and the people spared Agag, and the shepe and oxen yt were
good and fat, and the lambes, and all that was good, and wolde not damne the:
but loke what was foule and nothinge worth, that they damned.
10 Then came the worde of the LORDE vnto Samuel, and sayde:
11 It repenteth me that I made Saul kynge, for he hath turned him selfe backe
fro me, and not cofirmed my wordes. Therfore was Samuel angrye, & cried vnto the
LORDE all that nighte.
12 And Samuel gat him vp early, that he might mete Saul in ye mornynge. And it
was tolde him, that Saul was come vnto Carmel, & had set him vp a piler, and was
gone aboute, and come downe to Gilgall.
13 Now wha Samuel came to Saul, Saul sayde vnto him: Blessed be thou vnto ye
LORDE, I haue perfourmed the worde of ye LORDE.
14 Samuel answered: What crye is this then of shepe in myne eares, and the crye
of oxen which I heare?
15 Saul sayde: They haue broughte them from the Amalechites: for the people
spared the best shepe & oxen for the offerynge of ye LORDE thy God, the other
haue we damned.
16 Neuertheles Samuel answered Saul: Let me tell the what ye LORDE hath sayde
vnto me this nighte. He sayde: Saye on.
17 Samuel sayde: Whan thou wast but small in thine awne eyes, wast thou not ye
heade amoge the trybes of Israel? & the LORDE anoynted the to be kynge ouer
Israel?
18 and ye LORDE sent ye in to the waye, & sayde: Go yi waie & damne the synners
the Amalechites, and fighte agaynst them, tyll thou haue vtterly destroyed the?
19 Wherfore hast thou not herkened vnto the voyce of the LORDE, but hast turned
thy selfe to the spoyle, and done euell in the sighte of the LORDE?
20 Saul answered Samuel: Yee I haue herkened vnto the voyce of the LORDE, & haue
gone the waye that ye LORDE sent me, and broughte Agag the kynge of the
Amalechites, & damned the Amalechites:
21 but ye people haue take of the spoyle, shepe & oxen, and ye best amoge the
damned, to offer vnto ye LORDE thy God in Gilgall.
22 Samuel saide: Hath the LORDE pleasure in sacrifices and burntofferynges, as
in obeynge the voyce of the LORDE? Beholde, obedience is better then offerynge,
and to herken is better then the fat of rammes.
23 For disobedience is as ye synne of witchcrafte, and rebellion is as the
blasphemy of Idolatrye. In so moch now as thou hast refused the worde of the
LORDE, he hath refused the also, that thou shuldest not be kynge.
24 Then sayde Saul vnto Samuel: I haue synned, yt I haue transgressed the
commaundement of the LORDE and thy worde: for I was afrayed of the people, and
herkened vnto their voyce.
25 And now forgeue me my synne, & returne with me, that I maye worshippe ye
LORDE.
26 Samuel saide vnto Saul: I wil not turne backe with ye, for thou hast refused
the worde of the LORDE, and the LORDE hath refused the also, yt thou shuldest
not be kynge in Israel.
27 And whan Samuel turned him backe to go his waye, he gat him by ye edge of his
garment, & rete it.
28 Then sayde Samuel vnto him: The LORDE hath rente the kyngdome of Israel from
ye this daye, & geuen it vnto yi neghbor, which is better then thou.
29 The ouerwynner in Israel also shal not lye, nether shal he repente: for he is
no man, that he shulde repente.
30 He sayde: I haue synned, yet honoure me now before the Elders of my people
and before Israel, and turne backe with me, that I maye worshippe the LORDE thy
God.
31 So Samuel turned agayne after Saul, that Saul mighte worshippe the LORDE.
32 But Samuel sayde: Bringe me hither Agag the kynge of the Amalechites. And
Agag wente vnto him tederly. And Agag saide: Thus departeth the bytternesse of
death.
33 Samuel sayde: Like as thy swerde hath made wemen childlesse, so shal yi
mother also be without children amonge wemen. So Samuel hewed Agag in peces
before ye LORDE in Gilgall.
34 And Samuel departed vnto Ramath. But Saul wente vp to his house at Gibea
Saul.
35 And Samuel sawe Saul nomore vnto the daye of his death. Neuertheles Samuel
mourned for Saul, because it repented the LORDE, that he had made Saul kynge
ouer Israel.

Chapter 16

1 And ye LORDE sayde vnto Samuel: How longe mournest thou for Saul, whom I haue
refused, that he shulde not be kynge ouer Israel? Fyll thine horne with oyle, go
thy waye, I wyll sende the to Isai the Bethleemite: for amonge his sonnes haue I
prouyded me a kynge.
2 But Samuel sayde: How shal I go? Saul shal perceaue it, and shal slaye me. The
LORDE sayde: Take the a calfe from the droue, & saye: I am come to do sacrifice
vnto ye LORDE.
3 And thou shalt call Isai to ye sacrifice, so shall I tell the what thou shalt
do, that thou mayest anoynte me him, whom I shall shewe the.
4 Samuel dyd as the LORDE sayde, and came to Bethleem. Then were the Elders of
the cite astonnyed, and wente forth to mete him, and sayde: Is thy commynge
peaceable?
5 He sayde: Yee. I am come to do sacrifice vnto the LORDE. Sanctifye youre
selues, & come with me to the sacrifice. And he sanctified Isai and his sonnes,
and called them to the sacrifice.
6 Now wha they came in, he behelde Eliab, & thoughte, whether he shulde be his
anoynted before the LORDE.
7 But ye LORDE sayde vnto Samuel: loke not vpon his countenaunce, ner vpon the
tallnesse of his person, For I iudge not after the sighte of man. A man hath
respecte vnto the thinge that is before his eyes, but the LORDE loketh vpon the
hert.
8 Then Isai called Abinadab, & broughte him before Samuel. And he sayde: This
hath not the LORDE chosen.
9 Then Isai broughte Samma. But he sayde: This also hath not the LORDE chosen.
10 Then broughte Isai his seuen sonnes before Samuel. Neuertheles Samuel saide
vnto Isai: The LORDE hath chosen none of these.
11 And Samuel sayde vnto Isai: Are here all the childre? He sayde: There is yet
one ye leest of all, and beholde, he kepeth the shepe. The sayde Samuel vnto
Isai: Sende & cause him to be fetched, for we will not syt downe at the table,
vntyll he come.
12 Then sent he, & caused him be broughte. And he was well coloured wt fayre
eyes & of a beutyfull countenaunce. And the LORDE saide: Aryse, and anoynte him,
that is he.
13 The toke Samuel his oyle horne, & anoynted him amonge his brethre. And the
sprete of the LORDE came vpo Dauid fro ye daye forth. As for Samuel, he gat him
vp, & wente vnto Ramath.
14 But the sprete of the LORDE departed from Saul, and an euell sprete from ye
LORDE vexed him.
15 Then sayde Sauls seruauntes vnto him: Beholde, an euell sprete from God
vexeth the.
16 Let oure lorde saie vnto his seruauntes which stonde before him, yt they seke
a man which can playe vpon the harpe, and instrumente, that whan the euell
sprete of God cometh vpon the, he maye playe wt his hande, to ease the withall.
17 Then sayde Saul vnto his seruautes: Prouyde me a ma, that can playe well vpon
the instrumente, & brynge him vnto me.
18 Then answered one of the children, & sayde: Beholde, I sawe a sonne of Isai
ye Bethleemite, which can playe vpon the instrumete, an honest & valeaut man,
and one yt hath vnderstodinge in matters, & is welfauoured.
19 The Saul sent messaungers vnto Isai, sayege: Sende me Dauid yi sonne, which
is with the shepe.
20 Then toke Isai an asse wt bred, & a bottell wt wyne, and a kyd, and sent it
vnto Saul by Dauid his sonne.
21 So Dauid came to Saul, & stode before him, & he loued him well, and he became
his wapen bearer.
22 And Saul sente vnto Isai, sayege: Let Dauid remayne before me, for he hath
founde fauor in my sighte.
23 Now whan the sprete of God came vpo Saul, Dauid toke ye harpe, & played wt
his hande: so was Saul refresshed, & eased, & the euell sprete departed from
him.

Chapter 17

1 The Philistynes gathered their hoost to ye battayl, and came together to Socho
in Iuda, & pitched their tentes betwene Socho & Aseka, at the ende of Damin.
2 But Saul & the me of Israel came together, & pitched in the Oke valley, &
prepared them selues to the battayll agaynst the Philistynes.
3 And the Philistynes stode vpon a hyll on the one syde, and the Israelites vpon
a hyll on the other syde, so that there was a valley betwene them.
4 Then stepte there forth from amoge the Philistynes a stoute bolde man, named
Goliath of Gath, sixe cubites and an hande breth hye,
5 and had an helmet of stele on his heade, and a fast habergion vpon him, and
the weight of his habergion was fyue thousande Sicles of stele,
6 and harnesse of stele had he vpon his legges, and a shylde of stele vpon his
shulders:
7 and the shaft of his speare was like a weuers lome, and the yron of his speare
had sixe hundreth Sicles of yron, and his wapen bearer wente before him.
8 And he stode and called vnto the hoost of Israel, and sayde vnto them:
Wherfore are ye come forth to prepare youre selues to the battayll? Am not I a
Philistyne, and ye the seruauntes of Saul? Chose one amonge you to come downe
vnto me:
9 yf he can fighte agaynst me and slaye me, then wil we be youre seruauntes: but
yf I can ouercome him and slaye him, then shal ye be oure seruauntes, to do vs
seruyce.
10 And the Philistyne sayde: I haue spoke disdanedly vnto the hoost of Israel
this daye. Geue me one, and let vs fighte together.
11 Whan Saul and all Israel herde these wordes of ye Philistyne, they were
astonnyed, and sore afrayed.
12 But Dauid was the sonne of a man of Ephrata of Bethleem Iuda, whose name was
Isai, which had eight sonnes, and was an olde man in Sauls tyme, and was well
strycken in age amonge men.
13 And the thre eldest sonnes of Isai were gone with Saul to the battayll. And
there names were these: Eliab the first borne, Abinadab the seconde, and Samma
the thirde.
14 But Dauid was the yongest of all. So whan the thre eldest were gone with Saul
to the battayll,
15 Dauid wente agayne from Saul, to kepe his fathers shepe at Bethleem.
16 But the Philistyne stepte forth early in the mornynge and at euen, and stode
there fortye dayes.
17 Isai sayde vnto Dauid his sonne: Take this Epha of firmentye for thy
brethren, and these ten loaues of bred (and runne to the hoost vnto thy
brethren)
18 & these ten new cheses, and brynge them to ye captayne, and loke how thy
brethren do, whether it go well with them or no, and take what they byd the.
19 But Saul and they, and all the men of Israel were in the Oke valley, and
foughte agaynst the Philistynes.
20 Then Dauid gat him vp early in the mornynge, and commytted the shepe to ye
keper, and toke his burthen, wente his waye, as Isai commaunded him, and came to
the tet. And the hoost was gone forth, and had prepared them selues, and cried
in the battayl:
21 For Israel had set them selues in araye, and the Philistynes were agaynst
their hoost in their araye also.
22 Then lefte Dauid the vessell that he bare, with the keper of the stuffe, and
ranne to the hoost, and wente in, and saluted his brethren.
23 And whyle he was yet talkynge with them, beholde, then came vp the stoute
bolde man, whose name was Goliath, the Philistine of Gath, out of the
Philistynes hoost, and spake like as afore, and Dauid herde it.
24 But euery man of Israel, whan he sawe the man, fled from him, and was sore
afrayed of him.
25 And euery man in Israel sayde: Haue ye sene the man commynge vp hither? For
he is come vp hither, to speake disdanedly vnto Israel. And who so euer smyteth
him, him wyll the kynge make ryche, and geue him his doughter, and make his
fathers house fre in Israel.
26 Then sayde Dauid vnto the men that stode by him: What shalbe done to the man,
that smyteth this Philistyne, and turneth this shame awaye from Israel? For what
is he this Philistyne this vncircucysed, that defyeth the hoost of ye lyuynge
God?
27 Then the people tolde him as afore. Thus shall it be done vnto ye man that
smyteth him.
28 And Eliab his greater brother herde him talke with the men, and was very
wroth agaynst Dauid, and sayde: Wherfore art thou come downe? and why hast thou
left a fewe shepe in the wyldernesse? I knowe thy presumptuousnesse well ynough,
and the wickednesse of thine hert: for thou art come downe to se the battayll.
29 Dauid answered: What haue I downe now? Is there not an occasion?
30 And he turned him selfe from him vnto another, and spake acordinge as he had
sayde before. Then the people answered him like as afore.
31 And whan they herde the wordes which Dauid sayde, they tolde them in the
presence of Saul, and he caused him be fetched.
32 And Dauid sayde vnto Saul: Let no mans hert be discoraged because of him. Thy
seruaunt shall go, and fighte with the Philistyne.
33 Neuertheles Saul sayde vnto Dauid: Thou art not able to go agaynst this
Phylistyne to fighte with him, for thou art but a childe: but this is a man of
warre from his youth vp.
34 Dauid sayde vnto Saul: Thy seruaunt kepte his fathers shepe, and there came a
lyon and a Bere, and caried awaye a shepe from the flocke,
35 then wente I forth after him, and smote him, and delyuered it out of his
mouth. And whan he wolde haue bene vpon me, I toke him by his beerde, and smote
him, and slewe him.
36 So thy seruaunt smote both the Lyon and ye Bere. Therfore shall this
Philistyne this vncircumcysed be euen as one of them: for he hath defyed the
hoost of the lyuynge God.
37 And Dauid sayde: The LORDE that delyuered me from ye Lyon and Beer, shall
delyuer me also from this Philistyne. And Saul sayde vnto Dauid: Go thy waye,
the LORDE be with the.
38 And Saul clothed Dauid with his clothes, and set an helmet of stele vpon his
heade, and put an habergion vpo him.
39 And Dauid girded his swerde aboue his clothes, and beganne to go, for he had
neuer bene vsed to it afore. Then sayde Dauid vnto Saul: I can not go thus, for
I haue not bene vsed to it, and so he laied it from him,
40 and toke his staff in his hande, and chose fyue slighte stones out of the
ryuer, and put them in the shepardes bagge which he had by him, and toke a
slynge in his hande, and made him to the Philistyne.
41 And the Philistyne wente forth, and made him to Dauid, and his wapen bearer
before him.
42 Now whan the Philistyne loked & sawe Dauid, he thoughte scorne of him: for he
was but a childe, well coloured, and beutyfull to loke vpon.
43 And the Philistyne sayde vnto Dauid: Am I a dogg then, that thou commest vnto
me with a staffe? And he cursed Dauid by his God,
44 and sayde vnto Dauid: Come hither to me, I wil geue thy flesh to the foules
vnder the heauen, and to the beastes in the felde.
45 Neuertheles Dauid sayde vnto the Philistyne: Thou commest vnto me with
swerde, speare and shylde. But I come vnto the in the name of the LORDE Zebaoth
the God of the hoost of Israel, whom thou hast despysed.
46 This daye shall the LORDE delyuer the in to my hade, that I maye smyte the,
and take thy heade from the, and geue the bodies of the hoost of the Philistynes
this daye vnto the foules vnder the heauen, and to the wylde beestes vpon the
earth, that all the londe maye knowe yt Israel hath a God.
47 And all this congregacion shal knowe, that the LORDE saueth nether thorow
swerde ner speare: for the battayll is the LORDES, & he shal delyuer you in to
oure handes.
48 Now whan the Philistyne gat him vp, and wente forth and drue nye vnto Dauid,
Dauid made haiste, and ranne from ye hoost vnto the Philistyne.
49 And Dauid put his hade in his bagg, and toke out a stone, & thrue it with the
slynge, and hytt the Philistyne euen in the fore heade, so that the stone stacke
in his fore heade, and he fell downe to the grounde vpon his face.
50 So Dauid ouercame ye Philistyne with the slynge and with ye stone, and smote
him, and slewe him. And for so moch as Dauid had no swerde in his hande,
51 he ranne and stode ouer ye Philistyne, and toke his swerde, and drue it out
of the sheeth, and slewe him, and smote of his heade withall. Whan the
Philistynes sawe that the strongest of them was deed, they fled.
52 And the men of Israel and Iuda gat the vp, and cryed and folowed vpon the
Philistynes, tyll they came vnto the valley, and to the Portes of Ekron. And the
Philistynes fell downe slayne vnto Gath and to Ekron.
53 And the children of Israel turned agayne from chasynge of the Philistynes,
and spoyled their tentes.
54 But Dauid toke the heade of the Philistyne, and broughte it vnto Ierusalem,
as for is armoure, he layed it in his tente.
55 Whan Saul sawe Dauid go forth agaynst the Philistyne, he saide vnto Abner his
chefe captayne: Abner, whose sonne is this childe? Abner sayde: As truly as thy
soule lyueth O kynge, I wote not.
56 The kynge sayde: Axe the whose sonne the yonge ma is.
57 Now whan Dauid came agayne from the slaughter of the Philistyne, Abner toke
him, and broughte him before Saul, and he had the Philistynes heade in his
hande.
58 And Saul sayde vnto him: Whose sonne art thou, thou yonge man? Dauid sayde: I
am a sonne of thy seruaunt Isai the Bethleemite.

Chapter 18

1 And whan he had made an ende of talkynge with Saul, the soule of Ionathas was
bounde with the soule of Dauid, and Ionathas loued him as his owne soule.
2 And Saul toke him the same daye, and let him not go agayne to his fathers
house.
3 And Ionathas and Dauid made a couenaunt together, for he loued him as his owne
soule.
4 And Ionathas put of his owne cote that he had vpon him, and gaue it vnto
Dauid: yee and his cloke, his swerde, his bowe, and his girdell.
5 And Dauid wente forth whither so euer Saul sent him, and behaued him selfe
wysely. And Saul set him ouer the men of warre, and he pleased all the people
well, and all the seruauntes of Saul.
6 It fortuned, that whan Dauid was come agayne from the slaughter of the
Philistyne, the wemen wente out of all the cities of Israel with songes &
daunses, to mete kynge Saul, with tymbrels, with myrth, and with fyddels.
7 And the wemen sange one to another, and played & sayde: Saul hath smytten his
thousande: but Dauid his ten thousande.
8 Then was Saul very wroth, and yt worde displeased him sore, and he sayde: They
haue ascrybed ten thousande vnto Dauid, and but one thousande vnto me: what shal
he haue more but the kyngdome?
9 And from that daye forth, Saul loked sowerly vpo Dauid.
10 The nexte daye after came the euell sprete of God vpon Saul, and prophecyed
in ye myddes of the house. But Dauid played on the instrumente with his hande,
as he was wonte daylie.
11 And Saul had a iauelynge in his hande, and cast it, and thoughte: I wyll
stycke Dauid fast to the wall. Neuerthelesse Dauid turned himselfe twyse awaye
from him.
12 And Saul was afrayed of Dauid: for the LORDE was with him, and was departed
from Saul.
13 Then Saul put him from him, and set him to be prynce ouer a thousande men,
and he went out and in before the people.
14 And Dauid behaued himselfe wysely in all his doynges, and the LORDE was with
him.
15 Now whan Saul sawe that he was so exceadynge wyse, he stode in feare of him.
16 But all Israel and Iuda loued Dauid, for he wente out and in before them.
17 And Saul sayde vnto Dauid: Beholde, my greatest doughter Merob wyl I geue the
to wyfe: be stronge now, & gouerne the warres of the LORDE. For Saul thought: my
hade shal not be vpon him, but the hande of ye Pilistynes
18 Neuertheles Dauid answered Saul: Who am I? & what is my life & the kynred of
my father in Israel, that I shulde mary the kinges doughter?
19 But whan the tyme came, that Merob ye doughter of Saul shulde haue bene geue
vnto Dauid, she was geuen vnto Adriel ye Meholathite to wyfe.
20 Neuerthelesse Michol Sauls doughter loued Dauid. Whan this was tolde Saul, ye
matter pleased him well,
21 & he sayde: I wyl geue him her, yt she maye be a snare vnto him, & that the
handes of ye Philistynes maye come vpon him. And he sayde vnto Dauid: This daye
shalt thou be my doughters husbade ye secode time.
22 And Saul spake vnto his seruautes: Talke wt Dauid secretly & saye: Beholde,
the kinge hath pleasure in the, and all his seruauntes loue the, mary thou
therfore the kynges doughter.
23 And Sauls seruauntes spake these wordes in the eares of Dauid. But Dauid
saide: Thynke ye it but a small matter, to mary the kynges doughter? As for me,
I am but a poore symple man.
24 And Sauls seruauntes tolde him agayne, and sayde: Soch wordes hath Dauid
spoken.
25 Saul sayde: Then saye ye vnto Dauid: The kynge desyreth no dowry, but onely
an hundreth foreskynnes of the Philistynes, that vengeaunce maye be taken of the
kinges enemies. Howbeit Saul thought to cause Dauid be slayne by the hades of
the Philistynes.
26 Then his seruauntes tolde Dauid these wordes, and Dauid was contente with the
matter, to mary the kynges doughter.
27 And after a fewe dayes Dauid gatt him vp, and wente with his men, and smote
two hundreth men amonge the Philistynes. And Dauid broughte their foreskynnes,
and made their nombre sufficient vnto the kynge, yt he mighte mary the kynges
doughter. The Saul gaue him his doughter Michol to wyfe.
28 And Saul sawe and perceaued, that the LORDE was wt Dauid. And Michol Sauls
doughter loued him.
29 Then was Saul the more afrayed, and became his enemye as loge as he lyued.
30 And whan the prynces of the Philistynes wete forth, Dauid behaued him selfe
more wysely then all the seruauntes of Saul in their outgoynge: so that his name
was in greate reputacion.

Chapter 19

1 Saul spake to Ionathas his sonne, and to all his seruauntes, that they shulde
kyll Dauid.
2 Neuerthelesse Ionathas the sonne of Saul loued Dauid exceadingly, and tolde
him, and sayde: Saul my father goeth aboute to slaye the. Kepe the therfore (I
praye the) in the mornynge and abyde in secrete, and hyde the.
3 But I wyll go forth, and stonde besyde my father in the felde where thou art,
and wyll speake of the vnto my father: and what soeuer I se I shal brynge the
worde.
4 And Ionathas reported ye best of Dauid vnto Saul his father, and sayde vnto
him: Oh let not the kynge synne agaynst his seruaunt, for he hath not synned
agaynst the, and his doynge is very necessary for the,
5 he put his lyfe in his hande also, and smote the Philistyne, & the LORDE dyd a
greate health vnto all Israel: this hast thou sene, and reioysed therof.
Wherfore wylt thou then offende agaynst innocent bloude, that thou woldest kyll
Dauid without a cause?
6 Then herkened Saul vnto the voice of Ionathas and sware: As truly as the LORDE
lyueth, he shal not dye.
7 Then Ionathas called Dauid, and tolde him all these wordes, and brought him to
Saul, so that he was in presence like as afore tyme.
8 But there arose a battayll agayne, and Dauid wente forth, and fought agaynst
the Philistynes, and smote a greate slaughter, so that they fled before him.
9 Neuertheles ye euell sprete of the LORDE came vpon Saul, and he sat in his
house, and had a iauelynge in his hande. But Dauid plaied vpon the instrument
with his hade.
10 And Saul thought with the iauelinge to sticke Dauid fast to the wall.
Howbeit, he wente asyde fro Saul and the iauelynge smote in the wall. And Dauid
fled, and escaped that night.
11 Notwithstondinge Saul sent his messaungers to Dauids house, that they shulde
laye wayte for him, and kyll him in the mornynge. Michol Dauids wyfe tolde him
this, and sayde: Yf thou saue not thy soule this night, thou shalt dye tomorow.
12 Then Michol let him downe thorow the wyndow, so that he wente his waye, fled,
and escaped.
13 And Mickol toke an ymage, and layed it in the bed, and laied a goates skinne
at the heade of it, and couered it with clothes.
14 Then Saul sent messaugers, to fetch Dauid. But she sayde: He is sicke.
15 Neuerthelesse Saul sent messaungers to se Dauid, & sayde: Bringe him vp to me
with the bed, that he maye be slayne.
16 Now whan the messaungers came, beholde, the ymage laye in the bed, and a
goates skynne at the heade of it.
17 Then sayde Saul vnto Michol: Why hast thou begyled me, and let myne enemye
go, that he mighte escape? Michol sayde vnto Saul: He sayde vnto me: Let me go,
or I wyl kyll the.
18 As for Dauid, he fled, and escaped, and came to Samuel vnto Ramath, and tolde
him all yt Saul had done vnto him. And he wente wt Samuel, and they abode at
Naioth.
19 And it was tolde Saul: Beholde, Dauid is at Naioth in Ramath.
20 Then Saul sente messaungers to fetch Dauid. And they sawe a company of
prophetes prophecienge, and Samuel had the ouersight of them. Then came the
sprete of God vpon the messaungers of Saul, so that they prophecyed also.
21 Whan this was tolde Saul, he sent other messaungers, which prophecied
likewyse. Then sente he messaungers the thyrde tyme, and they in like maner
prophecyed.
22 Then wente he himselfe also vnto Ramath, and whan he came to the greate well
which is at Secho, he axed and sayde: Where is Samuel and Dauid? Then was it
tolde him: beholde, at Naioth in Ramath.
23 And he wente thither, euen vnto Naioth in Ramath. And ye sprete of God came
vpon him also, and he wete & prophecied till he came vnto Naioth in Ramath.
24 And he put of his clothes, & prophecied likewise before Samuel, & fell downe
naked all that daye and all that nighte. Here of came the prouerbe: Is Saul also
amonge the prophetes?

Chapter 20

1 Dauid fled fro Naioth in Ramath, and came, & spake before Ionathas: What haue
I done? What trespace haue I made? What haue I synned in ye sighte of thy
father, yt he seketh to kyll me?
2 He sayde vnto him: God forbyd, thou shalt not dye. Beholde, my father doth
nothinge, nether greate ner small, but he sheweth it before myne eares. Wherfore
shulde my father the hyde this fro me? It shal not be so.
3 The sware Dauid agayne, and sayde: Thy father knoweth well, yt I haue founde
fauoure in yi sighte, therfore shal he thynke: Ionathas shal not knowe of this,
lest it greue him. Verely, as truly as the LORDE lyueth, and as truly as yi
soule lyueth, there is but one steppe betwene me & death.
4 Ionathas sayde vnto Dauid: I wil do for the what so euer thy hert desyreth.
5 Dauid sayde vnto him: Beholde, tomorow is the new Mone, that I shulde syt at
the table with the kynge. Let me hyde my selfe therfore in the felde vnto the
thirde daye at euen.
6 Yf thy father then axe after me, saye: Dauid prayed me, yt he mighte runne to
Bethleem vnto his cite, for all his kynred haue there a yearly sacrifice.
7 Yf he saye then: It is good, the stondeth it well with yi seruaunt. But yf he
be wroth, thou shalt perceaue that he intendeth euell.
8 Do mercy therfore vpon thy seruaunt: for with me yi seruaunt hast thou made a
couenaunt in the LORDE. But yf there be eny trespace in me, then slaye me thy
selfe, for why woldest thou brynge me vnto thy father?
9 Ionathas sayde: That be farre from the, that I shulde perceaue my father to
intende eny euell agaynst the, and shulde not tell the.
10 Dauid sayde: Who shal brynge me worde, yf thy father geue the an harde
answere?
11 Ionathas sayde vnto Dauid: Come, let vs go forth into the felde. And they
wente out both in to ye felde.
12 And Ionathas sayde vnto Dauid: LORDE God of Israel, yf I perceaue by my
father tomorow or on the thirde daye, that it goeth well with Dauid, & sende not
vnto the, and shewe the before thine eares,
13 then let the LORDE do this and that vnto Ionathas. But yf my father delyte in
euell agaynst the, I wil shewe it before thine eares also, and let ye go, that
thou mayest departe in peace. And the LORDE be with the, as he hath bene with my
father.
14 Yf I do it not, then do thou no mercy of the LORDE on me, while I lyue, no
not whan I dye,
15 and plucke thy mercy fro my house for euer. And whan the LORDE roteth out ye
enemies of Dauid, euery one out of the londe,
16 then let Dauid rote out Ionathas also with his house, and the LORDE requyre
it of the hande of Dauids enemies.
17 And Ionathas proceaded further, and sware vnto Dauid (he loued him so well:
for he loued him euen es his owne soule)
18 and Ionathas sayde vnto him: Tomorow is ye new Mone, and thou shalt be axed
after: for thou shalt be wanted where thou wast wonte to sit.
19 But on the thirde daye come downe soone, & go in to ye place where thou
hydest the on the worckdaye, & set the downe by the stone of Asel:
20 then wyl I shute thre arowes on yt side, as though I wolde shute at a marck:
21 and beholde, I wil sende the boye, and saye vnto him, Go seke ye arowes. Yf I
saye now vnto the lad: Lo, the arowes lye hitherwarde behynde ye, fetch them,
then come thou, for it is peace, and there is no parell, as truly as the LORDE
lyueth.
22 But yf I saye vnto the lad: beholde, the arowes lye yonderwarde before the,
then go thou thy waye, for the LORDE hath let the go.
23 As for that which thou and I haue spoke together, the LORDE is betwene me and
the for euer.
24 Dauid hid himself in the felde. And wha the new Mone came, the kynge sat him
downe at the table to eate.
25 Whan the kynge had set him downe in his place as he was wonte by the wall,
Ionathas stode vp, but Abner sat him downe besyde Saul. And Dauid was myssed in
his place.
26 And Saul spake nothinge that daye, for he thoughte: There is somwhat happend
vnto him, that he is not cleane.
27 On the seconde daye of the new Mone, whan Dauid was myssed in his place, Saul
saide vnto Ionathas his sonne: Wherfore is not the sonne of Isai come to the
table nether yesterdaye ner to daye?
28 Ionathas answered Saul: He prayed me that he mighte go vnto Bethleem,
29 and sayde: Let me go, for oure kynred hath a sacrifyce to do in the cyte, and
my brother hath sent for me himselfe: yf I haue founde fauoure now in thy
syghte, I wyll go, and se my brethren: therfore is he not come to the kynges
table.
30 Then was the kynge wroth at Ionathas, and sayde vnto him: Thou wicked and
vnthrifte, I knowe how that thou hast chosen the sonne of Isai, to the shame of
thy selfe and of yi shamefull mother.
31 For as longe as ye sonne of Isai lyueth vpo earth nether thou ner thy
kingdome shal prospere. Sende now therfore, and cause him to be fetched vnto me,
for he is a childe of death.
32 Ionathas answered his father Saul and sayde vnto him: Wherfore shal he dye?
what hath he done?
33 Then shot Saul the iauelynge at him, that he might smite him. The perceaued
Ionathas, that his father was vtterly determed to kyll Dauid,
34 and he rose vp from ye table in a wrothfull displeasure, and ate no bred yt
same seconde daye of the new Mone: for he was vexed because of Dauid, that his
father had done him soch dishonor.
35 On the morow wente Ionathas forth in to the felde, at the tyme appoynted of
Dauid, and a litle boy with him,
36 and sayde vnto ye boy: Runne and seke me the arowes which I shute. Whan the
boy ranne, he shot an arowe ouer him.
37 And whan the boy came to the place whither Ionathas had shot ye arowe,
Ionathas cryed after him, and sayde: The arowe lyeth yonderwarde before the.
38 And he cryed after him agayne: haist the, and stonde not styll. Then the boy
gathered vp Ionothas arowes, and brought them to his lorde.
39 And the boy knewe nothinge, onely Ionathas and Dauid knewe of ye matter.
40 Then Ionathas gaue his boy his wapes and sayde vnto him: Go thy waye, and
cary them in to the cite.
41 And whan the boy was gone, Dauid arose from the place towarde the south, and
fell vpon his face to the groude, and worshipped thre tymes, and they kissed one
another, and wepte together. But Dauid most specially.
42 And Ionathas saide vnto Dauid: Go thy waye in peace: What soeuer we both haue
sworne & spoke together in the name of the LORDE, the LORDE be witnesse betwene
me and the, betwene my sede and yi sede for euer. And Ionathas gat him vp, and
came in to the cite.

Chapter 21

1 Dauid came to Nobe to ye prest Ahimelech. And Ahimelech was astonnyed, whan he
sawe Dauid comminge, and sayde vnto him: Why commest thou alone, and noman is
with the?
2 Dauid sayde vnto Ahimelech the prest: The kinge hath comytted a matter vnto
me, and sayde: Let noma knowe wherfore I haue sent the, and what I haue
commaunded the: for I haue appoynted my seruautes to mete me here & there.
3 Yf thou haue now ought vnder thy hande, a loafe of bred or fyue, geue me the
same in my hande, or what so euer thou findest.
4 The prest answered Dauid, and sayde: I haue no comen bred vnder my hande, but
the holy bred, yf the yonge men haue onely refrained them selues from wemen.
5 Dauid answered the prest, and sayde vnto him: The wemen were kepte thre dayes
from vs whan we departed forth, and the yonge mens vessels were holy. But this
waye is vnholy, neuerthelesse it shalbe santifyed to daye in the instrumentes.
6 Then the prest gaue him of ye holy, in so moch as there was none other bred
but the shewbredes, which were taken vp before the LORDE, that there might be
other freshbredes set therin the daye wha he toke them awaye.
7 But the same daye was there a man sparred in before the LORDE, one of Sauls
seruauntes, named Doeg an Edomite, ye mightiest amonge Sauls hyrdmen.
8 And Dauid sayde vnto Ahimelech: Is there not a speare or a swerde here vnder
thine hande? I haue not taken my swerde and weapens with me: for the kynges
matter requyred haist.
9 The prest sayde: The swerde of Goliath the Philistyne whom thou smotest in the
Oke valley, is here wrapped in a cloth behynde the ouerbody cote. Yf thou wylt
haue it, take it, for here is els none but it. Dauid sayde: There is not soch
another, geue me it.
10 And Dauid gat him vp, and fled from Saul, and came to Achis ye kynge of Gath.
11 But Achis seruauntes sayde vnto him: This is Dauid the kynge of the londe, of
whom they sunge in the daunse, and sayde: Saul hath smytten his thousande, but
Dauid his ten thousande.
12 And Dauid toke these wordes to hert, and was sore afrayed of Achis the kynge
of Gath,
13 and altered his countenaunce before them, and shewed himselfe as he had bene
madd in their handes, and stackered towarde the dores of the gate, and his
slauerynges ranne downe his beerd.
14 Then sayde Achis vnto his seruauntes: Beholde, ye se that the man is out of
his wyt, why haue ye brought him vnto me?
15 Haue I to fewe madd men, that ye haue brought this hither to be madd before
me? Shulde he come in to my house?

Chapter 22

1 Dauid wente fro thence, & fled vnto the caue of Adullam. Whan his brethren and
all his fathers house herde that, they came downe thither vnto him.
2 And there gathered vnto him all men that were in trouble and det, and sory of
hert, and he became their heade, so that there were with him vpon a foure
hundreth men.
3 And Dauid wente from thence towarde Mispa in the londe of the Moabites, and
sayde vnto the kynge of the Moabites: Let my father and my mother go out and in
amonge you, tyll I se what God wil do with me.
4 And he lefte them before the kynge of ye Moabites, so that they remayned by
him, as longe as Dauid was in the castell.
5 Neuertheles the prophet Gad sayde vnto Dauid: Abyde not in the castell, but go
yi waye, and come in to the londe of Iuda. Then departed Dauid, and came into
the wodd of Hareth.
6 And Saul herde that Dauid and the men which were with him, were come forth.
Now whyle Saul dwelt at Gibea vnder a groue in Rama, he had a Iauelinge in his
hande, and all his seruauntes stode by him.
7 Then sayde Saul vnto his seruauntes that stode by him: Heare ye children of
Iemini: Shal the sonne of Isai geue lodes and vynyardes vnto you all, & make you
all captaynes ouer thousandes and ouer hudreds,
8 that ye haue all conspyred agaynst me, and there is no ma that sheweth it
before myne eares, for so moch as my sonne also hath made a couenaunt with the
sonne of Isai? There is no man amonge you that letteth it for my sake, or yt
openeth it vnto myne eares: for my sonne hath stered vp my seruauntes against
me, that he maye laye wayte for me, as it is manifest.
9 Then answered Doeg ye Edomite which stode besyde Sauls seruauntes, and sayde:
I sawe the sonne of Isai, that he came vnto Nobe, to Ahimelech ye sonne of
Achitob,
10 which axed councell at the LORDE for him, and gaue him fode, & the swerde of
Goliath the Philistyne.
11 Then sent the kynge, and caused to call Ahimelech the prest the sonne of
Achitob, and all his fathers house, the prestes that were at Nobe, and they came
all to the kynge.
12 And Saul sayde: Heare thou sonne of Achitob. He saide: Here am I my lorde.
13 And Saul sayde vnto him: Wherfore haue ye cospyred agaynst me, thou & the
sonne of Isai, that thou hast geuen him bred and a swerde, and axed councell at
God for him, to stere him vp, that he mighte laye awayte for me, as it is
manifest?
14 Ahimelech answered the kynge and saide: And who is amonge all thy seruauntes
like Dauid, which is faithfull, and hath maried the kynges doughter, and goeth
in thine obedience, & is honorably taken in thine house?
15 Haue I begonne then first this daye to axe councell at God for him? That be
farre frome. Let not the kinge laie soch to his seruautes charge in all my
fathers house: for thy seruaunt knewe not of all these thinges nether small ner
greate.
16 Neuertheles the kynge saide: Ahimelech thou must dye ye death, thou and all
thy fathers house.
17 And the kynge sayde to his fote men that stode by him: Turne you, and slaye
the prestes of the LORDE, for their hande is with Dauid also. Not withstondinge
the kynges seruauntes wolde not not laye their handes vpon ye prestes of the
LORDE, to slaye them.
18 Then saide ye kynge vnto Doeg: Turne the, and slaye the prestes. Doeg the
Edomite turned him, and slewe the prestes, so that the same daye there dyed fyue
and foure score men, which wayre ouerbody cotes of lynnen.
19 And Nob the cite of the prestes smote he with the edge of the swerde, both
men and wemen, children and sucklynges, oxen and asses, and shepe.
20 Neuerthelesse there escaped a sonne of Ahimelech (the sonne of Achitob) whose
name was Abiathar, and fled after Dauid,
21 and tolde him, that Saul had slayne ye prestes of the LORDE.
22 Dauid sayde vnto Abiathar: I knewe well the same daye that Doeg the Edomite
was there, that he wolde tell Saul. I am giltye of the soules of thy fathers
house.
23 Abyde thou with me, and feare not. He that layeth wayte for my lyfe, shall
laye wayte for thyne also, and thou shalt be preserued with me.

Chapter 23

1 And it was tolde Dauid: Beholde, the Philistynes fight against Cegila, and
spoyle the barnes.
2 Then Dauid axed at the LORDE, and sayde: Shal I go, & smyte these Philistynes?
And the LORDE sayde vnto Dauid: Go thy waye, thou shalt smyte the Philistynes,
and delyuer Cegila.
3 But ye men that were with Dauid, sayde vnto him: Beholde, we are here in feare
in Iewry, and shall we go to Cegila vnto the hoost of the Philistynes?
4 The Dauid axed at the LORDE agayne. And the LORDE answered him, and sayde: Vp,
get the downe to Cegila, for I wil delyuer the Philistynes in to thy hande.
5 So Dauid wente with his men vnto Cegila, and foughte agaynst the Philistynes,
& droue awaye their catell, and smote them wt a greate slaughter. Thus Dauid
delyuered them of Cegila.
6 For whan Abiathar the sonne of Ahimelech fled vnto Dauid at Cegila, he bare
downe the ouerbody cote with him.
7 The was it tolde Saul, that Dauid was come to Cegila, and he sayde: God hath
deliuered him in to my hade, for he is shut fast in, now that he is come in to a
cite which is kepte wt gates and barres.
8 And Saul caused for to call all the people downe to ye battaill vnto Cegila,
yt they might besege Dauid and his men.
9 But whan Dauid perceaued yt Saul inteded euell against him, he saide vnto
Abiathar ye prest: Brynge me hither the ouerbody cote.
10 And Dauid sayde: O LORDE God of Israel, thy seruaunt hath herde, that Saul
goeth aboute to come for to destroye the cite of Cegila for my sake.
11 Shal the citysens of Cegila delyuer me ouer in to his handes? And shal Saul
come downe, as thy seruaunt hath herde? Tell thy seruaunt this, O LORDE God of
Israel. And the LORDE saide: He shal come downe.
12 Dauid sayde: Shall the citysens of Cegila delyuer me and my men in to Sauls
handes? The LORDE sayde: Yee.
13 The Dauid gat him vp with his me, of whom there were vpon a sixe hundreth, &
walked whither they coulde. Now whan it was tolde Saul that Dauid was escaped
from Cegila, he let his iourney stonde.
14 As for Dauid, he remayned in the wildernes in the castell, and abode vpon the
mount in the wildernes of Siph. But Saul soughte him as longe as he lyued.
Neuertheles God gaue him not in to his handes.
15 And Dauid sawe, that Saul was gone forth to seke after his life. But Dauid
was in the wildernes of Siph, in the wodd.
16 Then Ionathas the sonne of Saul gat him vp, and wete vnto Dauid in to the
wod, and strengthed his hande in God,
17 and sayde vnto him: Feare not, my father Sauls hande shal not finde ye: and
thou shalt be kynge ouer Israel, so will I be the nexte vnto the. And yt my
father knoweth right well.
18 And they made a couenaunt both together before the LORDE. And Dauid remayned
in the wodd. As for Ionathas, he wente home agayne.
19 But the Siphites wente vp to Saul vnto Gibeath, and sayde: Is not Dauid hyd
with vs in the castell in ye wodd, vpon mout Hachila, which lyeth on the righte
hande of the wildernesse?
20 Let the kynge come downe now therfore acordinge to all the desyre of his
hert, and we wyll delyuer him in to the kynges hande.
21 Then sayde Saul: Blessed be ye of the LORDE, that ye haue had pytie vpon me:
22 Go youre waye now therfore, and be sure, that ye maye knowe and se in what
place his fete haue bene, and who hath sene him there: for it is tolde me, that
he is full of sotiltye.
23 Loke well and spye out all the places, where he hydeth him, and come agayne
to me, whan ye are sure, and I will go with you. Yf he be in the londe, I wyl
enquere after him amonge all the thousandes in Iuda.
24 Then gat they them vp, and wente their waye vnto Siph before Saul. But Dauid
and his men were in the wyldernes of Mao, euen in the felde on the righte hande
of the wildernes.
25 Now whan Saul wente thither with his men to seke him, it was tolde Dauid and
he gat him downe to the rocke, and abode in the wildernesse of Mahon.
26 Whan Saul herde that, he folowed after Dauid in the wildernesse of Mahon. And
Saul with his men wente on the one syde of the hyll: Dauid wt his men on ye
other syde of ye hill. But whan Dauid made haist to escape from Saul, Saul with
his men compased aboute Dauid and his men, that he might take the.
27 Neuertheles there came a messauger vnto Saul, and sayde: Make haist and come,
for the Philistynes are falle in to the londe.
28 The Saul turned him from chacynge of Dauid, and wente agaynst the Philstynes.
Therfore is ye place called Sela Mahelkoth.
29 And Dauid wente vp from thence, and abode in the castell at En Gaddi.

Chapter 24

1 Now whan Saul came agayne from the Philistines, it was tolde him: Beholde,
Dauid is in the wyldernes of Engaddi.
2 And Saul toke thre thousande chosen men out of all Israel, and wente to seke
Dauid with his men vpon the stony rockes of the wylde goates.
3 And whan he came to the shepe foldes by ye waye, there was a caue, and Saul
wente in to couer his fete. But Dauid and his men sat behinde within the caue.
4 Then sayde Dauids men vnto him: Lo, this is the daye, wherof the LORDE thy God
hath sayde vnto the: Beholde, I wyll delyuer thyne enemye in to thy hande, that
thou mayest do wt him what it pleaseth the. And Dauid stode vp, & cut of the
typpe of Sauls garment quyetly.
5 Neuertheles it smote him afterwarde in his hert, because he had cut of the
typpe of Sauls garment,
6 and sayde vnto his men: The LORDE let that be farre frome, that I shulde do
it, & laye my hande vpo my lorde the LORDES anoyntd: for he is ye anoynted of
the LORDE.
7 And Dauid withelde his seruautes with wordes, & suffred the not to ryse vp
agaynst Saul. But whan Saul gat him vp out of the caue, and was goinge his waye,
8 Dauid rose vp also after him, and wente out of the caue, and cried behynde
Saul, & sayde: My lorde the kynge. And Saul loked behynde him. And Dauid bowed
downe his face to the earth, and worshipped,
9 and sayde vnto Saul: Why herkenest thou vnto the wordes of men, that saye:
Dauid seketh thy mysfortune?
10 Beholde, thine eyes se this daye that the LORDE gaue the into my hande in the
caue, and I was counceled to slaye the: Neuertheles thou wast fauoured, for I
sayde: I wil not laye my hande vpon my lorde, for he is the LORDES anoynted.
11 Beholde, my father the typpe of thy garment in my hande, that I wolde not
slaye the, whan I cut of the typpe of thy garment. Knowe and se, yt there is no
euell ner trespace in my hande: nether haue I offended the, and thou folowest
after my soule, to take it awaye.
12 The LORDE shal be iudge betwene me and the, and auenge me on the, but my hade
shal not be vpon the,
13 acordinge as it is sayde after the olde prouerbe: Vngodlynes commeth of the
vngodly: but my hande shal not be vpon the.
14 Whom persecutest thou O kynge of Israel, whom persecutest thou? a deed dogg?
a flee?
15 The LORDE be iudge, and geue sentence betwene me and the, and cosidre it, and
defende my cause, and delyuer me from thy hande.
16 Now whan Dauid had spoken out these wordes vnto Saul, Saul saide: Is not this
thy voyce my sonne Dauid? And Saul lifte vp his voyce, and wepte,
17 and saide vnto Dauid: Thou art more righteous then I: for thou hast
recompesed me good, but I haue rewarded the euell.
18 And this daye hast thou shewed me how thou hast done me good, for so moch as
ye LORDE hath delyuered me in to thy hande, and thou neuertheles hast not slaine
me.
19 What is he, which yf he fynde his enemye, wyl let him go in a good waye? The
LORDE rewarde the good for yt thou hast done vnto me this daye?
20 Beholde now, I knowe that thou shalt be kynge, & the kyngdome of Israel
stondeth in thy hande:
21 sweare now therfore vnto me by the LORDE, yt thou shalt not rote out my sede
after me, nether destroie my name out of my fathers house.
22 And Dauid sware vnto Saul. Then wente Saul home, but Dauid gat him vp with
his men vnto the castell.

Chapter 25

1 And Samuel dyed, and all Israel gathered them selues together, mourned for
him, & buried him in his house at Ramath. As for Dauid, he rose, and wente downe
into the wyldernesse of Paran.
2 And there was a man at Maon, and his possession at Carmel, and the man was of
greate power, and had thre thousande shepe, and a thousande goates. And it
fortuned that he clypped his shepe at Carmel,
3 and his name was Nabal, but his wyues name was Abigail, and she was a woman of
good vnderstondinge, & bewtyfull of face. But the man was harde, and wicked in
his doynges, and was one of Caleb.
4 Now whan Dauid herde in the wyldernes yt Nabal clypped his shepe,
5 he sent out ten yonge men, & saide vnto them: Go vp vnto Carmel, & whan ye
come to Nabal, salute him frendly on my behalfe,
6 & saye: Good lucke, peace be wt the & thine house, & with all yt thou hast.
7 haue herde saye that thou hast shepe clyppers. Now yi shepherdes whom thou
hast, haue bene with vs, we haue done them no dishonoure, and they wated
nothinge of their nombre, as longe as they were at Carmel:
8 Axe thy yonge men, they shal tell the, and let thy yonge men fynde fauoure in
yi sighte: for we are come in a good daye, geue thy seruauntes & thy sonne Dauid
what thy hande fyndeth.
9 And wha Dauids yonge men came, and spake all these wordes on Dauids behalfe
vnto Nabal, they lefte of.
10 But Nabal answered Dauids seruauntes, & sayde: What is he yt Dauid? & who is
the sonne of Isai? There are many seruauntes now yt runne awaye from their
masters.
11 Shulde I take my bred, water and flesh, that I haue slayne for my clyppers, &
geue it vnto me whom I knowe not whence they are?
12 The Dauids yonge me turned their waye agayne. And whan they came agayne vnto
him, they tolde him all these wordes.
13 The sayde Dauid vnto his men: Euery man gyrde his swerde aboute him. And
euery one gyrde his swerde aboute him. And Dauid gyrde his swerde aboute him
also, and there wete vp after him vpon a foure hundreth men, but two hundreth
remayned wt the stuffe.
14 Neuertheles Abigail Nabals wife tolde one of hir yonge men, and sayde:
Beholde, Dauid sent messaungers out of the wyldernes to blesse oure lorde,
Notwithstondinge he was fearce vpo them,
15 and yet haue they bene very profitable men vnto vs, and haue done vs no
dishonoure, and we wanted none of the nombre as loge as we walked with them,
whan we were in the felde:
16 but they haue bene oure wall daye and nighte, as longe as we kepte the shepe
by them.
17 Take hede now therfore, and loke well what thou doest, for there is surely a
mysfortune at hande agaynst oure lorde, & agaynst all his house. And he is a man
of Belial, to whom no man darre saye eny thinge.
18 Then Abigail made haist, and toke two hundred loaues of bred, and two botels
of wyne, and fyue shepe ready dighte, and fyue measures of firmentye, and an
hundreth frayles of rasens, and two hundreth frayles of fygges, & layed them vpo
asses,
19 and sayde to hir yonge men: Go ye youre waye before me, beholde, I wyl come
after. And she tolde Nabal hir housbade nothinge therof.
20 And as she rode vpo the asse, and wente downe in the shadowe of ye hill,
beholde, Dauid & his me met hir downe, so that she came vpon them.
21 But Dauid sayde: Wel, all that this man had in ye wyldernes, haue I kepte for
naughte, so that there wanted nothinge of all that he had, and he rewardeth me
euell for good.
22 God do this and yet more vnto the enemies of Dauid, yf vntyll tomorow in the
mornynge I leaue this man (of all that he hath) so moch as one that maketh water
agaynst ye wall.
23 Now whan Abigail sawe Dauid, she lighte downe from the asse in all the haist,
and fell vpo hir face before Dauid, and worshiped him to the grounde,
24 and fell at his fete, and sayde: Oh my lorde, let this trespace be myne, and
let thy handmayde speake before thine eares, and heare the wordes of thy
handmayden:
25 Let not my lorde set his hert agaynst this Nabal the man of Belial, for he is
a foole, acordinge as his name is called: his name is foole, and foolishnes is
with him. As for me thy handmayde, I sawe not my lordes yonge men, whom thou
dyddest sende.
26 But now my lorde, as truly as the LORDE lyueth, and as truly as thy soule
lyueth, the LORDE hath kepte the backe, yt thou shuldest not come agaynst
bloude, and he hath delyuered thine hande. Thine enemyes be now as Nabal, and so
be they that wolde my lorde euell.
27 Here is ye blessynge, yt thy handmayde hath brought my lorde, take it, and
geue it vnto the yonge men, that walke vnder my lorde.
28 For a sure house shal ye LORDE make my lorde, which fighteth the fighte of
the LORDE, and no euell shall be founde in the all thy life longe.
29 And yf eny man ryse vp to persecute ye, and to laye wayte for thy soule, then
shal the soule of my lorde be bounde in the bundell of ye lyuynge, euen with the
LORDE thy God. But ye soule of thine enemies shalbe turned backe wt the slynge.
30 Whan the LORDE therfore doth all this good for my lorde (which he hath
promysed the) and commaundeth ye to be his Duke ouer Israel,
31 then shal it be no stomblinge blocke ner occasiion of fallynge vnto my lordes
hert, that thou hast not shed bloude without a cause, and auenged thy selfe,
then shal ye LORDE do good vnto my lorde, and thou shalt thynke vpon thy
handmayden.
32 Then saide Dauid vnto Abigail: Blessed be the LORDE God of Israel, which hath
sent the to mete me this daye:
33 and blessed be thy speach, and blessed be thou, which hast kepte me backe
this daye, that I am not come agaynst bloude, to auenge me with myne awne hande.
34 Verely (as truly as the LORDE the God of Israel lyueth, which hath hyndred me
that I shulde do the no euell.) Yf thou haddest not met me in all the haist,
Nabal shulde not haue had lefte him vntyll ye lighte mornynge, so moch as one
that maketh water agaynst the wall.
35 So Dauid toke of hir hade what she had broughte him, and sayde vnto her: Go
vp in peace vnto yi house: beholde, I haue herkened vnto yi voyce, and accepted
thy personne.
36 But whan Abigail came to Nabal, beholde, he had prepared a feast in his house
like a kynges feast, and his hert was mery, for he was very dronken. And she
tolde him nothinge, nether small ner greate vntyll ye cleare mornynge.
37 But whan it was daye, & the wyne was come from Nabal, his wife tolde him
these thinges. Then was his hert deed in his body, so that he became euen as a
stone:
38 and ouer ten dayes the LORDE smote him, so yt he dyed.
39 Whan Dauid herde that Nabal was deed, he sayde: Blessed be ye LORDE which
hath auenged my rebuke on Nabal, and preserued his seruaunt from euell. And the
LORDE hath rewarded Nabal that euell vpon his heade. And Dauid sent, and caused
to talke with Abigail, yt he mighte take her to wife.
40 And whan Dauids seruauntes came to Abigail vnto Carmel, they spake vnto her,
and saide: Dauid hath sent vs vnto the, that he maye take ye to wife.
41 She rose vp, and worshipped vpon hir face vnto the earth, and sayde: beholde,
here is thy handmayde, that she maie do seruyce vnto the seruauntes of my lorde,
42 and to wasshe their fete. And Abigail made haist, and gat her vp, and rode
vpo an asse, and fyue maydens that were vnder her, and wente after Dauids
messaungers, and became his wife.
43 Dauid toke Ahinoam of Iesrael also, and they both became his wyues.
44 But Saul gaue Michol his doughter the wife of Dauid vnto Phalti ye sonne of
Lais of Gallim.

Chapter 26

1 They of Siph came to Saul vnto Gibeath, & sayde: Is not Dauid hyd vpo the hill
of Hachila, which lyeth ouer agaynst the wyldernesse?
2 Then Saul gat him vp, and wente downe to the wildernes of Siph, and thre
thousande chosen men of Israel with him, to seke Dauid in the wildernes of Siph,
3 and pitched vpon the hill of Hachila, which lyeth by the waye before the
wildernes. But Dauid remayned in the wyldernes, and whan he sawe that Saul came
after him in to the wildernes,
4 he sent out spyes, and knewe of a suertie, that he was come in dede.
5 And Dauid gat him vp, and came to the place where Saul had pitched his tet,
and sawe the place where Saul laye with his chefe captayne Abner ye sonne of
Ner: for Saul laye in the tent, and the hoost aboute him.
6 Then answered Dauid, and sayde vnto Ahimelech the Hethite, and to Abisai the
sonne of Ieru Ia ye brother of Ioab: Who wil go downe wt me to Saul in to the
hoost? Abisai sayde: I wil go downe with the.
7 So Dauid and Abisai came to the people in the night season, & beholde, Saul
laye and slepte in the tent, and his speare stacke in ye grounde at his heade.
But Abner and the people laye rounde aboute him.
8 The sayde Abisai vnto Dauid: God hath closed thine enemye in thyne hande this
daye. Therfore will I now thrust him thorow once with the speare euen in to the
grounde, yt he shall haue ynough of it.
9 Neuertheles Dauid sayde vnto Abisai: Destroye him not, for who wil laye hande
vpon the anoynted of ye LORDE, & remayne vngiltye?
10 Dauid sayde morouer: As truly as the LORDE lyueth, yf ye LORDE him selfe
smyte him not, or excepte his tyme come that he dye, or that he go in to the
battayll and perishe,
11 the LORDE let it be farre fro me, that I shulde laye my hande on the LORDES
anoynted. Take ye speare now therfore at his heade, & the cuppe of water, & let
vs go.
12 So Dauid toke ye speare & the cuppe of water at Sauls heade, & they wente
their waye. And there was no man yt sawe it, ner perceaued it, nether awaked,
but they slepte euery one, for there was a depe slepe fallen vpon them from the
LORDE.
13 Now whan Dauid was come ouer on ye other syde, he stode vpon the toppe of the
mount a farre of (so that there was a wyde space betwene them)
14 and cried vpon ye people, and vpo Abner the sonne of Ner, & sayde: Hearest
thou not Abner? And Abner answered and sayde: Who art thou that cryest so, and
diseasest the kynge?
15 And Dauid sayde vnto Abner: Art thou not a man? And where is there soch one
as thou in Israel? Why hast thou not then kepte thy lorde ye kynge? for there is
one of ye people come in to destroye thy lorde ye kynge.
16 It is not well that thou hast done. As truly as the LORDE lyueth ye are the
children of death, because ye haue not kepte youre lorde the LORDES anoynted.
Beholde now, where is ye kynges speare, and the cuppe of water that was at his
heade.
17 Then knewe Saul the voyce of Dauid, and saide: Is not that thy voyce my sonne
Dauid? Dauid sayde: It is my voyce my lorde the kynge.
18 And he sayde morouer: Why doth my lorde so persecute his seruaunt? What haue
I done? and what euell is there in my hande?
19 Yet let my lorde the kynge heare but the wordes of his seruaunt? Yf ye LORDE
prouoke the against me, let there be smelled a meatofferynge: but yf the childre
of men do it, cursed be they before the LORDE, because they haue thrust me out
this daye (that I shulde not dwell in the LORDES inheritaunce) and saye: Go yi
waye, and serue other goddes.
20 So fall not now my bloude vpon the earth from the face of the LORDE. For the
kynge of Israel is gone forth to seke a flee, as a partriche is folowed on vpo
the mountaynes.
21 And Saul sayde: I haue synned: Come agayne Dauid my sonne, I wil do the
nomore hurte, because my soule hath bene deare in yi sighte this daye. Beholde,
I haue done foolishly and very vnwysely.
22 Dauid answered and sayde: Beholde, here is the kynges speare, let one of the
yongemen come ouer here and fetch it.
23 But the LORDE shal rewarde euery one acordinge to his righteousnes and faith,
for ye LORDE delyuered ye this daye in to my hande: neuertheles I wolde not laie
my hande vpo the LORDES anoynted.
24 And as yi soule hath bene greatly reputed in my sighte this daye, so let ye
LORDE repute my soule in his sighte, & delyuer me from all trouble.
25 Saul saide vnto Dauid: Blessed be thou Dauid my sonne, thou shalt do it, & be
able. But Dauid wente his waye, and Saul turned agayne vnto his place.

Chapter 27

1 Dauid thoughte in his hert: One of these dayes shal I fall in to the handes of
Saul: It is better that I get me my waye in to ye londe of ye Philistynes, that
Saul maye leaue of from sekynge me in all the coastes of Israel, so shall I
escape his handes.
2 And he gat him vp, and wente ouer (with the sixe hundreth men that were with
him) vnto Achis the sonne of Maoch kynge of Gath.
3 So Dauid remayned by Achis at Gath, with his me, euery one with his housholde,
and Dauid with his two wyues, Ahinoam the Iesraelitisse, and Abigail Nabals wife
of Carmel.
4 And whan worde came to Saul that Dauid was fled vnto Gath, he soughte him
nomore.
5 And Dauid sayde vnto Achis: Yf I haue founde grace in thy sighte, then let
there be geuen me a place in one of the cities of the londe, that I maye dwell
therin. Wherfore shulde thy seruaunt dwell in the kynges cite with the?
6 Then Achis gaue him Siclag the same daye. Therfore belongeth. Siclag to the
kynges of Iuda vnto this daye.
7 The tyme that Dauid dwelt in the londe of the Philistynes, is foure monethes.
8 Dauid wente vp with his men, and fell in to the londe of the Gessurites and
Girsites, and Amalechites: for these were the inhabiters of this londe of olde,
as thou commest to Sur vnto the lode of Egipte.
9 But wha Dauid smote ye londe, he let nether man ner woman lyue, and toke the
shepe, oxen, asses, Camels and rayment, and returned and came to Achis.
10 So whan Achis spake: Whither fell ye in to daye? Dauid sayde: Towarde the
south parte of Iuda, towarde ye south parte of the Ierahmielites, & towarde the
south parte of the Kenites.
11 But Dauid let nether man ner woman come lyuynge vnto Geth, and thoughte: They
mighte peradueture speake & reporte agaynst vs: thus dyd Dauid, and this was his
maner as longe as he dwelt in ye londe of the Philistynes.
12 Therfore Achis gaue credence vnto Dauid, and thoughte: he hath made him selfe
stynke before his people of Israel, therfore shal he be my seruaunt for euer.

Chapter 28

1 It fortuned at ye same tyme, that the Philistynes gathered their hoost
together to the battayll, to go agaynst Israel. And Achis sayde vnto Dauid: Thou
shalt knowe, that thou and thy men shal go forth with me in the hoost.
2 Dauid sayde vnto Achis: Well, thou shalt se what thy seruaut shal do. Achis
saide vnto Dauid: Therfore wyll I ordene the to be the keper of my heade as
longe as I lyue.
3 As for Samuel, he was deed, and all ye people had mourned for him, & buried
him in his cite Ramath. So Saul had dryuen the soythsayers and expounders of
tokens out of ye londe.
4 Now whan the Philistynes gathered them selues together, and came and pitched
their tentes at Sunem, Saul gathered all the people together, & they pitched at
Gilboa.
5 But whan Saul sawe the hoost of the Philistynes, he was afrayed, and his hert
was discoraged,
6 and he axed councell at the LORDE. But ye LORDE gaue him no answere, nether by
dreames, ner by the lighte, ner by prophetes.
7 The sayde Saul vnto his seruauntes: Seke me a woma which hath a sprete of
soythsayege, that I maye go vnto her, and axe at her. His seruauntes sayde vnto
him: Beholde, at Endor is there a woman, which hath a sprete of soythsayenge.
8 And Saul chaunged his clothes, and put on other, and wente his waye and two
men with him, and came by nighte vnto the woman, and sayde: Prophecye vnto me (I
pray the) thorow the sprete of soythsayenge, and brynge me him vp whom I shal
name vnto the.
9 The woma saide vnto him: Beholde, thou knowest what Saul hath done, how he
hath roted out the soythsayers & witches from the londe, wherfore wilt thou
brynge my soule then in to ye nett, that I maye be slayne?
10 But Saul sware vnto her by ye LORDE, and sayde: As truly as the LORDE lyueth,
there shall no harme happen vnto the for this.
11 Then sayde ye woman: Whom shal I brynge vp vnto the? He sayde: Brynge me vp
Samuel.
12 Now whan ye woman sawe Samuel, she cryed loude, and sayde vnto Saul: Wherfore
hast thou begyled me? Thou art Saul.
13 And the kynge sayde vnto her: Feare not, what seist thou? The woman sayde
vnto Saul: I se goddes comynge vp out of ye earth?
14 He sayde: How is he shapened? She sayde: There commeth vp an olde man, and is
clothed with a longe garment. Then perceaued Saul that it was Samuel, & bowed
him selfe downe wt his face to the grounde, and worshiped him.
15 Samuel saide vnto Saul: Why hast thou disquyeted me, to cause me be broughte
vp? Saul sayde: I am sore troubled, the Philistynes fighte against me, & God is
departed frome, & geueth me no answere, nether by prophetes ner by dreames:
therfore haue I called the, yt thou mightest shewe me, what I shal do.
16 Samuel sayde: What wilt thou axe at me, seynge the LORDE is departed from
the, and is become thine enemye?
17 The LORDE shal do vnto the euen as he spake by me, and shall plucke the
kyngdome out of thy hande, and geue it vnto Dauid thy neghboure,
18 because thou hast not herkened vnto the voyce of the LORDE, ner perfourmed
the displeasure of his wrath agaynst Amalek. Therfore hath the LORDE done this
now vnto the.
19 Morouer the LORDE shal delyuer Israel with the also in to the handes of the
Philistynes: tomorow shalt thou and thy sonnes be with me. And the hoost of
Israel shal the LORDE delyuer in to the handes of the Philistynes.
20 Then fell Saul immediatly vnto the earth, for he coulde not stonde, and was
sore afrayed at these wordes of Samuel, so that there was nomore strength in
him: for he had eaten no bred all that daye and all that night.
21 And the woman wente into Saul, & sawe that he was sore vexed, and sayde vnto
him: Beholde, thy handmayde hath herkened vnto thy voyce, and I haue put my
soule in my hande, so that I haue herkened vnto yi wordes which thou spakest
vnto me.
22 Therfore folowe thou also the voyce of thy handmayde. I wil set a morsell of
bred before the to eate, that thou mayest come to thy strength, & go yi waye.
23 But he refused, and sayde, I wil not eate. Then his seruauntes & the woman
copelled him, so that he herkened vnto their voyce. And he rose vp from ye
grounde, and sat vpon the bed.
24 The woman had a fat calfe at home, so she made haist, and kylled it, and toke
meell and dyd kneet it, and baked swete cakes,
25 & broughte them forth before Saul, & before his seruauntes. And whan they had
eaten, they stode vp, and wete their waye yt nighte.

Chapter 29

1 The Philistynes gathered all their armies together at Aphek. But Israel
pitched at Ain in Iesrael.
2 And the prynces of the Philistynes wete forth with hundreds and with
thousandes, but Dauid and his men wete behynde with Achis.
3 The sayde the prynces of the Philistynes: What shal these Hebrues do? Achis
saide vnto the: Is not this Dauid ye seruaunt of Saul kynge of Israel, which
hath bene with me now yeares and dayes, & I haue founde no euell in him sence
the tyme that he fell to me vnto this daye?
4 Neuertheles the prynces of ye Philistynes were wroth at him, & sayde vnto him:
Let the man turne backe agayne, & abyde in his place, which thou hast appoynted
him, that he go not downe with vs to ye batayll, and become oure aduersary in ye
felde. For wherin coulde he better do his lorde a pleasure, the in the heades of
these men?
5 Is not this Dauid, of whom they sunge in the daunce: Saul hath smytte his
thousande, but Dauid his ten thousande?
6 Then Achis called Dauid, and sayde vnto him: As truly as the LORDE lyueth, I
take the for an honest man, and thy out goynge and ingoynge with me in ye hoost
pleaseth me well, and no euell haue I marked in the, sence ye tyme that thou
camest to me vnto this daye. But thou pleasest not the prynces.
7 Returne now therfore, and go yi waye in peace, that thou do no euell in the
sighte of the prynces of ye Philistynes.
8 Dauid sayde: What haue I done, & what hast thou marked in thy seruaunt, sence
ye tyme that I haue bene in yi presence vnto this daye, that I shulde not come
and fighte agaynst the enemies of my lorde the kynge?
9 Achis answered and sayde vnto Dauid: I knowe well that thou pleasest myne eyes
eue as an angell of God. But the prynces of ye Philistynes haue sayde: Let him
not go vp with vs vnto the batayll.
10 Get the vp therfore tomorow by tymes, and yi lordes seruauntes which are come
with the. And whan ye haue gotten you vp early in the mornynge, whan it is
lighte, go yor waye.
11 So Dauid & his men gat them vp early, to go their waye in the mornynge, and
to come agayne in to the londe of the Philistynes. But the Philistynes wente vp
towarde Iesrael.

Chapter 30

1 Now whan Dauid came to Siclag on the thirde daie with his men, the Amalechites
had falle in on ye south parte and at Siclag, and had smytten Siclag, and burned
it with fyre,
2 and had caried a waye the weme out of it, both small & greate. Neuertheles
they had slayne no man, but dryuen the thence, and were goynge on their waye.
3 Now whan Dauid with his men came to the cite, and sawe that it was brent wt
fyre, and that their wyues, sonnes & doughters were led awaye captyue,
4 Dauid and the people that was with him lefte vp their voyce, and wepte so
longe tyll they coulde wepe nomore.
5 For Dauids two wyues also were caried awaye captyue, Ahinoam ye Iesraelitisse,
and Abigail Nabals wife of Carmel.
6 And Dauid was very soroufull, for the people wolde haue stoned him: for ye
soule of all the people was in greate heuynes, euery one ouer his sonnes and
doughters. Neuertheles Dauid strengthed him selfe in the LORDE his God,
7 & sayde vnto Abiathar ye prest the sonne of Ahimelech: Bringe me hither the
ouerbody cote. And whan Abiathar had broughte the ouerbody cote vnto Dauid,
8 Dauid axed at the LORDE, and sayde: Shal I folowe vpon the men of warre, and
shal I ouertake them? He sayde: Yee, folowe vpo them, thou shalt ouertake them,
and shalt rescue the pray.
9 Then wente Dauid his waye, and the sixe hudreth men that were with him. And
whan they came to the ryuer of Besor, some stode styll.
10 But Dauid and the foure hundreth men folowed after: As for the two hudreth
men that stode styll, they had bene slowe to go ouer the ryuer of Besor.
11 And they founde a man of Egipte vpon the felde, him they broughte vnto Dauid,
& gaue him bred to eate, and water to drynke,
12 and gaue him a quantite of fygges, & two quantities of rasyns. And whan he
had eaten, his sprete came to him againe: for in thre dayes and thre nightes he
had eate no bred, and dronke no water.
13 Dauid sayde vnto him: Whose art thou? & whence art thou? He sayde: I am a
childe of Egipte, an Amalechites seruaunt, & my master hath forsaken me, because
I was sicke thre dayes a goo.
14 We fell her in towarde ye south syde of Chrethus, and vpon Iuda, and towarde
ye south parte of Caleb, & haue burned Siclag with fyre.
15 Dauid sayde vnto him: Wilt thou bringe me downe to these men of warre? He
sayde: Sweare vnto me by God, yt thou shalt not slaye me, ner delyuer me in to
my masters hade, and I wil brynge the downe to these me of warre.
16 And he broughte the downe, and beholde, they were scatred vpon all ye
grounde, eatinge and drynkynge, and kepynge holy daye, and were makinge mery
chere, because of all the greate spoyles that they had taken out of the londe of
the Philistynes and of Iuda.
17 And Dauid smote them from ye morow tyll the euen, agaynst the nexte daye, so
that there escaped none, excepte foure hundreth yonge men, which rode vpon
camels, & fled.
18 So Dauid rescued all that the Amalechites had taken, and his two wyues,
19 & there myssed nothinge, nether small ner greate, nether sonnes ner
doughters, ner spoyles: and what so euer they had taken, Dauid broughte all
agayne.
20 And Dauid toke the shepe and oxe, and droue ye catell before him. And they
sayde: This is Dauids spoyle.
21 And whan Dauid came to the two hundreth men, which had bene slowe to folowe
after Dauid, and abode at the ryuer of Besor, they wente forth to mete Dauid,
and the people yt was with him. And Dauid came to the people, and saluted them
frendly.
22 Then answered soch men as were euell & Belials men (amonge them that had gone
with Dauid) and sayde: Seynge they wente not wt vs, they shal haue none of the
spoyles that we haue rescued: but let euery ma take his wife & his children and
be goynge.
23 Then sayde Dauid: Ye shall not do so (my brethren) with that which ye LORDE
hath geuen vs, and hath preserued vs, and delyuered these men of warre (which
were come agaynst vs) in to oure hades.
24 Who shulde cosente vnto you herin? like as the porcion is of them that wente
downe to the battayll, so shal ye porcion be of them also that a bode wt the
stuffe, & shalbe deuyded a lyke.
25 From that tyme forth hath this bene an ordinaunce & lawe in Israel vnto this
daye.
26 And whan Dauid came to Siclag, he sent of the spoyle vnto the Elders in Iuda
his neghbours, and sayde: Beholde, there haue ye the blessynge out of the spoyle
of the enemies of the LORDE,
27 namely vnto them of Bethel, vnto them at Ramath in the south, vnto them at
Iathir,
28 vnto them at Aroer, vnto them at Siphamoth, vnto them at Eschemoa,
29 vnto them at Rachal, vnto them in the cities of the Ierahmielites, vnto them
in the cities of the Kenites,
30 vnto them at Horma, vnto the at Borasan, vnto the at Atach,
31 vnto them at Hebron, and vnto all the places where Dauid had walked wt his
men.

Chapter 31

1 Bvt ye Philistynes foughte against Israel, and the men of Israel fled before
the Philistynes, and fell downe smytten vpon the mount Gilboa.
2 And the Philistynes preassed vpon Saul and his sonnes, and slewe Ionathas, &
Abinadab and Malchisua the sonnes of Saul.
3 And the battayll was sore agaynst Saul, & the archers fell vpon him with
bowes, and he was sore wounded of the archers.
4 Then sayde Saul vnto his wapebearer: Drawe out thy swerde, and thrust it
thorow me, that these vncircumcised come not and slaie me, and make a laughinge
stocke of me. Neuertheles his wapenbearer wolde not, for he was sore afrayed.
Then toke Saul ye swerde, and fell therin.
5 Now whan his wapenbearer sawe that Saul was deed, he fell also vpon his
swerde, and dyed with him.
6 Thus dyed Saul and his thre sonnes, & his wapenbearer, and all his men
together the same daye.
7 Whan ye men of Israel which were beyonde the valley, and beyonde Iordane,
sawe, yt the men of Israel were fled, and that Saul and his sonnes were deed,
they lefte ye cities, and fled also. Then came the Philistynes, & dwelt therin.
8 On the nexte daye came the Philistynes to spoyle ye slayne, and founde Saul
and his thre sonnes lyenge vpon mount Gilboa,
9 and smote of his heade, and toke of his harnesse, and sent it in to the lande
of the Philistynes rounde aboute, to shewe it in the house of their Idols, and
amonge the people,
10 & layed his harnesse in ye house of Astaroth: but his body hanged they vp vpo
the wall of Bethsan.
11 Whan they of Iabes in Gilead herde, what the Philistynes had done vnto Saul,
12 they gat them vp, as many as were men of armes, and wente all the nighte, and
toke ye body of Saul, and the bodies of his sonnes from ye wall of Bethsan,
broughte the to Iabes, and brent them there,
13 and toke their bones, and buried them vnder ye tre at Iabes, & fasted seue
dayes.


2 Samuel

Chapter 1

1 After ye death of Saul whan Dauid was come agayne from the slaughter of ye
Amalechites, and had remayned two dayes at Siclag,
2 beholde, on the thirde daye there came a man out of Sauls hoost, with his
clothes rente, and earth vpon his heade. And whan he came vnto Dauid, he fell
downe to the grounde, and worshipped.
3 Dauid sayde vnto him: Whence commest thou? He sayde vnto him: Out of the hoost
of Israel am I fled.
4 Dauid sayde vnto him: Tell me, what is the matter? He sayde: the people is
fled from the battayll, and many of the people are fallen: Yee and Saul also is
deed and his sonne Ionathas.
5 Dauid sayde vnto the yonge ma that brought him this worde: How knowest thou
that Saul and Ionathas his sonne are deed?
6 The yonge man yt tolde him this, sayde: I came by chaunce vnto mount Gelboa,
and beholde, Saul leaned vpon his speare, & the charettes and horsme folowed
harde after him:
7 and he turned him aboute, and sawe me, and called me. And I sayde: Here, am I.
8 And he sayde vnto me: What art thou? I sayde vnto him: I am an Amalechite.
9 And he saide vnto me: Come to me, and kyll me, for anguysh hath gotten holde
of me: for my life is yet whole within me.
10 Then stepte I to him, and slewe him, for I knowe well that he coulde not lyue
after his fall. And I toke the crowne from his heade, and the armelet fro his
arme, and haue broughte it here vnto ye my lorde.
11 Then toke Dauid holde of his clothes, and rente them, and so dyd all the me
that were with him,
12 & mourned, and wepte, and fasted vntyll the euen, ouer Saul & Ionathas his
sonne, and ouer the people of the LORDE, and ouer the house of Israel, because
they were fallen thorow the swerde.
13 And Dauid sayde to the yonge man that broughte him worde: What art thou? He
sayde: I am ye sonne of a straunger an Amalechite.
14 Dauid sayde: How happeneth it that thou wast not afrayed to laye thine hade
vpon the LORDES anointed to destroye him?
15 And Dauid sayde vnto one of his yonge men: Come hither, and slaye him. And he
smote him that he dyed.
16 Then sayde Dauid vnto him: Thy bloude be vpon thyne owne heade. For thy mouth
hath spoken against thyselfe and sayde: I haue slayne the anoynted of the LORDE.
17 And Dauid mourned this lamentacion ouer Saul and Ionathas his sonne,
18 and commaunded to teach the childre of Iuda the bowe. Beholde, it is wrytten
in the boke of the righteous.
19 The Eldest in Israel are slayne vpon the heigth of the. How are the Worthies
falle?
20 Tell it not at Gath: speake not of it in ye stretes at Ascalon: lest the
doughters of ye Philistynes reioyse, lest the doughters of ye vncircumcysed
tryumphe.
21 Ye mountaynes of Gelboa, nether dew ner rayne come vpo you, nether lode be
wherof commeth Heueofferynges: for there is ye shylde of the Worthies smytten
downe, the shylde of Saul, as though he had not bene anoynted with oyle.
22 The bowe of Ionathas fayled not, and the swerde of Saul came not agayne voyde
from the bloude of the slayne, and fro the fat of the giauntes.
23 Saul and Ionathas louely and pleasaut in their lyfe, and in their deeth were
not parted asunder: lighter then Aegles, and stronger then lyons.
24 Ye doughters of Israel wepe ouer Saul which clothed yow with purple in
pleasures, and decked you with Iewels of golde on youre garmentes.
25 How are the Worthies fallen so in the battayll? Ionathas is slayne vpon ye
heigth of the.
26 I am sory for the my brother Ionathas: thou hast bene very louely vnto me:
Thy loue hath bene more speciall vnto me, then the loue of wemen.
27 How are the Worthies fallen, and ye weapens destroyed?

Chapter 2

1 After these actes Dauid axed at the LORDE, and sayde: Shall I go vp in to one
of the cities of Iuda? And the LORDE sayde vnto him: Go vp. Dauid sayde:
Whither? He sayde: Vnto Hebron.
2 So Dauid wente thither with his two wyues, Ahinoam the Iesraelitisse, and
Abigail Nabals wyfe of Carmel.
3 And Dauid broughte vp the men that were him also, euery one with his
housholde, and they dwelt in the cities of Hebron.
4 And ye men of Iuda came, and there they anointed him kynge ouer the house of
Iuda. And wha it was tolde Dauid, that they of Iabes in Gilead had buried Saul,
5 he sent messaungers vnto them, sayenge: Blessed be ye of the LORDE, that ye
haue done soch mercy vpon youre lorde Saul, and haue buried him.
6 The LORDE therfore shewe mercy now and faithfulnes vpon you. And because ye
haue done this, I also wyll do you good.
7 Let youre hade now therfore be comforted, and be ye stronge: for though Saul
youre lorde be deed, yet hath the house of Iuda chosen me to be kynge ouer them.
8 But Abner the sonne of Ner, which was Sauls chefe captayne, toke Isboseth the
sonne of Saul, and broughte him thorow the hoost,
9 and made him kynge ouer Gilead, Assuri, Iesrael, Ephraim, Ben Iamin and ouer
all Israel.
10 And Isboseth the sonne of Saul was fourtye yeare olde, whan he was made kynge
of Israel, & he raigned two yeares. But the house of Iuda helde with Dauid:
11 The tyme yt Dauid was kynge at Hebron ouer the house of Iuda, was seuen yeare
and sixe monethes longe.
12 And Abner the sonne of Ner wete forth with the seruauntes of Isboseth the
sonne of Saul, out of ye hoost vnto Gibeon.
13 And Ioab the sonne of Zeru Ia wete forth with Dauids seruauntes, and they met
together by the pole at Gibeon, and these laye on the one syde of the pole, the
other on the other syde.
14 And Abner sayde vnto Ioab: Let the yonge me get them vp, and playe before vs.
Ioab sayde: Let them aryse.
15 Then gat they them vp, & wente in nombre twolue of Ben Iamin on Isboseth
Sauls sonnes syde, and twolue of Dauids seruauntes.
16 And euery one gat another by the heade, and thrust his swerde in his syde,
and fell together: therfore is the place called Helkath hazurim (that is, the
felde of the Worthies) which is at Gibeon.
17 And there arose a sore harde battayll the same daye. But Abner and the men of
Israel were put to flighte of Dauids seruauntes.
18 Thre sonnes of Zeru Ia were there, Ioab, Abisai & Asahel. As for Asahel, he
was lighte of fete as a Roo in ye felde,
19 & folowed after Abner, and turned not asyde nether to the righte hande ner to
ye lefte from Abner.
20 Then Abner turned him aboute, and sayde: Art thou Asahel? He sayde: Yee.
21 Abner sayde vnto him: Go thy waye ether to the righte hande or to the lefte,
and get the one of ye yonge men, and take his harnesse from him. Neuertheles he
wolde not leaue of fro him.
22 Then sayde Abner agayne to Asahel: Get the awaye fro me, why wilt thou that I
smyte the to the grounde? and how darre I lifte vp my face before yi brother
Ioab?
23 Howbeit he wolde not go his waye. Then Abner thrust him in with a speare in
to his bely, so that the speare wete out behynde him. And there he fell and dyed
before him: and who so came to the place where Asahel laye deed, stode styll
there.
24 But Ioab and Abisai folowed vpon Abner, till the sonne wente downe. And whan
they came to ye hyll of Amma, which lieth before Giah, by ye waye to the
wildernes of Gibeon,
25 the children of Ben Iamin gathered them selues together behynde Abner, and
grewe to a multitude, and stode vpon the toppe of an hyll.
26 And Abner called vnto Ioab, and sayde: Shal the swerde the deuoure without
ende? Knowest thou not, that it wyll be bytter at the last? How longe wil it be
or thou saie vnto the people, that they leaue of from their brethre:
27 Ioab sayde: As truly as God lyueth yf thou haddest sayde thus daye in the
morninge, the people had ceassed euery one from his brother.
28 And Ioab blewe the trompet, & all the people stode still, and folowed nomore
vpon Israel, nether foughte they eny more.
29 Abner and his men wente all that same night ouer the playne felde, and passed
ouer Iordane, & walked thorow all Bithron, and came to the tentes.
30 Ioab turned him from Abner, and gathered all ye people together. And of
Dauids seruauntes there myssed nynetene men, and Asahel.
31 But Dauids seruautes had smytten so amonge Ben Iamin and the men of Abner,
that thre hundreth and thre score men were deed.
32 And they toke vp Asahel, and buried him in his fathers graue at Bethleem. And
Ioab with his men wete all that nighte: and at the breake of the daie they came
vnto Hebron.

Chapter 3

1 And there was a longe battayll betwene the house of Saul and the house of
Dauid. But Dauid wente and increased, and the house of Saul wente and mynished.
2 And vnto Dauid were children borne at Hebron. His firstborne sonne Ammon of
Ahinoam the Iesraelitisse:
3 the seconde Chileab of Abigail the wyfe of Nabal of Carmel: the thirde Absalon
the sonne of Maacha the doughter of Thalmai kynge of Gessur:
4 the fourth Adonia the sonne of Hagith: the fyfth Saphatia the sonne of Abital:
5 ye sixte Ierhream of Egla Dauids wife. These were borne vnto Dauid at Hebron.
6 Now whan it was warre betwene the house of Saul & the house of Dauid, Abner
strengthed Sauls house.
7 And Saul had a concubyne, whose name was Rispa the doughter of Aia. And
Isboseth sayde vnto Abner: Wherfore liest thou with my fathers concubyne?
8 Then was Abner very wroth at these wordes of Isboseth, and sayde: Am I a
dogges heade then, that I agaynst Iuda do mercy vnto the house of Saul thy
father, and vnto his brethren and kynsfolkes? and haue not delyuered the into ye
hande of Dauid, and thou layest a trespace to my charge this daye for a womans
sake?
9 God do Abner this and that, yf I do not as the LORDE hath sworne vnto Dauid,
10 that the kyngdome maye be taken fro the house of Saul, and ye seate of Dauid
set vp ouer Israel and Iuda, from Dan vnto Berseba.
11 Then coulde he not answere him one worde agayne, he feared him so.
12 And Abner sent messaungers vnto Dauid, sayenge: Whose is the londe? And
sayde: Make thy couenaunt with me. Beholde, my hande shall be with the, to turne
all Israel vnto the.
13 He sayde: Wel, I wyll make a couenaunt with the, but one thynge I desyre of
the, that thou se not my face, excepte thou brynge me first Michol Sauls
doughter, whan thou commest to se my face.
14 Dauid sent messaungers also vnto Isboseth the sonne of Saul, sayenge: Geue me
my wyfe Michol, whom I maried with an hundreth foreskinnes of the Philistynes.
15 Isboseth sent, and caused for to take her from the man Palthiel the sonne of
Lais.
16 And hir husbande wente with her, and wepte behynde her vnto Bahurim. Then
sayde Abner vnto him: Turne backe agayne, and go thy waye. And he turned backe
agayne.
17 And Abner talked with the Elders in Israel, and sayde: Youre myndes haue bene
set afore tyme and longe a goo vpon Dauid, that he mighte be kynge ouer you,
18 do it now therfore, for ye LORDE hath sayde of Dauid: I wil delyuer my people
of Israel by the hade of Dauid my seruaunt, from the hande of the Philistynes,
and from the hande of all their enemies.
19 Abner spake also before the eares of Ben Iamin, and wente to speake before
the eares of Dauid at Hebron all that Israel and the whole house of Ben Iamin
was contente withall.
20 Now whan Abner came to Hebron vnto Dauid, and twety men with him, Dauid made
them a feast.
21 And Abner sayde vnto Dauid: I wyll get me vp, and go gather all Israel
together to my lorde the kynge, and that they maye make a couenaunt with the,
that thou mayest be kynge, at thy soules desyre. So Dauid let Abner go from him
in peace.
22 And beholde, Dauid seruautes and Ioab came from the men of warre, and
broughte a greate spoyle with them. And Abner was not now with Dauid at Hebron,
for he had sent him from him, so that he was gone his waye in peace.
23 But whan Ioab and all the hoost with him was come, it was tolde him that
Abner the sonne of Ner came to the kynge, and how he had sent him fro him, so
that he was gone his waye in peace.
24 Then wente Ioab in to the kynge, and sayde: What hast thou done? Beholde,
Abner came to the, why hast thou sent him from the, that he is gone his waye?
25 Knowest thou not Abner the sonne of Ner? For he came to the to disceaue the,
that he mighte knowe thy outgoynge, and ingoynge, and to spie out all that thou
doest.
26 And whan Ioab wente out from Dauid, he sent messaugers after Abner, to fetch
him agayne from Boharsira, and Dauid knewe not therof.
27 Now whan Abner came agayne vnto Hebron, Ioab brought him in to ye middes
vnder ye gate, to talke wt him secretly, and thrust him there in to ye bely that
he dyed, because of his brother Asahels bloude.
28 Whan Dauid knewe of it therafter, he sayde: I am vngiltye, and so is my
kyngdodome for euer before the LORDE concernynge the bloude of Abner ye sonne of
Ner:
29 but vpon the heade of Ioab fall it, and vpon all his fathers house, and in
the house of Ioab there ceasse not one to haue a renninge yssue and a leprosy,
and to go vpon a staffe, and fall thorow the swerde, and to haue scarnesse of
bred.
30 Thus Ioab and his brother Abisai slewe Abner, because he had slayne their
brother Asahel in the battaill at Gibeon.
31 Dauid sayde vnto Ioab and to all ye people yt was with him: Rente youre
clothes, and gyrde sack cloth aboute you, and make lamentacion for Abner. And
the kynge wente after the Bere.
32 And whan they buryed Abner at Hebron, the kynge lifte vp his voyce, and wepte
besyde Abners graue, and all the people wepte also.
33 And the kynge mourned for Abner, and sayde: Abner is not deed as a foole
dyeth.
34 Thy handes were not bounde, thy fete were not vexed with fetters, thou art
fallen as a man falleth before wicked vnthriftes. Then all the people bewayled
him yet more.
35 Now whan all the people came in to eate with Dauid, whyle it was yet hye
daye, Dauid sware, and sayde: God do this and that vnto me, yf I taist ether
bred or oughte els afore the Sone go downe.
36 And all ye people knewe it, and it pleased them well all that ye kynge dyd in
the sighte of all the people.
37 And all the people and all Israel perceaued the same daye, that it came not
of the kynge, that Abner the sonne of Ner was slayne.
38 And the kynge sayde vnto his seruauntes: Knowe ye not that this daye a prynce
and a greate man is fallen in Israel?
39 As for me, I am yet but tender and anoynted kynge. But the men the children
of Zeru Ia are to harde for me. The LORDE recompence him that doth euell,
acordinge to his wickednes.

Chapter 4

1 Whan Sauls sonne herde yt Abner was deed at Hebron, his hades were feble, &
all Israell was sory.
2 But there were two men captaynes ouer the soudyers vnder the sonne of Saul,
the one was called Baena, the other Rehob, sonnes of Rimon ye Berothite, of the
childre of Ben Iamin: for Beroth was couted also in Ben Iamin.
3 And the Berothites were fled vnto Gethaim, & were straugers there vnto this
daye.
4 Ionathas also the sonne of Saul had a sonne which was lame on his fete, & was
fyue yeare olde whan the rumoure of Saul and Ionathas came from Iesrael. And his
norse toke him, and fled. And whyle she made haist and fled, he fell, and was
lame: And his name was Mephiboseth.
5 Then wente the sonnes of Rimon ye Berothite, Rehob & Baena, & came to the
house of Isboseth, in the heate of the daye, & he laye vpo his bed at the noone
daie.
6 And they came in to the house to fetch wheate, & thrust him in the bely, & gat
them awaye.
7 For wha they came into ye house, he laye vpo his bed in his chamber, & they
stickte him to death, & smote of his heade, and toke his heade, and departed by
the waye of the playne felde all that nighte,
8 and broughte the heade of Isboseth to Dauid vnto Hebron, and sayde vnto the
kynge: Beholde, there is the heade of Isboseth the sonne of Saul thine enemye,
which layed wayte for thy soule. This daye hath the LORDE auenged my lorde the
kynge of Saul and his sede.
9 Then answered Dauid vnto Rehob and Baena his brother, ye sonnes of Rimon ye
Berothite, & sayde: As truly as the LORDE lyueth, which hath deliuered my soule
out of all trouble,
10 I toke him yt brought me worde and sayde: Saul is deed, and he thoughte he
had bene a good messaunger, and at Siclag I put him to death, vnto whom I shulde
haue geuen a rewarde for his message.
11 And these vngodly personnes haue slayne a righteous man in his owne house
vpon his bed. Yee shulde not I requyre his bloude of youre handes, and take you
awaye from ye earth?
12 And Dauid commaunded his yonge men, which slewe them, and smote of their
handes and fete, and hanged them vp by ye pole at Hebron. But the heade of
Isboseth toke they, and buried it in Abners graue at Hebron.

Chapter 5

1 And all the trybes of Israel came to Dauid vnto Hebron, and sayde: Beholde, we
are thy bone and thy flesh.
2 And afore tyme wha Saul was kynge ouer vs, thou leddest Israel out and in. So
the LORDE hath sayde: Thou shalt kepe my people of Israel, and shalt be the duke
ouer Israel.
3 And all the Elders in Israel came to ye kynge vnto Hebron. And kynge Dauid
made a couenaunt with them at Hebron before ye LORDE. And they anoynted Dauid to
be kynge ouer Israel.
4 Thyrtie yeare olde was Dauid whan he was made kynge, and reigned fortye
yeares.
5 At Hebron raigned he seue yeares and sixe monethes ouer Iuda: but at Ierusalem
he reigned thre and thirtie yeares ouer all Israel and Iuda.
6 And the kynge wente with his men to Ierusalem, agaynst the Iebusites, which
dwelt in the londe. Neuertheles they sayde vnto Dauid: Thou shalt not come
hither but the blynde and lame shal dryue ye awaie. (They thoughte planely, that
Dauid shulde not come in.)
7 Howbeit Dauid wanne the castell of Sion, which is the cite of Dauid.
8 Then sayde Dauid the same daye: Who so euer smyteth the Iebusites, and
optayneth the perquellies, the lame & the blynde, which (Iebusites) Dauids soule
hateth. Herof cometh the prouerbe: Let no blynde ner lame come in to the house.
9 So Dauid dwelt in ye castell, and called it the cite of Dauid. And Dauid
builded roude aboute fro Millo and within.
10 And Dauid grewe, & the LORDE the God Zebaoth was with him.
11 And Hiram the kynge of Tyre sent messaungers vnto Dauid, and Ceder trees for
walles, and Carpenters, and Masons, to builde Dauid an house.
12 And Dauid knewe, that the LORDE had confyrmed him kynge ouer Israel, and
exalted his kingdome for his people of Israels sake.
13 And Dauid toke yet mo wyues and concubynes at Ierusalem, after he was come
from Hebron, and there were yet mo sonnes & doughters borne vnto him.
14 And these are the names of them that were borne vnto him at Ierusalem: Samma
Sobab, Nathan, Salomon,
15 Iebehar, Elisua, Nepheg, Iaphia,
16 Elisama, Eliada, Eliphalet.
17 And whan the Philistines herde that Dauid was anoynted kinge ouer Israel,
they wete vp all to seke Dauid. Whan Dauid perceaued that, he wete downe in to a
castell.
18 But the Philistynas came and scatered them selues beneth in the valley of
Rephaim.
19 And Dauid axed at the LORDE, and sayde: Shal I go vp agaynst the Philistynes?
and wylt thou delyuer them in to my hande? The LORDE sayde vnto Dauid: Go vp, I
wyll delyuer the Philistynes in to thy hande.
20 And Dauid came vnto Baal Prazim, and smote the there, and sayde: The LORDE
hath deuyded myne enemies, euen as the waters parte asunder: therfore is the
same place called Baal Prazim.
21 And they lefte their ymages there, but Dauid and his men caried the awaye.
22 Neuerthelesse the Philistynes wente vp agayne, and scatered them selues
beneth in the valley of Rephaim.
23 And Dauid axed at the LORDE. The LORDE sayde: Thou shalt go vp, but compase
them behinde, that thou mayest be vpon them ouer agaynst the Peertrees:
24 and whan thou hearest vpon the toppe of the Peertrees, the sounde of the
goinge be bolde, for then is the LORDE gone forth before the, to smyte the hoost
of the Philistines
25 Dauid dyd as the LORDE commaunded him and smote the Philistynes from Geba,
tyll thou commest vnto Gaser.

Chapter 6

1 And Dauid gathered agayne all the yonge chosen men in Israel, euen thre
thousande,
2 and gat him vp, and wente with all the people that was with him of the
citesins of Iuda, to fetch vp the Arke of God from thence: whose name is: The
name of the LORDE Zebaoth dwelleth theron betwene the Cherubins
3 And they caused the arke of God to be caried vpo a new cart, and fetched it
out of ye house of Abinadab, which dwelt at Gibea. Vsa and Ahio the sonnes of
Abinadab droue ye new cart.
4 And whan they broughte it with the Arke from the house of Abinadab which dwelt
at Gibea, Ahio wente before the Arke:
5 and Dauid and all the house of Israel played before the LORDE, with all maner
of instrumentes of Pine tre, with harpes, and Psalteries, and tabrettes, and
belles, and Cymbals.
6 And whan they came to the barnefloore of Nahon, Vsa stretched out his hande,
and helde the Arke of God, for the oxen wete out asyde.
7 Then waxed the wrath of the LORDE fearce agaynst Vsa, and God smote him there
because of his presumpcio, so that he dyed there besyde the Arke of God.
8 Then was Dauid sory, because the LORDE had made soch a rente vpon Vsa, and he
called the same place Perez Vsa vnto this daye.
9 And Dauid feared the LORDE the same daie, and sayde: How shall the Arke of the
LORDE come vnto me?
10 And he wolde not let it be broughte to him in to the cite of Dauid, but
caused it be brought in to ye house of Obed Edom the Gathite.
11 And whan the Arke of the LORDE had contynued thre monethes in the house of
Obed Edom the Gathite, the LORDE blessed him and all his house.
12 And it was tolde kynge Dauid, that the LORDE had blessed the house of Obed
Edo and all that he had because of the Arke of God. Then wente he, and fetched
vp the Arke of God out of ye house of Obed Edom in to the cite of Dauid with
ioye.
13 And wha they were gone sixe steppes in with the Arke of the LORDE, they
offered an oxe and a fat shepe.
14 And Dauid daunsed wt all his mighte before the LORDE, and was girded with an
ouerbody cote of lynne.
15 And Dauid withall Israel brought vp ye Arke of the LORDE with tabrertes and
trompettes.
16 And whan the Arke of the LORDE came into the cite of Dauid, Michol the
doughte of Saul loked out at a window, and sawe kynge Dauid leapynge, sprynginge
and dausynge before the LORDE, and despysed him in hir hert.
17 But whan they brought in ye Arke of the LORDE, they set it in hir place in
the myddes of the Tabernacle, which Dauid had pitched for it. And Dauid offred
burntofferynges and deedofferyges before ye LORDE.
18 And whan Dauid had made an ende of offerynge the burntofferynges and
deedofferynges, he blessed the people in the name of the LORDE Zebaoth,
19 and dealte out vnto all the people, and to the multitude of Israel, both to
man & woma, vnto euery one a cake of bred, and a pece of flesh, and a meece of
potage. Then wente all the people their waye, euery one vnto his house.
20 Whan Dauid came agayne to blesse his house, Michol the doughter of Saul wente
forth to mete him, and sayde: How glorious hath the kynge of Israel bene to
daye, which hath vncouered himselfe before the maydes of his seruauntes, like as
the rascall people discouer them selues.
21 But Dauid saide vnto Michol: I wil playe before ye LORDE, which hath chosen
me afore yi father, and afore all his house, because he hath commaunded me to be
the prynce ouer the people of the LORDE, euen ouer Israel,
22 and yet wyl I be vyler then so, and wyll be lowe in myne owne sighte: and
with the maydens wherof thou hast spoken, wyll I be honoured.
23 As for Michol the doughter of Saul, she had no childe vnto the daye of hir
death.

Chapter 7

1 Now whan the kynge sat in his house, and the LORDE had geuen him rest from all
his enemies on euery syde,
2 he sayde vnto the prophet Nathan: Beholde, I dwell in a house of Cedre, and
the Arke of God dwelleth amonge the curtaynes.
3 Nathan sayde vnto the kynge: Go thy waye, what so euer thou hast in thine
hert, yt do: for the LORDE is wt the.
4 But the same nighte came ye worde of the LORDE vnto Nathan, & sayde:
5 Go & speake to my seruaut Dauid: Thus sayeth ye LORDE: Shalt thou buylde me an
house to dwell in?
6 I haue dwelt in no house sence the daye that I broughte the children of Israel
vnto this daye, but haue walked in the Tabernacle and Habitacion,
7 whither so euer I wente with the children of Israel. Dyd I euer speake to eny
of the trybes of Israel (whom I commaunded to kepe my people of Israel) & sayde:
Wherfore do ye not buylde me an house of Ceder wodd?
8 So shalt thou speake now vnto my seruaunt Dauid: Thus sayeth the LORDE
Zebaoth: I toke the from the pasture whan thou wentest behynde the shepe, yt
thou shuldest be ye prynce ouer my people of Israel,
9 & haue bene wt the whither so euer thou wentest, & haue roted out all thine
enemies before the, & haue made the a greate name, acordinge to the name of the
greate men vpon earth.
10 And for my people of Israel I wyll appoynte a place, and wyll plante them,
that they maye remayne there, nomore to be remoued, and yt the childre of
wickednes oppresse them nomore, like as afore,
11 and sence the tyme that I ordeyned Iudges ouer my people of Israel. And I
wyll geue the rest from all thine enemies. And the LORDE sheweth the, that the
LORDE wyl make the a house.
12 Now whan yi tyme is fulfylled yt thou shalt slepe wt thy fathers, I wil after
ye rayse vp thy syde, which shal come of thy body: his kyngdome wyl I stablishe,
13 he shal buylde an house for my name, and I wyll stablyshe ye seate of his
kyngdome for euer.
14 I wyll be his father, and he shall be my sonne. Whan he doth a trespace, I
wyll reproue him with the rodd of men and with the plages of ye childre of men:
15 But my mercy shal not be withdrawen fro him, as I haue withdrawe it fro Saul,
who I haue take awaye before the.
16 As for yi house & thy kyngdome, it shal be stablished for euer before the, &
thy seate shal endure fast for euermore.
17 Whan Nathan had tolde all these wordes & all this vision vnto Dauid,
18 kynge Dauid came and sat him downe before the LORDE, and sayde: O LORDE God,
who am I? and what is my house, yt thou hast broughte me thus farre?
19 This O LORDE God hast thou thoughte to litle also, but hast spoken of the
house of thy seruaunt yet loge for to come. O LORDE God, is that the lawe of
men?
20 And what shall Dauid speake vnto the? thou knowest thy seruaunt O LORDE God,
21 for thy wordes sake and acordinge to yi hert hast thou done all these greate
thinges, yt thou mightest shewe the vnto thy seruaunt.
22 Therfore art thou greatly magnified O LORDE God: for there is none like the,
& there is no God but thou, acordinge vnto all that we haue herde with or eares.
23 For where is there a people vpon earth as thy people of Israel? For whose
sake God wente to delyuer him a people, and to make him selfe a name, and to do
them soch greate and terrible thinges in thy lode before yt people, whom thou
hast delyuered vnto thy selfe fro Egipte, from the people, and from their
goddes.
24 And thy people of Israel hast thou prepared the to be a people vnto thyne
owne selfe for euer, and thou O LORDE art become their God.
25 Stablish now ye worde therfore for euer (O LORDE God) which thou hast spoke
ouer thy seruaunt & ouer his house, & do acordinge as thou hast sayde.
26 So shall thy name be greate for euer, so that it shal be sayde: The LORDE
Zebaoth is the God ouer Israel, & the house of thy seruaunt Dauid shal be made
sure before the.
27 For thou LORDE Zebaoth, thou God of Israel hast opened the eare of thy
seruaunt, and sayde: I wil buylde the an house. Therfore hath yi seruaunt founde
his hert, to praye this prayer vnto the.
28 Now LORDE God thou thy selfe art God, & thy wordes shal be the trueth. Thou
hast spoken soch good ouer thy seruaunt.
29 Begynne now therfore, and blesse yi seruauntes house, that it maye be before
the for euer, for thou LORDE God thine awne selfe hast spoken it: and with thy
blessynge shal thy seruauntes house be blessed for euer.

Chapter 8

1 And it fortuned after this, yt Dauid smote ye Philistynes, and discomfited
them, and toke the brydell of bondage out of the Philistynes hande.
2 He smote the Moabites also to the grounde, so that he broughte two partes of
them to death, and let one parte lyue. Thus the Moabites were subdued vnto
Dauid, so yt they broughte him giftes.
3 Dauid smote Hadad Eser also the sonne of Rehob kynge of Zoba, whan he wete to
fetch his power agayne at ye water Euphrates.
4 And of them toke Dauid a thousande & seuen hundreth horsmen, and twenty
thousande fote men, and lamed all the charettes, saue an hundreth which he kepte
behynde.
5 But the Siryans came from Damascon to helpe Hadad Eser kynge of Zoba. And
Dauid smote two and twentye thousande men of the Syrians,
6 and layed people vnto Damascus in Syria. Thus was Syria subdued vnto Dauid, so
that they broughte him giftes: for ye LORDE helped Dauid whither so euer he
wente.
7 And Dauid toke ye shyldes of golde, which Hadad Esers seruauntes had, and
broughte them to Ierusalem.
8 But from Bethah & Berothai ye cities of Hadad Eser toke Dauid very moch
brasse.
9 Whan Thoi the kynge of Hemath herde, that Dauid had smytten all the power of
Hadad Eser,
10 he sent his sonne Ioram vnto Dauid to salute him frendly, & to blesse him,
because he had foughten with Adad Eser and smytten him (for Thoi had warre with
Hadad Eser) and had Iewels with him of syluer, of golde, and of brasse:
11 which kynge Dauid halowed also vnto ye LORDE, with the syluer and golde which
he sanctified vnto the LORDE from all the Heythe, whom he subdued,
12 from Siria, fro Moab, from the childre of Ammon, from the Philistynes, fro
Amalek, from the spoyle of Hadad Eser ye sonne of Rehob kynge of Zoba.
13 Dauid gat him selfe a name also whan he came, and smote eightene thousande of
ye Sirians in ye Salt valley.
14 And he layed people in all Edomea, and all Edem was subdued vnto Dauid: for
the LORDE helped Dauid, whither so euer he wente.
15 Thus was Dauid kynge ouer all Israel. And he executed iudgmente and
righteousnes vnto all ye people.
16 Ioab ye sonne of Zeru Ia was captayne ouer the hoost. Iosaphat the sonne of
Ahilud was Chaunceler.
17 Zadok the sonne of Achitob, & Ahimelech the sonne of Abiathar were prestes.
Seraia was Scrybe.
18 Benaia the sonne of Ioiada was ouer ye Chrethians & Plethians. And the sonnes
of Dauid were prestes.

Chapter 9

1 And Dauid sayde: Remayneth there yet eny man of Sauls house, that I maye do
mercy vpon him for Ionathas sake?
2 There was a seruaunt of Sauls house, named Siba, whom they called vnto Dauid,
& the kynge sayde vnto him: Art thou Siba? He sayde: Yee thy seruaunt.
3 The kynge sayde: Is there yet eny man of Sauls house, yt I maye do the mercy
of God vpon him? Siba sayde vnto the kynge: There is yet a sonne of Ionathas,
lame on his fete.
4 The kynge sayde vnto him: Where is he? Siba sayde vnto ye kynge: Beholde, he
is at Ladober in ye house of Machir ye sonne of Ammuel.
5 The sent kynge Dauid thither, & caused for to fetch him from Lodaber out of ye
house of Machir the sonne of Ammuel.
6 Now whan Mephiboseth the sonne of Ionathas the sonne of Saul came vnto Dauid,
he fell vpon his face, & worshiped him. Dauid sayde: Mephiboseth. He sayde: Here
am I thy seruaunt.
7 Dauid sayde vnto him: Feare not, for I wyll do mercy vpon the for thy father
Ionathas sake, and wil restore vnto the all the londe of thy father Saul: but
thou shalt eate bred daylie at my table.
8 He worshiped and sayde: Who am I thy seruaunt, that thou turnest the to a deed
dogg as I am?
9 Then the kynge called Siba ye seruaunt of Saul, and sayde vnto him: All yt
hath belonged vnto Saul & to all his house,
10 haue I geuen to thy lordes sonne. Tyll his londe for him therfore, thou & thy
children & seruauntes, & brynge it in, yt it maye be bred for yi lordes sonne,
and yt he maye enioye it: but Mephiboseth yi lordes sonne shal eate bred daylie
at my table. Siba had fyftene sonnes & twentye seruauntes.
11 And Siba sayde vnto ye kynge: Acordinge vnto all as my lorde the kynge hath
commaunded his seruaunt, so shal his seruaunt do. And let Mephiboseth (sayde
Dauid) eate at my table, as one of the kynges owne children.
12 And Mephiboseth had a yoge sonne, whose name was Micha. But all yt dwelt in
the house of Siba, serued Mephiboseth.
13 As for Mephiboseth him selfe, he dwelt at Ierusalem: for he ate daylie at the
kynges table and was lame on both his fete.

Chapter 10

1 And it fortuned after this, that ye kynge of the children of Ammon dyed, & his
sonne Hanun was kynge in his steade.
2 Then sayde Dauid: I wyll do mercy vpon Hanun the sonne of Nahas, as his father
dyd mercy vpon me. And so he sent, and comforted him by his seruautes ouer his
fathers death. Now whan Dauids seruautes came into the londe of the children of
Ammon,
3 the mightie men of the children of Ammon sayde vnto Hanun their lorde:
Thynkest thou it is for the honor of yi father in yi sighte, yt Dauid hath sent
comforters vnto the? Hath he not sent his seruauntes vnto ye (thynkest thou) to
spye and search out the cite and to ouerthrowe it?
4 Then toke Hanun the seruauntes of Dauid, and shoue of the one halue of their
beerdes, and cut of the halfe of their garmetes euen by the girdell, and so let
them go.
5 Wha this was tolde Dauid, he sent to mete them: for the men were put to greate
shame. And the kynge caused to saye vnto them: Abyde at Iericho, tyll youre
beerdes be growne, & then come agayne.
6 Whan the childre of Ammon sawe that they stynked in the sighte of Dauid, they
sent and hyred the Sirians of the house of Rehob, and the Sirians at Zoba euen
twentye thousande fote men, and from the kynge of Maecha a thousande men, and
from Istob twolue thousande men.
7 Whan Dauid herde that, he sent Ioab with all the hoost of ye men of warre.
8 And the children of Ammon wente forth, and prepared them selues to ye battayll
before the intraunce of the gate. But the Siryans of Soba, of Rehob, of Istob
and of Maecha were alone in the felde.
9 Now whan Ioab sawe that the battayll was set vpo him before and behynde, he
chose of all the best yonge men in Israel, & prepared him selfe agaynst the
Syrians.
10 And the resydue of the people put he vnder the hande of his brother Abisai,
that he mighte prepare him agaynst the childre of Ammon.
11 And sayde: Yf ye Syrians be to mightie for me, helpe thou me: but yf the
children of Ammon be to mightie for the, I shal helpe the.
12 Take a good corage vnto the, and let vs be stronge for oure people, and for
ye cite of oure God: neuertheles the LORDE do what pleaseth him.
13 And Ioab made him forth with the people that was with him, to fighte agaynst
the Syrians: and they fled before him.
14 And whan the children of Ammon sawe that the Syrians fled, they fled also
before Abisai, & wente in to the cite. So Ioab turned agayne from the children
of Ammon, & came to Ierusalem.
15 And whan the Syrians sawe yt they were smytten before Israel, they came
together.
16 And Hadad Eser sent & broughte out ye Syrians beyonde the water, and conueyed
their power in, & Sobath the chefe captayne of Hadad Eser wente before the.
17 Whan this was tolde Dauid, he gathered all Israel together, & wente ouer
Iordane, and came to Helam, & the Syrians prepared them selues against Dauid to
fighte with him,
18 howbeit the Syrians fled before Israel. And Dauid slewe of the Syrians seue
hundreth charettes, & fortye thousande horsme, & Sobath the chefe captayne smote
he also, so that he dyed there.
19 Whan the kynges which were vnder Adad Eser, sawe, that they were smytten
before Israel, they made peace with Israel, and were subdued vnto them. And the
Syrians were afrayed to helpe the children of Ammon enymore.

Chapter 11

1 And whan ye yeare came aboute what tyme as ye kynges vse to go forth, Dauid
sent Ioab and his seruautes with him, and all Israel, to destroye the children
of Ammon, and to laye sege vnto Rabba: but Dauid abode at Ierusalem.
2 And aboute the euetyde it fortuned that Dauid arose from his restinge place, &
wente vp to ye toppe of the kynges palace, and from ye toppe he sawe a woman
wasshinge hir selfe, and the woman was of a very fayre bewtye.
3 And Dauid sent, and caused to axe what woman it was, and sayde: Is not that
Bethseba the doughter of Eliam the wife of Vrias the Hethite?
4 And Dauid sent messaugers, and caused for to fetch her. And wha she was come
in vnto him, he laye with her. Neuertheles she halowed hir selfe from hir
vnclennes, and turned agayne vnto hir house.
5 And the woma was with childe, and sent, and caused to tell Dauid and to saye:
I am with childe.
6 Dauid sent vnto Ioab (sayege:) Sende me Vrias ye Hethite. And Ioab sent Vrias
vnto Dauid.
7 And whan Vrias came to him, Dauid axed him yf it stode well with Ioab, and
with the people and with the battayll.
8 And Dauid sayde to Vrias: Go downe in to thy house, and wash thy fete. And
whan Vrias wente out of the kynges palace, the kynges gifte folowed him.
9 And Vrias layed him downe to slepe before the kynges palace gate, where all
his lordes seruauntes laye, & wente not downe in to his house.
10 Whan worde came to Dauid: Vrias is not gone downe in to his house, Dauid
sayde vnto him: Camest thou not ouer the felde? Why wentest thou not downe in to
thy house?
11 Vrias sayde vnto Dauid: The Arke and Israel & Iuda abyde in the tentes: And
Ioab my lorde and my lordes seruauntes lye in ye felde, and shal I go in to my
house to eate and drynke, and to lye with my wife? As truly as thou lyuest, and
as truly as thy soule lyueth, I wyll not do this thinge.
12 Dauid sayde vnto Vria: Abyde here then to daye, tomorow wil I let the go. So
Vrias abode at Ierusalem the same daye, and the nexte also.
13 And Dauid called him to eate & drynke before him, & made him dronken. And at
euen he wente to lye him downe for to slepe vpon his couche with his lordes
seruauntes, and wente not downe in to his house.
14 On the morow wrote Dauid a letter vnto Ioab, & sent it by Vrias.
15 After this maner wrote he in the letter: Set Vrias in ye forest parte of ye
batayll, & turne you behynde him, yt he maye be slayne.
16 Now wha Ioab layed sege to the cite, he set Vrias in ye place, where he knewe
yt the mightiest men of Armes were.
17 And whan the men of the cite fell out and foughte agaynst Ioab, there fell
certayne of ye people of Dauids seruauntes. And Vrias the Hethite dyed also.
18 Then sent Ioab, and caused to tell ye kynge all the matter concernynge the
battayll,
19 and comaunded the messaunger, and sayde: Whan thou hast tolde ye kynge all
the matter concernynge the batayll,
20 and seist that he is wroth, and yf the kynge saye vnto the: Wherfore came ye
so nye the cite with the batayll? Knowe ye not how they vse to shute from the
wall?
21 Who smote Abimelech the sonne of Ierubaall? Dyd not a woma cast a pece of a
mylstone vpo him from the wall, so that he dyed at Thebez? Why came ye so nye
the wall? Then shalt thou saye: Thy seruaunt Vrias the Hethite is deed also.
22 The messaunger wente his waye, and came and tolde Dauid all together,
wherfore Ioab had sent him.
23 And the messaunger sayde vnto Dauid: The men preuayled against vs, and fell
out vnto vs in to ye felde: and we were vpon them harde at the dore of ye porte.
24 And the archers shot from the wall vpon thy seruauntes, and slewe certayne of
the kynges seruauntes: and thy seruaunt Vrias the Hethite is deed also.
25 Dauid sayde vnto the messaunger: Thus shalt thou saye vnto Ioab: Let not yt
vexe the, for the swerde consumeth now one now another. Go forth with the
battayll against the cite, that thou mayest destroye it, and coforte the men.
26 And whan Vrias wife herde that Vrias was deed, she mourned for hir husbande.
27 But wha she had made an ende of mournynge, Dauid sent, and caused her be
fetched vnto his palace, and she became his wyfe, and bare him a sonne.
Neuertheles this dede yt Dauid dyd, displeased the LORDE.

Chapter 12

1 And the LORDE sent Nathan vnto Dauid. Whan he came to him, he tolde him: There
were two men in one cite, the one riche, the other poore.
2 The riche man had very many shepe and oxen:
3 but the poore man had nothinge saue one litle shepe, which he had boughte, and
norished it, so that it grewe vp with him and his children together. It ate of
his bred, and dranke of his cuppe, and slepte in his lappe, and he helde it as a
doughter.
4 But whan there came a straunger vnto the riche man, he spared to take of his
awne shepe & oxen (to prepare oughte for the straunger that was come vnto him)
and toke the poore mans shepe, and prepared it for the man that was come vnto
him.
5 The was Dauid wroth with greate displeasure agaynst that man, and sayde vnto
Nathan: As truly as the LORDE lyueth, the man that hath done this, is the childe
of death.
6 The shepe also shal he make good foure folde, because he hath done soch a
thinge, and not spared it.
7 Then sayde Nathan vnto Dauid: Thou art euen the man. Thus sayeth the LORDE the
God of Israel: I haue anoynted the to be kynge ouer Israel, and delyuered the
out of the hande of Saul,
8 and haue geuen the yi lordes house, and his wyues into thy lappe, and the
house of Israel and Iuda haue I geuen the: and yf that be to litle, I wyl yet do
this and that for the also.
9 Wherfore hast thou then despysed the worde of the LORDE, to do soch euell in
his sighte? Vrias the Hethite hast thou slayne with the swerde: His wife hast
thou taken to be thy wyfe, but him hast thou slayne with ye swerde of the
children of Ammon.
10 Now therfore shal not ye swerde departe from thy house for ouer, because thou
hast despysed me, and taken the wife of Vrias the Hithite, to be thy wife.
11 Thus sayeth the LORDE: Beholde, I wyll rayse vp euell of thyne awne house,
and wyll take thy wyues before thyne eyes, and wyl geue them vnto thy neghboure,
so that he shall lye with thy wyues by Sonnelighte.
12 For thou hast done it secretly, but I wyl do this in the sighte of all
Israel, and by Sonne lighte.
13 Then sayde Dauid vnto Nathan I haue synned vnto the LORDE. Nathan sayde vnto
Dauid: So hath the LORDE also taken awaye thy synne, thou shalt not dye.
14 But for so moch as thou thorow this dede hast caused the enemies of the LORDE
to blaspheme, ye sonne that is borne vnto the, shall dye the death.
15 And Nathan wente home. As for the childe which Vrias wife bare vnto Dauid,
the LORDE smote it, so that it was deedsicke.
16 And Dauid besoughte God for the childe, and fasted, and wente in, and laie
all nighte vpon the earth.
17 Then rose the Elders of his house, and wolde haue taken him vp fro the
grounde: neuertheles he wolde not, nether ate he wt them.
18 Vpon the seuenth daye ye childe dyed. And Dauids seruauntes durst not tell
him that the childe was deed. For they thoughte: Beholde, whan the childe was
yet alyue, we spake vnto him, and he herkened not vnto oure voyce, How moch more
shall it greue him, yf we saye: The childe is deed?
19 And Dauid sawe that his seruauntes made a whisperinge together, and perceaued
that the childe was deed, and sayde vnto his seruauntes: Is the childe deed?
They sayde: Yee.
20 Then rose Dauid vp from the earth, and wasshed him selfe, and anoynted him,
and put on other garmentes, & wente in to the house of the LORDE, and
worshipped. And whan he came agayne, he commaunded to set bred before him, and
ate.
21 Then sayde his seruauntes vnto him: What maner of thinge is this that thou
doest? Whan the childe was alyue, thou fastedst and weptest: but now that it is
deed, thou stodest up and eatest?
22 He sayde: I fasted and wepte for the childe whan it was yet a lyue, for I
thoughte: Who knoweth, peraduenture the LORDE maye be gracious vnto me, that the
childe maye lyue.
23 But now that it is deed, wherfore shulde I fast? Can I fetch it agayne. I
shal go vnto it, but it shall not come agayne vnto me.
24 And whan Dauid had comforted Bethseba his wife, he wente in vnto her, and
laye with her. And she bare a sonne, whom he called Salomon. And the LORDE loued
him.
25 And he put him vnder the hade of Nathan ye prophet, which called him Iedidia
because of the LORDE.
26 So Ioab foughte agaynst Rabba of ye children of Ammon, and wanne the kynges
cite,
27 & sent messaugers vnto Dauid, & caused to saye vnto him: I haue foughte
against Rabba, and haue wonne the water cite also.
28 Gather thou therfore the residue of the people together, and laye sege to ye
cite, and wynne it, that I wynne it not, and haue the name therof.
29 So Dauid gathered all ye people together, and wente, & foughte agaynst Rabba,
and wanne it,
30 and toke their kynges crowne fro his heade (which in weight had a talente of
golde, and precious stones) and was set vpon Dauids heade, and very moch spoyle
caried he out of the cite.
31 As for the people that was therin, he broughte the forth, and layed them
vnder yron sawes and hokes and wedges of yron, and burned the in tyle ouens.
Thus dyd he vnto all the cities of the children of Ammon. Then returned Dauid
and all the people vnto Ierusalem agayne.

Chapter 13

1 And it fortuned after this, that Absalom ye sonne of Dauid had a fayre sister,
whose name was Thamar, & Ammon the sonne of Dauid loued her.
2 And Ammon was in greate combraunce, in so moch that he was euen sicke, because
of Thamar his sister. For she was a virgin, and Ammon thoughte it shulde beharde
for him to do eny thinge vnto her.
3 But Ammon had a frede, whose name was Ionadab the sonne of Simea Dauids
brother, And the same Ionadab was a very wyse man,
4 which sayde vnto him: Why art thou so leane (thou kynges sonne) from daye to
daye? Mayest thou not tell me? Then sayde Ammon vnto him: I loue Thamar my
brother Absaloms sister exceadingly.
5 Ionadab sayde vnto him: laye the downe vpon thy bedd, and make the sicke. And
whan thy father commeth to loke how thou doest, saye vnto him: Oh let my sister
Thamar come, that she maye fede me, and make a meece of meate before me, that I
maye se it, & eate it of hir hande.
6 So Ammon layed him downe, and made him sicke. Now wha the kynge came in to
loke how he dyd, Ammon sayde vnto the kynge: Oh let my sister Thamar come, and
make me a syppynge or two, and that I maye eate it of hir hande.
7 Then sent Dauid for Thamar in to the house, and sayde vnto her: Go thy waye to
thy brother Ammons house, & make him a meece of meate.
8 Thamar wente vnto hir brother Amons house, but he laye in his bed. And she
toke floure, and mixte it, and dighte it before his eyes, and made him a
syppynge.
9 And she toke the meece of meate, and poured it out before him: but he wolde
not eate.
10 And Ammon saide: Put forth euery man fro me. And euery man wete forth from
him. Then sayde Ammon vnto Thamar: Brynge me that meece of meate in to the
chamber, that I maye eate it of thy hande. Then toke Thamar ye syppynge that she
had made, and broughte it vnto Ammon hir brother into the chamber.
11 And whan she broughte it vnto him yt he mighte eate, he toke holde of her, &
sayde vnto her: Come my sister, lye with me.
12 Neuertheles she saide: Oh no my brother, force me not: for so do they not in
Israel, do not thou soch foly.
13 Whither shal I go with my shame? And thou shalt be as one of the vnwyse in
Israel. But speake vnto the kynge, he shal not withholde me from the.
14 Howbeit he wolde not herken vnto her, and ouercame her, forced her, and laye
with her.
15 And Ammon hated her exceadingly, so that the hate was greater then the loue
was before. And Ammon sayde vnto her: Vp, and get the hence.
16 She saide vnto him: This euell that thou thrustest me out, is greater then
the other, that thou hast done vnto me. Neuertheles he herkened not vnto her,
17 but called his boye that serued him, and sayde: Put awaye this woman fro me,
and locke the dore after her.
18 And she had a partye garment on: for soch garmentes wayre ye kynges doughters
whyle they were virgins. And wha his seruaunt had put hir forth, & lockte the
dore after her,
19 Thamar strowed asshes vpon hir heade, and rente the partye garment which she
had vpon her, and layed hir hande vpon hir heade, and wente on, and cryed.
20 And hir brother Absalom sayde vnto her: Hath thy brother Ammon bene with the?
Now holde thy peace my sister, it is thy brother, and take not the matter so to
hert. So Thamar remayned a wyddowe in brother Absaloms house.
21 And whan kynge Dauid herde of all this, he was very sory.
22 As for Absalom, he spake nether euell ner good to Ammon: but Absalom hated
Ammon, because he had forced his sister Thamar.
23 After two yeares had Absalom shepe clyppers at Baal Hazor, which lyeth by
Ephraim. And Absalom called all the kynges children,
24 and came to the kynge, and sayde: Beholde, thy seruaunt hath shepe clyppers,
let it please ye kynge with his seruauntes to go with his seruaunte.
25 But the kynge sayde vnto Absalom: No my sonne, let vs not all go, lest we be
to chargeable vnto the. And he wolde nedes haue had him to go, howbeit he wolde
not, but blessed him.
26 Absalom sayde: Shall my brother Ammon go with vs then? The kynge sayde vnto
him: Wherfore shall he go with the?
27 Then was Absalom so importune vpon him, that he let Ammon and all the kynges
childre go with him.
28 But Absalom commaunded his yongemen, and sayde: Take hede whan Ammon is mery
with wyne (and I saye vnto you: Smyte Ammon, and slaye him) that ye be not
afrayed: for I haue commaunded you, be stronge, and playe the men.
29 So Absaloms yonge men dyd vnto Ammon, as Absalom had commaunded them. Then
stode all the kynges children vp, and euery one gat him vp vpo his Mule, and
fled.
30 And whyle they were yet on their waye, the rumoure came to kynge Dauid, that
Absalom had slayne all the kynges children, so that not one of them was lefte.
31 Then stode the kynge vp, and rente his clothes, & layed him downe vpon the
earth, and all his seruautes that stode aboute him, rente their clothes.
32 Then answered Ionadab ye sonne of Simea Dauids brother, and sayde: Let not my
lorde thynke that all the yonge men the kynges children are deed, but yt Ammon
is deed onely: for Absalom hath kepte it in him selfe sence the daie that he
forced his sister Thamar.
33 Therfore let not my lorde the kynge take it so to hert, that all the kynges
children shulde be deed, but that Ammon is deed onely.
34 As for Absalom, he fled. And the yongeman that kepte the watch, lifte vp his
eyes, and loked, and beholde, A greate people came in the waye one after another
by the hill syde.
35 Then sayde Ionadab vnto the kynge: Beholde, the kynges children come. Euen as
thy seruaunt sayde, so is it happened.
36 And whan he had ended his talkynge, the kynges children came, and lifte vp
their voyce, and wepte. The kynge and all his seruauntes wepte also very sore.
37 But Absalom fled, and wente vnto Thalmai the sonne of Ammihud kynge of Gesur.
As for Dauid, he mourned for his sonne euery daye.
38 Whan Absalom was fled and gone vnto Gesur, he was there thre yeare.
39 And kynge Dauid ceassed from goinge out agaynst Absalom, for he had comforted
him selfe ouer Ammon that he was deed.

Chapter 14

1 Ioab the sonne of Ieru Ia perceaued yt the kynges hert was agaynst Absalom,
2 and sent vnto Thecoa, and caused to fetch from thence a prudent woman and
saide vnto her: Make lametacion, and weere mournynge garmentes, & anoynte the
not with oyle: but fayne thy selfe as a woman which hath mourned longe ouer a
deed,
3 and thou shalt go in to the kynge, and speake for so vnto him. And Ioab tolde
her what she shulde saye.
4 And whan the woman of Thecoa wolde speake with the kynge, she fell vpon hir
face to the grounde, and worshipped, and sayde: Helpe me O kynge.
5 The kynge sayde vnto her: What ayleth the? She sayde: I am a wedowe, a woman
that mourneth, and my husbade is deed.
6 And thy handmayde had two sonnes, which stroue together in the felde: and
whyle there was noman to parte the a sunder, the one smote the other, and slewe
him.
7 And beholde, all the whole kynred ryseth vp agaynst thy handmayden, and saye:
Delyuer him which hath smytten his brother, that we maye kyll him, for the soule
of his brother whom he hath slayne, and that we maye destroye the heyre also.
And thus are they mynded to put out my sparke, which yet is lefte, that there
shulde no name ner eny thinge els remayne ouer vnto my husbade vpon earth.
8 The kynge sayde vnto the woman: Go ye waye home, I wil geue a comaudemet for
ye.
9 And the woman of Thecoa saide vnto ye kynge: The trespace be vpon me (my lorde
ye kynge) and vpon my fathers house: but the kynge and his seate be vngiltye.
10 The kynge sayde: He that speaketh agaynst the, brynge him vnto me, so shall
he touch the nomore.
11 She sayde: Let the kynge thynke vpon the LORDE his God, that there be not to
many auengers of bloude to destroye, and that they brynge not my sonne to
naught. He sayde: As truly as the LORDE lyueth, there shall not one heer of thy
sonne fall vpon the earth.
12 And the woman sayde: Let thy handmayde speake somwhat to my lorde the kynge.
He sayde: speake on.
13 The woman sayde: Wherfore hast thou deuised soch a thinge agaynst the people
of God? And how happeneth it that the kynge speaketh soch, to make himselfe
giltie, and causeth not his outlawe to be broughte agayne?
14 For we all dye the death, and as the water that sinketh in to the earth,
which is not taken vp. And God will not take awaye the lyfe, but vnbethynketh
himselfe, yt euen the very outlawe be not cleane thrust out from him.
15 Thus am I come also to speake this to my lorde the kynge in the presence of
the people, for thy handmayden thoughte: I wyll speake to the kynge,
peraduenture he shall do that his handmayden sayeth,
16 for he shall heare his handmayden, to delyuer me from the hande of all them,
that wolde destroye me with my sonne from the enheritaunce of God.
17 And thy handmayden thoughte, ye worde of my lorde the kynge shall be as a
meatofferynge, for my lorde the kinge is as an angell of God, so that he can
heare good and euell, therfore shall the LORDE thy God be with the.
18 The kynge answered and sayde vnto the woman: Kepe nothynge fro me that I axe
the. The woman sayde: Let my lorde the kinge speake on.
19 The kynge sayde: Is not the hande of Ioab with the in all this? The woman
answered and sayde: As truly as thy soule lyueth (my lorde O kynge,) there is
els noman nether at the righte hande ner at ye lefte, but euen as my LORDE the
kynge hath sayde, for thy seruaunt Ioab hath commaunded me, and he himselfe hath
taughte thy handmayden all these wordes,
20 that I shulde turne this matter of this fasshio, this hath Ioab thy seruaunt
done. But my lorde is wyse, as the wysdome of an angell of God, so that he
knoweth all thynges vpon earth.
21 Then sayde the kynge vnto Ioab: Beholde, I haue done this: go thy waye
therfore and brynge the childe Absalom agayne.
22 Then fell Ioab vpon his face vnto the grounde, and worshipped, and thanked
the kynge, and sayde: This daye doth thy seruaunt perceaue, that I haue founde
grace in thy syghte my lorde the kynge, in that the kynge doth as his seruaunt
hath sayde.
23 So Ioab gat him vp, and wente vnto Gesur, and broughte Absalom to Ierusalem.
24 But the kinge sayde: Let him go againe in to his house, and not se my face.
Thus Absalom came agayne to his house, and sawe not ye kynges face.
25 But in all Israel there was not so fayre, and so maruelous goodly a man, as
Absalom. From the sole of his fote vnto the toppe of his heade there was not one
blemysh in him.
26 And whan his heade was rounded (that was comonly euery yeare, for it was to
heuy for him, so that it must nedes haue bene rounded) the heer of his heade
weyed two hudreth Sicles after ye kynges weight.
27 And vnto Absalom there were borne thre sonnes and one doughter, whose name
was Thamar, and she was a woman of a fayre bewtye:
28 So Absalom abode two yeare at Ierusalem, and sawe not the kynges face.
29 And Absalom sent for Ioab, that he mighte sende him to the kynge. And he
wolde not come to him. But he sent the seconde tyme, yet wolde he not come.
30 Then sayde he vnto his seruauntes: Ye knowe Ioabs pece of londe that lyeth by
myne, and he hath barlye theron: go youre waye therfore and set fyre vpon it. So
Absaloms seruauntes sett fyre vpon Ioabs pece of londe.
31 Then Ioab gat him vp, and came to Absalom in to the house, and sayde vnto
him: Wherfore haue thy seruauntes set fire vpon my pece of londe?
32 Absalo sayde vnto Ioab: Beholde, I sent for the, and caused to saye vnto the:
Come hither, that I maye sende the to the kynge, and to saye: Wherfore came I
from Gesur? It were better for me that I were there yet. Let me therfore se the
kynges face. But yf there be eny trespace in me, then put me to death.
33 And Ioab wente in to the kynge, and tolde him. And he called Absalom, to come
in to the kynge, and he worshipped vpon his face to the grounge before the
kynge. And the kynge kyssed Absalom.

Chapter 15

1 And after this it fortuned that Absalom caused to prepare himselfe chearettes
and horses, and fyftye men, which were his fote me.
2 And Absalo gat him vp allwaye early in the mornynge, and stode in the waye by
the porte: and whan eny man had a matter which shulde come to the kynge for
iudgment, Absalom called vnto him and sayde: Of what cite art thou? Yf he sayde
then: thy seruaunt is of one of the trybes of Israel,
3 then sayde Absalom vnto him: Beholde, thy matter is righte and plaine: but
there is noman appoynted ye of the kynge to heare the.
4 And Absalom sayde: O who setteth me to be iudge in ye londe, that euery man
which hath a plee or matter to do in ye lawe, might come to me, that I might
helpe him to right
5 And whan eny man came to him to do worshippe & to do him obeisaunce, he put
forth his hade, and helde him & kyssed him.
6 After this maner dyd Absalom vnto all Israel whan they came to the lawe vnto
the kynge, and so dyd he steale awaye the hert of ye men of Israel.
7 After fortye yeares sayde Absalom vnto the kynge: I wil go and perfourme my
vowe at Hebron, which I made vnto the LORDE.
8 For thy seruaunt made a vowe, whan I dwelt at Gesur in Siria, and saide: Whan
ye LORDE bryngeth me agayne to Ierusalem, I shal do a Gods seruyce vnto the
LORDE.
9 The kynge sayde vnto him: Go thy waye in peace. And he gat him vp, and wente
vnto Hebron.
10 But Absalom had sent out spyes in all the trybes of Israel, sayenge: Whan ye
heare the noyse of the trompe, saye: Absalom is made kynge at Hebron.
11 There wente with Absalom two hundreth men called from Ierusalem, but they
wente on symply, and knewe not of the matter.
12 Absalom sent also for Achitophel (the Gilonyte) Dauids counceler, out of his
cite Gilo. Now whan he did the sacrifice, the conspiracion was mightie and the
people ranne together, and multyplied with Absalom.
13 Then came one which tolde Dauid, and sayde, that the hert of euery man in
Israel folowed Absalom.
14 Dauid sayde vnto all his seruauntes that were with him at Ierusalem: Vp, let
vs fle, for here shall be no escapynge for vs before Absalom. Make haist that we
maye be goynge, lest he ouertake vs and catch vs, and dryue some mysfortune vpon
vs, and smyte the cyte with the edge of the swerde.
15 Then sayde the kynges seruauntes vnto him: Loke what my LORDE ye kinge
choseth, beholde, here are thy seruauntes.
16 And the kynge wente forth on fote wt all his housholde. But ten concubynes
lefte he to kepe the house.
17 And whan the kynge and all the people came forth on fote, they wete farre
from home,
18 and all his seruauntes wente by him, and all the Chrethians and Plethians,
and all the Gethites (euen sixe hundreth men) which were come on fote from Gath,
wente before the kynge.
19 And the kynge sayde vnto Ithai ye Gethite: Why goest thou also with vs? Turne
backe, and byde with the kynge, for thou art a straunger: get the hence agayne
vnto thy place.
20 Thou camest yesterdaye, and to daye thou iuperdest to go with vs: As for me,
I wyl go whither I can: turne thou backe agayne, and mercy and faithfulnes
happen vnto thy brethren with the.
21 Ithai answered, and sayde: As truly as the LORDE lyueth, and as truly as my
lorde the kynge lyueth, loke in what place my lorde the kynge shalbe, (whether
it chaunce to life or death) there shal thy seruaunt be also.
22 Dauid sayde vnto Ithai: Then come, and go with vs. So wente Ithai the Gethite
and all his men, and the whole multitude of the children that were with him.
23 And all the lande wepte with loude voyce, and all the people with them. And
the kynge wete ouer the broke Cedron, and all the people wente ouer by the waye
that goeth to the wyldernes.
24 And beholde, Sadoc was there also, and all the Leuites that were with them, &
they bare ye Arke of the couenuat of God, and set it there. And Abiathar wente
vp, tyll all the people came out of the cite.
25 But the kynge sayde vnto Sadoc: Brynge the Arke of God into the cite agayne.
Yf I shal fynde grace before the LORDE, he shall fetch me agayne, and shall let
me se it, and the house of it.
26 But yf he saye thus: I haue no pleasure to ye, beholde, here am I, let him do
with me as it pleaseth him.
27 And the kynge saide vnto Sadoc ye prest: O thou Seer, turne agayne to ye cite
with peace, and Ahimaas thy sonne with the and Ionathas the sonne of Abiathar:
28 beholde, I wyl tary in the playne of the wyldernes, tyll the message come
from you, and tell me.
29 So Sadoc and Abiathar broughte the Arke of God agayne to Ierusalem, and
remayned there.
30 But Dauid wente vp to mount Olyuete and wepte, & his heade was couered. And
all the people that was with him, had euery man his heade couered and wente on
and wepte.
31 And whan it was tolde Dauid, that Achitophel was in the cofederacy with
Absalom, he sayde: LORDE turne thou Achitophels councell to foolishnes.
32 And whan Dauid came vp to the toppe of the mount, where the vse was to
worshippe God, Chusai the Arachite met him with his cote rent, and earth vpon
his heade.
33 And Dauid sayde vnto him: Yf thou go with me, thou shalt be chargeable vnto
me:
34 but yf thou goest agayne in to the cite, and sayest vnto Absalom: I am thy
seruaunt O kynge euen as I was thy fathers seruaunt, so wyll I now be thy
seruaunt, Then shalt thou brynge Achitophels councell to naughte.
35 So is Sadoc and Abiathar ye prestes with the, and all that thou hearest out
of the kynges house, tell it vnto Sadoc and Abiathar the prestes.
36 Beholde, their two sonnes are with the: Ahimaas the sonne of Sadoc, and
Ionathas the sonne of Abiathar, by them mayest thou sende me worde what thou
hearest.
37 So Chusai Dauids frende came in to the cite. And Absalom came to Ierusalem.

Chapter 16

1 And whan Dauid was gone a lytle by from the toppe of the mount, beholde, Siba
the seruaut of Mephiboseth met him with a couple of asses sadled, wheron were
two hundreth loaues of bred, and an hundreth quantities of rasyns and an hudreth
quantities of fygges, and a bottell of wyne.
2 Then sayde the kynge vnto Siba: What wilt thou do herewith? Siba sayde: The
asses shalbe for the kynges housholde to ryde vpon, and the loaues and fygges
for the yonge men to eate, and the wyne shallbe for them to drynke whan they are
weery in the wyldernes.
3 The kynge sayde: Where is thy lordes sonne? Siba sayde vnto the kynge:
Beholde, he abyde that Ierusale, for he saide: To daye shal ye house of Israel
restore my fathers kigdome vnto me.
4 The kynge saide vnto Siba: Beholde, all that Mephiboseth hath, shalbe thine.
Siba sayde with reuerence, Let me finde grace in thy sight my lorde O kynge.
5 But whan kynge Dauid came to Bahurim, beholde, there wente out a man of the
kynred of the house of Saul, whose name was Semei the sonne of Gera, which wente
forth and cursed,
6 and cast stones at Dauid, and at all kynge Dauids seruauntes and all the
people and all the mightie men men were at his righte hande and at his lefte.
7 Thus sayde Semei whan he cursed: Get the forth, get the forth thou bloudy
hounde, thou man of Belial.
8 The LORDE hath rewarded the for all the bloude of the house of Saul, yt thou
becamest kynge in his steade. Now hath the LORDE geuen the kyngdome into ye
hande of Absalom thy sonne, and beholde, now stickest thou in thine owne
myschefe, for thou art a bloudy hounde.
9 But Abisai the sonne of Zeru Ia sayde vnto the kynge: Shall this deed dogg
curse my lorde the kynge? I wyl go and take the heade awaye from him.
10 The kynge saide: Ye children of Zeru Ia, what haue I to do wt you? Let him
curse on, for the LORDE hath commaunded him: Curse Dauid. Who can saye now: Why
doest thou so?
11 And Dauid sayde vnto Abisai and to all his seruauntes: Beholde, my sonne
which came of my body, seketh after my lyfe, how moch more now the sonne of
Iemini? Let him curse on, for the LORDE hath commaunded him:
12 peraduenture the LORDE shall consydre my aduersyte, and recompence me good
for his cursynge this daye.
13 So Dauid wente on his waye with his men. But Semei wente on by the mount
besyde him, and cursed, and cast stones at him, & threwe clottes of earth.
14 And the kynge came in and all the people that was with him, weery, and
refreshed him selfe there.
15 But Absalom and all the people of the men of Israel came to Ierusalem and
Achitophel with him.
16 Whan Chusai the Arachite Dauids frende came into Absalom, he sayde vnto
Absalom: God saue the kynge God saue the kynge.
17 Absalom sayde vnto Chusai: Is this thy mercy vnto thy frende? Why art thou
not gone with thy frende?
18 Chusai sayde vnto Absalom: Not so, but loke whom the LORDE choseth, and this
people, and all the men in Israel, his wyl I be, and byde with him.
19 Secondly, whom shulde I serue? Shulde I not do seruyce before his sonne? Like
as I haue serued in the presence of thy father, so wyll I do seruyce before the
also.
20 And Absalom sayde vnto Achitophel: Geue vs youre councell what we shal do?
21 Achitophel sayde vnto Absalom: Go lye with thy fathers concubynes, whom he
hath lefte to kepe the house, so shall all Israel heare that thou hast made thy
father to stynke, and the hande of all them that are with ye, shal be the
bolder.
22 Then made they a tente vnto Absalom vpon the house toppe. And Absalom laye
with his fathers concubynes in the sighte of all Israel.
23 At that tyme whan Achitophel gaue a councell, that was euen as yf a man axed
councell at God: So were all the councels of Achitophel both with Dauid and with
Absalom.

Chapter 17

1 And Achitophel sayde vnto Absalom: I wil chose out twolue thousande me, and
wyl get me vp, and persue Dauid by nighte,
2 and fall vpo him whan he is feble and weery: When I vexe him the, so that all
the people which is by him, flieth, I wil smite the kynge onely,
3 and brynge all the people vnto the agayne. So whan euery man is brought vnto
the as thou desyrest, then shal all the people be in peace.
4 Absalom thought that good, and so dyd all the Elders in Israel.
5 But Absalom sayde: I praye you call Chusai the Arachite also, and let vs heare
what he sayeth therto.
6 And wha Chusai came in to Absalom, Absalom saide vnto him: Thus hath
Achitophel spoken, Saye thou now, shal we do it or not?
7 Then sayde Chusai vnto Absalom: It is no good councell yt Achitophel hath
geuen at this tyme.
8 And Chusai sayde morouer: Thou knowest thy father well and his men, that they
are stronge and of a wrothfull stomack, euen as a Beer that is robbed of hir
yonge ones in the felde, Thy father also is a man of warre, and wyl not be
necliget with the people.
9 Beholde, he hath now peraduenture hyd hymselfe in some caue or in some place.
Yf it came to passe then that it chaunced euell at the first, & there shulde
come a rumor and saye: There is a slaughter done in the people that folowed
Absalo:
10 the shulde euery man be discoraged, which els is valeaunt, & hath a hert like
a lyo: for all Israel knoweth that thy father is stronge, and that all they
which be with him, are mightie men.
11 But this is my coucell, that thou gather together all Israel from Dan vnto
Berseba in nombre as the sonde of the See, and go thou thine owne person amonge
them,
12 then wil we fall vpon him in what place we finde him, and wyll ouerwhelme him
euen as the dew falleth vpon the earth, so that we shal not leaue one of him and
of all his men.
13 But yf he resorte in to a cite, then shal all Israel cast roapes aboute the
same cite, and drawe it in to the riuer, so that there shal not one stone of it
be founde
14 Then sayde Absalom and euery man in Israel: The councell of Chusai the
Arachite is better then Achitophels councell. But the LORDE broughte it so to
passe, that ye good councell of Achitophel was hyndred, that the LORDE mighte
brynge euell vpon Absalom.
15 And Chusai sayde vnto Sadoc & Abiathar the prestes: Thus and thus hath
Achitophel counceled Absalom and the Elders in Israel: but so and so haue I
counceled.
16 Sende now therfore in all the haist, and tell Dauid, and saye: Abyde not all
nighte in the playne felde of the wyldernes, but get the ouer, that the kynge be
not swalowed vp, and all the people that is with him.
17 As for Ionathas and Ahimaaz, they stode by the well of Rogel, and a damsell
wente thither and tolde them. They wente on their waye, and tolde kynge Dauid,
for they durst not be sene to come in to the cite.
18 But a lad sawe them, and tolde Absalom. Neuertheles they wente on their waye,
and came to a mans house at Bahurim, which had a well in his courte, and they
wete downe in to it.
19 And the woman toke and spred a couerynge ouer the welles mouth, & strowed
firmentye corne theron, that it was not perceaued.
20 Now whan Absaloms seruauntes came to the woman in to the house, they sayde:
where is Ahimaaz and Ionathas? The woma sayde vnto them: They are gone ouer the
litle water. And wha they soughte and founde them not, they wente agayne to
Ierusalem.
21 And whan they were gone, they clymmed vp out of the well, and wente their
waye, and tolde Dauid ye kynge, and sayde vnto Dauid: Get you vp, and go soone
ouer ye water, for thus and thus hath Achitophel geuen councell agaynst you.
22 Then Dauid gat him vp, and all the people that was with him, and passed ouer
Iordane tyll it was cleare mornynge. And there was not one, but he wente ouer
Iordane.
23 Whan Achitophel sawe that his coucell wente not forth, he sadled his asse,
gat him vp, and wete home in to his cite and put his house to poynte, and hanged
him selfe, and dyed, and was buried in his fathers graue.
24 And Dauid came to Mahanaim, and Absalom wente ouer Iordane, & all the men of
Israel wt him.
25 And Absalom had set Amasa ouer the hoost in Ioabs steade. Amasa was the sonne
of a man, whose name was Iethra a Iesraelite, which laye with Abigail the
doughter of Nahas the sister of Zeru Ia Ioabs mother.
26 But Israel and Absalom pitched in Gilead.
27 Whan Dauid was come to Mahanaim, Nahas of Rabbath of the childre of Ammon,
and Machir the sonne of Ammiel of Lodebar, and Barsillai a Gileadite of Roglim
28 broughte bedstuffe, tapestrie worke, basens, earthen vessell, whete, barly,
meel, parched corne, beenes, otemeell, ryse,
29 hony, butter, shepe and fat oxen vnto Dauid, and to ye people that was with
him, for to eate: for they thought, The people shall be hongrie, weerye and
thirstye in the wyldernes.

Chapter 18

1 And Dauid mustred the people yt was with him, and set captaynes ouer the, ouer
thousandes and ouer hundreds.
2 And sent out of the people one thirde parte vnder Abisai the sonne of Zeru Ia
Ioabs brother, and one thirde parte vnder Ithai the Gethite. And the kynge sayde
vnto the people: I wyll go forth with you also.
3 Neuertheles the people sayde: Thou shalt not go forth, for though we fle, or
die halfe of vs they shal not regarde vs. For thou art as ten thousande of vs.
Therfore is this better that thou mayest helpe vs out of the cite.
4 The kynge sayde: Loke what ye are content withall, that wyl I do. And the
kynge stode in the gate, and all the people wente forth by hundreds and by
thousandes.
5 And ye kinge comaunded Ioab and Abisai, and Ithai, and sayde: Intreate me the
yonge man Absalom gently. And all the people herde it, wha the kynge comaunded
all the captaynes concernynge Absalom.
6 And whan the people were come forth in to the felde agaynst Israel, the
battayll beganne in the wod of Ephraim.
7 And the people of Israel were smitten there before Dauids seruauntes, so that
there was a greate slaughter the same daye, of twentye thousande men.
8 And the battaill was scatred abrode there in the londe. And the wod consumed
moch more people the same daye, then the swerde consumed.
9 And Absalom met Dauids seruauntes, and rode vpon a Mule. And whan the Mule
came vnder a greate thicke Oke tre, his heade toke holde on the Oke, and so
hanged he betwene heauen and earth, but the Mule ranne awaye from vnder him.
10 Whan a certayne man sawe that, he tolde Ioab, and saide: Beholde, I sawe
Absalom hange vpo an Oke tre.
11 And Ioab saide vnto the ma yt tolde it him: Beholde, sawest thou that, why
smotest thou him not there to the groude? so wolde I haue geuen the of myne awne
behalfe ten syluerlynges and a gyrdell.
12 The man sayde vnto Ioab: Yf thou haddest weyed me a thousande syluerlynges in
my handes, yet wolde I not haue layed my handes on the kynges sonne. For the
kynge commaunded the and Abisai and Ithai before oure eares, and sayde: Kepe me
the yonge man Absalom.
13 Or yf I had dyssembled vpon the ioperdy of myne owne soule (for so moch as
nothinge shulde be hyd from ye kinge) thou thy selfe shuldest haue stode against
me.
14 Ioab sayde: Not so, I wil vpon him before thy face. Then toke Ioab thre
speares in his hande, and thrust Absalom thorow ye hert, while he was yet alyue
vpon the Oke.
15 And ten yoge men Ioabs weapenbearers, came aboute him, and smote him to
death.
16 Then blewe Ioab the trompe, and broughte the people agayne, that they shulde
folowe nomore vpon Israel. For Ioab wolde fauoure the people.
17 And they toke Absalom, and cast him in the wod in to a greate pytt, and layed
a greate heape of stones vpon him. And all Israel fled, euery one vnto his
tente.
18 Absalom had set him vp a piler whyle he was yet alyue, which stode in the
kynges valley, for he sayde: I haue no sonne, therfore shall this be a
remembraunce of my name: and he called the piler after his owne name. And vnto
this daie it is yet called Absaloms place.
19 Ahimaas the sonne of Sadoc sayde: Let me runne now, and brynge the kynge
worde, that the LORDE hath gotten him righte fro the hande of his enemies.
20 But Ioab sayde: Thou shalt bringe no good tidinges to daie another daye shalt
thou brynge him worde, and not to daye, for the kynges sonne is deed
21 But vnto Chusi sayde Ioab: Go thou thy waye, and tell the kynge what thou
hast sene. And Chusi did his obeysauce vnto Ioab, and ranne.
22 Ahimaas the sonne of Sadoc saide agayne vnto Ioab: What and I ranne also?
Ioab sayde: What wilt thou runne my sonne? Come hither, thou shalt brynge no
good tydinges. (He answered:) What and I ranne yet.
23 He saide vnto him: Renne on yi waye then. So Ahimaas ranne the straight waye,
and came before Chusi.
24 As for Dauid, he sat betwene the two gates. And the watchman wente vp to ye
toppe of the porte vpon the wall, and lifte vp his eyes, and sawe a man renninge
alone,
25 and cryed, and tolde the kinge. The kynge sayde: Yf he be alone, then is
there good tydinges in his mouth. And as the same wente and came forth,
26 the watchman sawe another man rennynge, and cryed in the porte and sayde:
Beholde, there renneth a man alone. The kinge sayde: The same is a good
messaunger also.
27 The watchman sayde: I se the rennynge of the first as it were the rennynge of
Ahimaas the sonne of Sadoc. And the kynge sayde: He is a good man, and bryngeth
good tidinges.
28 Ahimaas cryed, and sayde vnto ye kinge: Peace, and worshipped before the
kynge vpon his face to the grounde, and sayde: Praised be the LORDE thy God,
which hath geuen ouer ye men that lifte vp their handes agaynst my LORDE the
kynge.
29 The kynge sayde: Goeth it well with the yonge man Absalom? Ahimaas sayde: I
sawe a greate vproure, whan Ioab the kynges seruaunt sent me thy seruaunt, and I
wote not what it was.
30 The kynge sayde: Go aboute, and stonde here. And he wente aboute and stode
there.
31 Beholde, then came Chusi and sayde: I brynge good tydinges my lorde the
kynge: The LORDE hath executed righte for the this daye, from the hande of all
them that rose vp agaynst the.
32 But the kynge sayde vnto Chusi: Goeth it well with the yonge man Absalom?
Chusi sayde: Euen so go it wt all the enemyes of my lorde the kynge, and with
all them that ryse vp agaynst the to do euell, as it goeth with the yonge man.
33 Then was the kynge soroufull, and wente vp in to the perler vpon the gate,
and wepte, and as he wente, he sayde thus: O my sonne Absalo, my sonne, my sonne
Absalom, wolde God yt I shulde dye for the. O Absalom my sonne, my sonne.

Chapter 19

1 And it was tolde Ioab: beholde, ye kinge wepeth & mourneth for Absalom.
2 And so out of ye victory of yt daye there came a mourninge amonge all the
people. For the people had herde the same daye, yt the kynge toke on heuely
because of his sonne.
3 And ye people stale awaye the same daye, so that they came not in to the cite:
as a people that is put to shame, pycketh them selues awaye, whan they are fled
in a battayll.
4 As for the kynge, he had couered his face, and cryed loude, and sayde: Oh my
sonne Absalom, Absalom my sonne, my sonne.
5 But Ioab came to the kynge in to the house, and sayde: This daye hast thou
shamed all thy seruauntes (which haue delyuered thy soule this daye, and the
soules of thy sonnes, of thy doughters, of thy wyues, and of thy cocubynes)
6 in that thou louest them that hate the, and hatest those that loue ye. For to
daye thou shewest thy selfe, that thou carest not for the captaynes and
seruauntes: For I perceaue this daye, that yf Absalom onely were alyue, and we
all deed this daye, thou woldest thynke it were well.
7 Get the vp now therfore, and go forth, and speake louyngly vnto thy
seruauntes. For I sweare vnto the by ye LORDE, yf thou go not forth, there shall
not be lefte the one man this nighte: this shalbe worse vnto ye, then all the
euell that happened the sence yi youth vp hither to.
8 The the kynge gat him vp, and sat in the gate. And it was sayde vnto the
people: beholde, the kynge sytteth in the gate. Then came all the people before
ye kynge. But Israel was fled euery one vnto his tent.
9 And all the people stroue in all the trybes of Israel, and sayde: The kynge
ryd vs from the hande of oure enemies, and delyuered vs from the hande of the
Philistynes, and was fayne to fle out of the lode for Absalom.
10 So Absalom whom we had anoynted ouer vs, is deed in the battayll. Why are ye
so styll now, that ye fetch not the kynge agayne?
11 The kynge sent vnto Sadoc & Abiathar the prestes, & caused to saye vnto the:
Speake to the Elders of Iuda, & saye: Why wyl ye be the last to fetch the kynge
agayne vnto his house? (for ye sayenge of all Israel was come before the kynge
into his house)
12 ye are my brethren, my bone, and my flesh. Wherfore wyl ye then be the last
to brynge the kynge agayne?
13 And saye vnto Amasa: Art not thou my bone and my flesh? God do this & that
vnto me, yf thou shalt not be the chefe captayne before me in Ioabs steade, as
longe as thou lyuest.
14 And he bowed the hert of all the men of Iuda as of one man. And they sent
vnto ye kynge: Come agayne, thou and all thy seruauntes:
15 So the kynge came agayne. And whan he came vnto Iordane, ye men of Iuda were
come to Gilgal, for to go downe to mete the kynge, that they mighte brynge ye
kynge ouer Iordane.
16 And Semei the sonne of Gera the sonne of Iemini, which dwelt at Bahurim, made
haist, and wente downe with ye men of Iuda to mete kynge Dauid,
17 and there were with him a thousande me of Ben Iamin. Siba also the seruaunt
of the house of Saul with his fyftene sonnes and twenty seruauntes, & gat them
thorow Iordane and passed ouer ye fery,
18 that they mighte brynge ouer the kynges housholde, and to do him pleasure.
But Semei the sonne of Gera fell downe before the kynge, whan he passed ouer
Iordane,
19 and sayde vnto the kynge: O my lorde, laye not the trespace vnto my charge, &
thynke not vpon it that thy seruaunt vexed the, in the daye whan my lorde the
kynge wente out of Ierusalem: and let not ye kynge take it to hert,
20 for thy seruaunt knoweth that he hath synned. And beholde, this daye am I
come the first amonge all the house of Ioseph, for to go downe to mete my lorde
the kynge.
21 Neuertheles Abisai the sonne of Zeru Ia answered and sayde: And shulde not
Semei dye therfore, seynge he hath cursed ye anoynted of ye LORDE?
22 But Dauid sayde: What haue I to do with you ye children of ZeruIa, that ye
wyll become Sathan vnto me this daye? Shulde eny man dye this daye in Israel?
Thynkest thou that I knowe not, yt I am become kynge ouer Israel this daye?
23 And ye kynge sayde vnto Simei: Thou shalt not dye? And the kynge sware vnto
him.
24 Mephiboseth the sonne of Saul came downe also to mete the kynge. And he had
not made cleane his fete ner combde his beerde, nether had he wasshed his
clothes from the daye that the kynge was gone awaye, vntyll the daye that he
came agayne in peace.
25 Now wha he came to Ierusalem for to mete the kynge, the kynge sayde vnto him:
Mephiboseth, wherfore wentest thou not with me?
26 And he sayde: My lorde O kynge, my seruaut hath dealte vnrighteously with me:
for thy seruaunt thoughte: I wyl saddell an asse and ryde theron, and go vnto
the kynge: for thy seruaunt is lame,
27 and he hath accused thy seruaunt before my lorde ye kynge. But my lorde ye
kynge is an angell of God, and thou mayest do what pleaseth the.
28 For all my fathers house was nothinge, but people of death before my lorde ye
kynge. And yet hast thou set thy seruaunt amonge them that eate at yi table.
What other righteousnes haue I, that I shulde crye eny more vnto the kynge?
29 The kynge sayde vnto him: What speakest thou yet more of thy matter? I haue
sayde: Thou and Siba parte the londe betwene you.
30 Mephiboseth sayde vnto the kynge: Let him take it all, in as moch as my lorde
ye kynge is come home in peace.
31 And Barsillai the Gileadite came downe from Roglim, and broughte the kynge
ouer Iordane, that he mighte coueye him in Iordane.
32 And Barsillai was very olde, so good as foure score yeare olde, the same had
prouyded ye kynge of fode whyle he was at Mahanaim, for he was a very noble man.
33 And the kynge sayde vnto Barsillai: Thou shalt go ouer with me, I wyll take
care for the wt myne awne selfe at Ierusalem.
34 But Barsillai sayde vnto the kynge: What haue I yet to lyue, that I shulde go
vp to Ierusalem wt the kynge?
35 This daye am I foure score yeare olde. How shulde I knowe what is good or
euell, or taist what I eate or drynke, or heare what the Musicians do synge? Why
shulde thy seruaunt be chargeable first vnto my lorde the kynge?
36 thy seruaunt shall go a litle with the kynge ouer Iordane. Why wil the kynge
recompence me after this maner?
37 Let thy seruaunt turne backe agayne, that I maye dye in my cite besyde my
father and my mothers graue. Beholde, there is thy seruaunt Chimeam, let him go
ouer with my lorde the kynge, and do vnto him what pleaseth the.
38 The kynge sayde: Chimeam shal go ouer with me, and I wyll do for him what
liketh the: and what so euer thou desyrest of me, that wyll I do for the also.
39 And whan all ye people was gone ouer Iordane and the kynge likewyse, the
kynge kyssed Barsillai and blessed him, and he turned vnto his place.
40 And ye kynge passed ouer vnto Gilgal, and Chimeam wente with him. And all the
people of Iuda broughte the kynge ouer, howbeit there was but halfe of the
people of Israel there.
41 And beholde, the came all the men of Israel vnto the kynge, & sayde vnto him:
Why haue oure brethren the men of Iuda stollen the awaye, and haue conueyed ye
kynge and his housholde ouer Iordane, and all Dauids men with him?
42 Then answered they of Iuda vnto them of Israel: The kynge is of oure nye
kynred, why are ye angrie therfore? Thynke ye that we haue receaued eny fode or
giftes of the kynge?
43 Then answered they of Israel vnto them of Iuda, & sayde: We haue ten tymes
more with the kynge and with Dauid, the thou, why hast thou regarded me then so
lightly, that oures were not the first to fetch oure kynge agayne? But they of
Iuda spake harder then they of Israel.

Chapter 20

1 There was a famous man of Belial there, whose name was Seba ye sonne of
Bichri, a ma of Iemini, which blewe the trompe, and sayde: We haue no porcion in
Dauid, ner inheritaunce in ye sonne of Isai: let euery get him to his tent, O
Israel.
2 Then fell euery man in Israel from Dauid, and folowed Seba the sonne of
Bichri. But the men of Iuda cleued vnto their kynge from Iordane vnto Ierusale.
3 Whan Dauid came home to Ierusalem, he toke the ten concubynes ( whom he had
lefte to kepe the house) and put them in a holde to be kepte, and made prouysion
for them: but he laye not with them, and so were they shut vp vnto their death,
and lyued wedowes.
4 And ye kynge sayde vnto Amasa: Call me all the men of Iuda together agaynst
the thirde daye, & be thou here present also.
5 And Amasa wete to call Iuda together. And he was slacke to come at ye tyme
which he had appoynted him.
6 And Dauid sayde vnto Abisai: Now shall Seba the sonne of Bichri do vs more
harme then Absalom. Take thou yi lordes seruauntes, and folowe vpon him, yt he
fynde not some stroge cities for him, and so escape out of oure sighte.
7 Then wente Ioabs me forth after him, and the Chrethians and Plethians, and all
the mightie me: and they wete out of Ierusalem to folowe vpon Seba the sonne of
Bichri.
8 But whan they were by the greate stone at Gibeon, Amasa came before them. As
for Ioab, he was gyrded aboue his garment which he had on, and vpon it he had a
swerde gyrded, which hanged by his thye in the sheeth, and wente easely out and
in, and fell fro him.
9 And Ioab sayde vnto Amasa: Peace be with the my brother. And Ioab toke Amasa
by the beerde with his righte hade, to kysse him.
10 And Amasa toke no hede vnto ye swerde in Ioabs hande, and he thrust him
therwith in to the bely, yt his bowels ranne out vpon the earth, and he thrust
at him nomore. And so he dyed. Ioab & his brother Abisai folowed vpon Seba ye
sonne of Bichri.
11 And one of Ioabs seruauntes stode by him, and sayde: What is he this yt wolde
be agaynst Ioab to please Dauid, and to be with Dauid in Ioabs steade?
12 As for Amasa, he laye rolled in the bloude in ye myddes of the strete. But
wha one sawe that all the people stode there still, he remoued Amasa from the
strete vnto the felde, and cast a clothe vpon him, for so moch as he sawe, that
who so euer came by him, stode styll.
13 Now whan he was put out of the waye, euery man wete after Ioab, to folowe
vpon Seba the sonne of Bichri.
14 And he wente thorow all ye trybes of Israel vnto Abel Beth Maacha, and all
the best chosen men gathered them selues together, & folowed after him,
15 and came and beseged him at Abel Beth Maacha, and made a banke aboute to cite
harde on ye wall. And all the people that was with Ioab, layed to their
ordynaunce, and wolde haue cast downe the wall.
16 Then cried there a wyse woma out of ye cite: Heare, heare, saye vnto Ioab
that he come hither, I wyl speake with him.
17 And wha he came to her, the woman sayde: Art thou Ioab? He sayde: Yee. She
sayde vnto him: Heare the wordes of thy handmayden. He sayde: I heare.
18 She sayde: The comonsayenge was somtyme: Who so wyll axe, let him axe at
Abel, and so came it to a good ende.
19 This is ye noble and faithfull cite in Israel, and wilt thou destroye the
cite and the mother in Israel? Why wilt thou swalowe vp the enheritaunce of the
LORDE?
20 Ioab answered and sayde: That be farre, that be farre fro me, that I shulde
swalowe vp and destroye.
21 The matter is not so, but a certayne man of mount Ephraim named Seba the
sonne of Bichri, hath lifte vp him selfe agaynst kynge Dauid, delyuer him onely,
and I wyl departe from the cite. The woman sayde vnto Ioab: Beholde, his heade
shal be cast vnto the ouer the wall.
22 And the woman came in to all the people with hir wysdome. And they smote of
the heade of Seba the sonne of Bichri, and cast it vnto Ioab. Then blewe he the
trompe, and they departed from the cite, euery one vnto his tent. But Ioab came
agayne to Ierusalem vnto the kynge.
23 Ioab was captayne ouer all the hoost of Israel: Benaia ye sonne of Ioiada was
ouer the Chrethians and Plethians:
24 Adoram was rent gatherer: Iosaphat the sonne of Ahilud was Chaunceler:
25 Seia was the scrybe: Sadoc and Abiathar were the prestes:
26 Ira also ye Iairite was Dauids prest.

Chapter 21

1 There was a derth also in Dauids tyme thre yeares together. And Dauid soughte
the face of ye LORDE. And the LORDE sayde: Because of Saul and because of that
bloudy housholde yt he slewe the Gibeonites.
2 Then the kynge caused for to call the Gibeonites, and spake vnto them. (As for
the Gibeonites, they were not of ye children of Israel, but a remnaunt of the
Amorites: howbeit the children of Israel had sworne vnto the, and Saul soughte
for to smyte them in his gelousy, for the childre of Israel and Iuda.)
3 Then sayde Dauid to the Gibeonites: What shal I do vnto you? And where withall
shal I make the attonement, that ye maye blesse ye enheritaunce of ye LORDE?
4 The Gibeonites sayde vnto him: It is not for golde and syluer that we haue to
do wt Saul and his house, nether haue we oughte to do for to slaye eny ma in
Israel. He sayde: What saye ye then, that I shal do vnto you?
5 They sayde vnto ye kynge: The man that hath destroyed vs and broughte vs to
naughte, shulde we destroye, that nothinge be lefte him in all the coastes of
Israel.
6 Let there be geuen vs seuen men of his sonnes, that we maye hange them vp vnto
the LORDE at Gibea of Saul the chosen of the LORDE. The kynge sayde: I wyll geue
them.
7 Howbeit the kynge spared Mephiboseth ye sonne of Ionathas ye sonne of Saul,
because of the ooth of the LORDE yt was betwene them: namely, betwene Dauid &
Ionathas the sonne of Saul.
8 But the two sonnes of Rispa ye doughter of Aia, whom she had borne vnto Saul,
Armoni & Mephiboseth, And the fyue sonnes of Michol the doughter of Saul, whom
she bare vnto Adriel the sonne of Barsillai the Mahalothite,
9 dyd the kynge take, and gaue them in to the handes of ye Gibeonites, which
hanged the vp vpo the mount before the LORDE. So these seuen fell at one tyme,
and dyed in the tyme of the first haruest, whan ye barly haruest begynneth.
10 Then toke Rispa the doughter of Aia a sack cloth, & spred it vpon the rock in
the begynnynge of the haruest, tyll the water from the heauen dropped vpo them,
and suffred not the foules of the heauen to rest on them on the daye tyme,
nether the wylde beestes of the felde on the nighte season.
11 And it was tolde Dauid what Rispa the doughter of Aia Sauls concubyne had
done.
12 And Dauid wente and toke the bones of Saul and the bones of Ionathas his
sonne from ye citesens at Iabes in Gilead (which they had stollen from ye strete
at Bethsan, where ye Philistynes had hanged the, what tyme as the Philistynes
had smytten Saul vpon mount Gilboa)
13 and broughte them vp from thence, and gathered them together wt the bones of
them that were hanged.
14 And the bones of Saul and of his sonne Ionathas buried they in ye londe of
Ben Iamin, besyde ye graue of his father Cis. So after this was God at one with
the londe.
15 But there arose warre agayne of ye Philistynes agaynst Israel. And Dauid
wente downe & his seruauntes with him, & foughte agaynst the Philistynes. And
Dauid was weery,
16 & Iesbi of Nob (which was one of the children of Rapha, and the weight of his
speare was thre C. weight of brasse, and had a new harnesse vpon him) thoughte
to smyte Dauid.
17 Neuertheles Abisai the sonne of Zeru Ia helped him, & smote the Philistyne to
death. Then sware Dauids men vnto him, & sayde: Thou shalt nomore go forth with
vs vnto the warre, that the lanterne in Israel be not put out.
18 Afterwarde there arose yet warre at Nob with the Philistynes. Then Sibechai
the Husathite smote Saph, which also was one of the childre of Rapha.
19 And there arose yet warre at Gob with the Philistynes. Then Elhanan the sonne
of Iaere Orgim a Bethleemite smote Goliath the Gethite, which had a speare,
whose shaft was like a weeuers lome.
20 And there arose yet warre at Gath, where there was a cotencious man, which
had sixe fyngers on his handes, and sixe toes on his fete, that is foure and
twety in the nombre, and he was borne also of Rapha.
21 And whan he spake despitefully vnto Israel, Ionathas ye sonne of Simea Dauids
brother smote him.
22 These foure were borne vnto Rapha at Gath, and fell thorow the hande of Dauid
and of his seruauntes.

Chapter 22

1 And Dauid spake the wordes of this songe before the LORDE, what tyme as the
LORDE had delyuered him fro the hande of all his enemies, and from the hande of
Saul,
2 and he sayde. The LORDE is my stony rock, & my castell, and my delyuerer.
3 God is my strength, in him wyl I put my trust: my shylde & the horne of my
saluacion, my defence & my refuge, my Sauioure, thou shalt helpe me from violent
wronge.
4 I wil call vpon the LORDE with prayse, so shal I be delyuered fro myne
enemies.
5 For the sorowes of death copased me, and the brokes of Belial made me afrayed.
6 The paynes of hell came aboute me, and the snares of death had ouertaken me.
7 Wha I was in trouble, I called vpo the LORDE, yee euen my God called I vpon, &
so he herde my voyce fro his holy temple, & my coplaynte (came) into his eares.
8 The earth trembled and quaked, the foundacions of the heauen shoke and moued,
because he was wroth.
9 Smoke wente vp from his nose, and consumynge fyre out of his mouth, coles were
kyndled therof.
10 He bowed the heauens and came downe, and it was darke vnder his fete.
11 He sat vpon Cherub and dyd flye, and appeared vpon the fethers of the wynde.
12 He made darknes his pauylion rounde aboute him, thicke water in the cloudes
of ye ayre.
13 At the brightnesse of him were the fyre coles kyndled.
14 The LORDE thondered from heaue, and the Hyest put forth his voyce.
15 He shot his arowes, and scatered them: he lightened, and discomfited them.
16 The pourynges out of the See were sene, and the foundacions of the earth were
discouered at the chydinge of the LORDE, & at the breth of the sprete of his
wrath.
17 He sent downe from aboue, and receaued me, and drue me out of many waters.
18 He delyuered me fro my stronge enemye, from them that hated me, for they were
to mightie for me.
19 They ouertoke me in the tyme of my trouble, but the LORDE was my succoure.
20 He broughte me forth in to liberty: he delyuered me, because he had a fauoure
vnto me.
21 The LORDE shal rewarde me after my righteousnes, and acordinge to the clennes
of my handes shal he recompence me.
22 For I haue kepte ye waye of the LORDE, & haue not bene vngodly agaynst my
God.
23 For I haue an eye vnto all his lawes, and haue not put his ordinaunces fro
me.
24 Therfore wil I be perfecte vnto him, and wyl eshue myne awne wickednes.
25 So shal ye LORDE rewarde me after my righteousnes, acordinge to the clenes of
my handes in his eye sighte.
26 With the holy shalt thou be holy, and wt the perfecte thou shalt be perfecte.
27 With the cleane thou shalt be cleane, and with the frowarde thou shalt be
frowarde.
28 For thou shalt saue the poore oppressed people, and shalt set thine eyes
agaynst the proude to brynge them downe.
29 For thou O LORDE art my lanterne. The LORDE shal lighte my darknesse.
30 For in ye I shal discofite an hoost of men, & in my God I shal leape ouer the
wall.
31 The waye of God is perfecte: ye wordes of the LORDE are tryed in the fyre: he
is a shylde for all the that put their trust in him.
32 For where is there a God, excepte ye LORDE? Or who hath eny strength without
oure God?
33 God hath stregthed me with power, and made playne a perfecte waye for me.
34 He hath made my fete like hartes fete, & hath set me vp an hye.
35 He teacheth my handes to fighte, and bendeth the stele bowe with myne armes.
36 And thou hast geuen me the shylde of yi health, and with yi louynge
correccion shalt thou multiplye me.
37 Thou hast enlarged my goinge vnder me, and myne ankles haue not slyded.
38 I wyl folowe vpon myne enemies, and destroye the: and wyl not turne backe
agayne, tyll I haue broughte them to naught.
39 I wil cosume them and thrust them thorow, that they come not vp: they shal
fall vnder my fete.
40 Thou hast girded me with strength to ye battayll, and hast subdued them vnder
me yt rose vp agaynst me.
41 Thou hast made myne enemies to turne their backes vpo me, that I might
destroye them that hate me.
42 They shal crye, but there shalbe no Sauioure: yee euen vnto the LORDE, but he
answereth them not.
43 I wil beate them as small as the dust of the earth: euen as ye claye of the
stretes wil I make them thynne, and sprede them out abrode.
44 But me shalt thou delyuer from the stryuynges of the people, and shalt kepe
me to be ye heade of the Heythen: A people whom I haue not knowne, shal serue
me.
45 The straunge children haue denyed me: at the hearynge of the eare shal they
herke vnto me.
46 The straunge children are waxen olde, & are shut vp in their presons.
47 The LORDE lyueth, and blessed be my God, and magnified be the strength of my
health.
48 God seyth that I be auenged, and subdueth the people vnto me.
49 He bryngeth me out fro myne enemies: & from them yt ryse vp agaynst me, shalt
thou exalte me, and from ye cruell man shalt thou delyuer me.
50 For this cause wyl I geue thankes vnto the amonge the Heythen, and synge
prayses vnto thy name.
51 Which doth greate health for his kynge, & sheweth mercy vnto Dauid his
anoynted, and to his sede for euermore.

Chapter 23

1 These are the last wordes of Dauid: Dauid the sonne of Isai sayde. The man,
that was set vp to be ye anoynted of the God of Iacob, & a pleasaunt dyter of
songes of Israel, sayde:
2 The sprete of the LORDE hath spoken by me, and the vtteraunce therof is done
thorow my tunge.
3 He sayde: The God of Israel hath spoke vnto me, the strength of Israel, the
gouernoure amonge men, the righteous gouernoure in the feare of God.
4 As the lighte is in ye mornynge whan the Sonne aryseth, so that for the
brightnesse therof no cloude remayneth: and as the grasse loketh vpon the earth
thorow the rayne,
5 euen so shal my house be with God. For he hath made an euerlastinge couenaunt
with me, well appoynted on euery syde and sure. For this is all my health &
pleasure, that it shal growe.
6 But the Belial shalbe vtterly & cleane roted out as the thornes, which me take
not in their hades.
7 And they yt touch them, shal destroye them wt yrons & speares: & in the fyre
shal they be brent, that they maye be broughte to naught.
8 These are the names of Dauids Worthies: Iasabeam ye sonne of Hachmoni, the
chefest amonge thre, which lifte vp his speare, & slewe eight hundreth at one
tyme.
9 After him was Eleasar the sonne of Dodi the sonne of Ahohi amonge the thre
Worthies with Dauid, whan they spake despytefully to the Philistynes, and were
gathered together to the battayll, and the men of Israel wente vp.
10 Then stode he vp and smote the Philistynes, tyll his hande was so weery that
it crompled with the swerde. And the LORDE gaue a greate victory at the same
tyme, so that the people turned after him to spoyle.
11 After him was Samma the sonne of Age ye Hararite. Wha the Philistynes had
gathered themselues in a company, and in the same place there was a pece of lode
full of small corne, and the people fled before the Philistynes,
12 the stode he in the myddes of ye pece of londe, & delyuered it, & smote ye
Philistynes. And God gaue a greate victory.
13 And these thre pryncipall amonge thirtie, came downe in the haruest vnto
Dauid, into the caue of Adullam, & the hoost of ye Philistynes laye in ye valley
of Rephaim.
14 But Dauid was at the same tyme in the castell, and ye Philistynes people laye
at Bethleem.
15 And Dauid was desyrous, and sayde: Wolde God yt some man wolde fetch me a
drynke of water out of the well at Bethleem vnder the gate.
16 The brake the thre Worthies into the hoost of the Philistynes, and drue of
the water out of the well at Bethleem vnder ye gate, & caried it & broughte it
vnto Dauid: neuertheles he wolde not drynke it, but offred it vnto the LORDE,
17 & sayde: The LORDE let this be farre fro me, that I shulde do it. Is it not
the bloude of the men that ioperded their lyues, and wente thither? And he wolde
not drynke it. This dyd the thre Worthies.
18 Abisai ye brother of Ioab the sonne of Zeru Ia was one also chefe amoge thre.
He lifte vp his speare & smote thre hundreth, & was an awncient man amoge thre,
19 & the noblest amonge thre, & was their ruler. But he came not vnto the thre.
20 And Benaia the sonne of Ioiada, the sonne of Ishail (a man of greate actes of
Cabzeell) smote two mightie giautes of ye Moabites, & wete downe, & slewe a lyon
at a well in the snowe tyme.
21 He smote also a fayre goodly man of Egipte, which had a speare in his hande.
But he wete downe to him with a staffe, and toke the speare out of the Egipcians
hande by violence, and slewe him with his owne speare.
22 This dyd Benaia the sonne of Ioiada, and was a famous man amoge thre
Worthies,
23 and more honorable then the thirtie, but he came not vnto the thre. And Dauid
made him of his secrete coucell.
24 Asahel the brother of Ioab is amonge ye thirtie: Elham his vncles sonne at
Bethleem.
25 Samma the Haradite, Elika the Haradite,
26 Helez the Paltite, Ira the sonne of Tekoite,
27 Abiser the Anthothite, Mebunai the Husathite,
28 Zalmon the Ahohite, Maherai the Netophatite,
29 Ithai the sonne of Ribai of Gibea of the childre of Ben Iamin,
30 Benaia the Pirgathonite, Hidai of the broke of Gaas,
31 Abialbon the Arbathite, Asmaueth the Bahumite,
32 Eliaheba the Baalbonite. The children of Iasen and Ionathas:
33 Samma the Hararite,
34 Eliphelet the sonne of Ahasbai ye sonne of Maechathi, Eliam the sonne of
Achitophel ye Gilonite,
35 Hesrai of Carmel, Paerai the Arbite,
36 Iegael the sonne of Nathan of Soba, Bani the Gadite,
37 Zeleg the Ammonite, Naharai the Beerothite, the weapen bearer of Ioab the
sonne of Zeru Ia,
38 Ira the Iethrite, Gareb the Iethrite,
39 Vrias the Hethite. These are alltogether seuen and thirtie.

Chapter 24

1 And the LORDE was wrothfully displeased of ye new agaynst Israel, and moued
Dauid amonge them, because he saide: Go, nombre Israel and Iuda.
2 And the kynge sayde vnto Ioab ye chefe captayne of his hoost: Go aboute in all
the trybes of Israel, from Dan vnto Berseba, and nombre the people, that I maye
knowe how many they be.
3 Ioab sayde vnto the kynge: The LORDE thy God adde vnto this people an hundreth
tymes as moch as it is now, that my lorde the kynge maye se his eyes lust
theron. But why hath my lorde the kynge a desyre to this thinge?
4 Neuertheles the kynges worde preuayled agaynst Ioab and the captaynes of the
hoost.So Ioab and ye captaynes of the hoost wente forth from the kynge, to
nombre the people of Israel,
5 and passed ouer Iordane, and pitched at Aroer, at the righte hande of the cite
which lyeth in ye ryuer of Gad, and at Iaseer,
6 & came to Gilead, and in the lowe countre of Hadsi, and came vnto Dan Iaan,
and aboute Sidon,
7 and came to the stronge cite of Tyrus, and all the cities of the Heuites and
Cananites, and came forth to the south parte of Iuda vnto Berseba,
8 and wete rounde aboute that countre, and after nyne monethes and twenty daies
they came to Ierusalem.
9 And Ioab delyuered vnto ye kynge the summe of the people that was nombred. And
in Israel there were eight C. thousande stronge men, that drue out the swerde:
and in Iuda fyue hundreth thousande men.
10 And after that the people was nombred, Dauids hert smote him selfe. And Dauid
sayde vnto ye LORDE: I haue synned sore, that I haue done this. And now LORDE
take awaie the trespace of thy seruaunt. For I haue done very vnwysely.
11 And whan Dauid rose vp in the mornynge, the worde of the LORDE came vnto the
prophet Gad, Dauids Seer, & sayde:
12 Go & speake vnto Dauid. Thus sayeth the LORDE: I brynge the thre thinges,
chose the one of them, that I maye do it vnto the.
13 Gad came vnto Dauid, and tolde him, and sayde vnto him: Wilt thou that seuen
yeare derth shall come in to thy londe? Or that thou be fayne to flye before
thine aduersaries thre monethes, and they to persecute the? Or that there be
pestilence thre dayes in the londe? Take aduysement therfore and se, what
answere I shal bringe agayne vnto him yt sent me.
14 Dauid sayde vnto Gad: I am in extreme trouble. Neuertheles (yf it maye be)
let me rather fall in to ye handes of the LORDE (for his mercy is greate) I wyll
not fall in to the handes of men.
15 So the LORDE sent pestilece in to Israel from the morow vnto the tyme
appoynted, so that there dyed of the people from Dan vnto Berseba, thre score
and ten thousande men.
16 And whan the angel stretched his hande ouer Ierusalem to destroye it, the
LORDE repented ouer the euell, and sayde vnto the angell: It is ynough, holde
now thy hande. The angell of the LORDE was besyde the barne of Arafna the
Iebusite.
17 But whan Dauid sawe the angell that smote the people, he sayde vnto the
LORDE: beholde, It is I that haue synned, I haue done the trespace: As for these
shepe, what haue they done? Oh let thy hade be agaynst me and agaynst my fathers
house.
18 And Gad came to Dauid at the same tyme, and saide vnto him: Go vp, and set vp
an altare vnto the LORDE in ye barne of Arafna the Iebusite.
19 So Dauid wete vp as Gad sayde, and as the LORDE had commaunded.
20 And wha Arafna loked aboute him, he sawe the kynge with his seruauntes goinge
vnto him, and he worshipped vpon his face to the grounde,
21 and sayde: Wherfore commeth my lorde ye kynge vnto his seruaunt? Dauid sayde:
To bye the barne of the, and to buylde an altare vnto the LORDE, that the plage
maye ceasse from the people.
22 But Arafna sayde vnto Dauid: Let my lorde the kynge take it, and offre what
pleaseth him. Beholde, there is an oxe for a burntofferynge, and sleddes, and
vessels of oxen to the wodd.
23 All this gaue Arafna vnto the kynge. And Arafna sayde vnto ye kynge: The
LORDE thy God make the accepted vnto him.
24 Neuertheles ye kynge sayde vnto Arafna: Not so, but I wyll bye it of the for
as moch as it is worth. For I wyl not offre burntofferynges vnto ye LORDE, of yt
which I haue for naughte. So Dauid boughte the barne and the oxe for fiftye
Sicles of syluer,
25 and buylded an altare there vnto the LORDE, and offred burntofferynges &
deedofferynges. And the LORDE was mercifull vnto ye londe, and ye plage ceassed
from the people of Israel.


1 Kings

Chapter 1

1 And wha kinge Dauid was olde & well strycke in age, he coulde not be warme,
though he was couered with clothes.
2 Then sayde his seruauntes vnto him: Let vs seke a yonge damsell a virgin for
oure lorde the kynge, to stonde before the kynge, and to norish him, & to slepe
in his armes, and to warme oure lorde the kynge.
3 And they sought a fayre dasell, in all the coastes of Israel, and founde
Abisag of Sunem, and brought her vnto ye kynge.
4 And she was a very fayre damsell, and noryshed ye kynge, and serued him.
Howbeit the kynge knewe her not.
5 Adonias ye sonne of Hagith lifte vp him selfe and sayde: I wyl be kynge. And
he prepared him charettes and horsmen, and fyftie men to be renners on fote
before him.
6 And his father reproued hi not therfore, so moch as to saye: Wherfore doest
thou so? And he was a man of a very fayre bewtye and he had begotten him nexte
after Absalo.
7 And his matter stode by Ioab ye sonne of Zeru Ia and by Abiathar the prest,
which helped Adonias.
8 But Sadoc the prest, and Benaia the sonne of Ioiada, and Nathan the prest and
Semei and Rei, and Dauids Worthies were not with Adonias.
9 And wha Adonias offred shepe and oxe, and fat catell besyde the stone of
Soheleth, which lyeth by the well of Rogel, he called all his brethre the kynges
sonnes, and all the men of Iuda the kynges seruautes.
10 But the prophet Nathan and Benaia, and the Worthies, and his brother Salomon
called he not.
11 Then sayde Nathan vnto Bethseba Salomons mother: Hast thou not herde yt
Adonias is kynge, and oure lorde Dauid knoweth not therof?
12 Come now therfore, I wyll geue the councell, that thou mayest delyuer thy
soule and the soule of thy sonne Salomon.
13 Come now and go in to kinge Dauid and saye vnto him: Hast not thou my lorde
the kynge sworne and sayde vnto thy handmayden: Salomon thy sonne shall be kynge
after me, and he shall sytt vpon my seate? Why is then Adonias made kynge?
14 Beholde, while thou art yet there, and talkest with the kynge, I wyll come in
after the, and tell forth thy tayle.
15 And Bethseba wente in to the kynge to ye chamber. And the kynge was very
olde. And Abisag of Sunem serued the kynge.
16 And Bethseba bowed hirselfe, and worshipped the kynge.The kynge sayde: What
wilt thou?
17 She sayde vnto him: My lorde, Thou hast sworne vnto thy handmayde by the
LORDE thy God: Thy sonne Salomon shall be kynge after me and syt vpon my seate.
18 But now lo, Adonias is kynge, and my lorde the kynge knoweth it not.
19 He hath offred oxen and fat catell, and many shepe, and hath called all the
kynges sonnes, and Abiathar the prest, and Ioab the chefe captayne. But thy
seruaunt Salomon hath he not bydden.
20 Neuertheles thou my lorde art kynge, the eyes of all Israel loke vnto the.,
that thou shuldest shewe them who shall syt vpon the seate of my lorde the kynge
after the.
21 And wha my lorde the kynge slepeth with his fathers then shal I and my sonne
Salomon be fayne to be synners.
22 But whyle she yet spake to the kynge, the prophet Nathan came,
23 and she tolde ye kinge: beholde, there is the prophet Nathan. And whan he
came in before the kynge, he worshipped the kynge vpon his face to the grounde,
24 and sayde My lorde O kynge, hast thou saide: Adonias shal be kinge after me,
& syt vpo my seate?
25 For he is gone downe this daye, and hath offred oxen, and fat catell, & hath
called all the kynges sonnes, and the captaynes, and the prest Abiathar. And
beholde, they eate and drynke before him, and saye: God saue the kynge Adonias.
26 But me thy seruaunt, and Sadoc the prest, and Benaia the sonne of Ioiada, and
thy seruaunt Salomon hath he not called.
27 Hath my lorde the kynge commaunded this, and not certifyed his seruauntes who
shall sytt vpon the seate of my lorde the kynge after him?
28 The kinge answered and saide: Call Bethseba vnto me. And she came in before
the kinge. And whan she stode before the kynge,
29 the kynge sware and sayde: As truly as the LORDE lyueth (which hath delyuered
my soule out of trouble,)
30 I wyl do vnto the this daye, euen as I sware vnto the by the LORDE the God of
Israel, so that Salomon thy sonne shalbe kynge after me, and he shal sit pon my
seate in my steade.
31 Then Bethseba bowed hir selfe with hir face to the grounde, and thanked the
kynge and sayde: God saue my lorde kynge Dauid for euermore.
32 And the kynge sayde: Call me the prest Sadoc & the prophet Nathan, and Benaia
the sonne of Ioiada.And whan they came in before the kynge,
33 the kynge sayde vnto them: Take youre lordes seruauntes with you, and set my
sonne Salomon vpon my Mule, and cary him downe to Gihon:
34 and let Sadoc ye prest and the prophet Nathan, anoynte him there to be kynge
ouer Israel, and blowe the trompe, and saye: God saue kynge Salomon,
35 and go ye vp after him: and whan he commeth, he shal syt vpo my seate, and be
kynge in my steade: for I haue ordeyned him to be prynce ouer Israel and Iuda.
36 Then answered Benaia the sonne of Ioiada vnto the kynge, & sayde: Amen. The
LORDE God of my lorde the kynge saye thus also.
37 As the LORDE hath bene with my lorde the kynge, so be he with Salomon also,
that his seate maye be greater then the seate of my lorde kynge Dauid.
38 Then wente they downe, the prest Sadoc and the prophet Nathan, and Benaia the
sonne of Ioiada, and the Chrethians, & Plethians, & set Salomon vpon kynge
Dauids Mule, & broughte him to Gihon.
39 And Sadoc the prest toke the oyle horne out of the Tabernacle, and anoynted
Salomon. And they blewe the trompe: And all ye people sayde: God saue kynge
Salomon.
40 And all the people wente vp after him, and the people pyped with pypes, and
was very ioyfull, so that the earth range at the noyse of them.
41 And Adonias herde it, and all they whom he had called, which were wt him, and
they had new eaten. And whan Ioab herde the noyse of the trompe, he sayde: What
meaneth this noyse of the cite and this busynes?
42 But whyle he yet spake, beholde, Ionathas the sonne of Abiathar ye prest
came.And Adonias sayde: Come in, for thou art a valeaunt man, and bryngest good
tydinges.
43 Ionathas answered and sayde vnto Adonias: Alas, or lorde kynge Dauid hath
made Salomon kynge,
44 and hath sent with him Sadoc the prest, and the propheth Nathan, and Benaia
the sonne of Ioiada, and the Chrethians and Plethians, and they haue set him
vpon the kynges Mule:
45 and Sadoc ye prest with the prophet Nathan hath anoynted him kynge at Gihon,
and from thece are they gone vp with ioye, that the cite range with all: that is
the noyse that ye haue herde.
46 Salomon also sytteth vpo the kynges seate,
47 and the kynges seruauntes are gone in to wysh good lucke vnto ouer lorde
kynge Dauid, and haue sayde: Thy God make Salomon a better name then thy name
is, and make his seate greater then thy seate. And they haue wy?shed the kynge
good lucke vpon the bed.
48 Morouer ye kynge hath sayde thus: Praysed be ye LORDE God of Israel, which
this daye hath made one to syt vpon my seate, that myne eyes haue sene it.
49 Then were they afrayed, and gatt them vp all that were called by Adonias, and
so they departed euery man his waye.
50 But Adonias was afrayed of Salomon, and gat him vp, and wete his waye, & toke
holde of ye hornes of ye altare.
51 And it was tolde Salomon: beholde, Adonias feareth kynge Salomo, & beholde,
he taketh holde of the hornes of ye altare, & sayeth: Let kige Salomo sweare
vnto me this daye, that he shall not slaye his seruaunt with the swerde.
52 Salomon sayde: Yf he wil be an honest man, there shall not one heer fall from
him vpon the earth: but yf there be euell founde in him, he shall dye.
53 And kinge Salomo sent, and caused him to be fetched from the altare. And whan
he came, he fell downe before kynge Salomon. But Salomon sayde vnto him: Go yi
waye in to thy house.

Chapter 2

1 Now whan the tyme came that Dauid shulde dye, he commaunded Salomon his sonne,
and sayde:
2 I go the waye of all the worlde, Be thou stroge therfore, and shewe thyselfe a
man,
3 and kepe the watch of the LORDE thy God, that thou walke in his wayes, and
holde his ordinaunces, his commaundementes, his lawes, and his testimonies, as
it is written in the lawe of Moses, that thou mayest be wyse in all that thou
doest, and whither so euer thou turnest the:
4 that the LORDE maye rayse vp his worde, which he hath spoke ouer me, and
saide: Yf thy children kepe their waye and walke before me faithfully and truly
and with all their hert and withall their soule, the shal there neuer fayle the
a man vpon the seate of Israel.
5 Thou knowest well also what Ioab the sonne of Zeru Ia hath done vnto me, what
he dyd vnto the two chefe captaynes of Israel, Abner the sonne of Ner, and Amasa
the sonne of Iether, whom he slewe and shed the bloude of warre wha it was
peace, & put the bloude of warre vpon his girdel yt was aboute his loynes, and
in his shues that were vpon his fete:
6 Do thou acordynge to thy wy?dome, that thou brynge not his graye heer downe to
the graue in peace.
7 And to the children of Barsyllai the Gileadite, thou shalt shewe mercy, that
they maye eate at thy table. For so ioined they the selues vnto me, whan I fled
before thy brother Absalom.
8 And beholde, thou hast with the Semei the sonne of Gera the sonne of Iemini of
Bahurim, which cursed me with very bytter and shamefull cursynges, what tyme as
I wente to Mahanaim. Yet came he downe to mete me at Iordan, where I sware vnto
him by the LORDE, and sayde: I wyll not slaye the with the swerde.
9 But suffre not thou him to be vngiltye, for thou art a wyse man, and shalt wel
knowe what thou oughtest to do vnto him, that thou mayest brynge his graye heer
downe to the graue with bloude.
10 So Dauid slepte with his fathers, and was buried in the cite of Dauid.
11 The tyme that Dauid was kynge ouer Israel, is fortie yeare. Seuen yeares was
he kynge at Hebro and thre and thirtie yeare at Ierusalem.
12 And Salomon sat vpon the seate of Dauid his father, and his kyngdome was made
very sure.
13 But Adonias the sonne of Hagith came in to Bethseba Salomons mother. And she
sayde: Is thy commynge peaceable? He spake: Yee,
14 and sayde: I haue somwhat to saye to the. She sayde: Saye on.
15 He sayde: Thou knowest that the kyngdome was myne, and that all Israel had
sett them selues vpon me, that I shulde be kynge, but now is the kyngdome
turned, and become my brothers: for he hath it of the LORDE.
16 Now desyre I one peticion of the, Make not my face ashamed. She sayde vnto
him: Saye on.
17 He sayde: Speake vnto kynge Salomon (for he shall not shame thy face) that he
maye geue me Abisag to wyfe.
18 Bethseba sayde: Wel, I wil speake to the kynge for the.
19 And Bethseba came in to kynge Salomon to speake with him. And the kynge stode
vp, and wente to mete her, and worshipped her, and sat him downe vpon his seate.
And there was a chayre set for the kynges mother, so that she sat at his righte
hande.
20 And she sayde: One peticion desyre I of the make not my face ashamed. The
kynge saydt: Axe O my mother, I wyl not shame thy face.
21 She saide: Let Abisag of Sunem be geuen thy brother Adonias to wyfe.
22 Then answered kynge Salomon, and saide vnto his mother: Why desyrest thou
Abisag of Sunem for Adonias? Axe the kyngdome or him also, for he is my greater
brother, and hath Abiathar the prest, and Ioab the sonne of Zeru Ia.
23 And the kynge sware by the LORDE, and sayde: God do this and that vnto me,
Adonias shall haue spoken this agaynst his lyfe.
24 And now as truly as the LORDE lyueth which hath ordeyned me, and made me to
syt vpon the seate of my father Dauid, and hath made me a house ( acordynge as
he sayde) this daye shal Adonias dye.
25 And kynge Salomon sent thither by Benaia the sonne of Ioiada, which smote him
that he dyed.
26 And to the prest Abiathar sayde ye kynge: Go thy waye vnto Anathot to thy
londe, for thou art a man of deeth. Neuerthelesse I wyl not slaye the this daye
for thou hast borne the Arke of the LORDE God before my father Dauid, and hast
suffred also where my father suffred.
27 Thus Salomo put forth Abiathar, that he must nomore be the prest of the
LORDE, that the worde of the LORDE mighte be fulfilled, which he spake ouer the
house of Eli at Silo.
28 And this rumonre came before Ioab: for Ioab cleued vnto Adonias, and not vnto
Salomon. Then fled Ioab into the Tabernacle of the LORDE, and toke holde of the
hornes of the altare.
29 And it was tolde kynge Salomon, that Ioab was fled in to the Tabernacle of
the LORDE, and beholde, he stondeth at the altare.Then sent Salomon Benaia the
sonne of Ioiada, and sayde: Go slaye him.
30 And whan Benaia came to the Tabernacle of the LORDE, he sayde vnto him: Thus
sayeth the kynge: Come forth. He sayde: No, I wyl dye here. And Benaia tolde
this vnto the kynge agayne. and sayde: Thus hath Ioab spoken, and thus hath he
answered me.
31 The kinge saide vnto him: Do as he hath spoken, and slaye him, and bury him,
that thou mayest put fro me and my fathers house the bloude which Ioab hath shed
without a cause,
32 and that the LORDE maye recompence him his bloude vpon his heade, because he
smote two men, which were more righteous and better then he, and slewe them with
ye swerde that my father Dauid knewe not of: namely, Abner ye sonne of Ner the
chefe captaine ouer Israel, & Amasa the sonne of Iether ye chefe captaine ouer
Iuda yt
33 their bloude maye be recompensed vpo ye heade of Ioab and of his sede for
euer: but Dauid and his sede, his house and his seate haue peace for euermore of
the LORDE.
34 And Benaia the sonne of Ioiada wente vp, and smote him, and slewe him: & he
was buried in his house in the wyldernes.
35 And ye kynge set Benaia ye sonne of Ioiada in his steade ouer the hoost. And
Sadoc ye prest dyd the kynge set in the steade of Abiathar.
36 And the kynge sent, and caused for to call Semei, and sayde vnto him: Buylde
the an house at Ierusalem, and dwell there, and departe not from thence, nether
hither ner thither.
37 In what daye so euer thou departest forth, and goest ouer ye broke Cedron, be
thou sure, that thou shalt dye the deeth: thy bloude be vpon thy heade.
38 Semei sayde vnto the kynge: This is a good meanynge, as my lorde the kynge
hath sayde, so shal thy seruaunt do. So Semei dwelt at Ierusalem a longe season.
39 But after thre yeare it fortuned that two seruauntes ranne awaye from Semei
vnto Achis the sonne of Maecha kynge of Gath.And it was tolde Semei: beholde,
thy seruauntes are at Gath.
40 Then Semei gat him vp, and sadled his asse, and wete vnto Gath to Achis, for
to seke his seruautes. And wha he came thither, he broughte his seruauntes from
Gath.
41 And it was tolde Salomon, that Semei wente from Ierusalem vnto Gath, and was
come agayne.
42 Then sent the kynge, and caused for to call Semei, and sayde vnto him: Sware
not I to the by the LORDE, and assured the, and sayde: Loke what daye so euer
thou departest out and goest hither or thither, be sure that thou shalt dye the
death? And thou saydest vnto me: I haue herde a good meanynge.
43 Why hast thou not kepte the then acordinge to the ooth of the LORDE, and
commaundement that I commaunded the?
44 And the kynge sayde vnto Semei: Thou remembrest all ye wickednes, which thy
hert knoweth that thou dyddest vnto my father Dauid. The LORDE hath recompenced
ye thy wickednes, vpon thy heade.
45 And kynge Salomon is blessed, and the seate of Dauid shalbe stablished before
ye LORDE for euer.
46 And the kynge commaunded Benaia ye sonne of Ioiada, which wente forth, and
smote him that he dyed. And the kyngdome was stablished by Salomons hande.

Chapter 3

1 And Salomon made mariage wt Pharao the kynge of Egipte, & toke Pharaos
doughter, and broughte her in to the cite of Dauid, tyll he had buylded his
house, and the LORDES house, and the walles rounde aboute Ierusalem.
2 But the people offred yet vpon the hye places: for as yet there was no house
buylded vnto the name of the LORDE vnto that tyme.
3 But Salomon loued the LORDE, and walked after the ordinaunces of Dauid his
father: excepte onely that he offred and brent incense vpon the hye places.
4 And the kynge wente vnto Gibeon, to do sacrifice there: for that was a goodly
hye place. And Salomon offred a thousande burntofferynges vpon the same altare.
5 And the LORDE appeared vnto Salomon at Gibeon in a dreame of the nighte, and
God sayde: Axe what I shal geue ye.
6 Salomo saide: Thou hast done greate mercy vnto my father Dauid thy seruaunt.
Like as he walked before the in faithfulnes and righteousnes, and in a true hert
with the, & this greate mercy hast thou layed vp for him, and geuen him a sonne
to syt vpon his seate, as it is now come to passe.
7 Now LORDE my God, thou hast made thy seruaunt kynge in my father Dauids
steade: As for me, I am but a small yonge man, knowynge nether my outgoynge ner
ingoynge.
8 And thy seruaunt is amonge the people whom thou hast chosen: which is so
greate, that no man can nombre them ner descrybe them for multitude.
9 Geue thy seruaunt therfore an obedient hert, that he maye iudge thy people, &
vnderstonde what is good & bad: for who is able to iudge this thy mightie
people?
10 This pleased the LORDE well, that Salomon axed soch a peticion.
11 And God sayde vnto him: For so moch as thou axest this, and desyrest not
longe lyfe, nether riches, nether ye soules of thine enemies, but vnderstodinge
to heare iudgment,
12 beholde, therfore haue I done acordynge to thy wordes. Beholde, I haue geuen
the an hert of wy?dome and vnderstondynge, so that soch one as thou hath not
bene before the, nether shall ryse vp after the.
13 Yee and that thou hast not prayed for, haue I geuen the also, namely, ryches,
and honoure, so that amonge the kynges in yi tyme there is not soch one as thou.
14 And yf thou wilt walke in my wayes, so that thou kepe myne ordinaunces and
lawes, as Dauid thy father hath walked, then wyll I geue the a longe lyfe.
15 And whan Salomon awaked, beholde, it was a dreame, and he came to Ierusale,
and stode before the Arke of the LORDES couenaunt, and offred burntofferynges,
and healthofferinges, and made a greate feast vnto his seruauntes.
16 At the same tyme came there two harlottes vnto ye kynge, and stode before
him.
17 And the one woman sayde: Oh my lorde, I and this woman dwelt in one house,
and I was delyuered of a childe in the house with her:
18 & on the thirde daye after that I was delyuered, she was delyuered of a
childe also. And we were together, so yt there was no straunger in ye house, but
we two:
19 & this womans sonne died in the nighte (for she smoored him in the slepe)
20 and she rose vp in the nighte, and toke my sonne fro my syde (where thy
handmayde slepte,) and layed it in hir arme, and hir deed sonne layed she in
myne arme.
21 And whan I rose vp in the mornynge to geue my sonne sucke, beholde, he was
deed. But in the mornynge I loked well, and beholde, it was not my sonne, whom I
had borne.
22 The other woman sayde: Not so, my sonne lyueth, and thy sonne is deed. But
she sayde: Not so, thy sonne is deed, and my sonne liueth. And thus spake they
before the kynge.
23 And the kynge sayde: This woma saieth: my sonne lyueth and thy sonne is deed:
Yonder woman sayeth: Not so, thy sonne is deed, & my sonne lyueth.
24 And the kynge saide: Fetch me a swerde. And whan the swerde was brought
before the kynge,
25 the kynge sayde: Parte the lyuynge childe in two partes, and geue this woman
the one halfe, and yonder woman the other halfe.
26 Then sayde the woman whose sonne lyued, vnto ye kinge: (for hir motherly hert
was kyndled with pite ouer hir sonne) Oh my lorde, geue hir the childe alyue,
and kyll it not. But the other sayde: Let it nether be myne ner thine, but let
it be parted.
27 Then answered the kynge, and sayde: Geue this woman the lyuynge childe, and
slaye it not, for she is his mother.
28 And all Israel herde of this iudgment that the kynge had geuen: and they
feared the kynge, for they sawe that ye wysdome of God was in him to kepe
iudgmet.

Chapter 4

1 Thus was Salomon kynge ouer all Israel.
2 And these were his prynces: Asaria the sonne of Sadoc the prest:
3 Elihoreph, and Ahi Ia the sonnes of Sisa, were prestes: Iosaphat the sonne of
Ahilud was chaunceler:
4 Benaia ye sonne of Ioiada was the chefe captayne: Sadoc and Abiathar were
prestes:
5 Asaria the sonne of Nathan was ouer the officers: Sabud the sonne of Nathan
the prest was the kynges frende:
6 Ahisar was stewarde: Adoniram the sonne of Abda was rent gatherer.
7 And Salomon had twolue offycers ouer all Israel, which made prouysion of fode
for the kynge and his house: One had a moneth longe in ye yeare to make
prouysion:
8 The sonne of Hur vpon mount Ephraim.
9 The sonne of Deber at Macaz and at Saalbaim, & at Bethsames, and at Elon, and
BethHana.
10 The sonne of Hased at Aruboth, and had therto Socho and all the londe of
Hepher.
11 The sonne of Abinadab all ye lordshippe at Dor: & had Taphat Salomos doughter
to wife.
12 Baena ye sonne of Ahilud at Thaenach & at Magiddo, & ouer all BethSean, which
lyeth besyde Zarthana vnder Iesrael from BethSean vnto the playne of Mehelo,
tyll the other syde of Iakmeam.
13 The sonne of Geber at Ramoth in Gilead: he had the townes of Iair the sonne
of Manasse in Gilead, and had ye coastes of Argob which lyeth in Basan, euen
thre score greate walled cities, and with brasen barres.
14 Ahinadab ye sonne of Iddo at Mahanaim.
15 Ahimaas in Nephtali: and he also toke Basmath Salomons doughter to wife.
16 Baena the sonne of Husai in Asser and at Aloth.
17 Iosaphat the sonne of Paruha in Isachar.
18 Semei the sonne of Ela in BenIamin.
19 Geber the sonne of Vri in the londe of Gilead, in the londe of Sihon kynge of
the Amorites, and of Og the kynge in Basan. One officer was in the same londe.
20 As for Iuda and Israel, they were in nombre as the sonde of the see, and ate
and dronke, and were mery.
21 Thus was Salomo lorde ouer all the kyngdomes (from the water of the londe of
the Philistynes, vnto the border of Egipte) which broughte him giftes, and
serued him as longe as he lyued.
22 And Salomon had daylie to his vytayles thirtye quarters of fyne meel,
threscore quarters of other meel,
23 ten fat oxen, and twety small catell, and an hundreth shepe, beside hartes
and Roes, and wilde goates, and fat capons, and foules.
24 For he had the lordshippe of all the londe on this syde the water, fro Tiphsa
vnto Gasa, and ouer all ye kynges on this syde ye water: & had peace of all his
subiectes rounde aboute,
25 so that Iuda and Israel dwelt safe, euery one vnder his vyne, and vnder his
figge tre, from Dan vnto Berseba, as longe as Salomon lyued.
26 And Salomo had fortye thousande cart horses and twolue thousande horsmen.
27 And the officers prouyded the kynge Salomon with vytayles: and whatsoeuer
belonged to the kynges table, that brought euery man in his moneth, and myssed
not:
28 Barlye also & strawe for the horses and coursers, & broughte them vnto the
place where ye kynge was, euery one after his charge.
29 And God gaue Salomon maruelous greate wy?dome and vnderstondinge, and a large
hert, as the sonde that lyeth vpon ye See shore:
30 so that the wy?dome of Salomon was greater then the wy?dome of all the
children towarde the south and of all ye Egipcians.
31 And he was wyser then all men, yee wyser then Ethan the Esrahite, Heman,
Chalcal, and Darda, the sonnes of Mahol: and had a greate name amonge all the
Heythe on euery syde.
32 And he spake thre thousande prouerbes, & his songes were a thousande & fyue.
33 And he spake of trees, from ye Ceder of Libanus vnto the Isope yt groweth out
of ye wall: he talked also of catell, of foules, of wormes, of fishes.
34 And there came of all nacions to heare ye wy?dome of Salomon, and there came
of all the kynges of ye earth, which had herde of his wy?dome.

Chapter 5

1 And Hiram ye kynge of Tyre sent his seruauntes vnto Salomon, for he had herde,
yt they had anoynted him kynge in his fathers steade: For Hiram loued Dauid as
loge as he lyued.
2 And Salomon sent vnto Hiram, sayenge:
3 Thou knowest that my father might not buylde an house vnto the name of the
LORDE his God, because of the warre that was aboute him, vntyll the LORDE
delyuered them vnder the soles of his fete:
4 But now hath the LORDE my God geuen me rest on euery syde, so that there is no
aduersary ner euell hynderaunce:
5 Beholde, I am therfore aduysed to buylde an house vnto the name of the LORDE
my God, acordinge as the LORDE spake vnto Dauid my father, and sayde: Thy sonne,
whom I shal set vpon thy seate in thy steade, shal buylde an house vnto my name.
6 Commaunde therfore that they hewe me downe Ceders out of Libanus, and that thy
seruauntes be with my seruauntes, & the rewarde of thy seruauntes wyll I geue
the, what so euer thou shalt axe: for thou knowest, yt with vs there is no ma
which can hewe tymber as the Sidonians.
7 Whan Hiram herde the wordes of Salomon, he was very glad, and sayde: Praysed
be the LORDE this daye, which hath geuen Dauid a wyse sonne ouer this greate
people.
8 And Hiram sent vnto Salomon, sayenge: I haue herde what thou hast sent vnto
me: I wyl do acordinge vnto all thy desyre with Ceders and Pynetrees.
9 My seruautes shall brynge them downe from Libanus vnto ye See, and I wyl make
them to flote vpo the See, vnto the place which thou shalt shewe me, and there
wyl I cause them to aryue, & thou shalt make the to be fetched. But thou shalt
fulfyll my desyre also, and geue fode vnto my housholde folkes.
10 So Hira gaue Salomon Ceders and Pyne trees acordinge to all his desyre.
11 But Salomon gaue Hiram twentye thousande quarters of wheate to eate for his
housholde, and twetye quarters of beaten oyle. This gaue Salomon yearly vnto
Hiram.
12 And the LORDE gaue Salomon wy?dome, acordynge as he had sayde vnto him, &
there was peace betwene Hiram and Salomon, and they made a couenaunt both
together.
13 And Salomon made an outchosynge (of workmen) thorow out all Israel. And ye
outchosynge was thirtie thousande me,
14 and he sent the to mount Libanus euery two monethes ten thousande, so that
they were one moneth vpon Libanus, and two monethes at home. And Adoniram was
ouer the outchosynge.
15 And Salomon had thre score thousande & ten that bare burthens, & foure score
thousande that hewed tymber vpon the mount,
16 besyde Salomons chefe officers, which were ordeyned ouer the worke: namely
thre thousande and thre hundreth, which ruled ye people that laboured there in
the worke.
17 And ye kynge commaunded, that they shulde breake out greate and costly
stones, namely frestone, for the foundacion of the house.
18 And Salomons masons, and Hirams, and they that were in those coastes, hewed
out & prepared tymbre and stones to the buyldinge of the house.

Chapter 6

1 In the foure hundreth and foure score yeare after the departinge of the
children of Israel out of the londe of Egipte, in the fourth yeare of the raigne
of Salomon ouer Israel, in the moneth Sif (yt is the seconde moneth) was the
house buylded vnto the LORDE.
2 This house that kynge Salomon buylded vnto ye LORDE, was thre score cubytes
loge, twenty cubytes brode, & thirtie cubites hye.
3 And he buylded a Porche before the temple of twentye cubytes longe after the
bredth of the house, & ten cubites brode before the house.
4 And in ye house he made wyndowes, which might be opened and shut with lyddes.
5 And rounde aboute by the wall of ye house he buylded a compase, so yt it wente
both aboute the temple and the quere, and made his outwarde wall roude aboute.
6 The nethermost stacion was fyue cubytes wyde, and ye myddest sixe cubites
wyde, and the thirde seuen cubites wyde. For he layed balkes rounde aboute the
house, that they touched not ye wall of the house.
7 And whan ye house was buylded, it was buylded of whole and outbroken stones,
so yt there was herde nether hammer ner axe, ner eny other instrument of yron,
whan the house was a buyldinge.
8 But on the righte syde of the myddes of the house there was a dore, so yt they
might go vp to the myddest stacion by a turne grese, & from the myddest stacion
vnto ye thirde.
9 Thus buylded he the house, & fynished it, & syled ye house both aboue & by the
walles wt Ceder wodd.
10 He buylded a galery also aboue vpon the whole house fyue cubytes hye, and
couered the house with Ceder tymber.
11 And the worde of the LORDE came vnto Salomon, & sayde:
12 Let this be the house yt thou buyldest. Yf thou shalt walke in myne
ordinaunces, & do acordinge to my lawes, & kepe all my comaundementes, to walke
therin, then wyl I stably?she my worde with ye, ( as I sayde vnto Dauid thy
father)
13 & wyll dwell amonge the childre of Israel, and wil not forsake my people of
Israel.
14 Thus Salomon buylded the house, & fynished it,
15 & buylded the walles on the insyde with Ceder tymber, from the grounde of ye
house vnto the rofe, and syled it with tymbre on the ynsyde, and ouerlayed the
floore of ye house with bordes of Pyne tre.
16 And behynde in the house he buylded a wall of Ceder tymber twentye cubytes
longe, from the floore vnto the rofe. And there on the ynsyde buylded he the
quere for the most holy.
17 But the house of the temple before the quere was fortye cubites longe:
18 on the ynsyde was the whole house of Ceder with throwne knoppes and floures,
so that there was no stone sene.
19 As for the quere, he prepared it on the ynsyde of the house, that the Arke of
the couenaunt of the LORDE might be set therin.
20 And before the quere (which was twentye cubites longe, twentye cubytes brode,
and twentye cubytes hye, and ouerlayed with pure golde) he syled the altare with
Ceder.
21 And Salomon ouerlayed the house on ye ynsyde wt pure golde, & shot barres of
golde before the quere, which he had ouerlayed wt golde,
22 so that ye whole house was layed ouer with golde. And all the altare also
before ye quere ouerlayed he with golde.
23 He made also in the quere two Cherubins ten cubites hye of Olyue tre.
24 One wynge of ether of the Cherubs had fyue cubytes, so that from the edge of
his one wynge to the edge of his other wynge there were ten cubytes.
25 Euen so had the other Cherub ten cubites also, and both the Cherubs were of
one measure and of one quantitie
26 so yt ether Cherub was ten cubites hye. And he put the Cherubins within in
the house.
27 And the Cherubins spred forth their wynges, so that the wynge of the one
touched the one wall, and the other Cherubs wynge touched the other wall. But in
the myddes of ye house the one wynge touched another.
28 And he ouerlayed the Cherubins with golde.
29 And on all the walles of the house rounde aboute, he caused to make carued
worke, with carued Cherubins, palme trees, and floures.
30 And the pauement of the house ouerlayed he also with golde plates.
31 (Omitted Text)
32 And at the intraunce of the quere he made two dores of olyue thre with fyue
squared postes, and caused carued worke to be made therof with Cherubins, palme
trees and floures, & ouerlayed them with plates of golde.
33 So made he also at the intraunce of the temple, foure squared postes of Olyue
tre,
34 and two dores of Pyne tre (so that ether dore had two syde dores one haginge
to another)
35 and made carued worke therof, palme trees and floures, right as it was
appoynted.
36 And he buylded a courte also within wt thre rowes of fre stone, and with one
rowe of playne Ceder tymber.
37 In the fourth yeare in the moneth Sif, was the foundacion of the LORDES house
layed:
38 and in the eleuenth yeare in the moneth Bul (that is the eight moneth) was
the house fynished as it shulde be, so that they were seuen yeare a buyldinge of
it.

Chapter 7

1 Bvt Salomon was a buyldinge his awne house thirtene yeare, & fynished it,
namely,
2 he buylded an house of the wodd of Libanus, an hundreth cubites longe, fiftye
cubites wyde, & thirtie cubites hye, fouresquared with rowes of pilers, and wt
carued Ceders.
3 And the rofe aboue syled he also with Cederwodd vpon the fyue & fortie pilers,
for one rowe had fyftene pilers,
4 so yt there stode euer thre pilers one right ouer agaynst another:
5 so that euery space betwixte the pilers was one ouer agaynst another foure
squared with the pilers.
6 And he made a porche with pilers which was fiftye cubites longe, and thirtie
cubites brode, & yet a porche before it with pilers & wt a greate poste.
7 He made a porche also vnto ye kynges seate (wherin ye iudgment was kepte) and
made it to be the porche of iudgment, and syled it with Ceder from the pauement
vnto the pauement agayne,
8 and his owne house wherin he dwelt, in ye back courte made betwene ye house
and the porche like the other. And like vnto the porche made he a house for
Pharaos doughter, whom Salomon had taken to wife.
9 All these were costly stone hewen after ye measure, cut with sawes on euery
syde, from the grounde vnto the rofe: and without the greate courte also.
10 As for the foundacions, they were costly and greate stones, ten and eighte
cubites greate:
11 and costly fre stones theron acordinge to ye measure, and Ceders.
12 But the greate courte rounde aboute had thre rowes of fre stone, & one rowe
of playne Ceders: Euen so also the courte by ye hou of the LORDE within, and the
porch by the house.
13 And kynge Salomon sent to fetch one Hiram of Tyre
14 a wedowes sonne, of the trybe of Nephtali, and his father had bene a man of
Tyre, which was a connynge ma in metall, full of wy?dome, vnderstondinge and
knowlege to worke all maner of metall worke. Whan he came to kynge Salomon, he
made all his worke,
15 and made two brasen pilers, ether of them eightene cubites hye: and a threde
of xij. cubites was the measure aboute both ye pilers:
16 and he made two knoppes of brasse molten, to set aboue vpon the pilers: and
euery knoppe was fyue cubytes hye:
17 and on euery knoppe aboue vpon ye pilers seue wrythen ropes like cheynes.
18 And vpon euery knoppe he made two rowes of pomgranates rounde aboute on one
rope, wherwith ye knoppe was couered.
19 And the knoppes were like roses before ye porche foure cubites greate.
20 And the pomgranates in the rowes rounde aboute were two hudreth aboue and
beneth vpon the rope, which wete rounde aboute the thicknes of the knoppe, on
euery knoppe vpon both the pilers.
21 And set vp the pilers before the porche of the temple. And that which he set
on the right hande, called he Iachin: and that which he set on the lefte hande,
called he Boos.
22 And so stode it aboue vpon the pilers euen like roses. Thus was the worke of
ye pilers fynished.
23 And he made a molten lauer ten cubytes wyde from the one syde to the other
rounde aboute, and fyue cubites hye, and a threde of thirtie cubites loge was ye
measure rounde aboute:
24 and aboute the same lauer that was then cubites wyde, there wente knoppes on
the edge therof rounde aboute the lauer. Two rowes were there of the knoppes
molten with the lauer.
25 And it stode vpon twolue bullockes, wherof thre were turned towarde the
north, thre towarde the west, thre towarde the south, and thre towarde the east,
and the lauer aboue theron, so that all their hynder partes were within vnder
the lauer:
26 wherof the thicknesse was an handbreth: and the edge of it was like the edge
of a cuppe, and as a floured rose, and it conteyned two thousande Battes.
27 And he made ten brasen seates, euery one foure cubites longe and brode, and
thre cubites hye.
28 The seate was made so, that it had sydes betwene the ledges.
29 And on the sydes betwene the ledges there were lyons, bullockes and
Cherubins. And on ye ledges which were aboue and beneth the lyons and bullockes,
were the sydes made so, that they were set downwardes.
30 And euery stole had foure brasen wheles with brasen axeltrees. And vpon the
foure corners there were proppes molten, euery one ouer agaynst another,
vnderset vnto the kettell.
31 And the soket vpon the stole was a cubyte hye and rounde, a cubyte and an
halfe wyde: and on the soket there were knoppes in foldes, which were foure
squared & not rounde.
32 The foure wheles stode beneth by the sydes, & the axeltrees of the wheles
were harde on ye seate. Euery whele was a cubite and a halfe hye,
33 and they were wheles like cart wheles. And their axeltrees, spokes, nales, &
shaftes were all molten.
34 And the foure proppes vpo the foure corners of euery seate were harde on the
seate.
35 And on the soket aboue vpon the seate a cubyte and an halfe rounde aboute,
there were ledges and sydes harde on the seate.
36 And on the plat of the same sydes and ledges, he caused to carue Cherubins,
lyons and palme trees, one by another rounde aboute theron.
37 After this maner made he ten molte seates, one maner of measure & widenes was
in all.
38 And he made ten copper kettels, so that one kettell coteyned fortye Battes,
and was foure cubites greate, and vpon euery seate was a kettell.
39 And fyue seates set he on the righte syde of the house, and the other fyue on
the lefte syde. But the lauer set he before on the righte hande towarde the
south.
40 And Hiram made pottes also and shouels and basens, & so fynished he all the
worke, that kynge Salomon caused to be made in the house of the LORDE:
41 namely ye two pilers, and the rounde knoppes aboue vpon the two pilers, and
the two wrythen ropes to couer the two rounde knoppes vpon the pilers.
42 And the foure hudreth pomgranates on the two wrythen ropes, euer two rowes of
pomgranates vnto euery rope, to couer the two rounde knoppes vpon the pilers.
43 And the ten seates, and ten kettels theron, and the lauer,
44 and twolue bullockes vnder ye lauer.
45 And the pottes, shouels and basens. And all the ornamentes which Hiram made
vnto kynge Salomon for the house of the LORDE, were of pure metall.
46 In the countre by Iordane, caused the kynge them to be molten in thicke
earth, betwene Sucoth and Zarthan.
47 And Salomon let all the apparell be vnweyed, because the metall was so moch.
48 Morouer Salomon made all the apperell that belonged vnto the house of the
LORDE: namely a golden altare, a golden table that the shewbred laye on,
49 fyue candelstickes on the righte hande, and fyue candelstickes on the lefte
(before the quere) of pure golde, wt floures,
50 lampes and snoffers of golde, therto flat peces, charges, basens, spones and
censours of pure golde. And the hokes of ye dores on the insyde of the house in
the most holy, and in the dores of the house of the teple of the LORDE were of
golde.
51 Thus all the worke that kynge Salomon made in ye house of the LORDE, was
fynisshed. And Salomon brought in that his father Dauid had sanctified, of
syluer and golde and ornamentes, and layed it amonge the treasures of the house
of the LORDE.

Chapter 8

1 Then gathered kynge Salomon all ye Elders in Israel together, all the rulers
of the trybes and prynces of the fathers amonge the children of Israel, vnto
Ierusalem, to brynge vp the Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE, out of the cite
of Dauid, that is Sion.
2 And there resorted vnto kynge Salomon all the men in Israel, at the feast in
the moneth Ethanim, that is ye seuenth moneth.
3 And whan all ye Elders of Israel came, the prestes toke the Arke of the LORDE,
4 and broughte it vp, and the Tabernacle of witnesse, and all the ornamentes of
the Sanctuary that were in the Tabernacle. This dyd the prestes and the Leuites.
5 And kynge Salomon and all the congregacion of Israel yt were gathered vnto
him, wente with him before the Arke, and offred shepe and bullockes, so many,
that they coulde not be nombred ner tolde.
6 So the prestes broughte the Arke of the LORDES couenaunt vnto hir place, euen
in to ye Quere of the house in the most holy vnder ye wynges of the Cherubins.
7 For ye Cherubins spred out their wynges in the place where the Arke stode, and
couered the Arke and the staues therof from aboue.
8 And the staues were so loge, that ye knoppes of them were sene from the
Sanctuary before ye quere, but on the outsyde were they not sene, and they were
there vnto this daye.
9 And in the Arke there was nothinge, but onely the two tables of stone, which
Moses had layed therin at Horeb, whan ye LORDE made a couenaunt with the
children of Israel, what tyme as they were departed out of the londe of Egipte.
10 But whan the prestes wente out of the Sanctuary, a cloude fylled the house of
the LORDE,
11 so yt the prestes coulde not stonde & execute the office for the cloude: for
the glory of the LORDE fylled the LORDES house.
12 Then sayde Salomon: The LORDE sayde, that he wolde dwell in a darke cloude.
13 I haue buylded an house, to be an habitacion vnto the: a seate, yt thou
mayest dwell there for euer.
14 And ye kynge turned his face, & blessed all the congregacion of Israel. And
all the cogregacion of Israel stode,
15 & he sayde: Praysed be the LORDE God of Israel, which promised by his mouth
vnto my father Dauid, and by his hade hath fulfylled it, and sayde:
16 Sence the daye yt I broughte my people of Israel out of Egipte, haue I chosen
no cite amoge all the trybes of Israel, to buylde me an house, that my name
might be there. But Dauid haue I chosen, to be ouer my people of Israel.
17 And in dede my father Dauid was mynded to buylde an house vnto the name of
the LORDE God of Israel:
18 neuertheles the LORDE sayde vnto my father Dauid: Where as thou wast mynded
to buylde an house vnto my name, thou hast done well, that thou art so aduysed.
19 Howbeit thou shalt not buylde the house, but thy sonne which shal come out of
thy loynes, he shal buylde an house vnto my name.
20 And the LORDE hath perfourmed his worde that he spake: For I am come vp in my
father Dauids steade, and syt vpon the seate of Israel, as the LORDE sayde: and
haue buylded an house vnto the name of the LORDE God of Israel:
21 and there haue I ordeyned a place for the Arke, wherin is the LORDES
couenaunt, which he made with oure fathers, whan he broughte them out of ye
londe of Egipte.
22 And Salomon stode before the altare of the LORDE in the presence of the whole
congregacion of Israel, and helde out his handes towarde heauen,
23 and sayde: O LORDE God of Israel, there is no god like the, nether aboue in
heauen, ner beneth vpo earth, thou that kepest couenaut and mercy for all thy
seruauntes that walke before ye with all their hert,
24 thou that hast kepte promes with my father Dauid thy seruaunt: With thy mouth
thou saydest it, and with thy hande hast thou fulfylled it, as it is come to
passe this daye.
25 Now LORDE God of Israel make good vnto my father Dauid yi seruaunt, that
which thou hast promysed him, and sayde: Thou shalt not wante a man before me to
syt vpon the seate of Israel, yf thy childre kepe their waye, so yt they walke
before me like as thou hast walked before me.
26 Now thou God of Israel, let yi worde be verified, which thou hast promysed
vnto my father Dauid thy seruaunt.
27 For thynkest thou yt God dwelleth vpon earth? Beholde, the heauens and the
heauens of all heauens maye not contayne the: how shulde then this house do it,
that I haue buylded?
28 But turne the vnto the prayer of thy seruaunt, and to his supplicacion (O
LORDE my God) that thou mayest heare the thankesgeuynge and prayer, which thy
seruaunt maketh before the this daye,
29 so that thine eyes be open ouer this house night and daye, euen ouer this
place (wherof thou saydest: My name shall dwell there.) That thou mayest heare
the prayer which thy seruaut maketh in this place,
30 & heare the intercession of yi seruaunt & of thy people of Israel, which they
shall make here in this place of thy habitacion in heauen: and whan thou hearest
it, be gracious.
31 Whan eny ma synneth agaynst his neghboure, and taketh vpon him an ooth
wherwith he byndeth him selfe, and ye ooth commeth before thine altare in this
house,
32 then heare thou in heaue, and se that thy seruauntes haue right, to condemne
the vngodly, and to brynge his waye vpon his owne heade, and to iustifie the
righteous, to geue him acordinge to his righteousnes.
33 Whan thy people of Israel is smytten before their enemies (whyle they haue
synned agaynst the) and yf they turne vnto the and knowlege thy name, & make
their prayer and intercession vnto the in this house,
34 the heare thou them in heauen, and be mercifull vnto the synne of thy people
of Israel, and brynge them agayne into the londe, yt thou hast geuen vnto their
fathers.
35 Whan the heauen is shut vp, so yt it rayneth not (for so moch, as they haue
synned agaynst the) and yf they make their prayer in this place, and knowlege
thy name, and turne from their synnes wha thou troublest them,
36 heare thou them then in heauen, and be mercifull vnto the synnes of thy
seruauntes, and of thy people of Israel, that thou mayest shewe them the good
waye, wherin they shulde walke, and let it rayne vpon the londe that thou hast
geuen thy people to inheritaunce.
37 Whan a derth, or pestilence, or drouth, or burnynge, or greshopper or
catirpiller, is in their londe, or whan his enemye layeth sege to his portes in
the londe, or whan eny other plage or disease happeneth,
38 who so euer then maketh his prayer and peticion, whether it be eny other men
or thy people of Israel (which the are aware of their plage) euery one in his
hert, and spredeth out his handes vnto this house:
39 Heare thou then in heauen in the seate where thou dwellest, and be mercifull,
& se that thou geue euery one acordinge as he hath walked, like as thou knowest
his hert (for thou onely knowest the hert of all the children of men)
40 that they maye allwaye feare the, as longe as they lyue in the lande, which
thou hast geuen vnto oure fathers.
41 And whan eny straunger, that is not of thy people of Israel, commeth out of a
farre countre for thy names sake
42 (for they shall heare of thy greate name, and of thy mightie hade, and of thy
outstretched arme) and commeth to make his prayer in this house,
43 heare thou him then in heauen, euen in the seate of thy dwellynge, and do all
for the which that straunger calleth vpon the, that all the nacions vpon earth
maye knowe thy name, and that they maye feare the, as thy people of Israel do:
and that they maye knowe, how that this house which I haue buylded, is named
after thy name.
44 Whan thy people go forth to the battayll agaynst their enemyes, the waye that
thou shalt sende them and shall praye vnto the LORDE towarde the waye of the
cite which thou hast chosen, and towarde the house that I haue buylded vnto thy
name,
45 heare thou then their prayer and peticion in heauen, and execute iudgment for
them.
46 Whan they synne agaynst the (for there is no ma that synneth not) & thou be
wroth, and delyuer the vnto their enemyes, so that they cary them awaye captyue
in to the enemyes londe farre or nye,
47 and yf they remembre them selues in the londe where they are captyue, and
turne, and make their intercession vnto the in the londe of their captyuite, and
saye: We haue synned, & done amysse, and haue bene vngodly,
48 and so turne vnto ye with all their hert, and with all their soule in the
lode of their enemies (which led them awaye captyue) and make their prayer vnto
the towarde the waye of their londe, that thou hast geuen vnto their fathers,
euen towarde the cite which thou hast chosen, and towarde the house that I haue
buylded vnto thy name:
49 then heare thou their prayer and supplicacion in heauen, from the seate of
thy dwellynge, and execute iudgment for them,
50 and be mercifull vnto thy people that haue synned agaynst the, and vnto all
their trespaces, wherwith they haue transgressed agaynst the, and graunte the
mercy in the sighte of them which led them awaye presonners, that their enemyes
maye be mercyfull vnto them:
51 for they are thy people, and thyne enheritaunce, whom thou broughtest out of
Egipte, from the yron fornace:
52 that thine eyes maye be open vnto the peticion of thy seruaunt, and of thy
people of Israel, that thou maiest heare them in all thinges for the which they
shall call vpon the
53 (for thou O LORDELORDE) hast sundered them out to be an inheritaunce vnto thy
selfe, from amoge all the nacions vpon earth, acordinge as thou saydest by Moses
thy seruaunt, whan thou broughtest oure fathers out of Egipte.
54 And wha Salomon had ended all this prayer and peticion before the LORDE, he
rose vp from the altare of the LORDE, and lefte of from knelynge and holdynge
out of handes towarde heauen,
55 and stode and blessed all the congregacion of Israel with loude voyce, and
sayde:
56 Praysed be the LORDE which hath geuen rest vnto his people, acordinge as he
sayde. There hath not one fayled of all his good wordes, which he spake by his
seruaunt Moses.
57 The LORDE oure God be with vs, as he hath bene with oure fathers, and forsake
vs not,
58 nether withdrawe his hande from vs, but bowe oure hertes vnto him, that we
maye walke in all his wayes, and kepe his commaundementes, ordinaunces and
lawes, which he commaunded oure fathers.
59 And these wordes wherwith I haue made my peticion before the LORDE, come nye
vnto the LORDE oure God daye and nighte, that he maye execute iudgment for his
seruaunt and for his people of Israel, euery one at his tyme:
60 that all nacions vpon earth maye knowe, that the LORDE is God, & that there
is none other.
61 And let youre hert be perfecte with the LORDE oure God, to walke in his
statutes, and to kepe his commaundementes, as it is this daye.
62 And the kynge with all Israel his people offred sacrifice before the LORDE.
63 And Salomon offred deed offerynges (which he offred vnto the LORDE) two and
twenty thousande oxen, and an hundreth & twenty thousande shepe. So the kynge
and all the children of Israel dedicated the house of the LORDE.
64 The same daye dyd the kynge dedicate the myddelmost courte, which was before
the house of the LORDE: that he mighte there perfourme the burntofferynges,
meatofferynges, and the fat of the deedofferynges: for the brasen altare that
stode before ye LORDE, was to litle for the burntofferynges, meatofferynges, and
for the fat of the deedofferynges.
65 And at the same tyme made Salomon a solempne feast, and all Israel a greate
congregacion with him, from the border of Hemath vnto the ryuer of Egipte,
before the LORDE oure God, seuen dayes, and yet seuen dayes, that were fourtene
daies.
66 And on the eight daye he let the people go. And they blessed the kynge, and
wente vnto their tentes reioysinge and with a mery hert, because of all the good
that the LORDE had done vnto Dauid his seruaunt, & to his people of Israel.

Chapter 9

1 And whan Salomon had fynished ye buyldinge of the house of the LORDE, and the
kynges house, and all that his desyre and pleasure was to make,
2 ye LORDE appeared vnto him the seconde tyme, euen as he appeared vnto him at
Gibeon.
3 And the LORDE sayde vnto him: I haue herde thy prayer and peticion, that thou
hast made before me, and haue sanctified this house which thou hast buylded,
that I maye set my name there for euer: and myne eyes and my hert shalbe there
allwaye.
4 And yf thou walke before me (as thy father Dauid walked) with a perfecte and a
true hert, so that thou do all that I haue commaunded the, and kepe myne
ordinaunces and lawes,
5 then wyll I stablish the seate of thy kyngdome ouer Israel for euer, acordinge
as I promysed thy father Dauid, and sayde: Thou shalt not wante a man from the
seate of Israel.
6 But yf ye turne back fro me, ye and youre childre, and kepe not my
commaundementes and ordinaunces which I haue layed before you, but go and serue
other goddes, and worshipe them,
7 then wyll I rote Israel out of the londe that I haue geuen them. And the house
that I haue halowed vnto my name, wyll I put awaye fro my face. And Israel shall
be come a byworde and fabell amoge all nacions,
8 and so shal this hye house: so that euery one yt goeth by, shall be astonyed,
and make an hyssynge, and saye: Wherfore hath the LORDE done thus vnto this
londe and to this house?
9 Then shal it be answered: Because they forsoke ye LORDE their God, (which
brought their fathers out of the londe of Egipte) and haue receaued other
goddes, and worshipped them, and serued them. Therfore hath ye LORDE brought all
this euell vpon them.
10 Now whan the twentye yeares were ended, wherin Salomon buylded the two
houses, the LORDES house and the kynges house,
11 where vnto Hiram the kynge of Tyre brought Salomo Ceder trees & Pyne trees,
and golde after all his desyre, then gaue kynge Salomon vnto Hiram twentye
cities in the countre of Galile.
12 And Hiram departed from Tyre to vyset the cities which Salomon had geuen him,
& they pleased him not,
13 and he sayde: What maner of cities are these (my brother) that thou hast geue
me? And he called them the londe of Cabul vnto this daye.
14 And Hiram vnto the kynge, sixe score hundreth weight of Golde.
15 And the same is the summe of the taxe, that kynge Salomon raysed to the
buyldinge of the house of the LORDE, and his awne house, & Millo, and the walles
of Ierusalem, and Hasor, and Megiddo, and Gaser.
16 For Pharao ye kynge of Egipte came vp, and wane Gaser, & brent it with fyre,
& slewe the Cananites yt dwelt in the cite, & gaue it for a gifte vnto his
doughter Salomos wife.
17 So Salomon buylded Gaser, & the lower Bethoron,
18 and Baelath and Thamar, in ye wyldernes, in the londe,
19 & all the cities of the corne houses that Salomon had, and all the cities of
the charettes, & all the cities of the horsmen, and what it pleased him to
buylde at Ierusalem, in Libanus, & in euery countre of his domynion.
20 And all the remnaunt of the people of the Amorytes, Hethites, Pheresites,
Heuites and Iebusites, which were not of the children of Israel,
21 their children which they lefte behynde them in the londe (whom the children
of Israel coulde not vtterly destroye) those dyd Salomon make tributaries vnto
this daye.
22 But of the children of Israel he made no bondmen, but let them be men of
warre, and his seruauntes, and prynces, and knightes, and ouer his charettes and
horsme.
23 And the officers which were ouer Salomons busynesse, were fyue hundreth and
fyftye, which ruled the people, and perfourmed the worke.
24 And Pharaos doughter wente vp from the cite of Dauid, in to hir house which
he had buylded for her. Then buylded he Millo likewyse.
25 And thre tymes in the yeare dyd Salomon offre burntofferynges and
deedofferynges vpon the altare that he had buylded vnto the LORDE, and burnt
incense vpon it before the LORDE, and so was the house ended and fynished.
26 And Salomon made shippes also at Ezeon Geber, which lyeth by Eloth besyde the
Reed See shore in ye londe of the Edomites.
27 And Hiram sent his seruauntes by shippe, which were shipmen, and had
experience of the See, with Salomons seruauntes,
28 and they came vnto Ophir, and fetched from thence one & twenty score hundreth
weight of golde, and brought it vnto Salomon.

Chapter 10

1 And whan kynge Salomons fame of the name of the LORDE came to the eares of the
Quene of riche Arabia, she came to proue him with darke sentences.
2 And she came to Ierusalem with a maruelous greate trayne, with camels which
bare spyces, and moch golde, and precious stones And whan she came in to kynge
Salomon, she spake vnto him all that was in hir hert.
3 And Salomon tolde her euerythinge, and the kynge had nothinge in secrete, but
he tolde it her.
4 But whan the Quene of riche Arabia sawe all the wy?dome of Salomon, and the
house that he had buylded,
5 and the meates of his table, and the dwellinges of his seruauntes, & the
offyces of his ministers, and their garmentes, and his butlers and the
burntofferynges which he offred in the house of the LORDE, she wondred
exceadingly, and coulde no longer refrayne,
6 but sayde vnto the kynge: It is true that I haue herde in my londe of thy
behauoure and of thy wy?dome.
7 And I wolde not beleue it, tyll I came and sawe it with myne eyes: and
beholde, the halfe hath not bene tolde me. hou hast more wy?dome and good, the
the fame is that I haue herde.
8 Happye are thy people and thy seruauntes, that allwaie stonde before the, and
heare thy wy?dome.
9 Praysed be the LORDE thy God, which had soch a pleasure vnto the, that he set
the vpon the seate of Israel: because he hath allwaye loued Israel, and hath set
the to be kynge, that thou shuldest mantayne iustyce and equyte.
10 And she gaue the kynge syxe score hundreth weighte of golde, and very moch
spyce, and precious stones. There came neuer so moch spyce thyther, as the Quene
of riche Arabia gaue vnto kynge Salomon.
11 And Hirams shippes, which caried golde out of Ophir, broughte maruelous moch
costly tymber and precious stones from Ophir.
12 And of that costly tymber the kynge caused to make pilers in the house of the
LORDE, and in ye kinges house, and harpes and Psalteries for the Musicians.
There came nomore soch costly tymber, nether was it sene vnto this daye.
13 And kynge Salomon gaue the quene of riche Arabia, all that she desyred and
axed, besydes that which he gaue her of a frye hande. And she returned, and
departed in to hir lande with hir seruauntes.
14 The golde that came to Salomon in one yeare, was nyne and thyrtie score
hundreth weighte,
15 besydes that which came of chapmen, marchauntes and Apotecaries, and of the
nexte kynges, and of the mightie men in the londe.
16 And kynge Salomon caused to make two hundreth speares of beaten golde, sixe
hundreth peces of golde put he to euery speare:
17 and thre hundreth shyldes of ye best golde, euen thre pounde of golde vpon
euery shylde. And the kynge put them in the house of the wod of Libanus.
18 And the kynge made a greate seate of Yuery, and ouerlayed it with ye most
precious golde.
19 And the seate had sixe steppes, and ye heade of the seate was roude behynde.
And there were two postes to leane vpo on both the sydes of the seate, and two
lyons stode vpon the leanynge postes,
20 and twolue lyons stode vpon the sixe steppes on both the sydes. Soch one hath
not bene made in eny kyngdome.
21 All kynge Salomos drynkynge vessels were of golde, and all the vessels in the
house of ye wod of Libanus were of pure golde also: for syluer was not regarded
in Salomons tyme.
22 For the kynges Seeshippe yt sayled vpon the See with ye shippe of Hiram, came
once in thre yeare, and broughte golde, syluer, Yuery, Apes, and Pecockes.
23 Thus was kynge Salomon greater in riches and wy?dome, then all the kynges vpo
earth:
24 And all the worlde desyred to se Salomon, that they mighte heare the wy?dome
which God gaue him in his hert.
25 And they broughte him yearly euery man his present, vessels of syluer and
golde, rayment and harnesse, spyces, horses and Mules.
26 And Salomon broughte charettes and horsmen together, so that he had a
thousande and foure hundreth charettes, and twolue thousande horsmen: and those
he put in ye charet cities, and with the kynge at Ierusalem.
27 And the kynge broughte it to passe, that there was as moch syluer at Ierusale
as stones: and as many Ceders as there were wylde figge trees in the valleys.
28 And Salomos horses were broughte out of Egipte, and fro Reua: for the kynges
marchauntes fetched them from Reua for money.
29 And a charet came vp out of Egipte for sixe hudreth Sycles of Syluer, and an
horse for an hudreth and fyftye. Thus were they brought also vnto all the kynges
of the Hethites and to the kynges of Siria by their handes.

Chapter 11

1 But kynge Salomon loued many outlandish wemen, Pharaos doughter, and wemen of
Moab, of Ammo, of Edom, of Sidon, and of Heth,
2 euen of those nacions, that the LORDE spake of vnto the children of Israel: Go
not ye vnto them, and let not them come vnto you: they shal surely bowe youre
hertes after their goddes: Vnto these dyd Salomon enclyne with affeccion.
3 And he had seuen hundreth wemen to wyues, and thre hundreth concubynes, and
his wyues turned his hert asyde.
4 And whan he was now olde, his wyues bowed his hert after straunge goddes, so
that his hert was not whole with the LORDE his God, as was the hert of Dauid his
father.
5 So Salomon walked after Astaroth the god of the Sidonians, and after Malcom
the abhominacion of the Ammonites.
6 And Salomon dyd yt which displeased the LORDE, and folowed not ye LORDE to ye
vttemost as dyd his father Dauid.
7 The buylded Salomo an hie place vnto Chamos the abhominacio of ye Moabites
(vpon the mount that lyeth before Ierusale) and vnto Moloch the abhominacion of
the Ammnnites.
8 Thus dyd Salomon for all his outladish wyues, which brent incense, and offred
vnto their goddes.
9 But the LORDE was wroth at Salomon, because his hert was turned asyde from ye
LORDE God of Israel, which had two tymes appeared vnto him,
10 and comaunded him, that he shulde not walke after other goddes: and yet kepte
he not that the LORDE commaunded him.
11 Therfore sayde the LORDE vnto Salomon: For so moch as this is done with the,
and hast not kepte my couenaunt and myne ordinaunces, which I commaunded the,
therfore wyll I also plucke thy kyngdome from the, and geue it vnto thy
seruaunt:
12 Neruertheles in yi tyme will I not do it, for thy father Dauids sake, but
from the hande of thy sonne wyl I plucke it.
13 Howbeit I wyl not plucke ye kyngdome cleane awaye. One trybe wyll I geue vnto
thy sonne, for Dauid my seruauntes sake, and for Ierusalems sake which I haue
chosen.
14 And the LORDE raysed vp an aduersary vnto Salomon, euen Hadad the Edomite of
the kynges sede, which was in Edom.
15 For whan Dauid was in Edom, and Ioab the chefe captayne wente vp to bury the
slayne, he smote all the males in Edom.
16 (For Ioab remayned there sixe monethes and all Israel, tyl he had roted out
all ye males that were in Edom.)
17 Then fled Hadad, and certayne men of ye Moabites with him, of his fathers
seruauntes. As for Hadad, he was a yonge man.
18 And they gat them vp fro Madian, and came vnto Paran, and toke men with them
out of Paran, and came in to Egipte vnto Pharao the kynge of Egipte: which gaue
him an house and certayne vytales appoynted, & gaue him a countre.
19 And Adad founde greate fauoure in the sighte of Pharao, so that he gaue him
to wife euen the sister of his owne wife Thaphenes the Quene.
20 And Thaphenes sister bare him Genubath his sonne, and Thaphenes norished him
vp in Pharaos house, in so moch that Genubath was in Pharaos house amonge
Pharaos children.
21 Now wha Hadad herde in Egipte, that Dauid was falle on slepte with his
fathers, and yt Ioab the chefe captayne was deed, he sayde vnto Pharao: Let me
go in to my countre.
22 Pharao sayde vnto him: What lackest thou with me, that thou wilt go in to thy
countre? He sayde: Nothynge, but yet let me go.
23 God raysed him vp another aduersary also, one Reson the sonne of El Iada,
which fled from his lorde Hadad Eser kynge of Zeba,
24 and gathered men agaynst him, and was a captayne of the men of warre whan
Dauid slewe them: and they wente vnto Damascus and dwelt there, and reigned at
Damascus,
25 and he was Israels aduersary as loge as Salomon lyued. This is the harme yt
Hadad suffred: therfore had he euell will at Israel, and was kynge ouer Israel
26 Morouer Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat an Ephraite Salomons seruaunt (and his
mothers name was Zeruga, a wedowe) lifte vp his hande also agaynst the kynge.
27 And this is the cause wherfore he lifte vp his hande agaynst the kynge: Whan
Salomon buylded Millo, he shut vp a gappe in the cite of Dauid his father.
28 And Ieroboam was a ma of armes. And whan Salomon sawe that it was a mete
yonge man, he set him ouer all the burthens of the house of Ioseph.
29 But at the same tyme it fortuned, that Ieroboam wente out from Ierusalem, and
the prophet Ahias of Silo founde him by the waye, and he had a new cloke vpon
him, and they two were alone in the felde.
30 And Ahia toke holde of the new cloke yt he had on, and rente the same in to
twolue peces,
31 and sayde vnto Ieroboam: Take thou ten peces vnto the. For thus sayeth the
LORDE God of Israel: Beholde, euen thus wyll I rente the kyngdome from the hande
of Salomo, and wyll geue the ten trybes.
32 One trybe shall he haue for my seruaunt Dauids sake, and because of the cyte
of Ierusalem, which I haue chosen out of all the trybes of Israel:
33 for they haue forsaken me, and worshipped Astaroth the god of the Sidonians,
Chamos the god of the Moabites, and Malco the god of the children of Ammon, and
haue not walked in my wayes, to fulfill my pleasure, myne ordinaunces, and
lawes, as dyd Dauid his father.
34 Notwithstondynge I wyll not take the whole kyngdome from out of his hande,
but wil make him a prynce as longe as he lyueth for my seruaunt Dauids sake,
whom I dyd chose, which kepte my commaundementes & ordinaunces.
35 From out of the hande of his sonne wyl I take the kyngdome, and wyl geue ten
trybes vnto the,
36 and one vnto his sonne, that Dauid my seruaunt maye allwaye haue a lanterne
before me in the cite of Ierusalem, which I haue chosen, that I maye set my name
there.
37 Therfore wyl I take the now, to raygne ouer all that thine hert desyreth, and
thou shalt be kynge ouer Israel.
38 Yf thou folowe now all that I shall commaunde the, and walke in my wayes, and
fulfill my pleasure to kepe myne ordinaunces and commaundementes, as dyd my
seruaut Dauid, then wyll I be with the, and buylde the a sure house, as I
buylded vnto Dauid, and wyl geue Israel vnto the
39 and therwith wyll I subdue the sede of Dauid, but not for euermore.
40 But Salomon soughte to kyll Ieroboam. Then Ieroboam gat him vp, and fled in
to Egipte to Sisak the kynge of Egipte, and remayned in Egipte, tyll Salomon
dyed.
41 What more there is to saye of Salomon, and all that he dyd, and his wy?dome,
it is wrytten in the Cronicles of Salomon.
42 The tyme that Salomon was kynge at Ierusalem ouer all Israel, is fortye
yeare.
43 And Salomon fell on slepe with his fathers, and was buryed in the cite of
Dauid his father, and Roboam his sonne was kynge in his steade.

Chapter 12

1 And Roboam wete vnto Sichem, for all Israel was come to Sichem to make him
kynge.
2 And whan Ieroboam ye sonne of Nebat herde that, while he was yet in Egipte
(whither he was fled for Salomon) he came agayne out of Egipte.
3 And they sent for him, and called him. And Ieroboam with all the congregacion
of Israel came and spake to Roboam, and sayde:
4 Thy father made oure yock to harde: therfore make thou now the harde bondage
and the sore yock lighter, and we wyll submytte oure selues vnto the.
5 He sayde vnto them: Go youre waye vnto the thirde daye, and then come to me
agayne. And the people wete their waye.
6 And Roboam the kynge helde a councell with the Elders that stode before Salomo
his father whyle he lyued, & he sayde: What is youre councell, that we maye geue
this people an answere?
7 They sayde vnto him: Yf thou do this people a pleasure to daye, and folowe
their mynde, and heare them, and geue them good wordes, then shal they be
obedient vnto the as longe as thou liuest.
8 Neuertheles he forsoke the councell that ye Elders had geuen him, and axed
councell at the yonge men which were growne vp with him, and stode before him.
9 And he sayde vnto them: What is youre councell that we maye answere this
people which haue sayde vnto me: Make the yock lighter, that thy father hath
layed vpo vs.
10 And the yonge men that were growne vp with him, sayde vnto him: Where as the
people haue sayde vnto the: Thy father hath made oure yock to sore, make thou it
easyer for vs, Thus shalt thou saye vnto them: My litle fynger shall be thicker
then my fathers loynes.
11 Now, my father layed a sore yock vpon you, but I wyl yet laye more theron: My
father correcte you with scourges, but I wyl nourtoure you with scorpions.
12 So vpon the thyrde daye came Ieroboam with all the people vnto Roboam, as ye
kynge had appoynted and saide, come to me agayne on the thyrde daye.
13 And the kynge gaue the people an harde rough answere, and forsoke the coucell
that the Elders had geuen him,
14 and talked with them after the councell of the yonge men, and sayde: My
father made youre yock sore, but I wyll make it yet sorer vpon you. My father
correcte you with scourges, but I wil nourtoure you with scorpios.
15 Thus the kynge folowed not the peoples mynde, for he was turned so fro the
LORDE, that he mighte stablish his worde which he spake by Ahias of Silo vnto
Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat.
16 But whan all Israel sawe that the kynge wolde not heare them, the people gaue
ye kynge an answere and sayde: What porcion haue we then in Dauid or
inheritaunce in the sonne of Isai? Get the to thy tentes O Israel. Loke thou now
to thy house thou Dauid. So Israel wente vnto their tentes.
17 As for Roboam, he raigned but ouer ye children of Israel, which dwelt in the
cities of Iuda.
18 And whan kynge Roboam sent thither Adoram the rentgatherer, all Israel stoned
him to death. But kynge Roboam strengthed himselfe, and gat him vp in to a
charet, to fle vnto Ierusalem.
19 Thus departed Israel from the house of Dauid vnto this daye.
20 Now whan all Israel herde, that Ieroboam was come againe, they sent for to
call him to the whole congregacion, and made him kynge ouer all Israel. And no
man folowed the house of Dauid, saue onely the tribe of Iuda.
21 And whan Roboam came to Ierusalem, all the house of Iuda and the trybe of Ben
Iamin (euen an hundreth and foure score thousande chosen men of armes) gathered
themselues together to fight against ye house of Israel, & to brynge the
kyngdome agayne vnto Roboam ye sonne of Salomo.
22 But the worde of God came to Semeia the man of God, and sayde:
23 Speake thou to Roboam the sonne of Salomon kynge of Iuda, and to all ye house
of Iuda and Ben Iamin, and to the other people, and saye:
24 Thus sayeth the LORDE: Ye shall not go vp and fighte agaynst youre brethren
the children of Israel. Let euery man go home agayne, for this is my dede. And
they herkened vnto the worde of the LORDE, and turned back, to go their waye, as
the LORDE sayde.
25 But Roboam buylded Sichem vpon mount Ephraim, and dwelt therin, and departed
thence, and buylded Penuel.
26 Ieroboa thoughte in his hert: The kingdome shall fall agayne now vnto the
house of Dauid,
27 yf this people go vp to offre in the LORDES house at Ierusalem, and so shall
the hert of this people turne to their lorde Roboam kynge of Iuda, and the shal
they slaye me, and fall agayne to Roboam kynge of Iuda.
28 And the kynge helde a councell and made two golden calues, and sayde vnto
them: It is to moch for you to go to Ierusale: beholde, there is thy God (O
Israel) which broughte ye out of Egipte.
29 And the one set he at Bethel, & the other in Dan.
30 And this dede turned to synne, for the people wente before the one vnto Dan.
31 He made an house also in the hye places, and made prestes of the smallest in
the people, which were not of the childre of Leui.
32 And vpon the fiftene daye of the eighte moneth he made an holy daye, like as
the solempne feast in Iuda, and offered vpon the altare. Thus dyd he at Bethel,
in doynge sacrifice vnto the calues which he had made,and at Bethel he ordeyned
the prestes of the hye places that he had made:
33 and offred vpon the altar (which he had made) at Bethel, the fiftene daye of
the eight moneth, which he inuented of his owne hert. And he made the children
of Israel an holy daye, & wente vp to the altare to burne incense.

Chapter 13

1 And beholde, there came a ma of God from Iuda (thorow the worde of the LORDE)
vnto Bethel, and Ieroboam stode by the altar to burne incense.
2 And he cried agaynst the altare thorow the worde of the LORDE, and sayde: O
altar, altar, thus sayeth the LORDE: Beholde, there shal be borne vnto ye house
of Dauid a sonne, Iosias by name which on the shal offer the prestes of the hye
places, that burne incense vpon the, and mens bones shal he burne on the.
3 And he gaue a wonder token the same daye, and sayde: This is the token, that
the LORDE hath spoken it, beholde, the altar shall ryue, and the a?shes, that
are theron, shall be poured out.
4 But whan the kynge herde the worde of the man of God, that cried agaynst the
altare at Bethel, he stretched out his hande by ye altare, and sayde: Laye
hondes on him. And his hande that he stretched out, wythered, and he coulde not
drawe it vnto him agayne.
5 And ye altare roue, and the a?shes were poured out from the altare, acordinge
to the wonder token that the man of God had geuen by the worde of the LORDE.
6 And the kynge answered, and sayde vnto the man of God: O praye the face of the
LORDE thy God, and make intercession for me, that my hande maie be restored vnto
me agayne. Then prayed the man of God vnto the face of the LORDE. And the kynges
hande was restored him agayne, and became as it was afore.
7 And the kynge sayde vnto the man of God: Come home with me, and dyne, and I
wil geue the a rewarde.
8 But the man of God sayde vnto the kynge: Yf thou geuest me halfe thy house, I
wil not come with the: for in this place wyll I nether eate bred, ner drynke
water.
9 For thus am I commaunded, and thus is it sayde vnto me by the worde of the
LORDE: Thou shalt eate no bred, and drynke no water, nether returne the waye
that thou wentest.
10 And he departed another waye, and returned not agayne the waye that he came
to Bethel.
11 But at Bethel there dwelt an olde prophet vnto who his sonnes came, & tolde
him all the workes yt the ma of God had done that daye at Bethel, & the wordes
that he had spoken vnto the kynge.
12 And their father sayde vnto them: Which waye is he gone? And his sonnes
shewed him the waye that the man of God was gone: which came from Iuda.
13 He sayde vnto his sonnes: Saddell me the asse. And wha they had sadled him
the asse, he rode theron,
14 and wente after the man of God, and founde him syttinge vnder an Oke tre, and
sayde vnto him: Art thou the man of God that came from Iuda? He sayde: Yee.
15 He sayde vnto him: Come home with me, and eate bred.
16 He sayde: I maye not turne backe with the, and come with the. Nether wyll I
eate bred, ner drynke water with the in this place:
17 for it is spoken vnto me by the worde of the LORDE: Thou shalt nether eate
bred there, ner yet drynke water, nether shalt thou go agayne by the waye which
thou wentest.
18 He sayde vnto him: I myselfe am a prophet as well as thou, and an angell hath
spoken with me by ye worde of the LORDE, and saide: Bringe him againe with the,
that he maye eate bred, and drynke water. But he lyed vnto him,
19 and broughte him agayne, so that he ate bred, and dranke water in his house.
20 And whan they sat at the table, the worde of the LORDE came to the prophet
that had broughte him agayne,
21 and cryed vnto the man which was come fro Iuda, and sayde: Thus sayeth the
LORDE: Because thou hast bene dishobedient vnto the mouth of ye LORDE, and hast
not kepte the commaundement that the LORDE thy God commaunded the,
22 but hast turned backe, and hast eaten bred, and dronke water in ye place,
wherof he saide vnto the: Thou shalt nether eate bred ner drynke water, therfore
shall not thy body come in to thy fathers graue.
23 And whan he had eaten bred and dronke the asse was sadled vnto the prophet
whom he had brought agayne.
24 And wha he was gone, a lyon founde him by the waye, & slewe him, and his body
was cast in ye waye. And the asse stode by him, and the lyon stode by the body.
25 And wha men wente by, they sawe the body cast in the waye, and the lyon
stondynge besyde the body, and came and tolde it in the cite, where the olde
prophet dwelt.
26 Whan the prophet which had broughte him agayne, herde that, he sayde: It is
the man of God, that hath bene dishobediet vn the mouth of the LORDE, therfore
hath ye LORDE delyuered him vnto the Lyon, which hath rente him, and slayne him,
acordynge to the worde that the LORDE spake vnto him.
27 And he sayde vnto his sonnes: Saddell me the asse. And whan they had sadled
it,
28 he wente, and founde his body cast in the waie and the asse and the lyon
stondynge beside ye body. The lyon had eate nothinge of the body, nether had he
torne the asse.
29 Then toke the prophet the deed coarse of the man of God, and layed it vpo the
asse, and broughte it agayne in to the cite of the olde prophet, to mourne, and
to burye him.
30 And he layed the coarse in his awne graue, and they mourned for him: Alas my
brother.
31 And whan they had buryed him, he saide vnto his sonnes: Whan I dye, burye me
in the graue where the ma of God is buried, and laye my bones besyde his bones.
32 For it shal come to passe, that he cried (thorow the worde of the LORDE)
against Bethel, and agaynst all ye houses of the hye places, which are in the
cities of Samaria.
33 Howbeit after this acte dyd not Ieroboa turne from his euell waye, but was
peruerted, and made prestes of the hye places, eue of the smallest of the
people: Loke whom it pleased him, his handes he fylled, & he was prest of the
hye places.
34 And this turned to synne vnto the house of Ieroboa, to destroye him and to
brynge him to naughte.

Chapter 14

1 At the same tyme was Abia the sonne of Ieroboam sicke,
2 and Ieroboam saide vnto his wyfe: Get the vp, and disguise the, so that no man
perceaue that thou art Ieroboams wyfe, and go vnto Silo: beholde, there is the
prophet Ahias, which promysed me yt I shulde be kynge ouer this people:
3 and take with the ten loaues of bred and cakes, and a cuppe with hony, & go to
him, that he maye tell the how it shal go wt the childe.
4 And Ieroboams wyfe did so, and gat hir vp, and wente vnto Silo, and came in to
the house of Ahias. But Ahias coulde not se, for his eyes were dymme for age.
5 Neuerthelesse the LORDE sayde vnto Ahias: Beholde, Ieroboams wyfe commeth, to
axe a matter at the for hir sonne, for he is sycke. Speake thou therfore vnto
her thus & thus Now whan she came in, she shewed hirselfe straunge.
6 But whan Ahias herde the noyse of hir fete goynge in at the dore, he saide:
Come in thou wyfe of Ieroboa. Why shewest thou thy selfe so straunge? I am sent
vnto ye an harde messaunger.
7 Go thy waye and tell Ieroboam: Thus sayeth ye LORDE God of Israel: I haue
exalted the from amonge the people, and set the to be prynce ouer my people of
Israel,
8 and haue rente the kyngdome from the house of Dauid, and geuen it the. But
thou hast not bene as my seruaunt Dauid, which kepte my commaundemetes, and
walked after me with all his hert, so that he did onely ye thinge that was
righte in my sighte:
9 and thou hast done worse then all they that haue bene before the: thou hast
gone thy waye and made the other goddes, and molten ymages, to prouoke me vnto
wrath, and hast cast me behynde thy backe.
10 Beholde therfore, I wil brynge mysfortune vpon the house of Ieroboam, and wyl
rote out from Ieroboam eue him that maketh water agaynst the wall, the presoner
and forsaken in Israel: and the posterite of ye house of Ieroboam wyll I swepe
out, as donge is swepte out, tyll he be cleane broughte to naught.
11 He that dieth (of Ieroboam) in the cite, the dogges shal eate him vp. But him
yt dyeth in the felde, shall the foules of the aire eat vp, for the LORDE hath
spoken it.
12 Get the vp therfore, and go home, & whan thy fete enter in to ye cite, the
childe shal dye.
13 And all Israel shal bewayle him, and burye him. For he onely of Ieroboam shal
come to the graue, because there is some good founde in him before the LORDE God
of Israel, in Ieroboams house.
14 But the LORDE shall rayse him vp a kynge, which shal rote out ye house of
Ieroboam in that daie. And what is it, yt is now in hande all ready?
15 And the LORDE shal smyte Israel, like as a rede is moued in the water: & shal
rote out Israel from this good londe, that he gaue vnto their fathers, & shal
scater them beyonde the water, because they haue made their groues to prouoke
the LORDE vnto wrath.
16 And Israel shall be geuen ouer because of the synne of Ieroboam, which hath
synned him selfe, & made Israel to synne.
17 And Ieroboams wife gat her vp, wente hir waye, & came vnto Thirza. And whan
she came vpo the thresholde of the house, ye childe dyed,
18 & they buried him, & all Israel made lamentacion for him, acordinge to ye
worde of the LORDE, which he spake by his seruaunt Ahia ye prophet.
19 What more there is to saye of Ieroboam, how he foughte & raigned, beholde, it
is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Israel.
20 The tyme that Ieroboam raigned, was two & twentye yeare. And he slepte with
his fathers. And Nadab his sonne was kynge in his steade.
21 Roboam ye sonne of Salomon was kynge in Iuda. One and fortye yeare olde was
Roboam wha he was made kynge, & seuentene yeare raigned he at Ierusalem, in the
cite yt the LORDE had chosen out of all ye trybes of Israel, to set his name
there. His mothers name was Naemaan Ammonitisse.
22 And Iuda dyd yt which displeased the LORDE, & prouoked him to indignacion
more the all yt their fathers had done wt their synnes which they dyd:
23 for they likewyse buylded them hye places, pilers, and groues vpo euery hye
hill, and amonge all grene trees.
24 There were whoremogers also, & they dyd all ye abhominacios of ye Heythe,
whom ye LORDE droue out before the children of Israel.
25 But in ye fifth yeare of kynge Roboam wete Sisack ye kynge of Egipte vp
agaynst Ierusalem,
26 & toke the treasure out of ye house of the LORDE, & out of the kynges house,
& all that mighte be gotten, & toke all the shyldes of golde, which Salomon
caused to be made.
27 In steade wherof ye kynge Roboam caused for to make shyldes of stele, &
commytted them vnder the handes of the chefe fotemen, which kepte the dore of
the kynges house.
28 And as oft as the kynge wente in to ye house of the LORDE, the fote men bare
them, and brought them agayne in to the fote mens chamber.
29 What more there is to saye of Roboam, and all that he dyd, beholde, it is
wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Iuda.
30 But betwene Roboam & Ieroboam there was warre as longe as they lyued.
31 And Robobam slepte with his fathers, & was buried wt his fathers in the cite
of Dauid. And his mothers name was Naema an Ammonitisse. And his sonne Abia was
kynge in his steade.

Chapter 15

1 In the eightenth yeare of kynge Ieroboa the sonne of Nebat, was Abia kynge in
Iuda,
2 and reigned thre yeare at Ierusalem. His mothers name was. Maecha, the
doughter of Abisalom,
3 and he walked in all the synnes of his father, which he had done before him,
and his hert was not perfecte with the LORDE his God, as was the hert of Dauid
his father.
4 For because of Dauids sake dyd the LORDE his God geue him a lanterne at
Ierusalem, so yt he raysed his sonne after him, & manteyned him at Ierusalem,
5 because Dauid dyd the thinge yt was righte in ye sighte of the LORDE, and
departed not from all that he commaunded him as longe as he lyued (sauynge in
the matter with Vrias ye Hethite).
6 But there was warre betwene Roboam and Ieroboam, as longe as he lyued.
7 What more there is to saye of Abia, and all that he dyd, beholde, it is
wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Iuda. There was warre also betwene
Abia and Ieroboam.
8 And Abia slepte with his fathers, and they buried him in the cite of Dauid.
And Asa his sonne was kynge in his steade.
9 In ye twentyeth yeare of kynge Ieroboam ouer Israel, was Asa kynge in Iuda,
10 and reigned one & fortye yeare at Ierusalem. His graundmothers name was
Maecha the doughter of Abisalom.
11 And Asa dyd that which was righte in the sighte of the LORDE, as dyd his
father Dauid.
12 And he remoued ye whoremongers out of the londe, and put downe all the Idols
that his fathers had made.
13 He put his mother from the mynistracion, that she had made vnto Miplezeth in
ye groue. And Asa roted out hir Miplezeth, and brent it in the broke Cedron:
14 but the hye places put he not downe. Yet was the hert of Asa perfecte with
the LORDE as longe as he lyued.
15 And the syluer and golde, and vessels that his father had halowed, & soch as
was sanctified vnto ye house of the LORDE, that broughte he in.
16 And there was warre betwene Asa & Baesa the kynge of Israel, as longe as they
lyued.
17 Baesa the kynge of Israel wente vp agaynst Iuda, and buylded Rama, that no
man shulde go out and in of Asas syde the kynge of Iuda.
18 Then toke Asa all the syluer and golde that was lefte in the treasure of the
house of the LORDE, and in the treasure of the kynges house, and delyuered it in
to his seruauntes handes, & sent it vnto Benadab the sonne of Tabrimon the sonne
of Hesion kynge of Siria, which dwelt at Damascon, and let saye vnto him:
19 There is a couenaunt betwene me and the, and betwene my father and thy
father: therfore sende I the a present of syluer and golde, that thou shuldest
breake the couenaunt which thou hast with Baesa the kynge of Israel, that he
maye departe fro me.
20 Benadab agreed vnto kynge Asa, and sent his captaynes agaynst the cities of
Israel, and smote Iion and Dan, & Abel Beth Maecha, and all Cineroth with the
whole londe of Nephtali.
21 Wha Baesa herde that, he left of from buyldinge Rama, and wente agayne vnto
Thirza.
22 Kynge Asa caused it be proclamed in all Iuda: Here be no man excepte. And
they toke awaye the stones and tymber from Rama, wherwith Baesa had buylded. And
kynge Asa buylded Geba Ben Iamin & Mispa therwith.
23 What more there is to saye of Asa, and of all his power, and all that he dyd,
and of ye cities which he buylded, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of
the kynges of Iuda: sauynge that in his olde age he was diseased in his fete.
24 And Asa slepte with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the cite
of Dauid his father. And Iosaphat his sonne was kynge in his steade.
25 But Nadab the sonne of Ieroboam was kynge ouer Israel in the secode yeare of
Asa kynge of Iuda, & raigned ouer Israel two yeare,
26 and dyd euell in the sighte of the LORDE, and walked in the waye of his
father, and in his synnes, wherwith he made Israel to synne.
27 Howbeit Baesa the sonne of Ahia of the house of Isachar conspired agaynst
him, & smote him at Gibbethon, which was the Philistynes: for Nadab and all
Israel layed sege to Gibbethon.
28 So Baesa slewe him in the thirde yeare of Asa kynge of Iuda, & was kynge in
his steade.
29 Now whan he was kynge, he smote all the house of Ieroboam, and let nothinge
of Ieroboam remayne that had breth, tyll he had destroyed it, acordynge to ye
worde of the LORDE, which he spake by his seruaunt Ahia of Silo,
30 because of Ieroboams synnes which he dyd, & made Israel synne withall: euen
with ye prouokynge wherwith he displeased the LORDE God of Israel.
31 What more there is to saye of Nadab, & all that he dyd, beholde, it is
wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Israel,
32 and there was warre betwene Asa & Baesa the kynge of Israel, as longe as they
lyued.
33 In the thirde yeare of Asa kynge of Iuda was Baesa ye sonne of Ahia kynge
ouer all Israel at Thirza foure and twentye yeare,
34 and dyd that which was euell in the sighte of the LORDE, and walked in the
waye of Ieroboam, and in his synnes, wherwith he made Israel to synne.

Chapter 16

1 Neuertheles the worde of the LORDE came vnto Iehu the sonne of Hanani agaynst
Baesa, and sayde:
2 For so moch as I lifted the out of the dust, and made the prynce ouer my
people of Israel, and thou walkest in the waye of Ieroboam, and makest my people
ouer Israel for to synne, to prouoke me vnto wrath thorow their synnes,
3 beholde, therfore wyll I take awaye the posterite of Beasa, and the posterite
of his house, and wyll set thine house euen as the house of Ieroboam the sonne
of Nebat.
4 He that of Baesa dyeth in the cite, the dogges shal deuoure him: and who so
beynge of him dyeth in the felde, the foules of the ayre shall eate him vp.
5 What more there is to saye of Baesa, & what he dyd, & of his power, beholde,
it is wrytten in ye Cronicles of the kynges of Israel.
6 And Baesa slepte with his fathers, & was buried at Thirza: & his sonne Ella
was kynge in his steade.
7 And the worde of ye LORDE came by the prophet Iehu the sonne of Hanani, ouer
Baesa, and ouer his house, and agaynst all the euell that he dyd in the sighte
of ye LORDE, to prouoke him vnto wrath thorow the workes of his handes: so that
he became as the house of Ieroboam, and because he slewe this man.
8 In the sixe & twentieth yeare of Asa kynge of Iuda, was Ella the sonne of
Baesa kynge ouer Israel at Thirza two yeare.
9 Neuertheles his seruaunt Simri, ye principall man ouer the halfe of ye
charettes cospyred against him. As for Ella, he was at Thirza, dranke & was
dronke in ye house of Arza the ruler of Thirza.
10 And Simri came in, and slewe him in the seuen & twentieth yeare of Asa kynge
of Iuda, and was kynge in his steade.
11 And whan he was kynge, and sat vpon his seate, he smote all the house of
Baesa, & lefte not so moch as one to make water agaynst ye wall: his bloud
auengers also & his frendes.
12 Thus dyd Simri destroye all the house of Baesa, acordinge to the worde of the
LORDE, which he spake ouer Baesa by the prophet Iehu,
13 because of all the synnes of Baesa and of Ella his sonne, which they dyd, and
made Israel for to synne, to prouoke the LORDE God of Israel vnto wrath thorow
their vanities.
14 What more there is to saye of Ella, and all that he dyd, beholde, it is
wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Israel.
15 In the seuen and twentieth yeare of Asa kynge of Iuda, was Simri kynge vij.
dayes at Thirza, and the people laye before Gibbethon of the Philistynes.
16 But whan the people in the hoost herde saye yt Simri had conspired and slayne
the kynge, then all Israel the same daye made Amri the chefe captayne kynge ouer
all in the hoost.
17 And Amri wente vp and all Israel with him from Gibbethon, and layed sege vnto
Thirza.
18 But whan Simri sawe yt the cite shulde be wonne, he wente in to the palace in
the kynges house, & brent it with ye kynges house, & dyed
19 because of his synnes which he had committed, in that he dyd euell in the
sighte of the LORDE, and walked in the waye of Ieroboam, and in his synnes which
he dyd, wherwith he made Israel to synne.
20 What more there is to saye of Simri, and how he conspired, beholde, it is
wrytten in ye Cronicles of the kynges of Israel.
21 At the same tyme were ye people deuyded in two partes: the one parte helde
with Thibni the sonne of Ginath, that they might make him kynge: the other halfe
helde with Amri.
22 But the people that helde with Amri, were mightier then the people which
helde with Thibni ye sonne of Ginath. And Thibni dyed, and Amri was kynge.
23 In ye one and thirtieth yeare of Asa kynge of Iuda, was Amri kynge ouer
Israel twolue yeares, & raigned at Thirza sixe yeares.
24 He boughte the mount of Samaria of Semer for two hundreth weight of syluer, &
buylded vpon the mount, and called the cite which he buylded, after ye name of
Semer ye owner of ye mount of Samaria.
25 And Amri dyd that which was euell in ye sighte of the LORDE, and was worse
then all they that were before him,
26 and walked in all ye wayes of Ieroboam ye sonne of Nebat, and in his synnes,
wherwith he made Israel to synne, so that they prouoked the LORDE God of Israel
vnto wrath in their vanities.
27 What more there is to saye of Amri, & all that he dyd, and his power that he
exercysed, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Israel.
28 And Amri slepte with his fathers, & was buried in Samaria, and Achab his
sonne was kynge in his steade.
29 In the eight & thirtieth yeare of Asa kynge of Iuda, was Achab the sonne of
Amri kynge ouer Israel, & raigned ouer Israel at Samaria two & twentie yeare,
30 & dyd euell in the sighte of the LORDE, more the all they yt were before him.
31 And he thoughte it but a small matter to walke in the synnes of Ieroboam the
sonne of Nebat: and toke Iesabel the doughter of Eth Baal kynge of Sidon to
wife, and wente and serued Baal, and worshiped him.
32 And vnto Baal he set vp an altare in Baals house, which he buylded him in
Samaria,
33 and made a groue: so that Achab dyd more to prouoke the God of Israel vnto
wrath, then all the kynges yt were before him in Israel.
34 At ye same tyme dyd Hiel of Bethel buylde Iericho: It cost him his first
sonne Abiram, yt he layed ye foundacion: & his yongest sonne Segub, yt he set vp
the portes: Acordinge to the worde of the LORDE, which he spake by Iosua the
sonne of Nun.

Chapter 17

1 And Elias ye The?bite one of the inhabiters of Gilead, saide vnto Achab: As
truly as the LORDE God of Israel lyueth, whose seruaunt I am, there shal nether
rayne ner dew come this yeare, excepte I speake it.
2 And the worde of the LORDE came vnto him, and sayde:
3 Get the hence, and turne the towarde the east, and hyde the by the ryuer
Crith, which is ouer agaynst Iordane,
4 and thou shalt drynke of the ryuer: and I haue commaunded the rauens, that
they shal fede the there.
5 He departed, and dyd acordinge to the worde of the LORDE, and wente his waye,
and sat him downe by the ryuer Crith, which is ouer agaynst Iordane.
6 And the raues broughte him bred and flesh in the mornynge and in the euenynge,
and he dranke of the ryuer.
7 And it fortuned after cerayne dayes, that the riuer was dryed: vp for there
was no rayne in the lode.
8 Then came ye worde of ye LORDE vnto him, and sayde:
9 Get ye vp, and go vnto Sarepta, which lieth by Sido: for there haue I
commaunded a wedowe to make prouysion for the.
10 And he gat him vp, and wente vnto Sarepta. And whan he came to the gate of ye
cite, beholde, the wedowe was there, and gathered stickes. And he called her,
and sayde: Fetch me a litle water in a vessell, yt I maye drinke.
11 And as she was goinge to fetch it, he cried vnto her, & sayde: Brynge me a
morsell of bred also in thine hande.
12 She sayde: As truly as the LORDE yi God lyueth, I haue no bred, but an
handfull of floure in a pitcher, & a curtesy oyle in a cruse: and beholde, I
haue gathered vp one or two stickes, & wyll go and prepare it for me and my
sonne, that we maye eate and dye.
13 Elias sayde vnto her: Feare not, go thy waye, & do as thou hast sayde: yet
make me first a morsell of bred therof, & brynge it me forth: & afterwarde shalt
thou make it for ye & thy sonne.
14 For thus sayeth ye LORDE God of Israel: The meell in the pitcher shall not be
spent, & the oyle in ye cruse shall not fayll, vnto the daye yt the LORDE shal
cause it for to rayne vpo earth.
15 She wente & dyd as Elias sayde. And he ate, & she also, and hir house a
certayne season.
16 The meel in the pitcher was not mynished, and the oyle in the cruse fayled
not, acordinge to the worde of ye LORDE which he spake by Elias.
17 And after these actes the sonne of the wife of ye house was sicke: and his
sicknes was so exceadinge sore, that there remayned no breth in him.
18 And she sayde vnto Elias: What haue I to do with the, thou man of God? Art
thou come in vnto me, yt my synne shulde be kepte in remembraunce, & that my
sonne shulde be slayne?
19 He sayde vnto her: Geue me thy sonne. And he toke him fro hir lappe, & caried
him vp in to ye chamber where he himselfe dwelt, and layed him vpo his bed,
20 & called vpon the LORDE, and sayde: O LORDE my God, hast thou dealt so euell
wt the wedow with whom I dwell, yt thou woldest slaye hir sonne?
21 And he stretched out him selfe ouer the childe thre tymes, & called vpon the
LORDE, and saide: O LORDE my God, let the soule of this childe come agayne in to
him.
22 And the LORDE herde the voyce of Elias. And the soule of the childe came
agayne vnto him, & he reuyued.
23 And Elias toke the childe, and broughte him downe from the chamber in to the
house and delyuered him vnto his mother, and sayde: Beholde, thy sonne lyueth.
24 And the woman sayde vnto Elias: Now knowe I, that thou art a man of God, &
that the worde of the LORDE is in thy mouth of a trueth.

Chapter 18

1 And after a longe season came ye worde of the LORDE vnto Elias in the thirde
yeare, & sayde: Go thy waye, & shewe yi selfe vnto Achab, yt I maye cause it for
to rayne vpon earth.
2 And Elias wente to shewe him selfe vnto Achab. But there was a greate derth i
Samaria.
3 And Achab called Abdia his chefe officer: (As for Abdia, he feared ye LORDE
greatly:
4 for wha Iesabel roted out ye prophetes of ye LORDE, Abdia toke an C.
prophetes, and hyd them in caues, here fiftye, & there fiftye, & prouyded for
them wt bred and water.)
5 Achab now sayde vnto Abdia: Go thorow the londe vnto all the welles of water &
ryuers, yf happlye we maye finde hay, & to saue ye horses & mules, yt all the
catell perishe not.
6 And they parted the selues into the londe, to go thorow it. Achab departed the
one waye alone, and Abdia ye other waye alone.
7 Now whan Abdia was on ye waye, Elias met him. And whan he knewe him, he fell
downe vpon his face, & sayde: Art not thou my lorde Elias?
8 He sayde: yee, go thy waye, and tell yi lorde: beholde, Elias is here.
9 But he sayde: What haue I offended, that thou wilt delyuer thy seruaunt in to
the handes of Achab, that he maye slaye me?
10 As truly as the LORDE thy God lyueth, there is no people ner kingdome, but my
lorde hath sent thither to seke the. And whan they sayde: He is not here, he
toke an ooth of the same kyngdome and nacion, that they had not founde the.
11 And now thou sayest: Go tell yi LORDE: beholde, Elias is here.
12 Now whan I were gone from the, the sprete of the LORDE shulde take ye awaye,
I can not tell whither: and yf I then came and tolde Achab, and founde the not,
he shulde slaye me: But thy seruaunt feareth the LORDE from his youth vp.
13 Hath it not bene tolde my lorde what I dyd, whan Iesabel slewe the prophetes
of the LORDE, how that I hyd an hundreth of the LORDES prophetes, here fiftye,
and there fiftye in the caues, and prouyded for them with bred and water?
14 And thou sayest now: Go thy waye, tell thy lorde: Elias is here, that he maye
slaye me.
15 Elias saide: As truly as ye LORDE Zebaoth lyueth, before whom I stode, I wil
shewe my selfe vnto him this daye.
16 Then wete Abdia to mete Achab, & tolde him. And Achab wete for to mete Elias.
17 And whan Achab sawe Elias, Achab sayde vnto him: Art thou he that troublest
Israel?
18 He sayde: I trouble not Israel, but it is thou and thy fathers house, because
ye haue forsaken the commaundementes of the LORDE, and walke after Baal.
19 Go to, sende forth now, and gather me all Israel together vnto mount Carmell,
and the foure hundreth and fiftye prophetes of Baal, and the foure hundreth
prophetes of ye groue, which eate of Iesabels table.
20 So Achab sent vnto all the children of Israel, & gathered the prophetes
together vnto mount Carmell.
21 Then stepte Elias vnto all the people, & sayde: How longe halte ye on both ye
sydes? Yf the LORDE be God, the walke after him: but yf Baal be he, the folowe
him. And the people gaue him no answere.
22 The sayde Elias vnto the people: I onely am lefte a prophet of ye LORDE: but
Baals prophetes are foure C. and fiftie me.
23 Geue vs now two bullockes, & let them chose one bullocke, & hewe him in
peces, & laye him vpo the wod, & put no fyre theron: so wil I take ye other
bullock, & laye him vpo the wod, & put no fyre theron also:
24 call ye then vpo the name of yor god, & I wil call vpo the name of the LORDE:
loke which God now answereth with fyre, let the same be God. And all the people
answered & sayde: That is righte.
25 And Elias sayde vnto Baals prophetes: Chose ye one bullock, and do ye it
first (for ye are many) and call ye vpon the name of youre god, & laye no fyre
theron.
26 And they toke the bullock which he gaue them, & prepared it, & called vpon
the name of Baal from the mornynge vntyll the noone daye, and sayde: O Baal
heare vs. But there was nether voyce ner answere. And they hopped aboute the
altare, as their vse was to do.
27 Now whan it was noone daye, Elias mocked them, and sayde: Crye loude. For he
is a god, peradueture he is musynge, or hath somwhat to do, or is gone some
iourneye, or happlye he slepeth, so that he wolde be waked vp.
28 And they cried loude, and prouoked the selues with knyues & botkens, (as
their maner was) tyll ye bloude folowed.
29 But whan ye noone daye was past, they prophecied vntyll the tyme that the
meatofferynge shulde be offered, & there was nether voyce ner answere, ner one
to regarde them.
30 Then sayde Elias vnto all the people: Come hither all ye people vnto me. And
whan all ye people came to him, he repayred ye altare of the LORDE yt was
broken,
31 & toke twolue stones acordinge to the nombre of ye trybes of the childre of
Iacob (vnto whom the worde of the LORDE spake, and sayde: Thy name shal be
Israel)
32 and of ye stones he buylded an altare in the name of the LORDE, & made a pytt
rounde aboute the altare, like two forowes in the corne londe,
33 & prepared the wod, & hewed ye bullock in peces, and layed him vpon the wod,
& sayde: Fetch foure pitchers full of water, and poured it vpo the
burntofferynge, and vpon the wod.
34 And he sayde: Do it yet once. And they dyd it once agayne. And he sayde: Do
it ye thirde tyme. And they dyd it the thirde tyme.
35 And ye water ranne aboute the altare, and ye pytt was full of water also.
36 And whan the tyme was to offer ye meatofferynge, Elias stepte forth, and
sayde: O LORDE God of Abraham, of Isaac and of Israel, let it be knowne this
daye, that thou art God in Israel, and I thy seruaunt, and that I haue done all
this acordinge vnto yi worde.
37 Heare me O LORDE, O heare me, yt this people maye knowe, how that thou art
the LORDE God, that thou mayest afterwarde turne their hertes.
38 Then fell downe the fyre of the LORDE, and consumed the burntofferinge, the
wodd, the stones and the earth, and licked vp the water that was in the pytt.
39 Whan all the people sawe that, they fell vpon their faces, and sayde: The
LORDE is God, ye LORDE is God.
40 Elias sayde vnto them: Laye handes vpon Baals prophetes, yt none of them
escape. And they toke them. And Elias broughte them downe vnto ye broke Cyson, &
slewe the there.
41 And Elias sayde vnto Achab: Go vp, eate & drynke, for it soundeth as though
it wolde rayne sore.
42 And whan Achab wete vp to eate & drinke. Elias asceded vp to the toppe of
Carmel, & bowed him selfe downe to the earth, & put his heade betwene his knees,
43 & sayde vnto his lad: Go vp, and loke towarde the See. He wente vp & loked, &
sayde: There is nothinge. He sayde: Go agayne seuen tymes.
44 And at the seueth tyme he sayde: Beholde, there goeth vp a litle cloude out
of the see, like a mans hande. He sayde: Go vp, and saie vnto Achab: Bynde yi
charet, & go downe, yt the rayne ouertake the not.
45 And or a ma coulde turne him, the heauen was blacke wt cloudes & wynde, &
there came a greate rayne. But Achab rode his waie, & departed vnto Iesrael.
46 And the hade of ye LORDE came vpo Elias, and he gyrde his loynes, & ranne
before Achab, tyll he came vnto Iesrael.

Chapter 19

1 And Achab tolde Iesabel all yt Elias had done, & how he had slayne all Baals
prophetes wt the swerde.
2 The sent Iesabel a messaunger vnto Elias, sayenge: The goddes do this & that
vnto me, yf I tomorow aboute this tyme, make not thy soule as one of these.
3 Then was he afrayed, & gat him vp, & wente where he wolde, & came vnto Berseba
in Iuda, and lefte his lad there.
4 But he him selfe wente a daies iourney in to ye wyldernes, & came in, & sat
him downe vnder a Iuniper tre, & wy?shed vnto his soule yt he mighte dye, &
sayde: It is now ynough LORDE, take my soule, for I am no better then my
fathers.
5 And he layed him downe & slepte vnder the Iuniper tre. And beholde, ye angell
touched him, & sayde vnto him: Stonde vp, and eate.
6 And he loked aboute him, & beholde, at his heade there was a bred baken on the
coles, & a cruse wt water. And whan he had eaten and dronke, he layed him downe
agayne to slepe.
7 And ye angell of the LORDE, came agayne the seconde tyme, & touched him, &
sayde: Stonde vp, and eate, for thou hast a greate waye to go.
8 And he arose, and ate and drake, and wente on thorow the strength of that
meate fortye dayes and fortye nightes, eue vnto Horeb ye mount of God:
9 and there he came to a caue, and abode there all nighte. And beholde the worde
of the LORDE came to him, and sayde vnto him: What doest thou here Elias?
10 He sayde: I haue bene zelous for the LORDE God Zebaoth: for the children of
Israel haue forsaken thy couenaunt, and broken downe thine altares, and slayne
thy prophetes with the swerde, and I am lefte onely, & they seke to take awaye
my life.
11 He sayde: Go forth, and stonde vpon the mount before the LORDE. And beholde,
the LORDE wete ouer: and a greate mightie wynde, which roue the mountaynes, and
brake the harde stones, came before the LORDE, but the LORDE was not in the
wynde. After the wynde came there an earthquake, but the LORDE was not in the
earthquake.
12 And after the earth quake there came a fyre, but the LORDE was not in the
fyre. And after the fyre came there a styll softe hyssinge.
13 Whan Elias herde that, he couered his face with his cloke, and wente forth,
and stode in the dore of the caue. And beholde, there came a voyce vnto him, and
sayde: What hast thou here to do Elias?
14 He sayde: I haue bene zelous for the LORDE God Zebaoth: for the children of
Israel haue forsake thy couenaunt, broken downe thine altares, slayne yi
prophetes wt the swerde, & I onely am lefte, and they seke to take awaye my
life.
15 But the LORDE sayde vnto him: Go yi waye agayne thorow the wyldernes vnto
Damascon, & go in, & anoynte Hasael kynge ouer Siria,
16 & Iehu the sonne of Nimsi kynge ouer Israel, & Eliseus ye sonne of Saphat of
Abel Mehola to be prophet in yi steade.
17 And it shal come to passe, yt, who so escapeth the swerde of Hasael, Iehu
shall slaye him, & who so escapeth ye swerde of Iehu, Eliseus shal slaye him.
18 And I wil reserue vnto me vij.M. men in Israel: namely, all ye knees which
haue not bowed the selues vnto Baal, and euery mouth yt hath not kyssed him.
19 And he departed thence, & founde Elizeus ye sonne of Saphat, plowinge wt
twolue yocke of oxen before him, & he him selfe was amoge the twolue. And Elias
wete vnto him, & cast his cloke vpon him.
20 And he lefte the oxen, & ranne after Elias, & sayde: Let me kysse my father &
my mother, and so wil I folowe the. And he sayde vnto him: Go thy waye, & come
agayne, for I haue some what to do with the.
21 And he ranne agayne from him, and toke a yock of oxen, and offred it, and sod
ye flesh with the wod of the oxen plowes, and gaue it vnto the people to eate,
and gat him vp, & folowed Elias, and mynistred vnto him.

Chapter 20

1 And Benadab ye kynge of Siria gathered all his power, & there were two &
thirtie kynges wt him, & horses & charettes, and he wente vp, and layed sege
vnto Samaria, & foughte agaynst it.
2 And he sent messaungers vnto Achab ye kynge of Israel in to ye cite, & caused
to saye vnto him: Thus sayeth Benadab:
3 Thy syluer & thy golde is myne, and thy wyues & thy best children are myne
also.
4 The kynge of Israel answered, & sayde: My lorde O kynge, euen as thou hast
sayde, I am thine, and all that I haue.
5 And the messaungers came agayne, & sayde: Thus sayeth Benadab: For so moch as
I haue sent vnto the, sayenge: Thy syluer & thy golde, thy wyues & thy childre
6 shalt thou geue me, tomorow aboute this tyme wil I sende my seruautes vnto
the, yt they maye serch thyne house and the houses of thy subiectes: & loke what
pleasaunt thinge thou hast, yt shal they take in their handes, and cary it
awaye.
7 So the kynge of Israel called all ye Elders of the lode, & sayde: Mark well &
se, what myschefe this ma seketh: He sent vnto me for my wyues & children for
syluer & golde, & I haue not sayde him naye.
8 Then sayde all the Elders and all the people vnto him: Thou shalt not cosente
ner agree vnto him.
9 And he spake vnto Benadabs messaugers, Saye vnto my lorde ye kynge: All ye
thynges wherfore thou dyddest sende vnto me yi seruaunt at ye first, wil I do,
but this can I not do. And ye messaungers wete, and tolde this againe.
10 The sent Benadab vnto him sayege: The goddes do this and yt vnto me, yf the
dust of Samaria shalbe ynough, for euery one of my people to brynge me an
handfull therof.
11 But ye kynge of Israel answered, & sayde: Tell him, Let not him yt putteth on
ye harnes, make his boast like him yt hath put it of
12 Wha Benadab herde yt (eue as he was drynkinge wt the kynges in ye pauylion)
he sayde vnto his seruautes: Set yor selues in araye. And they set the selues in
araie against ye cite.
13 And beholde, there came a prophet vnto Achab ye kynge of Israel, & saide:
Thus sayeth the LORDE: Hast thou sene all this greate multitude? Beholde, this
daie wil I delyuer the in to yi hande, so yt thou shalt knowe, how yt I am ye
LORDE.
14 Achab sayde: By whom? He sayde: Thus sayeth the LORDE: Euen by the yonge men
of the rulers of the londe. He sayde: Who shal order the battayl? He sayde:
Thou.
15 Then mustered he the yonge men of the rulers of the londe, & there were two
hudreth and two and thirtie of them: & after the mustured he of the whole people
of all the childre of Israel, seue thousande men,
16 and they wente out in the noone daye. As for Benadab, he dranke and was
dronken in the pauylion with the two & thirtie kynges which were come to helpe
him.
17 And the yonge men of the rulers of the londe wente forth first. Benadab sent
forth, & they brought him worde, & sayde: There come men out of Samaria.
18 He sayde: Take them alyue, whether they be come forth for peace, or for
warre.
19 But whan the londe rulers yonge men were gone forth, and the hoost behynde
them, euery one smote him yt came in his waye.
20 And the Sirians fled, and Israel folowed after them. And Benadab the kynge of
Syria escaped with horses and horsme.
21 And the kynge of Israel wente forth, and smote horses and charettes, and dyd
a greate slaughter on the Syrians.
22 Then came there a prophet vnto the kynge of Israel, and sayde vnto him: Go
thy waye and strength the, and take hede, and loke well what thou doest: for
whan the yeare is aboute, the kynge of Syria shall come agaynst the of the new.
23 For the kynge of ye Syrians seruauntes sayde vnto him: Their goddes are
goddes of the mountaynes, therfore haue they gotten the victory. But let vs
fyghte with them on the playne, and thou shalt se that we shal ouercome them.
24 Do thus, put awaye the kynges euery one from his place, and set dukes in
their steades,
25 and appoynte the an hoost as was that which thou hast lost, & horses &
charettes as the other were, and let vs fight agaynst the in the plaine, and
thou shalt se that we shal haue the victory. He cosented vnto their voyce, and
dyd so.
26 Now whan the yeare was gone aboute, Benadab appoynted the Sirians, and wente
vp towarde Aphek, to fighte agaynst Israel,
27 and the childre of Israel mustured, and prouyded them selues with vytailes,
and wete to mete them, and pitched their tetes ouer against them, like two litle
flockes of goates but the londe was full of the Syrians.
28 And there came a man of God, and sayde vnto the kynge of Israel: Thus sayeth
the LORDE: Because the Syrians haue sayde, that the LORDE is a God of the
moutaynes and not a God of the valleys, therfore haue I geuen all this greate
heape in to thy handes, that ye maye knowe how that I am ye LORDE.
29 And they pitched their tentes right ouer agaynst them seuen dayes. But vpon
ye seuenth daye they wente together in to the battayll: and the children of
Israel smote of the Sirians an hundreth thousande fote men in one daye,
30 and the remnaunt fled to Aphek in to the cite, and the wall fell vpon the
other seuen and twenty thousande men. And Benadab fled also vnto the cite in to
a litle chamber.
31 Then sayde his seruauntes vnto him: Beholde, we haue herde that the kynges of
the house of Israel are mercifull kinges, Let vs therfore put sack cloth aboute
oure loynes, and halters aboute oure neckes, & go forth to the kynge of Israel,
peraduenture he shal let yi soule lyue.
32 And they put sack cloth aboute their loynes, and halters aboute their neckes,
and came to the kynge of Israel, and sayde: Benadab thy seruaunt sayeth vnto
the: O let my soule lyue. He sayde: yf he be yet alyue, he is my brother.
33 And the men toke him shortly at his worde, and expounded it for them selues
and sayde: Yee Benadab is thy brother. He sayde: Come and brynge him. The wente
Benadab forth vnto him, and he caused him to syt vpon the charet,
34 and sayde vnto him: The cities that my father toke from thy father, wyl I
geue the agayne. And make thou stretes for thyselfe at Damasco, as my father did
at Samaria, so wyl I let the go with a bonde of peace. And he made a couenaunt
with him, and let him go.
35 Then spake there a man amonge the children of the prophetes vnto his
neghboure by the worde of the LORDE: I praye the smite me. But he refused to
smite him.
36 Then saide he vnto him, because thou hast not herkened vnto the voyce of the
LORDE, beholde, therfore shall there a lyon smyte the, whan thou goest fro me.
And whan he wente fro him, a lyon founde him, and slewe him.
37 And he founde another man, and sayde: I praye the smyte me. And the man smote
him, and wounded him,
38 Then wente the prophet, and stepte vnto the kynge by the waye syde, and
altered his face with a?shes.
39 And whan the kynge wente by, he cried vpon ye kynge, and sayde: Thy seruaunt
wente forth in to the battayll, and beholde, there wente one asyde, and broughte
a man vnto me, and sayde: Kepe this ma: yf he be myssed, thy soule shall be in
steade of his soule, or els thou shalt weye downe an hundreth weighte of syluer.
40 And whyle thy seruaunt had here & there to do, he was awaye. The kynge of
Israel sayde vnto him: It is thine owne iudgment, thou hast geuen it thyselfe.
41 Then put he the a?shes from his face in all the haist. And the kynge of
Israel knewe him, that he was one of the prophetes.
42 And he sayde vnto him: Thus sayeth the LORDE: Because thou hast let the
damned man go, therfore shall thy soule be for his soule, and thy people for his
people.
43 And the kynge of Israel departed vnto his house, beinge troubled in his mynde
and full indignacion, and came to Samaria.

Chapter 21

1 After these actes it fortuned, that Naboth the Iesraelite had a vyniarde at
Iesreel besyde the palace of Achab kynge of Samaria.
2 And Achab spake to Naboth, and sayde: Geue me thy vynyarde, I wyll make me an
herbgarden therof, because it is so nye my house: I wyl geue the a better
vynyarde for it: or yf it please the, I wyll geue the syluer for it, as moch as
it is worth.
3 But Naboth sayde vnto Achab: The LORDE let that be farre fro me, that I shulde
geue ye my fathers heretage.
4 Then came Achab home, beinge moued and full of indignacion, because of the
worde that Naboth the Iesraelite had spoken vnto him, & sayde: I wyl not geue
the my fathers inheritaunce. And he laied him downe vpon his bed, and turned his
face asyde, and ate no bred.
5 Then Iesabel his wyfe came in to him and sayde vnto him: What is ye matter,
that thy sprete is so cobred, and that thou eatest no bred?
6 He sayde vnto her: I haue spoke vnto Naboth the Iesraelite, and sayde: Geue me
thy vynyarde for money: or yf it please ye, I wyl geue the another for it. But
he sayde: I wyll not geue the my vynyarde.
7 Then sayde Iesabel his wyfe vnto him: What kingdome were in Israel, yf thou
diddest it? Stonde vp, and eate bred, I wyl get the the vynyarde of Naboth the
Iesraelite.
8 And she wrote a letter vnder Achabs name, and sealed it with his signet, and
sent it vnto ye Elders and rulers in his cite, which dwelt aboute Naboth,
9 and wrote thus in ye letter: Proclame a fast, and set Naboth aboue in the
people,
10 and set two men of Belial before him, to testifye and saye: Thou hast
blasphemed God and the kynge. And brynge him forth, and stone him to death.
11 And the Elders and rulers of his cyte, which dwelt in his cite, dyd as
Iesabel had commaunded them, acordynge as she had wrytten in the letter that she
sent vnto them
12 and they proclamed a fast, and caused Naboth to syt aboue amonge the people.
13 Then came the two men of Belial, and stode before him, and testyfyed agaynst
Naboth in ye presence of the people, and sayde: Naboth hath blasphemed God and
the kynge. Then broughte they him out of the cite, and stoned him to death.
14 And they sent Iesabel worde, sayenge: Naboth is stoned & put to death.
15 Wha Iesabel herde that Naboth was stoned and deed, she sayde vnto Achab: Vp,
and take possession of the vynyarde of Naboth the Iesraelite, which he denyed to
geue the for money: for Naboth lyueth nomore but is deed.
16 And whan Achab herde yt Naboth was deed, he rose to go downe vnthe vyniarde
of Naboth the Iesraelite, and to take possession of it.
17 But the worde of the LORDE came to Elias the The?bite, and sayde:
18 Get the vp, and go downe to mete Achab the kynge of Israel, which is at
Samaria: beholde, he is in Naboths vynyarde, in to the which he is gone downe to
take possession of it,
19 and talke thou with him, and speake: Thus sayeth the LORDE: Thou hast slayne,
and taken in possession. And thou shalt talke morouer vnto him, and saye: Thus
sayeth the LORDE: Euen in the place where the dogges licked vp Naboths bloude,
shall the dogges licke thy bloude also.
20 And Achab sayde vnto Elias: Hast thou euer founde me thine enemye? He saide:
Yee, I haue founde the, because thou art euen solde to do euell in the sighte of
the LORDE.
21 Beholde, I wyll brynge mysfortune vpon the, and take awaye thy posterite, and
wil rote out from Achab, euen him that maketh water agaynst the wall, and him
that is shut vp and lefte behynde in Israel:
22 and thy house wyll I make as the house of Ieroboam ye sonne of Nebat, and as
the house of Baesa the sonne of Ahia, because of ye prouocacion wherwhith thou
hast prouoked me vnto wrath, and made Israel to synne.
23 And ouer Iesabel spake the LORDE also and sayde: The dogges shal deuoure
Iesabel in ye felde of Iesrael.
24 Who so of Achab dyeth in ye cite, him shal the dogges eate vp: and who so
dyeth in the felde, the foules vnder the heauen shall eate him vp.
25 So cleane solde to do myschefe in ye sighte of the LORDE hath no man bene, as
Achab: for his Iesabel hath so disceaued him,
26 and he maketh him selfe a greate abhominacion, that he goeth after Idols,
acordige vnto all as dyd the Amorites, whom the LORDE expelled before the
children of Israel.
27 But whan Achab herde these wordes, he rete his clothes, & put a sack cloth on
his body, & fasted, and slepte in sack cloth, and wente aboute hanginge downe
his heade.
28 And the worde of the LORDE came to Elias the The?bite, & sayde:
29 Hast thou not sene how Achab humbleth him selfe before me? For so moch now as
he hubleth him selfe in my sighte, I wil not brynge that plage whyle he lyueth:
but by his sonnes life wil I brynge mysfortune vpon his house.

Chapter 22

1 And there passed ouer thre yeares, that there was no warre betwene the Sirians
& Israel.
2 But in the thirde yeare wente Iosaphat the kynge of Iuda downe to the kynge of
Israel.
3 And the kynge of Israel sayde vnto his seruauntes: Knowe ye not yt Ramoth in
Gilead is oures? and we syt styll, and take it not out of the hande of the kynge
of Syria.
4 And he sayde vnto Iosaphat: Wilt thou go with me to the battaill vnto Ramoth
in Gilead? Iosaphat sayde vnto the kynge of Israel: I wyll be as thou my people
as thy people, and my horses as thy horses.
5 And Iosaphat sayde vnto ye kynge of Israel: Axe this daye at the worde of the
LORDE.
6 Then the kynge of Israel gathered the prophetes aboute a foure hundreth men,
and sayde vnto them: Shal I go vnto Ramoth in Gilead to fighte, or shal I let it
alone? They sayde: Go vp, ye LORDE shal delyuer it in to ye kinges hande.
7 But Iosaphat sayde: Is there not one prophet here more of ye LORDE, that we
maye axe at him?
8 The kinge of Israel saide vnto Iosaphat Here is yet a man, one Micheas the
sonne of Iemla, at whom we maye axe of the LORDE: but I hate him, for he
prophecieth me no good, but euell. Iosaphat sayde: Let not the kynge saye so.
9 Then called the kynge of Israel a chamberlayne, and sayde: Brynge hither soone
Micheas the sonne of Iemla.
10 As for the kynge of Israel and Iosaphat ye kinge of Iuda, they sat ether of
them vpon his seate, arayed in their garmentes in the place at ye dore of the
porte of Samaria, and all ye prophetes prophecied before the.
11 And Sedechias the sonne of Cnaena had made him hornes of yron, and sayde:
Thus sayeth the LORDE: With these shalt thou pu?she at ye Syrians, tyll thou
brynge them to naughte
12 And all the prophetes prophecied likewyse, and sayde: Go vp vnto Ramoth in
Gilead, thou shalt prospere right well, & the LORDE shal delyuer it in to the
kynges hande.
13 And the messaunger that wente to call Micheas sayde vnto him: Beholde, The
wordes of ye prophetes are with one acorde good before the kynge, let thy worde
therfore be as their worde, and speake thou good also.
14 Micheas sayde: As truly as the LORDE liueth, loke what the LORDE sayeth vnto
me, yt wyl I speake.
15 And whan he came to the kynge, the kynge sayde vnto him: Micheas, shal we go
vnto Ramoth in Gilead to fight or shall we let it alone? He sayde vnto him: Yee,
go vp, thou shalt prospere righte well, the LORDE shall geue it in to the kynges
hande.
16 But the kynge sayde vnto him agayne: I charge ye that thou saye no other
thinge vnto me but the trueth, in the name of ye LORDE.
17 He sayde: I sawe all Israel scatred abrode vpon the mountaynes, as the shepe
that haue no shepherde. And the LORDE saide: Haue these no lorde? Let euery one
turne home agayne in peace.
18 Then sayde ye kinge of Israel vnto Iosaphat: Tolde not I ye that he wolde
prophecye me no good, but euell?
19 He sayde: Heare now therfore the worde of the LORDE: I sawe the LORDE syt
vpon his seate, and all the hoost of heauen stodinge by him at his righte hande
& at his lefte.
20 And the LORDE saide: Who wil disceaue Achab to go vp, & fall at Ramoth in
Gilead. And one sayde this, another that.
21 Then wete there forth a sprete, & stode before the LORDE, and sayde: I wyl
disceaue him.
22 The LORDE sayde vnto him: Wherwith? He sayde vnto him: I wyll go forth, and
be a false sprete in the mouth of all his prophetes. He saide: Thou shalt
disceaue him, and shalt be able: go forth and do so.
23 Beholde now, the LORDE hath geue a false sprete in ye mouth of all these yi
prophetes, and the LORDE hath spoken euell ouer the.
24 Then stepte forth Sedechias the sonne of Cnaena, and smote Micheas vpon the
cheke, and sayde: What, is the sprete of the LORDE departed fro me, to speake
with the?
25 Micheas sayde: Beholde, thou shalt se it in yt daye, whan thou shalt go fro
one chamber to another to hyde the.
26 The kynge of Israel sayde: Take Micheas, and let him remayne with Amon the
ruler of the cite, and with Ioas the kynges sonne,
27 and saye: Thus sayeth the kynge: Put this man in preson, and fede him with
bred and water of trouble, tyll I come agayne in peace.
28 Micheas sayde: Yf thou commest agayne in peace, then hath not the LORDE
spoken thorow me. And he sayde: herken to all ye people.
29 So the kynge of Israel and Iosaphat ye kynge of Iuda wente vp vnto Ramoth in
Gilead.
30 And the kynge of Israel sayde vnto Iosaphat: Chaunge thy clothes, and come in
to ye battayll in thine araie. The kinge of Israel chaunged his clothes also,
and wete in to the battayll.
31 But the kynge of Siria commaunded the rulers of his charettes (of whom there
were two and thirtie) and saide: Ye shal fight nether agaynst small ner greate,
but onely agaynst the kynge of Israel.
32 And whan the rulers of the charettes sawe Iosaphat, they thought it had bene
the kynge of Israel, and fell vpon him with fightinge. But Iosaphat cried.
33 So whan the rulers of the charettes sawe that it was not ye kinge of Israel,
they turned back fro him.
34 A certayne man bended his bowe harde, and shott the kynge of Israel betwene
the mawe and ye longes. And he sayde vnto his charetman: Turne thine hade, and
cary me out of the hoost, for I am wounded.
35 And ye battayll was sore the same daie. And the kinge stode vpo his charet,
agaynst the Syrias and dyed in the eueninge, and the bloude ranne from the
wounde in to the myddes of the charet.
36 And whan the Sonne wente downe there was a proclamacion made in the hoost,
and sayde: Euery one gett him in to his cite, and to his countre.
37 Thus the kynge dyed, and was broughte vnto Samaria, and they buryed him in
Samaria.
38 And whan they wa?shed the charett in the pole of Samaria, ye dogges licked
his bloude (but the harlottes wa?shed him) acordinge to the worde of ye LORDE
which he spake.
39 What more there is to saye of Achab, & all yt he dyd, and of the Yuery house
which he buylded, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of
Israel.
40 So Achab slepte with his fathers, and his sonne Ahasia was kynge in his
steade.
41 And Iosaphat the sonne of Asa was kynge ouer Iuda in the fourth yeare of
Achab kynge of Israel,
42 and was fyue and thirtie yeare olde whan he was made kynge and raigned fyue
and twentye yeare at Ierusale. His mothers name was Asuba ye doughter of Silhi,
43 and he walked in all the waye of his father Asa, & departed not there from
And he dyd that which was right in ye sighte of the LORDE, yet put he not awaye
ye hie places, and ye people offred and brent incese yet vpon the hye places,
44 and he had peace with the kynge of Israel.
45 What more there is to saye of Iosaphat and the mighte that he exercised, and
how he fought, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Iuda.
46 He put out of the londe also the whoremongers that yet were lefte, which
remayned ouer in the tyme of his father Asa.
47 And at that tyme there were no kynges in Edom.
48 And Iosaphat had caused to make shippes vpon the See, which shulde go to
fetch golde in Ophir, but they wente not: for they were broken at Ezeon Gaber.
49 At that tyme sayde Ahasia the sonne of Achab vnto Iosaphat: Let my seruauntes
passe with thy seruauntes in the shippes. But Iosaphat wolde not.
50 And Iosaphat slepte with his fathers, and was buried in ye cite of Dauid. And
Ioram his sonne was kynge in his steade.
51 Ahasia the sonne off Achab was kynge ouer Israel at Samaria in ye seuententh
yeare of Iosaphat kige of Iuda, & reigned ouer Israel two yeares,
52 & dyd yt which was euell in ye sight of the LORDE, and walked in the waye of
his father and of his mother, & in the waie of Ieroboam ye sonne of Nebat, which
made Israel for to synne.
53 And serued Baal, and worshipped him, and displeased the LORDE God of Israel,
eue as his father dyd.


2 Kings

Chapter 1

1 The Moabites also fell awaye from Israel, whan Achab was deed.
2 And Ochosias fell thorow ye grate in his chaber at Samaria, and was deed
sicke, and sent messaungers, and sayde vnto them: Go youre waye, and axe
councell at Beelzebub the god of Ekron, whether I shall recouer from this
sicknesse.
3 But the angell of ye LORDE sayde vnto Elias the Tishbite: Vp, & go mete the
messaungers of the kynge of Samaria, and saie vnto them: Is there no God in
Israel that ye go to axe councell at ye god of Ekron?
4 Therfore thus sayeth the LORDE: Thou shalt not come from the bed wheron thou
lyest, but shalt dye the death. And Elias wente his waye.
5 And wha ye messaunges came to Ochosias agayne, he sayde vnto the: Why come ye
agayne?
6 They sayde vnto him: There came vp a man in oure waye, and sayde vnto vs: Go
againe to the kinge that hath sent you, and saye vnto him: Thus saieth the
LORDE: Is there no God in Israel, yt thou sendest to axe coucel at Beelzebub ye
god of Ekro? Therfore shalt thou not come from ye bed wheron thou lyest, but
shalt dye the death.
7 He sayde vnto them: What maner of man was it that mett you, and sayde this
vnto you?
8 They sayde vnto him: He had a rough heer vpon him, and a letheren gyrdell
aboute his loynes. He sayde: It is Elias the Tishbite.
9 And he sent vnto him a captaine ouer fiftye, with the same fyftye. And whan he
came vnto him, beholde, he sat aboue vpon the mout. He sayde vnto him: Thou ma
of God, the kynge sayeth: Thou shalt come downe
10 Elias answered the captayne ouer fyftye, and sayde vnto him: Yf I be a man of
God, the fyre fall downe then from heauen, and cosume the and thy fyftie. Then
fell there fire from heauen, and consumed him and his fyftye.
11 And agayne he sent another captayne ouer fyftye vnto him, with his fyftye,
which answered, and sayde vnto him: Thou man of God, thus sayeth the kynge: Come
downe in all the haist.
12 Elias answered, and saide: Yf I be a ma of God, ye fire fall downe from
heauen, and consume the and thy fyftye. Then fell the fyre of God from heauen, &
consumed him, and his fyftye. Agayne, he sent vnto him the thirde captayne ouer
fyftye, with his fyftie.
13 Now whan he came to him, he kneled to Elias, and besoughte him, and sayde
vnto him: Thou man of God, let my soule and ye soules of thy seruauntes these
fyftye, be somwhat worth in thy syghte.
14 Beholde, the fyre fell downe from heauen, and hath consumed the fyrst two
captaynes ouer fyftye wt their fyftyes. But now let my soule be somwhat worth in
thy sighte.
15 Then saide the angel of the LORDE vnto Elias: Go downe with him, and feare
him not. And he gatt him vp, and wente downe with him vnto ye kynge.
16 And he sayde vnto him: Thus saieth the LORDE: Because thou hast sent forth
messaugers, and caused to axe councell at Beelzebub the god of Ekron, as though
there were no God in Israel to axe coucell at his worde, therfore shalt thou not
come from the bed wheron thou hast layed the, but shalt dye ye death.
17 So he dyed, acordynge to the worde of the LORDE which Elias sayde. And Ioram
(his brother) was kynge in his steade in the seconde yeare of Ioram the sonne of
Iosaphat kynge of Iuda: for he had no sonne.
18 What more there is to saye of Ochosias, what he dyd, beholde, it is wrytte in
the Cronicles of the kynges of Israel.

Chapter 2

1 Whan the LORDE was mynded to take vp Elias in the tempest, Elias and Eliseus
wente from Gilgall.
2 And Elias sayde to Eliseus: Tary thou here I praye the, for the LORDE hath
sent me vnto Bethel. But Eliseus sayde: As truly as the LORDE liueth, and as
truly as thy soule lyueth, I wyll not forsake the. And whan they came downe vnto
Bethel,
3 the prophetes children that were at Bethel, wete forth to Eliseus, and sayde
vnto him: Knowest thou not, that the LORDE wyl take thy lorde awaye from thy
heade this daye? He saide: I knowe it well, holde ye youre peace.
4 And Elias sayde vnto him: Eliseus, tary thou here I praye the, for the LORDE
hath sent me vnto Iericho. Neuerthelesse he sayde: as truly as the LORDE lyueth,
and as truly as thy soule lyueth, I wyl not forsake the And whan they came vnto
Iericho,
5 the prophetes children which were at Iericho, stepte forth to Eliseus and
sayde vnto him: Knowest thou not that the LORDE wyll take yi lorde awaye from
thy heade this daie? He sayde: I knowe it well, holde ye yor peace.
6 And Elias sayde vnto him: I praie the tary here, for ye LORDE hath sent me
vnto Iordane. But he sayde: As truly as the LORDE lyueth, and as truly as thy
soule lyueth, I wil not forsake the. And they wente both together.
7 But fyftye men of ye prophetes children wete forth, and stode ouer agaynst the
a farre of: but they both stode by Iordane.
8 Then toke Elias his cloke, and wrapped it together, and smote the water, which
deuyded it selfe on both the sydes, so that they wete dry shod thorow it.
9 And whan they were come ouer, Elias sayde vnto Eliseus: Axe what I shall do
for the, afore I be taken awaye from the. Eliseus saide: That thy sprete maye be
vpo me to speake twyse as moch.
10 He sayde: Thou hast desyred an harde thinge: neuertheles yf thou shalt se me
wha I am taken awaye from the, it shal be so: Yf no, the shal it not be.
11 And as they were goinge together, and he talked, there came a fyrie charet
with horses of fyre, and parted the both asunder. And so wente Elias vp to
heauen in the storme.
12 But Eliseus sawe it, & cryed: My father, my father, the charetman of Israel
and his horsme. And he sawe him nomore. And he toke holde of his clothes, and
rente them in two peces,
13 and toke vp Elias cloke that was fallen from him, and turned backe, and stode
by the shore of Iordane,
14 and toke the same cloke of Elias which was fallen from him, and smote it in
the water, and saide: Where is now the LORDE God of Elias? And he smote it in to
the water, and then parted it asunder on both the sydes, and Eliseus wente
thorow.
15 And whan the prophetes children which were at Iericho ouer agynst him, sawe
him, they sayde: The sprete of Elias resteth vpo Eliseus, and so they wete forth
to mete him, and worshipped him to the groude,
16 and sayde vnto him: Beholde, there are fiftye valeaunt me amonge thy
seruauntes, let them go and seke thy lorde, peraduenture the sprete of the LORDE
hath taken him, and cast him vpon some mountaine or in some valley. But he
saide: Sende them not.
17 Neuertheles they constrayned him, tyll he was ashamed, and sayde: Let them
go. And they sent fiftye men, which soughte him thre dayes: but they founde him
not,
18 and came agayne vnto him. And he abode at Iericho, and sayde vnto them: Tolde
not I you, that ye shulde not go?
19 And the men of the cite sayde vnto Eliseus: Beholde, there is good dwellynge
in this cite, as my lorde seyth, but the water is euell, and the londe
vnfrutefull.
20 He sayde: Bringe me hither a new vessell, & put salt in it. And they broughte
it him.
21 Then wete he forth vnto the well of water, and cast the salt therin, & sayde:
Thus sayeth the LORDE: I haue healed this water: from hence forth shal there no
deed ner vnfrutefulnes come of it.
22 So the water was healed vnto this daye, acordinge to the worde of Eliseus
which he spake.
23 And he wete vp towarde Bethel. And as he was goynge vp by the waye, there
came litle boyes out of the cite, and mocked him, & sayde: Come vp here thou
balde heade, come vp here thou balde heade.
24 And he turned him aboute. And wha he sawe them, he cursed them in the name of
the LORDE. Then came there two Beeres out of the wod, and rente two and fortye
of the children.
25 From thence wete he vp vnto mount Carmel, and from it turned he backe to
Samaria.

Chapter 3

1 Ioram the sonne of Achab was kynge ouer Israel at Samaria in ye eightenth
yeare of Iosaphat kynge of Iuda, & raigned xij. yeares,
2 & dyd yt which was euell in ye sighte of ye LORDE, but not as his father & his
mother: for he put awaye ye pilers of Baal, which his father caused to make.
3 Neuertheles he cleued vnto ye synnes of Ieroboa & sonne of Nebat, which made
Israel for to synne, & departed not there fro.
4 Mesa ye kynge of the Moabites had many shepe, & payed tribute vnto the kynge
of Israel wt the woll of an hundreth thousande labes, & of an hudreth thousande
rames.
5 But whan Achab was deed, the kynge of ye Moabites fell awaye fro the kynge of
Israel.
6 At ye same tyme wete kynge Ioram fro Samaria, & mustered all Israel,
7 & sent vnto Iosaphat kynge of Iuda, sayenge: The kynge of the Moabites is
fallen awaye fro me, come thou wt me to fighte agaynst ye Moabites. He sayde: I
wil come vp, I am euen as thou, and my people as yi people, and my horses as thy
horses.
8 And sayde morouer: Which waye wil we go vp? He sayde: by the waye in the
wyldernesse of Edom.
9 So the kynge of Israel, the kynge of Iuda, & the kynge of Edom wente forth.
And whan they had gone aboute seue dayes iourney, ye hoost & the catell yt were
amonge the had no water.
10 Then sayde the kynge of Israel: Alas, the LORDE hath called these thre
kynges, to delyuer the in to the hande of the Moabites.
11 But Iosaphat sayde: Is here no prophet of ye LORDE, yt we maye axe coucell at
ye LORDE by him? Then answered one of ye kynge of Israels seruauntes, & saide:
Here is Eliseus ye sonne of Saphat, which poured water vpon Elias handes.
12 Iosaphat sayde: The worde of ye LORDE is with him. So the kynge of Israel &
Iosaphat, and ye kynge of Edom wente downe vnto him.
13 But Eliseus sayde vnto the kynge of Israel: What hast thou to do wt me? go to
the prophetes of thy father & to yi mothers prophetes. The kinge of Israel saide
vnto him: No, for ye LORDE hath called these thre kynges, to delyuer them in to
the handes of the Moabites.
14 Eliseus sayde: As truly as the LORDE Zebaoth lyueth, before whom I stode, yf
I regarded not Iosaphat the kynge of Iuda, I wolde not regarde the, ner set
oughte by ye.
15 So bringe me now a mynstrell. And whan the mynstrell played vpo the
instrument, the hande of the LORDE came vpo him.
16 And he sayde: Thus sayeth the LORDE: Make pittes by this broke.
17 For thus sayeth the LORDE: Ye shal se nether wynde ner rayne, yet shall the
broke be full of water, that ye and youre housholdes & youre catell maie drynke.
18 Yee and that is but a small thinge in the sighte of the LORDE. And the
Moabites shal he delyuer in to youre handes,
19 so yt ye shal smyte all the stronge cities, and all ye chosen cities & shal
fell downe all the good trees, and stoppe all the welles of water and all the
good feldes shall ye make waist with stones.
20 On the morow, whan the meatofferynge is offered, beholde, there came water ye
waye from Edom, and fylled ye londe with water.
21 But whan the Moabites herde, yt the kynges came vp to fighte agaynst the,
they called all ye harnessed men, & their rulers, & stode on ye border.
22 And whan they rose early in ye mornynge, & the Sonne wete vp vpon ye water,
the Moabites thoughte the water ouer agaynst the to be eue as reed as bloude,
23 & they sayde: It is bloude, ye kynges haue destroyed them selues wt the
swerde, & one hath smytten another. Now Moab get the vp to the spoyles.
24 But whan they came to the tentes of Israel, the Israelites gat vp, & smote
the Moabites, & they fled before them. Neuertheles they came in, & smote Moab,
25 & brake downe the cities, & euery one cast his stone vpon all the good
feldes, and made them full, and stopped all ye welles of water, and felled downe
all the good trees, tyll there remayned but the stones in the brickwall, and
they compased them aboute with slynges, and smote them.
26 But wha the kynge of ye Moabites sawe yt the battayll was to stroge for him,
he toke to him seuen C. men, which drue ye swerde, to fall vpon the kynge of
Edom: neuertheles they were not able.
27 Then toke he his first sonne, which shulde haue bene kynge in his steade, and
offred him for a burntofferynge vpon the wall. Then came there a greate wrath
ouer Israel, that they departed from him, and turned agayne into their londe.

Chapter 4

1 And there cried a woman amoge the wyues of the prophetes children vnto
Eliseus, and sayde: Thy seruaunt my hu?bade is deed, and thou knowest that thy
seruaunt feared the LORDE. Now commeth the man that he was detter vnto, and wyll
take awaye both my children to be bonde seruauntes.
2 Eliseus sayde vnto her: What shal I do for the? Tell me, what hast thou in the
house? She sayde: Thy handmayden hath nothinge in the house but a pitcher wt
oyle.
3 He sayde: Go yi waye, borowe without of all thy neghboures emptye vessels, &
that not a fewe,
4 and go in, and shut ye dore behynde the with thy sonnes, and poure of it in to
all ye vessels: & whan thou hast fylled them, delyuer them forth.
5 She wente, and shut the dore vnto her with hir sonnes, which broughte her the
vessels, and so she poured in.
6 And whan the vessels were full, she sayde vnto hir sonne: Brynge me yet one
vessell. He sayde vnto her: There is not one vessell more here. Then stode ye
oyle styll.
7 And she sent, and tolde the man of God. He sayde: Go thy waye, sell the oyle,
and paye the creditour: but lyue thou and yi sonnes of the resydue.
8 And it fortuned at ye same tyme, that Eliseus wente vnto Sunem. And there was
a riche woman, which helde him to eate with her: & as he passed oft thorow yt
waye, he wete in vnto her: & ate wt her.
9 And she sayde vnto hir hu?bande: Beholde, I perceaue that this is an holy man
of God, which goeth euer thorow this waye,
10 let vs make hi a litle chamber of boordes, & set a bed, a table, a stole & a
candelsticke therin, that whan he commeth vnto vs, he maye resorte thither.
11 And it fortuned vpon a tyme, that he came in, & layed him downe in the
chamber, & slepte therin.
12 And he saide vnto Gehasi his childe: Call this woma of Sunem. And wha he had
called her, she stode before him.
13 He sayde vnto him: Speake thou vnto her, beholde, thou hast mynistred vnto vs
in all these thinges, what shal I do for the? Hast thou eny matter to be spoken
for to the kynge, or to the chefe captayne of the hoost? She sayde: I dwell
amonge my people.
14 He sayde: What hast thou then to do? Gehasi sayde: Alas, she hath no sonne,
and hir hu?bade is olde.
15 He sayde: Call her. And wha he had called her, she stode at the dore.
16 And he sayde: Aboute this tyme yf ye frute can lyue, thou shalt enbrace a
sonne. She sayde: Alas, no my lorde, thou man of God, lye not vnto thy
handmayden.
17 And the woman conceaued, and bare a sonne aboute the same tyme, wha the frute
coulde lyue, acordynge as Eliseus had sayde vnto her.
18 But whan ye childe was growne, it fortuned, yt he wente forth to his father
vnto the reapers,
19 & sayde vnto his father: Oh my heade, my heade. He saide vnto his seruaut:
Bringe him to his mother.
20 And he toke him, and broughte him to his mother: and she set him vpon hir
lappe vntyll ye noone daye, & the he dyed.
21 And she wente vp, and layed him vpo the bed of the man of God, & shut the
dore, and wete forth,
22 & called hir hu?bande, & sayde vnto him: Sende me one of the seruautes, and
an Asse, I wyl go quyckly vnto the man of God, and come agayne.
23 He sayde: Why wilt thou go vnto him? To daye is it nether new moone ner
Sabbath. She sayde: Well.
24 And she sadled the asse, & sayde to the yongman: dryue forth, and kepe me not
bak with rydinge, and do as I byd the.
25 So she wente, and came to the man of God vnto mount Carmell. Wha the man of
God sawe her ouer agaynst him, he sayde vnto his childe Gehasi: Beholde, the
Sunamitisse is there,
26 runne now & mete her, and axe her yf it go well with her, and hir hu?bande &
hir sonne. She sayde: Well.
27 But whan she came to the man of God vpon ye mount, she helde him by his fete.
And Gehasi stepte to her, to put her awaye. But ye man of God sayde: Let her
alone, for hir soule is in heuynes, and the LORDE hath hyd it fro me, and not
shewed it me.
28 She sayde: Whan desyred I a sonne of my lorde? Sayde I not, yt thou shuldest
not mocke me?
29 He sayde vnto Gehasi: Girde vp thy loynes, and take my staffe in thy hande,
and go thy waye. Yf eny man mete the, salute him not: and yf eny man salute the,
thanke him not, and laye thou my staffe vpon ye childes face.
30 But the childes mother sayde: As truly as the LORDE lyueth, and as truly as
yi soule lyueth, I wyll not leaue the. Then gat he vp, and wente after her.
31 As for Gehasi, he wente before them, and layed the staffe vpon the childes
face, but there was nether voyce ner felynge. And he wente agayne to mete him,
and shewed him, and sayde: The childe is not rysen vp.
32 And whan Eliseus came into the house, beholde, ye childe laye deed vpo his
bed.
33 And he wete in, & shut the dore on the both, & made his prayer vnto the
LORDE,
34 & wente vp, & layed him selfe vpon the childe, & layed his mouth vpon the
childes mouth, and his eyes vpon his eyes, and his handes vpon his handes, & so
stretched him selfe forth vpon him, so yt the childes body was warme.
35 And he rose vp, & wente in to the house once hither and thither, & wente vp,
& layed him selfe a longe vpon him. Then nesed the childe seue tymes, and
afterwarde the childe opened his eyes.
36 And he cried vpon Gehasi, and sayde: Call the Sunamitisse. And whan he had
called her, she came in vnto him. He sayde: Take there thy sonne.
37 Then came she, and fell at his fete, and worshipped vnto the grounde, and
toke hir sonne, and wente forth.
38 But wha Eliseus came againe vnto Gilgal, there was a derth in the londe, &
the prophetes children dwelt before him, & he sayde vnto his seruaunt: Set on a
greate pot, and make potage for the children of the prophetes.
39 Then wente there one into the felde, to gather herbes, and founde a Cucumbers
stalke, & gathered wylde Cucumbers therof his cotefull. And whan he came, he
chopped it small for potage to the pott, for they knewe it not.
40 And wha they poured it forth for the me to eate, & they ate of ye potage,
they cried and sayde: O thou man of God, death is in the pot: for they mighte
not eate it.
41 Neuertheles he sayde: Brynge meel hither. And he put it in the pot, & sayde:
Poure it out for the people, that they maye eate. And then was it not bytter in
the pot.
42 There came a man from Baal Salisa, & broughte the man of God bred of the
first frutes, namely twentye barlye loaues, & new corne in his garment. But he
sayde: Geue it vnto ye people, that they maye eate.
43 His mynister sayde: How shall I geue an hudreth men of this? He sayde: Geue
it vnto the people, that they maye eate. For thus sayeth the LORDE: They shal
eate, and there shall be lefte ouer
44 And he set it before them, so that they ate, and there lefte ouer, acordinge
to ye worde of the LORDE.

Chapter 5

1 Naaman the chefe captayne of the kynge of Syria, was an excellet ma in the
sighte of his lorde, and moch set by (for thorow him the LORDE gaue health vnto
Syria) and he was a mightie man, but a leper.
2 And there had men of warre fallen out of Syria, and caried awaye a litle
damsel out of the londe of Israel: the same was in seruyce with Naamas wife,
3 and sayde vnto hir mastresse: O that my master were with the prophet at
Samaria, he wolde heale him from his leprosy.
4 Then wente he into his lorde, and tolde him, and sayde: Thus and thus hath the
damsel of the londe of Israel spoken.
5 The kynge of Syria sayde: Go thy waye then, & I wyl wrytte a letter vnto the
kynge of Israel. And he wente, and toke with him ten hundreth weighte of syluer,
and sixe thousande guldens, & ten chaunge of rayment,
6 & broughte the letter vnto the kynge of Israel, with these wordes: Whan this
letter commeth vnto the, beholde, thou shalt vnderstonde yt I haue sent my
seruaunt Naaman vnto the, that thou mayest heale him of his leprosy.
7 And whan the kynge of Israel red the letter, he rente his clothes, & sayde: Am
I God then, that I can kyll and quycke agayne, yt he sendeth vnto me, to heale
the man fro his leprosy? Considre and se, how he seketh an occasion vnto me.
8 Whan Eliseus the man of God herde, yt the kynge of Israel had rente his
clothes, he sent vnto him, sayenge: Why hast thou rente thy clothes? Let him
come to me, that he maye knowe, yt there is a prophet in Israel.
9 So Naaman came with horses and charettes, and helde still at the dore of
Eliseus house.
10 Then sent Eliseus a messaunger vnto him, sayenge: Go thy waye, and wa?she the
seuen tymes in Iordane, so shal thy flesh be restored the agayne, & be clensed.
11 Then was Naaman wroth, & wente his waye, & sayde: I thoughte he shulde haue
come forth vnto me, & to haue stode here & to haue called vpo the name of the
LORDE his God, & to haue touched the place with his hande, & so to haue put
awaye the leprosy.
12 Are not ye waters of Amana and Pharphar at Damascon better then all the
waters in Israel, yt I might wa?she me therin & be clesed? and he turned him,
and wete his waye in displeasure.
13 Then his seruauntes gat the to him, and sayde: Father, yf the prophet had
comaunded the eny greate thinge, shuldest thou not haue done it? moch more the
yf he saye vnto the: Wasshe the, & thou shalt be cleane.
14 Then wete he downe, & wa?shed him selfe in Iordane seue tymes (as the man of
God sayde) & his flesh was restored him agayne, euen as the flesh of a yonge
childe and he was clensed.
15 And he turned agayne to ye man of God with all his armye. And whan he came
in, he stode before him, and sayde: Beholde, I knowe that in all londes there is
no God, but in Israel. Take now therfore this blessynge I praye the of thy
seruaunt.
16 Neuertheles he sayde: As truly as the LORDE lyueth, before whom I stonde, I
wil not take it. And he wolde nedes haue him to take it, but he wolde not.
17 Then sayde Naaman: Mighte there not a burthe of this earth be geue vnto yi
seruaunt, as moch as two Mules maye beare? For thy seruaunt wyll nomore do
sacrifice and offer burntofferynges vnto other goddes, but vnto the LORDE,
18 That the LORDE maye be gracious vnto thy seruaunt, yf I worshippe in the
house of Rimmon, wha my lorde goeth there in to ye house to worshippe, & leaneth
vpon my hande.
19 He sayde vnto him: Go thy waye in peace. And as he was gone from him a felde
bredth in the londe,
20 Gehasi the seruaunt of Eliseus ye man of God thoughte: beholde, my lorde hath
spared Naama this Syrian, so that he hath not taken from him yt which he
broughte: As truly as ye LORDE lyueth, I wil rune after him, & take somthinge of
him.
21 So Gehasi folowed Naaman. And wha Naaman sawe yt he ranne after him, he
lighte downe from the charet to mete him, & sayde: Are all thinges well?
22 He sayde: Yee. But my lorde hath sent me, & caused to saye vnto the: Beholde,
there are now come to me fro mount Ephraim two yonge men of the prophetes
childre, geue them a talete of siluer (I praye the) & two chaunge of rayment.
23 Naama saide: Go to, take two taletes. And he copelled him, & bande two
talentes in two bagges, and two chaunge of rayment, and delyuered it vnto two of
his seruauntes, which bare it before him.
24 And whan he came in ye darcke, he toke it from their handes, & layed it a
syde in the house, & let the men go.
25 And whan they were gone their waye, he stode before his lorde. And Eliseus
sayde vnto him: Whence commest thou Gehasi? He sayde: Thy seruaunt wente nether
hither ner thither.
26 But he sayde vnto him: Wente not my hert wt the, whan the man turned backe
from his charet to mete the? Now thou hast take the syluer & the rayment, olyue
trees, vynyardes, shepe, oxen, seruauntes & maydens.
27 But the leprosy of Naaman shal cleue vnto the & to thy sede for euer. Then
wete he forth from him leporous as snowe.

Chapter 6

1 The children of ye prophetes sayde vnto Eliseus: Beholde, the place where we
dwell before ye, is to narow for vs,
2 let vs go vnto Iordane, & euery one fetch tymbre there, yt we maye there
buylde vs a place to dwell in. He saide: Go yor waye.
3 And one sayde: Go to then, & come wt thy seruauntes. He sayde: I wil go with
you.
4 And he wete with them. And whan they came to Iordane, they hewed downe tymber.
5 And as one was fellynge downe a tre, the yron fell in to the water, and he
cried and sayde: Alas my lorde, & it is burowed.
6 But the man of God sayde: Where fell it in? And whan he had shewed him the
place, he cut downe a sticke, and thrust it in there. Then swame the yron.
7 And he sayde: Take it vp. So he put forth his hande, and toke it.
8 And the kynge of Syria warred agaynst Israel, and toke councell at his
seruauntes, and sayde: There & there will we lye.
9 But the man of God sent to ye kynge of Israel, sayenge: Bewarre yt thou go not
vnto that place, for the Syrians rest there.
10 So the kynge of Israel sent vnto ye place wherof ye man of God tolde him, &
kepte it, & helde watch there, & dyd that not once or twyse onely.
11 The was ye kynge of Syrias herte vexed therfore, and called his seruauntes,
and sayde vnto them: Wyll ye not tell me, which of oure men is fled vnto the
kynge of Israel?
12 Then sayde one of his seruauntes: Not so my lorde O kynge, but Eliseus the
prophet in Israel telleth the kynge of Israel all that thou speakest in thy
chamber where thou lyest.
13 He sayde: Go youre waye the and loke where he is, that I maye sende, and
cause him be fetched. And they shewed him and sayde: Beholde, he is at Dothan.
14 The sent he thither horses & charetes, & a greate power. And wha they came
thither by nighte, they compased the cite aboute.
15 And the mynister of the ma of God arose early to get him vp. And as he wete
forth, beholde, there laye an hoost of men aboute ye cite with horses and
charettes. Then saide his childe vnto him: Alas syr, how wyll we now do?
16 He sayde: Feare not, for there are mo of them yt are with vs, then of those
that are with them.
17 And Eliseus prayed & sayde: LORDE open his eyes, yt he maye se. Then the
LORDE opened ye childes eyes, yt he sawe, & beholde, ye mount was full of fyrie
horses & charettes roude aboute Eliseus.
18 And wha they came downe vnto him, Eliseus made his prayer, & sayde: LORDE
smyte this people wt blyndnes. And he smote the with blyndnes acordinge to the
worde of Eliseus.
19 And Eliseus saide vnto them: This is not ye waye nor the cite, folowe me, I
wil brynge you to the man whom ye seke. And he broughte them vnto Samaria.
20 And whan they came to Samaria, Eliseus sayde: LORDE open these mens eyes, yt
they maye se. And the LORDE opened their eyes, yt they sawe, & beholde, they
were in the myddes of Samaria.
21 And whan the kynge of Israel sawe them, he saide vnto Eliseus: My father,
shal I smyte the?
22 He saide: Thou shalt not smyte the: loke whom thou takest with thy swerde and
bowe, smyte those. Set bred and water before them, that they maye eate and
drynke, and let them departe vnto their lorde.
23 The was there a greate dyner prepared. And whan they had eaten and dronken,
he let them go to departe vnto their lorde. From that tyme forth came the men of
warre of the Syrians nomore into the londe of Israel.
24 After this it fortuned, that Benadab the kynge of Syria gathered all his
hoost, and wete vp, & layed sege vnto Samaria:
25 & there was a greate derth at Samaria. But they layed sege to the cite so
longe, tyll an Asses heade was worth foure score syluer pes, and the fourth
parte of a Cab of doues donge worth fyue syluer pens.
26 And whan the kynge of Israel wente vnto the wall, a woman cried vnto him and
sayde: Helpe me my lorde O kynge.
27 He sayde: Yf the LORDE helpe the not, wherwith shal I helpe the? with ye
barne or with the wyne presse?
28 And the kynge sayde vnto her: What ayleth ye? She sayde: This woman sayde
vnto me: Geue vs yi sonne, that we maye eate him, tomorow wyll we eate my sonne.
29 So we sod my sonne, & haue eaten him, and I sayde vnto her on ye thirde daye:
Geue vs thy sonne and let vs eate him, but she hath hyd him awaye.
30 Whan the kynge herde the womans wordes, he rente his clothes, whyle he was
goynge to the wall. The sawe all the people, that he had a sackcloth vnder vpon
his body.
31 And he sayde: God do this and that vnto me, yf the heade of Eliseus the sonne
of Saphat shal this daye stonde vpon him.
32 As for Eliseus, he sat in his house, & the Elders sat by him. And he sent a
man before him, but or euer the messaunge came to him, he sayde vnto ye Elders:
Haue ye not sene how this childe of murthure hath sent hither, to take awaye my
heade? Take hede, whan the messaunger cometh, yt ye holde him at the dore.
Beholde, ye noyse of his lordes fete foloweth him.
33 Whyle he was thus talkynge wt them, beholde, ye messaunger came to him, &
sayde: Beholde, this euell cometh of ye LORDE, and what more shal I loke for of
the LORDE?

Chapter 7

1 Eliseus sayde: Heare the worde of the LORDE. Thus sayeth the LORDE: Tomorow
aboute this tyme shal a bu?shel of fyne meel be solde for one Sycle, and two
bu?shels of barly for one Sycle vnder the porte of Samaria.
2 Then a knyghte (vpon whose hande the kynge leaned) answered the ma of God, and
sayde: And though the LORDE made wyndowes in heaue, how coulde soch a thinge
come to passe? He saide: Beholde, thou shalt se it with thine eyes, & shalt not
eate therof.
3 And there were foure leporous men at ye dore before the porte, and one sayde
vnto another: Why tary we here whyle we dye?
4 Though we thoughte to come into the cite, yet is there derth in ye cite, and
there shulde we be fayne to dye. And yf we tary here, we must dye also. Let vs
go now, and flye vnto the hoost of the Syrians. Yf they let vs lyue, we shall
lyue: yf they slaye vs, then are we deed.
5 And so they gat them vp early, to come vnto the hoost of the Syrians. And whan
they came to the vttemost ende of ye tentes, beholde, there was no body.
6 For the LORDE had made the Syrians to heare a noyse of horses, charettes, and
of a mightie greate hoost, so that they sayde one to another amonge the selues:
Beholde, the kynge of Israel hath hyred the kynge of the Hethites, and the kynge
of the Egipcians agaynst vs, to come vpo vs.
7 And they gat them vp, and fled early in the twylight, and lefte their bothes,
and horses and Asses in the tentes as they stode, & fled euery man where he
mighte saue his life.
8 Now whan the lepers came to the place of the tentes, they wente in to the
tentes, ate and dronke, and toke syluer, golde and rayment, and wente and hyd
it: & came agayne & entred in to another tent, and toke therout, and wente and
hyd it.
9 But one of them saide vnto another: Let vs not do thus, this daye is a daye of
good tidynges. Yf we kepe this secrete and byde tyll the lighte mornynge, oure
trespace wyl be founde out. Let vs go now therfore, that we maye come, & tell
the kynges house.
10 And whan they came, they cried at the porte of the cite, and tolde them, and
sayde: We came to the tentes of the Sirians, and beholde, there is no ma there,
nether yet eny mans voyce, but horses and asses bounde, and the bothes as they
stonde.
11 Then cried ye porters and tolde it within in ye kynges house.
12 And the kynge arose in the nighte, & sayde vnto his seruauntes: I will tell
you how ye Syrians deale with vs: they knowe yt we suffer honger, and are gone
out of the tetes, to hyde them selues in the felde, and thynke thus: whan they
go out of the cite, we wyll take them alyue, & come in to the cite.
13 Then answered one of his seruauntes, and sayde: Let vs take the fyue horses
that remayne, which yet are lefte in the cite (beholde, these are left therin
for all ye multitude in Israel, which is destroyed) let vs sende these and se.
14 The toke they two charettes with ye horses. And the kynge sent them vnto the
tentes of the Syrians, and sayde: Go youre waye and se.
15 And whan they wente after the vnto Iordane, beholde, the waye laye full of
garmentes and vessels, which the Syrians had cast from the, whyle they made
haist. And whan the messaungers came agayne, and tolde the kynge,
16 the people wente forth, and spoyled the tentes of the Syrians. And a bu?shel
of fyne meell was solde for a Sycle, and two bu?shels of barlye for a Sycle
also, acordinge to the worde of the LORDE.
17 But the kynge appoynted the knyghte (vpon whose hande he leened) to be at the
gate, & the people trode vpon him, so that he dyed, euen as the man of God
sayde, whan the kynge came downe vnto him.
18 And it came to passe euen as ye man of God tolde the kynge, wha he sayde:
Tomorow aboute this tyme shall two bu?shels of barlye be solde for one Sycle,
and a bu?shel fyne meel for one Sycle vnder the gate at Samaria.
19 And the knyghte answered the man of God, and sayde: Beholde, though ye LORDE
made wyndowes in heauen, how coulde soch a thinge come to passe? Neuertheles he
sayde: Beholde, with thine eyes shalt thou se it, and shalt not eate therof.
20 And euen so fortuned it vnto him, for the people trode vpon him in the gate,
yt he dyed.

Chapter 8

1 Eliseus spake vnto the woma, whose sonne he had restored vnto life againe, and
sayde: Get the vp, & go with thine housholde, and be a straunger where thou
canst: for the LORDE shall call for a derth, which shal come into the londe
seuen yeare loge.
2 The woman gat her vp, and dyd as the man of God sayde, & wente with hir
housholde, and was a straunger in the londe of the Philistynes seuen yeare.
3 But whan the seuen yeares were ended, the woman came agayne out of the
Philistynes lode, and wente forth to crye vpon the kynge for hir house and
londe.
4 The kynge spake vnto Gehasi the seruaunt of the man of God, & sayde: Tell me
all the greate actes that Eliseus hath done.
5 And whyle he was tellynge the kynge how he had made one that was deed, to lyue
agayne, beholde, the woman whose sonne he had caused to reuyue, came euen in the
meane season, and cried vnto the kynge for hir house and londe. Then sayde
Gehasi: My lorde O kynge, this same is the woma, and this is hir sonne, whom
Eliseus restored vnto life agayne.
6 And the kynge axed ye woman, and she tolde him. Then the kynge delyuered her a
chamberlayne, & saide: Restore her agayne all that is hirs, and all the increase
of the londe, sence the tyme that she lefte the londe vntyll now.
7 And Eliseus came to Damascon, & Benadab the kynge of Syria laye sicke. And it
was tolde him, and sayde: The man of God is come hither.
8 Then sayde the kynge vnto Hasael: Take giftes with the, & go mete the man of
God, and axe councell at ye LORDE by him, and saye: Maye I recouer from this
sicknesse?
9 Hasael wente for to mete him, and toke rewardes with him, and of all the
goodes at Damasco, as moch as fortye Camels mighte beare. And whan he came, he
stode before him, and sayde: Thy sonne Benadab the kynge of Syria hath sent me
vnto the, sayenge: Maye I recouer from this siknes?
10 Eliseus sayde vnto him: Go yi waye and tell him: Thou shalt recouer. But the
LORDE hath shewed me, yt he shal dye ye death.
11 And the man of God loked earnestly, & made a troublous countenaunce, & wepte.
12 The sayde Hasael: Wherfore wepeth my lorde? He sayde: I knowe what euell thou
shalt do vnto the children of Israel. Thou shalt burne their stronge cities with
fyre, and slaye their yonge men with the swerde, and kyll their yonge children,
and ryppe vp their wemen with childe.
13 Hasael sayde: How so, is thy seruaunt a dogg, that he shulde do soch a greate
thynge? Eliseus saide: The LORDE hath shewed me, yt thou shalt be kynge of
Syria.
14 And he wete his waye from Eliseus, & came to his lorde, which saide vnto him:
What saieth Eliseus vnto the? He sayde: He tolde me, Thou shalt recouer.
15 But on the nexte daye he toke ye bed couerynge, and dypte it in water, and
spred it ouer him, and he dyed, & Hasael was kynge in his steade.
16 In the fyfth yeare of Ioram the sonne of Achab kynge of Israel, was Ioram ye
sonne of Iosaphat kynge of Iuda.
17 Two & thirtie yeare olde was he wha he was made kynge, & reigned eighte yeare
at Ierusalem,
18 & walked in the waye of the kynges of Israel, as the house of Achab dyd (for
Achabs doughter was his wife) & he dyd yt which was euell in ye sighte of the
LORDE.
19 Neuertheles the LORDE wolde not destroye Iuda for his seruaunt Dauids sake,
as he promysed him, to geue him euer a lanterne amoge his childre.
20 At ye same tyme fell ye Edomites awaye from Iuda, & made a kynge ouer them
selues:
21 ye cause was this, Ioram had gone thorow Seira, and all the charettes with
him, & had gotten him vp by nighte, and smytten the Edomites that were aboute
him, and ye rulers ouer the charettes, so that the people fled vnto their
tentes:
22 therfore fell the Edomites awaye from Iuda vnto this daye. At the same tyme
fell Libna awaye also.
23 What more there is to saye of Ioram, & all yt he dyd, beholde, it is wrytten
in the Cronicles of the kynges of Iuda.
24 And Ioram fell on slepe with his fathers, & was buried wt his fathers in ye
cite of Dauid, & Ochosias his sonne was kynge in his steade.
25 In the twolueth yeare of Ioram the sonne of Achab kynge of Israel, was
Ochosias ye sonne of Ioram kynge in Iuda.
26 Two and twentye yeare olde was Ochosias whan he was made kynge, and reigned
one yeare at Iurasalem. His mothers name was Atalia the doughter of Amri kynge
of Israel,
27 & he walked in the waye of the house of Achab, & dyd that which was euell in
the syght of ye LORDE, euen as dyd the house of Achab:
28 for he was sonne in lawe in the house of Achab. And he wente with Ioram the
sonne of Achab into the battayll agaynst Hasael ye kinge of Syria vnto Ramoth in
Gilead, but ye Syrians smote Ioram.
29 Then Ioram the kinge turned backe, to be healed at Iesreel of ye woundes,
wherwith the Syrians had wounded him at Ramoth, wha he foughte with Hasael kinge
of Syria. And Ochosyas ye sonne of Iora kinge of Iuda, came downe to viset Ioram
the sonne of Achab at Iesreel, for he laye sicke.

Chapter 9

1 Eliseus the prophet called one of the prophetes childre, & sayde vnto him:
Girde vp yi loynes, and take this cruse of oyle with the, and go vnto Ramoth in
Gilead:
2 and wha thou comest thither, thou shalt se there one Iehu, ye sonne of
Iosaphat the sonne of Nimsi, and go in, and byd him stonde vp amonge his
brethren, and brynge him in to the ynmost chamber,
3 & take thou ye cruse of oyle, and poure it vpon his heade, & saye: Thus sayeth
the LORDE: I haue anointed the to be kynge ouer Israel: & thou shalt open the
dore, and flye, and not tary.
4 And the prophetes yonge man, the childe wente his waye vnto Ramoth in Gilead.
5 And whan he came in, beholde, the captaynes of the hoost sat there, and he
sayde: I haue somwhat to saye vnto the O captayne. Iehu saide: Vnto whom amonge
vs all? He sayde: Euen vnto the o captayne.
6 Then stode he vp, and wente in. So he poured the oyle vpon his heade, and
sayde vnto him: Thus sayeth the LORDE God of Israel: I haue anoynted ye to be
kynge ouer the LORDES people of Israel,
7 and thou shalt smyte thy lorde Achabs house, that I maye auenge the bloude of
my seruauntes the prophetes, and the bloude of all the LORDES seruauntes, from
the hande of Iesabel,
8 that all the house of Achab maye peri?she. And I wyl rote out from Achab, euen
him that maketh water agaynst the wall, and the closed vp and the desolate in
Israel:
9 and the house of Achab wyll I make euen as the house of Ieroboam the sonne of
Nebat, and as the house of Baesa the sonne of Ahia,
10 and ye dogges shall eate vp Iesabel vpon the felde at Iesrael, and noman
shall burye her. And he opened the dore, and fled.
11 And wha Iehu came forth to his lordes seruauntes, they saide vnto him: Are
all thinges well? Wherfore came this madd felowe vnto the? He saide vnto them:
Ye knowe the man well, & what he hath spoken.
12 They sayde: That is not true, but tell thou vs. He sayde: Thus and thus hath
he spoken vnto me, and sayde: Thus sayeth the LORDE: I haue anoynted the to be
kynge ouer Israel.
13 Then made they haist, and euery one toke his garment and laied them vnder him
in maner of a iudges seate, and blewe the trompet, and sayde: Iehu is made
kinge.
14 So Iehu the sonne of Iosaphat the sonne of Nimsi, made a confederacion
agaynst Ioram. As for Iora he laye before Ramoth in Gilead with all Israel
agaynst Hasael the kynge of Syria.
15 But Ioram the kynge was turned backe, yt he might be healed of the woundes
wherwith the Syrians had wounded him, wha he foughte with Hasael the kynge of
the Syrians. And Iehu sayde: Yf it be youre mynde, there shall noman escape out
of the cite, to go and tell it at Iesreel.
16 And he rode, and departed vnto Iesrael: for Ioram laye there, and Ochosias
the kinge of Iuda was come downe to vyset Ioram.
17 But the watchman that stode vpon the tower at Iesrael, sawe the company of
Iehu commynge, and sayde: I se a company. Then sayde Ioram: Take a charet, and
sende to mete the, and saye: Is it peace?
18 And the charetman rode to mete them, and sayde: Thus sayeth the kynge: Is it
peace? Iehu sayde: What hast thou to do with peace? Turne the behynde me. The
watchman tolde it, and sayde: The messaunger is come vnto them, and cometh not
agayne.
19 Then sent he another charetman, which whan he came to them, saide: Thus
sayeth the kynge: Is it peace? Iehu sayde: What hast thou to do with peace?
Turne ye behynde me.
20 And the watchman tolde it, and sayde: He is come to them: and commeth not
agayne, and the goynge is as it were the goynge of Iehu the sonne of Nimsi: for
he dryueth on as he were mad.
21 Then sayde Ioram: Binde the charet fast. And they bounde the charet, and so
they wente forth, Ioram the kynge of Israel, and Ochosias the kynge of Iuda,
euery one vpon his charet, to mete Iehu. And they founde him vpon the felde of
Naboth the Iesraelite.
22 And whan Ioram sawe Iehu, he sayde: Iehu, is it peace? But he sayde: What
peace? The whordome and witchcraft of thy mother Iesabel is not yet come to an
ende.
23 Then turned Ioram his hande and fled, and sayde vnto Ochosias: There is
treason Ochosias.
24 But Iehu toke his bowe, & shot Ioram betwene the armes, that the arowe wente
thorow his hert, and he fell downe in his charet.
25 And Iehu sayde vnto Bidekar the knyghte: Take and cast him in the pece of
londe of Naboth the Iesraelite: for I remembre sence thou rodest with me in a
charet after Achab his father, that the LORDE wolde laye this heuy burthen vpon
him.
26 I holde (sayde the LORDE) I wyl recompence the yt bloude of Naboth and of his
childre, euen in this pece of londe. Take him now and cast him in to that pece
of londe, acordynge to the worde of the LORDE.
27 Whan Ochosias the kinge of Iuda sawe this, he fled by the waie vnto ye garden
house. But Iehu folowed after him, and commaunded to smyte him also vpon his
charet in the goynge vp towarde Gur, which lieth by Ieblaam: and he fled vnto
Megiddo, and dyed there.
28 And his seruauntes caused him to be caried vnto Ierusalem, and there they
buryed him in his awne graue with his fathers in the cite of Dauid.
29 Ochosias reigned ouer Iuda in ye eleuenth yeare of Iora ye sonne of Achab.
30 And whan Iehu came to Iesrael, and Iesabel herde therof, she coloured hir
face, and decked hir heade, and loked out at the wyndowe.
31 And whan Iehu came vnder the gate, she sayde: Prospered Symri well that slewe
his lorde?
32 And he lifte vp his face to the wyndow, and sayde: Who is with me? Then
resorted there two or thre chamberlaynes vnto him.
33 He sayde: Cast her downe headlinges. And they cast her downe headlynges, so
that ye wall and the horses were sprenkled with hir bloude, and she was trodde
vnder fete.
34 And whan he came in, and had eaten and dronken, he sayde: Loke vpon yonder
cursed woman, & burye her, for she is a kynges doughter.
35 Neuertheles whan they wente in to burye her, they founde nothinge of her, but
the?kull and the fete, and the palmes of her handes.
36 nd they came agayne and broughte him worde. He saide: This is euen it that
the LORDE spake by his seruaunt Elias the Tishbite, and sayde: In the felde of
Iesrael shal the dogges eate Iesabels flesh.
37 So the deed carcase of Iesabel became euen as donge in the felde of Iesrael,
so yt a man coulde not saye: This is Iesabel.

Chapter 10

1 Achab had thre score and ten sonnes at Samaria. And Iehu wrote a letter, and
sent it to Samaria, vnto the rulers of the cite Iesrael, euen vnto the Elders, &
to Achabs tuters, sayenge these wordes:
2 Whan this letter commeth vnto you wt whom are youre lordes sonnes, charetes,
horses, stronge cities, & ordynaunce,
3 loke which is the best and most righteous amonge youre lordes sonnes, & set
him vpon his fathers seate, and fighte for youre lordes house.
4 Neuertheles they were sore afrayed, and sayde: Beholde, two kynges were not
able to stonde before him, how wyl we then endure?
5 And they that were ouer the house and ouer the cite, and the Elders and tuters
sent vnto Iehu, sayege: We are thy seruauntes, we wyll do all that thou sayest
vnto vs: We wil make no man kynge, do thou what pleaseth the.
6 Then wrote he the seconde letter vnto them with these wordes: Yf ye be myne,
and herken vnto my voyce, then take the heades of the men youre lordes sonnes,
and brynge me them tomorow by this tyme vnto Iesrael. The kynges sonnes were
thre score men and ten, and ye chefemen of the cite broughte the vp.
7 Now whan this letter came they toke the kynges sonnes, and slewe them euen
thre score men and ten, and layed their heades in ba?kettes, and sent them to
him vnto Iesrael.
8 And whan the messaunger came, & tolde him, and sayde: They haue broughte the
heades of the kynges children, he sayde: Laye them vpon two heapes at the dore
of the porte tyll tomorow.
9 And on the morow whan he wente forth, he stode, and sayde vnto all the people:
Are ye righteous? Beholde, I haue made an appoyntmet against my lorde, and
slayne him, who hath slayne all these then?
10 Vnderstonde ye now therfore, that there is not fallen vpon the earth one
worde of the LORDE, which he spake agaynst the house of Achab: and the LORDE
hath done, euen as he sayde by his seruaunt Elias.
11 So Iehu smote all the remnaunt of the house of Achab at Iesrael, all his
greate men, his kynsfolkes, and his prestes, tyll there was not one lefte ouer.
12 And he gat him vp, wente his waye, and came to Samaria. By the waye there was
a shepherdes house,
13 where Iehu founde the brethren of Ochosias kynge of Iuda, and sayde: Whence
are ye? They sayde: We are Ochosias brethren, and are goynge downe to salute the
kynges children, and the quenes children.
14 He sayde: Take them alyue. And they toke them alyue, and slewe them by the
welles syde at the shepherdes house, euen two and fortye men, and let not one of
them remayne.
15 And whan he wente from thence, he foude Ionadab ye sonne of Rechab, which met
him, & saluted him. And he sayde vnto him: Is thyne hert righte, as myne hert is
with thyne hert? Ionadab sayde: Yee. Yf it be so (sayde he) then geue me thy
hande. And he gaue him his hande. And so he caused him to syt besyde him in the
charet,
16 and saide: Come with me, and se my zele for the LORDE. And they caryed him
with him vpon his charet.
17 And whan he came to Samaria, he smote all that remayned of Achab at Samaria,
tyll he had destroyed him, acordynge to the worde of the LORDE, which he spake
vnto Elias.
18 And Iehu gathered all the people together, and saide vnto them: Achab did
Baal but litle seruyce, Iehu wyll serue him better.
19 Call vnto me now therfore all Baals prophetes, all his seruautes and all his
prestes, that there be none wantynge, for I haue a greate sacrifyce to do vnto
Baal. Who so euer is myssed, shal not lyue. But Iehu dyd it craftely, that he
mighte destroye all the mynisters of Baal.
20 And Iehu sayde: Sanctifie ye feast vnto Baal, and proclame it.
21 And Iehu sent in to all Israel, and caused all Baals ministers to come, so
that there was noma lefte behynde, which came not. And they came into Baals
house, so that the house of Baal was full from one corner to another.
22 Then sayde he vnto him that had the rule of the vestrye. Brynge forth rayment
for all Baals mynisters. And he broughte forth the rayment.
23 And Iehu wente in to Baals house with Ionadab the sonne of Rechab, and sayde
vnto Baals mynisters: Search and se that there be not here amoge you eny
mynyster of the LORDE, but onely Baals mynisters.
24 And whan they came in to offer sacrifyces and burntofferynges, Iehu appoynted
him foure score men without, & sayde: Yf eny of these men escape whom I delyuer
vnder youre handes, then shal the same mans soule be for his soule.
25 Now wha he had made an ende of the burntofferynge, Iehu sayde vnto the
fotemen and knyghtes: Go in, & smyte euery man, let noman go forth. And they
smote the with the edge of the swerde. And the fote men and knightes threw the
awaie and wete vnto the cite of Baals house,
26 and brought forth the piler in ye house of Baal, and brent it,
27 and brake downe Baals pyler with the house of Baal, and made a preuy house
therof vnto this daie.
28 Thus Iehu destroyed Baal out of Israel.
29 But Iehu lefte not of from the sinnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat (which
caused Israel to synne) namely, from the golden calues at Bethel and at Dan.
30 And the LORDE sayde vnto Iehu: Because thou hast bene wyllinge to do that
which was righte in my sighte, & hast done vnto Achabs house all that was in my
hert, therfore shall thy children syt vpon ye seate of Israel vnto the fourth
generacion.
31 Neuerthelesse Iehu was not diligent to walke in the lawe of the LORDE God of
Israel with all his hert: for he lefte not of fro the synnes of Ieroboam which
made Israel to synne.
32 At the same time beganne the LORDE to be greued at Israel. For Hasael smote
them in all the borders of Israel
33 from Iordane Eastwarde, and all the londe Gilead of the Gaddites, Rubenites
and Manassytes, from Aroer that lyeth on the ryuer by Arnon, and Gilead and
Basan.
34 What more there is to saye of Iehu, and all that he dyd, and all his power,
beholde, it is wryten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Israel.
35 And Iehu fell on slepe with his fathers, & they buryed him in Samaria. And
Ioahas his sonne was kynge in his steade.
36 The tyme that Iehu reigned ouer Israel, is eight and twentye yeares at
Samaria.

Chapter 11

1 Athalia the mother of Ochosias, wha she sawe that hir sonne was deed, gat her
vp, and destroyed all the kynges sede.
2 But Ioseba kynge Iorams doughter the syster of Ochosias, toke Ioas the sonne
of Ochosias and stale him awaye with his norse in the chamber from amonge the
kynges children which were slayne, and she hyd him from Athalia, so that he was
not slayne.
3 And he was hyd with her in the house of the LORDE sixe yeares. But Athalia was
quene in the londe.
4 Neuertheles in the seuenth yeare sent Ioiada, and toke the rulers ouer hudreds
with the captaynes and fote men, and caused the to come to him in to the house
of the LORDE and made a couenaunt with them, and toke an ooth of them in the
house of the LORDE, and shewed them the kynges sonne,
5 and comaunded them, and sayde: This is it that ye shall do: One thirde parte
of you which enter on the Sabbath, shall kepe the watch in the kynges house,
6 and one thyrde parte shalbe at the porte of Sur, and one thirde parte shal be
at ye porte which is behynde the fote men, and ye shal kepe the watch at the
house of Massa.
7 But two partes of you all that go of on the Sabbath, shal kepe the watch in
the house of the LORDE aboute the kinge
8 and ye shall get you rounde aboute ye kynge and euery one with his weapen in
his hande: and who so euer cometh within ye wall, let him die, so that ye be
with the kinge, wha he goeth out and in.
9 And the rulers ouer the hundreds dyd all as Ioiada the prest had commauded
them, and toke vnto them their men which entred vpon the Sabbath, with those
that wente of on the Sabbath, and came to Ioiada ye prest.
10 And the prest gaue the captaynes speares and shyldes which had bene kynge
Dauids, and were in the house of the LORDE.
11 And the fote men stode aboute the kynge, euery one with his weapen in his
hande, fro the corner on the righte syde of the house vnto the corner of the
lefte syde, euen vnto the altare and to the house.
12 And he broughte forth the kynges sonne, and set a crowne vpon his heade, and
toke the witnes, and made him kynge, and they were glad, and clapped their
handes together, and sayde: God saue the kynge.
13 And whan Athalia herde the noyse of the people that ranne rogether, she came
to the people into the house of the LORDE,
14 and loked, and beholde, the kynge stode by the piler, as the vse was, and the
syngers and tropettes by the kynge: and all the people of ye lode were glad, and
blewe with trompettes. But Athalia rente hir clothes, & sayde: Vproure, vproure.
15 Neuertheles Ioiada ye prest commaunded ye rulers ouer hundreds, which were
appointed ouer the hoost, and saide vnto them: Brynge her without the wall, and
whosoeuer foloweth hir, let him dye of the swerde (for the prest had sayde, that
she shulde not dye in the house of the LORDE.)
16 And they layde handes vpo her, and she wente in by the waye where the horses
go in to ye kynges house, and there was she slayne.
17 Then made Ioiada a couenaunt betwene the LORDE and the kynge, and the people,
yt they shulde be the people of the LORDE. Likewyse also betwixte the kynge and
ye people.
18 Then wente all the people of the londe into the house of Baal, and brake
downe his altares, and destroyed his ymages right well. And Mathan the prest of
Baal slewe they before the altare: And the prest appoynted the officers in the
house of the LORDE,
19 and toke the rulers ouer hundreds, and the captaynes, and the fote men, and
all ye people of the londe, & broughte the kynge downe from the house of the
LORDE, and came the waye from the porte of the fote men vnto the kynges house,
and he sat vpon the kynges seate.
20 And all the people of the lode were glad, and the cite was at rest. As for
Athalia, they slewe her with the swerde in ye kynges house.
21 And Ioas was seuen yeare olde, whan he was made kynge.

Chapter 12

1 In the seueth yeare of Iehu, was Ioas made kynge, and reigned fortye yeare at
Ierusalem. His mothers name was Zibea of Bersaba.
2 And Ioas dyd that which was righte in the sighte of the LORDE, as longe as
Ioiada ye prest taught him.
3 But they put not downe ye hye places: for the people offred & brent incense
yet vpon the hye places.
4 And Ioas sayde vnto the prestes: All the money that is sanctified to be
bestowed vpo ye house of the LORDE, namely the money yt euery man geueth vnto
the treasury, and ye money that euery man geueth for his soule, and all the
money that euery man geueth of a fre hert, to be bestowed on the house of the
LORDE,
5 let the prestes take it vnto them, euery one his porcion: with that shall they
repayre the decaye in the house of the LORDE, where they fynde that there is eny
decaye.
6 But whan ye prestes repayred not the decaye in the house vnto the thre and
twetieth yeare of kynge Ioas,
7 Ioas the kynge called Ioiada the prest with the other prestes, and sayde vnto
them: Wherfore do ye not repayre the decaye in the house? Therfore shall ye not
take the money vnto you now euery one his porcion, but shall geue it to the
decaye of the house.
8 And the prestes agreed to take no money of the people, and to repayre the
decaye of the house.
9 Then Ioiada the prest toke a chest, and bored an hole aboue therin, and set it
on the righte hande besyde the altare, at the entrynge in to the house of the
LORDE. And the prestes that kepte the thresholde, put all the money therin that
was broughte vnto the house of the LORDE.
10 Whan they sawe then that there was moch money in the chest, ye kynges scrybe
came vp with the hye prest, and bounde the money together, and tolde it as moch
as was founde in the house of the LORDE.
11 And so the ready money was geuen vnto them that wrought and were appoynted to
the house of the LORDE, and they gaue it forth to the carpenters and to the that
buylded and wroughte in the house of the LORDE,
12 namely, to the dawbers and masons, and to them that boughte tymber and fre
stone, to repayre the decaye in the house of the LORDE and all that they founde
to haue nede of repayringe in the house.
13 Howbeit there were no syluer chargers, flat peces, basens, trompettes, ner
eny other vessell of golde and syluer made on the house of the LORDE, of the
money that was brought vnto the LORDES house:
14 but it was geuen vnto the workmen to repayre the decaye in the house of the
LORDE therwith.
15 The men also that the money was delyuered vnto, for to geue the workmen,
neded not to make eny acomptes, but did their busynes vpon credence.
16 But the money of trespace offerynges and synneofferynges was not broughte
vnto the house of the LORDE: for it was the prestes.
17 At the same tyme wente Hasael the kyn of Syria vp, and foughte agaynst Gath,
and wanne it. And whan Hasael set his face to go vp to Ierusalem,
18 kynge Ioas toke all that was sanctifyed, which his fathers Iosaphat, Ioram
and Ochosias the kynges of Iuda had halowed, and what he himselfe had
sanctifyed, and all the golde that was founde in the treasures of the house of
the LORDE, and in the kynges house, and sent it vnto Hasael the kynge of Syria.
And so he departed from Ierusalem.
19 What more there is to saye of Ioas, and all that he dyd, it is written in the
Cronicles of the kynges of Iuda.
20 And his seruauntes made insurreccion and conspyred, and smote him in the
house of Millo, at the goynge downe vnto Silla.
21 For Iosebar the sonne of Simeath, and Iosabad the sonne of Somer his
seruauntes smote him to death: and he was buried with his fathers in the cite of
Dauid. And Amasias his sonne was kynge in his steade.

Chapter 13

1 In ye XXIII. yeare of Ioas the sonne of Ochosias kynge of Iuda, was Ioahas the
sonne of Iehu kynge ouer Israel at Samaria, seuentene yeare:
2 & dyd yt which was euell in the sighte of the LORDE, and walked after the
sinnes of Ieroboam ye sonne of Nebat (which caused Israel to synne) and lefte
not of from them.
3 And ye wrath of the LORDE waxed whote vpon Israel, & he delyuered them ouer
vnder the hande of Hasael kynge of Syria, and vnder the hande of Benadad the
sonne of Hasael, as longe as they lyued.
4 And Ioahas besoughte the face of the LORDE. And the LORDE herde him, for he
consydered the myserie of Israel, how the kynge of Syria oppressed them.
5 And ye LORDE gaue Israel a sauioure, which broughte them out of the power of
the Syrians, so yt the children of Israel dwelt in their tentes, like as afore
tyme.
6 Yet lefte they not from the synnes of the house of Ieroboam, which caused
Israel to synne, but walked in them. The groue at Samaria stode styll also.
7 For of the people of Ioahas there were no mo lefte, but fyftye horsmen, ten
charettes, and ten thousande fote men: for the kynge of Syria had destroyed
them, and made them as the dust in the barne.
8 What more there is to saye of Ioahas, and all that he dyd, and his power,
beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Israel.
9 And Ioahas fell on slepe with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria, & Ioas
his sonne was kinge in his steade.
10 In the seuen and thirtieth yeare of Ioas kynge of Iuda, was Ioas the sonne of
Ioahas kynge ouer Israel at Samaria sixtene yeare.
11 And he dyd that which was euell in the sighte of the LORDE, and departed not
from all the synnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, which made Israel for to
synne, but walked in them.
12 What more there is to saye of Ioas, and what he dyd, & his power, how he
foughte with Amasias kynge of Iuda, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of
the kynges of Israel.
13 And Ioas fell on slepe with his fathers, and Ieroboam sat vpo his seate. And
Ioas was buried in Samaria wt the kynges of Israel.
14 As for Eliseus, he fell in to a sicknes, wherof he dyed. And Ioas the kynge
of Israel came downe vnto him, and wepte for him, and saide: My father, my
father, the charetman of Israel, and his horsmen.
15 Eliseus sayde vnto him: Take the bowe and the arowes
16 And whan he had taken the bowe and the arowes, he sayde vnto the kynge of
Israel: Bende the bowe with thine hande. And he bent it with his hade. And
Eliseus layed his hande vpon the kynges hande,
17 and sayde: Open that wyndowe towarde the East. And he opened it. And Eliseus
saide: Shute. And he shot. He sayde: one arowe of the saluacion of the LORDE,
one arowe of saluacio agaynst the Syrians: and thou shalt smyte the Syrians at
Aphek, tyll they be brought to naughte.
18 And he sayde: Take ye arowes. And wha he had taken them, he sayde vnto the
kynge of Israel: Smyte the earth. And he smote thre tymes and stode still.
19 Then was the ma of God wroth at him, and sayde: Yf thou haddest smytten fyue
or sixe times, thou shuldest haue smytten ye Syrians, tyll thou haddest vtterly
brought them to naughte. But now shalt thou smyte them thre tymes.
20 Whan Eliseus was deed and buried, the men of warre of the Moabites fell in to
the londe the same yeare.
21 And it fortuned yt they buryed a certaine man. But wha they sawe the men of
warre, they cast the man in to Eliseus graue. And whan he was therin, and
touched Eliseus bones, he reuyued, and stode vpon his fete.
22 So Hasael the kynge of Syria oppressed Israel, as longe as Ioahas lyued.
23 But the LORDE was gracious vnto them, and had mercy vpon them, and turned him
to them for his couenauntes sake, with Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, and wolde not
destroye the nether dyd he cast them out from his presence vnto this houre.
24 And Hasael the kinge of Syria dyed, and Benadad his sonne was kynge in his
steade.
25 But Ioas turned backe, and toke out of the hande of Benadad the sonne of
Hasael the cyties which he had take in battaill out of the hande of his father
Ioahas: Thre tymes dyd Ioas smyte him, and broughte the cities of Israel agayne.

Chapter 14

1 In the seconde yeare of Ioas ye sonne of Ioahas kynge of Israel, was Amasias
the sonne of Ioas kynge of Iuda made kynge:
2 fyue and twenty yeare olde was he, whan he was made kynge, & reigned nyne and
twentye yeare at Ierusale. His mothers name was Ioadan of Ierusalem.
3 And he dyd that which was righte in the sighte of the LORDE: yet not as his
father Dauid, but euen as his father Ioas did so dyd he also:
4 for ye hye places were not put downe, but the people offred and brent incese
yet vpon the hye places.
5 Now whan he had gotten the power of the kyngdome, he smote his seruauntes
which had smytte the kynge his father:
6 but the children of ye deedslayers slewe he not, acordinge to yt which is
wrytte in the boke of the lawe of Moses, where the LORDE hath comaunded & sayde:
The fathers shal not dye for the children, & the children shal not dye for the
fathers: but euery one shal dye for his awne synne.
7 Ten thousande of the Edomites smote he also in the Salt valley, and wanne Sela
in battayll, and called it Iatheel vnto this daye.
8 Then sent Amasias messaungers vnto Ioas the sonne of Ioahas the sonne of Iehu
kynge of Israel, sayenge: Come hither, let vs se one another.
9 But Ioas ye kynge of Israel sent vnto Amasias the kynge of Iuda, sayenge: The
hawthorne that is in Libanus, sent to the Ceder tre in Libanus, sayenge: Geue
thy doughter vnto my sonne to wife. But a wylde beest of the felde ranne ouer ye
hawthorne, and trode it downe.
10 Thou hast smytte the Edomites, therfore is thine hert waxen proude: Take the
prayse, and byde at home: why stryuest thou for mysfortune, yt thou mayest fall,
and Iuda with the?
11 Howbeit Amasias consented not. Then wete Ioas the kynge of Israel vp, and
they sawe one another, he and Amasias the kynge of Iuda at Beth Semes which
lyeth in Iuda.
12 But Iuda was smytten before Israel, so that euery one fled in to his tente.
13 And Ioas the kynge of Israel toke Amasias the kynge of Iuda, the sonne of
Ioas the sonne of Ochosias at Beth Semes, and came to Ierusalem, and brake downe
ye wall of Ierusalem from ye porte of Ephraim vnto the corner porte, euen foure
hundreth cubites loge:
14 and toke all the golde and syluer, and ornamentes that were founde in the
house of the LORDE, and in ye treasures of the kynges house, & the children also
to pledge, & departed agayne to Samaria.
15 What more there is to saie of Ioas, what he dyd, and of his power, & how he
foughte with Amasias the kynge of Iuda, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles
of the kynges of Israel.
16 And Ioas fell on slepe with his fathers, and was buried at Samaria amonge ye
kynges of Israel. And Ieroboam his sonne was kynge in his steade.
17 But Amasias the sonne of Ioas kynge of Iuda, lyued after the death of Ioas
the sonne of Ioahas kynge of Israel, fiftene yeare.
18 What more there is to saye of Amasias, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the
kynges of Iuda.
19 And they conspyred agaynst him at Ierusalem, but he fled vnto Lachis. And
they sent after him vnto Lachis, and slewe him there.
20 And they broughte him vpon horses, & he was buried at Ierusalem with his
fathers in ye cite of Dauid.
21 And all the people of Iuda toke Asarias in his sixtenth yeare, and made him
kynge in steade of Amasias his father.
22 He buylded Eloth, and broughte it agayne vnto Iuda, after that the kynge was
fallen on slepe with his fathers.
23 In the fyftenth yeare of Amasias the sonne of Ioas kynge of Iuda, was
Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas kynge ouer Israel at Samaria, one and fortye yeare.
24 And he dyd that which was euell in the sighte of the LORDE, and departed not
from all the synnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, which caused Israel for to
synne.
25 But the borders of Israel broughte he agayne from Hemath vnto ye see that
lyeth in the playne felde, acordinge to the worde of the LORDE God of Israel,
which he spake by his seruaunt Ionas ye sonne of Amithai the prophete, which was
of Gath Epher.
26 For the LORDE considered the myserable affliccion of Israel, how that euen
they which were shut vp and desolate, were awaye, and that there was no helper
in Israel.
27 And the LORDE sayde not that he wolde destroye the name of Israel from vnder
heaue. And he helped the by Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas.
28 What more there is to saye of Ieroboam, and all that he dyd, and of his
power, how he foughte, and how broughte Damascon and Hemath agayne vnto Iuda in
Israel, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Israel.
29 And Ieroboam fell on slepe with his fathers, with the kynges of Israel. And
Zacharias his sonne was kynge in his steade.

Chapter 15

1 In the seuen & twentieth yeare of Ieroboam kynge of Israel, reigned Asarias
the sonne of Amasias kynge of Iuda:
2 and was sixtene yeare olde whan he was made kynge, and reigned two and fyftye
yeare at Ierusalem. His mothers name was Iechalia of Ierusale.
3 And he dyd righte in the sighte of the LORDE, acordinge to all as dyd Amasias
his father,
4 sauynge that they put not downe the hye places. For the people dyd sacryfice
and brent incense yet vpon the hye places.
5 Howbeit the LORDE smote the kynge, so that he was leper vnto his death, and
dwelt in a frye house. But Iotham the kynges sonne ruled the house, and iudged
the people in the londe.
6 What more there is to saye of Asarias, & all yt he dyd, beholde, it is wrytten
in the Cronicles of the kynges of Iuda.
7 And Asarias fell on slepe with his fathers, & was buried with his fathers in
the cite of Dauid, & Iotham his sonne was kynge in his steade.
8 In the eight and thirtieth yeare of Asarias kynge of Iuda, was Zacharias the
sonne of Ieroboam kynge ouer Israel at Samaria sixe monethes.
9 And he dyd yt which was euell in the sighte of the LORDE, euen as his fathers
dyd. He departed not from ye synnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, which caused
Israel for to synne.
10 And Sellum the sonne of Iabes conspyred agaynst him, and smote him in the
presence of ye people, and slewe him, & was kynge in his steade.
11 What more there is to saie of Zacharias, beholde, it is wrytten in the
Cronicles of the kynges of Israel.
12 And this is it, yt the LORDE sayde vnto Iehu: Thy children shall syt vpo the
seate of Israel vntyll the fourth generacion. And euen so came it to passe.
13 Sellum the sonne of Iabes reigned in ye nyne & thirtieth yeare of Asarias
kynge of Iuda, & reigned one moneth at Samaria.
14 For Menahem the sonne of Gadi wete vp from Thirza, & came to Samaria, and
smote Sellum the sonne of Iabes at Samaria, & slewe him, and was kynge in his
steade.
15 What more there is to saye of Sellum, & of his sedicion which he stered vp,
beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Israel.
16 At the same tyme dyd Manahem smyte Tiphsa, & all yt were therin, & the
coastes therof from Thirza, because they wolde not let him in, and smote all
their wemen wt childe, and rypte them vp.
17 In the nyne & thirtieth yeare of Asarias kynge of Iuda, beganne Manahem the
sonne of Gad to reigne ouer Israel ten yeares at Samaria,
18 and dyd that which was euell in the sighte of the LORDE. As longe as he
lyued, departed he not from ye synnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, which
caused Israel for to synne.
19 And Phul the kynge of Assiria came into the lode. And Manahem gaue vnto Phul
a thousande talentes of syluer to holde with him, and to cofirme him in the
kyngdome.
20 And Manahem raysed vp a taxe in Israel vpon the richest, fiftye Sycles of
syluer vpon euery man, to geue vnto ye kynge of Assiria. So the kynge of Assiria
wete home agayne, and taried not in the londe.
21 What more there is to saye of Manahem, & all yt he dyd, beholde, it is
wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Israel.
22 And Manahem fell on slepe wt his fathers. And Pecahia his sonne was kynge in
his steade.
23 In the fiftieth yeare of Asarias kynge of Iuda, beganne Pecahia the sonne of
Manahem to reigne ouer Israel at Samaria two yeare,
24 and dyd that which was euell in the sighte of the LORDE: for he departed not
fro the synnes of Ieroboam ye sonne of Nebat, which caused Israel for to synne.
25 And Pecah the sonne of Romelia his knyghte conspyred agaynst him, & smote him
at Samaria in ye palace of the kynges house wt Argob and Ariah, and fiftye men
wt him of ye childre of Gilead, & slewe him, & was kynge in his steade.
26 What more there is to saye of Pecahia, & all that he dyd, beholde, it is
wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Israel.
27 In the two and fiftieth yeare of Asarias kynge of Iuda, beganne Pecah the
sonne of Romelia to reigne ouer Israel at Samaria, twentye yeare,
28 & dyd that which was euell in the sighte of ye LORDE: for he departed not
from the synnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, which caused Israel for to
synne.
29 In the tyme of Pecah the kynge of Israel, came Teglatphalasser the kynge of
Assiria, & toke Eion, Abel Beth Maecha, Ianoha, Redes, Hasor, Gilead, Galile,
and all the londe of Nephtali, & caried the awaye in to Assiria.
30 And Osea the sonne of Ela conspyred agaynst Pecah the sonne of Romelia, &
slue him, and was kynge in his steade in the twetieth yeare of Iotham the sonne
of Osias.
31 What more there is to saye of Pecah, & all that he dyd, beholde, it is
wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Israel.
32 In the seconde yeare of Pecah the sonne of Romelia kynge of Israel, was
Iotham the sonne of Osias kynge of Iuda,
33 & was fyue and twentye yeare olde whan he was made kynge, and reigned sixtene
yeare at Ierusalem. His mothers name was Ierusa the doughter of Sabok.
34 And he dyd yt which was righte in ye sighte of the LORDE, acordinge vnto all
as dyd Osias his father,
35 sauynge that he put not downe the hye places: for the people offred & brent
incense yet vpon the hye places. He buylded the hye porte of the house of the
LORDE.
36 What more there is to saye of Iotham, and all that he dyd, beholde, it is
wrytte in the Cronicles of the kynges of Iuda.
37 At ye same tyme beganne ye LORDE to sende Rezin ye kynge of Syria, & Pecah ye
sonne of Romelia into Iuda.
38 And Iotham fell on slepe with his fathers, and was buried wt his fathers in
the cite of Dauid his father. And Achas his sonne was kynge in his steade.

Chapter 16

1 In the seuententh yeare of Pecah ye sonne of Romelia, was Achas the sonne of
Iotham kynge of Iuda.
2 Twetye yeare olde was Achas wha he was made kynge, & reigned sixtene yeare at
Ierusalem, & dyd not yt which was righte in the sighte of ye LORDE his God, as
dyd Dauid his father:
3 for he walked in the waye of the kynges of Israel, Yee and caused his sonne to
go thorow the fyre, after the maner of the abhominacions of the Heythen, whom
the LORDE droue awaye before the childre of Israel.
4 And he dyd sacrifice, and brent incense vpon the hye places, & vpon all
hilles, and amonge all grene trees.
5 Then wente Rezin the kynge of Syria, and Pecah the sonne of Romelia kynge of
Israel vp to Ierusalem to fighte agaynst it, and layed sege to Achas: but they
coulde not wynne it.
6 At the same tyme dyd Rezin the kynge of Syria, brynge Eloth agayne vnto Syria,
and thrust ye Iewes out of Eloth. But the Syrians came & dwelt therin vnto this
daye.
7 Neuertheles Achas sent messaungers vnto Teglatphalasser ye kynge of Assiria,
sayege: I am thy seruaunt & thy sonne, come vp & helpe me out of ye hande of the
kynge of Syria, & of the kynge of Israel, which are rysen vp agaynst me.
8 And Achas toke the syluer & golde yt was founde in ye house of ye LORDE, & in
the treasures of ye kynges house, & sent a present to ye kynge of Assiria.
9 And ye kinge of Assiria cosented vnto him, & wente vp to Damascon, & wanne it,
& caried them awaye vnto Cira, & slewe Rezin.
10 And kynge Achas wete to Damascon for to mete Teglatphalasser ye kynge of
Assiria. And wha he sawe an altare yt was at Damascon, kynge Achas sent a
patrone & symilitude of ye same altare vnto the prest Vrias, euen as it was
made.
11 And Vrias the prest buylded an altare, and made it acordinge as kynge Achas
had sent vnto him from Damascon, tyll Achas ye kynge came from Damascon.
12 And whan ye kynge came from Damascon, and sawe the altare, he offred theron,
13 & kyndled his burntofferynges and meatofferynges vpon it, and poured his
drynkofferinges theron, & caused the bloude of ye deedofferynges which he
offred, to be sprenkled vpon the altare.
14 But the brasen altare that stode before the LORDE, put he awaye, so that it
stode not betwene the altare and the house of the LORDE, but set it in the
corner on the north syde of the altare.
15 And Achas the kynge comaunded Vrias ye prest, & sayde: Vpo the greate altare
shalt thou kyndle ye burntoffrynge in the mornynge, & the meatoffrynge in the
euenynge, & the kynges burntoffrynge & his meatoffrynge, & the burntoffrynge of
all the people in the londe, wt their meatoffrynge & drynkoffrynge. And all the
bloude of the burntofferynges, & all the bloude of the other offrynges shalt
thou sprenkle theron: but with the brasen altare wyll I deuyse what I can.
16 Vrias the prest dyd all acordinge as Achas the kynge commaunded him.
17 And kynge Achas brake downe the seates, and put a waye the ketell from aboue,
and toke the lauer from the brasen bullockes that were there vnder, and set it
vpon ye pauement of stone.
18 And the pulpit for the Sabbath which they had buylded in the house, and ye
entrye of the kynges house turned he vnto the house of the LORDE, for the kynge
of Assirias sake.
19 What more there is to saye of Achas, what he dyd, beholde, it is wrytten in
ye Cronicles of the kynges of Iuda.
20 And Achas fell on slepe with his fathers, & was buried wt his fathers in the
cite of Dauid. And Ezechias his sonne was kynge in his steade.

Chapter 17

1 In the twolueth yeare of Achas the kynge of Iuda, begane Oseas ye sonne of Ela
to reigne ouer Israel at Samaria nyne yeare,
2 and dyd yt which was euell in ye sighte of the LORDE, but not as ye kynges of
Israel yt were before him.
3 Agaynst him dyd Salmanasar ye kynge of Assiria come vp. And Oseas was subiecte
vnto him, & gaue him trybutes.
4 But wha ye kynge of Assiria perceaued yt Oseas had conspyred & sent
messaungers to Sua ye kynge of Egipte, & payed not trybute yearly to ye kynge of
ye Assirians, he beseged him & put him in preson.
5 And the kynge of Assiria wente vp in to all the londe and to Samaria, and
layed sege vnto it thre yeare.
6 And in the nyenth yeare of Oseas dyd ye kynge of Assiria wynne Samaria, and
caried Israel awaye in to Assiria, and set them at Halah and at Habor by the
water Gosan, and in the cities of the Meedes.
7 For whan the childre of Israel synned agaynst ye LORDE their God (yt broughte
the out of ye londe of Egipte, from the hade of Pharao kynge of Egipte) and
serued other goddes:
8 and walked after the customes of the Heythe, whom the LORDE had dryuen out
before the children of Israel, and dyd as the kynges of Israel,
9 and prouoked ye LORDE their God, and dyd secretly the thinges that were not
righte in the sighte of ye LORDE their God: namely in that they buylded them hye
places in all cities, both in castels and stronge cities,
10 and set vp pilers and groues, vpon all hye hilles, and amonge all grene
trees,
11 and brent incense there in all ye hye places, euen as dyd the Heythen, whom
the LORDE had cast out before them, & wroughte wicked thinges, wherwith they
prouoked the LORDE vnto wrath,
12 & serued the Idols, wherof the LORDE sayde vnto them: Ye shal not do soch a
thynge.
13 And whan the LORDE testified in Israel and Iuda by all the prophetes and
Seers, sayenge: O turne agayne from youre euell wayes, and kepe my
commaundemetes and ordynaunces, acordinge to all ye lawe which I gaue vnto youre
fathers, and that I sent vnto you by my seruauntes the prophetes:
14 they wolde not herken, but herdened their neckes, acordinge to the hardneck
of their fathers, which beleued not on the LORDE their God.
15 Yee they despysed his ordinaunces and his couenaunt which he made with their
fathers, and his testimonies which he witnessed amonge them, and walked in their
awne vanities, and became vayne folowinge the Heythen, which dwelt rounde aboute
them, concernynge whom the LORDE had commaunded them, that they shulde not do as
they dyd.
16 Neuertheles they forsoke all the commaundementes of the LORDE their God and
made them two molten calues and groues, and worshipped all the hoost of heauen,
& serued Baal,
17 and caused their sonnes and doughters to go thorow the fyre, and medled wt
soythsayers and witches, and gaue them selues ouer to do that which was euell in
the sighte of the LORDE, to prouoke him vnto wrath.
18 Then was the LORDE very wroth at Israel, and put them awaye fro his presence,
so yt there remayned nomo but onely ye trybe of Iuda.
19 Nether dyd Iuda kepe the commaundemetes of the LORDE their God, but walked
after the customes of Israel, which they dyd.
20 Therfore dyd ye LORDE cast awaye all ye sede of Israel, and troubled them,
and delyuered them in to the handes of the spoylers, tyll he had cast them out
of his presence:
21 for Israel was deuyded from the house of Dauid. And they made the a kynge,
one Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, which turned Israel back from ye LORDE, &
caused the to synne so sore.
22 Thus walked the childre of Israel in all ye synnes of Ieroboam, which he had
done, & departed not fro them,
23 vntyll ye LORDE put Israel out of his presence, acordinge as he had spoke by
all his seruauntes ye prophetes. So Israel was caried awaye out of their awne
londe to Assiria vnto this (daye.
24 The kynge of Assiria caused men to come fro Babilon, from Cutha, fro Aua,
from Hemath & Sepharuaim, & caused the to inhabite ye cities in Samaria in
steade of the children of Israel. And they toke possession of Samaria, & dwelt
in ye same cities.
25 But wha they begane to dwell there, & feared not ye LORDE, the LORDE sent
lyons amoge the, which slewe them.
26 And they caused it be sayde vnto ye kynge of Assiria: The Heythe whom thou
hast broughte hither, & caused them to inhabite the cities of Samaria, knowe not
the lawe of ye God of the londe. Therfore hath he sent lyons amoge them, &
beholde, they slaye the, because they knowe not the ordinaunce of the God of the
londe.
27 The kinge of Assiria comaunded & saide: Bringe thither one of ye prestes yt
were caried awaye fro thence & let him go thither, & dwell there, & teach the
the ordinauce of the God of ye londe.
28 Then came one of ye prestes which were caried awaye from Samaria, & dwelt at
Bethel, & taughte them how they shulde feare ye LORDE.
29 But euery people made the goddes, & put the in the houses vpon ye hye places,
which the Samaritanes had made, euery people i their cities wherin they dwelt.
30 They of Babilo made Sochoth Benoth. They of Chut made Nergel. They of Hemath
made Asima.
31 They of Aua made Nibehas & Tharthak. They of Sepharuaim burnt their sonnes
vnto Adramelech and Anamelech ye goddes of the of Sepharuaim.
32 And whyle they feared ye LORDE, they made prestes in ye hye places of ye
lowest amonge them, & put them in ye houses of ye hye places:
33 thus they feared ye LORDE, & serued ye goddes also, acordinge to ye custome
of euery nacion, from whence they were broughte.
34 And vnto this daye do they after ye olde fashion, so yt they nether feare ye
LORDE, ner yet kepe their awne ordinaunces and lawes, after the lawe and
commaundement that the LORDE comaunded the childre of Iacob, vnto whom he gaue
ye name of Israel,
35 and made a couenaunt with them, and commaunded them, and sayde: Feare none
other goddes, and worshipe them not, and serue them not, and offer not vnto
them:
36 but the LORDE which broughte you out of the lode of Egipte, with greate power
and outstretched arme, Him feare, him worshippe, & vnto him do sacrifice:
37 and the statutes, ordinaunces, lawe & comaundement which he hath caused to be
wrytten vnto you, those se that ye kepe, that ye allwaye do therafter, and feare
none other goddes.
38 And forget not the couenaunt which he hath made with you, lest ye feare other
goddes.
39 But feare ye LORDE youre God, he shall delyuer you from all youre enemies.
40 Neuertheles they wolde not herken, but dyd after their olde custome.
41 Thus these Heythen feared the LORDE, and serued their Idols also, and so dyd
their children and childers childre likewyse. Eue as their fathers haue done
before them, so do they vnto this daye.

Chapter 18

1 In the thirde yeare of Oseas ye sonne of Ela kynge of Israel, reigned Ezechias
ye sonne of Achas kynge of Iuda.
2 And he was fyue and twentie yeare olde whan he was made kynge, & reigned nyne
& twentye yeare at Ierusalem. His mothers name was Abi the doughter of Zachary.
3 And he dyd that which was righte in the sighte of the LORDE, acordinge vnto
all as dyd Dauid his father.
4 He put awaye the hye places, and brake downe the pilers, & roted out the
groues, and brake the brasen serpente which Moses had made. For vnto that tyme
had the children of Israel brent incese vnto it. And it was called Nehusthan.
5 He put his trust in the LORDE God of Israel, so that after him there was not
his like amoge all the kynges of Iuda nether had bene before him.
6 He cleued vnto the LORDE, and departed not backe from him, and kepte his
commaundementes, which the LORDE had comaunded Moses.
7 And the LORDE was wt him. And whither so euer he wete forth, he behaued him
selfe wysely. He resisted the kyn of Assiria, and was not subdued vnto him.
8 He smote the Philistynes also vnto Gasa, and their borders, from the castels
vnto the stronge cities.
9 In the fourth yeare of Ezechias kynge of Iuda (yt was the seuenth yeare of
Oseas the sonne of Ela kynge of Israel) came Salmanasar the kynge of Assiria vp
agaynst Samaria, and layed sege vnto it,
10 and wanne it after thre yeares in the sixte yeare of Ezechias, that is in the
nyenth yeare of Oseas kynge of Israel, the was Samaria wonne.
11 And the kynge of Assiria caried Israel awaye vnto Assiria, and set them at
Halah and Habor by the water Gosan, and in the cities of the Meedes.
12 And all because they herkened not vnto the voyce of the LORDE their God, and
had transgressed his couenaunt: And as for all that Moses the seruaunt of the
LORDE had commaunded the, they had nether herkened vnto eny of those, ner done
them.
13 In the fourteth yeare of kynge Ezechias dyd Sennacherib ye kynge of Assiria
come vp agaynst all the stronge cities of Iuda, & coquered the.
14 Then sent Ezechias the kynge of Iuda to ye kynge of Assiria vnto Lachis,
sayenge: I haue offended, turne back fro me: loke what thou layest vnto me, I
wil beare it. The the kynge of Assiria layed vnto Ezechias the kynge of Iuda,
thre hundreth talentes of syluer, & thirtie talentes of golde.
15 So Ezechias gaue all ye slyuer yt was foude in ye house of the LORDE, & in
the treasures of ye kynges house.
16 At ye same tyme brake Ezechias the kynge of Iuda the dores of the teple of ye
LORDE, & the plates of golde which he him selfe had caused to laye ouer the, &
gaue the vnto the kynge of Assiria.
17 And the kynge of Assiria sent Thartan, and the chefe chamberlayne, & the
chefe butler from Lachis to kynge Ezechias with a greate power vnto Ierusalem.
And they wete vp: and whan they came there, they stode styll at the condyte by
the ouer pole, which lyeth in the waye vpo the fullers londe,
18 and called vnto the kynge. The came there forth vnto them Eliachim the sonne
of Helchias the stewarde, and Sobna the scrybe, & Ioah the sonne of Assaph the
Secretary.
19 And the chefe butler sayde vnto the: Tell kynge Ezechias: Thus sayeth ye
greate kynge, eue the kynge of Assiria: What presumpcion is this yt thou
trustest vnto?
20 Thinkest thou, yt thou hast yet councell and power to fighte? Where vnto
trustest thou then, that thou art fallen of fro me?
21 Beholde, puttest thou thy trust in this broken staffe of rede, in Egipte?
which who leaneth vpon, it shall go into his hande, & pearse it thorow. Euen so
is Pharao the kynge of Egipte vnto all them that put their trust in him.
22 But yf ye wolde saye vnto me: We put oure trust in ye LORDE oure God. Is not
that he, whose hye places and altares Ezechias hath take downe, and sayde vnto
Iuda and Ierusale: Before this altare which is at Ierusale, shal ye worshippe?
23 Make a multitude now therfore vnto my lorde the kynge of Assiria, and I wil
geue ye two thousande horses, let se yf thou be able to man them:
24 how wilt thou then endure before the smallest prynce of my lordes subiectes?
And trustest thou vnto Egipte because of the charettes and horsmen?
25 But thinkest thou that I came vp hither without ye LORDE to destroye these
cities? The LORDE hath commaunded me: Go vp in to that londe and destroye it.
26 Then sayde Eliachim the sonne of Helchia & Sobna and Ioah vnto the chefe
butler: Speake to thy seruauntes in the Syrias language, for we vnderstonde it,
and speake not vnto vs in the Iewes speche before the eares of the people that
are vpon the wall.
27 Neuertheles ye chefe butler sayde vnto the: Hath my lorde then sent me vnto
thy lorde, or to the, to speake these wordes? Yee euen vnto the men, which syt
vpon the wall, that they maye eate their owne donge and drynke their owne stale
wt you.
28 So the chefe butler stode and cried with loude voyce in the Iewes language,
and spake and sayde: Heare the worde of the greate kynge the kynge of Assiria.
29 Thus sayeth the kynge: Let not Ezechias disceaue you, for he is not able to
delyuer you fro my hade:
30 & let not Ezechias make you to trust in the LORDE, sayenge: The LORDE shall
delyuer vs, and this cite shal not be geuen in to the handes of ye kynge of
Assiria.
31 Folowe not ye Ezechias, for thus sayeth the kynge of Assiria: Do me this
blessynge, and come forth vnto me, so shal eueryman eate of his vyne and of his
fygge tre, and drynke of his well,
32 tyll I come my selfe and fetch you in to a londe, which is like youre awne
lode, wherin is corne, wyne, bred, vynyardes, oyle trees, oyle and hony, so shal
ye lyue, and not dye. Folowe not ye Ezechias, for he disceaueth you, when he
sayeth: The LORDE shal delyuer vs.
33 Haue the goddes of the Heythen delyuered eueryone his londe from the hande of
the kynge of Assiria?
34 Where are the goddes of Hemath and Arphad? Where are the goddes of Sepharnaim
Hena and Iua? Haue they delyuered Samaria fro my hande?
35 Where is there one god amonge the goddes of all londes, which hath delyuered
his londe fro my hande? that the LORDE shulde delyuer Ierusalem fro my hande.
36 As for the people, they helde their peace, and gaue him no answere: for the
kynge had commaunded and sayde: Answere him nothinge.
37 Then came Eliachim the sonne of Helchia ye stewarde, and Sobna the scrybe,
and Ioah the sonne of Assaph the Secretary vnto Ezechias with rente clothes, and
tolde him the wordes of the chefe butler.

Chapter 19

1 Whan Ezechias ye kynge herde this, he rente his clothes, & put on a sack
cloth, & wente in to ye house of the LORDE,
2 & sent Eliachim the stewarde & Sobna the Scrybe with the Eldest prestes,
clothed in sackcloth, vnto the prophet Esay ye sonne of Amos,
3 & they saide vnto him: Thus sayeth Ezechias: This is a daye of trouble, & of
defiaunce & blasphemy. The childre are come to the byrth, & there is no strength
to be delyuered of them.
4 Yf happly the LORDE thy God wil heare all the wordes of ye chefe butler, whom
his lorde the kynge of Assiria hath sent, to blasphemie ye lyuynge God, & to
defye him with soch wordes as the LORDE thy God hath herde, therfore lifte thou
vp thy prayer for the remnaunt, which are yet lefte behynde.
5 And wha kynge Ezechias seruauntes came to Esay,
6 Esay sayde vnto them: Speake thus vnto youre lorde: Thus sayeth the LORDE:
Feare not thou the wordes yt thou hast herde, wherwith the kynge of Assirias
seruauntes haue blasphemed me.
7 Beholde, I wil put him in another mynde, so yt he shall heare tydinges, & go
agayne in to his awne countre, and in his awne londe wil I cause him to fall
thorow the swerde.
8 And whan ye chefe butlar came agayne, he founde the kynge of Assiria fightinge
agaynst Libna: for he had herde that he was departed from Lachis.
9 And he herde of Taracha the kynge of the Morians: Beholde, he is gone forth to
fighte with the.
10 Then turned he back, & sent messaungers to Ezechias, & caused to saye vnto
him: Let not thy God disceaue the, on whom thou trustest & sayest: Ierusalem
shal not be geue in to the hade of the kynge of Assiria.
11 Beholde, thou hast herde what the kynges of Assiria haue done vnto all
londes, & how they daned them, & shalt thou be delyuered?
12 Haue ye goddes of ye Heithen delyuered the, whom my father destroyed, as
Gosan, Haran, Reseph, & the childre of Eden which were at Thalassar?
13 Where is ye kynge of Hemath, ye kynge of Arphad, & ye kinge of ye cite
Sepharnaim, Hena & Iua?
14 And whan Ezechias had receaued the letters of the messaungers and had red
them, he wente vp vnto the house of the LORDE, and layed them abrode before the
LORDE,
15 & made his prayer before the LORDE, and sayde: O LORDE God of Israel, thou
that syttest vpo the Cherubins, thou onely art God amonge all ye kyngdomes of
the earth, thou hast made heauen and earth.
16 Enclyne thine eare O LORDE, and heare: open thine eyes, and beholde, and
heare the wordes of Sennacherib, which hath sent hither to blaspheme the lyuynge
God.
17 It is true (O LORDE) that the kynges of Assiria haue destroyed the Heythen
and their londe with the swerde,
18 and haue cast their goddes in the fyre: for they were not Goddes, but ye
worke of mes hondes, wodd and stone, therfore haue they destroyed them.
19 But now O LORDE helpe thou vs out of his hande, that all the kyngdomes vpon
earth maye knowe, that thou LORDE art God alone.
20 Then sent Esay the sonne of Amos vnto Ezechias, sayenge: Thus sayeth the
LORDE God of Israel: Where as thou hast made thy prayer vnto me concernynge
Sennacherib ye kynge of Assiria, I haue herde it.
21 This is it that the LORDE hath spoken agaynst him: He hath despysed ye and
mocked the O virgin thou doughter Sion: he hath shake his heade at the O
doughter Ierusalem.
22 Whom hast thou despysed & blasphemed? Ouer whom hast thou lifte vp thy voyce?
Eue agaynst ye holy one in Israel hast thou lifte vp thine eyes:
23 thou hast blasphemed ye LORDE by thy messaungers, and sayde: Thorow the
multitude of my charettes haue I gone vp to the toppes of the mountaynes, vpon
the sydes of Libanus. I haue hewen downe his hye Ceders and his chosen Pyne
trees, and am come to the vttemost habitacion of the wod of Carmel that
belongeth vnto it.
24 I haue dygged and dronke vp the straunge waters, and with ye soles of my fete
haue I dryed vp the See.
25 But hast thou not herde how that I haue done this longe agoo, and haue
prepared it from the begynnynge? Now haue I caused it for to come, that
contencious stronge cities mighte fall into a waist heape of stones,
26 & they that dwell therin, shal be faynte, and fearfull and a shamed, and shal
be as the grasse vpon the felde, and as ye grene herbe and hay vpon the house
toppes, that wythereth afore it be growne vp.
27 I knowe thy habitacion, thy out and ingoynge, and that thou ragest agaynst
me.
28 For so moch then as thou ragest agaynst me, and seynge thy presumpcion is
come vp to myne eares, therfore wyll I put a rynge in thy nose, and a brydle
bytt in thy lippes, and wyll brynge the agayne, euen the same waye thou camest.
29 And let this be a token vnto the O Ezechias. In this yeare eate yt which is
fallen. in the seconde yeare soch as groweth of it selfe: In ye thirde yeare
sowe and reape, and plante vynyardes, and eate the frute therof.
30 And the doughter Iuda which is escaped & remayneth, shall from hence forth
take rote beneth, and beare frute aboue.
31 For the remnaunt shal go forth from Ierusalem, & they yt are escaped, shall
go out fro mount Sion. The gelousy of the LORDE Zebaoth shall brynge this to
passe.
32 Therfore thus sayeth the LORDE concernynge ye kynge of the Assyrians: He
shall not come in to this cite, and shall shute no arowe therin, nether shal
there come eny shylde before it, nether shall he dygge eny backe aboute it,
33 but shal go agayne the waye that he came, and shall not come in to this cite,
sayeth the LORDE:
34 and I wyll defende this cite, to helpe it for myne awne sake, and for my
seruaunt Dauids sake.
35 And in the same nighte wente the angell of the LORDE, and smote in the hoost
of the Assyrians, an hundreth and fyue and foure score thousande men. And whan
they gatt them vp in the mornynge, beholde, all laye full of deed coarses.
36 So Sennacherib the kinge of Assyria brake vp, and departed, and returned, and
abode at Niniue.
37 And as he worshipped in ye house of Nesrach his god, his awne sonnes
Adramalech and Sarazer smote him with the swerde, and fled in to ye londe of
Ararat. And Asarhadon his sonne was kynge in his steade.

Chapter 20

1 At that tyme was Ezechias deedsicke. And the prophet Esay ye sonne of Amos,
came to him, & sayde vnto him: Thus sayeth ye LORDE: Set thine house in ordre
for thou shalt dye & not lyue.
2 And he turned, his face to the wall, and prayed vnto ye LORDE, and sayde:
3 Remembre (O LORDE) that I haue walked faithfully before the, & with a perfecte
hert, and haue done yt which is good in thy syghte. And Ezechias wepte sore.
4 But whan Esay was not gone out of halfe the cite, ye worde of ye LORDE came to
him, & sayde:
5 Turne back, & tell Ezechias ye prynce of my people: Thus sayeth ye LORDE God
of thy father Dauid: I haue herde thy praier, & considered yi teares. Beholde, I
wil heale ye: on the thirde daye shalt thou go in to ye house of the LORDE,
6 & fiftene yeares wil I adde vnto yi life, & wyll delyuer the & this cite from
the kynge of Assyria, & this cite wil I defende for myne awne sake, and for my
seruaut Dauids sake.
7 And Esay sayde: Bringe hither a quantite of fygges. And whan they broughte
them, they layed them vpon the sore, and it was healed.
8 Ezechias sayde vnto Esay: Which is ye token, that the LORDE wyll heale me, and
that I shal go vp in to the house of ye LORDE on the thirde daye?
9 Esay sayde: This token shalt thou haue of the LORDE, that the LORDE shal do
acordynge as he hath sayde. Shall the shadowe go ten degrees forwarde, or shal
it turne ten degrees backwarde?
10 Ezechias sayde: It is an easy thinge for the shadowe to go ten degrees
downewarde, yt is not my mynde: but that it go ten degrees backwarde.
11 Then cryed the prophet Esay vnto the LORDE, and the shadowe wente backe ten
degrees in Achas Dyall, which he was descended afore.
12 At the same tyme Merodach Baladan the sonne of Baladan kynge of Babilon, sent
letters and presentes vnto Ezechias, for he had herde that Ezechias had bene
sicke.
13 And Ezechias reioysed with them, & shewed them all the house of rotes, the
syluer, golde, spyces, and the best oyle, and the house of ordinaunce, and all
that was founde in his treasures. There was nothinge in his house and in all his
domynion, but Ezechias shewed it them.
14 Then came Esay the prophet vnto kynge Ezechias, and sayde vnto him: What haue
these men sayde? and whence came they vnto the? Ezechias sayde: They came to me
out of a farre countre, euen from Babilon.
15 He sayde: What haue they sene in thyne house? Ezechias sayde: They haue sene
all that is in my house, and there is nothynge in my treasures but I haue shewed
it them.
16 Then sayde Esay vnto Ezechias: Heare the worde of the LORDE:
17 Beholde, the tyme commeth, that it shall all be caryed awaye vnto Babilon,
and whatsoeuer thy fathers haue layed vp vnto this daye, and there shall
nothinge be lefte, sayeth the LORDE.
18 Yee and the children which come of the, whom thou shalt beget, shalbe taken
awaye, to be chamberlaynes in the kynge of Babilons palace.
19 Ezechias sayde vnto Esay: It is good that the LORDE hath spoken. And he sayde
morouer: Let there be peace yet and faithfulnesse in my tyme.
20 What more there is to saye of Ezechias, and all his power, and what he dyd,
and of the pole and water condyte, wher by he conueyed water in to the cite,
beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Iuda.
21 And Ezechias fell on slepe with his fathers, and Manasses his sonne was kynge
in his steade.

Chapter 21

1 Manasses was twolue yeare olde, whan he was made kinge, and reigned fyue and
fyftye yeare at Ierusalem. His mothers name was Hephziba.
2 And he dyd that which was euell in ye sight of the LORDE (euen after the
abhominacios of the Heithen, whom the LORDE expelled before the children of
Israel) and waxed frowarde,
3 and builded vp the hye places which his father Ezechias had destroyed, and
sett vp Baals altares, and made groues (as Achab the kynge of Israel dyd) and
worshipped all the hoost of heauen, and serued them.
4 And buylded altares in the LORDES house, wherof the LORDE sayde: I wyll set my
name at Ierusalem.
5 And in both the courtes of the house of the LORDE buylded he altares vnto all
the hoost of heaue.
6 And caused his sonne to go thorow the fyre, and regarded byrdes cryenge and
tokens, and maynteyned soythsayers, and expounders of tokens, and so moch dyd he
of this which was euell in the sight of the LORDE, that he prouoked him vnto
wrath.
7 A groue Idol also which he had made, set he in the house, wherof the LORDE
sayde vnto Dauid and to Salomon his sonne: In this house, and at Ierusalem (
which I haue chosen out of all the trybes of Israel) wil I set my name for euer,
8 and wyl not cause ye fote of Israel to be remoued eny more from the londe,
which I gaue vnto their fathers, yee so that they obserue and do acordynge vnto
all that I haue charged them, and after all the lawe that my seruaunt Moses
comaunded them.
9 Neuertheles they wolde not herken, but Manasses disceaued them, so yt they dyd
worse then the Heithen, whom the LORDE expelled before ye children of Israel.
10 Then spake the LORDE by his seruauntes the prophetes, and saide:
11 Because that Manasse the kynge of Iuda hath gone these abhominacions, which
are worse then all ye abhominacions that the Amorites haue done which were
before them, and hath caused Iuda also to synne agaynst their God,
12 therfore thus sayeth the LORDE God of Israel: Beholde, I wyll brynge soch a
plage vpon Ierusalem and Iuda, that who so euer heareth it, both his eares shal
glowe,
13 and ouer Ierusalem wyll I stretch forth the lyne of Samaria, and the weighte
of the house of Achab, and wyll wype out Ierusalem, euen as one wypeth a
platter, and I wyl ouerthrowe it.
14 And ye remnaunt of myne inheritaunce wil I cast out, & scater them abrode, &
wil delyuer them in to the hades of their enemies, to be spoyled and rent of all
their enemies:
15 because they haue done yt which is euell in my sighte, & haue prouoked me
vnto wrath, sence the daye that I broughte their fathers out of Egipte, vnto
this daye.
16 Manasses also shed exceadinge moch innocet bloude, so longe tyll Ierusale was
full on euery syde, without the synnes wherwith he caused Iuda for to synne, so
yt they dyd that which was euell in the sighte of the LORDE.
17 What more there is to saie of Manasses, and all that he dyd, and his synnes
which he commytted, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of
Iuda.
18 And Manasses fell on slepe with his fathers, and was buried in the garden
besyde his house, namely, in the garden of Vsa, and Amon his sonne was kynge in
his steade.
19 Two and twentye yeare olde was Amon whan he was made kynge, & he reigned two
yeare at Ierusalem. His mothers name was Mesumeleth, ye doughter of Harus of
Iatba,
20 and he dyd euell in the sighte of the LORDE, as Manasses his father had done,
21 and walked in all the waye which his father walked, and serued the Idols
which his father had serued, and worshipped them,
22 and forsoke the LORDE the God of his father, and walked not in the waye of
the LORDE.
23 And his seruauntes conspyred agaynst Amon, & slewe the kynge in his house.
24 But the people of the londe slewe all them yt had cospyred agaynst kynge
Amon. And the people of the londe made Iosias his sonne kynge in his steade.
25 As for other thinges that Amon dyd, beholde, they are wrytten in the
Cronicles of the kynges of Iuda.
26 And he was buried in his graue in Vsas garde. And Iosias his sonne was kynge
in his steade.

Chapter 22

1 Iosias was eight yeare olde wha he was made kynge, & reigned one and thirtie
yeare at Ierusalem. His mothers name was Iedida the doughter of Adaia of
Bascath,
2 and he dyd that which was righte in ye sighte of the LORDE, and walked in all
ye waye of Dauid his father, & turned not asyde, nether to the righte hande ner
to the lefte.
3 And in the eightenth yeare of kynge Iosias, the kynge sent Saphan ye sonne of
Asalia the sonne of Mesulam the scrybe, in to ye house of the LORDE, and sayde:
4 Go vp to Helchias the hye prest, that the money that is brought vnto ye house
of ye LORDE (which the tresholde kepers haue gathered of ye people)
5 maye be delyuered vnto them, that they maye geue it to the workmen which are
appoynted in the house of the LORDE, & to geue it vnto the labourers in the
house (yt they maye repayre the decaye of the house) namely,
6 vnto the carpenters, and buylders, & masons, and to them yt bie timber & fre
stone for the repairinge of the house:
7 but so yt there be no accomptes taken of them concernynge the money, that is
vnder their hande, but yt they deale withall vpon credence.
8 And Helchias ye prest sayde vnto Sapha the scrybe: I haue founde the boke of
the lawe in the house of the LORDE. And Helchias gaue the boke vnto Saphan, that
he might reade it.
9 And Saphan the scrybe bare it vnto the kynge, and brought him worde agayne, &
sayde: Thy seruauntes haue gathered together ye money yt was founde in the
house, & haue delyuered it vnto the workme, which are appoynted in ye house of
the LORDE.
10 And Saphan the scrybe tolde the kynge and sayde: Helchias the prest hath
delyuered me a boke, and Saphan red it before the kynge.
11 But whan the kinge herde the wordes of the boke of lawe, he rente his
clothes.
12 And the kynge comaunded Helchias the prest, & Ahicam the sonne of Saphan, &
Achbor the sonne of Michaia, and Saphan the scribe, & Asaia ye kynges seruaunt,
and sayde:
13 Go yor waye and axe councell at the LORDE for me, for the people, and for all
Iuda, concernynge the wordes of this boke that is founde: for greate is the
wrath of the LORDE that is kyndled ouer vs, because or fathers haue not herkened
vnto the wordes of this boke, to do all that is wrytten vnto vs therin.
14 Then wente Helchias the prest, and Ahicam, Achbor, Saphan & Asaia vnto Hulda
the prophetisse ye wife of Sellu the sonne of Thecua the sonne of Harham the
keper of ye clothes, and she dwelt at Ierusalem in the seconde porte, and they
spake vnto her.
15 And she sayde vnto them: Thus sayeth ye LORDE God of Israel: Tell the man
that sent you vnto me,
16 Thus sayeth the LORDE: Beholde, I wil brynge euell vpon this place, and the
inhabiters therof, euen all the wordes of ye lawe which the kynge hath caused to
be red,
17 because they haue forsaken me, and brent incense vnto other goddes, to
prouoke me vnto wrath with all the workes of their handes. Therfore is my wrath
kindled agaynst this cite, and shall not be quenched.
18 But tell this vnto the kynge of Iuda, which hath sent you to axe councell at
the LORDE: Thus sayeth the LORDE God of Israel: Because thine hert is not
departed fro the wordes which thou hast herde,
19 and hast humbled thyselfe before the LORDE, to heare what I haue spoken
agaynst this place and the inhabiters therof (how that they shall become a very
desolacion and curse) & hast rente thy clothes, and wepte before me, I haue
herde it, sayeth the LORDE:
20 therfore wyll I gather the vnto thy fathers, so yt thou shalt be put in to
thy graue in peace, and thine eyes shall not se all the euell that I wyll brynge
vpon this place. And they brought the kynge worde agayne.

Chapter 23

1 And the kynge sent forth, and all the Elders in Iuda and Ierusalem resorted
vnto him,
2 and the kynge wente vp in to the house of the LORDE, and all the men of Iuda,
and all the inhabiters of Ierusalem with him, the prestes and prophetes and all
the people both small and greate, and all the wordes of the boke of the
couenaunt that was founde in the house of the LORDE, were red in their eares.
3 And the kinge stode vpon a piler, and made a couenaut before the LORDE, that
they shulde walke after the LORDE, and to kepe his commaundementes, witnesses,
and ordinaunces with all their hert and with all their soule, yt they shulde set
vp the wordes of this couenaunt, which are wrytten in this boke. And all the
people entred in to the couenaunt.
4 And the kynge comaunded Helchias the hye prest, and the prestes of the secode
course, and the kepers of the thresholde, yt they shulde put out of the temple
all the vessels which were made for Baal, and for the groue, and for all the
hoost of heauen, & he brent them without Ierusalem in the valley of Cedron, and
the dust of them was caryed vnto Bethel.
5 And he put downe the Kemurims, who the kynges of Iuda had founded, to burne
incense vpon the hye places, in the cities of Iuda, and aboute Ierusalem. He put
downe also them that brent incense vnto Baal, to the Sonne, and the Mone, and
the twolue tokens, and to all ye hoost of heauen.
6 And the groue caused he to be caryed from the house of the LORDE out of
Ierusalem in to ye valley of Cedron, and brent it in the valley of Cedron, and
made it to dust, and cast the dust vpon the graues of ye comen people.
7 And he brake downe the whorekepers houses which were by the house of the
LORDE, wherin the wemen made mansions for the groue.
8 And he caused all the prestes for to come out of the cities of Iuda, and
suspended ye hye places, where the prestes brent incense, from Geba vnto
Berseba. And brake downe the hye places in the portes, that were at ye dore of
the gate of Iosua ye shreue of the cite, at the lefte hande as one goeth to the
cite porte.
9 Yet had not the prestes of the hye places offred vpon the altare of the LORDE
at Ierusalem, but ate vnleuended bred amonge their brethren.
10 He suspended Tophet also in the valley of the children of Ennon, that noman
shulde cause his sonne or his doughter to go thorow ye fyre vnto Moloch.
11 And he put downe the horses, which ye kynges of Iuda had set vnto the Sonne,
at the intringe in to the house of the LORDE, besyde the chest of Netham Melech
the chamberlayne which was at Paruarim, and the charettes of the Sonne brent he
with fyre,
12 and the altares vpon the rofe of Achabs perler, which the kynges of Iuda had
made. And the altares which Manasses had made in the two courtes of the house of
the LORDE, dyd the kynge breake downe. And ranne from thence, and cast the dust
of them in to the broke Cedron.
13 And the hye places that were before Ierusalem on the righte hande of Mount
Mashith which Salomon the kynge of Israel had buylded vnto Astaroth the
abhomynacion of Sidon, and to Camos the abhominacion of Moab, and to Malcom the
abhominacion of the children of Ammon, those did the kynge suspende,
14 and brake the pilers, and roted out the groues, and fylled their places with
mens bones.
15 And the altare at Bethel, and the hye place that Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat
made, which caused Israel to synne, the same altare brake he downe, and the hye
place, & brent the hye place, and made it to dust, and brent vp the groue.
16 And Iosias turned him aboute, and sawe the graues that were vpo the mount,
and caused the bones to the fetched out of the graues, and brent them vpo the
altare, and suspended it, acordinge to the worde of the LORDE, which the man of
God cryed out, that tolde this before.
17 And he sayde: What titell is this, that I se here? And the men of the cite
sayde vnto him: It is the graue of the man of God, which came from Iuda, and
cried out this that thou hast done agaynst ye altare of Bethel.
18 And he sayde: Let him lye, no man touche his bones. Thus were his bones
delyuered with the bones of the prophet that came from Samaria.
19 He put awaye also all the houses of the hye places in the cities of Samaria
(which the kynges of Israel had made to prouoke ye LORDE vnto wrath) and dyd
with them acordinge to all as he had done at Bethel.
20 And all ye prestes of the hye places that were there, offred he vp vpon the
altares, and so brent he mens bones theron, and came agayne to Ierusalem.
21 And the kynge commauded the people, and sayde: Kepe Easter vnto the LORDE
youre God, as it is wrytten in the boke of this couenaunt.
22 For there was no Easter so kepte as this, sence the tyme of the Iudges which
iudged Israel, and in all the tymes of the kynges of Israel, and of the kynges
of Iuda:
23 but in the eightenth yeare of kynge Iosias, was this Easter kepte vnto the
LORDE at Ierusalem.
24 And Iosias expelled all soythsayers, expounders of tokes, ymages and Idols,
and all the abhominacions which were sene in the londe of Iuda and at Ierusalem,
that he mighte set vp the wordes of the lawe, which were wrytten in the boke,
that Helchias ye prest foude in the house of ye LORDE.
25 His like was no kynge before him, which so couerted vnto ye LORDE wt all his
hert, wt all his soule, & with all his strength, acordinge to all the lawe of
Moses. And after him came there not vp soch another.
26 Yet turned not the LORDE from the indignacion of his greate wrath, wherwith
he was displeased ouer Iuda, because of all the prouocacion wherwith Manasses
had prouoked him.
27 And ye LORDE sayde: I wil put Iuda out of my presence also, euen as I haue
put awaye Israel: and this cite which I haue chosen, wyl I cast out, namely,
Ierusalem, & the house wherof I sayde: My name shalbe there.
28 What more there is to saye of Iosias, and all that he dyd, beholde, it is
wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Iuda.
29 In his tyme wete Pharao Necho ye kynge of Egipte vp agaynst the kynge of
Assyria by the water Euphrates. But kynge Iosias wente agaynst him, and dyed at
Megiddo, wha he had sene him.
30 And his seruauntes caried him deed fro Megiddo, & brought him to Ierusale, &
buryed him in his graue. And the people of the londe toke Ioahas the sonne of
Iosias, and anoynted him, and made him kynge in his fathers steade.
31 Thre & twentye yeare olde was Ioahas wha he was made kynge, & reigned thre
monethes at Ierusale. His mothers name was Hamutal ye doughter of Ieremia of
Libna.
32 And he dyd yt which was euell in ye sight of ye LORDE, euen as his fathers
had done.
33 But Pharao Necho toke him presoner of Reblatha in the londe of Hemath, yt he
shulde not reigne at Ierusalem: & raysed a taxe vpo the londe, an hundreth
taletes of siluer, & one talente of golde.
34 And Pharao Necho made Eliachim ye sonne of Iosias kynge in his father Iosias
steade, & turned his name Ioachim. But Ioahas toke he, & brought him in to
Egipte where he dyed.
35 And Ioachim gaue the siluer & golde vnto Pharao, yet taxed he the londe, yt
he might geue ye syluer acordynge to Pharaos comaundement. Euery one amonge the
people in ye londe taxed he after his abilite in siluer & golde, to geue it vnto
Pharao.
36 Fyue & twentye yeare olde was Ioachim whan he was made kynge, & reigned
eleuen yeares at Ierusalem. His mothers name was Sebida ye doughter of Pedaia of
Ruma,
37 & he dyd euell in the sight of the LORDE, euen as his fathers had done.

Chapter 24

1 In his tyme came vp Nabuchodonosor ye kynge of Babilon, & Ioachim was in
subieccion vnto him iij. yeare. And he turned back, & rebelled agaynst him.
2 And ye LORDE sent men of warre vpon him out of Chaldea, out of Syria, out of
Moab, & fro amonge the childre of Ammon, & caused the for to come in to Iuda, to
destroie it acordinge to the worde of the LORDE, which he spake by his
seruauntes the prophetes.
3 It fortuned eue so vnto Iuda, acordynge to ye worde of the LORDE, that he
wolde put them awaye from his presence, because of ye sinnes of Manasses which
he dyd,
4 & because of the innocent bloude that he shed. And he fylled Ierusalem with
innocent bloude, therfore wolde not the LORDE be reconcyled.
5 What more there is to saye of Ioachim, and all that he dyd, beholde, it is
wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Iuda.
6 And Ioachim fell on slepe with his fathers. And Ioachim his sonne was kynge in
his steade.
7 And the kynge of Egipte came nomore out of his londe: for the kynge of Babilon
had conquered all that was the kynge of Egiptes, from the ryuer of Egipte vnto
ye water Euphrates.
8 Eightene yeare olde was Ioachim whan he was made kynge, and reigned thre
monethes at Ierusale. His mothers name was Nebustha the doughter of Elnathan of
Ierusalem.
9 And he dyd euell in the sighte of the LORDE, euen as his father had done.
10 At the same tyme wente the seruauntes of Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babilon vp
to Ierusalem, and came vpon the cyte with ordinaunce of warre.
11 And whan Nabuchodonosor and his seruauntes came to the cite they layed sege
vnto it.
12 But Ioachim ye kynge of Iuda wente forth to the kynge of Babilon with his
mother, with his seruauntes, with his rulers and chamberlaynes. And the kynge of
Babilon receaued him in the eight yeare of his reigne.
13 And he toke forth fro thence all the treasure in the house of the LORDE, and
in ye kynges house, and brake all the golden vessell yt Salomon the kynge of
Israel had made in the house of the LORDE (acordynge as the LORDE had sayde)
14 and caryed awaye all Ierusalem, all the rulers, all the mightie men, euen ten
thousande presoners, and all the carpenters, and all the smithes, and lefte none
behynde but the poore people of the londe.
15 And he caryed Ioachim awaye vnto Babilon, and the kynges mother, the kinges
wyues, and his chamberlaynes: and ye mightie men of the londe led he awaye
presoners also from Ierusalem vnto Babilon,
16 and seuen thousande of the best men, and a thousande carpenters and smythes,
and all the stronge men of warre.
17 And the kynge of Babilon made Matania his vncle kynge in his steade, and
turned his name Sedechias.
18 One and twentye yeare olde was Sedechias, whan he was made kynge, and reigned
eleuen yeare at Ierusalem. His mothers name was Amithal the doughter of Ieremia
of Libna.
19 And he dyd euell in the sight of the LORDE, eue as Ioachim dyd:
20 for thus fortuned it vnto Ierusale thorow the wrath of the LORDE, tyll he had
cast them out fro his presence. And Sedechias fell awaye fro the kynge of
Babilon.

Chapter 25

1 And it fortuned, that in ye nyenth yeare of his reigne, vpon the tenth daye of
the tenth moneth, Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babilon came with all his power
agaynst Ierusalem. And they laied sege vnto it, and buylded stronge holdes
rounde aboute it.
2 Thus was the cite beseged vnto the eleuenth yeare of kynge Sedechias.
3 But on ye nyenth daye of the fourth moneth was the honger so stronge in the
cite, that the people of the londe had nothinge to eate.
4 And the cite was broken vp, & all the men of warre fled in the night by the
waye of the porte betwene the two walles, which goeth to the kynges garde. But
the Caldees laye aboute the cite. And he fled by the waye to the playne felde.
5 Neuertheles the power of the Caldees folowed after the kynge, and toke him in
the plaine felde of Iericho: and all the men of warre that were with him, were
scatered abrode from him.
6 And they toke the kynge, and led him vp to the kynge of Babilon vnto Reblatha.
And he gaue iudgmet vpon him.
7 And they slewe Ezechias children before his eyes, and put out Sedechias eies,
and bounde him with cheynes, and caryed him vnto Babilon.
8 Vpon the seuenth daye of the fyfth monet, that is the ninetenth yeare of
Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babilon, came Nabusaradan the chefe captayne the kynge
of Babilons seruaunt, vnto Ierusalem,
9 and brent ye house of the LORDE, and the kynges house, & all the houses at
Ierusalem, and all the greate houses brent he with fyre.
10 And all the power of the Caldees which was with the chefe captayne, brake
downe the walles rounde aboute Ierusalem.
11 As for the other people that yet were lefte in the cite, and were falle vnto
the kinge of Babilon, and the other comen people, Nabusaradan the chefe captayne
caryed them awaye.
12 And of the poorest people dyd the chefe captaine leaue in ye londe to be
wynegardeners and plowmen.
13 But the brasen pilers in the house of the LORDE, and the seates, and the
brasen lauer that was in the house of the LORDE, dyd ye Caldees breake downe,
and caried the metall vnto Babilon.
14 And the pottes, shouels, fleshokes, spones, & all ye brasen vessell that was
occupied in the seruyce, caried they awaye.
15 And ye chefe captayne toke awaye ye censors and basens yt were of golde and
syluer,
16 two pilers, one lauer, and the seates yt Salomon had made for ye house of the
LORDE. The metall of all these ornamentes coulde not be weyed.
17 Eightene cubytes hye was one piler, and ye knoppe theron was of brasse also,
& thre cubytes hye: & the rope and the pomgranates vpon the knoppe rounde
aboute, were all of brasse. After the same maner was the other piler also with
the rope.
18 And the chefe captayne toke Seraia the prest of the first course, & Sophony
the prest of the seconde course, and thre dorekepers,
19 and one chamberlayne out of the cite, which was appoynted ouer ye men of
warre: and fyue men that were euer before the kynge, which were founde in the
cite: and Sophar the captayne, which taught the people of ye londe to fighte:
and thre score men of ye people of the londe, that were founde in the cite:
20 these dyd Nabusaradan ye chefe captayne take, and broughte them to the kynge
of Babilon vnto Reblatha.
21 And the kynge of Babilon slewe them at Reblatha in ye londe of Hemath. Thus
was Iuda caried awaye out of his awne londe.
22 But ouer the remnaunt of the people in the londe of Iuda, whom Nabuchodonosor
the kynge of Babilon lefte behynde, he set Godolias ye sonne of Ahicam ye sonne
of Saphan.
23 Now wha all the captaynes of the soudyers, & the men herde, that the kynge of
Babilon had made Godolias gouernoure, they came to Godolias vnto Mispa, namely,
Ismael ye sonne of Nathanias, & Iohanna ye sonne Carea, & Seraia ye sonne of
Tanhometh the Netopharite, & Iesanias ye sonne of Maechati wt their men.
24 And Godolias sware vnto them & to their men, & sayde vnto them: Feare not ye
ye officers of the Caldees, tary in the londe, & submytte youre selues vnto the
kynge of Babilon, & ye shal prospere.
25 But in the seueth moneth came Ismael the sonne of Nathanias the sonne of
Elisama (of the kynges kynred) and ten men with him, and slewe Godolias, and the
Iewes and Caldees that were with him at Mispa.
26 Then all the people gat them vp, both small and greate, and the captaynes of
the hoost, and came in to Egipte, for they were afrayed of ye Caldees.
27 Howbeit in the seuen and thirtieth yeare after that Ioachim the kynge of Iuda
was caried awaye on the seuen and twenty daye of the twolueth moneth,
Euilmerodach the kynge of Babilon in the first yeare of his reigne, lifte vp the
heade of Ioachim ye kynge of Iuda out of preson,
28 and spake louyngly vnto him, and set his trone aboue ye trones of ye kynges
that were with him at Babilon,
29 and chaunged the clothes of his captiuyte. And he ate allwaye before him as
longe as he lyued.
30 And he appoynted him his porcion, which was euer geue him daylie of the
kynge, as longe as he lyued.


1 Chronicles

Chapter 1

1 Adam, Seth, Enos,
2 Kenan, Mahalaleel, Iared,
3 Henoch, Mathusalah, Lamech,
4 Noe, Sem, Ham & Iaphet.
5 The childre of Iaphet are these: Gomer, Magog, Madai, Iauan, Tubal, Mesech and
Thiras.
6 The children of Gomer are these: Ascenas, Riphat Togarma.
7 The children of Iauan are these: Elisa, Tharsisa, Chitim and Dodanim.
8 The childre of Ham are these: Chus, Misraim, Phut & Canaan.
9 The children of Chus are these: Seba, Heuila, Sabtha, Reyma & Sabthecha. The
childre of Reyma are these: Sheba & Dedan.
10 Chus, begat Nemrod, yt beganne to be mighty vpon earthe.
11 Misraim begat Ludim, Enanim, Lehabim, Napchuhim,
12 Pathrusim, and Casluhim: of whom came the Philistynes and Caphthorims.
13 Canaan begat Sidon his first sonne: Heth,
14 Iebusi, Amori, Girgosi,
15 Heui, Arki, Sini,
16 Aruadi, Zemari and Hemathi.
17 The childre of Sem are these: Elam, Assur, Arphachsad, Lud, Aram, Vz, Hul,
Gether & Masech.
18 Arphachsad begat Salah. Salah begat Eber.
19 Vnto Eber there were borne two sonnes: the name of the one was Peleg, because
that in his tyme the worlde was deuyded, and his brothers name was Iaketan.
20 And Iaketa begat Almodad, Saleph, Hazarmaphet, Iarah,
21 Hadora, Vsal, Dikela,
22 Ebal, Abimael, Seba,
23 Ophir, Heuila and Iobab. These all are the children of Iakethan.
24 Sem, Arphachsad, Salah,
25 Eber, Peleg, Regu,
26 Serug, Nahor, Terah,
27 Abram, that is Abraham.
28 The children of Abraham are these: Isaac and Ismael.
29 This is their generacion: The first sonne of Ismael: Nebaioth, Cedar, Abdeel,
Mibsam,
30 Misma, Duma, Masa, Hadad, Thema,
31 Iethur, Naphis & Kedma. These are the children of Ismael.
32 The children which Ketura Abrahams cocubyne bare, are these: Simram, Iaksan,
Medan, Midian, Ie?bak and Suah. The children of Iaksan are these: Seba and
Dedan.
33 And the childre of Midian are: Epha, Epher, Henoch, Abida and Eldaa. All
these are the childre of Ketura.
34 Abraham begat Isaac. The children of Isaac are: Esau and Israel.
35 The children of Esau are: Eliphas, Reguel, Ieus, Iaelam, Korah.
36 The children of Eliphas are, Theman, Omar, Zephi, Gaethan, Kenas, Thimna &
Amalek.
37 The children of Reguel are: Nahath, Serah, Samma and Misa.
38 The children of Seir are: Lothan, Sobal, Zibeon, Ana, Dison, Ezer, Disan.
39 The children of Lothan are: Hori and Homan and Thimna was the sister of
Lothan.
40 The children of Sobal are: Aluan, Manahath, Ebal, Sephi, Onam. The children
of Zibeon are: Aia and Ana.
41 The childre of Ana, Dison. The children of Dison are: Hamran, E?ban, Iethran
and Charan.
42 The children of Ezer are: Bilhan, Seauan & Acan. The children of Disan are:
Vz and Aran.
43 These are the kynges which reigned in the lode of Edom, or euer there reigned
eny kynge amonge the children of Israel: Bela the sonne of Beor, and the name of
his cite was Dinhaba.
44 And whan Bela dyed, Iobab the sonne of Serah of Bosra was kynge in his
steade.
45 And whan Iobab dyed, Husam out of ye londe of the Themanites was kynge in his
steade.
46 Whan Husam dyed, Hadad the sonne of Bedad (which smote the Madianites in the
felde of ye Moabites) was kynge in his steade, & the name of his cite was Auith.
47 Whan Hadad dyed, Samla of Masrek was kynge in his steade.
48 Whan Samla dyed, Saul of Rehobeth by the water syde, was kynge in his steade.
49 Whan Saul dyed, Baal Hauan the sonne of Achbor was kynge in his steade.
50 Whan Baal Hauan dyed, Hadad was kynge in his steade, and the name of his cite
was Pagi, & his wyues name was Mehetabeel the doughter of Matred, & doughter of
Mesahab.
51 But whan Hadad dyed, there were prynces at Edom: Prynce Thimnah, prynce Alua,
prynce Ietheth,
52 prynce Ahalibama, prynce Ela, prynce Pinon,
53 prynce Kenas, prynce Theman, prynce Mibzar,
54 prynce Magdiel, prynce Iram. These are the prynces of Edom.

Chapter 2

1 These are the children of Israel: Ruben, Simeon, Leui, Iuda, Isachar, Zabulon,
2 Dan, Ioseph, Be Iamin, Nephtali, Gad & Aser.
3 The childre of Iuda: Er, Onan & Sela: these thre were borne vnto him of ye
doughter Sua ye Cananitisse. Howbeit ye first sonne of Iuda was wicked before ye
LORDE, & therfore he slewe him.
4 But Thamar his sonnes wife bare him Phares & Zarah, so yt all ye childre of
Iuda were fyue.
5 The childre of Phares are, Hesrom and Hamuel.
6 The childre of Zarah are, Simri, Ethan, Heman, Chalcol, Dara, which all are
fyue in nombre.
7 The childre of Charmi are, Achan, which troubled Israel, wha he synned in the
thinge that was damned.
8 The children of Ethan: Asaria.
9 The children which were borne vnto Hesrom, are: Raia, Thalubai.
10 Ram begat Aminadab. Aminadab begat Naasson the prynce of the children of
Iuda.
11 Naasson begat Salmon. Salmon begat Boos.
12 Boos begat Obed. Obed begat Isai.
13 Isai begat Eliab his first sonne, Abinadab the seconde, Samma the thirde,
14 Nathanael the fourth, Raddai ye fifth,
15 Ozem ye sixte, Dauid ye vij.
16 And their sisters were Zeruia & Abigail. The childre of Zeruia are these
thre: Abisai, Ioab & Asahel.
17 Abigail begat Amasa. The father of Amasa was Iether an Ismaelite.
18 Caleb the sonne of Hesrom begat Asuba ye woman, & Ierigoth. And these are the
same womans childre: Ieser, Sobab, and Ardon.
19 But wha Asuba dyed, Caleb toke Ephrat, which bare him Hur.
20 Hur begat Vri. Vri begat Bezaleel.
21 Afterwarde laye Hesrom with ye doughter of Machir the father of Gilead, & he
toke her wha he was thre score yeare olde, and she bare him Segub.
22 Segub begat Iair, which had thre & twentye cities in the londe of Gilead.
23 And he toke out of the same Iesur and Aram the townes of Iair, and Kenath
with the vyllages therof, thre score cities. All these are the children of
Machir ye father of Gilead.
24 After ye death of Hesrom in Caleb Ephrata, lefte Hesrom his wife vnto Abia:
which (wife) bare him Ashur ye father of Thecoa.
25 Ierahmeel the first sonne of Hesrom had children: the first Ram, Buna, Oren
and Ozem and Ahia.
26 And Ierahmeel had yet another wife, whose name was Athara, she is ye mother
of Onam.
27 The childre of Ram the first sonne of Ierahmeel are, Maaz, Iamin and Eker.
28 Onam had children: Samai and Iada. The children of Samai are, Nadab & Abisur.
29 Abisurs wife was called Abihail, which bare him Ahban and Molid.
30 The childre of Nadab are, Seled and Appaim. And Seled dyed without children.
31 The children of Appaim: Iesei. The children of Iesei: Sesan. The childre of
Sesan: Ahelai.
32 The childre of Iada ye brother of Samai are, Iether & Ionathan. But Iether
dyed without childre.
33 The children of Ionathan are, Peleth and Sasa: These are the children of
Ierahmeel.
34 As for Sesan, he had no sones, but a doughter. And Sesan had a seruaut an
Egipcian, whose name was Iatha.
35 And Sesan gaue his doughter vnto Iatha his seruaut to wife, which bare him
Athai.
36 Athai begat Nathan. Nathan begat Sabad.
37 Sabad begat Ephal. Ephal begat Obed.
38 Obed begat Iehu. Iehu begat Asaria.
39 Asaria begat Halez. Halez begat Elleasa.
40 Elleasa begat Sissemai. Sissemai begat Sallum.
41 Sallum begat Iekamia. Iekamia begat Elisama.
42 The children of Caleb the brother of Ierahmeel are, Mesa his first sonne,
which is the father of Siph, and of the children of Maresa the father of Hebron.
43 The children of Hebron are, Corah, Thapuah, Rekem, & Sama.
44 Sama begat Raham ye father of Iarkaam. Rekem begat Samai.
45 The sonne of Samai was called Maon, & Maon was ye father of Bethzur.
46 Epha Calebs concubyne bare Haram, Mosa & Gases. Haram begat Gases.
47 The childre of Iahdai are, Rekem, Iotham, Gesan, Pelet, Epha and Saaph.
48 Maecha Calebs concubyne bare Seber and Thirhena.
49 And she bare Saaph also ye father of Madmanna, and Scheua the father of
Machbena, and the father of Gibea. But Achsa was Calebs doughter.
50 These were the children of Caleb: Hur ye first sonne of Ephrata, Sobal the
father of Kiriath Iearim,
51 Salma ye father of Bethleem, Hareph ye father of Beth Sader.
52 And Sobal the father of Kiriath Iearim had sonnes, namely the halfe kynred of
Manuhoth.
53 The kynreds at Kiriath Iearim were ye Iethites, Puthites, Sumathites &
Misraites. From these came forth the Zaregathites & Esthaolites.
54 The children of Salma are Bethleem & the Netophathites the crowne of the
house of Ioab, and the halfe of the Manahites of the Zareite.
55 And ye kynreds of the scrybes which dwelt at Iabes, are ye Thireathites,
Simeathites, Suchothites, these are the Kenites, yt came of Hamath the father of
Beth Rechab.

Chapter 3

1 These are the childre of Dauid, which were borne vnto him in Hebron. The first
sonne, Amnon of Ahinoam the Iesraelitisse: the seconde, Daniel of Abigail the
Carmelitisse:
2 the thirde, Absalom ye sonne of Maecha ye doughter of Thalmai kynge of Gesur:
the fourth, Adonias the sonne of Hagith:
3 the fifth, Saphathia of Abital: the sixte, Iethream of his wife Egla.
4 These sixe were borne vnto him at Hebron, for he reigned there vij. yeare &
sixe monethes. But at Ierusale reigned he thre & thirtie yeare.
5 And these were borne vnto him at Ierusalem: Simea, Sobab, Nathan, Salomo:
these foure of Bethseba ye doughter of Ammiel.
6 And Iebear, Elisama, Eliphalet,
7 Noga, Nepheg, Iapia,
8 Elisama, Eliada, Eliphelet, these nyne.
9 These all are ye children of Dauid, besyde those yt were the childre of ye
cocubynes. And Thamar was their sister.
10 Salomons sonne was Roboam, whose sonne was Abia, whose sonne was Asa, who
sonne was Iosaphat,
11 whose sonne was Ioram, whose sonne was Ahasia, whose sonne was Ioas,
12 whose sonne was Amasias, whose sonne was Asaria, whose sonne was Iotham,
13 whose sonne was Achas, whose sonne was Ezechias, whose sonne was Manasses,
14 whose sonne was Amon, whose sonne was Iosias.
15 The sonnes of Iosias were: ye first, Iohanna: the seconde, Ioachim: the
thirde, Sedechias: the fourth, Sallum.
16 The childre of Ioachim were, Iechonias, whose sonne was Sedechias.
17 The childre of Iechonias which were take presoners, were Selathiel,
18 Malchiram, Phadaia, Semeazar, Iekamia, Hosanna, Nedabia.
19 The childre of Phadaia were: Zorobabel & Simei. The childre of Zorobabel
were: Mesullam & Hanania, & their sister Selomith,
20 and Hasuba, Ohel, Barachias, Hasadia, Iusab Hases, these fyue.
21 The children of Hanania were: Platia & Iesaia, whose sonne was Rephaia, whose
sonne was Arnan, whose sonne was Obedia, whose sonne was Sachania.
22 The children of Sachania were: Semaia. The children of Semaia were: Hatus,
Iegeal, Bariah, Nearia, Saphat & Sesa, these sixe.
23 The children of Nearia were: Elioenai, Ezechias & Asrika, these thre.
24 The childre of Elioenai were: Hodaia, Eliasib, Platia, Akub, Iohanna, Delaia
and Anani, these seuen.

Chapter 4

1 The children of Iuda were: Phares, Hesrom, Charmi, Hur & Sobal.
2 Rehoia the sonne of Sobal begat Iahath. Iahath begat Ahumai and Lahad. These
are the kynreds of the Zaregathites,
3 Elle ye father of Etha, Iesreel, Iesma, Iedbas and their sister was called
Hazelelponi:
4 and Penuel the father of Gedor, & Eser the father of Husa. These are the
children of Hur the first sonne of Ephrata ye father of Bethleem.
5 Ashur ye father of Thecoa had two wyues, Hellea & Naera:
6 and Naera bare Ahusam, Hepher, Thennu, & Ahastari: these are the childre of
Naera.
7 The childre of Hellea were: Zereth, Iezohar and Ethnan.
8 Chos begat Anub and Hazobeba, and the kynred of Aharhel the sonne of Harum.
9 Iaebes was more honorable then his brethre, and his mother called him Iaebes,
for she sayde: I haue borne him with trouble.
10 And Iaebes called vpon the God of Israel, & sayde: Yf thou wilt blesse me,
and increase the borders of my londe, & yf thy hande be with me, & thou delyuer
me from euell, yt it trouble me not. And God caused it for to come that he axed.
11 Chalub the brother of Suah begat Mehir: he is the father of Esthon.
12 Esthon begat Bethrapha, Passeah, and Thehinna ye father of the cite of Nahas:
these are the men of Recha.
13 The children of Kenas were: Athniel and Saraia. The childre of Athniel were,
Hathath.
14 And Meonothai begat Aphra. And Saraia begat Ioab the father of Geharasim: for
they were carpenters.
15 The childre of Caleb the sonne of Iephune were: Iru, Ela & Naam. The children
of Ela were: Kenas.
16 The children of Iehaleleel were: Siph, Sipha, Thiria, & Asarieel.
17 The childre of Esra were: Iether, Mered, Epher & Ialon, & Thahar with Miriam,
Samai, Ie?bah the father of Esthemoa,
18 & his wife Iudi Ia bare Iered the father of Geder, Heber the father of Socho,
Iekuthiel ye father of Sanoah: these are the children of Bithia the doughter of
Pharao, which Mared toke.
19 The childre of the wife Hodia the sister of Naham ye father of Regila, were,
Hagarmi & Esthomoa the Maechathite.
20 The children of Simon were: Amnon, Rimna & Benhanan, Thiflon. The children of
Iesei were: Soheth, and Ben Soheth.
21 The childre of Sela ye sonne of Iuda were: Er, ye father of Lecha. Laeda the
father of Maresa, & the kynred of ye lynnen weuers in ye house of A?bea:
22 & Iokim, & the men of Cosebo, Ioas & Seraph, which were housholders in Moab,
and dwelt at Lahem and Hadebarim Athikim.
23 These were potmakers, and dwelt amoge plantes and hedges, besyde the kynge in
his busynes, and came & dwelt there.
24 The children of Simeon were Nemuel, Iamin, Iarib, Serah, Saul:
25 whose sonne was Sallum, whose sonne was Mipsam, whose sone was Misma.
26 The childre of Misma were, Hamuel, whose sonne was Sachur, whose sonne was
Simei.
27 Simei had sixtene sonnes and sixe doughters, and his brethren had not many
childre. And all their kynred multiplied not as the children of Iuda.
28 But they dwelt at Berseba, Molada, Hazar Sual,
29 Bilha, Ezem, Tholad,
30 Bethuel, Harma, Ziclag,
31 Beth Marchaboth, Hazarsussim, Beth Birei, and Saraim: these were their cities
vntyll ye tyme of kynge Dauid.
32 And their townes, Etam, Ain, Rimmon, Tochen, Asan, these fyue cities,
33 & all the vyllages that were aboute these cities, vntyll Baal, this is their
habitacion and their kynred amonge them.
34 And Mesobab, Iamlech, Iosa the sonne of Amasia,
35 Ioel, Iehu the sonne of Ieschibia, the sonne of Seraia, the sonne of Asiel,
36 Elioenai, Iaecoba, Iesohaia, Asaia, Adiel, Ismael and Benaia.
37 Sisa the sonne of Siphei, ye sonne of Alon, the sonne of Iedaia, the sonne of
Simri, the sonne of Semaia.
38 These were famous prynces in their kynreds of the house of their fathers, and
multiplied in nombre.
39 And they wente forth, that they might come vnto Gedor to the east syde of the
valley, to seke pasture for their shepe.
40 And founde fat and good pasture, and a londe large on both the sydes, quyete
and riche: for they of Ham dwelt there afore tyme.
41 And these that are now descrybed by name, came in the tyme of Ezechias the
kynge of Iuda, and smote the tentes and dwellinges of those that were founde
there, and damned them vnto this daye, and dwelt in their steade, for there had
they pasture for their shepe.
42 There wente of them also (of the children of Simeon) fyue hundreth men vnto
mount Seir, with their rulers: Platia, Nearia, Rephaia and Vsiel, the children
of Iesei,
43 and smote the remnaunt of the Amalechites (which were escaped) and dwelt
there vnto this daye.

Chapter 5

1 The children of Ruben the first sonne of Israel: for he was the first sonne,
but because he defyled his fathers bed, therfore was his first byrthrighte geuen
vnto the children of Ioseph the sonne of Israel, & he was not rekened to ye
first byrthrighte:
2 for vnto Iuda which was mightie amonge his brethren, was geuen the
pryncipalite before him, and the first byrthrighte vnto Ioseph.
3 The children now of Ruben the first sonne of Israel are these: Hanoch, Pallu,
Hesron and Charmi.
4 The childre of Iohel were, Semaia, whose sonne was Gog, whose sonne was Semei,
5 whose sonne was Micha, whose sonne was Reaia, whose sonne was Baal,
6 whose sonne was Beera, whom Teglatphalasser the kynge of Assiria caried awaye
presoner. He was a prynce amonge the Rubenites.
7 But his brethren amonge his kynreds (wha they were rekened amonge their
generacion) had Ieiel and Sacharia to their heades.
8 And Bela the sonne of Asan the sonne of Sema, the sonne of Ioel, dwelt at
Aroer, and vntyll Nebo & Baal Meon.
9 And dwelt towarde ye East, as one cometh to the wyldernes by ye water
Euphrates: for their catell were many in the londe of Gilead.
10 And in ye tyme of Saul they foughte agaynst ye Agarites, which fell thorow
their hande, and they dwelt in their tentes towarde all the East parte of
Gilead.
11 But the children of Gad dwelt ouer agaynst them in ye countre of Basan,
vntyll Salcha.
12 Ioel the chefest, and Sapham the secode, Iaenai and Saphat at Basan.
13 And their brethren of the house of their fathers were, Michael, Mesullam,
Seba, Iorai, Iaecan, Sia and Eber, these seuen.
14 These are the children of Abihail the sonne of Huri, the sonne of Iaroah, the
sonne of Gilead, the sonne of Michael, the sonne of Iesisai, ye sonne of Iahdo,
the sonne of Bus.
15 Ahi the sonne of Abdiel, the sonne of Guni was a ruler in ye house of their
fathers,
16 and they dwelt at Gilead in Basan, and in ye vyllages therof, and in all the
suburbes of Saron, vnto the vttemost partes therof.
17 All these were rekened in the tyme of Iotham the kynge of Iuda, and of
Ieroboam the kynge of Israel.
18 The children of Ruben, the Gaddites & the halfe trybe of Manasses (of soch as
were fightinge men, which wayre shylde & swerde, and coulde bende the bowe, and
were men of armes) were foure and fortye thousande and seuen hundreth and thre
score, that wente forth to ye warre.
19 And whan they foughte agaynst ye Agarites, Ietur, Naphes and Nodab
20 helped them, and delyuered ye Agarites in to their handes, and all that was
wt them: for they cried vnto God in ye batayll. And he herde them, because they
put their trust in him.
21 And they caried awaie their catell, fyue thousande Camels, two hundreth &
fyftie thousande shepe, two thousande Asses, and an hudreth thousande soules of
men.
22 For there were many wounded, for why? the battayll was of God. And they dwelt
in their steade, vntyll the tyme that they were caried awaye presoners.
23 The childre of the halfe trybe of Manasses dwelt in ye londe from Basan forth
vntyll Baal Hermon & Seuir, and mount Hermon:
24 for they were many. And these were ye heades of the house of their fathers,
Epher, Iesei, Eliel, Asriel, Ieremia, Hodaneia, Iahdiel, mightie valeaunt men, &
awncient heades in the house of their fathers.
25 And wha they synned agaynst ye God of their fathers, and wente awhorynge
after the goddes of the people of the londe, (whom God had destroyed before
them)
26 the God of Israel stered vp the sprete of Phul the kynge of Assiria, and the
sprete of Teglatphalassar the kynge of Assiria, and led awaye the Rubenites,
Gaddites, and ye halfe trybe of Manasses, and broughte the vn Halah, and Habor,
and Hara, and to the water of Gosan vnto this daye.

Chapter 6

1 The children of Leui were, Gerson, Kahath and Merari.
2 The childre of Kahath were, Amram, Iezeher, Hebron and Vsiel.
3 The children of Amram were, Aaron, Moses and Miriam. The children of Aaro
were, Nadab, Abihu, Eleasar and Ithamar.
4 Eleasar begat Phineas. Phineas begat Abisua.
5 Abisua begat Buki. Buki begat Vsi.
6 Vsi begat Serahia. Serahia begat Meraioth.
7 Meraioth begat Amaria. Amaria begat Achitob.
8 Achitob begat Sadoc. Sadoc begat Ahimaas.
9 Ahimaas begat Asaria. Asaria begat Iohanan.
10 Iohana begat Asaria: for he was prest in the house yt Salomon buylded at
Ierusalem.
11 Asaria begat Amaria. Amaria begat Achitob.
12 Achitob begat Zadock. Zadock begat Sallum.
13 Sallum begat Helchias. Helchias begat Asaria.
14 Asaria begat Seraia. Seraia begat Iosedec.
15 But Iosedec was caried awaie wha the LORDE caused Iuda & Ierusale to be led
awaye captyue by Nabuchodonosor.
16 The children of Leui are these: Gerson, Kahath and Merari.
17 These are the names of the children of Gerson: Libni and Semei.
18 The names of the childre of Kahat are these: Amram, Iezohar, Hebron and
Vsiel.
19 The names of the children of Merari are: Maheli and Musi. These are the
kynreds of the Leuites amonge their housholdes.
20 Gersons sonne was Libni, whose sonne was Iahath, whose sonne was Sima,
21 whose sonne was Ioah, whose sonne was Iddo, whose sonne was Serah, whose
sonne was Ieathrai.
22 Kahats sonne was Aminadab, whose sonne was Corah, whose sonne was Assir,
23 whose sonne was Elcana, whose sonne was Abiasaph, whose sonne was Assir,
24 whose sonne was Thahath, whose sonne was Vriel, whose sonne was Vsia, whose
sonne was Saul.
25 The childre of Elkana were, Amasai & Ahimoth,
26 whose sonne was Elkana, whose sonne was Elkana of Zuph, whose sonne was
Nahath,
27 whose sonne was Eliab, whose sonne was Ieroham, whose sonne was Elkana,
28 whose sonne was Samuel. Whose first borne sonnes were Seni and Abija.
29 Meraris sonne was Maheli, whose sonne was Libni, whose sonne was Simei, whose
sonne was Vsa,
30 whose sone was Simea, whose sone was Haggia, whose sone was Asaia.
31 These are they whom Dauid appoynted to synge in the house of the LORDE, where
the Arke rested,
32 & they mynistred before the habitacion of the Tabernacle of witnes wt
synginge, vntyll Salomon had buylded the house of the LORDE at Ierusalem, and
they stode after their maner in their office.
33 And these are they yt stode & their children. Of ye children of Kahath was
Heman ye synger, the sonne of Ioel, the sonne of Samuel,
34 the sonne of Elkana, the sonne of Ieroham, ye sonne of Eliel, the sonne of
Thoah,
35 the sonne of Zuph, the sonne of Elkana, the sonne of Mahath, the sonne of
Amasai,
36 the sonne of Elkana, the sonne of Iohel, the sonne of Asaria, the sonne of
Sophonias,
37 the sonne of Thahath, the sonne of Assir, the sonne of Abijasaph, the sonne
of Corah,
38 the sonne of Iezehar, the sonne of Rahath, the sonne of Leui, the sonne of
Israel.
39 And his brother Assaph stode at his righte hande, and Assaph was the sonne of
Barachia, the sonne of Simea,
40 the sonne of Michael, ye sonne of Maeseia, the sonne of Malchija,
41 the sonne of Athin, ye sonne of Serah, the sonne of Adaia,
42 the sonne of Ethan, the sonne of Sima, the sonne of Simei,
43 the sonne of Iahath, the sonne of Gerson, the sonne of Leui.
44 Their brethren the childre of Merari, stode on the lefte hande, namely, Ethan
the sonne of Kusi, the sonne of Abdi, the sonne of Malluch,
45 the sonne of Hasabia, the sonne of Amazia, the sonne of Helchia,
46 ye sonne of Amzi, the sonne of Bani, the sonne of Samer,
47 the sonne of Maheli, the sonne of Musi, the sonne of Merari, the sonne of
Leui.
48 As for their brethre the Leuites, they were geuen to all the offices in the
habitacion of the house of the LORDE:
49 but the office of Aaron and his sonnes was to kyndle the fyre vpon the altare
of burntofferynges, and vpon the altare of incense, and to all the busynes in
the most holy, and to make attonement for the people, acordinge as Moses ye
seruaunt of God commaunded.
50 These are the children of Aaron: Eleasar his sonne, whose sonne was Phineas,
whose sonne was Abisua,
51 whose sonne was Buki, whose sonne was Vsi, whose sonne was Serahia,
52 whose sonne was Meraioth, whose sonne was Amaria, whose sonne was Achitob,
53 whose sonne was Sadoc, whose sonne was Ahimaas.
54 And this is their habitacion and rowme in their borders, namely of Aarons
children of the kynred of ye Kahathites: for this lot fell vnto them.
55 And they gaue the Hebron in the londe of Iuda, & the suburbes of the same
rounde aboute.
56 But the felde of ye cite & the vyllages therof, gaue they vnto Caleb the
sonne of Iephune.
57 Thus gaue they vnto the children of Aaron these fre cities, Hebron & Libna
with their suburbes, Iather, & Esthemoa,
58 Hilen, Debir,
59 Asan and Bethsemes, with their suburbes.
60 And out of the trybe of Ben Iamin, Geba, Alemeth and Anachot wt their
suburbes, so yt all the cities in their kindred were thirtene.
61 The other childre of Kahath of their kynred, had out of ye halfe trybe of
Manasses, ten cities by lot.
62 The children of Gerson of their kynred, had out of ye trybe of Isachar, & out
of the trybe of Asser, & out of the trybe of Nephtali, & out of the trybe of
Manasses in Basan, thirtene cities.
63 The childre of Merari of their kynred, had by lot out of the trybe of Ruben,
& out of the trybe of Gad, and out of the trybe of Zabulon, twolue cities.
64 And vnto ye Leuites gaue the childre of Israel cities with their suburbes,
65 namely by lot, out the trybe of the children of Iuda, & out of the trybe of
the childre of Simeon, & out of the trybe of the children of Ben Iamin, euen
those cities, which they appoynted by name.
66 But the kynreds of the children of Kahath had the cities of their borders out
of the trybe of Ephraim.
67 So gaue they now vnto the (namely vnto the kynred of the children of Kahath)
ye fre cities, Sichem vpon mount Ephraim, Geser,
68 Iakmeam, Bethoron,
69 Aialon, and Gath Rimon with their suburbes.
70 And out of ye halfe trybe of Manasses, Aner and Bileam with their suburbes.
71 But vnto the children of Gerson they gaue out of the kynred of the halfe
trybe of Manasses, Gola in Basan and Astharoth with their suburbes.
72 Out of the trybe of Isachar, Redes, Dabrath
73 Ramoth, and Anem with their suburbes
74 Out of the trybe of Asser, Masal, Abdo,
75 Hutoh and Sehob, with their suburbes.
76 Out of the trybe of Nephtali, Redes in Galile, Hamon and Kiriathaim with
their suburbes.
77 Vnto the other children of Merari gaue they out of the trybe of Zabulon,
Rimano and Thabor with their suburbes.
78 And beyode Iordane ouer agaynst Iericho eastwarde besyde Iordane out of the
trybe of Ruben, Bezer in the wildernes, Iahza,
79 Kedemoth and Mepaath with their suburbes.
80 Out of the trybe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead, Mahanaim,
81 He?bon and Iaeser with their suburbes.

Chapter 7

1 The children of Isachar were, Thola, Pua, Iasub and Simrom, these foure.
2 The children of Thola were, Vsi, Rephaia, Ieriel, Iahemai and Iebsam and
Samuel, heades in the house of their fathers of Thola, & mightie men in their
kynred, in nombre in the tyme of Dauid, two and twentye thousande and sixe
hundreth.
3 The children of Vsi were, Iesrahia. The children of Iesrahia were, Michael,
and Obedia, Ioel and Iesia: all these fyue were heades.
4 And with them amonge their kynred in the house of their fathers there were
ready harnessed men of warre to the battayll, sixe and thirtie thousande: for
they had many wiues and children.
5 And the mightie men of their brethren in all the kynreds of Isachar, were seue
and foure score thousande, and were all nombred.
6 The children of BenIamin, were, Bela, Becher, and Iedieel, these thre.
7 The children of Bela, were, Ezbon, Vsi, Vsiel, Ieremoth & Iri, these fyue,
heades in ye house of their fathers, mightie men: and were nombred two & twentie
thousande and foure and thyrtie.
8 The childre of Becher were, Semira, Ioas Elieser, Elioenai, Amri, Ieremoth,
Abia, Anathot & Alameh, all these were the children of Becher,
9 and were rekened in their kinreds after the heades in the house of their
fathers, valeaunt men, twentie thousande, and two hundreth.
10 The children of Iedieel were Bilhan. The childre of Bilhan were, Ieus,
BenIamin, Ehud, Cnaena, Sethan, Tharsis and Ahisahar,
11 all these were the children of Iedieel, heades of the fathers, valeaunt men,
euen seuentene thousande, which wente forth to the warre for to fighte.
12 And Supim and Hupim were the childre of Ir. But Husim were the children of
Aher.
13 The children of Nephtali were: Iahziel, Guni, Iezer and Sallum, the children
of Bilha.
14 The children of Manasses are these: Esriel, whom his concubyne Aramiel dyd
beare. But (first) begat he Machir the father of Gilead.
15 And Machir gaue wyues vnto Hupim & Supim, & their sisters name was Maecha.
His secode sonnes name was Zelaphehad. And Zelaphehad had doughters.
16 And Maecha ye wife of Machir bare a sonne whose name was Phares, & his
brothers name was Sares, and his sonnes were Vlam and Rakem.
17 Vlams sonne was Bedam. These are the children of Gilead ye sonne of Machir
the sonne of Manasses.
18 And his sister Molecheth bare Ishud, Abieser and Mahela.
19 And Semida had these children: Ahean, Sichem, Likhi and Aniam.
20 The children of Ephraim were these: Suthelah, whose sonne was Bered, whose
sonne was Thahath, whose sonne was Eleada, whose sonne was Thahath,
21 whose sonne was Sabad, whose sonne was Suthelah, whose sonne was Eser and
Elead. And the men of Gath, that dwelt in the londe, slewe them, because they
were gone downe to take their catell.
22 And their father Ephraim mourned for them a longe season, and his brethren
came to comforte him.
23 And he wente in to his wife, which conceaued, and bare a sonne, whom he
called Bria, because of the aduersite that was in his house.
24 His doughter was Seera, which builded the lower and vpper Bethoron, & Vsen
Serea.
25 Whose sonne was Rephad & Reseph, whose sonne was Thelah, whose sonne was
Thahan,
26 whose sonne was Laedan, whose sonne was Ammihud, whose sonne was Elisama,
27 whose sonne was Nun, whose sonne was Iosua.
28 And their substaunce & dwellynge was, Bethel and the vyllages therof, and
towarde the East syde of Naeran, and towarde the westparte of Geser and ye
vyllages therof. Sechem and hir vyllages vnto Aia and hir vyllages.
29 And by the children of Manasses, Bethsean and ye vyllages therof, Thaenach
and the vyllages therof, Dor and the vyllages therof. In these dwelt the
children of Ioseph the sonne of Israel.
30 The children of Asser were these: Iemna, Iesua, Iesui, Bria and Serah their
sister.
31 The children of Bria were, Heber and Malchiel, this is ye father of
Birsauith.
32 Heber begat Iaphet, Somor, Hothan, and Sua their sister.
33 The childre of Iaphlet were, Passach, Bimehal and Asuath, these were the
childre of Iaphlet.
34 The childre of Somer were, Ahi, Rahag, Iehuba, and Aram.
35 And the children of his brother Hele were, Zophah, Iemna, Seles and Amal.
36 The children of Zophah were, Suah, Harnepher, Sual, Beri, Iemra,
37 Bezer, Hod, Sama, Silsa, Iethran and Beera.
38 The children of Iether were, Iephune, Phispa and Ara.
39 The children of Vlla were Arah, Haniel and Rizia.
40 All these were the children of Asser, heades in the house of their fathers,
chosen out, valeaunt men, and heades amonge the prynces, and were mustered to
the warre for to fight, in their nombre, sixe and twentye thousande men.

Chapter 8

1 BenIamin begat Bela his fyrst sonne, A?bal the secode, Ahrah ye thirde,
2 Noah the fourth, Rapha the fyfth.
3 And Bela had children: Gera, Abihud,
4 Abisua, Neman, Ahoah,
5 Gera, Sphuphan and Huram.
6 These are Ehuds children, which were heades of the fathers amonge the citesyns
at Geba, and wete awaye vnto Manahath,
7 namely Naeman, Ahia and Gera, the same caryed them awaye, and begat Vsa and
Ahihud.
8 And Seharaim (whan he had sent the awaye) begat children in the londe of Moab
of Husim and Baera his wyues.
9 And of Hodes his wyfe begat he Iobab, Zibea, Mesa, Malcham,
10 Ieus, Sachia, and Mirma, these are his children, heades of the fathers.
11 Of Husim begat he Ahitob and Elpaal.
12 The childre of Elpaal were: Eber, Miseam and Samed. The same buylded Ono &
Lod and the vyllages therof.
13 And Bria and Sama were heades of the fathers amonge the citesyns at Aialon.
These chaced awaye the of Gath.
14 His brethre Sasak, Ieremoth,
15 Sebadia, Arad, Ader,
16 Michael, Iespa and Ioha, these are the children of Bria.
17 Sebadia Mesullam, Ezechi, Heber,
18 Iesmerai, Ieslia, Ioab, these are ye childre of Elpaal.
19 Iakim Sichri, Sabdi,
20 Eloenai, Zilthai, Eliel,
21 Adaia, Braia and Simrath, these are the childre of Semei.
22 Iespan, Eber, Eliel,
23 Abdon, Sichri, Hanan,
24 Hanania, Elan, Enthothia,
25 Iephdeia and Penuel, these are the children of Sasak.
26 Samserai, Seharia, Athalia,
27 Iaeresia, Elia and Sichri, these are, the children of Ieroham.
28 These are the heades of the fathers of their kynreds, which dwelt at
Ierusalem.
29 But at Gibeon dwelt, the father of Gibeon, & his wyues name was Maecha,
30 and his first sonne was Abdon, Zur, Cis, Baal, Nadab,
31 Gedor, Ahio and Secher.
32 Mikloth begat Simea. And they dwelt ouer agaynst their brethre at Ierusalem
with theirs.
33 Ner begat Cis. Cis begat Saul. Saul begat Ionathas, Melchisua, Abinadab and
Esbaal.
34 The sonne of Ionathas was Meribaal. Meribaal begat Micha.
35 The children of Micha were: Pithon, Melech, Thaerea and Ahas.
36 Ahas begat Ioadda. Ioadda begat Alemeth, Asmaueth and Simri. Simri begat
Moza.
37 Moza begat Binea, whose sonne was Rapha, whose sonne was Eleasa, whose sonne
was Azel.
38 Azel had sixe sonnes, whose names were: Esricam, Bochru, Iesmael, Searia,
Abadia, Hanan, all these were the sonnes of Azel.
39 The children of Esek his brother were: Vlam his first sonne, Ieus the
seconde, Elipelet the thirde.
40 The children of Vlam were valeaunt men, and coulde handell bowes, and had
many sonnes, and sonnes sonnes an hundreth and fiftye. All these are of the
children of Ben Iamin.

Chapter 9

1 And all Israel were nombred: and beholde, they are wrytten in the boke of the
kynges of Israel and Iuda, and now are they caried awaie vnto Babilo for their
synne,
2 euen they yt afore dwelt in their possessions and cities, namely Israel, ye
prestes, Leuites and Nethinim.
3 But at Ierusalem dwelt certayne of the children of Iuda, some of the children
of Ben Iamin, some of the children of Ephraim and of Manasses.
4 Namely of the children of Phares the sonne of Iuda, was Vthai the sonne of
Ammihud the sonne of Amri, the sonne of Imri, the sonne of Bani.
5 Of Soloni, Asaia ye first sonne, and his other sonnes.
6 Of the children of Serah, Ieguel and his brethren, sixe hundreth, foure score
and ten.
7 Of the children of Ben Iamin, Sallu ye sonne of Mesullam, the sonne of
Hodauia, ye sonne of Hasnua.
8 And Iebneia the sonne of Ieroham. And Ela the sonne of Vsi the sonne of
Michri. And Mesullam the sonne of Sephatia the sonne of Reguel the sonne of
Iebneia.
9 And their brethren in their kinreds nyne hundreth and syxe and fyftye. All
these were heades of the fathers in the house of their fathers.
10 Of the prestes: Iedaia, Ioiarib, Iachim,
11 And Asaria the sonne of Helchia, the sonne of Mesullam, the sonne of Sadoc,
the sonne of Meraioth, the sonne of Achitob, prynce in the house of God.
12 And Adaia the sonne of Ieroham, the sonne of Pashur, the sonne of Malchia.
And Maesai the sonne of Adiel the sonne of Iachsera, the sonne of Mesullam, the
sonne of Messylemeth, the sonne of Immer.
13 And their brethren heades in the house of their fathers a thousande, seuen
hundreth and thre score valeaunt men in executynge the offyce in the house of
God.
14 Of the Leuites of the children of Merari, Semaia the sonne of Hasub, the
sonne of Asrikam, the sonne of Hasabia.
15 And Bakbakar the carpenter and Galal. And Mathania ye sonne of Micha ye sonne
of Sichri, the sonne of Assaph.
16 And Obadia the sonne of Semaia, the sonne of Galal, ye sonne of Elkana, which
dwelt in the vyllages of the Netophatites.
17 The porters were: Sallum, Acub, Talmon, Ahiman, with their brethren, and
Sallum the chefest:
18 for hither to had the children of Leui kepte the watch at the eastsyde of the
kinges gate by armies.
19 And Sallum the sonne of Core, the sonne of Abiassaph, the sonne of Corah, and
his brethren of his fathers house. The Corahytes were in the worke of the
seruyce, to kepe the thresholdes of the Tabernacle: and their fathers in the
hoost of the LORDE, to kepe the intraunce.
20 Phineas the sonne of Eleasar was the prynce ouer them, because the LORDE had
bene with him before.
21 Sacharia the sonne of Meselemia was keper at the dore of the Tabernacle of
witnesse.
22 All these were chosen out to be kepers of the thresholdes euen two hundreth
and twolue. These were nombred in their vyllages. And Dauid and Samuel the Seer
fouded them thorow their faith,
23 that they and their children shulde kepe the house of the LORDE, namely to
kepe the watch of ye house of the Tabernacle.
24 These dorekepers were appointed towarde the foure wyndes, towarde the East,
towarde the West, towarde the North, towarde ye South.
25 But their brethre were in their vyllages, that they might come allwaye on the
seuenth daye to be with them:
26 for vnto these foure maner of chefe dorrkepers were the Leuites committed.
And they had the ouersight of the chestes and treasures in ye house of God.
27 In the nighte season also remayned they aboute the house of God: for their
dewtye was to geue attendaunce to open euery mornynge.
28 And some of them had the ouersight of the mynistrynge vessell: for they bare
the vessell out and in.
29 And some of the were appoynted ouer the vessell, and ouer all the holy
vessell, ouer the fine wheate floure, ouer ye wyne, ouer the oile, ouer the
frankencense, ouer the swete odoures:
30 but some of ye prestes children made the incense.
31 Vnto Mathithia one of the Leuites the fyrst sonne of Sallum the Corahite,
were ye pannes comytted.
32 And certayne of the Kahathites their brethren were appointed ouer the
shewbred, to prepare it euery Sabbath daye.
33 These are the heades of the singers amoge the fathers of the Leuites chosen
out ouer the chestes: for daye and night were they in worke withall.
34 These are the heades of ye fathers amonge ye Leuites in their kinreds. These
dwelt at Ierusalem.
35 At Gibeon dwelt Ieiel the father of Gibeon, his wiues name was Maecha,
36 and his fyrstsonne Abdon, Zur, Cis, Baal, Ner, Nadab,
37 Gedor, Ahaio, Sacharia, Mikloth.
38 Mikloth begat Simeam. And they dwelt also aboute their brethren at Ierusalem
amonge theirs.
39 Ner begat Cis, Cis begat Saul, Saul begat Ionathas, Malchisua, Abinadab,
Esbaal.
40 The sonne of Ionathas was Meribaal. Meribaal begat Micha.
41 The children of Micha were, Pithon, Melech and Thaherea.
42 Ahas begat Iaera, Iaera begat Alemeth, Asmaueth and Simri. Simri begat Moza.
43 Moza begat Binea, whose sonne was Raphaia, whose sonne was Eleasa, whose
sonne was Azel.
44 Azel had sixe sonnes, whose names were: Asrikam, Bochru, Iesmael, Searia,
Obadia, Hanan. These are the children of Azel.

Chapter 10

1 The Philistynes foughte agaynst Israel. And they of Israel fled before the
Philistynes, and ye wounded fell vpon mount Gilboa.
2 And the Philistynes folowed vpon Saul and his sonnes, and smote Ionathas,
Abinadab and Malchisua ye sonnes of Saul.
3 And the battayll was sore agaynst Saul. And the archers came vpon him, so that
he was wounded of the archers
4 Then sayde Saul vnto his weapenbearer: Drawe out thy swerde, and thrust it
thorow me, that these vncircumcysed come not, and deale shamefully with me.
Neuertheles his weapenbearer wolde not, for he was sore afrayed. Then toke Saul
his swerde, and fell therin.
5 Whan his weapenbearer sawe that Saul was deed, he fell vpon his swerde also,
and dyed.
6 Thus died Saul and his thre sonnes, and all his housholde together.
7 And whan the men of Israel which were in ye valley, sawe, that Saul and his
sonnes were deed, they lefte their cities and fled: and the Philistynes came and
dwelt therin.
8 On the morowe came the Philistynes to spoyle the slayne, and founde Saul, and
his sonnes lyenge vpon mount Gelboa,
9 and stryped him out, and toke his heade, and his harnesse, and sent it aboute
in to ye londe of the Philistynes, and caused it to be shewed before their
Idoles and the people.
10 And his weapens layed they in the house of their god, and styckte vp his
heade vpon the house of Dagon.
11 But whan all they of Iabes in Gilead herde of euery thinge, that the
Philistynes had done vnto Saul,
12 they gat them vp (as many as were men of armes) and toke the body of Saul and
of his sonnes, and broughte them vnto Iabes, and buryed their bones vnder the
Oke at Iabes, and fasted seuen dayes.
13 Thus dyed Saul in his trespace which he commytted agaynst the LORDE, because
he kepte not the worde of the LORDE: & because he axed councell at the
soythsayer,
14 and axed not at the LORDE, therfore slewe he him, & turned the kyngdome vnto
Dauid.

Chapter 11

1 And all Israel resorted to Dauid vnto Hebron, and sayde: Beholde, we are yi
bone and thy flesh.
2 And afore tyme whan Saul reigned, thou leddest Israel out and in. So the LORDE
thy God hath sayde vnto the: Thou shalt kepe my people of Israel, and thou shalt
be the prynce ouer my people of Israel.
3 And all the Elders of Israel came to the kynge vnto Hebron. And Dauid made a
couenaunt with them at Hebron before the LORDE. And they anoynted Dauid to be
kynge ouer Israel acordynge to the worde of the LORDE by Samuel.
4 And Dauid and all Israel wete vnto Ierusalem, that is Iebus: for the Iebusites
dwelt in the lode.
5 And the citesyns of Iebus saide vnto Dauid: Thou shalt not come in hither.
Howbeit Dauid wane ye castell of Sio. which is ye cite of Dauid.
6 And Dauid sayde: who so euer smyteth ye Iebusites first, shalbe a prynce &
captayne. The Ioab ye sonne of Zeruia clymmed vp first, & was made captayne.
7 So Dauid dwelt in ye castell, therfore was it called ye cite of Dauid.
8 And he buylded ye cite roude aboute, fro Millo forth on euery syde. As for ye
remnaunt of ye cite, Ioab buylded it, & repayred it.
9 And Dauid wete forth & grewe, & the LORDE Zebaoth was wt him.
10 These are ye chefe amoge ye mightie me of Dauid, which dealt valeauntly wt
him in his kyngdome wt all Israel, to make him kynge, acordinge to the worde of
ye LORDE ouer Israel.
11 And this is ye nombre of Dauids mightie men: Iesabeam the sonne of Hachmoni
the chefest amoge thirtie. He lifte vp his speare, & smote thre C. at one tyme.
12 After him was Eleasar the sonne of Dodo the Ahohite, and he was amoge the
thre mightie.
13 This man was wt Dauid wha they blasphemed, & the Philistynes gathered the
selues there to ye batayll. And eue ther was there a pece of londe full of
barly, & the people fled before the Philistynes.
14 And they stode in the myddes of the londe, and rescued it, and smote the
Philistynes. And the LORDE gaue a greate health.
15 And thre of the chefest thirtie wete downe to the rocke vnto Dauid in to the
caue of Adullam. But the Philistynes hoost laye in the valley of Rephaim.
16 As for Dauid, he was in the castell. And the Philistynes people were then at
Bethleem.
17 And Dauid was desyrous, and sayde: O that some wolde geue me to drynke of the
water out of the well at Bethleem vnder the gate.
18 The brake those thre in to the Philistynes hoost, and drue of the water out
of the well at Bethleem vnder the gate, and caried it, and broughte it vnto
Dauid. Neuertheles he wolde not drynke it, but poured it vnto the LORDE,
19 and sayde: God let this be farre fro me, yt I shulde do it, and drynke the
bloude of these men in ye parell of their life: for with the parell of their
life haue they broughte it: therfore wolde he not drynke it. This dyd the thre
Worthies.
20 Abisai the brother of Ioab, he was the chefest amonge thre. And he lifte vp
his speare, and smote thre hundreth. And he was famous amonge thre,
21 and before the thirde, more honorable then the two, yet came he not vnto the
thre.
22 Benaia the sonne of Ioiada the sonne of Ishail of Cabzeel, was a man of
greate actes. He smote two lyons of the Moabites. And he wente downe, and smote
a lyon in the myddes of a well in the tyme of snowe.
23 He smote a man of Egipte also, which was fyue cubites greate of stature, and
had in his hande a speare like a weuers lome. Yet wente he downe to him with a
staffe, and toke the speare out of his hande, and slewe him with his awne
speare,
24 This dyd Benaia the sonne of Ioiada, and was a famous man amonge thre
Worthies,
25 and most awncient amonge thirtie. But vnto the thre came he not. Howbeit
Dauid made him of his secrete councell.
26 The valeaunt Worthies are these: Asahel the brother of Ioab, Elhanam his
Vncles sonne of Bethleem,
27 Samoth the Harodite, Helez the Pelonite,
28 Ira the sonne of Ekes the Thecoite, Abraser the Anathothite,
29 Sibechai the Husathite, Ilai the Ahohite,
30 Matherai the Netophatite, Heled ye sonne of Baena ye Netophatite,
31 Ithai ye sonne of Ribai of Gibeath of the childre of Ben Ianim, Benaia the
Pirgathonite,
32 Hura of the broke of Gaas. Abiel the arbathite,
33 Asmaueth the Baherunite, Eliahba the Saalbonite.
34 The children of Hasem ye Gisonite, Ionathas the sonne of Sage the Hararite,
35 Ahiam the sonne of Sachar the Hararite, Eliphal the sonne of Vr,
36 Hepher the Macherathite, Ahia the Pelonite,
37 Hezro of Carmel, Naerai the sonne of A?bai,
38 Ioel the brother of Nathan, Mibehar the sonne of Hagri,
39 Zeleg the Ammonite, Naherai the Berothithe the wapenbearer of Ioab the sonne
of Zeruia,
40 Ira the Iethrite, Gareb the Iethrite,
41 Vrias the Hethite, Sabad the sonne of Ahalai,
42 Adina the sonne of Sisa the Rubenite, a captayne of the Rubenites, and there
were thirtie vnder him:
43 Hanam ye sonne of Maecha, Iosaphat the Mathonite,
44 Vsia ye Astharathite, Sama and Iaiel, the sonnes of Hotham the Aroerite,
45 Iediael the sonne of Simri, Ioha his brother the Thirzite,
46 Eliel the Mahenite, Ieribai and Iosua the sonnes of Elnaan, Iethma the
Moabite,
47 Eliel, Obed, Iaesiel of Mizobaia.

Chapter 12

1 These also came to Dauid vnto Siclag whan he was yet kepte a syde because of
Saul the sonne of Cis: And they were like wyse amouge the worthies yt helped in
the battayll,
2 and coulde handle bowes with both their handes, & coulde cast stones, and
shute arowes with the bowe. Of Sauls brethren which were of Ben Iamin:
3 The chefest Ahieser and Ioas ye children of Samaa the Gibeathite. Iesiel and
Pelet the children of Asmaueth. Baracha & and Iehu the Anthothite.
4 Iesmaia the Gibeonite, valeaunt amonge thirtie and ouer thirtie. Ieremia,
Iahasiel, Iohanan, Iosabad the Gederathite.
5 Eleusai, Ierimoth, Bealia, Samaria, Saphatia the Harophite,
6 Elkana, Iesiia, Asareel, Iasabeam ye Korahyte,
7 Ioela and Sabadia the children of Ieroham of Gedor.
8 Of the Gaddites resorted there vnto Dauid to the castell in the wyldernesse,
mightie Worthies and men of armes, which hadled speares and swerdes, and had
faces like lios, & were as swifte as the Roes vpon ye mountaynes.
9 The fyrst Eser, the seconde Obadia, the thyrde Eliab,
10 the fourth Masmanna, ye fyfth Ieremia,
11 the sixte Athai, the seueth Eliel,
12 the eight Iohanna, the nyenth Elsabad
13 the tenth Ieremia, ye eleuenth Machbanai.
14 These were of the children of Gad, heades in the hoost, the leest ouer an
hundreth, and ye greatest ouer a thousande
15 These are they which in the fyrst moneth wente ouer Iordane, whan it was full
on both the shores, so that all the valleys were eauen both towarde the East and
towarde the West.
16 There came of the children of BenIamin also and of Iuda vnto the castell of
Dauid.
17 But Dauid wente forth vnto them, and answered and sayde vnto them: Yf ye come
to me in peace, and to helpe me, my hert shal be with you. But yf ye come vpo
disceate, and to be mine aduersaries (where as there is yet no vnrighte in me)
the God of oure fathers loke vpon it, and rebuke it.
18 Neuertheles the sprete endued Amasai the captayne amonge thirtie, and he
sayde: We are thine O Dauid, and holde with the thou sonne of Isai. Peace, peace
be with the, peace be with thy helpers, for thy God helpeth the. Then Dauid
receaued them, and made them captaynes ouer the men of warre.
19 And of Manasses there fell certaine vnto Dauid, whan he came to the battayll
with the Philistynes agaynst Saul, and helped them not, for the prynces of ye
Philistynes counceled to let him go from them, and sayde: Yf he fell vnto his
lorde Saul, it mighte cost vs oure neckes.
20 Now wha he departed vnto Siclag, there fell vnto him of Manasses, Adna,
Iosabad, Iediael, Michael, Iosabad, Elihu, Zilthai, heades ouer thousandes in
Manasses.
21 And they helped Dauid against the men of warre: for they were all valeaunt
Worthies, and were captaynes ouer the hoost.
22 And euery daye came there some to Dauid, to helpe him, till there was a
greate hoost as an hoost of God.
23 And this is the nombre of the heades harnessed vnto the warre, which came to
Dauid vnto Hebron, for to turne the kyngdome of Saul vnto him, acordynge to the
worde of the LORDE.
24 The childre of Iuda, which handled speares and swerdes, were sixe thousande,
& eight hundreth ready harnessed vnto ye warre.
25 Of the children of Simeon noble men of armes for the battayll, seuen
thousande and an hudreth.
26 Of the children of Leui foure thousande and sixe hundreth.
27 And Ioiada the prynce amonge them of Aaron with thre thousande and seuen
hundreth.
28 Sadoc the yonge valeaunt man of armes with his fathers house, two and twentye
rulers.
29 Of the children of BenIamin Sauls brother, thre thousande: for vnto that time
helde many of the yet with the house of Saul.
30 Of ye children of Ephraim, twentie thousande and eighte hundreth valeaunt men
of armes, and famous in the house of their fathers.
31 Of the halfe trybe of Manasses, eightene thousande, named by name, to come
and make Dauid kynge.
32 Of the children of Isachar (which were men of vnderstondynge, whan nede
requyred to knowe what Israel shulde do) two hundreth captaynes, and all their
brethren folowed their worde.
33 Of Sabulon, soch as wente forth in the hoost to ye warre, ready with all
maner of weapens for the battayll, fyftye thousande, beynge of one mynde to kepe
them selues in ordre.
34 Of Nephtali, a thousande captaynes, & with them soch as handled shylde and
speare, seuen and thyrtie thousande.
35 Of Dan, ready harnessed to the battayll, eight and twentye thousande, and
sixe hundreth.
36 Of Asser, soch as wente forth in ye hoost, ready harnessed to the battayll,
fortye thousande
37 From beyonde Iordane, of the Rubenites, Gaddites and the halfe trybe of
Manasses, with all maner of weapens to the battayll, an hudreth and twentye
thousande.
38 All these men of warre, ready harnessed to the battayll, came with a whole
hert vnto Hebron, to make Dauid kynge ouer all Israel. And all Israel besyde
were of one hert, that Dauid shulde be made kynge.
39 And there were they with Dauid thre dayes, eatynge and drynkynge: for their
brethren had prepared for them.
40 And soch neghbours as were aboute them vntyll Isachar, Zabulon and Nephtali,
brought bred vpon Asses, Camels, Mules and oxen to eate: meel, fyges, rasens,
wyne, oyle, oxen, shepe, very many: for there was ioye in Israel.

Chapter 13

1 And Dauid helde a councell with the captaynes ouer thousandes and ouer
hundreds, and with all the prynces,
2 and sayde vnto all the congregacion of Israel: Yf it lyke you, and yf it be of
the LORDE oure God, let vs sende forth on euery syde to oure other brethren in
all the countrees of Israel, and to the prestes and Leuites in the cities where
they haue suburbes, yt they maye be gathered together vnto vs,
3 and let vs fetch the Arke of oure God agayne vnto vs: for by Sauls tyme we
axed after it.
4 The sayde the whole cogregacion, that the same shulde be done, for it pleased
all the people well.
5 So Dauid gathered all Israel together from Sihor of Egipte, tyll a man come
vnto Hemath, to fetch the Arke of God from Kiriath Iearim.
6 And Dauid wente vp wt all Israel to Kiriath Iearim, which lieth in Iuda, to
brynge from thence the Arke of God the LORDE, that sytteth vpo the Cherubins,
where the name is named:
7 and they caused the Arke of God to be caried vpo a new cart from the house of
Abinadab. Vsa and his brethren droue the cart.
8 As for Dauid and all Israel, they played with all their strength before God,
with songes, with harpes, with psalteries, with tabrettes, with Cymbales and
trompes.
9 But whan they came to the barne floore of Chidon, Vsa stretched out his hande
to holde the Arke: for the oxen wente out asyde.
10 Then waxed the wrath of the LORDE fearce ouer Vsa, & smote him, because he
stretched out his hade to the Arke, so yt he dyed there before God.
11 The was Dauid sory, because ye LORDE had made soch a rente vpo Vsa, and
called the place Perez Vsa, vnto this daye.
12 And Dauid stode in feare of God the same daye, & sayde: How shal I brynge ye
Arke of God vnto me?
13 Therfore wolde he not let ye Arke of God be broughte vnto him in to ye cite
of Dauid, but caried it in to ye house of Obed Edom the Gathite.
14 So the Arke of God abode with Obed Edom in his house thre monethes. And ye
LORDE blessed Obed Edoms house and all that he had.

Chapter 14

1 And Hiram ye kynge of Tyre sent messaungers vnto Dauid and Cedre tymber, and
masons and carpenters, to buylde him an house.
2 And Dauid perceaued, that the LORDE had confirmed him kynge ouer Israel: for
his kyngdome increased for his people of Israels sake.
3 And Dauid toke yet mo wyues at Ierusalem, & begat yet mo sonnes & doughters.
4 And the names of them yt were borne vnto him at Ierusalem, are these: Sammua,
Sobab, Nathan, Salomon,
5 Iebehar, Elisua, Elipalet,
6 Noga, Nepheg, Iaphia,
7 Elisamma, Baal Iada, Eliphalet.
8 And whan the Philistynes herde that Dauid was anoynted kynge ouer all Israel,
they wente vp all to seke Dauid. Whan Dauid herde that, he wente forth agaynst
them.
9 And the Philistynes came, and scatered the selues beneth in ye valley of
Rephaim.
10 And Dauid axed councell at God, & sayde: Shal I go vp agaynst the
Philistynes? and wilt thou delyuer them in to my hande? The LORDE sayde vnto
him: Go vp, and I wil delyuer them in to thy hande.
11 And whan they were gone vp to Baal Prasim, Dauid smote them there. And Dauid
sayde: God hath deuyded myne enemies thorow my hande, euen as the water parteth
asunder: therfore called they the place Baal Prasim.
12 And there lefte they their goddes. Then commaunded Dauid to burne them with
fyre.
13 But the Philistynes gat them thither agayne, and scatered them selues beneth
in ye valley.
14 And Dauid axed councell at God agayne. And God sayde vnto him: Thou shalt not
go vp behynde them, but turne the from them, that thou mayest come vpon the ouer
agaynst the Peertrees.
15 So whan thou hearest aboue vpon the Peertrees the noyse of the goynge, go
thou forth then to the batayll: for God is gone forth then before the to smyte
the hoost of the Philistynes.
16 And Dauid dyd as God commaunded him. And they smote the hoost of the
Philistynes from Gibeon forth vnto Gaser.
17 And Dauids name was noysed out in all londes. And the LORDE caused ye feare
of him to come vpo all the Heythen.

Chapter 15

1 And he buylded him houses in the cite of Dauid, & made ready a place for ye
Arke of God, & pitched a Tabernacle for it.
2 At that tyme sayde Dauid: The Arke of God is not to be borne, but onely of ye
Leuites: for them hath the LORDE chosen to beare the Arke of the LORDE, and to
mynister vnto him for euer.
3 Therfore gathered Dauid all Israel together vnto Ierusalem, to brynge vp the
Arke of the LORDE vnto the place which he had prepared for it.
4 And Dauid broughte the children of Aaron & the Leuites together.
5 Of the children of Kahath: Vriel the chefe wt his brethren, an C. and twentye.
6 Of the children of Merari: Asaia the chefe wt his brethre, two C. and twentye.
7 Of the childre of Gerson: Ioel the chefe wt his brethren, an C. and thirtie.
8 Of ye childre of Elizaphan: Semaia the chefe wt his brethren, two hundreth.
9 Of the childre of Hebron: Eliel the chefe, with his brethre, foure score.
10 Of the children of Vsiel: Amminadab the chefe, with his brethren, an hudreth
and twolue.
11 And Dauid called Sadoc and Abiathar the prestes, and the Leuites, namely
Vriel, Asaia, Ioeli, Semaia, Eliel, Aminadab,
12 and sayde vnto them: Ye are the heades of ye fathers amonge the Leuites:
sanctifye yor selues therfore & youre brethre, yt ye maye brynge vp the Arke of
the LORDE God of Israel, to the place yt I haue prepared for it.
13 For a fore whan ye were not there, the LORDE oure God made a rent amonge vs,
because we soughte him not, as we shulde haue done.
14 So ye prestes & the Leuites halowed the selues, yt they mighte brynge vp the
Arke of the LORDE God of Israel.
15 And the children of Leui bare the Arke of God the LORDE vpon their shulders
with the staues theron, as Moses comaunded acordinge to ye worde of the LORDE.
16 And Dauid spake vnto ye rulers of ye Leuites, that they shulde ordeyne some
of their brethren to be syngers with psalteries, harpes and loude instrumentes,
and Cimbales, to synge loude with ioye.
17 Then the Leuites appoynted Heman ye sonne of Ioel: and of his brethren Assaph
the sonne of Barachias: and of the children of Merari their brethren, Ethan the
sonne of Cusaia:
18 and with them their brethren of the seconde course, namely Zacharias,
Iaesiel, Semiramoth, Iehiel, Vnni, Eliab, Benaia, Maeseia, Mathithia,
Elipheleia, Mikneia, Obed Edom, Ieiel, the dore kepers.
19 For Heman, Assaph and Ethan were syngers, with brasen belles makynge a loude
noyse:
20 but Zacharias, Iaesiel, Semiramoth, Iehiel, Vnni, Eliab, Maeseia & Benaia
with Phalteries to Alamoth:
21 Mathithia, Elipheleia, Mikneia, Obed Edom, Ieiel & Asasia with harpes to
synge aboue them on hye.
22 Chenania the ruler of the Leuites was the master of Musick to teach them for
to synge, for he was a man of vnderstondinge.
23 And Barachias and Elcana were the dorekepers of the Arke.
24 But Sachania, Iosaphat, Nathaneel, Amasai, Zacharias, Benaia, Elieser the
prestes, blewe the trompettes before ye Arke of God. And Obed Edom and Iehia
were dorekepers of the Arke.
25 So Dauid and the Elders of Israel, and the captaynes ouer thousandes wente vp
to fetch the Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE out of the house of Obed Edom wt
ioye.
26 And whan God had helped the Leuites yt bare the Arke of the LORDES couenaunt,
there were offred seuen bullockes & seuen rames,
27 And Dauid had a lynne garment vpo him, and so had all the Leuites yt bare the
Arke, and ye syngers, and Chenania the master of Musick wt the syngers. Dauid
had an ouerbody cote of lynnen vpon him also.
28 Thus all Israel brought vp the Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE with myrth,
with trompettes, tabrettes, & loude Cymbales, with psalteries and harpes.
29 Now whan the Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE came in to the cite of Dauid,
Michol ye doughter of Saul loked out at a wyndowe: & wha she sawe kynge Dauid
daunsynge & playenge, she despysed him in hir hert.

Chapter 16

1 And wha they brought in the Arke of God, they set it in ye Tabernacle, that
Dauid had pitched for it, and offred burntofferynges & thankofferynges before
God.
2 And wha Dauid had ended the burntofferynges and thankofferynges, he blessed
the people in the name of the LORDE,
3 & distributed vnto euery man in Israel (both vnto man and woman) a cake of
bred, and a pece of flesh and a meece of potage.
4 And he appoynted before the Arke of ye LORDE certayne Leuites to mynister,
that they shulde geue prayse, thankes and loauinges vnto the LORDE God of
Israel:
5 namely Assaph the first, Zacharias the seconde, Ieiel, Semiramoth, Iehiel,
Mathithia, Eliab, Benaia, Obed Edom and Iehiel, with psalteries and harpes. But
Assaph with loude Cymbales.
6 Benaia and Iehasiel the prestes with tabrettes, allwaye before the Arke of ye
couenaunt of God.
7 At the same tyme ordeyned Dauid first of all to geue thakes vnto the LORDE by
Assaph and his brethren.
8 O geue thankes vnto the LORDE, call vpon his name, tell the people what
thinges he hath done.
9 O let youre songes be of him: prayse him, and let youre talkynge be of all his
wonderous workes.
10 Geue his holy name a good reporte: let ye hert of them reioyce, that seke the
LORDE.
11 O seke the LORDE and his strength, seke his face euermore.
12 Remebre his maruelous workes that he hath done, his wonders, and the
iudgmetes of his mouth.
13 Ye sede of Israel his seruaunt, ye children of Iacob his chosen.
14 He is the LORDE oure God, his iudgmetes are in all londes.
15 Be myndefull euer of his couenaut what he hath commaunded in to a thousande
generacions.
16 Which he made with Abraham, & his ooth vnto Isaac.
17 And he comfirmed the same vnto Iacob for a perpetuall lawe, and to Israel for
an euerlastinge couenaunt.
18 And sayde: Vnto the wyl I geue ye londe of Canaan, ye metelyne of yor
inheritaunce.
19 Wha they were yet but small & fewe in nobre, and straungers in the same
londe.
20 And they wente from one nacion to another, & from one realme to another
people.
21 He suffred no man to hurte them, and reproued euen kynges for their sakes.
22 Touch not myne anoynted, & do my prophetes no harme.
23 O synge vnto ye LORDE, let all ye earth be tellynge of his saluacion from
daye to daye.
24 Declare his holynes amoge the Heythe, & his wonderous workes amonge ye
people.
25 For the LORDE is greate, and can not worthely be praysed, and more to he had
in awe then all goddes.
26 As for all the goddes of the Heythe, they are but Idols: but it is the LORDE
that made the heauens.
27 Thankesgeuynge and worshipe are before him, strength and ioye is in his
place.
28 Ascrybe vnto the LORDE ye kynreds of nacions: ascrybe vnto the LORDE worshipe
and strength.
29 Ascrybe vnto the LORDE the honoure of his name: brynge presentes, and come
before him, and worshipe ye LORDE in ye bewtye of holynes.
30 Let the whole earth stode in awe of him: he hath made the compase of the
worlde so fast, that it can not be moued.
31 Let the heauens reioyse, and let the earth be glad: and let it be tolde
amonge the Heythen, that the LORDE reigneth.
32 Let the See make a noyse, and the fulnesse therof: let the felde be ioyfull,
and all that therin is.
33 Let all the trees in the wod leape for ioye before the LORDE, for he commeth
to iudge the earth.
34 O geue thankes vnto the LORDE, for he is gracious: and his mercy endureth for
euer.
35 And saye: Helpe vs O God oure Sauioure, and gather vs together, and delyuer
vs from the Heythen, that we maye geue thankes vnto yi holy name, and synge
prayses vnto the in thy Psalmes.
36 Praysed be the LORDE God of Israel from euerlastinge to euerlastinge: and let
all people saye, Amen, And: Prayse be vnto the LORDE.
37 So he lefte Assaph and his brethren there before the Arke of the couenaunt of
the LORDE, to mynister allwaye before the Arke, euery daye his daye worke.
38 But Obed Edom and their brethren, eight and thre score, and Obed Edom the
sonne of Iedithun, and Hossa, to be dore kepers.
39 And Sadoc ye prest, & his brethre the prestes, lefte he before the habitacion
of the LORDE vpon the hye place at Gibeo,
40 to offre burntsacrifices daylie vnto the LORDE vpon the altare of
burntofferynges in the mornynge & in the euenynge, as it is wrytten in the lawe
of the LORDE, which he comaunded vnto Israel.
41 And with them Heman & Iedithun, and ye other chosen, which were named by name
to geue thankes vnto the LORDE, because his mercy endureth for euer.
42 And with them Heman & Iedithun to stryke vpon the tabrettes and Cymbales, and
the musicall instrumentes of God. As for the childre of Iedithun, he made them
dorekepers.
43 So all the people departed, euery one to his house: and Dauid returned also
to blesse his house.

Chapter 17

1 It fortuned wha Dauid dwelt in his house, he sayde vnto ye prophet Nathan:
Beholde, I dwell in a house of Ceder, and the Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE
is amonge the curtaynes.
2 Nathan saide vnto Dauid: What so euer is in thine hert, that do: for God is
with ye.
3 But the same night came ye worde of God vnto Nathan, and sayde:
4 Go and speake to Dauid my seruaunt: Thus sayeth the LORDE: Thou shalt not
buylde me an house to be an habitacio:
5 for I haue dwelt in no house sence the daye that I broughte forth the children
of Israel, vnto this daye: But where the Tabernacle and habitacion hath bene,
there haue I bene where so euer
6 I haue walked in all Israel. Spake I euer to eny of the Iudges in Israel (whom
I commaunded to kepe my people) and sayde: Wherfore do ye not buylde me an house
of Cedre tymber?
7 So shalt thou speake now vnto my seruaunt Dauid: Thus sayeth the LORDE
Zebaoth: I toke the from the pasture behynde the shepe, that thou shuldest be
the prynce ouer my people,
8 and haue bene with the whither so euer thou wetest, and haue roted out all
thine enemies before the, and haue made the a name, acordinge to the name of the
greate men that are vpo earth.
9 And for my people of Israel, I wyll appoynte them a place, and wyl plante
them, that they maye dwell there, and nomore to be remoued. And the childre of
wickednes shal oppresse them nomore,
10 like as afore tyme, whan I comaunded the Iudges ouer my people of Israel. And
I wyl subdue all thine enemies, and do declare vnto the, that the LORDE wyl
buylde the an house.
11 But whan thy dayes are fulfilled, that thou departest hence with yi fathers,
I wyl after the rayse vp yi sede, which shall be eue one of thy sonnes: his
kyngdome wyl I stabli?she,
12 he shal buylde me an house, & I wyl make his seate sure for euer.
13 I wyl be his father, and he shal be my sonne. And I wyl not withdrawe my
mercy from him, as I haue withdrawen it fro him that was before the:
14 But I wyll set him in my house and in my kyngdome for euer, so that his seate
shalbe sure for euermore.
15 And wha Nathan had spoken vnto Dauid acordinge to all these wordes & all this
vision,
16 kynge Dauid came and sat him downe before the LORDE, and sayde: O LORDE God,
who am I? and what is my house, yt thou hast broughte me thus farre?
17 And this (O God) hast thou thoughte yet to litle, but hast spoken of thy
seruauntes house yet longe for to come. And thou LORDE God hast loked downe vpon
me from aboue, euen as one man loketh vpon another.
18 What more shal Dauid saye vnto the, yt thou bryngest yi seruaunt to soch
honoure? Thou knowest thy seruaunt
19 O LORDE, for thy seruauntes sake and acordinge to thy hert hast thou done all
these greate thinges, that thou mightest shewe all greate thinges vnto thy
seruaunt.
20 LORDE, there is none lykel the, and there is no God but thou, of whom we haue
herde with oure eares.
21 And where is there a people vpon earth as thy people of Israel, where God
wente to delyuer him a people, and to make him selfe a name thorow greate &
terrible thinges, to cast out the Heythen before thy people, whom thou hast
delyuered out of Egipte?
22 and ye people of Israel hast thou made yi people for euer, and thou LORDE art
become their God.
23 Now LORDE, let the worde be verified for euer, that thou hast spoken ouer thy
seruaunt and ouer his house, & do as thou hast spoken:
24 and let thy name endure and be magnified for euer, that it maye sayde: The
LORDE Zebaoth, the God of Israel is the God in Israel, and that the house of thy
seruaunt Dauid maye be stably?shed before the:
25 for thou LORDE hast opened the eare of yi seruaunt, that thou wilt buylde him
an house. Therfore hath thy seruaunt founde (confydence) to make his prayer
before the.
26 Now LORDE, thou art God, and hast promysed soch good vnto thy seruaunt.
27 Begynne now to blesse the house of thy seruaunt, that it maye be euermore
before the: for loke what thou blessest (O LORDE) the same is blessed for euer.

Chapter 18

1 After this smote Dauid the Philistynes, and subdued them, and toke Gath & the
vyllages therof out of the hande of the Philistynes.
2 He smote the Moabites likewyse, so that the Moabites were subdued vnto Dauid,
and gaue him trybute.
3 He smote Hadad Eser also ye kynge of Zoba in Hemath, whan he wente to set vp
his power by the water Euphrates.
4 And Dauid toke from him a thousande charettes, seuen thousande horsmen, and
twetye thousande fote men. And Dauid lamed all the charettes, and kepte an
hundreth charettes ouer.
5 And the Syrias came from Damascon, to helpe Hadad Eser the kynge of Zoba.
Howbeit Dauid smote two & twentie thousande of the same Syrians,
6 and layed men of warre at Damascon in Syria, so that the Syrians were subdued
vnto Dauid, and broughte him trybute. For the LORDE helped Dauid, whither so
euer he wente.
7 And Dauid toke the shyldes of golde, yt Hadad Esers seruautes had, & broughte
the to Ierusale.
8 And out of Tibehath & Chun the cities of Hadad Eser, toke Dauid very moch
brasse, wherof Salomon made the brasen lauer, and pilers, and brasen vessels.
9 And wha Thogu the kynge of Hemath herde, yt Dauid had smytten all ye power of
Hadad Eser,
10 he sent his sonne Hadora vnto kynge Dauid, to salute him & to blesse him,
because he had foughte wt Hadad Eser, & smytte hi (for Thogu had warre wt Hadad
Eser) and all the same vessels of golde, syluer and of brasse,
11 dyd kynge Dauid consecrate vnto the LORDE, with the syluer and golde that he
had taken from the Heythe, namely, from the Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites,
Philistynes, and Amalechites.
12 And Abisai the sonne of Zeru Ia smote eightene thousande of the Edomites in
the Salt valley,
13 and layed me of warre in Edomea, so that all the Edomites were subdued vnto
Dauid: for ye LORDE helped Dauid, whither so euer he wente.
14 Thus Dauid reigned ouer all Israel, and executed iudgment and righteousnes
vnto all the people.
15 Ioab the sonne of Zeru Ia was captayne ouer the hoost. Iosaphat the sonne of
Ahilud was Chaunceler.
16 Sadoc the sonne of Achitob, and Ahimelech ye sonne of Abiathar, were prestes.
Sauesa was Scrybe.
17 Benaia the sonne of Ioiada was ouer the Chrethians & Plethians. And Dauids
sonnes were chefe at ye kynges hande.

Chapter 19

1 And after this dyed Nahas ye kynge of the childre of Ammon, and his sonne was
kynge in his steade.
2 Then sayde Dauid: I wil do mercy vpon Hanun the sonne of Nahas, for his father
dyd mercy vpon me: and so he sent messaungers to comforte him ouer his father.
And wha Dauids seruauntes came in to the londe of the children of Ammon vnto
Hanun to comforte him,
3 the prynces of the children of Ammon sayde vnto Hanun: Thinkest thou that
Dauid honoureth thy father in thy sighte, that he hath sent coforters vnto the?
Yee his seruauntes are come vnto the, to search and to ouerthrowe, and to spye
out the londe.
4 Then toke Hanun the seruauntes of Dauid, and shoue them, & cut the halfe of
their garmentes of, eue by the loynes, & so let the go.
5 And they wente their waye, & sent men to tell Dauid. Neuertheles he sent to
mete them (for ye men were put to greate shame) and the kynge sayde: Abyde at
Iericho, tyll youre beerdes be growne, and then come agayne.
6 Whan the childre of Ammon sawe, that they stynked in ye sighte of Dauid, both
Hanun and the children of Ammon sent a thousande taletes of syluer, to hyre
charettes and horsmen out of Mesopotamia, out of Maecha and out of Zoba:
7 and hyred two and thirtie thousande charettes, & ye kynge of Maecha with his
people, which came & pitched their tentes before Medba. And the children of
Ammon gathered them selues together out of their cities, and came to the
battayll.
8 Whan Dauid herde that, he sent Ioab thither with all the hoost of the men of
armes.
9 And the childre of Ammon were gone forth, and prepared them selues to the
battayll before the gate of the cite. But the kynges yt were come, kepte them
asyde in the felde.
10 Now wha Ioab sawe that the battayll was agaynst him both before and behynde,
he chose of all the best yonge men in Israel, and prepared him selfe agaynst ye
Syrians.
11 As for ye residue of the people, he put them vnder the hande of Abisai his
brother, that they shulde prepare them selues agaynst the children of Ammon,
12 and he sayde: Yf ye Syrias be to mightie for me, helpe thou me: but yf the
childre of Ammon be to stroge for ye, I shall helpe the:
13 take a good corage vnto the, and let vs quyte oure selues manly for oure
people and for the cities of oure God: neuertheles the LORDE do what pleaseth
him.
14 And Ioab made him forth with ye people that was with him, to fighte agaynst
ye Syrians: & they fled before him.
15 And whan the children of Ammon sawe yt the Syrians fled, they fled also
before Abisai his brother, and wente in to the cite. And Ioab came to Ierusalem.
16 But whan the Syrians sawe that they were smytte before Israel, they sent
messaungers, and broughte forth ye Syrians which were beyonde the water. And
Sophach the chefe captayne of Hadad Eser wente before them.
17 Wha this was tolde Dauid, he gathered all Israel together, and wente ouer
Iordane. And whan he came at them, he set ye battayll in araye agaynst them. And
Dauid prepared him selfe to ye battayll agaynst ye Syrians, & they foughte with
him:
18 but ye Syrias fled before Israel. And Dauid slewe of the Syrians seuen
thousande charettes, & fortye thousande fote men. And Sophach the chefe captayne
slewe he also.
19 And whan Hadad Esers seruauntes sawe that they were smytte before Israel,
they made peace wt Dauid & his seruauntes. And the Syrians wolde helpe the
childre of Ammon nomore.

Chapter 20

1 And whan ye yeare came aboute, what tyme as ye kynges vse to go forth, Ioab
broughte the power of the hoost, & destroyed the londe of the children of Ammon,
and came and layed sege vnto Rabba. But Dauid abode at Ierusalem. And Ioab smote
Rabba, and brake it downe.
2 And Dauid toke their kynges crowne from his heade, and founde the weighte of a
talent of golde theron, & precious stones. And it was set vpo Dauids heade. And
very moch spoyle caried he out of the cite.
3 As for the people that were therin, he broughte the forth, & parted them in
sunder wt sawes, & hokes & betels of yron. Thus dyd Dauid vnto all ye cities of
the childre of Ammon. And Dauid departed againe, with the people vnto Ierusalem.
4 Afterwarde arose there warre at Gasar with the Philistynes. Then Sibechai ye
Husathite smote Sibai, which was one of the children of Rephaim, and he subdued
him.
5 And there arose warre agayne wt the Philistynes. The Elhamah ye sonne of Iair
smote Lahemi ye brother of Goliath ye Gathite, whose speares staff was life a
weeuers lome.
6 Afterwarde was there a battayll at Gath, where there was a man of a greate
stature, yt had sixe fyngers and sixe toes, which make foure and twentye. And he
was borne also of Rapha, and spake despytefully vnto Israel.
7 But Ionathas the sonne of Simea Dauids brother smote him.
8 These were the childre of Rapha at Gath, & fell thorow ye hande of Dauid, and
of his seruauntes.

Chapter 21

1 And Sathan stode agaynst Israel, & entysed Dauid to nombre Israel.
2 And Dauid sayde vnto Ioab & to ye rulers of the people: Go yor waye, nombre
Israel from Berseba vnto Dan, and brynge me the nombre of the, that I maye knowe
it.
3 Ioab sayde: The LORDE make his people an hundreth tymes mo then they are now.
But my lorde O kynge, are they not all my lordes seruauntes? Why doth my lorde
then axe therafter? Wherfore shal there a trespace come vpon Israel?
4 Neuertheles the kynges worde preuayled agaynst Ioab. And Ioab wente forth, and
walked thorow all Israel, and came to Ierusalem,
5 and delyuered vnto Dauid ye nombre of the people that was tolde. And of all
Israel there were a thousande tymes a thousande, and an hundreth thousande men,
that drue out the swerde: and of Iuda foure hundreth thousande and seuetye
thousande men, which drue out the swerde.
6 As for Leui and Ben Iamin, he nombred them not amonge these: for the kynges
worde was abhominable vnto Ioab.
7 But this displeased God righte sore: for he smote Israel.
8 And Dauid sayde vnto God: I haue synned greuously, that I haue done this. But
now take awaye the trespace of thy seruaunt: for I haue done very vnwysely.
9 And the LORDE spake vnto Gad Dauids Seer, & sayde:
10 Go speake to Dauid, & saye: Thus saieth the LORDE: Thre thinges laye I before
the, chose ye one of them, yt I maye do it vnto the.
11 And wha Gad came to Dauid, he spake vnto him: Thus sayeth the LORDE: Chose ye
12 ether thre yeare derth, or thre monethes to flye before thine aduersaries, &
before the swerde of thine enemies, yt it maye ouertake the: or thre dayes ye
swerde of the LORDE, & pestilece in the londe, yt the angell of the LORDE maye
destroye in all ye coastes of Israel. Loke now what answere I shal geue vnto him
yt sent me.
13 Dauid sayde vnto Gad: I am in greate trouble: yet wyl I rather fall in to ye
hande of the LORDE, for his mercy is exceadynge greate, & I wil not fall in to
the handes of men.
14 Then dyd the LORDE cause pestilence to come into Israel, so that there fell
of Israel thre score & ten thousande me.
15 And God sent the angell to Ierusale for to destroye it. And euen in the
destruccion the LORDE considered, and he repeted of the euell, and sayde vnto
the angell ye destroyer: It is ynough, holde now thy hande. The angell of the
LORDE stode besyde ye barne of Arnan ye Iebusite.
16 And Dauid lifte vp his eyes, and sawe the angell of ye LORDE stondinge
betwene heaue and earth, and a naked swerde in his hande stretched out ouer
Ierusalem. Then Dauid and ye Elders beynge clothed with sack cloth, fell vpo
their faces.
17 And Dauid sayde vnto God: Am not I he that caused the people to be nombred? I
am he that hath synned and done euell: as for these shepe, what haue they done?
LORDE my God, let thine hande be agaynst me and agaynst my fathers house, and
not agaynst thy people to plage them.
18 And the angell sayde vnto Gad, that he shulde speake vnto Dauid, that Dauid
shulde shulde go vp, & set vp an altare in the barne of Arnan the Iebusite.
19 So Dauid wente vp acordinge to ye worde of Gad, which he spake in the name of
the LORDE.
20 But wha Arnan turned him, and sawe the angell (and his foure sonnes with him)
they hyd the selues: for Arnan thro?shed wheate.
21 Now whan Dauid came to Arnan, Arnan loked, and was aware of Dauid, and wete
forth out of the barne, and worshipped Dauid with his face to the grounde.
22 And Dauid sayde vnto Arnan: Geue me rowme in the barne, to buylde an altare
vnto the LORDE therin: for ye full money shalt thou geue it me, that the plage
maye ceasse from the people.
23 But Arnan sayde vnto Dauid: Take it vnto the, and let my lorde the kynge do
as pleaseth him. Beholde, that oxe geue I for a burntofferynge, and those
vessels to the oxe, and wheate for the meatofferynge, I geue it all.
24 Neuertheles the kynge sayde vnto Arnan: Not so, but for ye full money wyl I
bye it: for that which is thine wyl not I take for the LORDE, and offre a
burntofferynge for naughte.
25 So Dauid gaue Arnan for ye rowme, sixe hundreth Sycles of golde in weight.
26 And there buylded Dauid an altare vnto ye LORDE, & offred burntofferynges &
slaynofferynges. And whan he called vpo the LORDE, he herde him thorow the fyre
from heaue vpon ye altare of the burntofferynge.
27 And ye LORDE sayde vnto the angell, that he shulde put his swerde in to his
sheeth.
28 At the same tyme wha Dauid sawe, that the LORDE had herde him vpon the corne
floore of Arnan ye Iebusite, he dyd sacrifice there.
29 For ye habitacion of ye LORDE which Moses had made in the wyldernes, and the
altare of burntofferynges, was at that tyme in the hye place at Gibeon.
30 But Dauid coulde not go thither to seke God before it, for he feared the
swerde of the LORDES angell.

Chapter 22

1 And Dauid sayde: Here shal be ye house of God ye LORDE, and this the altare of
burntofferynges for Israel.
2 And Dauid comaunded to gather together the straungers that were in ye londe of
Israel, and appoynted masons to hewe stone for the buyldinge of the house of
God.
3 And Dauid prepared moch yron for nales in the dores of the portes, and for
soch thinges as were to be naled together, and so moch brasse, that is was not
to be weyed:
4 and Cedre trees innumerable: for they of Zidon & Tyre brought Dauid moch Cedre
tymbre:
5 for Dauid thoughte, Salomo my sonne is but a childe and tender: But the house
that shal be buylded vnto the LORDE, shal be greate, that his name & prayse maye
be exalted in all londes, therfore wyl I prouyde for him. So Dauid made greate
prouysion before his death.
6 And he called Salomon his sonne, & commaunded him to buylde the house of LORDE
God of Israel,
7 and sayde vnto him: My sonne, I was minded to buylde an house vnto the name of
the LORDE my God,
8 but the worde of ye LORDE came vnto me, and sayde: Thou hast shed moch bloude,
and strycken many battayls, therfore shalt thou not buylde an house vnto my
name, for as moch as thou hast shed so moch bloude vpon the earth before me.
9 Beholde, the sonne which shal be borne vnto the, shal be a quyete man: and I
wyl cause him to be in rest from al his enemies on euery syde, for his name
shalbe Salomon: for I wyll geue peace and rest vpon Israel as longe as he
lyueth.
10 He shal buylde an house vnto my name. He shal be my sonne, and I wyll be his
father. And I wyl stablyshe ye seate of his kyngdome vpo Israel for euer.
11 Now my sonne, the LORDE shal be wyth the, and thou shalt prospere, that thou
mayest buylde an house vnto the LORDE thy God, acordynge as he hath spoken of
the.
12 The LORDE also shal geue the wy?dome & vnderstondynge, and shal commytte
Israel vnto the, that thou mayest kepe the lawe of the LORDE thy God.
13 But then shal thou prospere, yf thou take hede to do after the ordynaunces
and lawes which the LORDE commaunded Moses vnto Israel. Be stronge, and take a
good corage vnto the, feare not, and be not faynt harted.
14 Beholde, I haue in my pouerte prouyded for the house of the LORDE, an
hundreth thousande talentes of golde, and a thousande tymes a thousande talentes
of syluer, and brasse and yron without nombre: for there is so moch of it. And
tymbre and stone haue I prepared, thou mayest get more therof.
15 Thou hast many workmen also, mesons and carpenters in stone and tymber, and
all maner of men that haue vnderstondinge in all worke
16 off golde, syluer, brasse, and yron without nombre. Yet get the vp, and be
doynge, and the LORDE shal be with the.
17 And Dauid commaunded all the rulers of Israel, to helpe Salomon his sonne,
and sayde:
18 Is not the LORDE youre God with you, and hath geuen you rest on euery syde?
for he hath delyuered the inhabiters of the londe in to youre handes, and the
londe is subdued before the LORDE and before his people.
19 Geue ouer youre hert now therfore and youre soule, to seke the LORDE youre
God, and get you vp, and buylde a Sanctuary vnto the LORDE God, that the Arke of
the couenaunt of the LORDE and the holy vessels of God, maye be brought in to
the house, which shalbe buylded vnto the name of the LORDE.

Chapter 23

1 So Dauid made Salomon his sonne kynge ouer Israel, whan he himselfe was olde,
and had lyued ynough.
2 And Dauid gathered all the rulers in Israel together, and the prestes &
Leuites,
3 to nombre ye Leuites from thirtie yeare olde & aboue. And ye nombre of the
(which were stroge men) fro heade to heade, was eight and thirtie thousande:
4 of whom there were foure & twentie thousande, which dyd their diligence in the
worke ouer ye house of the LORDE, and sixe thousande officers and Iudges,
5 and foure thousande porters, & foure thousande that songe prayses vnto ye
LORDE with instrumentes, which he had made to synge prayse with all.
6 And Dauid made the ordinaunce amonge the children of Leui, namely amoge
Gerson, Kahath & Merari.
7 The Gersonites were: Laedan and Simei.
8 The children of Laedan: the first, Iehiel, Sethan, and Ioel, these thre.
9 The children of Simei were: Salomith, Hasiel and Haran, these thre. These were
the chefe amonge the fathers of Laedan.
10 These also were the children of Simei: Iahath, Sina, Ieus and Bria, these
foure were Simeis children also.
11 Iahath was the first, Sina the seconde. As for Ieus and Bria, they had not
many childre, therfore were they couted but for one fathers house.
12 The childre of Kahath were: Amram, Iezehar, Hebron and Vsiel, these foure.
13 The childre of Amram were: Aaron and Moses. As for Aaron, he was separated,
to be sanctified for the Most holy, he & his sonnes for euer, to burne incense
before the LORDE, & to mynister and blesse in ye name of the LORDE for euermore.
14 And the children of Moses the man of God were named amonge ye trybe of the
Leuites.
15 The childre of Moses were Gerson and Elieser.
16 The children of Gerson, the fyrst was Sebuel.
17 The children of Elieser, the fyrst was Rehabia & Elieser had none other
children. But ye childre of Rehabia were many ther ouer.
18 The children of Iezehar were: Salomith the fyrst.
19 The children of Hebron were: Ieria the fyrst, Amaria the seconde, Iahasiel
the thirde and Iakmeam ye fourth.
20 The children of Vsiel were: Micha the fyrst and Iesia the seconde.
21 The children of Merari were: Maheli & Musi. The children of Maheli were:
Eleasar and Cis.
22 And Eleasar dyed, and had no sonnes but doughters. And the children of Cis
their brethren toke them.
23 The children of Musi were: Maheli, Eder and Ieremoth, these thre.
24 These are the children of Leui amonge their fathers houses, and the chefest
of the fathers, which were counted after the nombre of ye names heade by heade:
which executed the worke of the offices in the house of the LORDE from thirtie
yeare olde & aboue.
25 For Dauid sayde: The LORDE God of Israel hath geuen his people rest, & shall
dwell at Ierusalem for euer.
26 Amonge ye Leuites also were the childre of Leui nombred from thirtie yeare
olde and aboue, that they neded not to beare ye Habitacion with all the vessels
of their office,
27 but acordinge to ye last wordes of Dauid,
28 yt they shulde stonde vnder the hande of the children of Aaron, to mynister
in the house of the LORDE in the courte, and to the chestes, and for purifyenge,
and to all maner of sanctifyenge, and to euery worke of the office in the house
of God.
29 And for ye shewbred, for the fyne floure, for the meatoffrynge, for the
vnleuended wafers, for the pannes, for ye fryenge, and for all maner of weight
and measure.
30 And in the mornynge to stonde for to geue thankes and to prayse the LORDE,
and in the euenynge likewyse.
31 And vpon all Sabbathes, Newmones and feastes to offre all the burntofferynges
vnto the LOROE, acordinge to the nombre and ordre, allwaye before the LORDE:
32 to wayte vpon the Tabernacle of witnesse and of the Sactuary, and vpon their
brethre the children of Aaron, to mynister in the house of the LORDE.

Chapter 24

1 This was ye ordinaunce of the childre of Aaron. The children of Aaron were,
Nadab, Abihu, Eleasar and Ithamar.
2 But Nadab and Abihu dyed before their fathers, and had no children. And
Eleasar and Ithamar were prestes.
3 And Dauid ordred them after his maner: Sadoc out of the children of Eleasar,
and Ahimelech out of the children of Ithamar, acordinge to their nombre and
office.
4 And there were mo chefe stronge men founde amonge the children of Eleasar,
then the children of Ithamar. And he ordeyned them after this maner: namely,
sixtene out of ye childre of Eleasar to be rulers thorow out their fathers
house: & eight of the children of Ithamar thorow out their fathers house.
5 Neuertheles he ordeyned them by lot, because that both the pryncipall of the
children of Eleasar and of Ithamar were in ye Sanctuary, and chefe before God.
6 And the Scrybe Semeia the sonne of Nethaneel one of the Leuites, wrote them vp
before ye kynge and before the rulers, and before Sadoc the prest, & before
Ahimelech the sonne of Abiathar, & before the chefe of the fathers amonge the
prestes & Leuites: namely one fathers house for Eleasar, and the other for
Ithamar.
7 And the first lot fell vpon Ioiarib, the seconde vpon Iedana,
8 the thirde vpo Harim, the fourth vpon Seorim,
9 the fifth vpo Malchia, the sixte vpon Meiamin,
10 the seuenth vpon Hakoz, the eight vpon Abia,
11 the nyenth vpon Iesua, the tenth vpon Sechania,
12 the eleuenth vpon Eliasib, the twolueth vpon Iakim,
13 the thirtenth vpon Hupa, the fourtenth vpon Iesebeab,
14 the fiftenth vpon Bilga, the sixtenth vpon Immer,
15 the seuententh vpon Hesir, the eightenth vpon Hapizez,
16 the nyententh vpon Pethahia, the twentieth vpon Iehe?kel,
17 the one and twentieth vpon Iachin, the two & twentieth vpon Samul,
18 the thre & twentieth vpo Dalaia, ye foure and twentieth vpo Maasia.
19 This is their course after their office, to go in to the house of the LORDE,
acordinge to their maner vnder their father Aaron, as the LORDE God of Israel
commaunded him.
20 Of the children of Leui amonge the children of Amram, was Subael. Amonge the
children of Subael, was Iohdea.
21 Amonge the children of Rehabia, was ye first Iesia.
22 Amonge the Iezeharites was Selomoth. Amonge the children of Selomoth was
Iahath.
23 The children of Hebron were: Ieria ye first, Amaria the seconde, Iehasiel the
thirde, Iakneam the fourth.
24 The children of Vsiel were: Micha. Amoge the children of Micha was Samir.
25 The brother of Micha was Iesia. Amonge the children of Iesia was Zacharias.
26 The children of Merari were: Maheli & Musi, whose sonne was Iaesia.
27 The childre of Merari of his sonne Iaesia were: Soham, Sacur & Ibri.
28 Maheli had Eleasar: for he had no sonnes.
29 Of Cis, the children of Cis were: Ierahmeel and Musi.
30 The children of Musi were, Maheli, Eder and Ieremoth. These are the childre
of ye Leuites thorow out ye house of their fathers.
31 And the lot was cast for them also besyde their brethren the children of
Aaron, in the presence of kynge Dauid and Sadoc and Ahimelech, and before the
chefe fathers amonge the prestes & Leuites, as well for the leest brother as for
the chefest amonge the fathers.

Chapter 25

1 And Dauid with the chefe captaynes sundered to the offices amonge ye childre
of Assaph, Heman & Iedithun ye prophetes with harpes, psalteries & Cymbales, and
they were nombred vnto the worke acordynge to their offyce.
2 Amonge the childre of Assaph was Sakur, Ioseph, Nethania, Asarela, childre of
Assaph vnder Assaph which prophecyed besyde ye kynge.
3 Of Iedithun: The children of Iedithun were, Gedalia, Zori, Iesaia, Hasabia,
Mathithia (Simei) these sixe vnder their father Iedithun wt harpes, whose
prophecienge was to geue thankes and to praise the LORDE.
4 Of Heman: The children of Heman were Bukia, Mathania, Vsiel, Sebuel, Ierimoth,
Hanania, Hanani, Eliatha, Gilthi, Romamthieser, Ia?baksa, Mallochi, Hothir and
Mehesioth.
5 All these were the children of Hema the kynges Seer in the wordes of God to
lyfte vp the horne: for God gaue Heman fourtene sonnes & thre daughters.
6 All these were vnder their fathers Assaph Iedithun and Heman, to synge in the
house of the LORDE with Cymbales, Psalteries & harpes, acordynge to the office
in the house of God besyde the kynge.
7 And their nombre with their brethren, which were taughte in the songe of the
LORDE (euery one hauynge vnderstondinge) was two hundreth & eight and foure
score.
8 And they cast the lottes ouer their offyce, for the leest as for the greatest,
for the master as for the scolar.
9 And the first Lot fell vpo Ioseph which was of Assaph: the seconde vpo Gedolia
wt his brethre and sonnes, of whom there were twolue.
10 The thirde vpo Sacur with his sonnes & brethre, of who there were twolue.
11 The fourth vpon Iezri with his sonnes and brethren, of whom there were
twolue.
12 The fyfth vpo Nethania with his sonnes and brethre, of whom there were
twolue.
13 The syxte vpon Bukia with his sonnes and brethren, of whom there were twolue.
14 The seuenth vpon Iesreela with his sonnes and brethre, of whom there were
twolue.
15 The eighte vpon Iesaia with his sonnes and brethren, of whom there were
twolue.
16 The nyenth vpon Mathania with his sonnes and brethre, of whom there were
twolue.
17 The tenth vpon Simei with his sonnes and brethren, of whom there were twolue.
18 The eleuenth vpon Asraeel with his sonnes and brethren, of whom there were
twolue.
19 The twolueth vpon Hasabia with his sonnes and brethre, of whom there were
twolue.
20 The thirtenth vpon Subael with his sonnes and brethren, of whom there were
twolue.
21 The fourtenth vpon Mathithia with his sonnes & brethre, of whom there were
twolue.
22 The fyftenth vpo Ieremoth with his sonnes and brethre, of whom there were
twolue.
23 The syxtenth vpon Anania with his sonnes and brethren of whom there were
twolue.
24 The seuenteth vpon Ia?bekasa with his sonnes & brethren of whom there were
twolue.
25 The eightenth vpon Hanani with his sonnes and brethre, of whom there were
twolue.
26 The nyententh vpon Mallothi with his sonnes & brethren, of whom there were
twolue.
27 The twentieth vpon Eliatha with his sonnes and brethre of whom there were
twolue.
28 The one & twetieth vpon Hothir with his sonnes & brethre of whom there were
twolue.
29 The two and twentieth vpon Gidalthi with his sonnes & brethren, of whom there
were twolue.
30 The thre and twentieth vpon Mehesioth with his sonnes and brethren of whom
there were twolue.
31 The foure and twetyeth vpon Romamthieser with his sonnes and brethren, of
whom there were twolue.

Chapter 26

1 Of the ordinauces of the dorekepers Amonge the Korahytes was Meselemia of the
children of Assaph.
2 The children of Meselemia were these: the fyrstborne Zacharias, the seconde
Iediael, ye thirde Sebadia, the fourth Iathniel,
3 ye fifth Elam, the sixte Iohanan, the seuenth Elioenai.
4 The children of ObedEdom were these: the firstborne Semaia, the seconde
Iosabad the thirde Ioah, the fourth Sachur, ye fyfth Nethaneel,
5 the sixte Ammiel, the seuenth Isachar, the eight Pegulthai: for God had
blessed him.
6 And vnto Semaia his sonne there were sonnes borne also, which bare rule in the
house of their fathers: for they were mightie valeaunt men.
7 The children of Semaia were, Athni, Rephael, Obed and Elsabad, whose brethren
were valeaunt men, Elihu and Semachia:
8 all these were of the children of ObedEdom.
9 Meselemia had children and brethren which were stronge men, euen eightene.
10 Hossa of the children of Merari had children, Simri the chefest: for ye
fyrstborne was not there, therfore dyd his father appoynte him to be chefest,
11 the secode Helchias, ye thirde Tebalia, ye fourth Zacharias. All the children
and brethren of Hossa were thirtene.
12 This is the ordinaunce of the dorekepers amonge the heades of the valeaunt
men in the offyce besyde their brethren, to mynister in the house of the LORDE.
13 And the lot was cast for the small as for ye greate thorow out the house of
their fathers at euery dore.
14 The lot towarde the East fell vpon Meselemia. And the lot was cast for
Zacharias his sonne, which was a man of prudent councell, & vnto him it fell
towarde the North:
15 But vnto ObedEdom towarde the South, and to his sonnes besyde the house of
Esupim.
16 And vnto Supim and Hossa towarde the West by the gate of Salechet in the
strete of the burntofferinges, where the tabernacles stonde together.
17 Towarde the East were there sixe of the Leuites. Towarde the north foure on
ye daie tyme. Towarde the south foure on the daye season likewyse. Besyde Esupim
two & two.
18 By Parbar westwarde were there foure in in the strete, and two besyde Parbar.
19 These are the ordinaunces of the dorekepers amonge the children of the
Korahites, and the children of Merari.
20 Of the Leuites, was Ahia ouer the treasures of the house of God, and ouer the
treasures that were sanctifyed.
21 Of the children of Laedan, the childre of the Gersonites. Of Laedan were
these the heades of the fathers, namely ye Iehielites.
22 The children of the Iehielites were, Setha and his brother Ioel ouer the
treasures of the house of the LORDE.
23 Amonge the Amramites, Iezeharites, Hebronites and Vsielites,
24 was Sebuel the sonne of Gerson the sonne of Moses, prynce ouer the treasures.
25 His brother Elieser had a sonne Rehabia, whose sonne was Iesaia, whose sonne
was Iora, whose sonne was Sichri, whose sonne was Selomith:
26 the same Selomith and his brethren were ouer all the treasures of the thinges
that were halowed, which kinge Dauid halowed, and the pryncipall of the fathers
amonge the rulers ouer thousandes & ouer hundreds, and rulers in the hoost
27 (of warres and spoyles had they halowed it, to repayre the house of the
LORDE)
28 and ouer all yt Samuel the Seer, and Saul the sonne of Cis, & Abner the sonne
of Ner, and Ioab the sonne of ZeruIa had halowed: whatsoeuer was sanctifyed, it
was vnder the hande of Selomith and his brethren.
29 Amonge the Iezeharites was Chenaia with his sonnes for the worke without ouer
Israel, offycers & Iudges.
30 Amonge the Hebronites was Hasabia & his brethren, valeaunt men, a thousande
and seuen hundreth, ouer the offyces of Israel on this syde Iordane westwarde
for all maner worke of the LORDE, and to serue the kinge.
31 But amonge the Hebronites was Ieria the chefest amonge the Hebronites of his
kinred amoge the fathers. And search was made amonge them, and in the fortieth
yeare of kynge Dauid there were founde valeaut men at Iaeser in Gilead,
32 and their brethren mightie men, two thousande and seuen hundreth pryncipall
fathers, and Dauid set the ouer the Rubenites, Gaddites, and ouer the halfe
trybe of Manasses, for all soch busynes as belonged vnto God and the kynge.

Chapter 27

1 The children of Israel acordinge to their nombre, were heades of the fathers,
and ouer thousandes and ouer hundreds, & officers waytinge vpon the kynge, to go
of & on after their course euery moneth one, in all ye monethes of ye yeare.
Euery course had foure & twentye thousande.
2 Ouer the first course of the first moneth, was Iasebeam ye sonne of Sabdiel,
and vnder his course were foure and twentye thousande.
3 Of the children of Phares was the pryncipall amonge all the chefe captaynes in
the first moneth.
4 Ouer the course of the seconde moneth was Dodai the Ahohite, and Mikloth was
the prynce ouer his course. And vnder his course were foure and twentye
thousande.
5 The thirde pryncipall captayne of the thirde moneth, was Benaia the sonne of
Ioiada ye prest, and vnder his course were foure and twentye thousande.
6 This is yt Benaia the Worthie amonge thirtie and aboue thirtie, And his course
was vnder his sonne Ammi Sabad.
7 The fourth in ye fourth moneth was Asahel the brother of Ioab, and Sabadia his
sonne after him, and vnder his course were foure and twentye thousande.
8 The fifth in the fifth moneth was Samehuth the Iesrahite, and vnder his course
were foure and twentye thousande.
9 The sixte in the sixte moneth, was Ira ye sonne of Ickes the Thecoite, and
vnder his course were foure and twentye thousande.
10 The seuenth in the seuenth moneth, was Helez the Pelonite of the children of
Ephraim, and vnder his course were foure and twetye thousande.
11 The eight in the eight moneth, was Sibechai the Husathite of ye Sarehites,
and vnder his course were foure and twentye thousande.
12 The nyenth in the nyenth moneth, was Abieser the Anthothite of the childre of
Iemini, & vnder his course were foure and twetye thousande.
13 The tenth in the tenth moneth, was Maherai the Netophatite of the Serahites,
and vnder his course were foure and twentye thousande.
14 The eleuenth in the eleueth moneth, was Benaia the Pirgathonite of the
children of Ephraim, and vnder his course were foure and twentye thousande.
15 The twolueth in the twolueth moneth was Heldai ye Netophatite of Athniel, and
vnder his course were foure and twentye thousande.
16 Ouer the trybes of Israel were these: Amonge the Rubenites was Prynce Elieser
the sonne of Sichri. Amonge the Simeoninites was Sephatia the sonne of Maecha.
17 Amonge the Leuites was Hasabia the sonne of Kemuel. Amonge the Aaronites was
Sadoc.
18 Amoge Iuda was Elihu one of Dauids brethren. Amonge Isachar was Amri the
sonne of Michael.
19 Amonge Zabulo was Iesmaia the sonne of Obadia. Amonge Nephtali was Ieremoth
the sonne of Asriel.
20 Amonge the children of Ephraim was Hosea the sonne of Asasia. Amonge the
halfe trybe of Manasses was Ioel the sonne of Pedaia.
21 Amonge the halfe trybe of Manasses in Gilead was Ieddo the sonne of
Zacharias. Amonge BenIamin was Iaesiel the sonne of Abner.
22 Amonge Dan was Asareel the sonne of Ieroham. These are the princes of the
trybes of Israel.
23 But Dauid toke not the nombre of them that were twentye yeare olde and there
vnder: for the LORDE had promysed to multiplye Israel as the starres of the?kie.
24 Howbeit Ioab the sonne of Zeruia had begonne to nombre them, and perfourmed
it not: for there came wrath vpon Israel for the same cause, therfore came not
the nombre in to ye Cronicles of kynge Dauid.
25 Ouer the kynges treasures was Asmaueth the sonne of Adiel. And ouer the
treasures in the lode, in the cities, vyllages and castels was Ionathan the
sonne of Vsia.
26 Ouer the hu?bandmen to tyll the londe was Esri the sonne of Chelab.
27 Ouer the vynyardes was Simei the Ramathite. Ouer the wyne Cellers and
treasures of wyne was Sabdi the Siphimite.
28 Ouer the oyle gardens and Molberytrees in the lowe feldes, was Baal Hanan the
Gaderite. Ouer the treasure of the oyle was Ioas.
29 Ouer ye oxen of the pasture at Saron was Sitari the Saronite. Ouer the oxen
in the valleys was Saphath the sonne of Adlai.
30 Ouer the Camels was Obil the Ismaelite. Ouer the asses was Iehethia the
Meronothite.
31 Ouer the shepe was Iasis the Hagarite. All these were rulers ouer kynge
Dauids goodes.
32 Ionathan Dauids vncle was of the councell a wyse man and a scrybe. And
Iehiel, the sonne of Hachmoni was with the kynges children.
33 Achitophel also was of the kynges councell. Husai the Arachite was the kinges
frende.
34 After Achitophel was Ioiada ye sonne of Benaia and Abiathar. As for Ioab, he
was the kynges chefe captayne of warre.

Chapter 28

1 And Dauid gathered vnto Ierusalem all the rulers of Israel, namely ye prynces
of the trybes, the rulers ouer the courses, which wayted vpon the kynge, the
captaynes ouer thousandes and ouer hundreds, the rulers ouer the goodes and
catell of the kynge and of his sonnes, with the chaberlaines, warryers and
valeaunt men.
2 And Dauid the kynge stode vp vpon his fete, and saide: Heare me my brethren
and my people: I was mynded to buylde an house, where the Arke of the couenaunt
of the LORDE shulde rest, and a fote stole for the fete of oure God, and
prepared my selfe for to buylde,
3 But God sayde vnto me: Thou shalt not buylde an house vnto my name, for thou
art a man of warre, and hast shed bloude.
4 Now hath the LORDE God of Israel chosen me out of all my fathers house, yt I
shulde be kynge ouer Israel: for Iuda hath he chosen to be the Prynce, and in
the house of Iuda amonge my fathers children hath he had pleasure vnto me, to
make me kynge ouer all Israel:
5 and amoge all my sonnes (for the LORDE hath geuen me many sonnes) he hath
chosen Salomon my sonne, to syt vpon the seate of the kyngdome of the LORDE ouer
Israel,
6 and hath sayde vnto me: Salomon thy sonne shall buylde me an house and my
courtes: for I haue chosen him to be my sonne, & I wil be his father,
7 & wyll stablishe his kyngdome for euer, yf he be constant to do after my
commaundementes and lawes, as it is this daye.
8 Now in the sight of all Israel the congregacion of the LORDE, and in the eares
of oure God, se that ye obserue and seke all the commaundemetes of the LORDE yor
God, that ye maye possesse this good londe and that ye and youre children maie
haue ye inheritaunce therof for euer.
9 And thou my sonne Salomo, knowe thou the God of thy father, and serue him with
all thy hert, and with the desyre of thy soule: for the LORDE searcheth all
hertes, and vnderstondeth all thoughtes & ymaginacions Yf thou seke him, thou
shalt fynde him: but yf thou forsake him, he shall refuse the for euer.
10 Take hede now, for the LORDE hath chosen the, to buylde an house to be the
Sactuary: be stronge, and make it.
11 And Dauid gaue Salomon his sonne a patrone of the Porche, and of his house,
and of the celles and perlers and ynnermer chabers, and of the house of the
Mercyseate,
12 & of all that he had in his mynde, namely of the courte of the LORDES house,
and of all the oratories rounde aboute the treasures in ye house of God, and of
the treasures of soch thinges as were halowed,
13 of the ordinaunces of the prestes, and Leuites, and of all ye busynesse of
the offyces in the house of the LORDE.
14 Golde (gaue he him) after ye golde weight for all maner of vessels of euery
offyce, and all siluer ornamentes after the weight for all maner of vessell of
euery offyce:
15 and weight for the golden candilstickes and golden lampes, for euery
candilstycke and his lampes his weight: likewyse for the siluer candilstickes
gaue he the weight to the candilsticke & his lampes, acordynge as was requyred
for euery candilstycke.
16 He gaue golde also for ye tables of the shewbred, for euery table his weight:
and syluer lykewise for the syluer tables.
17 And pure golde for the fleshokes, basens and censors: and for the golden
cuppes, vnto euery cuppe his weight: and for the siluer cuppes, vnto euery cuppe
his weighte:
18 and for the altare of incense his weighte, of the most pure golde. And a
patrone of the charett of the golden Cherubins, that they mighte sprede out them
selues, and couer the Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE.
19 All this is geuen me in wrytinge of the hande of the LORDE, to make me
vnderstonde all the workes of the patrone.
20 And Dauid sayde vnto Salomo his sonne: Be thou manly and stronge, and make
it, feare not, and be not fayntharted, the LORDE God my God shal be with the,
and shall not withdrawe his hande, ner fayle the, tyll thou haue fynished euery
worke for the seruyce in the house of the LORDE.
21 Beholde, the courses of the prestes and Leuites to all the offyces in the
house of God are with the in euery worke, and are willinge, and haue wisdome to
all the offyces: and so haue the prynces and all the people for euery thinge
that thou hast to do.

Chapter 29

1 And kynge Dauid sayde vnto all the congregacion: God hath chosen Salomon one
of my sonnes, which yet is yonge and tender. But the worke is greate: for it is
not a mans palace, but the LORDE Gods.
2 Yet haue I after all my abilite prepared vnto the house of God, golde for the
vessels of golde, syluer for them of syluer, brasse for them of brasse, yron for
the of yron, wod for them of wod, Onix stones, set Rubyes, & stones of dyuerse
coloures, & all precious stones, & Marble stones in multitude.
3 Besydes this, for the good wyl yt I haue to the house of God,
4 I haue of myne awne proper good thre M. taletes of golde of Ophir, & seuen M.
taletes of pure syluer, which I geue vnto the holy house of God, besyde all yt I
haue prepared, to ouerlaye ye walles of the house,
5 yt the same which ought to be of golde, maye be of golde: & that it which
ought to be of syluer, maye be of syluer: and for all maner of worke by the
hande of the craftesmen. And who is now fre wyllinge, to fyll his hande this
daye vnto the LORDE?
6 Then were the prynces of the fathers, ye prynces of the trybes of Israel, the
captaynes ouer thousandes & ouer hundreds, the rulers ouer the kynges busynes,
fre wyllinge,
7 & gaue to ye mynistracion in the house of God fyue M. talentes of golde, and
ten M. guldens, and ten M. talentes of syluer, eightene M. taletes of brasse,
and an hundred M. taletes of yron.
8 And by whom so euer were foude stones, they gaue them to the treasure of the
house of the LORDE, vnder the hade of Iehiel the Gersonite.
9 And ye people were glad that they were fre wyllinge: for they gaue it wt a
good wyll (euen with all their hert) vnto the LORDE. And Dauid also ye kynge
reioysed greatly,
10 and praysed God, and sayde before the whole congregacion: Praysed be thou O
LORDE God of Israel oure father,
11 vnto the belongeth worshippe and power, glory, victory & thankes: for all
that is in heauen and earth, is thine: thine is ye kyngdome, and thou art
exalted aboue all prynces.
12 Thine are riches and honoure before ye, thou reignest ouer all, in thy hande
consisteth power and might, in thy hade is it to make euery man greate and
stronge.
13 Now thake we the oure God, and prayse ye name of thy glory:
14 For who am I? What is my people? that we shulde be able with a fre wyll to
offre, as this is done? For of the commeth all, and of thy hande haue we geuen
it the:
15 For we are but pilgrems & straugers before the, as were all oure fathers.
Oure life vpon earth is as a shadowe, and here is no abydinge.
16 O LORDE oure God, all this abundaunce that we haue prepared to buylde the an
house vnto thy name, came of thy hande, and is thine alltogether.
17 I knowe my God, that thou tryest the hert, and that vnfaynednes is acceptable
vnto the: therfore haue I geue all this with an vnfayned hert, eue with a good
wyll, and now haue I had ioye to se thy people (which here are present) offre
with a fre wyll vnto the.
18 O LORDE God of oure fathers Abraham, Isaac, & Israel, kepe thou euermore soch
purposes and thoughtes in ye hertes of thy people, & prepare thou their hertes
vnto the.
19 And graunte my sonne Salomon a perfecte hert, that he maye kepe thy
comaundementes, thy testimonies, & thy statutes, that he maye do all, & buylde
this palace, which I haue prepared.
20 And Dauid sayde vnto the whole cogregacion: O prayse the LORDE yor God. And
all the cogregacion praysed ye LORDE God of their fathers, & bowed them selues,
& worshipped the LORDE & then the kynge,
21 and offred sacrifices vnto the LORDE. And on ye nexte morow offred they
burntofferynges, a M. bullockes, a M. rames, a M. labes wt their
drynkofferynges, & plenteously offred they amonge all Israel.
22 And they ate and dranke the same daie before the LORDE with greate ioye, and
made Salomon the sonne of Dauid kynge ye seconde tyme, and anoynted him to be ye
prynce for the LORDE, & Sadoc to be the prest.
23 Thus sat Salomon vpon the seate of ye LORDE, kynge in his fathers steade, &
prospered. And all Israel obeyed him,
24 & all ye rulers & mightie men, & all kynge Dauids children submytted
themselues vnto kynge Salomon.
25 And ye LORDE made Salomon excellent & greate in ye sighte of all Israel, and
gaue him soch a glorious kyngdome, as none had before him ouer Israel.
26 So had Dauid now bene kynge ouer all Israel.
27 And ye tyme that he was kynge ouer Israel, is fortye yeares: At Hebron
reigned he seuen yeare, and at Ierusalem thre & thirtie yeare,
28 & dyed in a good age, full of dayes, riches and honoure. And Salomon his
sonne was kynge in his steade.
29 These actes of kynge Dauid (both ye first and last) beholde, they are wrytten
amonge the actes of Samuel the Seer, and amonge the actes of the prophet Nathan,
and amoge the actes of Gad the Seer,
30 with all his kyngdome, power and tymes which passed vnder him, both vpon
Israel & vpon all the kyngdomes of the earth.


2 Chronicles

Chapter 1

1 And Salomon the sonne of Dauid was stablyshed in his kyngdome, and the LORDE
his God was with him, & made him exceadinge greate.
2 And Salomon spake vnto all Israel, to the captaynes ouer thousandes and ouer
hundreds, to the Iudges, and to all ye prynces in Israel, and to the chefest
fathers,
3 so that they wente (Salomon and the whole congregacion with him) vnto the hye
place which was at Gibea: for there was ye Tabernacle of ye witnesse of God,
which Moses the seruaunt of the LORDE had made in ye wyldernesse.
4 For Dauid had brought vp the Arke of God from Kiriath Iarim, whan he had
prepared for it: for he had pitched a tent for it at Ierusalem.
5 As for ye brasen altare which Bezaleel the sonne of Vri the sonne of Hur had
made, it was there before the habitacion of the LORDE: and Salomon and the
congregacion soughte God.
6 And Salomon offred a thousande burntofferynges vpo the brasen altare that
stode before the Tabernacle of witnesse.
7 In the same nighte appeared God vnto Salomon, and sayde vnto him: Axe, what
shal I geue the?
8 And Salomon sayde vnto God: Thou hast done greate mercy vnto my father Dauid,
and hast made me kynge in his steade.
9 Now LORDE God, let yi worde that thou hast promysed vnto my father Dauid, be
verified, for thou hast made me kynge ouer a people, which is as many in nobre
as the dust vpon the earth.
10 Graunte me wy?dome therfore and knowlege, yt I maye go out and in before this
people: for who is able to iudge this greate people of thine?
11 Then sayde God vnto Salomon: For so moch as thou art so mynded, and hast not
desyred riches ner good, ner honor, ner the soules of thine enemies, ner longe
life, but hast requyred wy?dome and knowlege, to iudge my people, ouer whom I
haue made the kynge,
12 wy?dome therfore and knowlege be geuen the. Morouer, riches & good and
honoure wyll I geue the, so that soch one as thou hath not bene before the amoge
the kynges, nether shal be after the.
13 So came Salomon from the hye place (which was at Gibeon) vnto Ierusale from
ye Tabernacle of witnesse, and reigned ouer Israel.
14 And Salomon gathered him charettes and horsmen, so that he had a thousande
and foure hundreth charettes, & twolue thousande horsmen: and those appoynted he
to be in the charet cities, and with the kynge at Ierusalem.
15 And the kynge broughte it so to passe, that there was as moch syluer & golde
at Ierusale as stones: and as many Ceders, as the Molberyes trees, that are in
the valleys.
16 And there were horses broughte vnto Salomon out of Egipte, & the kynges
marchauntes fetched them from Kena for moneye.
17 And they came vp, and broughte out of Egipte a charet for sixe hudreth syluer
pes, and an horse for an hundreth and fiftye. Thus broughte they also vnto all
the kynges of the Hethites, and to the kynges of ye Syrians.

Chapter 2

1 And Salomon thoughte to buylde an house vnto the name of the LORDE, & an house
for his kyngdome:
2 and tolde out thre score and ten thousande men to beare burthens, and foure
score thousande that hewed tymber vpo the mount, and thre thousande and sixe
hundreth officers ouer them.
3 And Salomon sent vnto Hiram the kynge of Tyre, sayenge: As thou dyddest with
my father, & sendedst him Ceder trees, to builde an house for to dwell in (euen
so do thou wt me also.)
4 Beholde, I wyl buylde an house vnto the name of the LORDE my God, to sanctifie
it, for to burne good incense before him, and allwaye to prepare ye shewbred,
and burntofferynges in the mornynge and in the euenynge, on the Sabbathes &
Newmones, and solempne feastes of ye LORDE oure God euermore for Israel.
5 And the house that I wyl buylde, shal be greate: for oure God is greater then
all goddes.
6 But who is able to buylde him an house? For heauen & the heauens of all
heauens maye not coprehende him. Who am I then, that I shulde buylde him an
house? But onely for this intent to burne incense before him?
7 Sede me now therfore a wyse ma to worke with golde, syluer, brasse, yron,
scarlet, purple, yalow sylke and soch one as can graue carued worke with the
wyse men that are with me in Iewry and Ierusalem, whom my father Dauid ordeyned.
8 And sende me tymber of Ceder, pyne tre and costly wodd from Libanus: for I
knowe that yi seruauntes can hewe tymber vpon Libanus. And beholde, my
seruauntes shalbe with yi seruauntes,
9 to prepare me moch tymber: for the house that I wyl buylde, shalbe greate &
maruelous goodly.
10 And beholde, I wyl geue vnto the carpenters thy seruauntes which hewe the
tymber, twetye thousande quarters, of beaten wheate, and twentye thousande
quarters of barlye, and twentye thousande Batthes of wyne, and twentye thousande
Batthes of oyle.
11 Then sayde Hiram the kynge of Tyre by wrytinge, and sent it vnto Salomon:
Because the LORDE loueth his people, therfore hath he made ye to be kynge ouer
them.
12 And Hiram sayde morouer: Praysed be ye LORDE God of Israel, which made heauen
earth, that he hath geue kynge Dauid a wyse and prudent sonne, and soch one as
hath vnderstondinge to buylde an house vnto the LORDE, & an house for his
realme.
13 Therfore sende I now a wyse man that hath vnderstondynge, euen Hiram Abi
14 (which is the sonne of a woman of the doughters of Dan, and his father was of
Tyre) which can worke in golde, syluer, brasse, yron, stone, tymber, scarlet,
yalowe sylke, lynnen, purple and to carue all maner of thinges, and to make what
conynge thinge so euer is geuen him, with thy wyse men, and with the wyse men of
my lorde kynge Dauid yi father.
15 And now let my lorde sende the wheate, barlye, oyle and wyne vnto his
seruautes, acordinge as he hath sayde,
16 and so wyll we hewe ye tymber vpon Libanus, as moch as thou nedest, and wyll
brynge it by flotes in the See vnto Iapho, from whence thou mayest brynge it vp
to Ierusalem.
17 And Salomon nombred all the straungers in the londe of Israel, acordinge to
the nombre whan Dauid his father nombred them: and there were founde an hundreth
& fiftye thousande, thre thousande and sixe hudreth.
18 And of the same he made thre score and ten thousande beares of burthens, and
foure score thousande hewers vpo ye mount, and thre thousande and sixe hundreth
ouerseers, which helde ye people at their worke.

Chapter 3

1 And Salomon beganne to buylde the house of the LORDE at Ierusalem vpon the
mount Moria, that was shewed vnto Dauid his father, which Dauid had prepared for
the rowme, vpon the corne floore of Arnan the Iebusite.
2 In the seconde daye of the seconde moneth in the fourth yeare of his reigne
begane he to buylde.
3 And so layed Salomon the foundacion to buylde the house of God: first the
length thre score cubytes, the bredth twentye cubites
4 and the Porche before the wydenes of the house, was twentye cubites longe, but
the height was an hundreth and twentye, and he ouerlayed it on the ynsyde with
pure golde.
5 But the greate house syled he with Pyne tre, and ouerlayed it with the best
golde, and made palme trees and throwne worke theron,
6 and ouerlayed the house with precious stones to beutifye it. As for the golde,
it was golde of Paruaim.
7 And the balkes and postes aboue, and the walles, and the dores of it ouerlayed
he with golde, and caused Cherubins to be carued on the walles.
8 He made also the house of the Most holy, whose length was twentye cubites
acordinge to the wydenesse of the house: and the bredth of it was twentye
cubites likewyse, and he ouerlayed it with the best golde by sixe hundreth
talentes.
9 And for nales he gaue fiftye Sicles of golde in weight, and ouerlayed the
chambers with golde.
10 He made also in the house of the most holy, two Cherubins of carued worke,
and ouerlayed them with golde:
11 and the length on the wynges of the Cherubins, so that one wynge had fyue
cubytes, and touched the wall of the house: and the other wynge had fyue cubytes
also, and touched the wynge of the other Cherub.
12 Euen so had one wynge of the other Cherub fyue cubites likewyse, and touched
the wall of the house: and his other wynge had fyue cubites also, and touched
the wynge of the other Cherub:
13 so that these wynges of the Cherubins were spred out twentye cubites wyde.
And they stode vpo their fete, and their face was turned to the house warde.
14 He made a vayle also of yalow sylke, scarlet, purple and lynworke, and made
Cherubins theron.
15 And before the house he made two pilers fyue and thirtie cubites longe, and
the knoppes aboue theron, fyue cubytes.
16 And he made throwne worke for the quere, and put it aboue vpon the pilers:
and made an hundreth pomgranates, and put them on the wrythren worke.
17 And he set vp the pilers before the temple, the one on the righte honde, and
the other on the lefte: and that on the righte honde called he Iachin, and it on
the lefte honde called he Boos.

Chapter 4

1 He made a brasen altare also, twentye cubytes longe, and twentye cubytes
brode, and ten cubites hye.
2 And he made a molten lauer ten cubites wyde fro the one syde to the other
rounde aboute, and fyue cubytes hye. And a metelyne of thirtie cubites mighte
comprehende it aboute.
3 And ymages of Bullockes were vnder it. And aboute the lauer (which was ten
cubites wyde) there were two rowes of knoppes, yt were molten withall.
4 It stode so vpon the bullockes, that thre were turned towarde the north, thre
towarde the west, thre towarde the south, and thre towarde the east, and the
lauer aboue vpon them, and all their hynder partes were on the ynsyde.
5 The thicknesse of it was an handbredth, and the edge of it was like the edge
of a cuppe, and as a floured rose. And it conteyned thre thousande Batthes.
6 And he made ten kettels, wherof he set fyue on the righte hande and fyue on
the lefte, to wa?she in them soch thinges as belonged to the burntofferynge,
that they mighte thrust them therin: but ye lauer (made he) for for the prestes
to wash in.
7 Ten golden candelstickes made he also as they ought to be, and set them in the
temple: fyue on the righte hande, and fyue on the lefte.
8 And made ten tables, and set them in the temple: fyue on the righte hande, and
fyue on the lefte. And made an hundreth basens of golde.
9 He made a courte likewyse for the prestes, and a greate courte, and dores in
the courte, and ouerlayed ye dores with brasse.
10 And the lauer set he on the righte syde towarde the south east.
11 And Hiram made cauldrous, shouels and basens. So Hiram fynished the worke
which he made for kynge Salomon in the house of God:
12 namely the two pilers with the roundels and knoppes aboue vpon both the
pilers, and both the wrythen ropes to couer both the roundels of ye knoppes
aboue vpo the pilers,
13 and the foure hundreth pomgranates on both the wrythe ropes, two rowes of
pomgranates on euery rope, to couer the roundels of the knoppes that were aboue
vpon the pilers.
14 He made the stoles also and ye kettels vpon the stoles,
15 and a lauer, and twolue bullockes there vnder.
16 And pottes, shouels, fleshokes, and all their vessels made Hiram Abif of pure
metall for kynge Salomon vnto the house of the LORDE.
17 In the coaste of Iordane dyd the kynge cause them to be molten in thicke
earth betwene Suchoth and Zaredatha.
18 And Salomon made all these vessels which were so many, that the weight of ye
metall was not to be soughte out.
19 And Salomen made all the ornamentes for the house of God: namely, the golden
altare, the tables and the shewbreds theron,
20 the candelstickes with their lampes of pure golde, to burne before the Quere
acordinge to the maner:
21 and the floures and the lampes and the snoffers were of golde, all these were
of pure golde.
22 And the knyues, basens, spones and pottes, were of pure golde. And the
intraunce and his dores within vnto the Most holy, and the dores of the house of
the temple were of golde.

Chapter 5

1 Thus was all ye worke fynished, which Salomon made in the house of the
LORDE.And Salomon broughte in all yt his father Dauid had sanctified, namely,
syluer and golde, and all maner of ornamentes, and layed them in the treasures
of the house of God.
2 The gathered Salomon all the Elders in Israel together, all ye heades of the
trybes, prynces of the fathers amoge the childre of Israel vnto Ierusale, to
brynge vp the Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE out of the cite of Dauid, that
is Sion.
3 And there resorted vnto the kynge all the men in Israel at the feast, that is
in the seuenth moneth,
4 and all ye Elders in Israel came. And ye Leuites toke the Arke,
5 & broughte it vp with the Tabernacle of witnesse, and all the holy vessels
that were in the Tabernacle: and ye prestes and Leuites broughte them vp.
6 As for kynge Salomon and all the cogregacion of Israel that was gathered vnto
him before the Arke, they offred shepe and oxen, so many, that no man coulde
nombre ner reken them.
7 Thus the prestes broughte the Arke of ye couenaunt of the LORDE vnto hir place
in to the quere of the house, euen in to ye Most holy vnder the wynges of the
Cherubins,
8 so that the Cherubins spred out their wynges ouer the place of the Arke: and
the Cherubins couered the Arke and the staues therof from aboue.
9 And the staues were so longe, yt the knoppes of them were sene from the Arke
before the quere, but on the outsyde were they not sene. And it was there vnto
this daye.
10 And there was nothinge in the Arke, saue the two tables, which Moses put
therin at Horeb, whan the LORDE made a couenaunt with the childre of Israel,
what tyme as they were departed out of Egipte.
11 And whan the prestes wente out of the Sanctuary (for all ye prestes that were
founde, sanctified them selues, because the courses were not kepte)
12 the Leuites with all those that were vnder Asaph, Heman, Iedithun and their
children and brethren, beynge clothed in lynnen, songe with Cymbales, psalteries
and harpes, and stode towarde the east parte of the altare, and an hundreth &
twentye prestes with them, which blewe wt trompettes.
13 And it was, as yf one dyd trompet and synge, as though a voyce had bene herde
of praysinge and geuynge thankes vnto the LORDE. And whan the voyce arose from
ye trompettes, cymbales and other instrumentes of musick, and from praysinge the
LORDE (because he is gracious, and because his mercy endureth for euer) the
house of the LORDE was fylled on the ynsyde with a cloude,
14 so yt the prestes coulde not stonde to mynister for the cloude: for the glory
of the LORDE fylled the house of God.

Chapter 6

1 Then sayde Salomon: The LORDE sayde, that he wolde dwell in a darck cloude:
2 I haue buylded an house to be an habitacion vnto the: & a seate, yt thou
mayest dwell there for euer.
3 And the kynge turned his face, and blessed all the congregacion of Israel: for
the whole cogregacion of Israel stode,
4 & he sayde: Praysed be the LORDE God of Israel, which promysed by his mouth
vnto my father Dauid, and with his hande hath fulfylled it, wha he sayde:
5 Sece the tyme that I broughte my people out of the londe of Egipte, I haue
chosen no cite in all ye trybes of Israel, to buylde an house for my name to be
there, nether haue I chosen eny man to be prynce ouer my people of Israel.
6 But Ierusalem haue I chosen, for my name to be there: & Dauid haue I electe,
to be prynce ouer my people of Israel.
7 And whan my father Dauid was mynded to buylde an house vnto the name of the
LORDE God of Israel,
8 the LORDE sayde vnto Dauid my father: Where as thou wast mynded to buylde an
house vnto my name, thou hast done well:
9 howbeit thou shalt not buylde the house, but thy sonne which shall come out of
thy loynes, shal buylde the house vnto my name.
10 Thus hath ye LORDE now perfourmed his worde, that he spake: for I am come vp
in my father Dauids steade, and syt vpon the seate of Israel, euen as the LORDE
sayde, & haue buylded an house vnto the name of ye LORDE God of Israel,
11 & in it haue I put ye Arke, wherin is the couenaunt of ye LORDE, which he
made with the childre of Israel.
12 And he stode before the altare of the LORDE in the presence of the whole
congregacion of Israel, and spred out his handes:
13 for Salomon had made a brasen pulpit, and set it in the myddes of the courte,
fyue cubites longe, and fyue cubites brode, and thre cubites hye: vpon the same
stode he, and fell downe vpon his knees in the presence of the whole cogregacion
of Israel, and helde out his handes towarde heaue
14 and sayde: O LORDE God of Israel, there is no god like the, nether in heauen
ner vpon earth, thou that kepest couenaunt and mercy for thy seruauntes, that
walke before the with all their hert.
15 Thou hast kepte promes wt my father Dauid thy seruaunt: With thy mouth thou
saydest it, and with thy hande hast thou fulfylled it, as it is come to passe
this daye.
16 Now LORDE God of Israel, make good vnto my father Dauid yi seruaunt, that
which thou hast promysed him, & sayde: Thou shalt not want a man before me, to
syt vpon the seate of Israel: yf thy children kepe their waye, so yt they walke
in my lawe, like as thou hast walked before me:
17 Now LORDE God of Israel, let yi worde be verified, which thou hast promysed
vnto Dauid thy seruaunt.
18 For thinkest thou that God in very dede dwelleth amonge men vpon earth?
Beholde, the heauen and ye heauens of all heauens maye not coteyne the: how
shulde then this house do it, which I haue buylded?
19 But turne the vnto the prayer of thy seruaunt, and to his supplicacio (O
LORDE my God) that thou mayest heare the thankesgeuynge and prayer, which thy
seruaunt maketh before the,
20 so that thine eyes be open ouer this house daye and night, euen ouer this
place (wherin thou saydest thou woldest set thy name) that thou mayest heare the
prayer, which thy seruaunt shall make in this place.
21 Heare now therfore the intercession of thy seruaunt and of thy people of
Israel, what so euer they shall desyre in this place: heare thou it from the
place of thy habitacion, eue from heauen: and whan thou hearest it, be
mercifull.
22 Whan eny ma synneth agaynst his neghboure, and an ooth be put vpon him which
he ought to sweare, and the ooth commeth before thine altare in this house,
23 then heare thou from heauen, and se yt thy seruaunt haue righte, so that thou
rewarde the vngodly, and recopence him his waye vpon his awne heade, and to
iustifye the righteous, and to geue him acordinge to his righteousnes.
24 Whan thy people of Israel is smytte before their enemies (whyle they haue
synned agaynst the) and yf they turne vnto the, and knowlege thy name, and make
their prayer and intercession before the in this house,
25 then heare thou them from heauen, and be mercifull vnto the synne of thy
people of Israel, & brynge them agayne into the londe, yt thou hast geuen them
and their fathers.
26 Whan the heauen is shut vp, so that it rayne not (for so moch as they haue
synned agaynst the) and yf they make their prayer in this place, and knowlege
thy name, and turne from their synnes (whan thou hast brought them lowe)
27 heare thou them then in heauen, and be mercifull vnto the synne of thy
seruauntes, and of thy people of Israel, that thou mayest teach them the good
waye wherin they shulde walke, and let it rayne vpon thy londe which thou hast
geuen thy people to possesse.
28 Whan a derth, or pestilence, or drouth, or blastinge, or greshopper or
catirpiller, is in the londe: Or whan their enemye layeth sege to their portes
in the lode, or whan eny other plage or disease happeneth,
29 who so euer the maketh his prayer or peticion amonge eny maner of men, or
amonge all thy people of Israel, yf eny man fele his plage and disease, and
spredeth out his handes vnto this house,
30 heare thou then from heauen, euen from ye seate of thy habitacion, and be
mercifull: and geue euery man acordinge to all his wayes, in so moch as thou
knowest his hert (for thou onely knowest the hert of the children of men)
31 that they maye feare the, and allwaye walke in thy wayes, as longe as they
lyue in the londe, which thou hast geuen vnto oure fathers.
32 And whan eny straunger which is not of thy people of Israel, commeth out of a
farre countre because of thy greate name, and mightie hande, and out stretched
arme, and commeth to make his prayer in this house,
33 heare thou him then from heaue, euen from the seate of thy habitacion: and do
all for ye which that straunger calleth vpo the, that all the nacions vpon earth
maye knowe thy name, and feare the, as thy people of Israel do: and that they
maye knowe, how yt this house which I haue buylded, is named after thy name.
34 Whan thy people go forth to ye battayll agaynst their enemies, the waye that
thou shalt sende them, and shall praye vnto the towarde the waye of this cite
which thou hast chosen, and towarde the house that I haue buylded vnto thy name,
35 heare thou the their prayer and peticion from heauen, and helpe them to their
righte.
36 Whan they synne agaynst the ( for there is no man that synneth not) and thou
be wroth at them, and geue them ouer before their enemyes, so that they cary
them awaye captyue in to a countre farre or nye,
37 and yf they turne within their hertes in the londe where they are presoners,
and so conuerte, and make their intercession vnto the in the londe of their
captiuyte, and saye: We haue synned, and done amysse, and haue bene vngodly:
38 and so turne them selues vnto ye with all their hert and with all their soule
in the londe of their captiuyte, wherin they are presoners: and make their
prayer towarde the waye of their owne londe, which thou gauest vnto their
fathers, and towarde the cite which thou hast chosen, and towarde the house that
I haue buylded vnto thy name:
39 then heare thou their prayer and supplicacion from heauen, euen from the
seate of thy dwellynge, and helpe them to their righte, and be mercifull vnto
thy people that haue synned agaynst the.
40 My God, let thine eyes now be ope, and let thine eares geue hede vnto prayer
in this place.
41 Aryse now O LORDE God vnto thy restinge place, thou and the Arke of thy
strength. Let thy prestes O LORDE God be clothed with health, and let thy
sayentes reioyse ouer this good.
42 LORDE God, turne not awaye the face of thine anoynted: thinke vpon the
mercies of thy seruaunt Dauid.

Chapter 7

1 And wha Salomo had ended his praier, there fell a fyre from heauen, and
cosumed the burntofferynge and the other offeringes. And the glory of the LORDE
fylled the house,
2 so that ye prestes coulde not go in to the house of the LORDE, while ye glory
of the LORDE filled ye LORDES house.
3 And all the children of Israel sawe the fyre fall downe, and the glory of the
LORDE ouer the house: and they fell on their knees wt their faces to the grounde
vpon the pauement, and worshipped, and gaue thankes vnto the LORDE, because he
is gracious, and because his mercy endureth for euer.
4 As for the kynge and all the people, they offred before the LORDE.
5 For kynge Salomon offred two and twetye thousande bullockes, and an hundreth
thousande and twentye thousande shepe, & so both the kynge and all the people
dedicated the house of God.
6 But the prestes stode in their watches, & the Leuites with the musicall
instrumentes of the LORDE, which kynge Dauid had caused to make for to geue
thankes vnto the LORDE, (because his mercy endureth for euer) wt psalmes of
Dauid thorow their hande. And the prestes blewe trompettes ouer agaynst them,
and all Israel stode.
7 And Salomon halowed the myddelmost courte, which was before the house of the
LORDE, for there prepared he the burntofferynges and the fat of the slayne
offeringes: for the brasen altare that Salomon made, might not conteyne all the
burntofferinges, meatofferynges, and the fat.
8 And at the same tyme helde Salomon a feast seuen daies longe, and all Israel
with him a very greate congregacion, from Hemath vnto the ryuer of Egipte,
9 and on the eight daye helde he a conuocacion. For the dedicacion of the altare
helde they seuen daies, and the feast seuen dayes also.
10 But on the thre and twentyeth daye of the seuenth moneth he let the people go
vnto their tentes ioyfull and with mery hertes because of all the good, that the
LORDE had done vnto Dauid, vnto Salomo, and to his people of Israel.
11 Thus fynished Salomo the house of ye LORDE, and the kinges house, and all yt
came in his hert to make in the house of the LORDE, and in his awne house,
prosperously.
12 And the LORDE appeared vnto Salomon in the nighte season, and sayde vnto him:
I haue herde thy prayer and chosen this place vnto my selfe for an house of
sacrifyce.
13 Beholde, whan I shut the heaue so yt it raine not, or commaunde the
greshopper to cosume the londe, or cause a pestilence to come amonge my people,
14 to humble my people, which is named after my name: and yf they praye, and
seke my face, and turne from their euell wayes, the wyl I heare them from
heauen, and wyll forgeue their sinne, and heale their londe.
15 So shal myne eyes now be open, and myne eares shal be attente vnto prayer in
this place.
16 Thus haue I now chosen this house, and sanctifyed it, that my name maye be
there for euer: and myne eyes and my hert shal allwaye be there.
17 And yf thou walke before me, as thy father Dauid walked, so that thou do all
that I commaunde the, and kepe myne ordinauces and lawes,
18 then wyll I stablishe the seate of thy kyngdome, acordynge as I promysed thy
father Dauid, and sayde: Thou shalt not wante a man to be lorde ouer Israel.
19 But yf ye turne backe, and forsake myne ordynaunces and commaundemetes which
I haue layed before you, and so go youre waye, and serue other goddes, and
worshippe them,
20 the wyll I rote you out of my londe that I haue geuen you: and this house
which I haue sanctifyed vnto my name, wil I cast awaye out of my presence, and
geue it ouer to be a byworde and fabell amoge all nacions.
21 And euery one that goeth by, shall be astonnyed at this hye house, and shall
hysse at it, and saye: Wherfore hath the LORDE dealte thus with this londe and
with this house?
22 Then shall it be sayde: Euen because they haue forsaken the LORDE God of
their fathers (which brought them out of the londe of Egipte) & haue cleued vnto
other goddes, & worshipped them, and serued the: therfore hath he brought all
this euell vpon the.

Chapter 8

1 And after twentye yeares (wherin Salomon buylded the house of the LORDE and
his awue house)
2 he buylded the cyties also which Hiram gaue vnto Salomon, and caused the
children of Israel to dwell therin.
3 And Salomon wente vnto Hemath Zoba, and made it stronge,
4 and buylded Thadmor in the wyldernes, and all the cornecyties which he buylded
in Hemath.
5 He buylded the vpper and lower Bethoron likewyse, so that they were stronge
cities wt walles, portes and barres.
6 And Baelath, and all the cornecites which Salomon had, and all the cities of
the charettes and of the horse men, and all that Salomon had lust to buylde,
both at Ierusalem and vpon Libanus, and in all the londe of his domynion.
7 All the remnaunt of the people of the Hethites, Amorites, Pheresites, Heuites
and Iebusites, which were not of the children of Israel,
8 and their children which they had lefte behynde them in the londe, (whom the
children of Israel had not vtterly destroied) those dyd Salomon make trybutaries
vnto this daye.
9 As for the children of Israel, Salomon made no bondmen of them vnto his worke,
but they were men of warre, and chefe captaynes, and ouer his charettes &
horsmen.
10 And the chefe of kynge Salomons officers were two hundreth and fyftie, which
ruled the people.
11 And Salomon caused Pharaos doughter to be fetched vp out of the cite of
Dauid, in to the house that he had bnylded for her: for he sayde: My wyfe shall
not dwell in the house of Dauid the kynge of Israel, for it is sanctifyed, in as
moch as ye Arke of the LORDE is come in to it.
12 Then offred Salomon burntofferynges vnto the LORDE vpon the LORDES altare,
which he had buylded before the porche,
13 euery one vpon his daye to offre after the comaundement of Moses, on the
Sabbathes, Newmones & at the appoynted seasons of the yeare, euen thre tymes,
namely in ye feast of vnleuended bred, in the feast of wekes, & in the feast of
Tabernacles.
14 And he set the prestes in ordre to their ministracion acordynge as Dauid his
father had appoynted, and the Leuites in their offyces, to geue thankes and to
mynister in the presence of the prestes, euery one vpon his daye. And the
dorekepers in their courses, euery one at his dore, for so had Dauid the ma of
God commaunded.
15 And they departed not from the kynges commaundement ouer the prestes and
Leuites in euery matter and in the treasures.
16 Thus was all Salomons busynesse made ready, from the daye that the foundacion
of the LORDES house was layed, tyll it was fynished, so that the house of the
LORDE was all prepared.
17 Then wente Salomon vnto Ezeon Geber, and vnto Eloth by the See syde in the
londe of Edomea.
18 And Hiram sent him shippes by his seruauntes which had knowlege of the See,
and they wente with Salomos seruauntes vnto Ophir, and fetched from thence foure
hundreth and fyftye talentes of golde, and broughte it vnto kynge Salomon.

Chapter 9

1 And whan the quene of rich Arabia herde the fame of Salomon, she came with a
very greate tryne to Ierusalem (with Camels that bare spyces and golde, and
precious stones) to proue Salomon with darke sentences. And whan she came vnto
Salomon, she spake vnto him all that she had deuysed in hir mynde.
2 And the kynge tolde her all hir matters, & Salomon had nothinge in secrete,
but he tolde it her.
3 And whan the Quene of riche Arabia sawe the wy?dome of Salomon, and ye house
that he had buylded,
4 the meates of his table, the dwellinges of his seruauntes, ye offices of his
mynisters and their garmentes, & his butlers and their apparell, and his parler
where he wente vp in to the house of the LORDE, she coulde no longer refrayne.
5 And she sayde vnto the kynge: It is true that I haue herde in my londe of thy
behaueoure and of thy wy?dome:
6 howbeit I wolde not beleue their wordes, tyll I came my selfe, & sawe it with
myne eyes: and beholde, the halfe of thy greate wy?dome hath not bene tolde me:
there is more in ye then the fame that I haue herde.
7 Happye are thy men, and happie are these thy seruauntes, yt allwaye stonde
before the, and heare thy wy?dome.
8 Praysed be the LORDE thy God, which had soch pleasure vnto the, that he hath
set the vpon his seate to be kynge vnto the LORDE thy God. Because thy God
loueth Israel, to set them vp for euer, therfore hath he ordeyned ye to be kynge
ouer them, that thou shuldest mayntayne iustice and equyte.
9 And she gaue ye kynge an hundreth and twentye talentes of golde, & very moch
spyce & precious stones. There were no mo soch spyces as these that the Quene of
riche Arabia gaue vnto kynge Salomo.
10 And Hirams seruauntes and the seruauntes of Salomon, which broughte golde
from Ophir, broughte costly tymber also & precious stones.
11 And of the same costly tymber dyd Salomon cause to make stares in the house
of the LORDE, and the kynges house, and harpes and psalteries for the Musicians.
There was no soch tymber sene before in the londe of Iuda.
12 But kynge Salomon gaue the Quene of riche Arabia all that she desyred and
axed, & moch more then she had broughte vnto the kynge. And she returned, and
departed into hir londe with hir seruauntes.
13 The golde that was broughte vnto Salomon in one yeare, was sixe hundreth and
sixe and thre score talentes,
14 besydes that ye chapmen and marchauntes broughte. And all the kynges of the
Arabians, and the lordes in ye londe broughte golde and syluer vnto Salomon.
15 Of the which kynge Salomon made two hundreth speares of beaten golde, so yt
sixe hundreth peces of beaten golde came vpo one speare:
16 & thre hundreth shildes of beaten golde, so that thre hundreth peces of
beaten golde came to one shylde: and the kynge put the in the house of the wod
of Libanus.
17 And the kynge made a greate seate of Yuery, and ouerlaied it with pure golde:
18 and the seate had sixe steppes, and a fotestole of golde festened vnto the
seate, and it had two leanynge postes vpon both the sydes of the seate,
19 and two lyons stode beside the leanynge postes, and there stode twolue Lions
vpo the syxe steppes on both the sides. In all realmes hath not soch one bene
made.
20 And all kynge Salomons drynkynge vessels were of golde, and all the vessels
of the house of the wod of Libanus, were of pure golde: for syluer was rekened
nothinge in Salomons tyme.
21 For the kynges shippes wente vpon the See with the seruauntes of Hira, & came
once in thre yeare, and brought golde, syluer, Yuery, Apes and Pecockes.
22 Thus was kynge Salomon greater then all the kynges vpon earth, in riches and
wisdome.
23 And all the kynges of ye earth desired (to se) Salomons face, and to heare
his wysdome, which God had geuen him in his hert.
24 And they brought him yearly euery ma his present: Iewels of siluer and golde,
raymet, harnesse, spyces, horses and Mules.
25 And Salomon had foure thousande charethorses, and twolue thousande horsmen,
and put them in the charetcities, and with the kynge at Ierusalem.
26 And he was lorde ouer all the kynges from the water vnto the londe of the
Philistynes, and to the coaste of Egipte.
27 And the kynge brought it so to passe, that there was as moch syluer at
Ierusalem as stones: and as many Ceders, as there were Molbery trees in the
valleys.
28 And there were horses broughte vnto him out of Egipte, and out of all
countres.
29 What more there is to saye of Salomon, both of his first and of his last,
beholde, it is writte in the Cronicles of the prophet Nathan, and in the
prophecies of Ahia of Silo, & in ye actes of Ieddi the Seer against Ieroboa ye
sonne of Nebat.
30 And Salomo reigned at Ierusale ouer all Israel fortie yeares.
31 And Salomon fell on slepe wt his fathers, & was buried in the cyte of Dauid
his father. And Roboa his sonne was kige i his steade.

Chapter 10

1 Roboam wente vnto Sichem: for all Israel was come vnto Sichem: to make him
kinge.
2 And whan Ieroboa the sonne of Nebat herde that, which was in Egipte ( whither
he was fled for kynge Salomon) he came agayne out of Egipte.
3 And they sent for him and called him. And Ieroboam came with all Israel, and
spake to Roboam, and sayde:
4 Thy father made or yocke greuous: make thou lighter now ye harde bondage of
thy father, and ye heuy yocke that he layed vpon vs, and we wyll submytte oure
selues vnto the.
5 He sayde vnto them: Come to me agayne ouer thre dayes. And ye people wente
their waye.
6 And Roboam the kynge axed coucell at the Elders, which had stonde before
Salomon his father whyle he lyued, and he sayde: What is youre councell, that I
maye geue this people an answere?
7 They spake vnto him, and sayde: Yf thou be louynge vnto this people, and deale
gently with them, and geue them good wordes, then shal they allwaye be obedient
vnto the.
8 Neuerthelesse he forsoke the councell of the Elders that they had geuen him,
and toke councell at ye yonge men which were growne vp wt him, and stode before
him.
9 And he sayde vnto the: What is youre councell, that we maye answere this
people, which haue spoken vnto me, and saide: Make oure yock lighter, yt thy
father layed vpon vs?
10 The yongemen yt were growne vp with him, spake vnto him, and sayde: Thus
shalt thou saye vnto the people, that haue talked with the & spoken: Thy father
made oure yock to heuy, make thou or yock lighter, Thus shalt thou saye vnto
them: My litle finger shalbe thicker then my fathers loynes.
11 Yf my father hath layed an heuy yock vpon you, I wyl make youre yock the
more. My father chastened you wt scourges, but I wyl beate you with scorpions.
12 Now whan Ieroboam and all the people came to Roboam on the thirde daye
(acordynge as ye kinge sayde: Come to me againe on the thirde daie)
13 the kynge gaue the an harde answere. And Roboa the kynge forsoke ye councell
of the Elders,
14 & spake vnto the after ye yonge mens councell, & sayde: Yf my father haue
made yor yock to heuy, I wil make it yet heuyer. My father chastened you wt
scourges, but I wyl beate you wt scorpios.
15 Thus the kynge folowed not ye peoples minde: for so was it determyned of God,
yt ye LORDE might stablishe his worde, which he spake by Ahia of Silo, vnto
Ieroboa ye sonne of Nebat.
16 But whan all Israel sawe that the kynge wolde not consente vnto them, ye
people answered the kynge, and sayde: What porcion haue we then in Dauid, or
inheritauce in the sonne of Isai? Let euery man of Israel get him to his tent.
Loke thou now to thy house Dauid. And all Israel wente vnto their tentes,
17 so that Roboam reigned but ouer the children of Israel that dwelt in the
cities of Iuda.
18 And Roboam sent forth Adoram the rentgatherer, but the children of Israel
stoned him to death. And kynge Roboa strengthed himselfe vpon his charet, to
flye vnto Ierusalem.
19 Thus fell Israel awaie fro the house of Dauid vnto this daye.

Chapter 11

1 And whan Roboam came to Ierusalem, he gathered together the house of Iuda and
BenIamin (euen an hudreth and foure score thousande chosen men of armes) to
fyghte agaynst Israel, that they mighte brynge the kyngdome agayne vnto Roboam.
2 But ye worde of the LORDE came to Semaia the man of God, and sayde:
3 Speake to Roboam the sonne of Salomon kynge of Iuda, and to all Israel yt are
in Iuda and BenIamin, and saye:
4 Thus sayeth the LORDE: Ye shal not go vp, ner fyght agaynst youre brethren:
let euery man go home agayne, for this is my dede. They herkened vnto the wordes
of ye LORDE, and wete not forth agaynst Ieroboa.
5 As for Roboa, he dwelt at Ierusalem, and buylded vp the stronge cities in
Iuda,
6 namely Bethlee, Etan, Tekoa,
7 Bethzur, Socho, Adulla,
8 Gath, Maresa, Siph,
9 Adoraim, Laches, Aseka,
10 Zarega, Aialon, and Hebron (which were the fensed cities in Iuda and
BenIamin)
11 & he made them stronge, and set prynces therin, & prouyded them of vytayles,
oyle and wyne,
12 and in all cities prepared he shildes and speares, and made them very
stronge. And Iuda and BenIamin were vnder him.
13 The Prestes and Leuites also came vnto him out of Israel and from all the
borders therof,
14 And lefte their suburbes & possession, and came to Iuda vnto Ierusalem: for
Ieroboam and his sonnes expelled them, that they shulde not execute the offyce
of ye presthode vnto ye LORDE.
15 But for himselfe he fouded prestes to ye hye places, & to feldedeuels &
calues, which he caused to make.
16 And after them came there men out of all the trybes of Israel, which gaue
ouer their hertes to seke ye LORDE God of Israel, & came to Ierusale for to
offre vnto the LORDE God of their fathers.
17 And so strengthed they ye kingdome of Iuda, and matayned Roboam the sonne of
Salomon thre yeare longe: for they walked in ye waye of Dauid & Salomon thre
yeares.
18 And Roboam toke Mahelath ye doughter of Ieremoth ye sonne of Dauid to wife, &
Abihail the doughter of Eliab ye sonne of Isai,
19 which bare him these sonnes: Ieus, Semaria & Saham.
20 After her toke he Maecha the doughter of Absalom, which bare him Abia, Athai
Sisa and Selomith.
21 But Roboam loued Maecha the doughter of Absalom better then all his wyues &
concubynes: for he had eightene wyues and thre score cocubynes, and begat eight
& twentye sonnes, and thre score doughters.
22 And Roboam set Abia the sonne of Maecha to be heade and prynce amonge his
brethren: for he thoughte to make him kynge:
23 for he was wyse, & more mightie then all his sonnes in all the countrees of
Iuda & Ben Iamin, and in all the stronge cities. And he gaue them plenteousnes
of fode, and desyred many wyues.

Chapter 12

1 Bvt wha the kyngdome of Roboam was confirmed and stablyshed, he forsoke the
lawe of the LORDE & all Israel with him.
2 And in the fyfth yeare of Roboam wete Sisack the kynge of Egipte vp agaynst
Ierusalem (for they had transgressed agaynst the LORDE)
3 with a thousande and two hundreth charettes, and with thre score thousande
horsmen, and the people were innumerable that came with him out of Egipte,
Libya, Suchim & out of Ethiopia,
4 and he wanne the stroge cities that were in Iuda, and came to Ierusalem.
5 Then came Semaia ye prophet vnto Roboam and to ye rulers of Iuda (which were
gathered together at Ierusalem for Sisack) & sayde vnto them: Thus sayeth ye
LORDE: Ye haue lefte me, therfore haue I lefte you also in Sisacks hande.
6 The the rulers in Israel with the kynge submytted them selues, and sayde: The
LORDE is righteous.
7 But wha the LORDE sawe yt they hubled them selues, ye worde of the LORDE came
to Semaia, & sayde: They haue humbled them selues, therfore wyl I not destroye
them, but I wyl geue them a litle delyueraunce, that my indignacion fall not
vpon Ierusalem by Sisack:
8 for they shalbe subdued vnto him, yt they maye knowe what it is to serue me, &
to serue the kyngdomes of the worlde.
9 Thus wete Sisack the kynge of Egipte vp to Ierusalem, & toke the treasures in
the house of the LORDE, & the treasures in the kynges house, and caried all
awaye, and toke the shyldes of golde that Salomon caused to make:
10 in steade wherof kynge Roboa made shyldes of stele, and commytted the vnto
the chefe fotemen, which kepte the dore of the kynges house.
11 And as oft as the kynge wente in to the house of the LORDE, ye fote men came
& bare them, & brought them againe in to ye fote mens chaber.
12 And for so moch as he submytted himselfe, ye wrath of ye LORDE turned fro
him, so that all was not destroied: for there was yet some good in Iuda.
13 Thus was Roboam the kinge stablished in Ierusalem, and reigned. One and
fortye yeare olde was Roboam wha he was made kynge, and reigned seuentene yeare
at Ierusalem in the cite, which the LORDE had chosen out of all the trybes of
Israel, to set his name there. His mothers name was Naema an Ammonitisse:
14 and he did euell, and prepared not his hert to seke the LORDE.
15 These actes of Roboam, both fyrst and last, are wrytten in the actes of
Semaia the prophet, & of Iddo the Seer, and are noted, & so are the warres that
Roboam and Ieroboam had together as longe as they lyued.
16 And Roboam fell on slepe with his fathers and was buryed in the cite of
Dauid, & Abia his sonne was kynge in his steade.

Chapter 13

1 In the eightenth yeare of kynge Ieroboam, was Abia kynge in Iuda,
2 & reigned thre yeare at Ierusalem. His mothers name was Michaia the doughter
of Vriel of Gibea. And there was warre betwene Abia and Ieroboam.
3 And Abia prepared himselfe to the battayll with foure hudreth thousande
stronge chosen men of warre. But Ieroboam made himselfe ready to fight agaynst
him wt eight hundreth thousande chosen men of strength.
4 And Abia gatt him vp vpon the hyll Zemaraim, which lyeth vpon mount Ephraim
and sayde: Herken vnto me thou Ieroboam and all Israel:
5 Knowe ye not that the LORDE God of Israel hath geuen Dauid ye kyngdome of
Israel for euer, vnto him and his sonnes with a Salt couenaunt?
6 But Ieroboa the sonne of Nebat, the seruaunt of Salomon Dauids sonne, gat him
vp & fell awaye from his lorde.
7 And there resorted vnto him vagaboundes and children of Belial, and haue
strengthed them selues against Roboa the sonne of Salomo: for Roboam was but
yonge and of a fearfull hert, and coulde not resiste them.
8 Now thinke ye to set youre selues against the kyngdome of the LORDE amonge the
sonnes of Dauid, for so moch as there is so greate a multitude of you, and haue
ye golden calues yt Ieroboam made for goddes.
9 Haue ye not expelled the prestes of the LORDE the children of Aaron and the
Leuites? and haue made you prestes of youre awne, euen as the people of the
londes? Who so euer commeth to fyll his hande with a yonge bullocke and seuen
rammes, shal be preste vnto them that are not goddes.
10 But with vs is ye LORDE oure God, who we forsake not: and the prestes that
minister vnto the LORDE, the children of Aaron and the Leuites in their busines,
11 and euery mornynge and euery euenynge kyndle they the burntofferynges vnto
the LORDE, and the swete incense, and prepare the shewbred vpo the pure table,
and the golden candilsticke with his lampes, to be kyndled euery euenynge: for
we wayte vpo the LORDE oure God. As for you, ye haue forsaken him.
12 Beholde, God is the captayne of oure hoost, and with vs are his prestes, and
the blowynge trompettes, to trompe agaynst you. Ye children of Israel, fight not
agaynst the LORDE God of yor fathers: for ye shal not prospere.
13 Neuertheles Ieroboam made a preuy watch on euery syde, to come vpon them
behynde, so that they were before Iuda, and ye preuy watch behynde.
14 Now wha Iuda turned them, beholde, there was battayll before the & behynde.
Then cryed they vnto ye LORDE, & the prestes tromped with the trompettes,
15 & wha euery man in Iuda gaue a shoute, God plaged Ieroboam and Israel before
Abia and Iuda.
16 And the children of Israel fled before Iuda, and God gaue them in to their
handes,
17 so that Abia & his people dyd a greate slaughter vpon them, and there fell
wounded of Israel fyue hundreth thousande chosen men.
18 Thus were the children of Israel subdued at that tyme, but the children of
Iuda were comforted, for they put their trust in ye LORDE God of their fathers.
19 And Abia folowed vpon Ieroboam, and wanne cities fro him, Bethel with the
vyllages therof, Iesana wt hir vyllages, and Ephron with the villages therof,
20 so that Ieroboam came nomore to strength, as longe as Abia lyued. And the
LORDE smote him that he dyed.
21 Now whan Abia was strengthed, he toke fourtene wyues, and begat two and
twentye sonnes and sixtene daughters.
22 What more there is to saye of Abia, and of his wayes and his doynges, it is
wrytten in the storye of the prophet Iddo.

Chapter 14

1 And Abia fell on slepe with his fathers, and they buryed him in ye cite of
Dauid: and Asa his sonne was kynge in his steade. In his tyme was the londe in
rest ten yeares.
2 And Asa dyd that which was good & right in the sighte of the LORDE his God,
3 and put awaye the straunge altares, and the hye places, and brake the pilers,
and hewed downe the groues,
4 and sayde vnto Iuda, that they shulde seke the LORDE God of their fathers, and
to do after ye lawe and commaundementes.
5 And the hye places and ymages put he awaye out of all the cities of Iuda: and
the kyngdome had rest before him.
6 And he builded stroge cities in Iuda, whyle the londe was in quietnes, & whyle
there was no warre agaynst him in the same yeares: for ye LORDE gaue him rest.
7 And he sayde vnto Iuda: Let vs buylde vp these cities, and fense them rounde
aboute with walles and towres, with portes and barres, while the londe is yet
with vs: for we haue soughte the LORDE oure God, and he hath geuen vs rest on
euery syde. So they buylded, and it wente prosperously with the
8 And Asa had an hoost of me which bare shildes & speares, out of Iuda thre C.
thousande, and out of BenIamin two hudreth and foure score thousande, that bare
shyldes & coulde shute wt bowes, and all these were mightie stronge men.
9 But Serah the Moryan came out against the wt an hoost of a thousande times a
thousande, and with thre hundreth charettes, and came vnto Maresa.
10 And Asa wente forth agaynst him. And they prepared them selues to the
battayll in the valley Zephata beside Maresa.
11 And Asa called vpon ye LORDE his God and sayde: LORDE, it is no differece wt
ye, to helpe by fewe or by many. Helpe vs O LORDE oure God: for oure trust is in
the, & in thy name are we come forth against this multitude. LORDE oure God, let
no man preuayle agaynst the.
12 And the LORDE smote the Morias before Asa and before Iuda, so that they fled.
13 And Asa with ye people that was by him, folowed vpon them vnto Gerar. And the
Morias fell, so that none of them remained alyue, but were smytten before the
LORDE and before his hoost. And they caried exceadinge moch spoyle from thence.
14 And he smote all the cyties aboute Gerar, for a fearfulnesse of the LORDE
came vpon them. And they spoyled all the cities, for there was moch spoyle in
them.
15 They smote the tentes of the catell also, and toke many shepe and Camels, and
came agayne to Ierusalem.

Chapter 15

1 And the sprete of God came vpo Asarias the sonne of Obed,
2 which wente forth to Asa, and sayde vnto him: Heare me Asa and all Iuda & Ben
Iamin: The LORDE is with you, whyle ye are with him: and yf ye seke him, he
wylbe founde of you. But yf ye forsake him, he shal forsake you also.
3 Neuertheles there shal be many dayes in Israel, that there shalbe no true God,
no prest to teach, & no lawe.
4 And whan they turne in their trouble vnto the LORDE God of Israel, and seke
him, he shalbe founde.
5 At that tyme shall it not be well with him that goeth out and in: for there
shal be greate vproures vpon all them yt dwell on the earth.
6 For one people shall all to smyte another, & one cite another: for God shal
vexe them wt all maner of trouble.
7 But be ye stronge, and let not youre handes be feble: for youre worke hath his
rewarde.
8 Whan Asa herde these wordes, and the propheciege (of Asarias the sonne) of
Obed the prophet, he toke a corage vnto him, and put awaye the abhominacions out
of all ye londe of Iuda and Ben Iamin, and out of the cities that he had wonne
vpon mount Ephraim: and renued the LORDES altare, which stode before the porche
of the LORDE.
9 And all Iuda and Ben Iamin gathered them selues together, and the straungers
with them out of Ephraim, Manasses and Simeon: for there fell many vnto him out
of Israel, whan they sawe that the LORDE his God was with him.
10 And they resorted vnto Ierusalem in the thirde moneth of the fyftenth yeare
of the reigne of Asa,
11 and the same daye offred they vnto the LORDE of the spoyle that they had
broughte, seuen hudreth oxen, and seuen thousande shepe.
12 And they entred in to ye couenaunt, that they wolde seke the LORDE God of
their fathers, with all their hert and with all their soule.
13 And who so euer wolde not seke ye LORDE God of Israel, shulde dye, both small
& greate, both man and woman:
14 and they sware vnto the LORDE with loude voyce, with shoutinge, with
trompettes and with shawmes.
15 And all Iuda were glad ouer the ooth: for they had sworne with all their
hert, and they soughte him with a whole wyll: and he was founde of them, and the
LORDE gaue them rest on euery syde.
16 And Asa ye kynge put downe his mother from the mynistracion, that she had
founded in the groue vnto Miplezeth. And Asa roted out hir Miplezeth, and beate
it in sunder, and brent it by the broke Cedron.
17 But the hye places were not put downe out of Israel. Yet was the hert of Asa
perfecte as longe as he lyued.
18 And loke what his father had halowed, and that he him selfe had halowed, he
broughte it in to ye house of God, syluer, golde and ornametes.
19 And there was no warre vnto the fyue and thirtieth yeare of the reigne of
Asa.

Chapter 16

1 In the sixe and thirtieth yeare of ye reigne of Asa, wente Baesa the kynge of
Israel vp agaynst Iuda, and buylded Rama, to let Asa the kynge of Iuda, yt he
shulde not go out and in:
2 But Asa toke forth the treasure in the house of the LORDE, and the syluer and
golde in the kynges house, and sent it vnto Benadad ye kynge of Syria, which
dwelt at Damascon, and caused to saye vnto him:
3 There is a couenaunt betwene me and the, betwene my father and thy father,
therfore haue I sent ye syluer and golde, that thou mayest breake ye couenaunt
with Baesa the kynge of Israel, that he maye departe fro me,
4 Benadad herkened vnto kynge Asa, and sent his hoost agaynst the cities of
Israel, which smote Eion, Dan and Abel Maim, and all the corne cities of
Nephtali.
5 Whan Baesa herde that, he lefte of from buyldinge Rama, and ceassed from his
worke.
6 But kynge Asa toke all Iuda vnto him, and caried awaye ye stones and tymber
(wherwith Baesa buylded) and he buylded Geba & Mizpa withall.
7 At the same tyme came Hanani the Seer vnto Asa the kynge of Iuda, and sayde
vnto him: Because thou hast trusted vnto the kynge of Syria, and not put thy
trust in the LORDE thy God, therfore is the power of the kynge of Syria escaped
thy hade.
8 Were not the Moryans and Lybians a greate multitude with exceadinge many
charettes and horsmen? Yet gaue the LORDE them in to thy hande, whan thou
dyddest put thy trust in him:
9 for the eyes of the LORDE loke rounde aboute all londes, to strength them yt
are in him with all their hert. Thou hast done vnwysely, therfore shalt thou
haue warre from hece forth.
10 But Asa was wroth at ye Seer, and put him in preson: for he murmured with him
ouer this thinge. And Asa oppressed certayne of the people at ye same tyme.
11 These actes of Asa both first and last, beholde, they are wrytten in the boke
of ye kynges of Iuda & Israel.
12 And Asa was diseased in his fete in the nyne and thirtieth yeare of his
reigne, and endured ther ouer. Nether soughte he the LORDE in his sicknesse, but
trusted vnto Phisicians.
13 Thus fell Asa on slepe with his fathers, & dyed in the one and fortieth yeare
of his reigne,
14 & was buried in his awne sepulcre which he had caused to be grauen for him
selfe in the cite of Dauid. And they layed him vpon his bed, which was fylled
with swete odoures & all maner of spyces (made after ye Apotecaries craft) and
made a very greate burnynge.

Chapter 17

1 And Iosaphat his sonne was kynge in his steade, & waxed mightie against
Israel.
2 And he put men of warre in all the stronge cities of Iuda, and set officers in
the londe of Iuda, and in the cities of Ephraim, which Asa his father had wonne.
3 And the LORDE was wt Iosaphat: for he walked in the olde wayes of his father
Dauid, & soughte not Baalim,
4 but the God of his father, & walked in his commaundementes, & not after the
workes of Israel:
5 therfore dyd the LORDE stablyshe the kyngdome in his hade. And all Iuda gaue
presentes vnto Iosaphat, & he had greate riches & worshippe.
6 And whan his hert was coraged in the wayes of the LORDE, he put downe styll
the hye places and groues out of Iuda.
7 In the thirde yeare of his reigne sent he his prynces, Benhail, Obadia,
Zacharias, Nethaneel & Michaia, to teach in the cities of Iuda:
8 & with them the Leuites: Semaia, Nethania, Sebadia, Asahel, Semiramoth,
Ionathan, Adonia, Tobia & Tob Adonia, & with them ye prestes Elisama & Ioram.
9 And they taughte in Iuda, & had the boke of the lawe of ye LORDE wt them, &
wente aboute in all ye cities of Iuda, & taughte the people.
10 And the feare of the LORDE came vpon all ye kyngdomes in the countrees that
laye aboute Iuda, so yt they foughte not agaynst Iosaphat.
11 And the Philistynes broughte presentes and trybute of syluer vnto Iosaphat.
And the Arabians broughte him seuen thousande and seuen hundreth rammes, and
seuen thousande and seuen hundreth he goates.
12 Thus increased Iosaphat, & grewe euer greater. And he buylded castels and
corne cities in Iuda.
13 And dyd moch in the cities of Iuda, and had valeaunt and mightie men at
Ierusalem.
14 And this was ye ordinaunce thorow out the house of their fathers, which were
rulers ouer the thousandes in Iuda. Adna a captayne, & wt him were thre hudreth
thousande mightie men.
15 Nexte vnto him was Iohanan ye chefe, and with him were two hundreth and foure
score thousande.
16 Nexte him was Amasia the sonne of Sichri the fre wyllinge of ye LORDE, and
with him were two hundreth thousande valeaunt men.
17 Of the children of Ben Iamin was Eliada a mightie man, and with him were two
hundreth thousande ready with bowes and shyldes.
18 Nexte vnto him was Iosabad, and with him were an hundreth and foure score
thousande harnessed men of warre.
19 All these wayted vpon the kynge, besydes those that the kynge had layed in
the stroge cities thorow out all Iuda.

Chapter 18

1 And Iosaphat had greate riches and worshippe, and made frendshippe wt Achab.
2 And after two yeares wente he downe to Achab vnto Samaria. And Achab caused
many shepe and oxe to be slayne for him and for ye people that were with him.
And he counceled him to go vp vnto Ramoth in Gilead.
3 And Achab the kynge of Israel sayde vnto Iosaphat the kynge of Iuda: Go with
me vnto Ramoth in Gilead. He sayde vnto him: I am as thou, and my people as thy
people, we wyll go with the vnto the battayll.
4 But Iosaphat sayde vnto the kynge of Israel: Axe councell (I praye the) this
daye at the worde of the LORDE.
5 And the kynge of Israel gathered the prophetes together, euen foure hundreth
men, & saide vnto them: Shal we go to the battayll vnto Ramoth in Gilead, or
shal I let it alone? They sayde: Go vp, God shal delyuer it into the kynges
hade.
6 But Iosaphat sayde: Is there not yet one prophet of the LORDE here, yt we maye
axe at him?
7 The kynge of Israel sayde vnto Iosaphat: There is yet one man, at whom we maye
axe of ye LORDE: but I hate him, for he prophecieth me no good, but allwaye
euell, namely Micheas the sonne of Iemla. Iosaphat sayde: Let not the kynge saye
so.
8 And the kynge of Israel called one of his chamberlaynes, & sayde: Brynge
hither soone Micheas the sonne of Iemla.
9 And the kynge of Israel, and Iosaphat the kynge of Iuda, sat either of them
vpon his seate, arayed in their garmentes. Euen in the place at the dore of the
porte of Samaria sat they, and all ye prophetes prophecied before them.
10 And Sedechias the sonne of Cnaena had made him hornes of yron, and sayde:
Thus sayeth the LORDE: With these shalt thou pu?she at the Syrians, tyll thou
brynge them to naughte.
11 And all the prophetes prophecied likewyse, & sayde: Go vp vnto Ramoth in
Gilead, and thou shalt prospere, and ye LORDE shal delyuer it in to the kynges
hande.
12 And the messaunger that wente to call Micheas, spake vnto him, and sayde:
Beholde, ye wordes of the prophetes are with one acorde good before the kynge:
let thy worde (I praye the) be as one of theirs, and speake thou good also.
13 But Micheas sayde: As truly as the LORDE lyueth, loke what my God sayeth vnto
me, yt wyl I speake.
14 And whan he came to the kynge, the kynge sayde vnto him: Micheas, shulde we
go vnto Ramoth in Gilead to the battayll, or shulde we let it alone? He saide:
Go vp, and ye shal prospere. It shal be geue you in youre handes.
15 But ye kynge sayde vnto him: I charge ye yet agayne, that thou tell me
nothinge but ye trueth in the name of the LORDE.
16 Then saide he: I sawe all Israel scatered abrode vpo the mountaynes, as the
shepe yt haue no shepherde. And the LORDE sayde: Haue these no lorde? Let euery
one turne home agayne in peace.
17 The sayde the kynge of Israel vnto Iosaphat: Dyd not I tell the, yt he wolde
prophecie me no good, but euell?
18 And he sayde: Therfore heare ye the worde of the LORDE: I sawe the LORDE syt
vpon his seate, and all the hoost of heauen stondinge at his righte hande & at
his lefte.
19 And the LORDE sayde: Wo wyll disceaue Achab the kynge of Israel, that he maye
go vp & fall at Ramoth in Gilead? And whan one sayde thus, another so,
20 there came forth a sprete, and stode before ye LORDE, and sayde: I wyl
disceaue him. The LORDE sayde vnto him: Wherwith?
21 He sayde: I wyll go forth, and be a false sprete in the mouth of all his
prophetes. And he sayde: Thou shalt disceaue him, and shalt be able: go thy
waye, and do so.
22 Beholde now, the LORDE hath geuen a false sprete in the mouth of all these
thy prophetes, and the LORDE hath spoke euell agaynst the.
23 Then stepte forth Sedechias the sonne of Cnaena, and smote Micheas vpon the
cheke, and sayde: Which waye is the sprete of ye LORDE departed fro me, to
speake thorow the?
24 Micheas sayde: Beholde, thou shalt se it, whan thou commest in to ye ynmost
chamber to hyde the.
25 But the kynge of Israel sayde: Take Micheas, and let him remayne wt Amon the
ruler of the cite, and with Ioas the sonne of Melech,
26 and saye: Thus sayeth the kynge: Put this man in preson, and fede him wt bred
and water of trouble, tyll I come agayne in peace.
27 Micheas saide: Yf thou commest agayne in peace, then hath not the LORDE
spoken thorow me. And he sayde: Herken to all ye people.
28 So the kynge of Israel, and Iosaphat ye kynge of Iuda wente vp vnto Ramoth in
Gilead.
29 And ye kynge of Israel sayde vnto Iosaphat: Chaunge thy clothes, and come to
the battayll in thine araye. And ye kynge of Israel chaunged his rayment, & came
in to the battayll.
30 But the kynge of Syria had commaunded the rulers of his charettes: Ye shal
fighte nether agaynst small ner greate, but onely agaynst the kynge of Israel.
31 Now whan the rulers of the charrettes sawe Iosaphat, they thoughte: It is ye
kynge of Israel, and they wete aboute to fighte agaynst him. But Iosaphat cryed,
and the LORDE helped him. And God turned them from him:
32 for whan the rulers of the charettes sawe that it was not ye kynge of Israel,
they turned back from him.
33 But a certayne man bended his bowe harde, & shot the kynge of Israel betwene
the mawe and the longes. The sayde he vnto his charet man: Turne thine hade, and
cary me out of the hoost, for I am wounded.
34 And the battayll was sore the same daye. And the kynge of Israel stode vpon
his charet agaynst the Syrians vntyll the euenynge, and dyed wha the Sonne wente
downe.

Chapter 19

1 Bvt Iosaphat the kynge of Iuda came home agayne in peace vnto Ierusalem.
2 And Iehu ye sonne of Hanani the Seer wete forth to mete him, & sayde vnto
kynge Iosaphat: Shuldest thou so helpe the vngodly, and loue them that hate the
LORDE? And for this cause is ye wrath vpo the from the LORDE:
3 neuertheles there is some good founde in the, that thou hast put the groues
out of the londe, and hast prepared thine hert to seke God.
4 So Iosaphat abode at Ierusalem. And he wente agayne amonge the people, from
Berseba vnto mout Ephraim, and broughte them agayne to the LORDE God of their
fathers.
5 And he set Iudges thorow out the londe, in all the stronge cities of Iuda, and
a certayne in euery cite.
6 And sayde vnto the Iudges: Take hede what ye do: for ye execute not the
iudgment of man, but of the LORDE, and he is with you in iudgmet:
7 therfore let the feare of the LORDE be with you, and bewarre, and do it: for
with the LORDE oure God there is no vnrighteousnes, ner respecte of personnes,
ner acceptinge of giftes.
8 And at Ierusalem dyd Iosaphat ordeyne certayne of the Leuites and prestes, and
of the awnciet fathers of Israel for ye iudgment of the LORDE, and ouer the
matter of the lawe, and caused them to dwell at Ierusalem,
9 and commaunded them, and sayde: Se that ye do thus in the feare of the LORDE,
in faithfulnes & in a perfect hert.
10 In all causes that come vnto you from youre brethren (which dwell in their
cities) betwene bloude and bloude, betwene lawe and commaundement, betwene
statutes and ordinaunces ye shal enforme them, yt they synne not against the
LORDE, and so the wrath to come vpon you and youre brethren. Do thus, and ye
shal not offende.
11 Beholde, Amaria the prest is chefe ouer you in all causes of ye LORDE: so is
Sabadia the sonne of Ismael prynce in the house of Iuda in all the kynges
matters: Ye haue officers likewyse the Leuites before you. Take a good corage
vnto you, and be doynge, and the LORDE shalbe with the good.

Chapter 20

1 After this came the childre of Moab, the children of Ammon, and certayne of
Amanim wt them, to fighte against Iosaphat.
2 And they came and tolde Iosaphat, and sayde: There cometh a greate multitude
agaynst the from beyonde the See of Syria, & beholde, they are at Hazezon
Thamar, that is Engaddi.
3 And Iosaphat was afrayed, & set his face to seke ye LORDE, & caused a fast to
be proclamed in all Iuda.
4 And Iuda came together to seke the LORDE. And out of all ye cities of Iuda
came they to seke the LORDE.
5 And Iosaphat stode amoge ye cogregacion of Iuda & Ierusalem in the house of ye
LORDE before the new courte,
6 and sayde: O LORDE God of oure fathers, art not thou God in heauen, and hast
domynion in all the kyngdomes of the Heythen? And in thy hande is strength and
power, and there is no man that can withstode the.
7 Hast not thou or God expelled the inhabiters of this londe before thy people
of Israel? and hast geue it vnto the sede of Abraham thy louer for euer?
8 so that they haue dwelt in it, & haue buylded the a Sanctuary vnto yi name
therin, and sayde:
9 Yf there come eny plage, swerde, iudgmet, pestilence, or derth vpon vs, we
wyll stonde before this house euen before the (for thy name is in this house)
and wyll crye vnto the in oure trouble, and thou shalt heare, and shalt saue vs.
10 Beholde now, the children of Ammon, of Moab, & they of mount Seir, vpon whom
thou woldest not suffre the children of Israel to go, whan they wente out of the
londe of Egipte, but they were fayne to departe from the, and not to destroye
them:
11 and beholde, they deale contrarely with vs, and come to thrust vs out of the
inheritaunce, that thou hast geuen vs in possession.
12 O oure God, wylt thou not iudge them? For in vs is no strength to withstonde
this greate multitude that commeth agaynst vs. We knowe not what we shulde do,
but oure eyes loke vnto the.
13 And all Iuda stode before the LORDE, with their children, wyues and sonnes.
14 But vpon Iehasiel the sonne of Zacharias, the sonne of Benaia, the sonne of
Iehiel, the sonne of Mathania the Leuite of ye children of Assaph, came the
sprete of the LORDE in the myddes of the congregacion,
15 and sayde: Geue hede all thou Iuda, and ye inhabiters of Ierusalem, and thou
kynge Iosaphat: Thus sayeth the LORDE vnto you: Be not ye afrayed, nether feare
ye this greate multitude: for it is not ye that fighte, but God.
16 Tomorow shal ye go downe vnto the. And beholde, they go vp by Sis, and ye
shal fynde them at the reed see by the broke before the wyldernes of Ieruel:
17 for ye shall not fighte in this cause. Do ye but steppe forth, and stonde,
and se the health of the LORDE that is with you. Feare not O Iuda and Ierusalem,
and be not afrayed, tomorow go ye forth agaynst them, and the LORDE shalbe with
you.
18 The Iosaphat bowed him selfe wt his face to the earth, & all Iuda, & the
inhabiters of Ierusalem fell before the LORDE, & worshipped the LORDE.
19 And the Leuites of ye childre of the Kahathites & of the children of the
Corahites arose to prayse the LORDE God of Israel wt loude voyce on hye.
20 And they gat them vp early in ye mornynge, and wete forth by the wyldernesse
of Thekoa. And whan they were goynge out, Iosaphat stode, & sayde: Herke vnto me
O Iuda, & ye indwellers of Ierusale: Put youre trust in the LORDE yor God, & ye
shal be safe: and geue credence vnto his prophetes, & ye shall prospere.
21 And he gaue councell vnto ye people, and appoynted the syngers vnto ye LORDE,
and them that gaue prayse in the bewtye of holynes to go before the harnessed
me, & to saye: O geue thankes vnto the LORDE, for his mercy endureth for euer.
22 And whan they beganne to geue thankes and prayse, the LORDE caused the hynder
watch that was come agaynst Iuda, to come vpon the childre of Ammon, Moab & them
of mount Seir, and they smote them.
23 Then stode the children of Ammon & Moab agaynst them of mount Seir, to damne
them, and to destroye them. And whan they had destroyed them of mount Seir, one
helped another to destroye them selues also.
24 And whan Iuda came to Mispa vnto the wyldernes, they turned them towarde the
multitude, and beholde, the deed bodies laye vpo the earth, so that none was
escaped.
25 And Iosaphat came with his people to deuyde the spoyles of them. And they
founde amonge them so moch goodes and rayment and precious Iewels (which they
toke from them) that they coulde not beare them. And thre dayes were they
deuydinge the spoyle, for it was so moch.
26 On the fourth daye came they together into the valley of blessynge: for there
blessed they the LORDE. Therfore is the place called the valley of blessinge
vnto this daye.
27 So euery man of Iuda & Ierusalem turned back agayne, & Iosaphat before them,
to go to Ierusale with ioye: for ye LORDE had geuen them gladnesse on their
enemies.
28 And they entred in to Ierusalem with psalteries, harpes & trompettes vnto the
house of the LORDE.
29 And there came a feare of God ouer all the kyngdomes in the londes, whan they
herde that the LORDE had foughte agaynst ye enemies of Israel.
30 Thus was ye kyngdome of Iosaphat in quyetnes, & God gaue him rest on euery
syde.
31 And Iosaphat reigned ouer Iuda, & was fyue & thirtie yeare olde whan he was
made kynge, & reigned fyue & twentye yeare at Ierusalem. His mothers name was
Asuba the doughter of Silhi
32 And he walked in the waye of his father Asa, & departed not asyde from doynge
yt which was righte in the sighte of the LORDE:
33 sauynge that ye hye places were not put downe, for the people had not yet
prepared their hert to the God of their fathers.
34 What more there is to saye of Iosaphat, both the first & the last, beholde,
it is wrytten in the actes of Iehu ye sonne of Hanani, which he noted vp in the
boke of the kynges of Israel.
35 Afterwarde dyd Iosaphat the kynge of Iuda agree wt Ahasia the kynge of
Israel, which was vngodly in his doynges.
36 And he agreed with him to make shippes, for to go vpon the see. And they made
the shippes at Ezeon Gaber.
37 But Elieser the sonne of Dodana of Maresa prophecied agaynst Iosaphat, and
sayde: Because thou hast agreed with Ahasia, therfore hath the LORDE broken thy
workes. And so ye shippes were broken, & mighte not go vpon the See.

Chapter 21

1 And Iosaphat fell on slepe wt his fathers, & was buried wt his fathers in the
cite of Dauid, & Ioram his sonne was kynge in his steade.
2 And he had brethre the sonnes of Iosaphat: Asaria, Iehiel, Zacharias, Asaria,
Michael & Sephatia. All these were the children of Iosaphat kynge of Iuda.
3 And their father gaue them many giftes of syluer, golde & Iewels, wt stronge
cities in Iuda. But the kyngdome gaue he vnto Ioram: for he was the first borne.
4 But whan Ioram came vp ouer his fathers kyngdome, & had gotten the power of
it, he slewe all his brethre with the swerde, & certayne rulers also in Israel.
5 Two & thirtie yeare olde was Ioram whan he was made kynge, & reigned eight
yeare at Ierusale,
6 & walked in the waye of ye kynges of Israel, euen as the house of Achab dyd
(for Achabs doughter was his wife) & he dyd that which was euell in the sighte
of the LORDE.
7 Neuertheles ye LORDE wolde not destroie the house of Dauid, for the
couenauntes sake, which he made wt Dauid, and acordinge as he had sayde, yt he
wolde geue him and his children a lanterne for euermore.
8 At ye same tyme fell ye Edomites awaye from Iuda, and made a kynge ouer them
selues:
9 for Ioram had gone ouer with his captaynes and all the charettes with him, &
had gotten him vp in the night season, and slayne the Edomites on euery syde,
and the rulers of the charettes:
10 therfore fell ye Edomites awaye from Iuda vnto this daye. At ye same tyme
fell Lybna awaye from him also: because he forsoke the LORDE God of his fathers.
11 He made hye places also on the mountaynes in Iuda, & caused them of Ierusale
to go awhorynge, and disceaued Iuda.
12 But there came a wrytinge vnto him fro the prophet Elias, sayenge: Thus
sayeth the LORDE God of thy father Dauid: Because thou hast not walked in the
wayes of thy father Iosaphat, nether in ye wayes of Asa the kynge of Iuda,
13 but walkest in the waye of the kynges of Israel, and makest Iuda and them of
Ierusalem to go awhorynge after the whordome of the house of Achab, and hast
slayne thy brethren also of thy fathers house, which were better the thou.
14 Beholde, the LORDE shal smyte the wt a greate plage on thy people, on thy
children & thy wyues, and on all thy substaunce.
15 But thou thy selfe shalt haue moch sicknesse in thy bowels, tyll thy bowels
go forth from daye to daye for very disease.
16 So ye LORDE raysed vp agaynst Ioram, the sprete of the Philistynes, &
Arabians, which lye besyde the Morians,
17 and they wente vp in to Iuda, and waysted it, and caried awaye all the
substaunce that was founde in the kynges house, & his sonnes, and his wyues, so
yt there was not one sonne lefte him, saue Ioahas his yogest sonne.
18 And after all this dyd ye LORDE smyte him in his bowels, with soch a
sicknesse as coulde not be healed.
19 And whyle that endured from daye to daye, whan the tyme of two yeares was
expyred, his bowels wente from him wt his sicknesse, and he dyed in euell
diseases. And they made not a burninge ouer him, as they dyd vnto his fathers.
20 Two and thirtie yeare olde was he wha he was made kynge, and reigned eight
yeare at Ierusale, and walked not well. And they buried him in the cite of
Dauid, but not amoge the sepulcres of the kynges.

Chapter 22

1 And they of Ierusalem made Ochosias his yogest sonne kynge in his steade: for
the men of warre that came wt the hoost of the Arabians, had slayne all ye
first, therfore reigned Ochosias the sonne of Ioram kynge of Iuda.
2 Two and fortye yeare olde was Ochosias whan he was made kynge, and reigned one
yeare at Ierusalem. His mothers name was Athalia the doughter of Amri.
3 And he walked also in ye wayes of the house of Achab: for his mother entysed
him so yt he was vngodly.
4 Therfore dyd he euell in ye sighte of the LORDE, euen as ye house of Achab:
for they were his councell geuers after his fathers death, to destroye him, and
he walked after their councell.
5 And he wente with Ioram the sonne of Achab kynge of Israel, to the battayll
vnto Ramoth in Gilead, agaynst Hasael the kynge of Syria. But the Syrias smote
Ioram,
6 so yt he turned back to be healed at Iesreel: for he had woundes that were
geuen him at Rama, whan he foughte with Hasael the kynge of Syria. And Asarias
the sonne of Ioram kynge of Iuda wete downe to vyset Ioram ye sonne of Achab at
Iesreel, which laye sicke:
7 For it was ordeyned of God vnto Ochosias, that he shulde come to Ioram, & so
to go forth with Ioram agaynst Iehu ye sonne of Nimsi, whom the LORDE had
anoynted to rote out the house of Achab.
8 Now whan Iehu wolde be aueged of ye house of Achab, he founde certayne rulers
of Iuda, and ye childre of Ochosias brethren which serued Ochosias, and he slewe
them.
9 And he soughte Ochosias, and they ouertoke him, wha he had hyd him at Samaria:
& he was broughte vnto Iehu, which slewe him, and they buried him, for they
sayde: He his the sonne of Iosaphat, which soughte ye LORDE with all his hert.
And there was no man more of the house of Ochosias that mighte be kynge.
10 Whan Athalia the mother of Ochosias sawe yt hir sonne was deed, she gat hir
vp, & destroyed all the kynges sede in the house of Iuda.
11 But Iosabeath ye kynges sister toke Ioas ye sonne of Ochosias, and stale him
awaye fro amonge the kynges childre yt were slayne, & put him with his norse in
a chamber. Thus Iosabeath kynge Iorams douhgter, the wyfe of Ioiada the prest,
hyd him from Athalia, so yt he was not slayne: for she was Ochosias sister.
12 And he was hyd with them in the house of God sixe yeares, for so moch as
Athalia was quene in the londe.

Chapter 23

1 Bvt in the seuenth yeare was Ioiada bolde, and toke the rulers ouer hundreds:
namely Asaria ye sonne of Ieraham, Ismael ye sonne of Iohanan, Asaria ye sonne
of Obed, Maeseia ye sonne of Adaia, and Elisaphat ye sonne of Sichri with him,
into the couenaunt:
2 and they wente aboute in Iuda, and broughte ye Leuites together out of all the
cities of Iuda, and the chefe fathers of Israel, to come vnto Ierusalem.
3 And all the cogregacion made a couenaunt with the kynge in the house of God,
and he sayde vnto them: Beholde, the kynges sonne shal be kynge, eue as the
LORDE spake cocernynge the children of Dauid.
4 This is it therfore yt ye shal do: The thirde parte of you that entre on the
Sabbath, shalbe amonge the prestes & Leuites, which are dorekepers at the
thresholdes:
5 & one thirde parte in the kynges house, and one thirde parte at the grounde
porte. But all the people shalbe in the courtes of the house of the LORDE,
6 and that no man go in to the house of the LORDE, excepte the prestes and
Leuites that mynister there, they shal go in: for they are halowed. And let all
ye people wayte vpon the LORDE.
7 And the Leuites shal get them rounde aboute ye kynge, euery one with his
weapen in his hande. And who so els goeth in to ye house, let him dye. And they
shall be wt the kynge wha he goeth out & in.
8 And the Leuites & all Iuda dyd as Ioiada ye prest had commaunded, and euery
one toke his men that entred on the Sabbath, wt those yt wente of on the
Sabbath: for Ioiada ye prest suffred not those two companies to parte asunder.
9 And Ioiada ye prest gaue the captaynes ouer hundreds speares & shyldes, and
kynge Dauids weapens, which were in the house of God,
10 and set all the people euery one wt his weapen in his hande, from the righte
corner of the house, vnto the lefte corner of the altare, and to the house warde
aboute the kynge.
11 And they broughte forth the kynges sonne, & set the crowne vpon his heade,
and gaue them the wytnesse, & made him kynge. And Ioiada wt his sonnes anoynted
him, & sayde: God saue the kynge.
12 But whan Athalia herde the noyse of ye people yt ranne together and praysed
ye kynge, she wente forth to the people in to ye house of the LORDE,
13 and loked: and beholde, ye kynge stode in his place at ye intraunce, and the
rulers and trompettes aboute ye kynge: and all the people of the londe were
glad, & blewe the trompes, and there were syngers yt coulde playe wt all maner
of musicall instrumentes. But she rete hir clothes, & sayde: Sedicion, sedicion.
14 Neuertheles Ioiada ye prest gat him forth with the captaynes ouer hundreds
and rulers of the hoost, and sayde vnto them: Brynge her forth betwene ye
walles, & who so euer foloweth her, shal be slayne with ye swerde: for the prest
had comaunded, that she shulde not be slayne in ye house of the LORDE.
15 And they layed handes on her. And whan she came at the intraunce of the
horsgate of the kynges house, they put her to death there.
16 And Ioiada made a couenaunt betwene him and all the people, and the kynge, yt
they shulde be the people of the LORDE.
17 The wete all the people in to the house of Baal, and destroyed it, & brake
downe his altares & ymages, & slewe Mathan the prest of Baal before the altare.
18 And Ioiada appoynted ye officers in the house of the LORDE amoge the prestes
& Leuites whom Dauid had ordeyned for ye house of the LORDE, to offre
burntsacrifices vnto ye LORDE, as it is wrytten in the lawe of Moses: wt ioye &
songes made by Dauid.
19 And ye porters set he at ye gates of ye house of ye LORDE, yt none shulde
entre, which were defiled wt eny maner of thinge.
20 And he toke the captaynes ouer hudreds and the mightie men and lordes of ye
people, and all the people of the londe, and brought the kinge downe from the
house of the LORDE, and broughte him thorow the hye porte of the kynges house,
and caused the kinge sit vpon the seate royall.
21 And all the people of the lode were glad, and the cite was at rest. But
Athalia was slayne with the swerde.

Chapter 24

1 Ioas was seuen yeare olde whan he was made kynge, and reigned fortie yeare at
Ierusale. His mothers name was Zibea of Berseba.
2 And Ioas dyd that which was right in the sight of the LORDE, as longe as
Ioiada the prest lyued.
3 And Ioiada gaue him two wiues, & he begat sonnes & doughters.
4 Afterwarde deuysed Ioas to renue the house of the LORDE,
5 & gathered together the prestes and Leuites, & sayde vnto the: Go forth vnto
all the cities of Iuda, & gather the money of all Israel, to repayre ye house of
God yearly, and do it righte soone: but the Leuites made no haist.
6 Then the kynge called Ioiada the pryncipall, and sayde vnto him: Why lokest
thou not vnto the Leuites, yt they bringe in from Iuda and Ierusalem, the
colleccion which Moses the seruaunt of the LORDE appoynted to be gathered amoge
Israel for the Tabernacle of witnes?
7 For yt vngodly Athalia & hir sonnes haue waisted the house of God: and all
that was halowed for the house of the LORDE, haue they bestowed on Baalim.
8 Then commaunded the kynge to make a chest, and to set it without at the
intraunce of the house of the LORDE:
9 & caused it to be proclamed in Iuda and Ierusale, that they shulde bringe in
to the LORDE, the colleccio, which Moses the seruaut of God appointed vnto
Israel in ye wildernes.
10 The were all ye rulers glad, & so were all ye people, & brought it, and cast
it in to the chest, tyll it was full.
11 And whan the tyme was yt the Leuites shulde brynge the Arke at ye kinges
comaundement (whan they sawe yt there was moch money therin) then came the
kinges scrybe, & he yt was appoynted of the chefe prest, and emptyed the chest,
and caried it againe in to his place. Thus dyd they euery daye, so that they
gathered moch money together.
12 And ye kinge & Ioiada gaue it vnto ye workmasters of ye house of the LORDE,
and they hired masons & carpenters to repayre the house of ye LORDE, and men
that coulde worke in yron and brasse, to repayre the house of ye LORDE.
13 And the labourers wrought, so that ye repairinge in ye worke wente forwarde
thorow their hande, and they set the house of God in his bewtye, and made it
stronge.
14 And whan they had perfourmed this, they brought the resydue of the money
before the kynge and Ioiada, wherof there were made vessels for the house of the
LORDE, vessels for the ministracion and burntofferinge, spones and ornamentes of
golde and siluer. And they offred burntofferynges allwaye in the house of the
LORDE, as longe as Ioiada lyued.
15 And Ioiada waxed olde, and had lyued longe ynough, and dyed, & was an
hundreth and thirtie yeare olde whan he dyed:
16 and they buried him in the cite of Dauid, amonge the kynges, because he had
done good vnto Israel, and towarde God & his house.
17 And after the death of Ioiada, came the rulers in Iuda, and worshipped the
kynge. Then consented the kynge vnto the.
18 And they forsoke the house of the LORDE God of their fathers, and serued ye
groues and ymages. Then came ye wrath of the LORDE vpo Iuda and Ierusalem
because of this trespace of theirs.
19 Yet sent he prophetes vnto the, yt they shulde turne vnto the LORDE, & they
testified vnto the: but they wolde not heare.
20 And the sprete of God came vpon Zachary the sonne of Ioiada the prest, which
stode ouer ye people, & sayde vnto the: Thus sayeth God: Wherfore do ye
transgresse the comaundementes of the LORDE, which shall not be to yor
prosperite: for ye haue forsaken ye LORDE, therfore shal he forsake you.
21 Neuertheles they conspyred agaynst him, & stoned him at ye kynges
comaundement in ye courte of the house of the LORDE.
22 And Ioas ye kinge thought not on the mercy yt Ioiada his father had done for
him, but slewe his sonne. Notwithstondinge wha he dyed, he sayde: The LORDE shal
loke vpon it, and requyre it.
23 And whan the yeare was gone aboute, ye power of the Syrians wente vp, & came
to Iuda & Ierusalem, and destroyed the rulers in the people, and sent all the
spoiles of them vnto Damascon.
24 For the power of the Syrians came but with a fewe men, yet gaue ye LORDE a
very greate power in to their hande: because they had forsaken ye LORDE God of
their fathers. They executed iudgment also vpon Ioas.
25 And whan they departed fro him, they lefte him in greate sicknesses.
Neuertheles his seruauntes conspyred against him (because of the bloude of the
childre of Ioiada the prest) & slewe him vpo his bed, & he dyed, and they buryed
him in the cite of Dauid, but not amonge the sepulcres of the kynges.
26 They that conspyred against him, were these: Sabad ye sonne of Simeath the
Ammonitisse, and Iosabad the sonne of Simrith the Moabitisse.
27 As for his sonnes, and the summe that was gathered vnder him, and the
buyldinge of the house of God beholde, they are wrytten in the storye in the
boke of the kynges. And Amasias his sonne was kynge in his steade.

Chapter 25

1 Fyue and twentye yeare olde was Amasias whan he was made kynge, and reigned
nyne and twentye yeare at Ierusalem. His mothers name was Ioadan of Ierusalem.
2 And he dyd yt which was right in the sighte of the LORDE, but not wt a whole
her.
3 Now whan his kingdome was in stregth, he slewe his seruautes which had slayne
the kinge his father.
4 But their childre slewe he not, for so is it wrytten in the boke of the lawe
of Moses, where the LORDE comaundeth, and sayeth: The fathers shal not dye for
the children, nether shal the children dye for the fathers: but euery one shal
die for his awne synne.
5 And Amasias broughte Iuda together, and set them after the fathers houses,
after the rulers ouer thousandes & ouer hundreds amonge all Iuda and BenIamin,
and nombred them from twentye yeare olde & aboue, and founde of the thre
hundreth thousande chosen men, which were able to go forth to the warre, and
caryed speares and shyldes.
6 And out of Israel appoynted he an hundreth thousande stronge men of warre for
an hundreth talentes of siluer.
7 But there came a man of God vnto him, and sayde: O kynge, Let not the hoost of
Israel come wt the: for the LORDE is not with Israel, nether with all the
childre of Ephraim.
8 For yf thou commest to shewe yi boldnes in the battaill, God shal make the
fall before thine enemies. For God hath power to helpe, and to cause for to
fall.
9 Amasias sayde vnto the man of God: What shal be done then with ye hundreth
talentes yt I haue geue ye soudyers of Israel? The ma of God sayde: The LORDE
hath yet more the this to geue the.
10 So Amasias separated out the men of warre which were come to him out of
Ephraim, yt they shulde departed vnto their place. Then waxed their wrath very
whote agaynst Iuda, and they wente agayne vnto their place in wrothfull
displeasure.
11 And Amasias stregthed himselfe, and caried out his people, and wente forth in
to the Salt valley, and smote ten thousande of the children of Seir.
12 And the childre of Iuda toke ten thousande of the alyue, whom they broughte
vp to the toppe of a mountayne, and cast the downe headlinges from the toppe of
the mount, so that they all to barst in sunder.
13 But ye childre of the men of warre whom Amasias had sent awaye agayne (that
they shulde not go to the battayll with his people) fell in to the cities of
Iuda, from Samaria vnto Beth Horon, and smote thre thousande of me, and toke
moch spoyle.
14 And whan Amasias came agayne from the slaughter of the Edomites, he broughte
the goddes of the children of Seir, and made them his goddes, and worshipped
before them, & brent incense vnto them.
15 Then was the LORDE very wroth at Amasias, & sent vnto him a prophet, which
sayde vnto him: Why sekest thou the goddes of the people, which coulde not
delyuer their folke from yi hande?
16 And whan he talked with him, the kynge sayde vnto him: Haue they made ye of
the kynges councell? Ceasse, why wilt thou be smytten? Then the prophet ceassed,
& sayde: I perceaue, that the LORDE is mynded to destroye ye, because thou hast
done this, and herkenest not vnto my councell.
17 And Amasias ye kyuge of Iuda toke coucell, & sent vnto Ioas the sonne of
Ioahas ye sonne of Iehu, kynge of Israel, sayege; Come, let vs se one another.
18 But Ioas the kynge of Israel sent vnto Amasias ye kynge of Iuda, sayenge: The
hawthorne in Libanus sent vnto ye Cedre tre in Libanus, sayege: Geue thy
doughter vnto my sonne to wife. But a wylde beest in Libanus ranne ouer ye
hawthorne, & trode it downe.
19 Thou thinkest: Beholde, I haue smytten the Edomites, therfore is thine hert
proude to boaste. Now byde at home: why stryuest thou after mysfortune, that
thou mayest fall & Iuda wt the?
20 Neuertheles Amasias consented not: for so was it broughte to passe of God, yt
they mighte be geuen in to the handes of the enemies, because they soughte the
goddes of ye Edomites.
21 Then wente Ioas the kynge of Israel vp, & they sawe one another, he and
Amasias the kynge of Iuda, at Beth Semes which lyeth in Iuda.
22 But Iuda was smytte before Israel, and they fled euery one vnto his tent.
23 And Ioas the kynge of Israel toke Amasias ye kynge of Iuda, the sonne of Ioas
ye sonne of Ioahas, at Beth Semes, & broughte him to Ierusalem, & brake downe
the wall of Ierusale, from ye porte of Ephraim vnto the corner porte, eue foure
hundreth cubites longe:
24 and toke with him all the golde, and siluer, and all the ornamentes that were
foude in ye house of God with ObedEdom, and in the treasures in the kynges
house, and the childre to pledge vnto Samaria.
25 And Amasias the sonne of Ioas kynge of Iuda, liued after the death of Ioas
the sonne of Ioahas kynge of Israel fiftene yeare.
26 What more there is to saye of Amasias (both the first and last) beholde, it
is written in ye boke of the kynges of Iuda & Israel.
27 And fro the tyme forth that Amasias departed from the LORDE, they conspyred
against him at Ierusalem. But he fled vnto Lachis. The sent they after him vnto
Lachis, & slewe him there.
28 And they brought him vpo horses & buried him beside his fathers in the cite
of Iuda.

Chapter 26

1 Then all the people of Iuda toke Osias, which was syxtene yeare olde, and made
him kynge in steade of his father Amasias.
2 He builded Eloth, & broughte it agayne vnto Iuda, after that the kynge was
fallen on slepe with his fathers.
3 Sixtene yeare olde was Osias whan he was made kinge, and reigned two and
fiftie yeare at Ierusale. His mothers name was Iechalia of Ierusalem.
4 And he did right in the syght of the LORDE, as his father Amasias had done,
5 and soughte God as longe as Zacharias lyued, which taughte in the visyons of
God: and as longe as he sought the LORDE, God made him to prospere.
6 For he wente forth, and foughte agaynst the Philistynes, and brake downe ye
walles of Gath, and the walles of Iabne, and the walles of A?dod, and buylded
cities aboute A?dod, & amonge the Philistynes.
7 For God helped him agaynst the Philistines, against the Arabians, agaynst them
of GurBaal, & agaynst the Meunites.
8 And ye Ammonites gaue Osias presentes, & his name came in to Egipte: for he
was exceadinge stronge.
9 And Osias buylded towres at Ierusalem vpon the cornerporte, and on the valley
gate, and on other corners, and made them stronge.
10 He buylded castels also in the wyldernesse, and dygged many welles: for he
had many catell, both in the medewes and in the playnes, hu?bandmen also and
wynegardeners on the mountaynes and on Carmel: for he delyted in hu?bandrye.
11 And Osias had an hoost of men of warre goynge forth to the battaill, which
were nobred vnder the hande of Ieiel the scrybe & of Maesa the offycer, vnder
the hade of Hanania of the kynges rulers.
12 And the nombre of the chefe fathers amonge the stronge me of warre, was two
thousande and syxe hundreth.
13 And vnder the hande of the hoost thre hundreth thousande, and seuen thousande
and fyue hundreth mete for the battayll, in the strength of an armye to helpe
the kinge agaynst the enemies.
14 And Osias prepared for all the hoost, shyldes, speares, helmettes,
brestplates, bowes and slyngstones.
15 And at Ierusale he made ordinaunce coningly, to be vpon the towres and in the
pynnacles, to shute arowes and greate stones. And the fame of him came farre
abrode, because he was specially helped, tyll he became mightie.
16 And whan his power was greate, his hert arose to his awne destruccion: for he
trespaced agaynst the LORDE his God, and wente in to the temple of the LORDE, to
burne incense vpon the altare of incense.
17 But Asarias the prest wente after him, and foure score prestes with him,
valeaunt men,
18 and withstode kynge Osias, and saide vnto him: It belongeth not vnto thy
offyce (Osias) to burne incense vnto the LORDE, but vnto the prestes belongeth
it, euen vnto the children of Aaron, which are halowed to burne incense. Go
forth out of the Sanctuary: for thou offendest, and it shall be no worshippe
vnto the before God the LORDE.
19 And Osias was wroth, and had a censoure in his hande. And whyle he murmured
with the prestes, the leprosy spronge out of his foreheade in the presence of
the prestes in the house of the LORDE before the altare of incense.
20 And Asarias the chefe prest turned his heade towarde him, and so dyd all the
prestes, and beholde, he was leper in his foreheade. And they put him out from
thence. Yee he made haist himselfe to go forth, for his plage came of the LORDE.
21 Thus became Osias ye kynge a leper vnto his death, and dwelt full of leprosye
in a fre house: for he was put out of the house of the LORDE. But Ioram his
sonne had the ouersight of the kynges house, and iudged the people in the londe.
22 What more there is to saie of Osias (both first and last) Esay the sonne of
Amos hath wrytten it.
23 And Osias fell on slepe wt his fathers, and they buryed him with his fathers
in the pece of grounde beside ye kynges sepulcres: for they sayde: He is
leporous. And Iotham his sonne was kynge in his steade.

Chapter 27

1 Iotham was fyue and twentye yeare olde whan he was made kynge, and reigned
sixtene yeare at Ierusalem. His mothers name was Ierusa the daughter of Sadoc:
2 & he dyd righte in the sighte of the LORDE as did Osias his father: sauynge yt
he wente not in to the temple of the LORDE, and the people yet marred them
selues.
3 He buylded the hye porte of the house of ye LORDE, and on the wall of Ophel
buylded he moch,
4 and buylded the cities vpon the mountaynes of Iuda, and in the woddes buylded
he castels and towres.
5 And he fought with the kinge of the children of Ammon, and ouer came them, so
that the childre of Ammon gaue him ye same yeare an hundreth talentes of siluer,
ten thousande quarters of wheate, and ten thousande of barlye. So moch dyd the
children of Ammon geue him also in ye seconde & thirde yeare.
6 Thus became Iotham mightye, for he gyded his wayes before the LORDE his God.
7 What more there is to saye of Iotham, & all his warres, vnd his waies,
beholde, it is wrytten in ye boke of the kinges of Israel & Iuda.
8 Fyue and twentye yeare olde was he whan he was made kynge, & reigned sixtene
yeare at Ierusale.
9 And Iotha fell on slepe wt his fathers, & they buryed him in the cite of
Dauid, and Achas his sonne was kynge in his steade.

Chapter 28

1 Achas was twentye yeare olde whan he was made kynge, and reigned sixtene yeare
at Ierusalem, and dyd not that which was righte in the sighte of the LORDE, as
did Dauid his father,
2 but walked in the wayes of the kinges of Israel, and made molten ymages vnto
Baalim,
3 and brent incense in the valley of the children of Hennon, and bret his awne
sonnes in ye fire, after the abhominacions of the Heithen, who the LORDE
expelled before the childre of Israel.
4 And he dyd sacrifice and brent incense vpon the hye places and vpon the
hilles, and amoge all grene trees.
5 Therfore dyd the LORDE his God delyuer him in to the hande of the kynge of
Syria, so that they smote him, and caryed awaye a greate multitude of his men
presoners, and broughte them to Damascon. He was geuen also vnder the hande of
the kynge of Israel, so yt he dyd a greate slaughter vpon him.
6 For Pecah the sonne of Romelia smote in Iuda an hundreth & twentye thousande
in one daye (which all were valeaunt men) eue because they had forsaken ye LORDE
God of their fathers.
7 And Sichri a mightie ma of Ephraim slewe Maeseia ye kinges sonne, & Asrikam
the prynce of the house, & Elkana the nexte vnto the kynge.
8 And the children of Israel caried of their brethren presoners two hundreth
thousande, wemen, sonnes and doughters, and toke a greate spoyle from them, and
broughte the spoyle vnto Samaria.
9 But eue there was there a prophet of ye LORDE, whose name was Obed, which wete
out to mete ye hoost that came to Samaria, and sayde vnto them: Beholde, because
the LORDE God of youre fathers is wroth at Iuda, therfore hath he geuen them
ouer in to youre handes: but ye haue slayne them so abhominably, that it is come
vnto heaue.
10 Now thinke ye to subdue the children of Iuda and Ierusalem, to be bondmen and
bondmaydens vnto you. Is not this a trespace then wt you agaynst the LORDE yor
God?
11 Herken now vnto me, and sende ye presoners hence agayne, whom ye haue caried
awaye from youre brethren: for the wrath of ye LORDE is fearce ouer you.
12 Then gat vp certayne of the chefe of the children of Ephraim, Asarias the
sonne of Iohanan, Barachias the sonne of Mesillemoth, Ezechias the sonne of
Sallum, & Amasa ye sonne of Hadlai, agaynst them yt came from ye battayll,
13 & sayde vnto them: Ye shal not brynge the presoners in hither, for youre
mynde is but to make vs trespace before the LORDE, to make oure synnes and
offences the greater: for the trespace is to moch allready, & the wrath is
fearce ouer Israel.
14 So the hoost lefte the presoners & the spoyle before ye rulers and before the
whole cogregacion.
15 Then stode vp the men (which now were rehearced by name) and toke the
presoners, and as many as were naked amonge them, clothed they with ye spoyles,
& deckte them, and put shues vpon their fete, and gaue the to eate and drynke,
and anoynted them, and caried them vpon asses (as many as were feble) and
broughte them to Iericho to ye Palme cite vnto their brethren, and came agayne
to Samaria.
16 At the same tyme sent kynge Achas vnto the kynges of Assur, yt they shulde
helpe him.
17 And the Edomites came agayne, and smote Iuda, and caried some awaye captyue.
18 The Philistynes also fell in to the cities in the playne, & towarde ye south
parte of Iuda, & wanne Beth Semes, Aialon, Gederoth, and Socho with the vyllages
therof, Timna wt the vyllages therof, & Gimso with the vyllages therof, and
dwelt therin.
19 For ye LORDE subdued Iuda for Achas sake ye kynge of Iuda, because he made
Iuda naked, and rebelled agaynst the LORDE.
20 And Teglatpilnesser the kynge of Assur came agaynst him, and beseged him, &
he was not mightie ynough for him.
21 For Achas spoyled the house of the LORDE, and the kynges house, and of the
rulers, to geue vnto ye kynge of Assur, but it helped him not.
22 Morouer kinge Achas trespaced yet more against the LORDE euen in his trouble,
23 and dyd sacrifyce vnto the goddes of them of Damascon, which had smitten him,
& sayde: The goddes of the kynges of Syria helpe them, therfore wil I offre vnto
them, that they maye helpe me also, where as the same yet were a fall vnto him
and to all Israel.
24 And Achas gathered the vessels of ye house of God together, and brake the
vessels in ye house of God, & shut the dores of the house of ye LORDE, and made
him altares in all corners at Ierusalem,
25 and euery where in the cyties of Iuda made he hye places to burne incense
vnto other goddes, and prouoked ye LORDE God of his fathers vnto wrath.
26 What more there is to saye of him and of all his wayes (both first and last)
beholde, it is wrytten in the boke of the kynges of Iuda and Israel.
27 And Achas fell on slepe with his fathers, and they buried him in ye cite of
Ierusalem: for they brought him not amonge the sepulcres of the kynges of
Israel. And Ezechias his sonne was kynge in his steade.

Chapter 29

1 Ezechias was fyue & twentye yeare olde whan he was made kynge, & reigned nyne
& twentye yeares at Ierusalem. His mothers name was Abia ye doughter of Zachary.
2 And he dyd that which was right in the sight of the LORDE, as did his father
Dauid.
3 He opened the dores of ye house of the LORDE in the first moneth of ye first
yeare of his raigne, & made them stronge,
4 & brought in the prestes and Leuites, and gathered them together vnto the East
streate
5 and sayde vnto them: Herken vnto me ye Leuites, sanctifye youre selues now, yt
ye maye halowe the house of the LORDE God of yor fathers, and put fylthines out
of the Sanctuary:
6 for oure fathers haue trespaced, and done yt which was euell in the sighte of
the LORDE oure God, and haue forsaken him. For they turned their faces from the
habitacio of ye LORDE oure God, & turned their backes on it,
7 and shut the dores of the Porche, and put out the lampes, and brent no
incense, & offred no burntsacrifyces in the Sanctuary vnto the God of Israel.
8 Therfore is the wrath of the LORDE come ouer Iuda and Ierusalem, and he hath
geuen them ouer to be scatred abrode, desolate and to be hyssed at, as ye se
with yor eies.
9 For beholde, euen for the same cause fell oure fathers thorow the swerde, oure
sonnes doughters and wyues were caryed awaye captyue.
10 Now am I mynded to make a couenaunt with the LORDE God of Israel, yt he maye
turne awaie from vs his wrath & indignacion.
11 Now my sonnes, be not ye negligent: for the LORDE hath chosen you to stode
before him, and to be his mynisters and to burne incense vnto him.
12 Then rose the Leuites: Mahath the sonne of Amasai, and Ioel the sonne of
Asaria of the children of the Kahathites. Of the children of Merari: Cis the
sonne of Abdi, & Asaria the sonne of Iehaleleel. Of the children of the
Gersonites: Ioah the sonne of Simma, and Eden the sonne of Ioah.
13 And of the childre of Elizaphan: Simri & Ieiel. And of the childre of Assaph:
Sachary and Mathama.
14 And of the chidren of Heman: Iehiel and Simei. And of the children of
Iedithun: Semaia and Vsiel.
15 And they gathered their brethren together, and were sanctified, and wente in
acordinge to the kynges commaundement at the worde of the LORDE, to clense the
house of ye LORDE.
16 And the prestes entred within in the house of the LORDE to purifye, and put
out all the vnclennes that was founde in the teple of the LORDE, in the courte
of the LORDES house: and the prestes toke it vp, and caryed it out in to the
broke Cedron.
17 The fyrst daye of the fyrst moneth beganne they to sanctifye them selues, and
on the eight daye of the moneth wente they in to the porche of the LORDE, and
halowed the house of ye LORDE eight dayes, and fynished it on the sixtenth daye
of the fyrst moneth.
18 And they wete in to the kynge Ezechias, and sayde: We haue clensed all the
house of the LORDE, the altare of burntofferynges, and all his vessels, the
table of the shewbred and all the apparell therof:
19 and all the ornamentes that kynge Achas cast awaye wha he was kynge, what
tyme as he transgressed, those haue we prepared and halowed. Beholde, they are
before the altare of the LORDE.
20 The the kynge Ezechias gat him vp early, and gathered together the Elders of
the cite, and wete vp vnto the house of the LORDE,
21 and they broughte seuen bullockes, seuen rammes, seuen lambes, and seuen he
goates to be the synofferynge, for the Sanctuary, & for Iuda. And he spake vnto
the prestes the children of Aaron, that they shulde offre vpon the altare of the
LORDE.
22 So they slewe the bullockes, and the prestes toke the bloude, and sprenkled
it vpon ye altare: and slewe the rammes, and sprenkled the bloude vpon the
altare: and slewe the labes, and sprenkled the bloude vpon the altare.
23 And ye goates to ye synofferynge brought they before the kynge and the
congregacio, and layed their handes vpon them:
24 and the prestes slewe them, and sprenkled their bloude vpon the altare to
make attonemet for all Israel: for the kynge commaunded to offre burntsacrifyces
and sinofferinges for all Israel.
25 And he set the Leuites in the house of the LORDE with Cymbales, Psalteries
and harpes, as Dauid had commaunded, and Gad the kynges Seer, and the prophet
Nathan for it was the commaundement of the LORDE by his prophetes.
26 And the Leuites stode with the musicall instrumentes of Dauid, & the prestes
with the trompettes.
27 And Ezechias commaunded them to offre burntsacrifyces vpon the altare. And
aboute the tyme that the burntsacrifyce begane to be offred the songe of the
LORDE beganne also, and ye trompettes, and dyuerse instrumentes of Dauid the
kynge of Israel
28 and all the congregacion gaue praise & thankes: and the songe of the
Musicians, and ye blowynge of the trompetters, endured all tyll the
burntofferynge was fynished.
29 Now whan the burntofferynge was perfourmed, the kynge and all they that were
with him, bowed them selues, and gaue praise and thankes.
30 And Ezechias the kynge wt the rulers commaunded the Leuites to prayse the
LORDE with the songes of Dauid and Assaph the Seer. And they gaue prayse tyll
they were ioyfull, and they bowed them selues, and worshipped.
31 And Ezechias answered and saide: Now haue ye fylled youre hades vnto the
LORDE steppe forth, and brynge hither ye sacrifyces and thankofferynges vnto the
house of the LORDE. And the congregacion broughte sacrifyces and
thankofferynges, and euery ma of a fre wyllinge hert brought burntofferynges.
32 And the nombre of the burntofferynges that the congregacion broughte, was
thre score bullockes and ten, an hundreth rames, and two hundreth lambes, and
all these for the burntofferynge vnto the LORDE,
33 and they sanctifyed sixe hundreth bullockes, and thre thousande shepe.
34 But the prestes were to fewe, and coulde not pluck of the skynnes of all the
burnt offerynges, therfore toke they their brethren the Leuites, tyll the worke
was fynished, and tyll the prestes were halowed (for the Leuites are easier to
be halowed then the prestes)
35 and many of the burnt offerynges were with the fat of the thankofferynges and
drynkofferynges to the burntsacrifices. Thus was the ministracion of the house
of the LORDE prepared.
36 And Ezechias reioysed with all the people, that they were prepared with God:
for it was done righte haistely.

Chapter 30

1 And Ezechias sent into all Israel and Iuda, and wrote letters vnto Ephraim and
Manasses, that they shulde come to the house of the LORDE at Ierusalem, to kepe
easter vnto the LORDE God of Israel.
2 And the kynge helde a councell with his rulers, and all the cogregacion at
Ierusalem, to kepe Passeouer in the seconde moneth:
3 for at that tyme they coulde not kepe it, because the prestes were not
sanctified ynough, and the people were not yet come together vnto Ierusalem.
4 And it pleased the kynge well and all the cogregacion.
5 And they appointed it to be proclamed thorow out all Israel from Berseba vnto
Dan, that they shulde come to kepe Passeouer vnto the LORDE God of Israel: for
they were not many to kepe it as it is wrytten.
6 And the postes wente with the letters from the hande of the kynge and of his
rulers thorow out all Israell and Iuda, at ye kynges commaundement, and sayde:
Ye children of Israel, turne you vnto the LORDE God of Abraham, Isaac and Iacob,
and he shal turne to ye escaped, which are lefte ouer amonge you from the hande
of the kynge of Assur:
7 and be not ye as youre fathers and brethren, which rebelled agaynst the LORDE
God of their fathers, and he gaue the ouer in to desolacion as ye se youre
selues.
8 Be not ye hardnecked now as were youre fathers, but offre youre hade vnto the
LORDE, and come to his sanctuary, which he hath sanctified for euer, and serue
the LORDE youre God, & so shal the indignacion of his wrath turne awaye from
you.
9 For yf ye turne vnto the LORDE, then shal youre brethren and children haue
mercy in the sighte of them which holde them in captiuyte, that they maye come
agayne in to this londe: for the LORDE youre God is gracious and mercifull, and
shal not turne awaye his face from you, yf ye conuerte vnto him.
10 And the postes wente from one cite to another in the londe of Ephraim and
Manasses, and vnto Zabulon. But they mocked them and laughed them to scorne.
11 Yet were there some of Asser and Manasses, and of Zabulon, that submytted
them selues, and came to Ierusalem.
12 And the hande of God came in to Iuda, so that he gaue the one hert to do
after the commaundement of the kynge and the rulers at the worde of the LORDE.
13 And there came together vnto Ierusale a greate people, to kepe the feast of
vnleuended bred in the seconde moneth, a very greate congregacion.
14 And they gat them vp, and put downe ye altares that were at Ierusalem, and
all the incense put they awaye, and cast it in to the broke Cedron,
15 and slewe the Passeouer on the fourtenth daye of the secode moneth. And ye
prestes and Leuites were ashamed, and halowed them selues, and broughte the
burntofferynges to the house of the LORDE,
16 and stode in their ordinaunce, as it was acordinge, after the lawe off Moses
the man of God. And the prestes sprenkled the bloude from the hande of the
Leuites:
17 for there were many in the cogregacion which were not sanctified, therfore
dyd the Leuites kyll Passeouer for them which were not clensed, that they mighte
be sanctified vnto the LORDE.
18 There were many people also of Ephraim, Manasses, Isachar and Zabulon, which
were not cleane, but ate the Easter lambe not as it is wrytten: for Ezechias
prayed for them, and sayde: The LORDE, which is gracious,
19 shalbe mercifull vnto all them that prepare their hertes vnto God, to seke
the LORDE God of their fathers, though they be not clensed after the holy
purificacion.
20 And the LORDE herde Ezechias, and healed the people.
21 Thus the children of Israel that were founde at Ierusale, helde ye feast of
vnleuended bred seuen dayes with greate ioye. And the Leuites and prestes
praysed the LORDE euery daye with the loude instrumentes of the LORDE.
22 And Ezechias spake hertely vnto all ye Leuites, which had good vnderstondinge
in the LORDE, and they ate the feast seuen dayes, and offred thakofferynges, and
gaue thankes vnto ye LORDE God of their fathers.
23 And all the congregacion deuysed to kepe the feast yet other seue dayes, and
so they helde it those seuen dayes also with ioye:
24 for Ezechias the kinge of Iuda gaue an Heueofferynge for the cogregacion,
euen a thousande bullockes, and seuen thousande shepe. But the rulers gaue an
Heueoffering for ye congregacion, euen a thousande bullockes, and ten thousande
shepe. And many of the prestes sanctified them selues.
25 And the whole congregacion of Iuda reioysed, the prestes and Leuites, and all
the congregacion that came out of Israel, and the straungers that were come out
of the londe of Israel, and they that dwelt in Iuda,
26 and greate ioye was there at Ierusalem: for sence the tyme of Salomon the
sonne of Dauid the kynge of Israel, was there no soch (ioye) at Ierusale.
27 And the prestes and Leuites stode vp and blessed the people, and their voyce
was herde, and their prayer came in to his holy habitacion in heauen.

Chapter 31

1 And whan all this was fynished, all the Israelites that were founde in ye
cities of Iuda, wente out, and brake the pilers, and hewed downe the groues, and
brake downe the hye places and altares out of all Iuda, Ben Iamin, Ephraim and
Manasses, tyll they had destroyed the. And all the children of Israel wente
agayne euery one to his possession vnto their cities.
2 But Ezechias set the prestes and Leuites in their ordinaunces, euery one after
his office, both the prestes and Leuites, for the burntsacrifices and
thankofferynges, to mynister, to geue thankes and prayse in the gates of the
hoost of the LORDE.
3 And the kynge gaue his porcion of his substauce for the burntofferynges in the
mornynge and euenynge, and for the burntofferynges of the Sabbath, and of the
newmone and of the feastes, as it is wrytten in the lawe of the LORDE.
4 And he spake vnto ye people which dwelt at Ierusalem, that they shulde geue
porcios vnto the prestes and Leuites, yt they mighte the more stedfastly endure
in the lawe of the LORDE.
5 And wha ye worde came forth, the childre of Israel gaue many fyrst frutes of
come, wyne, oyle, hony, and all maner increace of the felde, and broughte in
moch of all maner tithes.
6 And the children of Israel and Iuda which dwelt in the cities of Iuda,
broughte the tithes also of oxen and shepe, and the tithes of soch thinges as
were sanctifyed, which they had halowed vnto the LORDE their God, and made here
an heape, and there an heape.
7 In the thirde moneth begane they to laye vpon heapes, and in the seuenth
moneth dyd they fynishe it.
8 And wha Ezechias with the rulers wente in, and sawe the heapes, they praysed
the LORDE, and his people of Israel.
9 And Ezechias axed the prestes and Leuites concernynge the heapes.
10 And Asaria the prest the chefe in the house of Sadoc, sayde vnto him: Sence
the tyme that they beganne to brynge the Heueofferynges in to ye house of the
LORDE, we haue eaten, and are satisfied, and yet is there lefte ouer: for the
LORDE hath blessed his people, therfore is this heape lefte ouer.
11 Then commaunded the kynge, that they shulde prepare chestes in the house of
the LORDE. And they prepared them,
12 and put in the Heueofferynges, and tithes and that which was halowed,
faithfully.And the ouersighte of the same had Chanania the Leuite, and Simei his
brother the seconde,
13 and Iehiel, Asasia, Naglath, Asahel, Ierimoth, Iosabad, Eliel, Iesmachia,
Mahath and Benaia, ordeyned of the hande off Chanania and Simei his brother,
acordinge to the commaundement of kynge Ezechias. But Asaria was prynce in the
house of God.
14 And Core ye sonne of Iemna the Leuite the porter of the Eastgate was ouer the
frewyllinge giftes of God (which were geuen for Heueofferynges vnto the LORDE)
and ouer the Most holy.
15 And vnder his hande were, Eden, Miniamin, Iesua, Semaia, Amaria, and Sachania
in the cities of the prestes vpon credence, that they shulde geue vnto their
brethre acordinge to their courses, to the leest as to the greatest.
16 And vnto them that were counted for men childre from thre yeare olde and
aboue, amonge all the that wete in to the house of the LORDE, euery one vpo his
daye to their office in their attendaunces after their courses.
17 And they that were rekened for prestes in the house of their fathers, and the
Leuites from twentye yeare and aboue, in their attendaunces after their courses.
18 And they that were rekened amonge their children, wyues, sonnes and doughters
amoge the whole congregacion: for that which was halowed, sanctifyed they vpon
credence.
19 There were men also named by name amonge Aarons children the prestes vpon the
feldes of the suburbes in all ye cities, that they shulde geue porcions vnto all
the men children amoge the prestes, and to all them that were nombred amonge the
Leuites.
20 Thus dyd Ezechias in all Iuda, and dyd that which was good, righte and true
in the sighte of the LORDE his God.
21 And in all the busynes that he toke in hade concernynge the seruyce of the
house of God, acordinge to the lawe and commaundement, to seke his God, that dyd
he with all his hert, and therfore prospered he well.

Chapter 32

1 After these actes and faithfulnes came Sennacharib the kynge of Assur, and
wente in to Iuda, and pitched before the stroge cities, and thoughte to plucke
them vnto him.
2 And whan Ezechias sawe that Sennacherib came, and that his face stode to
fighte agaynst Ierusalem,
3 he deuysed with his rulers and mightie men, to couer the waters of the welles
that were without the cite, and they helped him:
4 and there gathered together a greate people, and couered all ye welles and
water brokes in the myddes of the londe, and sayde: Lest the kynges of Assur
fynde moch water wha they come.
5 And he toke a corage vnto him, and buylded all the walles where they were in
decaye, and made towres theron, and buylded yet another wall without, and
strengthed Millo in the cite of Dauid. And made moch ordinaunce and shyldes,
6 and set captaynes of warre ouer the people.And gathered them vnto him vpon the
brode strete by the gate of the cite, and spake hertely vnto them, and sayde:
7 Be stronge and bolde, feare not, and be not afrayed for the kynge of Assur,
ner all ye multitude that is with him: for there is one greater with vs then
with him.
8 With him is a fleshly arme, but with vs is the LORDE oure God, to helpe vs and
to fighte for vs. And ye people trusted vnto the wordes of Ezechias kynge of
Iuda.
9 Afterwarde sent Sennacherib the kynge of Assur his seruauntes vnto Ierusalem
(for he laye before Lachis, & all his hoost wt him) to Ezechias ye kinge of
Iuda, & to all Iuda that was at Ierusale, sayenge:
10 Thus sayeth Sennacherib ye kynge of Assur: Wherin put ye youre trust ye that
dwell in the beseged Ierusalem?
11 Ezechias disceaueth you, that he maye delyuer you vnto death, hoger and
thyrst, and sayeth: The LORDE oure God shal delyuer vs from the hande of the
kynge of Assur.
12 Is it not Ezechias, that hath put awaye his hye places and altares, and sayde
vnto Iuda and Ierusalem: Before one altare shal ye worshippe, and burne incense
theron?
13 Knowe ye not what I and my fathers haue done to all ye people in the londes?
Haue the goddes of the Heythen in the londes bene able to delyuer their
countrees fro my hande?
14 What is he amonge all the goddes of these Heythen (whom my father damned)
that was able to delyuer his people fro my hande? yt youre God shulde be able to
delyuer fro my hande.
15 Therfore let not Ezechias now disceaue you, and let him not persuade you eny
soch thinge, and beleue him not. For yf no god of all the Heythe and kyngdomes
might delyuer his people fro my hande and from the hande of my progenitours,
then shal not youre goddes be able to delyuer you fro my hande.
16 His seruautes also spake yet more against the LORDE God, and agaynst his
seruaunt Ezechias.
17 And he wrote a letter to blaspheme the LORDE God of Israel, and spake of him,
and sayde: Like as the goddes of the Heythen in their londes haue not bene able
to delyuer their people from my hande, euen so shal not the God of Ezechias
delyuer his people fro my hande.
18 And the cryed with loude voyce in the Iewish langage vnto the people of
Ierusalem that were vpon the wall, to make them fearfull and to be fayntharted,
that they might wynne the cite.
19 And they spake agaynst the God off Ierusalem, euen as agaynst the goddes off
the nacions vpon earth, which were but the workes of mens hondes.
20 But contrary wyse the kynge Ezechias and the prophet Esay the sonne of Amos
prayed, and cryed vnto heaue.
21 And the LORDE sent an angell, which destroyed all the mightie men of the
hoost, and the prynces and rulers in ye tentes of the kynge of Assur, so that he
departed agayne with shame in to his owne londe. And whan he wente in to his
gods house, they yt came of his owne body, slewe him there with the swerde.
22 Thus the LORDE, helped Ezechias and them at Ierusalem, out of the hade of
Sennacherib ye kynge of Assur, and of all other, and mayntayned the fro all on
euery syde,
23 so yt many broughte presentes vnto the LORDE to Ierusalem, and Iewels vnto
Ezechias the kynge of Iuda. And afterwarde was he exalted in the sighte of all
Heythen.
24 At ye same tyme was Ezechias deedsicke, and he prayed vnto the LORDE, which
made him promes, and gaue him a wondertoken.
25 But Ezechias recopensed not acordinde as was geuen vnto him, for his hert was
lifted vp: therfore came the wrath vpon him, and vpon Iuda and Ierusalem.
26 Neuertheles Ezechias humbled him selfe because his hert had bene exalted,
with them at Ierusalem: therfore came not the wrath of the LORDE vpon them,
whyle Ezechias lyued.
27 And Ezechias had very greate riches and worshippe, and made him treasures of
syluer, golde, precious stones, spyces, shyldes, and all maner costly vessell,
28 and corne houses for the increace of corne, wyne and oyle, and stalles for
all maner catell, and foldes for the shepe,
29 and buylded him cities, and had many catell of shepe and oxen: for God gaue
him very moch good.
30 It is the same Ezechias that couered the hye water condyte in Gihon, and
conveyed it vnder on the west syde of ye cite of Dauid: for Ezechias prospered
in all his workes.
31 But whan the interpreters the chefe of Babilon were sent vnto him, to axe
question at him (concernynge the wondertoke that had happened in the londe) God
lefte him to be tempted, that it mighte be knowne what soeuer was in his hert.
32 What more there is to saye of Ezechias, and of his mercifulnes, beholde, it
is wrytte in the vision of the prophet Esay the sonne of Amos, and in the boke
of the kynges of Iuda and Israel.
33 And Ezechias fell on slepe with his fathers, and they buried him ouer the
sepulcres of the children of Dauid, and all Iuda and they of Ierusale dyd him
worshippe in his death: and Manasses his sonne was kynge in his steade.

Chapter 33

1 Manasses was twolue yeare olde wha he was made kynge, and reigned fyue and
fiftye yeare at Ierusalem,
2 and dyd that which was euell in the sighte of the LORDE (euen after the
abominacions of the Heythen, whom the LORDE expelled before the children of
Israel) and turned backe,
3 and buylded the hye places, ( which his father Ezechies had broken downe) and
set vp altares vnto Baalim, and made groues, and worshipped all the hoost of
heauen, and serued them.
4 He buylded altares also in ye LORDES house, wherof the LORDE had sayde: At
Ierusalem shal my name be for euer.
5 And vnto all the hoost of heauen buylded he altares in both the courtes of ye
house of the LORDE.
6 And in the valley of the sonne of Hennon caused he his awne sonnes to go
thorow the fyre, and chosed dayes, & regarded byrdescryenge, and witches, and
founded soythsayers and expounders of tokens, and dyd moch that was euell in the
sighte of the LORDE to prouoke him vnto wrath.
7 Carued ymages also and Idols (which he caused to make) set he vp in Gods
house, wherof the LORDE saide vnto Dauid and to Salomon his sonne: In this house
at Ierusalem which I haue chosen out of all the trybes of Israel, wyl I set my
name for euer
8 and wyl nomore let the fote of Israel remoue fro the londe that I appoynted
for their fathers, so farre as they obserue to do all yt I haue commaunded them,
in all the lawe, statutes and ordinaunces by Moses.
9 But Manasses disceaued Iuda and them of Ierusale, so that they dyd worse then
the Heythen, whom the LORDE destroyed before the children of Israel.
10 And the LORDE spake vnto Manasses and his people, and they regarded it not.
11 Therfore dyd the LORDE cause the rulers of the hoost of the kynge of Assur to
come vpo the, which toke Manasses presoner with bodes, and bounde him with
cheynes, & broughte him vnto Babilon.
12 And whan he was in trouble, he made intercession before the LORDE his God,
and humbled him selfe greatly before the God of his fathers,
13 and prayed and besoughte him. Then herde he his prayer, and broughte him
agayne to Ierusalem to his kyngdome. And Manasses knewe that the LORDE is God.
14 Afterwarde buylded he ye vttemost wall of the cite of Dauid, on the west syde
of Gihon by the broke, and at the intraunce of the Fyshgate, and rounde aboute
Ophel, and made it very hye. And layed captaynes in ye stroge cities of Iuda,
15 & put awaye ye straunge goddes & Idols out of ye house of ye LORDE, and all
the altares which he had buylded vpo the mount of the house of the LORDE, and in
Ierusalem, and cast them out of the cite,
16 and buylded the altare of the LORDE, and offred slaynofferynges and
thankofferynges theron, and commaunded Iuda, that they shulde serue the LORDE
God of Israel.
17 Neuertheles though the people offred vnto the LORDE their God, yet offred
they vpon the hye places.
18 What more there is to saye of Manasses and of his prayer to his God, and the
wordes of the Seers that spake vnto him in the name of the LORDE God of Israel,
beholde, they are amonge the actes of the kynges of Israel.
19 And his prayer and intercession, and all his synne and offence, & the rowmes
wherin he buylded the hye places & groues and founded ydols, a fore he hubled
himselfe, beholde, they are wrytten amonge the actes of the Seers.
20 And Manasses fell on slepe with his fathers, and they buried him in his
house, and Amon his sonne was kynge in his steade.
21 Two and twetye yeare olde was Amon wha he was made kynge, and reigned two
yeare at Ierusale,
22 and dyd euell in the sighte of the LORDE, as Manasses his father had done.
And Amon offred vnto all the Idols that his father Manasses had made and serued
the.
23 Yet dyd not he humble himselfe before the LORDE, as Manasse his father had
submitted himselfe: but Amon trespaced euer more and more.
24 And his seruauntes cospyred agaynst him, and slewe him in his house.
25 Then smote the people in the londe all them that had conspyred agaynst kynge
Amon. And the people in the londe made Iosias his sonne kynge in his steade.

Chapter 34

1 Iosias was eight yeare olde whan he was made kynge, and reigned one and
thirtye yeare at Ierusalem,
2 and dyd that which was righte in the sighte of the LORDE, and walked in the
wayes of Dauid his father, and turned not asyde, nether to the righte hande ner
to the lefte.
3 For in the eight yeare of his reigne wha he was yet but a childe, he beganne
to seke the God of his father Dauid: and in the twolueth yeare begane he to
clense Iuda and Ierusale from the hye places and groues, and carued Idols, and
molten ymages:
4 and caused the altares of Baalim to be broken downe before him, and the ymages
that were theron, hewed he downe. And ye groues and carued Idols and molte
ymages brake he in peces, and made them to dust, and scatred it vpon the graues
of them that had offred vnto them.
5 And the bones of the prestes brent he vpo the altares, and so clesed he Iuda &
Ierusale,
6 & in ye cities of Manasses, Ephraim, Simeon, and vnto Nephtali in their
wyldernesses on euerysyde.
7 And wha he had broken downe the altares and groues, and smytten the Idols in
peces, and hewed downe all the ymages in all the londe of Israel, he came agayne
to Ierusalem.
8 In the eighteth yeare of his reigne wha he had clensed the londe and the
house, he sent Saphan the sonne of Asalia and Maeseia the Shreue of the cite,
and Ioath the sonne of Ioahas the Chaunceler, to repayre the house of the LORDE
his God.
9 And they came to Hechias ye hye prest, and there was delyuered vnto them the
money that was broughte vnto the house of God, which the Leuites (that kepte the
threshouldes) had gathered, of Manasses, Epraim, and of all the residue in
Israel, and of all Iuda & Ben Iamin, and of them that dwelt at Ierusale,
10 and they delyuered it vnto the hades of the worke men in the house of the
LORDE, and gaue it vnto those that wrought in the house of the LORDE, where it
was in decaye, yt they shulde repayre it.
11 And the same gaue it forth vnto the carpenters and buylders, to bye fre stone
and hewen tymber for the balkes in the houses, which the kynges had destroyed.
12 And the men laboured faithfully in the worke. And ouer them were ordeyned,
Iahath and Obadia the Leuites of the children of Merari: Zachary and Mesullam of
the children of the Kahathites, to further the worke, and they were all Leuites
that coulde playe vpon instrumentes.
13 But ouer them that bare burthens and furthured all maner of worke in all the
offices, there were scrybes, officers and dore kepers of the Leuites.
14 And wha they toke out the money that was broughte vnto ye house of the LORDE,
Helchias the prest founde the boke of the lawe of the LORDE geuen by Moses.
15 And Helchias answered, and saide vnto Saphan the Scrybe: I haue founde the
boke of the lawe in ye house of ye LORDE. And Helchias delyuered the boke vnto
Saphan.
16 And Saphan bare it vnto the kynge, and broughte ye kynge worde agayne, and
sayde: All that was geuen vnder the handes of thy seruauntes, that make they:
17 and ye money that was founde in ye house of the LORDE, haue they gathered
together, and delyuered it vnto ye officers, and to the workmen.
18 And Saphan the Scrybe tolde the kynge, and sayde: Helchias the prest hath
delyuered me a boke. And Saphan red therin before the kynge.
19 And whan the kynge herde the wordes of the lawe, he rente his clothes.
20 And the kynge commaunded Helchias and Ahicam the sonne of Saphan, and Abdon
the sonne of Micha, and Saphan the Scrybe, and Asaia the kynges seruaunt, and
sayde:
21 Go youre waye, axe councell at the LORDE for me and for the remnaunt in
Israel, and for Iuda, concernynge these wordes of the boke that is founde. For
greate is the indignacion of the LORDE that is gone forth ouer vs, because oure
fathers haue not kepte the worde of the LORDE, to do acordinge as it is wrytten
in this boke.
22 Then wete Helchias (with the other that were sent from the kynge) vnto the
prophetisse Hulda the wife of Sallum the Sonne of Thecoath the sonne of Hasra
the keper of the clothes, which dwelt at Ierusalem in the secode parte, and they
spake this vnto her.
23 And she sayde vnto them: Thus sayeth the LORDE God of Israel: Tell the man yt
sent you vnto me:
24 Thus sayeth ye LORDE: Beholde, I wil brynge plages vpo this place and the
inhabiters therof, eue all the curses which are wrytten in the boke, that was
red before the kynge of Iuda:
25 because they haue forsake me, and bret incese vnto other goddes, to prouoke
me with all the workes of their handes. And my indignacion shal go forth vpon
this cite, and shal not be quenched.
26 And after this maner shal ye saye vnto the kynge of Iuda, that sent you to
axe councell at the LORDE: Thus sayeth ye LORDE God of Israel concernynge the
wordes that thou hast herde:
27 Because thine hert is moued, and because thou hast humbled thy selfe in the
sighte of God, whan thou herdest his wordes agaynst this place and the
inhabiters therof, and hast submytted thy selfe before me, and rent thy clothes,
and wepte before me, therfore haue I herde the, sayeth ye LORDE.
28 Beholde, I wil gather the vnto thy fathers, and thou shalt be layed in thy
graue with peace, so yt thine eyes shal not se all the euell that I wyl brynge
ouer this place, and the indwellers therof. And they broughte the kynge worde
agayne.
29 Then sent ye kynge, and caused all the Elders in Iuda and Ierusalem to come
together.
30 And the kynge wente vp in to the house of the LORDE, and all the men of Iuda
and inhabiters of Ierusale, the prestes, the Leuites, and all the people both
small and greate: and all the wordes in the boke of the couenaunt that was
founde in the house of the LORDE, were red in their eares.
31 And ye kynge stode in his place, and made a couenaunt before the LORDE, that
they shulde walke after the LORDE, to kepe his comaundementes, his testimonies,
and his statutes with all their hert and with all their soule, to do accordinge
vnto all the wordes of the couenaunt that are wrytten in this boke.
32 And there stode all they that were founde at Ierusalem and in Ben Iamin. And
ye inhabiters of Ierusalem dyd acordinge to the couenaunt of God the God of
their fathers.
33 And Iosias put awaye all abhominacions out of all the londes that were the
children of Israels, and caused all them that were founde in Israel, to serue
the LORDE their God. As longe as Iosias lyued, departed they not from the LORDE
the God of their fathers.

Chapter 35

1 And Iosias kepte Passeouer vnto the LORDE at Ierusalem, and slewe the
Passeouer on the fourtenth daye off the first moneth,
2 and set the prestes in their offices, and strengthed them to their
mynistracion in the house of the LORDE,
3 and sayde vnto the Leuites that taughte in all Israel, and were sanctified
vnto ye LORDE: Put the holy Arke in the house that Salomon ye sonne of Dauid
kynge of Israel dyd buylde. Ye shal beare it nomore vpon youre shulders. Se that
ye serue now the LORDE youre God, and his people of Israel,
4 and prepare the house of youre fathers in youre courses, as it was appoynted
by Dauid the kynge of Israel, and by Salomo his sonne:
5 and stonde in the Sanctuary after ye course of the fathers houses amonge youre
brethren the children of the people, And after the course of the fathers houses
amonge the Leuites,
6 and kyll Passeouer, sanctifye and prepare youre brethren, that they maye do
acordinge to the worde of the LORDE by Moses.
7 And Iosias gaue lambes and yonge kyddes which were males, to the Heueofferynge
for the comontye (all to the Passeouer for euery one that was founde) in the
nombre thirtye thousande, and thre thousande oxen, all of the kynges good.
8 And his prynces of their awne good wyll gaue to the Heueofferynge for the
people, & for the prestes and Leuites (namely, Helchias, Zachary and Iehiel the
prynces in ye house of God amoge the prestes) for the Passeouer, two thousande
and sixe hundreth, And thre hudreth oxen.
9 But Chanania, Semaia, Nathaneel and his brethren, Gasabia, Ieiel and Iosabad
the chefe of the Leuites gaue the Leuites to the Heue offerynge for the
Passeouer, fyue thousandeshepe, & fyue hundreth oxen.
10 Thus was the Gods seruyce prepared, and the prestes stode in their place, and
the Leuites in their courses acordinge to the kynges commaundement.
11 And they kylled the Passeouer, and the prestes toke it off their handes, and
sprenkled it: and the Leuites toke the skynnes off them,
12 and remoued the burntofferynge there from, to geue it amonge the porcions of
the fathers houses in the multitudes of their congregacion to offre vnto the
LORDE, as it is wrytten in ye boke of Moses, Euen so dyd they with the oxen
also.
13 And they dighte the Passeouer at the fyre acordinge to the lawe. And that
which was halowed, dighte they in pottes, kettels, and pannes, and made haist
for the comon people.
14 Afterwarde prepared they for them selues also and for ye prestes: for the
prestes the children of Aaron were occupied in the burntofferynges and fat
vntyll the nighte. Therfore must the Leuites prepare for them selues and for the
prestes the children of Aaron.
15 And the syngers the children of Asaph stode in their place (acordinge to
Dauids commaundement) and Asaph and Heman, and Iedithim the kynges Seer, and the
porters at all the gates. And they departed not from their office. For the
Leuites their brethren prepared for them.
16 Thus was all the Gods seruyce prepared the same daye, that the Passeouer
mighte be kepte, and the burntsacrifices offred vpon the altare off the LORDE
acordinge to the commaundement of kynge Iosias.
17 So the children of Israel that were at hande, helde Passeouer at that tyme,
and the feast of vnleuended bred, seuen dayes.
18 Sence ye tyme of Samuel the prophet, was no Passeouer kepte in Israel like
this: and no kynge of Israel had holde soch a Passeouer as Iosias dyd, and the
prestes, Leuites, all Iuda, and soch as were founde of Israel, and the
inhabiters of Ierusalem.
19 In the eighteth yeare of the reigne of Iosias was this Passeouer kepte.
20 After this, whan Iosias had prepared the house, Necho the kynge of Egipte
wente vp to fighte agaynst Carcamis besyde Euphrates. And Iosias wete forth
agaynst him.
21 But he sent messaungers vnto him, sayenge: What haue I to do with the O kynge
off Iuda? I am not come now agaynst the, but I fighte agaynst another house: and
God hath sayde, that I shal make haist. Ceasse from God which is with me, that
he destroye the not.
22 Neuertheles Iosias turned not his face from him, but prepared himselfe to
fighte with him, and herkened not vnto the wordes of Necho out of the mouth of
God, & came to fighte wt him vpon the playne besyde Mageddo.
23 But the Archers shot at kynge Iosias. And the kynge sayde vnto his
seruauntes: Cary me awaye, for I am sore wounded.
24 And his seruautes toke him from the charet, and caried him vpon his seconde
charet, and broughte him to Ierusalem. And he dyed, and was buried amonge the
sepulcres off his fathers. And All Iuda and Ierusalem mourned for Iosias,
25 and Ieremy bewayled Iosias, and all the synginge men and wemen, spake their
lametacions ouer Iosias vnto this daye, and made a custome therof vnto this
daye. Beholde, it is wrytten also amonge the Lamentacions.
26 What more there is to saye of Iosias, and his mercy acordinge to the
scripture in the lawe of the LORDE,
27 and of his actes (both first and last) beholde, it is wrytten in the boke of
the kynges of Israel and Iuda.

Chapter 36

1 And the people of the londe toke Ioahas the sonne of Iosias, and made him
kynge in his fathers steade at Ierusalem.
2 Thre and twentye yeare olde was Ioahas whan he was made kynge, and reigned
thre monethes at Ierusalem.
3 For the kynge of Egipte deposed him at Ierusalem, and condemned the londe in
an hundreth talentes of syluer, and one talent off golde.
4 And the kynge of Egipte made Eliachim his brother kynge ouer Iuda and
Ierusale, and turned his name Ioachim. But Necho toke his brother Ioahas, and
caried him in to Egipte.
5 Fyue and twentye yeare olde was Ioachim wha he was made kynge, and reigned
eleue yeare at Ierusale, and dyd that which was euell in the siighte of the
LORDE his God.
6 And Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babilon wente vp agaynst him, and bounde him
with cheynes, to cary him vnto Babilon.
7 And Nabuchodonosor broughte certayne vessels of ye house of the LORDE vnto
Babilon, and put them in his temple at Babilon.
8 What more there is to saye of Ioachim, and off his abhominacions which he dyd,
and that were founde in him, beholde, they are wrytten in the boke of the kynges
of Israel and Iuda. And Ioachim his sonne was kynge in his steade.
9 Eight yeare olde was Ioachim whan he was made kynge, and reigned thre monethes
and ten dayes at Ierusale, and dyd yt which was euell in the sighte of ye LORDE.
10 But wha the yeare came aboute, Nabuchodonosor sent thither, and caused him be
fetched vnto Babilon with the costly vessels and Iewels of the house of the
LORDE, and made Sedechias his brother kynge ouer Iuda and Ierusalem.
11 One and twentye yeare olde was Sedechias whan he was made kynge, & reigned
eleuen yeare at Ierusalem,
12 and dyd that which was euell in the sighte of the LORDE his God, and
submytted not himselfe before the face of the prophet Ieremy, which spake out of
the mouth of the LORDE.
13 He fell awaye also from Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babilon (which had taken
an ooth of him by God) and was styfnecked, and hardened his hert, that he shulde
not conuerte vnto the LORDE God of Israel.
14 And all ye chefe amonge the prestes, and the people, multiplyed their synnes,
acordinge to all the abhominacions of the Heythen, and dyfyled the house of the
LORDE, which he had sanctified at Ierusalem.
15 And the LORDE God of their fathers sent vnto them early by his messaungers
(for he spared his people and his habitacion)
16 but they laughed the messaungers of God to scorne, and despysed his wordes,
and had his prophetes in derision, so loge tyll the indignacion of the LORDE
increased ouer his people, and there was no remedye of healinge.
17 For he broughte the kynge of the Caldees vpon them, and caused for to slaye
all their yonge men with the swerde in the house of their Sanctuary, and spared
nether yonge ma ner virgin, nether aged ner graudfather, but gaue them all in to
his hande.
18 And all the vessels in the house of God, greate and small, the treasures in
the house of ye LORDE, and the treasures of the kynge and of his prynces, all
this caused he to be caried vnto Babilon.
19 And they brent the house of God, and brake downe the wall of Ierusale, and
all the palaces therof brent they with fyre, so that all the costly ornamentes
of it were destroyed.
20 And loke who escaped ye swerde, hi caried he awaye vnto Babilon, & they
became his seruautes, & the seruauntes of his sonnes, tyll the Persians had the
empyre:
21 that ye worde of the LORDE by the mouth of Ieremy mighte be perfourmed, euen
vntyll the londe had ynough of hir Sabbathes: for all the tyme of the desolacion
was it Sabbath, vntyll the seuentye yeares were fulfylled.
22 But in the first yeare of Cyrus the kynge of Persia (that the worde of the
LORDE spoken by the mouth of Ieremy mighte be fulfylled) the LODDE raysed vp the
sprete of Cyrus the kynge of Persia, that he caused it be proclamed thorow out
all his empyre, yee and by wrytinge also, sayenge:
23 Thus sayeth Cyrus the kynge of Persia: The LORDE God of heauen hath geuen me
all the kyngdomes in the londe, and hath commaunded me to buylde him an house at
Ierusalem in Iuda. Who soeuer now amonge you is of his people, the LORDE his God
be with him, and let him go vp.


Ezra

Chapter 1

1 In the first yeare of Cyrus kynge off Persia (that the worde of the LORDE
spoken by the mouth of Ieremy might be fulfilled) the LORDE stered vp the sprete
of Cyrus kynge of Persia, yt he caused it be proclamed thorow out all his
empyre, yee and by wrytinge also, sayenge:
2 Thus sayeth Cyrus the kynge of Persia: The LORDE God of heaue hath geuen me
all the kyngdomes in the londe and hath commaunded me to buylde him an house at
Ierusalem in Iuda.
3 Who soeuer now amonge you is of his people, the LORDE his God be with him, and
let him go vp to Ierusalem in Iuda, and buylde the house of the LORDE God of
Israel. He is ye God that is at Ierusale.
4 And who so euer remayneth yet in eny maner of place (where he is a straunger)
let the me of his place helpe him with syluer and golde, with good and catell of
a good frewill, for the house of God at Ierusalem.
5 Then gat vp the pryncipall fathers of Iuda and Ben Iamin, and the prestes and
Leuites, and all they whose sprete God had raysed to go vp, and to buylde the
house of the LORDE at Ierusale.
6 And all they that were aboute them, strengthed their hande with vessels of
syluer and golde, with good and catell, and Iewels, besydes that which they gane
of their awne frewill.
7 And kynge Cyrus brought forth the vessels of the LORDES house, which
Nabuchodonosor had take out of Ierusalem, and put in his gods house.
8 But Cyrus ye kynge of Persia brought the forth by Mithredath the treasurer,
and nombred the vnto Se?bazar the prynce of Iuda.
9 And this is the nombre of them: thirtye basens of golde, and a thousande
basens of syluer, and nyne and twentye knyues,
10 thirtye cuppes of golde, and of other syluer cuppes foure hundreth and ten,
and of other vessels a thousande.
11 So that all the vessels both of golde and syluer, were fyue thousande and
foure hundreth. Se?bazar broughte them all vp, with them that came vp out of the
captiuyte off Babilon vnto Ierusalem.

Chapter 2

1 These are the childre of the londe that wente vp out of the captiuyte (who
Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babilon had caried awaye vnto Babilon) and came
agayne to Ierusalem and in to Iuda, euery one vnto his cite,
2 and came with Zorobabel, Iesua, Nehemias, Seraia, Reeleia, Mardachai, Bilsan,
Mispar, Begeuai, Rehum and Baena. This is now the nombre of the men of the
people of Israel:
3 The children of Phares, two thousande, an hudreth, and two and seuentye:
4 the children of Sephatia, thre hundreth and two and seuentye:
5 the children of Arath, seuen hundreth and fyue and seuentye:
6 the children of Pahath Moab amonge the children of Iesua Ioab, two thousande,
eight hundreth and twolue:
7 the children of Elam, a thousande, two hundreth and foure and fiftye:
8 the children of Sathu, nyne hundreth, and fyue and fortye:
9 the children of Sacai, seue hundreth and thre score:
10 the children of Bani, sixe hundreth and two and fortye:
11 the children of Bebai, sixe hundreth and thre and twentye:
12 the children of Asgad, a thousande two hundreth and two and twentye:
13 the children of Adonicam, sixe hudreth and sixe and sixtye:
14 the children of Bigeuai, two thousande and sixe and fiftye:
15 the children of Adin, foure hundreth and foure and fiftye:
16 the children of Ater of Ezechias, eight and nynetye:
17 the children of Bezai, thre hundreth and thre and twentye:
18 the children of Iorath, an hundreth and twolue:
19 the children of Hasum, two hundreth and thre and twentye:
20 the children of Gibbar, fyue and nynetye:
21 the children off Bethleem, an hundreth and thre and twentye:
22 the men off Netopha sixe and fiftye:
23 the men off Anathot, an hundreth and eight and twentye:
24 the children off Asmaueth, two and fortye:
25 the children off Kiriath Arim, Caphira and Beeroth, seuen hundreth and thre
and fortye:
26 the children off Rama and Gaba, sixe hundreth and one and twetye:
27 the men off Michmas, an hundreth and two and twentye:
28 the men of Bethel and Ai, two hundreth and thre and twentye:
29 the childre of Nebo, two and fyftye:
30 the children of Magbis, an hudreth and sixe and fiftye:
31 the childre of the other Elam a thousande, two hundreth and foure and fiftye:
32 the children of Harim, thre hundreth and twentye:
33 the childre of Lodhadid and Ono, seue hudreth and fyue and twetye:
34 the childre of Iericho, thre hundreth and fyue and fortye:
35 the children of Senaa, thre thousande, sixe, hundreth and thirtye.
36 The prestes. The children of Iedaia of the house of Iesua, nyne hundreth and
thre and seuentye:
37 the childre of Iemmer, a thousande and two and fiftye:
38 the children of Pashur, a thousande and two hudreth, and seuen and fortye:
39 the childre of Harim, a thousande and seuentene.
40 The Leuites. The children of Iesua and Cadmiel of the children of Hodauia,
foure and seuentye.
41 The syngers, the children of Asaph, an hundreth and eight and twentye.
42 The children of the dorekepers. The children of Sallum, the children of Ater,
the childre off Talmon, the children off Acub, the children off Hatita, and the
children off Sobai: alltogether an hundreth and nyne and thirtye.
43 The Nethinims. the children of Ziha, the children of Hasupha, the children of
Tabaoth,
44 the children of Ceros, the children of Sieha, the children of Padon,
45 the children of Lebana, the children of Hagaba, the children of Acub,
46 the childre of Hagab, the children of Samlai, the children of Hanan,
47 the children of Giddel, the children of Gahar, the childre of Reaia,
48 the children of Rezin, the children of Necuba, the children of Gasan,
49 the children of Vsa, the children of Passeah, the children of Bessai,
50 the children of Asna, the children of Meunim, the children of Nephussim,
51 the children of Bacbuc, the childre of Hacupha, the children of Harhur,
52 ye childre of Hazeluth, ye childre of Mehira, the children of Harsa,
53 the children of Barcom, the children of Sissera, the children of Thamah,
54 the children of Neziah, the children of Hatipha.
55 The children of Salomons seruauntes. The children of Sotai, the children of
Sophereth, the children of Pruda,
56 the children of Iaela, the childre of Darcon, the childre of Giddell,
57 the childre of Sephatia, the children of Hattil, the children of Pochereth of
Zebaim, the children of Ami.
58 All the Nethinims and the children off Salomons seruauntes were alltogether,
thre hundreth and two and nyentye.
59 And these wete vp also, Mithel, Melath, Thel, Harso, Cherub, Addon and Immer.
But they coulde not shewe their fathers house ner their sede, whether they were
of Israel.
60 The children of Delaia, the children of Tobias, the children of Necoda, sixe
hundreih and two and fiftye.
61 And of the children of the prestes. The children of Habaia, the children of
Hacom, the children of Barsillai, which toke one of the daughters of Barsillai
the Gileadite to wife, and was counted amonge the same names:
62 these soughte the register of their byrth, and founde none, therfore were
they put from the presthode.
63 And Hathirsatha sayde vnto them, that they shulde not eate of the most holy,
tyll there rose vp a prest with the lighte and perfectnesse.
64 The whole congregacion as one man, was two and fortye thousande, thre
hundreth and thre score:
65 besyde their seruauntes and maydes, of whom there were seue thousande, thre
hundreth and seuen and thirtye. And they had two hundreth singinge men and
wemen,
66 seue hundreth and sixe and thirtye horses, two hundreth and fyue and fortye
Mules,
67 foure hudreth and fyue and thirtye Camels, and sixe thousande, seuen hundreth
and twentye Asses.
68 And certayne of the chefe fathers, whan they came to the house of the LORDE
at Ierusalem, they were well mynded vnto the house of God, that it shulde be set
in his place,
69 and gaue after their abilyte vnto the treasure of the worke, one and
threscore thousande guldens, and fyue thousande pounde of syluer, and an
hundreth prestes garmentes.
70 So the prestes and the Leuites, and certayne of ye people, and the syngers,
and the porters, and ye Nethinims dwelt in their cities, and all Israel in their
cities.

Chapter 3

1 And whan the seuenth moneth came, and the children of Israel were now in their
cities, the people came together euen as one man, vnto Ierusalem.
2 And there stode vp Iesua the sonne of Iosedec and his brethren the prestes,
and Zorobabel the sonne of Saalthiel and his brethren, and buylded the altare of
the God of Israel, to offre burntofferynges theron, as it is wrytten in the lawe
of Moses the man of God,
3 and the altare set they vpon his sokettes (for there was a fearfulnes amonge
them because of the nacions and lodes) and offred burntofferinges theron vnto ye
LORDE in the mornynge and at euen.
4 And helde the feast of Tabernacles as it is wrytten, and offred
burntsacrifices daylie after the nombre as acordinge was, euery daye his
sacrifice.
5 Afterwarde the daylie burntofferynges also, and of the new Mones and of all
the feast dayes of the LORDE that were halowed, and allmaner of fre wyllinge
offeringes, which they did of their awne fre wyl vnto the LORDE.
6 Vpon the first daye of the seuenth moneth beganne they to offre burnt
sacrifices vnto the LORDE. But the foundacion of the teple of the LORDE was not
yet layed.
7 Neuertheles they gaue money vnto ye masons and carpenters, and meate and
drynke and oyle vnto them of Zidon and of Tyre, to brynge the Cedre tymbre from
Libanus by See vnto Ioppa, acordinge to the comaundement of Cyrus the kynge of
Persia.
8 In the seconde yeare of their commynge vnto the house of God at Ierusalem in
the seconde moneth, beganne Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel, and Iesua the
sonne of Iosedec, and the remnaunt of their brethren the prestes and Leuites,
and all they that were come out of the captiuyte vnto Ierusalem, and appoynted
the Leuites fro twentye yeare olde and aboue, to se that the worke of the house
of the LORDE wete forwarde.
9 And Iesua stode with his sonnes and brethren, and Cadmiel with his sonnes, and
the children of Iuda, to furthur the workmen of the house of God, namely the
childre of Henadad with their children and their brethren the Leuites.
10 And whan the buylders layed the foundacion of the temple of the LORDE, the
prestes stode in their araye, with trompettes. And the Leuites the children of
Asaph with Cimbales, to prayse ye LORDE with the Dytie of Dauid kynge of Israel.
11 And they sunge together, geuynge prayse & thankes vnto ye LORDE, because he
is gracious, and because his mercy endureth for euer vpon Israell. And all the
people shouted loude in praysinge the LORDE, because the foundacion of ye house
of the LORDE was layed.
12 Neuertheles many of the olde prestes and Leuites and awncient fathers, which
had sene the house afore in his foundacion, and this was now before their eyes,
wepte loude. But many shouted with ioye,
13 so that the noyse gaue a greate sounde, in so moch that the people coulde not
knowe ye ioyfull sounde for the noyse of the wepinge in the people: for the
people shouted loude, so that the noyse was herde farre of.

Chapter 4

1 But whan the aduersaries of Iuda and Ben Iamin herde, that the children of the
captiuyte buylded the teple vnto the LORDE God of Israel,
2 they came to Zorobabel & to the pryncipall fathers, and sayde vnto them: We
wyl buylde with you: for we seke the LORDE youre God like as ye do. And we haue
done sacrifice vnto him, sence the tyme that Assar Hadon the kynge of Assur
broughte vs vp hither.
3 But Zorobabel and Iesua and the other awnciet fathers of Israel, answered
them: It is not mete for vs and you to buylde the house of oure God, but we wyl
buylde alone vnto the LORDE God of Israel, as Cyrus the kynge of Persia hath
commaunded vs.
4 Then the folke of the londe hyndered the people of Iuda, and made them afrayed
to buylde,
5 and hyred councelers aganst them and hyndered their deuyce, as longe as Cyrus
the kynge of Persia lyued, vntyll the reigne off Darius kynge off Persia.
6 But whan Ahasuerus was kynge, in the begynnynge off his reigne wrote they vnto
him a complaynte agaynst them of Iuda and Ierusalem.
7 And in the tyme of Artaxerses, wrote Bisellam, Mithudath, Tabeel and the other
of their councell vnto Artaxerses the kynge of Persia. But the scripture of ye
letter was wrytten in the Syrians speach, and was interpretated in the langage
of the Syrians.
8 Rehum ye chaunceler, and Simsai the scrybe, wrote this letter agaynst
Ierusalem to Artaxerses the kynge.
9 We Rehum the chaunceler, and Simsai the scribe, and other of the councell of
Dina, off Arphasath, off Tarplat, off Persia, off Arach, of Babilon, of Susan,
of Deha, and of Elam,
10 and other of the people whom the greate and noble Asnaphar broughte ouer, and
set in the cities of Samaria, and other on this syde the water, and in Canaan.
11 And this is ye summe of the letter that they sent vnto kynge Artaxerses: Thy
seruauntes the men on this syde the water and in Canaan.
12 Be it knowne vnto ye kynge, that the Iewes which are come vp from the to vs
vnto Ierusale in to that sedicious & wicked cite, buylde the same, and make vp
ye walles of it, & brynge it out of ye foundacion.
13 Be it knowne now therfore vnto ye kynge, yt yf this cite be buylded & the
walles made vp agayne, the shal not they geue tribute, toll, and yearly custome,
and their deuyce shal do ye kynge harme.
14 But now that we all are therby which destroyed the temple, we wolde no longer
se the kynges dishonoure. Therfore sent we out, and caused the kynge to be
certified therof:
15 That it maye be soughte in ye Cronicles of thy progenitours, and so shalt
thou fynde in the same Cronicles, and perceaue, that this cite is sedicious and
noysome vnto kynges and londes, and that they cause other also to rebell of
olde, and for the same cause was this cite destroyed.
16 Therfore do we certifie the kynge, that yf this cite be buylded, and the
walles therof made vp, thou shalt kepe nothinge on this syde the water by the
reason of it.
17 Then sent ye kynge an answere vnto Rehum the chaunceler, and Simsai the
Scrybe, and to the other of their councell that dwelt in Samaria, and vnto the
other beyonde ye water. Peace and salutacion.
18 The letter which ye sent vnto vs, hath bene opely red before me,
19 and I haue commaunded to make search: and it is founde, that this cite of
olde hath made insurreccion agaynst, kynges, & how yt vpror and rebellion hath
bene commytted therin.
20 There haue bene mightie kynges also at Ierusale, which haue reigned ouer all
that is beyonde the water, and toll, tribute and yearly custome was geuen vnto
them.
21 Do ye now after this commaundemet, forbyd the same men, that the cite be not
builded, tyll I haue geue comaundemet.
22 Take hede now that ye be not necligent here in, lest the kynge haue harme
there thorow.
23 Now wha kynge Artaxerses letter was red before Rehum the chaunceler and
Simsai the Scrybe and their councell, they wente vp in all the haist to
Ierusalem vnto the Iewes, and forbad them with the arme and auctorite.
24 Then ceassed the worke of the house of God at Ierusalem, and continued so
vnto the seconde yeare of Darius kynge of Persia.

Chapter 5

1 The prophetes, Aggeus and Zachary ye sonne of Iddo, prophecied vnto ye Iewes
that were in Iuda and Ierusale, in the name of the God of Israel.
2 Then gat vp Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel, and Iesua the sonne of Iosedec,
and beganne to buylde the house of God at Ierusalem, and with them the prophetes
of God which strengthed the.
3 At the same tyme came to the Thathnai the debite on this syde the water, and
Sethar of Bosen, and their councelers, and sayde thus vnto them: Who hath
commaunded you to buylde this house, and to make vp the walles therof?
4 Then tolde we them the names of the men, that made this buyldinge.
5 But the eye of their God came vpon the Elders of the Iewes, that they were not
inhibyte, tyll the matter was brought before Darius, and tyll there came a
wrytinge therof agayne.
6 This is the summe of the letter yt Thathnai the Debyte on this syde the water,
and Sethar of Bosen, and their councellers of Apharsach (which were on this syde
the water) sent vnto kynge Darius.
7 And these are the wordes that they sent vnto him: Vnto Darius the kynge, all
peace.
8 Be it knowne vnto the kynge, that we came in to Iewry to the house of ye
greate God, which is buylded with all maner of stone, and balckes are layed in
the walles, and ye worke goeth fast forth, and prospereth in their handes.
9 Neuertheles we axed the Elders and sayde vnto them: Who hath comaunded you to
buylde this house, and to make vp the walles therof?
10 We axed their names also, that we might certifye the, and haue wrytten the
names of the men that were their rulers.
11 But they answered vs wt these wordes, and sayde: We are the seruautes of the
God of heauen and earth, and buylde the house yt was buylded many yeares agoo,
which a greate kynge of Israel buylded and set vp.
12 Howbeit whan oure fathers prouoked the God of heauen vnto wrath, he gaue them
ouer in the hande of Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babilon the Caldee, which brake
downe this house, & caried ye people awaye vnto Babilon.
13 Neuertheles in the first yeare of Cyrus the kynge of Babilon, ye same kynge
Cyrus commaunded to buylde this house of God:
14 for the vessels of golde and siluer in the house of God, which Nabuchodonosor
toke out of the temple at Ierusale, and broughte the in to ye temple at Babilon,
those dyd Cyrus the kynge take out of ye temple at Babilon, and delyuered them
vnto Se?bazer by name, whom he made Debyte,
15 and sayde vnto him: Take these vessels, go thy waye and brynge them vnto the
temple at Ierusalem, and let the house of God be buylded in his place.
16 Then came the same Se?bazar, and layed ye foundacion of the house of God at
Ierusalem. Sence that tyme hath it bene in buyldinge, and yet is it not
fynished.
17 Yf it please ye kynge now, let there be search made in ye kynges treasure
house which is at Babilon, whether it haue bene kynge Cyrus commaundement, that
the house of God at Ierusalem shulde be buylded: & sende vs ye kynges mynde
concernynge the same.

Chapter 6

1 Then comaunded kinge Darius, that search shulde be made in ye library of ye
kynges treasure house, which laye at Babilon.
2 So at Egbathanis in a castell that lyeth in the londe of the Meedes, there was
founde a boke, & in it was there an acte wrytten after this maner:
3 In the first yeare of kynge Cyrus, comaunded the same kynge Cyrus to buylde ye
house of God at Ierusalem, in the place where the sacrifice is made, & to laye
the foundacion to beare thre score cubites heyght, & thre score cubites bredth,
4 & thre walles of all maner of stones, and one wall of tymber, & the expences
shalbe geuen of the kynges house.
5 And the golde and syluer vessell of ye house of God (which Nabuchodonosor toke
out of the temple at Ierusalem, and broughte vnto Babilon) shalbe restored
agayne, yt they maye be broughte vnto the temple at Ierusale to their place in
to the house of God.
6 Get you farre from them therfore, thou Thathnai Debyte beyonde the water, and
Sethar of Bosen, & youre councelers which are beyonde the water.
7 Let them worke in ye house of God, that the Debyte of ye Iewes and their
Elders maye buylde the house of God in his place.
8 I haue commaunded also, what shalbe done to ye Elders of Iuda for the
buyldinge of the house of God, that there shal diligently be take of the kynges
goodes, euen of the rentes beyonde the water, & geuen vnto the men, and that
they be not hyndered.
9 And yf they haue nede of calues, lambes, or goates for the burntoffrynge vnto
ye God of heauen, wheate, salt, wyne and oyle, after the custome of the prestes
at Ierusalem, there shalbe geuen them daylie as is acordinge: and se that this
be not done necligetly,
10 that they maye offre swete sauoures vnto ye God of heauen, and praye for the
kynges lyfe, and for his children.
11 This commaundement haue I geue. And what man so euer he be that altereth
these wordes, there shal a balke be taken from his house, and set vp, and he
shalbe hanged theron, and his house shalbe prysed for the dede.
12 But the God that dwelleth in heauen, destroye all kynges and people, that put
to their hade to alter and to breake downe the house of God at Ierusalem. I
Darius haue commaunded, that this be diligently done.
13 Then Thathnai ye Debyte beyonde ye water, and Sethar of Bosen with their
councelers (to whom kynge Darius had sent) dyd their diligence.
14 And ye Elders of the Iewes buylded, and they prospered thorow the
prophecienge of Aggeus the prophet and Zachary the sonne of Iddo: and they
buylded, and set vp the worke, acordinge to the commaundement of the God of
Israel, and after the commaundement of Cyrus, Darius and Artaxerses kynges of
Persia.
15 And they perfourmed the house vnto the thirde daye of the moneth Adar, that
was the sixte yeare of the reigne of kynge Darius.
16 And the children of Israel, the prestes, the Leuites, and the other children
of ye captyuite helde the dedicacion of the house of God with ioye,
17 and offred at the dedicacion of the house of God, an hundreth calues, two
hundreth lambes, foure hundreth goates: and for the synofferynge for all Israel,
twolue he goates, acordinge to the nombre of the trybes of Israel,
18 and set the prestes in their courses, and ye Leuites in their offices, to
mynister vnto God which is at Ierusale, as it is wrytten in the boke of Moses.
19 And the children of the captyuite helde Passeouer vpon the fourtenth daye of
the first moneth:
20 for ye prestes and Leuites had purified them selues, so yt they were all
cleane as one man, and kylled Passeouer for all the children of the captyuite,
and for their brethre the prestes, and for them selues.
21 And the childre of Israel which were come agayne out of captiuyte, and all
soch as had separated them selues vnto them from the fylthinesse of the Heythen
in the londe, to seke the LORDE God of Israel, ate
22 & helde the feast of vnleueded bred seuen dayes with ioye: for the LORDE had
made them glad, and turned the hert of the kynge of Assur vnto the, so that
their handes were strengthed in the worke of the house of God, which is ye God
of Israel.

Chapter 7

1 After these actes in the reigne of Artaxerses kynge of Persia, there wente vp
from Babilon, E?dras the sonne of Seraia, the sonne of Asaria, the sonne of
Helchias,
2 the sonne of Sallum, the sonne of Sadoc, the sonne of Achitob,
3 the sonne of Amaria, the sonne of Asaria, the sonne Meraioth,
4 the sonne of Serahia, ye sonne of Vsi, the sonne of Buki,
5 the sonne of Abisua, the sonne of Phineas, the sonne of Eleasar, the sonne of
Aaron the chefe prest,
6 which was a quycke scrybe in the lawe of Moses, which the LORDE God of Israel
dyd geue. And ye kynge gaue him all that he requyred, acordinge to the hande of
the LORDE his God vpon him.
7 And there wente vp certayne of the children of Israel, and of the prestes, and
of the Leuites, of the syngers, of the porters, and of the Nethinims vnto
Ierusalem, in the seuenth yeare of kynge Artaxerses.
8 And they came to Ierusalem in the fifth moneth, that is the seuenth yeare of
the kynge.
9 For vpon the first daye of the first moneth, deuysed he to go vp from Babilon:
and on ye first daye of the fifth moneth came he to Ierusalem, acordinge to the
good hande of God vpon him:
10 For E?dras prepared his hert to seke the lawe of the LORDE, and to do it, and
to teach the precepte & iudgment in Israel.
11 And this is the summe of the letter, that kynge Artaxerses gaue vnto E?dras
the prest, the scrybe, which was a teacher in the wordes of the LORDE and of his
statutes ouer Israel.
12 Vnto E?dras the prest and scrybe in the lawe of the God of heauen, peace and
salutacion.
13 I haue commaunded, that all they of the people of Israel, and of the prestes
and Leuites in my realme, which are mynded of their awne good wyll to go vp to
Ierusalem, that they go with the,
14 beynge sent of the kynge and of the seuen lordes of the councell, to vyset
Iuda and Ierusalem, acordinge to the lawe of God, which is in thy hade:
15 And that thou shuldest take with the, syluer and golde, which the kynge and
the lordes of his councell geue of their awne good wyll vnto the God of Israel
(whose habitacion is at Ierusalem)
16 and all the syluer and golde that thou canst fynde in all ye countre of
Babilon: with it that the people and prestes geue of their awne good wil vnto
the house of God at Ierusalem.
17 Take thou the same, and bye diligently with the same money, calues, lambes,
goates, and meatofferynges and drynkofferynges, to be offred vpon the altare of
the house of youre God at Ierusalem.
18 And loke what it lyketh the and thy brethren to do with the remnaunt of the
money, that do after the wyll of youre God.
19 And the vessels that are geuen the for the mynistracion in the house of thy
God, those delyuer thou before God at Ierusalem.
20 And what so euer thinge more shal be nedefull for the house of thy God, which
is necessary for the to spende, let the same be geue out of the kynges chamber.
21 I kynge Artaxerses haue commaunded all the treasurers beyonde the water, yt
loke what so euer E?dras the prest and scrybe in the lawe of the God of heaue,
requyreth of you, that ye fulfyll the same diligently,
22 vntyll an hundreth taletes of syluer, and tyll an hundreth quarters of
wheate, and tyll an hudreth Batthes of wyne, and tyll an hundreth Batthes of
oyle, and salt without measure.
23 Whatsoeuer belongeth to the lawe of the God of heauen, let the same be done
with diligence for the house of the God of heaue, that there come no wrath vpon
the kynges realme & his children.
24 And knowne be it vnto you, that ye shall haue no auctorite to requyre taxinge
& custome, and yearly rentes vpon eny of the prestes, Leuites, syngers, porters,
Nethinims and mynisters in ye house of this God.
25 But thou E?dras (after the wy?dome of yi God that is in thy hande) set thou
iudges and arbiters, to iudge all the people that is beyonde Iordane, euen all
soch as knowe the lawe of thy God: and them that knowe it not, those se that ye
teache.
26 And who so euer wyl not diligently fulfyll the lawe of thy God, and the
kynges lawe, shall haue his iudgmet for the dede, whether it be vnto death, or
to be banyshed, or to be condemned in good, or to be put in preson.
27 Praysed be the LORDE God of oure fathers, which so hath inspyred ye kynges
hert to garnysh the house of God at Ierusalem:
28 and hath enclyned his mercy vnto me in the presence of the kynge, and his
councelers, and before all the kynges hye estates. And I was comforted
(acordinge to the hade of the LORDE my God ouer me) and so gathered I the heades
of Israel together, yt they mighte go vp with me.

Chapter 8

1 These are the heades of their fathers that were named, which wente vp wt me
from Babilon, what tyme as kynge Artaxerses reigned.
2 Of the childre of Phineas, Gersom: of the children of Ithamar, Daniel: of the
children of Dauid, Hattus:
3 of the childre of Pareos, Zachary, and the men childre nombred with him, an
hundreth and fiftye.
4 Of the children of Pahath Moab, Eleoenai the sonne of Serahia, and wt him two
hundreth males.
5 Of the children of Sechania, the sonne of Iehasiel, and with him thre hundreth
males.
6 Of the children of Adin Ebed, the sonne of Ionathan, and with him fiftie
males.
7 Of the children of Elam, Iesaia the sonne of Athalia, and with him seuentie
males.
8 Of the children of Sephatia, Sebadia the sonne of Michael, and wt him foure
score males.
9 Op the children of Ioab, Obadia the sonne of Iehiel, and with him two hundreth
& eightene men children.
10 Of the children of Selomith, the sonne of Iosiphia, and with him an hundreth
and thre score males.
11 Of the children of Bebai, Zachary the sonne of Bebai, and with him eight and
twentye males.
12 Of the children of Asgad, Iohanan the yongest sonne, and with him an hundreth
and ten males.
13 Of the last children of Adonicam, and these were their names: Eliphelet,
Ieiel and Semaia, and with them thre score males.
14 Of the children of Bigeuai, Vthai and Sabud, and with them seue males.
15 And I gathered them together by the water that renneth towarde Aheua, & there
abode we thre dayes, And whan I loked amonge the people & the prestes, I founde
no Leuites there.
16 The sent I Elieser, Ariel, Semaia, Elnathan, Iarib, Elnathan, Natha, Zachary
and Mesullam the rulers, and Ioiarib and Elnathan the teachers,
17 and those sent I vnto Iddo ye chefest at Casiphia, that they shulde fetch us
mynysters for the house of oure God, and I tolde them what they shulde saye vnto
Iddo and to his brethren the Nethinims at Casiphia.
18 And (acordinge to the good hande of oure God vpon us) they broughte us a wyse
man from amonge the children of Maheli the sonne of Leui the sonne of Israel,
euen Serebia with his sonnes and brethren, eightene.
19 And Hasabia, and with him Iesaia of the children of Merari, with his brethren
& their sonnes, twentye.
20 And of the Nethinims, whom Dauid and the princes gaue to mynister vnto the
Leuites, two hundreth & twentye, all named by name.
21 And euen there at the water besyde Aheua, caused I a fastinge to be
proclamed, yt we mighte humble oure selues before oure God, to seke of him a
righte waye for us, & oure children and all oure substaunce.
22 For I was ashamed to require of the kynge, soudyers & horsmen, to helpe us
agaynst the enemye in the waye. For we had sayde vnto the kynge: The hande of
oure God is for the best vpon all them that seke him, and his violence and wrath
vpon all them that forsake him.
23 So we fasted, and soughte this at oure God, and he herde us.
24 And I toke out twolue of the chefe prestes, Serebia and Hasabia, and ten of
their brethren with them,
25 and weyed them there the syluer and golde and vessels for the Heueofferinge
vnto the house of oure God, which the kynge, and the lordes of his councell and
prynces, and all Israel that were at hande, had geuen to the Heue offerynge:
26 and there weyed I them vnder their hande sixe hundreth and fiftye talentes of
syluer, and in syluer vessell an hundreth talentes, and in golde an hundreth
talentes,
27 twentye cuppes of golde of a thousande guldens, and two costly ornamentes of
good brasse, as cleare as golde,
28 and sayde vnto them: Ye are holy vnto the LORDE, therfore are the vessels
holy also, and so is the syluer and golde that is geuen of a good wyll vnto the
LORDE God of youre fathers:
29 Watch ye therfore and kepe it, tyll ye weye it downe before the chefe prestes
and Leuites, and awncient fathers of Israel at Ierusalem in the chestes of the
house of the LORDE.
30 Then toke the prestes and Leuites that weyed syluer and golde & vessell, to
brynge it to Ierusalem vnto ye house of oure God.
31 So we brake vp, from the water of Aheua on the twolueth daye of the first
moneth, to go vnto Ierusalem: and the hande of oure God was vpon us, and
delyuered us fro the hande of the enemies and preuy waytinges by the waye.
32 And we came to Ierusalem, and abode there thre dayes.
33 But on ye fourth daye was the syluer and golde, and vessell weyed in the
house of oure God vnder the hande of Meremoth the sonne of Vrias the prest, and
with him Eleasar the sonne of Phineas, and with them Iosabad the sonne of Iesua,
and Noadia ye sonne of Benui the Leuites,
34 acordinge to the nombre & weight of euery one. And the weight was all wrytten
vp at the same tyme.
35 And the children of the captiuyte, which were come out of preson, offred
burntofferinges vnto ye God of Israel: twolue bullockes for all Israel, sixe and
nynetye rammes, seuen and seuentye lambes, and twolue goates for a synofferynge,
all to the burnt offeringe of the LORDE.
36 And they delyuered the kynges commyssion vnto the kynges officers, & to the
Debytes on this syde the water. And they promoted the people and the house of
God.

Chapter 9

1 Whan all this was perfourmed, the rulers came to me, and sayde: The people of
Israel, and the prestes, & Leuites are not separated from the nacions in the
londes as touchinge their abhominacions, namely of the Cananites, Hethites,
Pheresites, Iebusites, Ammonites, Moabites, Egipcians, and Amorites.
2 For they haue taken the doughters of the same, & their sonnes, and haue myxte
the holy sede with ye nacions in the londes: and the hande of the rulers and
lordes of councell hath bene principall in this trespace.
3 Whan I herde this, I rente my clothes and my rayment, and plucte out the heer
of my heade and of my beerd, and sat mournynge.
4 And there resorted vnto me all soch as feared the worde of the LORDE God of
Israel because of the greate transgression. And I sat mournynge vntyll the
euenynge sacrifyce.
5 And aboute the euenynge sacrifice I rose vp fro my heuynes, and rente my
clothes and my raiment, and fell vpon my knees, and spred out my handes vnto the
LORDE my God,
6 and sayde: My God, I am ashamed, and darre not lifte vp mine eies vnto the my
God: for oure wickednesses are growne ouer oure heade, & oure trespaces are
waxen greate vnto ye heaue.
7 Sence the tyme of oure fathers haue we bene in greate trespace vnto this daie,
and because of oure wickednesses haue we and or kynges bene delyuered in to the
hande of ye kynges of the nacions, in to the swerde, in to captiuyte, in to
spoyle, and in to confusion of face, as it is come to passe this daye.
8 But now is there a litle and sodane graciousnes come from the LORDE oure God,
so that some of vs are escaped, that he maie geue vs a nayle in his holy place,
that oure God maye lighte oure eyes, and geue vs a litle lyfe in oure bondage.
9 For we are bondmen, and or God hath not forsake vs though we be bondmen, and
hath enclyned mercy vnto vs in the sighte of the kynges of Persia, that they
shulde geue vs lyfe, and promote the house of oure God, and to sett vp the
desolacion therof, and to geue vs an hedge in Iuda and Ierusalem.
10 O oure God, what shall we saye now after this? that we haue forsaken thy
commaundementes,
11 which thou hast commaunded by thy seruauntes the prophetes, and saide: The
londe wherin ye shal come to possesse it, is an vncleane londe thorow the
fylthines of the people of the londes, in their abhominacions wherwith they haue
made it full of vnclennes on euery syde.
12 Therfore shal ye not geue youre doughters vnto their sonnes, and their
doughters shall ye not take vnto youre sonnes, and seke not their peace and
welth for euer, that ye maye be stronge, and enioye the good in the londe, and
yt ye and youre children maye haue the inheritaunce of it for euermore.
13 And after all this that is come vpon vs (because of oure euell dedes and
greate trespace) thou oure God hast spared oure wickednesses, and hast geuen vs
a delyueraunce as it is come to passe.
14 As for vs, we haue turned backe, & haue let go thy commaundementes, to make
contracte with the people of these abhominacions. Wilt thou then be wroth at vs,
tyll we be vtterly consumed, so that nothynge remayne, and tyll there be no
delyueraunce?
15 O LORDE God of Israel, thou art righteous, for we remaine yet escaped, as it
is this daie. Beholde, in thy presence are we in oure trespace, for because of
it is there no stondinge before the.

Chapter 10

1 And whan E?dras prayed after this maner and knowleged, wepte, and laie before
the house of God, there resorted vnto him out of Israel a very greate
congregacion of men and wemen, and children: for the people wepte very sore.
2 And Sachania the sonne of Iehiel one of the children of Elam, answered, and
sayde vnto E?dras: We haue trespaced agaynst the LORDE oure God, in that we haue
taken straunge wyues of all the people of the londe. Now there is hope yet in
Israel cocerninge this,
3 therfore let vs make a couenaut now with oure God, that we shal put awaye all
the wyues (and soch as are borne of them) acordynge to the councell of ye LORDE,
and of them that feare the commaundement of oure God, yt we maye do acordynge to
the lawe.
4 Get the vp therfore, for the matter belongeth vnto the. We wyll be with the,
be of good comforte, and do it.
5 Then rose E?dras, and toke an ooth of the rulers, prestes and Leuites, and of
all Israel, that they shulde do acordynge to this worde: and they swore.
6 And E?dras stode vp before the house of God, and wente in to the chamber of
Iohanan the sonne of Eliasab. And whan he came thither, he ate no bred, and
dranke no water: for he mourned because of the transgression of them that had
bene in captiuyte.
7 And they caused a proclamacion be made thorow out Iuda and Ierusalem, vnto all
the children which had bene in captiuite, yt they shulde gather them selues
together vnto Ierusale:
8 And that who soeuer came not within thre dayes acordinge to the deuyce of the
rulers and Elders, all his substaunce shulde be forfett, and he put out from the
cogregacion of the captiue.
9 Then all the men of Iuda and Ben Iamin gathered them selues together vnto
Ierusalem in thre dayes, yt is on the twentieth daye of the nyenth moneth: and
all the people sat in the strete before the house of God, and trembled because
of the matter, and for the rayne.
10 And E?dras ye prest stode vp, and sayde vnto them: Ye haue transgressed, yt
ye haue taken straunge wyues, to make the trespace of Israel yet more:
11 confesse now therfore vnto ye LORDE God of youre fathers, & do his pleasure,
and separate youre selues from the people of the londe, & from ye straunge
wyues.
12 The answered all the cogregacion, & sayde with loude voyce: Let it be done as
thou hast sayde.
13 But the people are many, & it is a raynye wether, & they ca not stode here
without, nether is this a worke of one daye or two, for we are many yt haue
offended in this transgression.
14 Let vs appoynte oure rulers therfore in all the congregacion, yt all they
which haue taken straunge wyues in oure cities, maye come at the tyme appoynted,
and the Elders of euery cite and their Iudges with them, tyll the wrath of oure
God because of this matter be turned awaye from vs.
15 Then were appoynted Ionathan the sonne of Asahel & Iehasia the sonne of
Thecua ouer this matter. And Mesullam and Sabthai the Leuites helped them.
16 And the children of the captiuyte dyd euen so. And E?dras the prest, and ye
awncient fathers thorow the house of their fathers, and all that were now
rehearsed by name, separated the selues, and sat them downe on the first daye of
the tenth moneth, to exame this matter.
17 And on ye first daye of ye first moneth broughte they the matter to a
conclusion, concernynge all the men yt had take straunge wyues.
18 And amoge the childre of the prestes there were men founde yt had take
straunge wyues, namely amoge the children of Iesua the sonne of Iosedec & of his
brethre, Maeseia, Elieser, Iarib and Godolia.
19 And they gaue their hades there vpon, that they wolde put awaye their wyues:
& for their trespace offerynge to geue a rame for their trespace.
20 Amoge the children of Immer, Hanani & Sabadia.
21 Amonge the childre of Harim, Maeseia, Elia, Semaia, Iehiel, and Vsia.
22 Amonge ye children of Pashur, Elioenai, Maeseia, Ismael, Nethaneel, Iosabad &
Eleasa.
23 Amonge the Leuites, Iosabad, Simei and Celaia, He is that Celita, Pethahia,
Iuda & Eleasar.
24 Amonge the syngers, Elyasib. Amonge the porters, Sallum, Telem and Vri.
25 Of Israel. Amonge the children of Pareos, Ramia, Iesia, Malchia, Meiamin,
Eleasar, Malchia & Benaia.
26 Amonge ye children of Elam, Mathania, Zachary, Iehiel, Abdy, Ieremoth & Elia.
27 Amonge the children of Sathu, Elioenai, Eliasib, Mathania, Ieremoth, Sabad &
Asisa.
28 Amonge the children of Bebai, Iohanan, Hanania, Sabai & Athlai.
29 Amonge the children of Bani, Mesullam, Malluch, Adaia, Iasub, Seal and
Ieremoth.
30 Amonge the children of Pahath Moab, Adna, Chelal, Benaia, Maesea, Mathania,
Bezaleel, Benui and Manasse.
31 Amonge the children of Harim, Elieser, Iesia, Malchia, Semaia, Simeon,
32 Be Iamin, Malluch & Samaria.
33 Amonge the childre of Hasum, Mathnai, Mathatha, Sabad, Eliphelet, Ieremai,
Manasse & Simei.
34 Amoge the childre of Bani, Maedai, Amram, Huel,
35 Benaia, Bedia, Chelui,
36 Naia, Meremoth, Eliasib,
37 Mathania, Mathnai, Iaesau,
38 Bani, Benui, Simei,
39 Selemia, Nathan, Adaia,
40 Machnadbai, Sasai, Sarai,
41 Asareel, Selemia, Samaria,
42 Sallum, Amaria, & Ioseph.
43 Amonge the childre of Nebo, Ieiel, Mathithia, Sabad, Sebina, Iaddai, Ioel,
and Benaia.
44 All these had taken straunge wyues. And amonge the same wyues there were
some, that had borne children.


Nehemiah

Chapter 1

1 These are the actes of Nehemias the sonne of Hachalia. It fortuned in ye
moneth Chisleu in ye twetieth yeare, that I was in the castell at Susan:
2 and Hanani one of my brethren came with certayne me of Iuda, and I axed them
how the Iewes dyd that were delyuered and escaped from the captiuyte, & how it
wente at Ierusale.
3 And they sayde vnto me: The remnaunt of the captiuyte are there in the londe
in greate mysfortune & rebuke. The walles of Ierusalem are broken downe, and the
portes ther of are brent with fyre.
4 Wha I herde these wordes, I sat me downe & wepte, & mourned two dayes, &
fasted & prayed before the God of heauen,
5 & sayde: O LORDE God of heauen, thou greate & terrible God, thou yt kepest
couenaunt & mercy for them yt loue the & obserue thy comaundementes:
6 let yi eares marke, & let thine eies be open, yt thou mayest heare the prayer
of yi seruaunt, which I praye now before ye daye and nighte for the children of
Israel thy seruauntes, & knowlege the synnes of the children of Israel, which we
haue commytted agaynst the. And I & my fathers house haue synned also.
7 We haue bene corrupte vnto the, in yt we haue not kepte the comaundementes,
statutes & lawes, which thou comaundedst yi seruaunt Moses.
8 Yet call to remembraunce ye worde that thou comaundedst thy seruaunt Moses,
and saydest: Yf ye trasgresse, then wil I scater you abrode amonge the nacios.
9 But yf ye turne vnto me, and kepe my commaundementes & do them: though ye were
cast out vnto the vttemost parte of heauen yet wyl I gather you from thence, and
wyll brynge you from thence, eue vnto the place, that I haue chosen for my name
to dwell there.
10 They are thy seruauntes, and thy people, whom thou hast delyuered thorow thy
greate power & mightie hande.
11 O LORDE, let thine eares marke the prayer of thy seruaunt, & the prayer of
thy seruauntes, whose desyre is to feare thy name, & let thy seruaunt prospere
this daye, & graunte him mercy in the sight of this man: for I was the kynges
butlar.

Chapter 2

1 In the moneth Nisan of the twentieth yeare of kynge Artaxerses, wha the wyne
stode before him, I toke vp the wyne, and gaue it vnto ye kynge, and I was heuy
in his presence.
2 Then sayde ye kynge vnto me: Why lokest thou so sadly? Thou art not sicke,
that is not ye matter, but thou art heuy harted. Neuertheles I was sore afrayed,
3 & sayde vnto the kynge: God saue the kynges life for euer, shulde I not loke
sadly? the cite of my fathers buryall lyeth wayest, & the portes therof are
consumed wt the fyre.
4 Then sayde the kynge vnto me: What is the thy request? Then made I my prayer
to the God of heaue,
5 and sayde vnto the kynge: yf it please the kynge, and yf thy seruaunt be
fauoured in thy sighte, I beseke the sende me in to Iuda vnto ye cite of my
fathers buryall, that I maye buylde it.
6 And ye kynge sayde vnto me, & so dyd the quene yt sat by him: How loge shal
thy iourney cotynue, and wha wilt thou come agayne? And it pleased ye kynge to
sende me, and I set him a tyme,
7 & sayde vnto the kynge: Yf it please the kynge, let him geue me letters to the
Debites beyonde ye water, yt they maye conueye me ouer, tyll I come in to Iuda:
8 & letters vnto Assaph the lorde of the kynges wod, yt he maye geue me wodd for
balkes to the gates of the palace, which are harde on the house & harde on the
walles of the cite, & for the house that I shal entre in to. And ye kynge gaue
me acordinge to the good hande of God vpo me.
9 And whan I came to ye Debites beyonde the water, I gaue them ye kynges
letters. And the kynge sent captaynes and horsmen with me.
10 But whan Saneballath the Horonite, & Tobias the seruaunt of the Ammonites
herde yt, it greued them sore, yt there was come a man which soughte the welth
of the children of Israel.
11 And whan I came to Ierusalem, & had bene there thre daies,
12 I gat me vp in ye night season, & a fewe men with me: for I tolde no man what
God had geue me in my hert to do at Ierusalem: & there was not one beest wt me,
saue it yt I rode vpon.
13 And I rode by nighte vnto the valley porte before the Dragon well, & to the
Dongporte, & considered ye walles of Ierusalem that were broken downe, & the
portes therof consumed wt the fyre.
14 And I wente ouer vnto ye Well porte, & to the kynges condyte, & there was no
rowme for my beest, yt it coulde go vnder me.
15 Then wete I on in the nighte by the broke syde, & cosidered ye wall, & turned
back, & came home agayne to ye valley porte.
16 And ye rulers knewe not whither I wete, or what I dyd: for hither to had I
not tolde the Iewes & the prestes, the councelers & the rulers, & the other yt
laboured in the worke,
17 & I saide vnto the: Ye se the myserye yt we are in, how Ierusale lyeth wayst,
& how ye gates therof are brent wt fyre, come, let vs buylde vp ye walles of
Ierusale, yt we be nomore a rebuke.
18 And I tolde the of the good hade of my God which was vpo me: And ye kynges
wordes yt he had spoke vnto me. And they saide: Then let vs get vp. And we
buylded, and their handes were strengthed to good.
19 But whan Saneballat ye Horonite, and Tobias the seruaunt of ye Ammonites, &
Gosem the Arabian herde it, they laughed vs to scorne, and despised vs, & sayde:
What is this that ye do? Wyll ye fall awaye agayne from the kynge?
20 Then answered I them, and sayde: The God of heauen shal cause vs to prospere:
for we his seruauntes are gotten vp, & are buyldinge. As for you, ye haue no
porcio ner right, ner remembraunce in Ierusale.

Chapter 3

1 And Eliasib the hye prest gat him vp with his brethren the prestes, and
buylded the Shepegate. They halowed it, and set vp the dores of it: euen vnto
the tower Mea halowed they it, namely vnto the tower of Hananeel.
2 Nexte vnto him buylded ye men of Iericho. And besyde him buylded Sachur the
sonne of Imri.
3 But the Fyshporte dyd the children of Senaa buylde, they couered it, and set
on the dores, lockes and barres of it.
4 Nexte vnto him buylded Meremoth the sonne of Vria the sonne of Hacoz. Nexte
vnto him buylded Mesullam ye sonne of Barachias ye sonne of Mesesabeel. Nexte
vnto him buylded Sadoc ye sonne of Baena.
5 Nexte vnto him buylded they of Thecoa. But their greate me put not their
neckes to ye seruyce of their lorde.
6 The Oldgate buylded Ioiada ye sonne of Passeah, & Mesullam the sonne of
Besodia: they couered it, and set on the dores, lockes & barres of it.
7 Nexte vnto them buylded Melacia of Gibeon, and Iadon of Morono, me of Gibeon
and of Mispa, for the seate of the Debyte on this syde the water.
8 Nexte vnto him buylded Vsiel the sonne of Harhaia the goldsmyth. Nexte vnto
him buylded Hanania ye Apotecarys sonne, & they repayred Ierusale vnto the brode
wall.
9 Nexte vnto him buylded Rephaia the sonne of Hur, the ruler of the halfe
quarter of Ierusalem.
10 Nexte vnto him buylded Iedaia the sonne of Harumaph, ouer agaynst his house.
Nexte vnto him buylded Hattus the sonne of Hasabema.
11 But Malchia the sonne of Harim, and Hasub the sonne of Pahath Moab buylded ye
other pece, and the tower beside the fornace.
12 Nexte vnto him buylded Sallum the sonne of Halohes the ruler of the halfe
quarter of Ierusalem, and his daughters.
13 The valley gate buylded Hanum, and the citesins of Sanoah. They buylded it,
and set on the dores, lockes and barres therof, and a thousande cubytes on the
wall, vnto the Dogeporte.
14 But the Dongeporte buylded Malechia the sonne of Rechab, the ruler of the
fourth parte of the vynyardes: He buylded it, & set on the dores, lockes &
barres therof.
15 But the Wellgate builded Sallum ye sonne of ChalHose, the ruler of the
fourthparte of Mispa: He builded it, & couered it, & set on ye dores, lockes, &
barres therof, & the wall vnto the pole of Sybah by the kynges garden, vnto the
steppes that go downe from the cite of Dauid.
16 After him builded Nehemia the sonne of A?buk, the ruler of the halfe quarter
of Bethzur, vntyll the other side ouer agaynst the sepulcres of Dauid, and to
the pole Asuia, & vnto the house of the mightie.
17 After him buylded the Leuites, Rehum the sonne of Bani. Nexte vnto him
buylded Hasabia ye ruler of the halfe quarter at Regila in his quarter.
18 After him buylded their brethre, Banai the sonne of Henadab, the ruler of the
halfe quarter of Segila.
19 After him buylded Eser the sonne of Iesua ye ruler of Mispa, the other pece
hard ouer against the Harnesse corner.
20 After him buylded Baruc the sonne of Sabai the other pece worshipfully &
costly, fro the corner vnto ye dore of ye house of Eliasib ye hye prest.
21 After him builded Meremoth the sonne of Vria the sonne of Hacos the other
pece, fro ye dore of Eliasibs house, vnto the ende of the house of Eliasib.
22 After him buylded the prestes, the me of the countre.
23 After him buylded BenIamin and Hasub ouer against their house. After the
buylded Asaria the sonne of Maeseia the sonne of Anania nexte vnto his house.
24 After him buylded Benui ye sonne of Henadad the other pece from the house of
Asaria vnto the turnynge, and vnto the corner.
25 After him buylded Palal the sonne of Vsai, ouer agaynst the corner & the hye
tower, which lieth out ouer fro the kynges house, besyde the courte of the
preson. After him Pedaia the sonne of Pareos
26 (As for ye Nethinims they dwelt in Ophel, vnto ye Watergate, towarde the east
where ye tower lieth out)
27 After him buylded they of Thecoa ye other pece ouer against ye greate tower,
yt lieth outwarde, and vnto the wall of Ophel.
28 But from the Horsgate forth buylded ye prestes, euery one ouer agaynst his
house.
29 After them buylded Sadoc ye sonne of Immer ouer against his house. After him
buylded Semaia the sonne of Sachania ye keper of the eastgate.
30 After him buylded Hanania the sonne of Selemia, & Hanum the sonne of Zalaph
ye sixte, ye other peace. After him builded Mesullam the sonne of Berechia ouer
against his chest.
31 After him builded Malchia the goldsmythes sonne, vntyll ye house of the
Nethinims, and of the marchauntes ouer agaynst the councell gate, and to the
perler in the corner.
32 And betwene the perler of the corner vnto the Shepegate builded the
goldsmythes and the marchauntes.

Chapter 4

1 Bvt whan Saneballat herde that we builded ye wall, he was wroth, & toke greate
indignacio & mocked ye Iewes
2 & saide before his brethre & the mightie men of Samaria: What do the impotet
Iewes? shall they be thus suffred? shall they offre? shal they perfourme it in
one daie? shal they make ye stones whole againe, yt are brought to dust, &
brent?
3 And Tobias the Ammonite beside him saide: Let the builde on, yf a foxe go vp,
he shall breake downe their stonye wall.
4 Heare O thou oure God, how we are despysed, turne their shame vpon their awne
heade, yt thou mayest geue them ouer in to despisinge in the londe of their
captiuite.
5 Couer not their wickednesse, & put not out their sinne fro yi presence: for
they haue prouoked the buylders.
6 Yet buylded we the wall, & ioyned it whole together, vnto ye halfe heigth. And
the people were well mynded to labor.
7 But whan Saneballat, & Tobias, and ye Arabias, & Ammonites, & A?dodites herde,
yt the walles of Ierusalem were made vp, and that they had begonne to stoppe vp
ye gappes, they were very wroth,
8 and cospyred all together, to come and fight against Ierusalem, & to make an
hinderaunce therin.
9 Neuertheles we made or praier vnto oure God, & set watchme vpo the wall daye &
night ouer against them.
10 And Iuda saide: The stregth of the bearers is to feble, & there is to moch
dust, we are not able to builde on the wall.
11 And or aduersaries thought: They shall not knowe nether se, tyll we come in
the myddes amonge the, and slaye them, & hynder ye worke.
12 But whan the Iewes that dwelt besyde them, came out of all the places where
they dwelt aboute vs, and tolde vs as good as te tymes,
13 then set I the people after their kynreds with their swerdes, speares & bowes
beneth in the lowe places behynde the wall,
14 & loked, and gat me vp, and sayde vnto the chefe men and rulers, & to the
other people: Be not ye afrayed of them, thynke vpon ye greate LORDE which ought
to be feared, & fighte for yor brethren, sonnes, daughters, wyues, & houses.
15 Neuertheles whan or enemies herde yt we had gotten worde of it, God broughte
their councell to naughte, and we turned all againe to the wall, euery one vnto
his labor.
16 And from that time forth it came to passe, yt the halfe parte of the yonge
men dyd the laboure, & the other halfe parte helde the speares, shyldes, bowes,
and brestplates, and the rulers stode behynde all the house of Iuda,
17 which buylded on the wall, & bare burthes, from those that laded the. With
one hande dyd they ye worke, and with the other helde they the weapen.
18 And euery one yt buylded, had his swerde girde by his side, & so builded
they. And the trompetters stode beside me.
19 And I sayde vnto the pryncipall men, & rulers, and to ye other people: The
worke is greate & large, & we are separated vpon the wall one farre from
another.
20 Loke in what place now ye heare the noise of ye trompe, resorte ye thither
vnto vs. Oure God shal fight for vs,
21 & we wil be labourige in ye worke. And the halfe parte of the helde ye
speares fro ye morninge springe, till ye starres came forth.
22 And at ye same tyme sayde I vnto ye people: Euery one abyde with his seruaunt
at Ierusalem, yt in the night season we maye geue attendaunce to ye watch, and
to laboure on the daye tyme.
23 As for me and my brethren, & my seruauntes, and ye men of the watch behynde
me, we put neuer of oure clothes, so so moch as to washe oure selues.

Chapter 5

1 And there arose a greate complaynte of ye people, & of their wyues against
their brethren the Iewes.
2 And there were some yt sayde: oure sonnes and doughters are to many, let vs
take corne for the, & eate, that we maye lyue.
3 Some saide: Let vs set or londes, vynyardes & houses to pledge, & take vp
corne in the derth.
4 But some saide: Let vs borowe money of the kinge vpo vsury for oure londes and
vynyardes.
5 Now are oure brethrens bodies as oure awne bodies, and their children as oure
children: els shulde we subdue oure sonnes and doughters vnto bondage, and some
of oure doughters are subdued allready, and no strength is there in oure handes,
and other men shal haue oure londes and vynyardes.
6 But whan I herde their complaynte and soch wordes, it displeased me sore,
7 and I aduysed so in my mynde, yt I rebuked the councelers, and the rulers, and
sayde vnto them: Wyl ye requyre vsury one of another? And I broughte a greate
congregacion agaynst them,
8 and sayde vnto them: We (after oure abilyte) haue boughte oure brethren the
Iewes, which were solde vnto the Heythen. And wyl ye sell youre brethren, whom
we haue boughte vnto vs? Then helde they their peace, & coulde fynde nothinge to
answere.
9 And I sayde: It is not good that ye do. Oughte ye not to walke in the feare of
God, because of the rebuke of the Heythen oure enemies?
10 I and my brethre, and my seruauntes haue lent them money and corne: but as
for vsury, let vs leaue it.
11 Therfore this same daye se that ye restore the their londes agayne, their
vynyardes, oyle gardens and houses, and the hundreth parte of the money of the
corne, wyne and oyle that ye haue wonne of them.
12 Then sayde they: We wyl restore them agayne, and wyl requyre nothinge of
them, and wyl do as thou hast spoken. And I called the prestes, and toke an ooth
of the, that they shulde do so.
13 And I shoke my lappe, and sayde: God shake out euery man after the same maner
fro his house and laboure, that maynteyneth not this worde: euen thus be he
shaken out, and voyde. And all ye congregacion sayde: Amen, and praysed the
LORDE. And the people dyd so.
14 And from the tyme forth that it was commytted vnto me to be a Debyte in the
londe of Iuda, namely from the twentieth yeare vnto the two and thirtieth yeare
off kynge Artaxerses (that is twolue yeare) I and my brethre lyued not of soch
sustenaunbe as was geuen to a Debyte:
15 For the olde Debytes that were before me, had bene chargeable vnto the
people, and had take of the bred and wyne, and fortye Sycles of syluer: Yee and
their seruauntes had oppressed the people. But so dyd not I, and that because of
the feare of God.
16 I laboured also in the worke vpon the wall, and boughte no lode. And all my
seruautes came thither together vnto ye worke.
17 Morouer there were at my table an hundreth and fiftie of the Iewes and
rulers, which came vnto me, from amonge the Heythen, that are aboute vs.
18 And there was prepared me daylie an oxe, and sixe chosen shepe, and byrdes,
and euer once in ten dayes a greate summe of wyne. Yet requyred not I the
lyuynge of a Debyte for ye bondage was greuous vnto ye people.
19 Thynke vpo me my God vnto ye best, acordige to all that I haue done for this
people.

Chapter 6

1 And whan Saneballat, Tobias and Gosem the Arabian, and the other of oure
enemyes herde, that I had buylded the wall, and that there were no mo gappes
ther in (howbeit at the same tyme had I not hanged the dores vpon the gates)
2 Saneballat and Gosem sent vnto me, sayenge: Come and let us mete together in
the vyllages vpon the playne of the cite Ono. Neuertheles they thoughte to do me
euell.
3 Notwithstondynge I sent messaungers vnto them, sayenge: I haue a greate
busynes to do, I can not come downe. The worke shulde stonde still, yf I were
necligent, and came downe to you.
4 Howbeit they sent vnto me as good as foure tymes after the same maner. And I
gaue the same answere.
5 Then sent Saneballat his seruaunt vnto me the fifth tyme, with an open letter
in his hande,
6 wherin was wrytten: It is tolde the Heythen, & Gosem hath sayde it, that thou
and the Iewes thynke to rebell: for ye which cause thou buyldest the wall, and
wylt be their kynge in these matters,
7 and hast ordeyned the prophetes to preach of the at Ierusalem, and to saye: He
is kynge of Iuda. Now shal this come to the kynges eares: come now therfore, and
let us take oure councell together.
8 Neuertheles I sent vnto him, sayenge: There is no soch thinge done as thou
sayest: thou hast fayned it out of thine owne hert.
9 For they were all mynded to make us afrayed, and thoughte: They shal withdrawe
their handes from the worke, yt they shal not laboure. Howbeit I stregthed my
hande the more.
10 And I came vnto ye house of Semaia ye sonne of Delaia the sonne of
Mechetabeel, & he had shut him selfe within, & sayde: Let us come together in to
ye house of God, eue vnto ye myddes of ye teple, & sparre ye dores of ye teple:
for they wyl come to slaye ye, yee eue in the night wyl they come to put the to
death.
11 But I sayde: Shulde soch a ma flye? Shulde soch a ma as I am, go in to ye
teple, to saue his life? I wyl not go in.
12 For I perceaued, that God had not sent him: Yet spake he prophecye vpon me,
neuerthelesse Tobias and Saneballat had hired him for money.
13 Therfore toke he the money, that I shulde be afrayed, and so to do and synne,
that they might haue an euell reporte of me, to blaspheme me.
14 My God thynke thou vpon Tobias and Saneballat, acordynge vnto these their
workes, and of ye prophet Noadia, and of the other prophetes, yt wolde haue put
me in feare.
15 And the wall was fynished on the fyue & twentyeth daye of the moneth Elul, in
two and fyftye dayes.
16 And whan all or enemies herde therof, all the Heithen yt were aboute vs, were
afraied, and their corage failed the: for they perceaued, that this worke came
of God.
17 And at ye same tyme were there many of ye chefe of Iuda, whose letters wete
vnto Tobias, & from Tobias vnto them
18 for there were many in Iuda that were sworne vnto him: for he was the sonne
in lawe of Sachania the sonne of Arah, and his sonne Iohanan had the doughter of
Mesullam the sonne of Barachia,
19 and they spake good of him before me, and tolde him my wordes. And Tobias
sent letters, to put me in feare.

Chapter 7

1 Now whan we had buylded the wall I hanged on the dores, and the porters,
syngers and Leuites were appoynted.
2 And I comaunded my brother Hanam, and Hanama the ruler of the palace at
Ierusalem: for he was a faithfull man, and feared God more then dyd many other
3 and I sayde vnto them: Let not the gates of Ierusale be opened vntyll the
Sonne be whote. And whyle they are yet stondinge in the watch, the dores shall
be shut and barred. And there were certayne citesyns of Ierusalem appoynted to
be watchmen, euery one in his watch, and aboute his house.
4 As for ye cite, it was large of rowme, and greate, but ye people were fewe
therin, and the houses were not buylded.
5 And my God gaue me in my hert, that I gatherd together the pryncipall men and
ye people, to nombre them, and I founde a register of their nombre, which came
vp afore out of the captiuyte
6 (whom Nabuchodonosor ye kynge of Babilo had caryed awaie) and dwelt at
Ierusalem and in Iuda, euery one vnto his cite,
7 and were come with Zorobabel, Iesua, Nehemias, Asaria, Raamia, Naheman,
Mardachai, Bilsan, Mispereth, Bigeuai, Nehum and Baena. This is the nombre of
the men of the people of Israel.
8 The children of Pareos were two thousande, an hundreth and two and seuentye:
9 The children of Sephatia, thre hundreth & two and seuentye:
10 the children of Arah, sixe hundreth and two and fiftye:
11 ye children of Pahath Moab amonge the childre of Iesua and Ioab, two
thousande, eight hudreth, and eightene:
12 the childron of Elam, a thousande, two hundreth, and foure and fyftye:
13 the children of Sathu, eight hundreth & fyue and fortye,
14 the children of Sacai, seuen hundreth and thre score:
15 the children of Benni, sixe hundreth, and eight and fortye:
16 ye children of Bebai, sixe hundreth and eight and twentye:
17 the children of Asgad, two thousande, thre hundreth and two and twentye:
18 the children of Adonicam, syxe hundreth & thre score:
19 the children of Bigeuai, two thousande, and seuen and thre score:
20 the childre of Adin, sixe hudreth & fiue and fiftye:
21 the childre of Atter of Ezechias, eight and nyentye.
22 The children of Hasum, thre hundreth & eighte and twentye:
23 the children of Bezai, thre hundreth and foure and twentye:
24 the children of Hariph, an hundreth and twolue:
25 the children of Gibeon, fyue and nyentye
26 the men of Bethleem and Netopha, an hudreth and eight and foure score:
27 the men of Anathot, an hundreth and eight and twentye:
28 the men of Beth Asmaueth, two and fortye:
29 the men of Ririath Iearim, Caphira and Beeroth, seuen hundreth and thre and
fortye:
30 the men of Rama and Gaba, sixe hudreth and one and twentye:
31 the men of Michmas, an hundreth and two and twentye:
32 the men of Bethel and Ai, an hundreth and thre and twentye:
33 the men of Nebo, an hundreth and two and fiftye:
34 the children of the other Elam, a thousande, two hundreth and foure and
fyftye:
35 the children of Haram, thre thre hundreth and twentye:
36 the children of Iericho: thre hundreth and fyue and fortye
37 the children of Lodhadid & Ono, seuen hundreth and one and twentye:
38 the children of Senaa, thre thousande, nyne hundreth and thirtye.
39 The prestes. The children of Iedaia of the house of Iesua, nyne hundreth and
thre and seuentye:
40 the children of Immer, a thousande and two and fyftye:
41 the children of Pashur, a thousande, two hundreth and seue and fortye:
42 the children of Harim, a thousande and seuentene.
43 The Leuites. The children of Iesua of Cadmiel amonge the children of Hodua,
foure & seuentye.
44 The syngers. The children of Assaph, an hundreth and eight and fortye.
45 The porters were: The children of Sallum, the children of Ater, the childre
of Talmon, the children of Acub, the children of Hatita, the children of Sobai,
alltogether an hundreth and eight and thirtye.
46 The Nethinims, The children of Ziha, ye childre of Hasupha, the childre of
Tabaoth,
47 the children of Ceros, the children of Sia, ye children of Padon,
48 the children of Libana, the children of Hagaba, the children of Salmai,
49 the children of Hanan, the children of Giddel, the children of Gahar,
50 the children of Reaia, the children of Rezin, the children of Necoda,
51 the childre of Gasam, the childre of Vsa, the children of Passeah,
52 the children of Bessai, the children of Megunim, the children of Nephusim,
53 the children of Bachuc, the children of Hacupha, the childre of Harhur,
54 the children of Bazlith, the children of Mehida, the children of Harsa,
55 the children of Barcos, the children of Sissera, the children of Thamah,
56 the children of Neziah, ye children of Hatipha.
57 The childre of Salomons seruauntes were: The children of Sotai, the childre
of Sophereth, the children of Prida,
58 the childre of Iaela, the children of Darcon, the childre of Giddel,
59 the childre of Sephatia, the childre of Hatil, ye childre of Pochereth of
Zebaim, the children of Amon.
60 All the Nethinims & the childre of Salomons seruauntes, were thre hundreth
and two and nynetye.
61 And these wente vp also: Michel, Mela, Thel, Harsa, Cherub, Addo, Immer: but
they coulde not shewe their fathers house ner their sede, whether they were of
Israel.
62 The childre of Delaia, ye children of Tobia, & the childre of Necoda, were
sixe hudreth & two & fortye.
63 And of the prestes were, the children of Habaia, the childre of Hacoz, the
children of Barsillai, which toke one of ye doughters of Barsillai the Gileadite
to wyfe, and was named afther their name.
64 These soughte the register of their generacion, and whan they foude it not,
they were put from ye presthode.
65 And Hathirsatha sayde vnto them, yt they shulde not eate of ye most holy,
tyll there came vp a prest wt ye light and perfectnesse.
66 The whole congregacio as one ma, was two and fortye thousande there hundreth,
and thre score:
67 besyde their seruauntes and maydes, of whom there were seuen thousande, thre
hundreth and seue and thirtye. And they had two hundreth and seuen and fortie
synginge men and wemen,
68 seuen hundreth and sixe and thirtie horses, two hudreth and fyue and fortie
Mules, foure hundreth and fyue and thirtie
69 Camels: sixe thousande, seue hundreth and twentye Asses.
70 And certayne of the awnciet fathers gaue vnto the worke. Hathirsatha gaue to
the treasure a thousande guldens, fiftie basens, fyue hundreth and thyrtie
prestes garmentes.
71 And some of the chefe fathers gaue vnto ye treasure of the worke, twetye
thousande guldens, two thousande and two hundreth poude of siluer.
72 And the other people gaue twetye thousande guldens, and two thousande pounde
of siluer, and seue and thre score prestes garmentes.
73 And the prestes and Leuites, the Porters, the syngers, and the other of the
people, and the Nethinims, and all Israel, dwelt in their cities.

Chapter 8

1 Now whan the seuenth moneth drue nye, and ye children of Israel were in their
cities, all the people gathered them selues together as one man vpon the strete
before the Watergate, and sayde vnto E?dras the scrybe, that he shulde fetch the
boke of the lawe of Moses, which the LORDE commaunded Israel.
2 And E?dras the prest brought ye lawe before the congregacio both of men and
wemen, and of all that coulde vnderstonde it, vpon the first daye of the seuenth
moneth,
3 and red therin in the strete that is before the Watergate, from ye light
mornynge vntyll the noone daye before men and wemen and soch as coulde
vnderstonde it: and the eares of all the people were inclyned vnto the boke of
the lawe.
4 And E?dras the scrybe stode vpon an hye pulpit of wod, which they had made for
the preachynge, & beside him stode Mathithia, Sema, Anania Vria, Ezechias, and
Maeseia on his righte hand: And on his lefte honde stode Pedaia, Misael,
Malchia, Hasum, Ha?badana, Zachary and Mesullam.
5 And E?dras opened ye boke before all ye people, for he stode aboue all ye
people. And whan he opened it, all the people stode vp.
6 And E?dras praysed the LORDE the greate God. And all the people answered Amen,
Amen, with their handes vp, and bowed the selues, and worshipped ye LORDE with
their faces to the grounde.
7 And Iesua, Bani, Serebia, Iamin, Acub, Sabthai, Hodaia, Maeseia, Celita,
Asaria, Iosabad, Hanam, Plaia, and the Leuites, caused ye people to geue hede
vnto the lawe, & the people stode in their place.
8 And they red in the boke of the lawe of God distinctly and planely, so that
men vnderstode the thinge that was red.
9 And Nehemias (which is Hathirsatha) and Esdras the prest and scrybe, and the
Leuites yt caused the people to take hede, sayde vnto all the people: This daye
is holy vnto the LORDE youre God: be not ye sory therfore, & wepe not. For all
ye people wepte, wha they herde the wordes of the lawe.
10 Therfore sayde he vnto them: Go youre waye, and eate the fat, and drynke the
swete, and sende parte vnto them also that haue not prepared themselues: for
this daye is holy vnto oure LORDE, be not ye sory therfore: for the ioye of the
LORDE is youre strength.
11 And the Leuites stylled all the people, and sayde: Holde youre peace, for the
daye is holy, vexe not ye youre selues.
12 And all the people wente their waye to eate and drinke, and to sende parte
vnto other, and to make greate myrth, for they had vnderstonde the wordes that
were declared vnto them.
13 And on the nexte daye were gathered together the chefe fathers amonge all the
people, and the prestes and Leuites, vnto Esdras the scrybe, that he shulde
teach them ye wordes of the lawe.
14 And they founde written in the lawe, how that the LORDE had commaunded by
Moses, that the childre of Israel shulde dwell in bothes in the feast of the
seuenth moneth.
15 And so they caused it be declared and proclamed in all their cities, & at
Ierusalem, sayenge: Go vp vnto ye mout and fetch Olyue braunches, Pynebraunches,
Myrtbraunches, Palmebraunches, & braunches of thicketrees, to make bothes as it
is wrytten.
16 And ye people wente vp, and fetched the, and made them bothes, euery one vpon
the rofe of his house, and in their courtes, and in the courtes of the house of
God, and in the strete by the Watergate, and in the strete by Ephraims porte.
17 And all the congregacion of them that were come agayne out of the captyuite,
made bothes, and dwelt therin: for sence the tyme of Iosua the sonne of Nu vnto
this daye, had not the children of Israel done so, and there was very greate
gladnesse.
18 And euery daye from the first daie vnto the last, red he in the boke of the
lawe of God. And seuen dayes helde they the feast, & on the eight daye the
gatherynge together, acordynge vnto the maner.

Chapter 9

1 In the foure and twentieth daye of this moneth came the children of Israel
together with fastinge and sack clothes, and earth vpon them,
2 and separated the sede of Israel from all the straunge children, and stode and
knowleged their synnes, and the wyckednesses of their fathers,
3 and stode vp in their place, and red in the boke of the lawe of the LORDE
their God foure tymes on the daye, and they knowleged, and worshipped the LORDE
their God foure tymes on the daye.
4 And the Leuites stode on hye, namely Iesua, Bani, Cadmiel, Sebania, Buni,
Serebia, Bani, and Chenani, and cryed loude vnto the LORDE their God.
5 And the Leuites, Iesua, Cadmiel, Bani, Hasabenia, Serebia, Hodia, Sebania,
Pethahia, sayde: Stonde vp, prayse the LORDE oure God for euer: and let thankes
be geue vnto the name of thy glorye, which excelleth all thankesgeuynge and
prayse.
6 LORDE, thou art alone, thou hast made heauen, and the heauen of all heauens,
with all their hoost, the earth and all that therin is, the See and all that is
therin: thou geuest life vnto all, and ye hoost of heauen bowe themselues vnto
the.
7 Thou art the LORDE God, that hast chosen Abra, and broughte him out of Vr in
Chaldea, & called him Abraham,
8 and founde his hert faithfull before the, and madest a couenaut with him, to
geue vnto his sede the londe of the Cananites, Hethites, Amorites, Pheresites,
Iebusites, and Girgosites, and hast made good thy wordes: for thou art
righteous.
9 And hast considered the mysery of oure fathers in Egipte, and herde their
complainte by the reed See,
10 and shewed tokes and wonders vpo Pharao, and on all his seruautes, and on all
his people of his londe: for thou knewest yt they were presumptuous & cruell
against them, & so madest thou the a name as it is this daie.
11 And the reed See partedst thou in sunder before them, so that they wete
thorow the myddes of the See drye shod: & their persecuters threwest thou in to
the depe as a stone, in the mightie waters,
12 and leddest them on the daye tyme in a cloudy pyler, and on the nighte season
in a piler of fyre, to shewe them lighte in the waye yt they wente.
13 Thou camest downe also vpo mount Sinai, and spakest vnto them from heauen,
and gauest them righte iudgmentes, true lawes, good commaundementes and
statutes,
14 and declared vnto them thy holy Sabbath, and commaunded them preceptes,
ordinaunces, and lawes, by Moses thy seruaunt:
15 and gauest them bred from heauen whan they were hongrye, and broughte forth
water for them out of the rock whan they were thyrstye: and promysed them, that
they shulde go in, and take possession of the londe, where ouer thou haddest
lyfte vp thine hande for to geue them.
16 Neuertheles oure fathers were proude and hardnecked, so that they folowed not
yi comaundementes,
17 and refused to heare, and were not myndefull of the wonders yt thou dyddest
for them: but became obstynate and heady, in so moch that they turned back to
their bondage in their dishobedience. But thou my God forgauest, and wast
gracious, mercifull, pacient, and of greate goodnesse, and forsokest them not.
18 And though they made a molten calfe (and sayde: This is thy God, that
broughte the out of the londe of Egipte) and dyd greate blasphemies,
19 yet forsokest thou them not in the wyldernes, acordinge to thy greate mercy.
And ye cloudy piler departed not from them on ye dayetyme to lede them the waye,
nether the piler of fyre in the night season, to shewe them lighte in the waye
that they wente.
20 And thou gauest them thy good sprete to enfourme them, and withheldest not
thy Manna from their mouth, and gauest the water wha they were thirstie.
21 Fortye yeares longe madest thou prouysion for them in the wyldernesse, so
that they wanted nothinge: their clothes waxed not olde, and their fete swelled
not.
22 And thou gauest the kigdomes & nacions, & partedst the acordinge to their
porcions, so that they possessed the londe of Sihon kynge of He?bon, & the londe
of Og ye kynge of Basan.
23 And their childre multiplyedst thou as the starres of heauen, and broughtest
the in to the londe wherof thou haddest spoken vnto their fathers, that they
shulde go in to it, and haue it in possession.
24 And ye children wente in, and possessed the londe, and thou subdudest before
the the inhabiters of the londe, euen the Cananites, & gauest them in to their
hande, and their kynges and ye people of the londe, yt they might do with them
what they wolde.
25 And they wanne their stronge cities, & a fat londe, and toke possession of
houses yt were full of all maner goodes, welles dygged out, vynyardes,
oylgardens, & many frutefull trees: and they ate & were fylled, & became fat, &
lyued in welth thorow thy greate goodnes.
26 Neuertheles they were disobedient, and rebelled agaynst the, and cast thy
lawe behynde their backes, and slewe thy prophetes (which exhorted them so
earnestly, that they shulde couerte vnto the) and dyd greate blasphemies.
27 Therfore gauest thou them ouer in to the hade of their enemies that vexed
them. And in ye tyme of their trouble they cried vnto the, and thou hardest them
from heauen: and thorow thy greate mercy thou gauest them sauiours, which helped
the out of the hande of their enemies.
28 But whan they came to rest, they turned back agayne to do euell before the:
therfore leftest thou them in the hande of their enemies, so yt they had ye
dominion ouer them. So they couerted, and cryed vnto the, and thou herdest them
from heauen, and many a tyme hast thou delyuered them acordinge to yi greate
mercy,
29 and testified vnto them, that they shulde turne agayne vnto thy lawe.
Notwithstodinge they were proude, and herkened not vnto thy comaundementes, but
synned in thy lawes (which a man shulde do, & lyue in them) & turned their
shulder awaye, & were styffnecked, & wolde not heare.
30 And many yeares dyddest thou forbeare them, & testified vnto them thorow yi
sprete, euen by the office of yi prophetes, & yet wolde they not heare. Therfore
gauest thou the in to ye hade of ye nacions in the londes.
31 But for thy greate mercies sake thou hast not vtterly cosumed them, nether
forsaken them: for thou art a gracious and mercifull God.
32 Now oure God, thou greate God, mightie and terrible, thou that kepest
couenaunt and mercy, regarde not a litle all the trauayle yt hath happened vnto
vs, & oure kynges, prynces, prestes, prophetes, fathers & all thy people, sence
the tyme of the kynges of Assur vnto this daie.
33 Thou art righteous in all yt thou hast broughte vpo vs: for thou hast done
righte.
34 As for vs, we haue bene vngodly, and or kynges, prynces, prestes & fathers
haue not done after yi lawe, ner regarded yi comaundementes, & thy earnest
exhortacios wherwith thou hast exhorted them,
35 & haue not serued ye in their kyngdome, and in thy greate goodes yt thou
gauest them, and in the large and plenteous lode which thou gauest them to good,
and haue not conuerted from their wicked workes.
36 Beholde, therfore are we in bondage this daye: Yee euen in the lode that thou
gauest vnto oure fathers, to enioye the frutes and goodes therof, beholde, there
are we bondmen.
37 And greate is the increase of it vnto the kynges, whom thou hast set ouer vs
because of oure synnes, and they haue dominion ouer oure bodies and catell, and
we are in greate trouble.
38 And in all this made we a sure couenaunt, & wrote it, & let or prynces,
Leuites & prestes seale it.

Chapter 10

1 The sealers were: Nehemias (that is) Hathirsatha the sonne of Hachalia and
Sedechias,
2 Seraia, Asaria, Ieremy,
3 Pashur, Amaria, Malchia,
4 Hattus, Sebania, Malluch,
5 Harim, Meremoth, Obadia,
6 Daniel, Sinthun, Baruch,
7 Mesullam, Abia, Meiamin,
8 Maasga, Bilgai and Semaia: these were prestes.
9 The Leuites were: Iesua ye sonne of Asania, Binui amonge the childre of
Henadad, Cadmiel.
10 And their brethren: Sechania, Hodia, Celita, Plaia, Hauan,
11 Micha, Rehob, Hasabia,
12 Sachur, Serebia, Sebania,
13 Hodia, Bani and Beninu.
14 The heades of the people were: Pareos, Pahath Moab, Elam, Sathu, Bani,
15 Buni, Asgad, Sebai,
16 Adonia, Bigenai, Adiu,
17 Ater, Hezechias, Asur,
18 Hodia, Hasum, Bezai,
19 Hariph, Anathot, Neubai,
20 Magpias, Mesullam, Hesir,
21 Mesesabeel, Sadoc, Iaddua,
22 Platia, Hanan, Anaia,
23 Hoseia, Hanania, Hasub,
24 Halohes, Pilha, Sobek,
25 Rehum, Hasabna, Maeseia,
26 Ahia, Hanan, Anan,
27 Malluch, Harim and Baena.
28 And the other people, the prestes, Leuites, Porters, syngers. Nethinims, &
all they that had separated them selues from ye people in the lodes vnto the
lawe of God, with their wyues, sonnes and daughters, as many as coulde
vnderstonde it,
29 and their lordes that had rule of them, receaued it for their brethren. And
they came to sweare, and to bynde them selues with an ooth to walke in Gods
lawe, which was geuen by Moses the seruaunt of God, that they wolde obserue and
do acordinge vnto all the commaundementes, iudgmentes and statutes of the LORDE
oure God:
30 and that we wolde not geue oure doughters vnto the people in the lode, nether
to take their doughters for oure sonnes.
31 And yf ye people of the lode broughte ware on the Sabbath, and all maner of
vytayles to sell, that we wolde not take it of them on the Sabbath and on the
holy dayes. And that we wolde let the seueth yeare be fre concernynge all maner
of charge.
32 And we layed a statute vpon oure selues, to geue yearly ye thirde parte of a
Sycle to the mynistracion in the house of oure God,
33 namely to the shewbred, to the daylie meatofferynge, to the daylie
burntofferynge of ye Sabbathes, of the new mones and feast dayes, and to the
thinges that were sanctified, and to the synofferynges, to reconcyle Israel with
all, and to all the busynes in ye house of oure God.
34 And we cast the lot amonge the prestes, Leuites and the people, for offerynge
of ye wod, to be brought vnto ye house of or God from yeare to yeare, after the
houses of oure fathers, that it might be brent at tymes appoynted, vpon the
altare of the LORDE oure God, as it is wrytten in the lawe:
35 and yearly to brynge the firstlinges of or londe, & the firstlinges of oure
frutes of all trees, yeare by yeare, vnto ye house of the LORDE:
36 and the firstlinges of oure sonnes, and of oure catell, as it is wrytten in
the lawe: and the firstlinges of oure oxen and of oure shepe, that we shulde
brynge all this to the house of oure God vnto the prestes that mynister in the
house of oure God:
37 and that we shulde brynge the firstlinges of oure dowe, and of oure
Heueofferinges, and the frutes of all maner trees, of wyne also and of oyle,
vnto the prestes to the chestes of the house of oure God. And the tithes of or
lode vnto the Leuites, yt the Leuites might haue the tithes in all the cities of
oure mynistracion.
38 And the prest the sonne of Aaron shal wt the Leuites haue also of the tithes
of ye Leuites, so that the Leuites shal brynge vp the tithes of their tithes
vnto the house of oure God to the chest in ye treasure house.
39 For the children of Israel and the children of Leui shall brynge vp the
Heueofferynges of the corne, wyne and oyle vnto the chestes, there are the
vessels of the Sanctuary, & the prestes yt mynister, and the porters & syngers,
yt we forsake not the house of oure God.

Chapter 11

1 And the rulers of the people dwelt at Ierusalem. But the other people cast
lottes therfore, so that amoge ten one parte wente to Ierusalem in to the holy
cite to dwell, and nyne partes in the cities.
2 And ye people thanked all the men that were willinge to dwell at Ierusalem.
3 These are the heades of the londe that dwelt at Ierusalem. In the cities dwelt
Iuda euery one in his possession yt was in their cities, namely Israel, the
prestes, Leuites, ye Nethinims, and the children of Salomons seruauntes.
4 And at Ierusale dwelt certayne of the children of Iuda & of Ben Iamin. Of the
children of Iuda: Athaia the sonne of Vsia ye sonne of Zachary, the sonne of
Amaria, the sonne of Sephatia, the sonne of Mahelaleel, of the children of
Phares.
5 And Maeseia the sonne of Baruch, the sonne of Chal Hose, the sonne of Hasaia,
the sonne of Adaia, the sonne of Ioiarib, the sonne of Zachary, the sonne of
Siloni.
6 All the childre of Phares that dwelt at Ierusalem, were foure C. and eight &
thre score valeaunt men.
7 These are the childre of Ben Iamin: Sallu the sonne of Mesullam, ye sonne of
Ioed, the sonne of Pedaia, the sonne of Colaia, ye sonne of Maeseia, the sonne
of Ithiel, ye sonne of Iesaia.
8 And after him Sabai, Sallai: nyne hundreth and eight and twentye.
9 And Ioel the sonne of Sichri had the ouersight of them: and Iuda ye sonne of
Hasnua ouer the seconde parte of the cite.
10 Of the prestes there dwelt: Iedaia ye sonne of Ioiarib, Iachin.
11 Seraia the sonne of Helchias ye sonne of Mesullam, the sonne of Sadoc, the
sonne of Meraioth, the sonne of Achitob, was prynce in the house of God:
12 & his brethre that perfourmed the worke in ye house: of whom there were viij.
C. and xxij. And Adaia the sonne of Ieroham, the sonne of Plalia, the sonne of
Amzi, the sonne of Zachary, the sonne of Pashur
13 & his brethre, chefe amoge the fathers: of whom there were two hundreth and
two and fortye. And Amassai the sonne of Asariel the sonne of Ahusai, the sonne
of Mesillemoth, the sonne of Immer:
14 and his brethren were valeaunt men, of whom there were an hundreth and eight
and twentye. And their ouerseer was Sabdaiel the sonne of Gedolim.
15 Of the Leuites: Semaia the sonne of Hasub, the sonne of Asrikam, the sonne of
Hasabia, the sonne of Bunni:
16 And Sabthai and Iosabad of the chefe of the Leuites, in the outwarde busynes
of ye house of God.
17 And Mathania the sonne of Micha, the sonne of Sabdi, the sonne of Assaph,
which was the pryncipall to begynne the thankesgeuynge vnto prayer. And
bacbuchia ye seconde amoge his brethren, and Abda the sonne of Sammua, the sonne
of Galal, the sonne of Iedithun.
18 All the Leuites in the holy cite were two hundreth and foure & foure score.
19 And ye porters Acub and Calman, and their brethren yt kepte the portes, were
an hundreth and two and seuentye.
20 As for the residue of Israel, the prestes and Leuites, they were in all the
cities of Iuda, euery one in his inheritaunce.
21 And the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel: and Zipha and Gispa belonged vnto the
Nethinims.
22 The ouerseer of the Leuites at Ierusalem, was Vsi the sonne of Bani, the
sonne of Hasabia, the sonne of Mathania, the sonne of Micha. Of the children of
Assaph there were syngers aboute ye busynes in the house of God:
23 for it was the kynges commaundement cocernynge them, that ye syngers shulde
deale faithfully, euery daye as acordinge was.
24 And Pethaia the sonne of Mesesabeel of the childre of Serah the sonne of Iuda
nexte the kynge in all matters concernynge the people.
25 And the children of Iuda that were without in the townes of their londe,
dwelt some at Kiriath Arba, and in the vyllages therof, & at Dibon, and in the
vyllages therof:
26 and at Cabzeel, and in ye vyllages therof: and at Iesua, Molada, Bethphalet,
27 Hazarsual, Berseba and in their vyllages:
28 & at Siclag and Mochona, and in their vyllages:
29 And at Enrimmon, Zarega, Ieremuth,
30 Sanoah, Adullam and in their vyllages: At Lachis, and in the feldes therof:
At Aseka, and in the vyllages therof: and dwelt from Berseba vnto the valley of
Hinnom.
31 The children of Ben Iamin of Gaba, dwelt at Michmas, Aia, Bethel and in their
vyllages.
32 And at Anathoth, Nob, Anania,
33 Hazor, Rama, Githaim,
34 Hadid, Ziboim, Neballat,
35 Lod, Ono & in the Carpeters valley.
36 And certayne of the Leuites yt had porcions in Iuda, dwelt in Ben Iamin.

Chapter 12

1 These are ye prestes and Leuites that wente vp with Zorobabel ye sonne of
Saalthiel and with Iesua: Seraia, Ieremy, Esdras,
2 Amaria, Malluch, Hattus,
3 Sechania, Rehum, Meremoth,
4 Iddo, Ginthoi, Abia,
5 Meiamin, Maadia, Bilga,
6 Semaia, Ioiarib, Iedaia,
7 Sallu, Amok, Helchias & Iedaia. These were the heades amoge the prestes and
their brethren in the tyme of Iesua.
8 The Leuites were these: Iesua, Benui, Cadmiel, Serebia, Iuda and Mathania,
ouer the office of thankesgeuynge, they & their brethre:
9 Bacbuchia & Vnni and their brethre, were aboute them in the watches.
10 Iesua begat Ioachim. Ioachim begat Eliasib. Eliasib begat Ioiada.
11 Ioiada begat Ionathan. Ionathan begat Iaddua.
12 And in the tyme of Ioachim were these the chefe fathers amonge the prestes:
namely of Seraia was Meraia, of Ieremy was Hanania,
13 of E?dras was Mesullam, of Amaria was Iohanan,
14 of Malluch was Ionathan, of Sebania was Ioseph,
15 of Harim was Adna, of Meraioth was Helcai,
16 of Iddo was Zachary, of Ginthon was Mesulla,
17 of Abia was Sichri, of Miniamin Moadia was Piltai,
18 of Bilga was Sammua, of Semaia was Ionathan,
19 of Ioiarib was Mathnai, of Iedaia was Vsi,
20 of Sallai was Callai, of Amok was Eber,
21 of Helchias was Hasabia, of Gedaia, was Nethaneel.
22 And in the tyme of Eliasib. Ioiada, Iohanan and Iaddua, were the chefe
fathers amonge the Leuites, and the prestes wrytte vnder the reigne of Darius ye
Persian.
23 The children of Leui the pryncipall fathers were wrytten in the Cronicles,
vntyll the tyme of Iohanan the sonne of Eliasib.
24 And these were the chefe amoge the Leuites, Hasabia, Serebia and Iesua the
sonne of Cadmiel, & their brethren ouer agaynst them, to geue prayse and
thankes, acordinge as Dauid ye ma of God had ordeyned it, one watch ouer agaynst
another.
25 Mathania, Bacbuchia, Obadia, Mesullam, Talmon and Acub were porters in the
watch at the thresholdes of the gates.
26 These were in the tyme of Ioiachim the sonne of Iesua the sonne of Iosedec,
and in the tyme of Nehemias the Debyte, and of the prest E?dras the scrybe.
27 And in the dedicacion of the wall at Ierusalem, were the Leuites soughte out
of all their places, that they mighte be broughte to Ierusalem, to kepe ye
dedicacion in gladnesse, with thankesgeuynges, with synginge, with Cymbales,
Psalteries and harpes.
28 And the children of the syngers gathered the selues together from the playne
countre aboute Ierusalem, and from the vyllages of Nethophathi,
29 and from the house of Gilgal, & out of the feldes of Gibea & Asmaueth: for ye
syngers had buylded them vyllages aboute Ierusalem.
30 And ye prestes and Leuites purified them selues, and clensed the people, the
gates and the wall.
31 And I caused the prynces to go vp vpon the wall, and appoynted two greate
queres of thankesgeuynge, which wete on the righte hande of the wall towarde the
Donggate,
32 and after them wete Hosaia, and halfe of the prynces of Iuda,
33 & Asaria, E?dras, Mesullam,
34 Iuda, Ben Iamin, Semaia and Ieremy:
35 and certayne of the prestes childre wt trompettes, namely Zachary ye sonne of
Ionathan, the sonne of Semaia, the sonne of Mathania, the sonne of Michaia, the
sonne of Sachur, the sonne of Assaph,
36 and his brethren, Semaia, Asareel, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nathaneel and Iuda
and Hanani, with the musicall instrumentes of Dauid ye man of God. And E?dras ye
scrybe before the
37 towarde the Wellgate, and they wente vp ouer agaynst them vpon the steppes of
the cite of Dauid at the goynge vp of the wall to the house of Dauid, vnto the
Watergate Eastwarde.
38 The other quere of thankesgeuynge wente ouer against them, and I after them,
and the halfe parte of the people vpon ye wall, towarde ye Fornacegate vpwarde,
vntyll ye brode wall,
39 and to ye porte of Ephraim, and to the Oldgate, and to ye Fyshgate, and to
the tower of Hananeel, and to the tower of Meah, vntyll the Shepegate. And in ye
presongate stode they styll,
40 and so stode the two queres of thankesgeuynge of the house of God, and I and
the halfe of the rulers with me,
41 and the prestes, namely Eliachim, Maeseia, Miniamin, Michaia, Elioenai,
Zachary, Hanania, with tropettes,
42 and Maeseia, Semaia, Eleasar, Vsi, Iohanan, Malchia, Elam and Aser. And the
syngers songe loude, and Iesrahia was the ouerseer.
43 And the same daye were there greate sacrifices offred, & they reioysed: for
God had geue them greate gladnesse, so that both the wyues and children were
ioyfull, & the myrth of Ierusalem was herde farre of.
44 At the same tyme were there men appoynted ouer the treasure chestes (wherin
were ye Heueofferynges, the firstlinges and the tithes) that they shulde gather
them out of ye feldes aboute the cities, to destribute the vnto the prestes and
Leuites acordinge to the lawe: for Iuda was glad of the prestes, and Leuites,
that they stode and wayted
45 vpon the office of their God, and the office of the purificacion. And the
syngers & porters stode after the commaundemet of Dauid & of Salomon his sonne:
46 for in the tyme of Dauid and Assaph, were the chefe syngers founded, and the
songes of prayse and thankesgeuynge vnto God.
47 In the tyme of Zorobabel and Nehemias, dyd all Israel geue porcios vnto the
syngers and porters, euery daye his porcion, and they gaue thinges halowed vnto
the Leuites, and the Leuites gaue thinges that were sanctified, vnto the childre
of Aaron.

Chapter 13

1 And what tyme as the boke of Moses was red in ye eares of the people, there
was founde wrytten therin, yt the Ammonites and Moabites shulde neuer come in to
the congregacion of God,
2 because they mett not the children of Israel wt bred and water, and hyred
Balaam against the, that he shulde curse them: neuertheles oure God turned ye
curse in to a blessynge.
3 Now whan they herde the lawe, they separated from Israel euery one that had
myxte him selfe therin.
4 And before this had the prest Eliasib delyuered the chest of ye house of oure
God vnto his kynsman Tobia:
5 for he had made him a greate chest, and there had they aforetyme layed the
meatofferynges, frankencense, vessell, and the tithes of corne, wyne and oyle
(acordinge to the commaundement geuen to the Leuites, syngers and porters) and
the Heueofferynges of the prestes.
6 But in all this was not I at Ierusalem: for in ye two and thirtieth yeare of
Artaxerses kynge of Babilon, came I vnto the kynge, and after certayne dayes
optayned I lycence of the kynge
7 to come to Ierusale. And I gat knowlege of ye euell that Eliasib dyd vnto
Tobia, in that he had made him a chest in the courte of the house of God,
8 and it greued me sore, and I cast forth all the vessels of Tobias house out of
the chest,
9 and commauded them to clense the chest. And thither broughte I agayne the
vessels of the house of God, the meatofferynge and the incense.
10 And I perceaued, that the porcions of ye Leuites were not geuen them, for the
which cause the Leuites and syngers were fled, euery one to his londe for to
worke.
11 Then reproued I the rulers, and sayde: Why forsake we the house of God? But I
gathered them together, and set them in their place.
12 Then brought all Iuda the tithes of corne, wyne and oyle vnto the treasure.
13 And I made treasurers ouer ye treasure, euen Selemia ye prest, and Sadoc the
scrybe, & of the Leuites Pedaia, and vnder their hande Hanan the sonne of Sachur
the sonne of Mathania: for they were counted faithfull, and their office was, to
destribute vnto their brethren.
14 Thynke vpon me O my God here in, & wype not out my mercy, that I haue shewed
on ye house of my God, & on the offices therof.
15 At the same tyme sawe I some tredinge wyne presses on the Sabbath, and
brynginge in clusters, and asses laden wyth wyne, grapes, fygges, and brynginge
all maner of burthens vnto Ierusalem, vpon the Sabbath daye. And I rebuked them
earnestly ye same daye that they solde ye vytayles.
16 There dwelt me of Tyre also therin, which broughte fysh and all maner of
ware, and solde on the Sabbath vnto the childre of Iuda and Ierusalem.
17 Then reproued I the rulers in Iuda, and saide vnto them: What euell thinge is
this that ye do, and breake the Sabbath daye?
18 Dyd not oure fathers euen thus, and oure God broughte all this plage vpon vs
& vpon this cite? And ye make the wrath more yet vpon Israel, in that ye breake
the Sabbath.
19 And whan the portes of Ierusalem were drawen vp before the Sabbath, I
commauded to shutt the gates, and charged that they shulde not be opened tyll
after the Sabbath: and some of my seruauntes set I at the gates, yt there shulde
no burthe be broughte in on the Sabbath daye.
20 Then remayned the chapmen and marchauntes once or twyce ouer nighte without
Ierusalem with all maner of wares.
21 Then reproued I them sore, & sayde vnto them: Why tary ye all night aboute
the wall? Yf ye do it once agayne, I wil laye handes vpon you. From that tyme
forth came they nomore on the Sabbath.
22 And I sayde vnto the Leuites which were cleane, that they shulde come and
kepe the gates, to halowe the Sabbath daye. Thynke vpo me (O my God) cocernynge
this also, & spare me acordynge to thy greate mercy.
23 And at the same tyme sawe I Iewes, that maried wyues of Asdod, Ammon and of
Moab,
24 and their children spake halfe in the speache of Asdod, and coulde not speake
in ye Iewish language, but by ye tonge mighte a ma perceaue euery people.
25 And I reproued them, and cursed them, & smote certayne men of the, and plucte
them vp, and toke an ooth of them by God: Ye shal not geue youre daughters vnto
their sonnes, nether shal ye take their daughters vnto youre sonnes, or for
youre selues.
26 Dyd not Salomon ye kynge of Israel synne ther in? & yet amonge many Heythen
was there no kynge like him, & he was deare vnto his God, and God made him kynge
ouer all Israel, and the outlandish wemen.
27 (Omitted Text)
28 And one of the children of Ioiada the sonne of Eliasib ye hye prest, had made
a cotracte wyth Saneballath the Horonite: but I chaced him fro me.
29 O my God, thynke thou vpon them that are quyte of the presthode, and haue
desyled the couenaunt of the presthode and of the Leuites.
30 Thus clensed I them from all soch as were outlandish, and appoynted the
courses of the prestes and Leuites, euery one to his office,
31 and to offre the wod at tymes appoynted, and the first frutes. Thynke thou
vpon me (O my God) for the best.


Esther

Chapter 1

1 In the tyme of Ahasuerus, which reigned from India vnto Ethiopia, ouer an
hundreth and seuen and twentye londes,
2 what tyme as he sat on his seate roiall in the castell of Susan
3 in the thirde yeare of his reigne, he made a feast vnto all his prynces and
seruauntes, namely vnto the mightie men of Persia and Media, to the Debities and
rulers of his countrees,
4 that he mighte shewe the noble riches of his kingdome, and the glorious
worshippe of his greatnesse, many dayes longe, euen an hundreth and foure score
dayes.
5 And whan these dayes were expyred, the kynge made a feast vnto all the people
that were in the castell of Susan, both vnto greate and small, seuen dayes longe
in the courte of the garden by the kynges palace:
6 where there hanged whyte, reed & yalow clothes, fastened with coardes of
lynnen and scarlet in siluer rynges, vpon pylers of Marble stone. The benches
were of golde and siluer made vpon a pauement of grene, white, yalowe and black
Marble.
7 And ye drinke was caried in vessels of golde, and there was euer chaunge of
vessell. And the kinges wine was moch acordynge to the power of the kynge.
8 And no man was appoynted what he shulde drinke: for the kynge had commaunded
all the officers of his house, that euery one shulde do as it lyked him.
9 And the quene Vasthi made a feast also for the wemen in the palace of
Ahasuerus.
10 And on the seuenth daye whan the kynge was mery of the wine, he comaunded
Mehuman, Bistha, Harbona, Bigtha, Abagtha, Sethar and Charcas, the seuen
chamberlaynes (that dyd seruyce in the presence of kynge Ahasuerus)
11 to fetch the quene Vasthi with the crowne regall, that he might shewe ye
people and prynces hir fairnesse: for she was bewtifull.
12 But the quene Vasthi wolde not come at the kynges worde by his chamberlaynes.
Then was the kynge very wroth, and his indignacio kyndled in him.
13 And the kynge spake to ye wyse men that had vnderstondinge in the ordinaunces
of the londe (for the kinges matters must be hadled before all soch as haue
knowlege of the lawe and iudgment:
14 And the nexte vnto him were, Charsena, Sethar, Admatha, Tharsis, Meres,
Marsena and Memuchan, the seuen prynces of the Persias, and Meedes, which sawe
the kynges face, and satt aboue in the kyngdome)
15 What lawe shulde be execute vpon the quene Vasthi, because she dyd not
acordynge to the worde of the kynge by his chamberlaines.
16 The saide Memucha before the kynge & the prynces: The quene Vasthi hath not
onely done euell agaynst the kinge but also agaynst all the prynces and all the
people in all the londes of kynge Ahasuerus
17 for this dede of the quene shall come abrode vnto all wemen, so that they
shall despyse their hu?bandes before their eyes, and shall saye: The kynge
Ahasuers comaunded Vasthi ye quene to come before him, but she wolde not.
18 And so shall the pryncesses in Persia and Media saye lykewyse vnto all the
kynges prynces, whan they heare of this dede of the quene, thus shall there
aryse despytefulnes and wrath ynough.
19 Yf it please the kynge, let there go a kyngly commaundemet from him, and let
it be wrytten acordynge to the lawe of the Persians and Medians (and not to be
transgressed) that Vasthi come nomore before kynge Ahasuerus, and let the kynge
geue the kyngdome vnto another that is better then she.
20 And yt this wrytinge of the kynge which shalbe made, be published thorow out
all his empyre (which is greate) that all wyues maye holde their hu?bandes in
honoure, both amonge greate and smal.
21 This pleased the kynge and the prynces, and the kynge dyd acordynge to the
worde of Memuchan.
22 Then were there letters sent forth in to all the kynges londes, in to euery
londe acordinge to the wrytinge ther of, and to euery people after their
laguage, yt euery man shulde be lorde in his awne house. And this caused he be
spoken after the language of his people.

Chapter 2

1 After these actes whan the displeasure of kynge Ahasuerus was layed, he
thoughte vpon Vasthi, what she had done, and what was concluded concernynge her.
2 Then sayde the kynges seruauntes: Let there be fayre yonge virgins soughte for
the kynge,
3 and let the kynge appoynte ouerseers in all ye londes of his empyre, that they
maye brynge together all fayre yonge virgins vnto the castel of Susan to the
Wemens buyldinge, vnder the hande of Hegai the kynges clamberlayne, that kepeth
the wemen, and let him geue them their apparell.
4 And loke which damsell pleaseth the kynge, let her be quene in Vasthis steade.
This pleased the kynge, and he dyd so.
5 In the castell of Susan there was a Iewe, whose name was Mardocheus, the sonne
of Iair, the sonne of Simei, the sonne of Cis, the sonne of Iemini,
6 which was caried awaye from Ierusalem, whan Iechonias the kynge of Iuda was
led awaye, (whom Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babilon caried awaye)
7 and he norished Hadassa (that is Hester) his vncles danghter: for she had
nether father ner mother, and she was a fayre and beutyfull damsell. And whan
hir father and mother dyed, Mardocheus receaued her as his awne daughter.
8 Now whan ye kynges comaundemet and comyssion was published, & many dasels were
broughte together vnto the castell of Susan vnder ye hande of Hegai, Hester, was
take also vnto ye kynges house vnder ye hande of Hegai ye keper of ye weme,
9 & the damsell pleased him, & she founde grace in his sighte. And he put her wt
hir maydes in ye best place of ye Womes buildige.
10 And Hester shewed it not vnto hir people & hir kynred: for Mardocheus had
charged her, yt she shulde not tell it.
11 And Mardocheus walked euery daye before ye courte of ye Womes buyldinge, yt
he might knowe how Hester dyd, and what shulde become of her.
12 And whan the appoynted tyme of euery damsell came that she shulde come to ye
kynge Ahasuerus, after that she had bene twolue monethes in the deckynge of the
wemen (for their deckynge must haue so moch tyme, namely sixe monethes with
Balme & Myrre, & sixe monethes wt good spyces, so were the weme beutifyed)
13 then wente there one damsell vnto ye kynge, and what so euer she requyred, yt
must be geue her to go wt her out of the Womens buyldinge vnto ye kynges palace.
14 And whan one came in the euenynge, ye same wete fro him on ye morow in to ye
seconde house of wemen, vnder the hande of Saasgas the kynges chamberlayne,
which kepte ye concubines. And she must come vnto the kynge nomore, excepte it
pleased the kynge, and that he caused her to be called by name.
15 Now whan the tyme came of Hester the daughter of Abihail Mardocheus vncle
(whom he had receaued as his awne daughter) yt she shulde come to the kynge, she
desyred nothinge but what Hegai the kynges chamberlayne the keper of the wemen
sayde. And Hester founde fauoure in the sighte of all them that loked vpon her.
16 And Hester was taken vnto kynge Ahasuerus in to the house royall, in the
tenth moneth which is called Tebeth, in the seuenthe yeare of his reigne.
17 And the kynge loued Hester aboue all the wemen, and she founde grace and
mercy in his sighte before all the virgins: and he set the quenes croune vpon
hir heade, and made her quene in steade of Vasthi.
18 And the kynke made a greate feast vnto all his prynces and seruauntes (which
feast was because of Hester) and let the londes be in quyetnes, & gaue royall
giftes.
19 And whan the virgins were gathered together the seconde tyme, Mardocheus sat
in the kynges gate.
20 And as yet had not Hester shewed hir kynred and hir people, acordinge as
Mardocheus had bydden her: for Hester dyd after the worde of Mardocheus, like as
whan he was hir tutoure.
21 At the same tyme whyle Mardocheus sat in the kynges gate, two of the kinges
chamberlaynes, Bigthan and Theres which kepte the dore, were wroth, and sought
to laye their handes on the kynge Ahasuerus:
22 Wherof Mardocheus gat knowlege, and tolde it vnto quene Hester, and Hester
certified the kynge therof in Mardocheus name.
23 And whan inquisicion was made, it was founde so. And they were both hanged on
tre: and it was wrytte in the Cronicles before the kynge.

Chapter 3

1 After these actes dyd the kynge promote Aman the sonne of Amadathi the
Agagite, vnd set him hye, & set his seate aboue all ye prynces that were with
him.
2 And all the kynges seruauntes that were in the gate, bowed their knees, and
dyd reuerence vnto Aman: for the kinge had so comaunded. But Mardocheus bowed
not the knee, and worshipped him not.
3 Then the kynges seruauntes which were in the kynges gate, sayde vnto
Mardocheus: Why transgressest thou the kynges commaundement?
4 And whan they spake this daylie vnto him, and he folowed them not, they tolde
Aman, that they mighte se whether Mardocheus matters wolde endure: for he had
tolde them, yt he was a Iewe.
5 And wha Aman sawe, that Mardocheus bowed not the knee vnto him, ner worshipped
him, he was full of indignacion & despyte,
6 that he shulde laye hondes onely on Mardocheus: for they had shewed him ye
people of Mardocheus, but he sought to destroye the people of Mardocheus, and
all the people that were in the whole empyre of Ahasuerus.
7 In the first moneth that is the moneth Nissan, in ye twolueth yeare of kinge
Ahasuerus, was there occasion and oportunyte sought by Aman, from one daye to
another, and from the same moneth vnto the twolueth moneth, that is the moneth
Adar.
8 And Ama sayde vnto kinge Ahasuerus: There is a people scatered abrode and
dispersed amonge all people in all the londes of thine empire, and their lawe is
cotrary vnto all people, and they do not after the kynges lawes, nether is it
the kinges profit to suffre the after this maner.
9 Yf it please the kynge, let him wryte, that they maye be destroyed, & so wil I
weye downe ten thousande talentes of siluer, vnder the handes of the workmen, to
be brought in to the kynges chamber.
10 Then toke the kynge his rynge from his hande, and gaue it vnto Aman the sonne
of Amadathi the Agagite the Iewes enemie.
11 And the kinge sayde vnto Aman: Let the siluer be geuen the, and that people
also, to do withall what pleaseth the.
12 Then were the kynges scrybes called on ye thirtenth daye of the first moneth,
& there was wrytten (acordynge as Aman commauded) vnto the kynges prynces, and
to the Debites euery where in the londes, and to the captaynes of euery people
in the countrees on euery syde, acordynge to the wrytinge of euery nacion, and
after their language in the name of kynge Ahasuerus, and sealed with the kynges
rynge.
13 And the wrytynges were sent by postes in to all the kynges lodes, to rote
out, to kyll, and to destroye all Iewes, both yonge and olde, childre and wemen
in one daye (namely vpon the thirtenth daye of the twolueth moneth, which is the
moneth Adar) and to spoyle their goodes.
14 This was the summe of the wrytinge, yt there shulde be a commaundement geuen
in all londes, to be published vnto all people, yt they shulde be ready agaynst
the same daye.
15 And the postes wente in all the haist acordynge to the kynges commaundement.
And in the castell of Susan was the comaundement deuysed. And the kynge & Aman
sat & dranke. But ye cite of Susan was disquieted.

Chapter 4

1 Whan Mardocheus perceaued all that was done, he rete his clothes, and put on a
sack cloth, & a?shes, & wente out in to the myddes of the cite, and cried loude
and lamentably,
2 and came before the kynges gate: for there might no man entre within the
kynges gate, that had a sack cloth on.
3 And in all lodes & places, as farre as the kynges worde and commaundement
extended, there was greate lamentacion amonge the Iewes, and many fasted, wepte,
mourned, & laye in sack clothes & in ashes.
4 So Hesters dasels, and hir chamberlaines, came and tolde it her. Then was the
quene exceadingly astonnyed. And she sent rayment, that Mardocheus shulde put
them on, and laye the sacklothe from him. But Mardocheus wolde not take them.
5 The called Hester Hathac one of the kinges chamberlaines (which stode before
her) and gaue him a comaundement vnto Mardocheus, that he might knowe what it
were, and wherfore he dyd so.
6 So Hathac wente forth to Mardocheus vnto the strete of the cite, which was
before the kynges gate.
7 And Mardocheus tolde him of all yt had happened vnto him, and of the summe of
siluer that Ama had promysed to weie downe in the kynges chamber because of ye
Iewes for to destroye them,
8 and he gaue him the copye of the commaundement, that was deuysed at Susan to
destroye them, that he mighte shewe it vnto Hester, and to speake to her and
charge her, yt she shulde go into the kynge, and make her prayer and
supplicacion vnto him for hir people.
9 And wha Hathat came in, and tolde Hester the wordes of Mardocheus,
10 Hester spake vnto Hathat, and comaunded him to saye vnto Mardocheus:
11 All the kynges seruauntes, and the people in the londes of the kynge knowe,
that who so euer commeth within the courte vnto ye kynge, whether it be man or
woman, which is not called, the comaundement is that the same shal dye
immediatly, excepte the kynge holde out the golde cepter vnto him, that he maye
lyue. As for me, I haue not bene called to come in to the kynge now this thirtie
dayes.
12 And wha Mardocheus was certified of Hesters wordes,
13 Mardocheus bad saie againe vnto Hester: Thynke not to saue thine awne life,
whyle thou art in ye kynges house before all Iewes:
14 for yf thou holdest thy peace at this tyme, then shal the Iewes haue helpe
and delyueraunce out of another place, & thou & thy fathers house shalbe
destroyed. And who knoweth whether thou art come to the kyngdome, for this tymes
sake?
15 Hester bad geue Mardocheus this answere:
16 Go thou yi waye then, & gather together all ye Iewes yt are founde at Susan,
& fast ye for me, yt ye eate not & drynke not in thre dayes, nether daye ner
nighte. I & my damsels wil fast likewyse, & so wyl I go into the kynge cotrary
to the comaundement: yf I perishe, I perishe.
17 So Mardocheus wente his waye, & dyd all yt Hester had comaunded him.

Chapter 5

1 And on the thirde daye put Hester on hir royall apparell, and stode in the
courte of ye kinges palace within ouer agaynst the kynges house. And ye kynge
sat vpo his royall seate in ye kynges palace ouer agaynst ye dore of the house.
2 And whan the kynge sawe Hester the quene stodinge in the courte, she founde
grace in his sighte. And ye kynge helde out the golde cepter in his hade towarde
Hester. So Hester stepte forth, and touched the toppe of ye cepter.
3 Then sayde ye kynge vnto her: What wilt thou quene Hester? & what requyrest
thou? axe eue the halfe of ye empyre, & it shal be geue the.
4 Hester sayde: Yf it please ye kynge, let ye kynge & Aman come this daye vnto
ye banket yt I haue prepared.
5 The kynge sayde: Cause Aman to make haist, yt he maye do as Hester hath saide.
Now wha the kynge & Aman came to ye banket yt Hester had prepared,
6 the kynge sayde vnto Hester whan he had dronken wyne: Hester, what is thy
peticion? it shal be geue the. And what requyrest thou? euen the halfe of the
empyre, it shal be done.
7 Then answered Hester and sayde: My peticion and desire is,
8 yf I haue founde grace in ye sight of the kynge, & yf it please the kinge to
geue me my peticion, and to fulfill my request, then let the kynge & Aman come
to the bancket yt I shal prepare for the, and so wil I do tomorow as the kynge
hath sayde.
9 Then wente Aman forth the same daye ioyfull and mery in his mynde. And whan he
sawe Mardocheus in the kynges gate, yt he stode not vp and kneled before him, he
was full of indignacion at Mardocheus.
10 Neuertheles he refrained himselfe: and wha he came home, he sent, and called
for his fredes, and Seres his wyfe,
11 and tolde them of the glory of his riches, and the multitude of his children,
all together how the kynge had promoted him so greatly, and how that he was
taken aboue the prynces and seruauntes of the kynge.
12 Aman sayde morouer: Yee and Hester the quene let no man come with the kynge
vnto the bancket that she had prepared, excepte me, and tomorow am I bidden vnto
her also with the kynge.
13 But in all this am I not satisfied as longe as I se Mardocheus the Iewe
syttinge in ye kynges gate.
14 Then sayde Seres his wife and all his frendes vnto him: Let the make a galowe
of fiftye cubites hie, & tomorow speake thou vnto the kynge, that Mardocheus
maye be hanged theron, yf thou comest merely with the kynge vnto the bancket.
Aman was well content withall, and caused a galowe to be prepared.

Chapter 6

1 The same night coulde not the kynge slepe, and he commaunded to brynge ye
Chronicles and storyes: which wha they were red before ye kinge,
2 they happened on the place where it was wrytte, how Mardocheus had tolde, that
the kynges two chaberlaynes (which kepte ye tresholdes) sought to laie hondes on
kinge Ahasuerus.
3 And the kynge saide: What worshippe and good haue we done to Mardocheus
therfore? Then sayde the kynges seruauntes that mynistred vnto him. There is
nothinge done for him.
4 And the kynge sayde: Who is in ye courte? (for Aman was gone in to ye courte
without before ye kinges house, yt he might speake vnto ye kinge to hange
Mardocheus on ye tre, yt he had prepared for him.)
5 And the kinges seruauntes saide vnto him: Beholde, Ama stodeth in the courte.
The kynge saide: Let him come in.
6 And wha Ama came in, ye kinge saide vnto him: What shal be done vnto ye ma,
whom the kynge wolde fayne brynge vnto worshippe? But Hama thought in his hert:
Whom shulde the kynge els be glad to brynge vnto worshippe, but me?
7 And Aman sayde vnto the kynge: Let the man vnto whom the kynge wolde be glad
to do worshippe, be broughte hither,
8 that he maye be araied with the royall garmentes which the kynge vseth to
weere: and the horse that the kynge rydeth vpon, and that the crowne royall maye
be set vpon his heade.
9 And let this rayment and horse be delyuered vnder the hande of one of the
kynges prynces, that he maye araye the man withall (whom the kynge wolde fayne
honoure) and cary him vpon the horse thorow the strete of the cite, and cause it
to be proclamed before him: Thus shal it be done to euery man, whom the kynge
wolde fayne honoure.
10 The kynge sayde: Make haist, and take (as thou hast sayde) the raymet and the
horse, and do euen so with Mardocheus ye Iewe that sitteth before the kynges
gate, and let nothinge fayle of all that thou hast spoken.
11 Then toke Aman the rayment and the horse, and arayed him, and broughte him on
hor?backe thorow the strete of the cite, and proclamed before him: Euen thus
shall it be done vnto euery man whom the kynge is disposed to honoure.
12 And Mardocheus came agayne to the kynges gate, but Aman gat him home in all
the haist, mournynge with bare heade,
13 and tolde Seres his wyfe and all his frendes, euery thynge that had happened
him. Then sayde his wise men and Seres his wyfe vnto him: Yf it be Mardocheus of
the sede of the Iewes, before who thou hast begonne to fall, thou canst do
nothynge vnto him, but shalt fall before him.
14 Whyle they were yet talkynge with him, came the kynges chamberlaynes, and
caused Aman to make haist to come vnto the bancket that Hester had prepared.

Chapter 7

1 And whan the kynge and Aman came to the bancket that quene Hester had
prepared,
2 the kynge sayde vnto Hester on the seconde daye whan he had droken wyne: What
is thy peticion quene Hester, that it maye be geuen the? And what requyrest
thou? Yee axe euen halfe of the empyre, and it shal be done.
3 Hester ye quene answered and sayde: Yf I haue founde grace in thy sighte (O
kynge) and yf it please the kynge, then graunte me my lyfe at my desyre and my
people for my peticions sake:
4 for we are solde to be destroyed, to be slayne, and to perishe. And wolde God
we were solde to be bondmen and bondwemen, then wolde I holde my tonge, so
shulde not the enemye be so hye to the kynges harme.
5 The kynge Ahasuerus spake & saide vnto quene Hester: What is he that? Or where
is he yt darre presume in his mynde to do soch a thinge after that maner?
6 Hester sayde: The enemye and aduersary is this wicked Aman. As for Ama, he was
exceadingly afraied before ye kynge & ye quene.
7 And the kynge arose fro the bancket & fro ye wyne in his displeasure, and
wente in to the palace garden. And Aman stode vp, and besoughte quene Hester for
his life: for he sawe yt there was a mischauce prepared for him of the kynge
allready.
8 And whan the kynge came agayne out of the palace garden in to ye parler where
they had eaten, Aman had layed him vpon the bed that Hester sat vpon. Then saide
the kinge: wyl he force the quene also besyde me in the house? As soone as that
worde wente out of the kynges mouth, they couered Amans face.
9 And Harbona one of the chamberlaynes that stode before the kynge, sayde
Beholde, there stondeth a galowe in Amas house fiftie cubytes hye, which he had
made for Mardocheus, that spake good for ye kinge. The kynge sayde: Hange him
theron.
10 So they hanged Aman on the galowe that he had made for Mardocheus. Then was
the kynges wrath stylled.

Chapter 8

1 The same daye dyd kynge Ahasuerus geue the house of Aman the Iewes enemye,
vnto quene Hester. And Mardocheus came before ye kinge: for Hester tolde how
that he beloged vnto her.
2 And the kynge put of his fynger rynge, which he had taken from Aman, & gaue it
vnto Mardocheus. And Hester set Mardocheus ouer the house of Aman.
3 And Hester spake yet more before the kynge, and fell downe at his fete, &
besought him, that he wolde put awaye the wyckednes of Aman the Agagite, and his
deuice that he had ymagined against ye Iewes.
4 And the kynge helde out the golden cepter vnto Hester. Then rose Hester, and
stode before the kynge,
5 and sayde: Yf it please the kynge, and yf I haue foude grace in his sight, &
yf it be couenyent for the kinge, and yf it be accepted in his sighte, then let
it be wrytte, yt the letters of the deuyce of Ama the sonne of Amadathai the
Agagite, maie be called agayne: which letters he wrote, to destroie ye Iewes in
all ye kynges lodes.
6 For how can I se the euell that shal happe vnto my people? and how can I loke
vpon the destruction of my kynred?
7 Then sayde ye kynge Ahasuerus vnto quene Hester, and to Mardocheus the Iewe:
Beholde, I haue geuen Hester the house of Aman, & him haue they hanged vpon a
tre, because he layed hade vpon ye Iewes.
8 Wryte ye now therfore for the Iewes, as it liketh you in the kynges name, and
seale it with ye kynges rynge (for the wrytinges that were wrytten in ye kynges
name, and sealed with the kynges rynge, durst no man dysanulle.)
9 Then were the kynges scrybes called at the same tyme in the thirde moneth,
that is the moneth Siuan, on the thre & twentieth daie. And it was wrytten (as
Mardocheus comaunded) vnto the Iewes and to the prynces, to the Debities and
captaynes in the londes from India vntyll Ethiopia, namely, an hundreth and
seuen and twentye londes, vnto euery one acordinge to the wrytinge therof, vnto
euery people after their speche, and to the Iewes acordinge to their wrytinge
and language.
10 And it was written in the kynge Ahasuerus name, and sealed with the kynges
rynge. And by postes that rode vpon swyfte yonge Mules, sent he the wrytinges,
11 wher in the kynge graunted the Iewes (in what cities so euer they were) to
gather them selues together, and to stonde for their lyfe, and for to rote out,
to slaye, and to destroye all the power of the people and londe that wolde
trouble them, with children and wemen, and to spoyle their good
12 vpon one daye in all the londes of kynge Ahasuerus, namely vpon the thirtenth
daye of the twolueth moneth, which is the moneth Adar.
13 The summe of the wrytinge was, how there was a comaundement geuen in all
londes to be publisled vnto all the people, that ye Iewes shulde be ready
agaynst that daye to auenge them selues on their enemies.
14 And the postes that rode vpon the Mules, made haistwith all spede, acordinge
to the kynges worde: and the commaundement was deuysed in the castel of Susan.
15 As for Mardocheus, he wente out from the kynge in royall apparell of yalow
and whyte, and wyth a greate crowne of golde, beynge arayed with a garment of
linnen and purple, and ye cite of Susan reioysed & was glad:
16 but vnto the Iewes there was come light and gladnesse, & ioye & worshippe.
17 And in all londes and cities, in to what places so euer the kynges worde and
commaundemet reached, there was ioye & myrth, prosperite and good dayes amonge
the Iewes: in so moch that many of the people in the londe became of the Iewes
beleue, for the feare of the Iewes came vpon them.

Chapter 9

1 In the twolueth moneth, that is the moneth Adar, vpon the thyrtenth daye,
which the kinges worde and comaundement had appoynted, that it shulde be done,
eue vpon ye same daie yt the enemies shulde haue destroyed the Iewes to haue
oppressed them, it turned contrary wise, euen yt the Iewes shulde subdue their
enemies.
2 Then gathered the Iewes together in their cities within all ye londes of kynge
Ahasuerus, to laye honde on soch as wolde do the euell, & no man coulde
withstonde them: for ye feare of the was come ouer all people.
3 And all the rulers in the londes, and prynces and Debities, and officers of
the kinge promoted the Iewes: for the feare of Mardocheus came vpo the.
4 For Mardocheus was greate in the kynges house, & the reporte of him was noised
in all lodes, how he increased & grewe.
5 Thus the Iewes smote all their enemies with a sore slaughter, and slewe and
destroyed, & dyd after their wyll vnto soch as were their aduersaries.
6 And at ye castell of Susan slewe the Iewes and destroied fyue hudreth men:
7 & slewe Parsandatha, Dalphon, Aspatha,
8 Poratha, Adalia, Aridatha,
9 Parmastha Arissai, Aridai, Vaiesatha,
10 the ten sonnes of Aman ye sonne of Amadathi ye enemie of the Iewes: but on
his goodes they layed no handes.
11 At the same tyme was the kynge certified of the nombre of those that were
slaine at the castell of Susan.
12 And the kynge sayde vnto quene Hester: The Iewes haue slayne and destroyed
fyue hudreth men at ye castell of Susan, and the ten sonnes of Ama: What shal
they do in the other londes of ye kynge? What is thy peticion, that it maye be
geuen the? & what requirest thou more to be done?
13 Hester sayde: Yf it please the kynge, let him suffre the Iewes tomorow also
to do acordinge vnto this dayes commaundement, that they maye hange Amans ten
sonnes vpo ye tre.
14 And the kynge charged to do so, and the commaundement was deuysed at Susan, &
Amans ten sonnes were hanged.
15 And the Iewes gathered the selues together at Susan, vpon the fourtenth daye
of the moneth Adar, and slewe thre hundreth men at Susan, but on their goodes
they laied no hades.
16 As for the other Iewes in the kyuges lodes, they came together, & stode for
their lyues, & gatt rest fro their enemies: and slewe of their enemies fyue and
seuentye thousande, howbeit they layed no hondes on their goodes.
17 This was done on the thirteth daie of the moneth Adar, and on the fourtenth
daye of the same moneth rested they, which (daye) they ordeyned to be a daye of
feastinge and gladnesse.
18 But the Iewes at Susan were come together both on the thyrtenth daye and on
the fourtenth, and on the fyftenth daye they rested, and the same daye ordeyned
they to be a daye of feastinge & gladnes.
19 Therfore the Iewes that dwelt in the vyllages and vnwalled townes, ordeyned
ye fourtenth daye of the moneth Adar, to be a daye of feastinge and gladnes, and
one sent giftes vnto another.
20 And Mardocheus wrote these actes, and sent the writinges vnto all the Iewes
yt were in all ye londes of kynge Ahasuerus, both nye and farre,
21 that they shulde yearly receaue and holde the fourtenth and fiftenth daie of
the moneth Adar,
22 as the daies wherin ye Iewes came to rest from their enemies, & as a moneth
wherin their payne was turned to ioye, and their sorowe in to prosperite: that
they shulde obserue the same as dayes of wealth and gladnes, and one to sende
giftes vnto another, & to distribute vnto the poore.
23 And the Iewes receaued it that they had begonne to do, and that Mardocheus
wrote vnto them:
24 how that Aman the sonne of Amadathai all ye Iewes enemye, had deuysed to
destroye all the Iewes, and caused the lot to be cast for to put them in feare,
and to brynge them to naughte:
25 and how Hester wente and spake to the kynge, that thorow letters his wicked
deuyce (which he ymagyned agaynst the Iewes) might be turned vpon his awne
heade, and how he and his sonnes were hanged on the tre.
26 For the which cause they called this daye Purim after the name of the lot,
acordynge to all ye wordes of this wrytinge: and what they the selues had sene,
and what had happened vnto them.
27 And the Iewes set it vp, and toke it vpon them and their sede, and vpon all
soch as ioyned themselues vnto them, that they wolde not mysse to obserue these
two dayes yearly, acordynge as they were wrytte and appoynted,
28 how yt these dayes are not to be forgotten, but to be kepte of childers
children amoge all kynreds in all londes and cities. They are the dayes of
Purim, which are not to be ouerslipte amonge the Iewes, and the memoriall of
them oughte not to perishe from their sede.
29 And quene Hester the daughter of Abihail and Mardocheus the Iewe, wrote with
all auctorite, to confirme this seconde wrytinge of Purim,
30 and sent the letters vnto all the Iewes in the hundreth and seuen and twentye
londes of ye empyre of Ahasuerus, with frendly and faithfull wordes,
31 to confirme these dayes of Purim, in their tyme appoynted, acordynges as
Mardocheus the Iewe and Hester the quene had ordeined cocernynge them: lyke as
they vpon their soule and vpon their sede had cofirmed the actes of the
fastinges and of hir coplainte.
32 And Hester comaunded to stablish these actes of this Purim, and to wryte them
in a boke.

Chapter 10

1 And the kynge Ahasuerus layed tribute vpon the londe, and vpon the Iles of the
See.
2 As for all ye worke of his power and auctoryte, and ye greate worshippe of
Mardocheus, which the kynge gaue him, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of
the kynges of Media & Persia,
3 For Mardocheus the Iewe was the seconde nexte vnto kynge Ahasuerus, and greate
amonge ye Iewes, and accepted amonge the multitude of his brethren, as one yt
seketh the welth of his people, and speaketh the best for all his sede.


Job

Chapter 1

1 In the lode of Hus there was a man called Iob: an innocent and vertuous man,
soch one as feared God, and eschued euell.
2 This man had vij. sonnes, and iij. doughters.
3 His substaunce was vij. M. shepe, iij.M. camels, v.C. yock of oxen, v.C. she
asses, and a very greate housholde: so yt he was one of the most principall men
amoge all them of the east countre.
4 His sonnes now wente on euery man, and made banckettes: one daye in one house,
another daye in another, and sent for their iij. sisters, to eate & drinke with
them.
5 So when they had passed ouer the tyme of their banckettinge rounde aboute, Iob
sent for them, and clensed them agayne, stode vp early, and offred for euery one
a bretofferinge. For Iob thought thus: peraduenture my sonnes haue done some
offence, and haue bene vnthankfull to God in their hertes. And thus dyd Iob
euery daye.
6 Now vpon a tyme, when the seruauntes of God came and stode before the LORDE,
Sathan came also amonge them.
7 And the LORDE sayde vnto Sathan: From whence commest thou? Sathan answered the
LORDE, and sayde: I haue gone aboute the lode, and walked thorow it.
8 Then sayde the LORDE vnto Satha: hast thou not considered my seruaunt Iob, how
that he is an innocet and vertuous ma: soch one as feareth God, and eschueth
euell, and that there is none like him in the londe?
9 Sathan answered, and sayde vnto the LORDE: Doth Iob feare God for naught?
10 hast thou not preserued him, his house, and all his substaunce on euery syde?
hast thou not blessed the workes of his hondes? Is not his possession encreaced
in the londe?
11 But laye thyne honde vpo him a litle, touch once all that he hath, and (I
holde) he shall curse the to thy face.
12 And the LORDE sayde vnto Sathan: lo all that he hath, be in thy power: only
vpon himself se that thou laye not thine honde. Then wente Sathan forth from the
LORDE.
13 Now vpon a certayne daye when his sonnes and doughters were eatinge, and
drynkinge wyne in their eldest brothers house,
14 there came a messaunger vnto Iob, and sayde: Whyle the oxen were a plowinge,
and the Asses goinge in the pasture besyde them:
15 the Sabees came in violetly, and toke them all awaye: yee they haue slayne
the seruauntes with the swearde, and I only ranne my waye, to tell the.
16 And whyle he was yet speakynge, there came another, and sayde: The fyre of
God is fallen from heauen, it hath consumed & bret vp all the shepe and
seruauntes: and I only ranne my waye, to tell the.
17 In the meane season whyle he was yet speakinge, there came another, and
sayde: The Caldees made thre armies, and fell in vpon the camels, which they
haue caried awaye, yee and slayne the seruauntes with the swearde: and I only am
gotte awaye, to tell the.
18 Whyle he was speakinge, there came yet another, ad sayde: Thy sonnes and
doughters were eatinge ad drynkinge wyne in their eldest brothers house,
19 ad sodenly there came a mightie greate wynde out off the South, and smote the
iiij. corners of the house: which fell vpon thy children, so that they are deed:
and I am gotten awaye alone, to tell the.
20 Then Iob stode vp, and rente his clothes shaued his heade, fell downe vpon
the groude, worshipped,
21 and sayde: Naked came I out of my mothers wombe, and naked shall I turne
thither agayne. The LORDE gaue, and the LORDE hath taken awaye (the LORDE hath
done his pleasure) now blessed be ye name off the LORDE.
22 In all these thinges dyd Iob not offende, ner murmured foolishly agaynst God.

Chapter 2

1 It happened also apon a tyme, that when the seruauntes of God came & stode
before the LORDE, Sathan came also amonge them, and stode before him.
2 And the LORDE sayde vnto Sathan: From whence commest thou? Sathan answered and
sayde: I haue gone aboute the lode, and walked thorow it.
3 Then sayde the LORDE vnto Sathan: Hast thou not considered my seruaunt Iob,
how that he is an innocent & vertuous man soch one as feareth God, and eschueth
euell, and that there is none like him in the londe? But thou mouedest me
agaynst him, to punysh him: yet is it in vayne, for he contynueth still in his
godlynesse.
4 Sathan answered the LORDE, and sayde: Skynne for skynne? yee a man will geue
all yt euer he hath, for his life.
5 But laye thine honde vpon him, touch him once vpon the bone and flesh, and (I
holde) he shall curse the to thy face.
6 Then sayde the LORDE vnto Satha: lo, there hast thou him in thy power, but
spare his life.
7 So wente Sathan forth from the LORDE, and smote Iob with maruelous sore byles,
from the sole off the fote vnto his crowne:
8 so that he sat vpon the grounde in the asshes, and scraped of the etter off
his sores with a potsherde.
9 Then sayde his wife vnto him: Dost thou yet cotynue in thy perfectnesse? curse
God, & dye.
10 But Iob sayde vnto her: Thou speakest like a foolish woma. Seinge we haue
receaued prosperite at the honde of God, wherfore shulde we not be content with
aduersite also? In all these thinges, dyd not Iob synne with his lippes.
11 Now when Iobs frendes herde of all ye trouble, that happened vnto him, there
came thre off them, euery one from his owne place: namely, Eliphas the
Themanite, Baldad the Suhite, and Sophar the Naamathite. For they were agreed
together to come, to shewe their compassion vpon him, and to comforte him.
12 So when they lifte vp their eyes a farre off, they knewe him not. Then they
cried, and wepte: then euery one off them rente his clothes, and sprynckled dust
vpon their heades in the ayre.
13 They sat them downe by him also vpon the grounde, vij. dayes and vij.
nightes. Nether was there eny of them that spake one worde vnto him, for they
sawe that his payne was very greate.

Chapter 3

1 After this opened Iob his mouth, and cursed his daye,
2 and sayde:
3 lost be that daye, wherin I was borne: and the night, in the which it was
sayde: there is a manchilde conceaued.
4 The same daye be turned to darcknesse, and not regarded of God from aboue,
nether be shyned vpo wt light:
5 but be couered with darcknesse, and the shadowe of death. Let the dymme cloude
fall vpon it, and let it be lapped in with sorowe.
6 Let the darckstorme ouercome ye night, let it not be reckened amonge the dayes
off the yeare, ner counted in the monethes.
7 Despysed be that night, and discommended: let them that curse the daye,
8 geue it their curse also, euen those that be ready to rayse vp Leuiathan.
9 Let the starres be dymme thorow darcknesse of it. Let it loke for light, but
let it se none, nether the rysynge vp of the fayre mornynge:
10 because it shut not vp the wombe that bare me, ner hyd these sorowes fro myne
eyes.
11 Alas, why dyed I not in ye byrth? Why dyd not I perysh, as soone as I came
out of my mothers wobe?
12 Why set they me vpo yeir knees? Why gaue they me suck with their brestes?
13 Then shulde I now haue lyen still, I shulde haue slepte, and bene at rest:
14 like as the kynges ad lordes of ye earth, which buylde them selues speciall
places:
15 As the prynces that haue greate substaunce of golde, & their houses full of
syluer.
16 O that I vtterly had no beynge, or were as a thige borne out of tyme (that is
put asyde) ether as yonge children, which neuer sawe the light.
17 There must the wicked ceasse from their tyranny, there soch as are
ouerlaboured, be at rest:
18 there are those letten out fre, which haue bene in preson, so that they heare
nomore the voyce of the oppressoure:
19 There are small and greate: the bonde man, and he that is fre fro his master.
20 Wherfore is the light geuen, to him that is in mysery? and life vnto them,
that haue heuy hertes?
21 (Which longe for death, and it commeth not: for yf they might fynde their
graue,
22 they wolde be maruelous glad, as those that dygge vp treasure)
23 To the man whose waye is hyd, which God kepeth backe from him.
24 This is the cause, that I syghe before I eate, and my roaringes fall out like
a water floude.
25 For the thynge that I feared, is come vpon me: and the thynge that I was
afrayed of, is happened vnto me.
26 Was I not happy? Had I not quyetnesse? Was I not in rest? And now commeth
soch mysery vpon me.

Chapter 4

1 Then answered Eliphas of Theman and sayde vnto him:
2 Yf we begynne to comon with the, peradueture thou wilt be myscontent, but who
can witholde himself from speakynge?
3 Beholde, thou hast bene a teacher of many, and hast comforted the weery
hondes.
4 Thy wordes haue set vp those that were fallen, thou hast refresshed the weake
knees.
5 But now that the plage is come vpon the, thou shreckest awaye: now that it
hath touched thyself, thou art faint harted.
6 Where is now thy feare of God, thy stedfastnesse, thy pacience, and the
perfectnesse of thy life?
7 Considre (I praye the) who euer peryshed, beynge an innocent? Or, when were
the godly destroyed?
8 As for those that plowe wickednesse (as I haue sene myself) and sowe myschefe,
they reape ye same.
9 For whe God bloweth vpon them, they perysh, and are destroyed thorow the blast
of his wrath.
10 The roaringe of the lyon, the cryenge off the lyonesse, & ye teth off ye lyos
whelpes are broke.
11 The greate lyon perysheth, because he ca get no pray and the lyons whelpes
are scatred abrode.
12 There is spoken vnto me a thynge in councell, which hath geuen a terrible
sounde in myne eare,
13 with a vision in the night, when men are fallen a slepe.
14 Soch feare and drede came vpo me, that all my bones shoke.
15 And when the wynde passed ouer by me, the hayres of my flesh stode vp.
16 Then stode there one before me, whose face I knewe not: an ymage there was,
and the wether was still, so that I herde this voyce:
17 Maye a man be iustified before God? Maye there eny man be iudged to be clene,
by reason of his owne workes?
18 Beholde, he hath founde vnfaythfulnesse amonge his owne seruauntes, and
proude disobedience amonge his angels.
19 How moch more the shal they (that dwell in houses of claye, whose foundacion
is but earth) be moth eaten?
20 They shalbe destroyed from the mornynge vnto the euenynge: yee they shall
perish, or euer they be awarre:
21 and be taken awaye so clene, that none of the shall remayne, but be deed, or
euer they be awarre off it.

Chapter 5

1 Name me one els, yf thou canst fynde eny: yee loke aboute the, vpon eny of the
holy men.
2 As for the foolish man displeasure kylleth him, and anger slayeth ye
ignoraunt.
3 I haue sene my self, when the foolish was depe roted, that his bewty was
sodely destroyed:
4 that his children were without prosperite or health: that they were slayne in
the dore, and no ma to delyuer them:
5 that his haruest was eaten vp off the hungrie: that the weapened man had
spoyled it, and that the thurstie had droncke vp his riches. It is not the earth
that bryngeth forth trauayle,
6 nether commeth sorow out of ye groude:
7 but it is man, that is borne vnto mysery, like as the byrde for to fle.
8 But now will I speake off the LORDE, and talke of God:
9 which doth thinges, that are vnsearcheable, and marueles without nobre:
10 Which geueth rayne vpo the earth, and poureth water vpon all thinges:
11 which setteth vp them of lowe degre, and sendeth prosperite, to those that
are in heuynesse:
12 Which destroyeth the deuyces of the sotyll, so that they are not able to
perfourme the thynges that they take in hode:
13 which compaseth ye wyse in their owne craftynesse, and ouertroweth the
councell of the wicked:
14 In so moch that they runne in to darcknesse by fayre daye, and grope aboute
them at the noone daye, like as in the night.
15 And so he delyuereth the poore from the swearde, from their mouth, and from
the hode of the cruell:
16 that the poore maye haue hope, & that the mouth of the oppressoure maye be
stopped.
17 Beholde, happie is the man, whom God punysheth: therfore, despyse not thou ye
chastenynge of the Allmighty.
18 For though he make a wounde, he geueth a medicyne agayne: though he smyte,
his honde maketh whole agayne.
19 He delyuereth the out of sixe troubles, so that in the seuenth there can no
harme touch the.
20 In the myddest of honger he saueth ye from death: and when it is warre, from
the power of the swearde.
21 He shall kepe the from the perlous tonge so that when trouble commeth, thou
shalt not nede to feare.
22 In destruccion and derth thou shalt be mery, and shalt not be afrayed for the
beastes of the earth:
23 But the castels in the londe shal be confederate with the, & the beastes of
the felde shall geue the peace:
24 Yee thou shalt se, that thy dwellynge place shalbe in rest: thou shalt
beholde thy substaunce, and be nomore punyshed for synne.
25 Thou shalt se also, that thy sede shall encreace, and that thy posterite
shalbe as the grasse vpon the earth.
26 Thou shalt come to thy graue in a fayre age, like as ye corne sheeues are
brought in to the barne in due season.
27 Lo, this is the matter, as we oure selues haue proued by experience. Therfore
now that thou hearest it, take better hede to thy selff.

Chapter 6

1 Iob answered, and sayde:
2 O that my misery weere weyed, and my punyshment layed in the balaunces:
3 for then shulde it be heuyer, then the sonde of the see. This is the cause,
that my wordes are so soroufull.
4 For the allmighty hath shott at me with his arowes, whose indignacion hath
droncke vp my sprete, and ye terrible feares of God fight agaysnt me.
5 Doth the wilde asse roare when he hath grasse? Or crieth the oxe, whe he hath
fodder ynough?
6 Maye a thynge be eaten vnseasoned, or without salt? What taist hath ye whyte
within the yoke an egg?
7 The thinges that sometyme I might not awaye withall, are now my meate for very
sorow.
8 O that I might haue my desyre: O yt God wolde graunte me the thynge, that I
longe for:
9 That he wolde begynne and smyte me: that he wolde let his honde go, & hew me
downe.
10 The shulde I haue some coforte: yee I wolde desyre him in my payne, that he
shulde not spare, for I will not be agaynst ye wordes of the holy one.
11 What power haue I to endure? Or? what is myne ende, that my soule might be
paciet?
12 Is my strength the strength of stones? Or, is my flesh made of brasse?
13 Am I able to helpe my self? Is not my strength gone fro me,
14 like as yf one withdrewe a good dede from his frende, and forsoke the feare
of God?
15 Myne owne brethren passe ouer by me as the waterbroke, that hastely runneth
thorow ye valleys.
16 But they that feare the horefrost, the snowe shal fall vpon them.
17 When their tyme cometh, they shalbe destroyed and perishe: and when they be
set on fyre, they shalbe remoued out of their place,
18 for the pathes yt they go in, are croked: they haist after vayne thinges, and
shal perish.
19 Considre the pathes off Theman, & the wayes off Saba, wherin they haue put
their trust.
20 Confounded are they, that put eny cofidence in them: For whe they came to
opteyne the thynges that they loked for, they were brought to confucion.
21 Eue so are ye also come vnto me: but now that ye se my mysery, ye are
afrayed.
22 Dyd I desyre you, to come hyther? Or, to geue me eny off youre substaunce?
23 To delyuer me me from the enemies honde, or to saue me from the powers off
the mightie?
24 Teach me and I will holde my tonge: and yf I do erre, shewe me wherin.
25 Wherfore blame ye then the wordes, that are well and truly spoken?
26 which of you can reproue them? Sauynge only that ye are sotyll to check mens
sayenges, and can speake many wordes in the wynde.
27 Ye fall vpon the fatherlesse, ad go aboute to ouerthrowe youre owne frende.
28 Wherfore loke not only vpon me, but vpon youre selues: whether I lye, or no.
29 Turne into youre owne selues (I praye you) be indifferent iudges, and
considre myne vngyltinesse:
30 whether there be eny vnrightuousnesse in my tonge, or vayne wordes in my
mouth.

Chapter 7

1 Is not the life off ma vpon earth a very batayll? Are not his dayes, like the
dayes of an hyred seruaunte?
2 For like as a bonde seruaunt desyreth the shadowe, and as an hyrelinge wolde
fayne haue an ende of his worke:
3 Euen so haue I laboured whole monethes longe (but in vayne) and many a
carefull night haue I tolde.
4 When I layed me downe to slepe, I sayde: O when shal I ryse? Agayne, I longed
sore for the night. Thus am I full off sorowe, till it be darcke.
5 My flesh is clothed with wormes, fylthinesse and dust: my skynne is wythered,
and crompled together:
6 my dayes passe ouer more spedely, the a weeuer can weeue out his webbe, and
are gone, or I am awarre.
7 O remembre, that my life is but a wynde, ad that myne eye shal nomore se the
pleasures
8 therof yee and that none other mans eye shall se me eny more. For yf thou
fasten thine eyes vpon me, I come to naught like
9 as a cloude is cosumed and vanyshed awaye, euen so he that goeth downe to
hell, commeth nomore vp,
10 ner turneth agayne in to his house, nether shall his place knowe him eny
more.
11 Therfore I will not spare my mouth, but will speake in the trouble of my
sprete, in ye bytternesse of my mynde will I talke.
12 Am I a see or a whalfysh, that thou kepest me so in preson?
13 When I thynke: my bedd shall comforte me, I shall haue some refresshinge by
talkynge with myself vpon my couche:
14 The troublest thou me with dreames, ad makest me so afrayed thorow visions,
15 that my soule wyssheth rather to be hanged, and my bones to be deed.
16 I can se no remedy, I shall lyue nomore: O spare me then, for my dayes are
but vayne
17 What is man, that thou hast him in soch reputacion, and settest so moch by
him?
18 Thou takest diligent care for him, and sodely doest thou trye him.
19 Why goest thou not fro me, ner lettest me alone, so longe till I swalow downe
my spetle?
20 I haue offended, what shal I do vnto ye, O thou preseruer off men? Why hast
thou made me to stonde in thy waye, and am so heuy a burden vnto myself?
21 Why doest thou not forgeue me my synne? Wherfore takest thou not awaye my
wickednesse? Beholde, now must I slepe in the dust: and yff thou sekest me
tomorow in the mornynge, I shalbe gone.

Chapter 8

1 Then answered Baldad the Suhite, and sayde:
2 How longe wilt thou talke of soch thinges? how longe shal yi mouth speake so
proude wordes?
3 Doth God peruerte the thinge that is laufull? Or, doth the Allmightie destroye
the thynge that is right?
4 Whe thy sonnes synned agaynst him, dyd not he punysh the for their
wickednesse?
5 Yff thou woldest now resorte vnto God by tymes, and make thine humble prayer
to ye Allmightie:
6 yf thou woldest lyue a pure and a godly life: shulde he not wake vp vnto the
immediatly, & geue the the bewtie of rightuousnesse agayne?
7 In so moch, that where i so euer thou haddest litle afore, thou shuldest now
haue greate abundaunce.
8 Enquere of them that haue bene before the, search diligently amonge thy
forefathers:
9 Namely, yt we are but of yesterdaye, and considre not, that oure dayes vpon
earth are buth a very shadow.
10 They shall shewe the, they shall tell the, yee they will gladly confesse the
same.
11 Maye a resshe be grene without moystnesse? maye the grasse growe without
water?
12 No: but (or euer it be shot forth, and or euer it be gathered) it wythereth,
before eny other herbe.
13 Euen so goeth it with all them, that forget God: and euen thus also shal the
ypocrytes hope come to naught.
14 His confidence shalbe destroyed, for he trusteth in a spyders webbe.
15 He leeneth him vpo his house, but he shal not stonde: he holdeth him fast by
it, yet shal he not endure.
16 Oft tymes a thinge doth florish, and men thynke that it maye abyde the
Sonneshyne: it shuteth forth the braunches in his garden,
17 it taketh many rotes, in so moch that it is like an house off stones.
18 But yf it be taken out off his place, euery man denyeth it, sayenge: I knowe
the not.
19 Lo, thus is it wt him, that reioyseth in his owne doinges: and as for other,
they growe out of the earth.
20 Beholde, God will not cast awaye a vertuous man, nether wil he helpe the
vngodly.
21 Thy mouth shall he fyll with laughynge, ad thy lyppes with gladnesse.
22 They that hate the, shalbe confounded, & ye dwellinges of ye vngodly shal
come to naught.

Chapter 9

1 Iob answered, and sayde:
2 As for yt I knowe it is so of a treuth, yt a man compared vnto God, can not be
iustified.
3 Yf he wil argue with him, he shall not be able to answere him vnto one amonge
a thousande.
4 He is wyse of hert, and mightie in strength. Who euer prospered, that toke
parte agaynst him?
5 He translateth the moutaynes, or euer they be awarre, & ouerthroweth them in
his wrath.
6 He remoueth the earth out of hir place, that hir pilers shake withall.
7 He commaundeth the Sone, & it ryseth not: he closeth vp the starres, as it
were vnder a signet.
8 He himself alone spredeth out ye heauens, and goeth vpon the wawes of the see.
9 He maketh the waynes of heauen, the Orions, the vij. starres and the secrete
places of the south.
10 He doth greate thinges, soch as are vnsearcheable, yee and wonders without
nombre.
11 Yf he came by me, I might not loke vpo him: yf he wente his waye, I shulde
not perceaue it.
12 Yf he be haisty to take eny thinge awaye, who wil make him restore it agayne?
Who wil saye vnto him: what doest thou?
13 He is God, whose wrath no man maye with stode: but the proudest of all must
stoupe vnder him.
14 How shulde I then answere him? or, what wordes shulde I fynde out agaynst
him?
15 Yee though I be rightuous, yet will I not geue him one worde agayne, but
mekely submytte my self to my iudge.
16 All be it that I call vpon him, and he heare me, yet am I not sure, yt he
hath herde my voyce:
17 he troubleth me so with the tempest, and woundeth me out of measure without a
cause.
18 He will not let my sprete be in rest, but fylleth me wt bytternesse.
19 Yf men will speake of strength, he is the stogest of all: yf me will speake
of rightousnes, who darre be my recorde?
20 yf I will iustifie my self, myne owne mouth shall codemne me: yf I will put
forth my self for a perfecte man, he shal proue me a wicked doer:
21 For that I shulde be an innocent, my coscience knoweth it not, yee I my self
am weery off my life.
22 This one thige wil I saye: He destroyeth both the rightuous & vngodly.
23 And though he slaye sodenly wt the scourge, yet laugheth he at the punyshment
of the innocent.
24 As for the worlde, he geueth it ouer in to the power of the wicked, soch as
the rulers be, wherof all londes are full. Is it not so? where is there eny, but
he is soch one?
25 My dayes haue bene more swifte, then a runner: they are gone sodenly, and
haue sene no good thinge.
26 They are passed awaye, as the shippes that be good vnder sale, and as the
Aegle that haisteth to the pray.
27 When I am purposed to forget my complayninges to chaunge my countenaunce, and
to coforte my self:
28 then am I afrayed of all my workes, for I knowe, thou fauourest not an euell
doer.
29 Yf I be then a wicked one, why haue I laboured in vayne?
30 Though I wasshed my self with snowe water, and made myne hondes neuer so
clene,
31 yet shuldest thou dyppe me in ye myre, & myne owne clothes shulde defyle me.
32 For he yt I must geue answere vnto, and with whom I go to lawe, is not a man
as I am.
33 Nether is there eny dayes man to reproue both the partes, or to laye his hode
betwixte vs.
34 Let him take his rod awaye fro me, yee let him make me nomore afrayed of him,
35 and then shal I answere him without eny feare. For as longe as I am in soch
fearfulnesse, I can make no answere: And why?

Chapter 10

1 it greueth my soule to lyue. Neuerthelesse, now will I put forth my wordes: I
wil speake out of the very heuynesse off my soule,
2 and will saye vnto God: O do not condemne me, but shewe me the cause, wherfore
thou iudgest me on this maner.
3 Thinkest thou it well done, to oppresse me, to cast me of (beinge a worke of
thy hondes) and to manteyne the councell of the vngodly?
4 Hast thou fle?shy eyes then, or doest thou loke as man loketh?
5 Are thy dayes as the dayes of man, and thy yeares as mans yeares?
6 that thou makest soch inquisicion for my wickednesse, and searchest out my
synne?
7 where as (notwithstondinge) thou knowest that I am no wicked person, & that
there is no man able to delyuer me out of thine honde.
8 Thy hondes haue made me, & fashioned me alltogether rounde aboute, wilt thou
then destroye me sodely?
9 O remembre (I beseke the) how that thou madest me of the moulde of the earth,
and shalt brynge me to earth agayne.
10 Hast thou not milked me, as it were mylck: and turned me to cruddes like
chese?
11 Thou hast couered me with skynne and flesh, and ioyned me together with bones
& synowes.
12 Thou hast graunted me life, and done me good: and the diligent hede that thou
tokest vpon me, hath preserued my sprete.
13 Though thou hydest these thinges in thine hert, yet am I sure, that thou
remembrest the all.
14 Wherfore didest thou kepe me, when I synned, and hast not clensed me fro myne
offence?
15 Yf I do wickedly, wo is me therfore: Yf I be rightuous, yet darre I not lift
vp my heade: so full am I of confucion, and se myne owne misery.
16 Thou huntest me out (beynge in heuynesse) as it were a Lyon, and troublest me
out of measure.
17 Thou bringest fresh witnesses agaynst me, thy wrath increasest thou vpon me,
very many are the plages that I am in.
18 Wherfore hast thou brought me out of my mothers wombe? O that I had perished,
& that no eye had sene me.
19 Yf they had caried me to my graue, as soone as I was borne, then shulde I be
now, as though I had neuer bene.
20 Shall not my short life come soone to an ende? O holde the fro me, let me
alone, that I maye ease myself a litle:
21 afore I go thyther, from whence I shal not turne agayne: Namely, to that
londe of darcknesse & shadowe of death:
22 yee into that darck clowdy londe & deadly shadowe, where as is no ordre, but
terrible feare as in the darcknesse.

Chapter 11

1 Then answered Sophar the Naamathite, and sayde:
2 Shulde not he that maketh many wordes, be answered? Shulde he that bableth
moch, be commended therin?
3 Shulde men geue eare vnto the only? Thou wilt laugh other men to scorne, &
shal no body mocke the agayne?
4 Wilt thou saye vnto God: The thinge that I take in honde, is perfecte, & I am
clene in thy sight?
5 O that God wolde speake, and open his lippes agaynst the,
6 that he might shewe the (out of his secrete wy?dome) how manyfolde his lawe
is: then shuldest thou knowe, that God had forgotten the, because of thy synnes.
7 Wilt thou fynde out God with thy sekynge? wilt thou attayne to the
perfectnesse of the Allmightie?
8 He is hyer the heaue, what wilt thou do? Deper the hell, how wilt thou then
knowe him?
9 His length exceadeth the length of the earth, and his bredth ye bredth of the
see.
10 Though he turne all thinges vpsyde downe, close them in, or thrust the
together, who darre check him therfore?
11 For it is he, that knoweth the vanite of men: he seyth their wickednesse
also, shulde he not then considre it?
12 A vayne body exalteth him self, and the sonne of man is like a wylde asses
foale.
13 Yf thou haddest now a right herte, & liftest vp thine hondes towarde him:
14 yf thou woldest put awaye the wickednesse, which thou hast in honde, so that
no vngodlynesse dwelt in thy house:
15 Then mightest thou lift vp thy face without shame, the shuldest thou be sure,
and haue no nede to feare.
16 Then shuldest thou forget thy misery, and thynke nomore vpon it, then vpon
the waters that runne by.
17 Then shulde thy life be as cleare as the noone daye, and sprynge forth as the
mornynge.
18 Then mightest thou haue comforth, in the hope that thou hast: & slepe
quyetly, when thou art buried.
19 Then shuldest thou take thy rest, and no ma to make the afrayed, yee many one
shulde set moch by the.
20 As for the eyes of the vngodly, they shal be consumed, and not escape: their
hope shalbe misery and sorow of mynde.

Chapter 12

1 So Iob answered, and sayde:
2 Then (no doute) ye are the men alone, and wy?dome shal perish with you.
3 But I haue vnderstodinge as well as ye, and am no lesse then ye. Yee who
knoweth not these thinges?
4 Thus he that calleth vpo God, and whom God heareth, is mocked of his
neghboure: the godly & innocent man is laughed to scorne.
5 Godlynesse is a light despysed in ye hertes of the rich, & is set for them to
stomble vpon.
6 The houses of robbers are in wealth and prosperite, & they that maliciously
medle agaynst God, dwel without care: yee God geueth all thinges richely with
his honde.
7 Axe the catell, & they shal enfourme the: the foules of the ayre, and they
shall tell ye:
8 Speake to the earth, and it shall shewe the: Or to the fyshes of the see, and
they shal certifie the.
9 What is he, but he knoweth, that ye hode of the LORDE made all these?
10 In whose honde is the soule of euery lyuynge thinge, and the breth of all
men.
11 Haue not the eares pleasure in hearinge, and the mouth in tastinge the thinge
that it eateth?
12 Amonge olde personnes there is wy?dome, and amonge the aged is vnderstodinge.
13 Yee with God is wy?dome and strength, it is he that hath councell &
foreknowlege.
14 Yf he breake downe a thinge, who can set it vp agayne? Yf he shutt a thinge,
who wil open it?
15 Beholde, yf he witholde the waters, they drye vp: Yf he let the go, they
destroye the earth.
16 With him is strength and wy?dome: he knoweth both the disceauer, and him that
is disceaued.
17 He carieth awaye the wyse men, as it were a spoyle, and bryngeth the iudges
out of their wyttes.
18 He lowseth the gyrdle of kynges, and gyrdeth their loynes with a bonde.
19 he ledeth awaye the prestes into captiuyte, and turneth the mightie vp syde
downe.
20 He taketh the verite from out of the mouth, & disapoynteth ye aged of their
wy?dome.
21 He poureth out confucion vpon prynces, and coforteth them that haue bene
oppressed.
22 Loke what lyeth hyd in darcknesse, he declareth it opely: and the very
shadowe of death bringeth he to light.
23 He both increaseth the people, and destroyeth them: He maketh them to
multiplie, and dryueth them awaye.
24 He chaungeth the herte of the prynces and kynges of the earth, and
disapoynteth them: so that they go wadringe out of the waye,
25 and grope in the darke without light, stackeringe to and fro like droncken
men.

Chapter 13

1 Lo, all this haue I sene with myne eye, herde with myne eare, & vnderstonde
it.
2 Loke what ye knowe, that same do I knowe also, nether am I inferior vnto you.
3 Neuerthelesse I am purposed to talke with the Allmightie, and my desyre is to
comon with God.
4 As for you, ye are workmasters of lyes: and vnprofitable Phisicians
alltogether.
5 Wolde God ye kepte youre tonge, that ye might be taken for wyse men.
6 Therfore heare my wordes, and pondre the sentence of my lippes.
7 Will ye make answere for God with lyes, and mateyne him with disceate?
8 Wil ye accepte ye personne of God, and intreate for him?
9 Shal that helpe you, when he calleth you to rekenynge? Thynke ye to begyle
him, as a man is begyled?
10 Punysh you shall he and reproue you, yf ye do secretly accepte eny personne.
11 Shall he not make you afrayed, when he sheweth himself? Shal not his terrible
feare fall vpo you?
12 youre remembraunce shalbe like the dust, & youre pryde shalbe turned to
claye.
13 Holde youre tonges now, and let me speake, for there is some thinge come in
to my mynde.
14 Wherfore do I beare my flesh in my teth, and my soule in myne hondes?
15 Lo, there is nether coforte ner hope for me, yf he wil slaye me. But yf I
shewe and reproue myne owne wayes in his sight,
16 he is euen the same, that maketh me whole: and why? there maye no Ypocrite
come before him,
17 Heare my wordes, and pondre my sayenges with youre eares.
18 Beholde, though sentence were geuen vpon me, I am sure to be knowne for
vngilty.
19 What is he, that will go to lawe with me? For yf I holde my tonge, I shal
dye.
20 Neuerthelesse graunte me ij. thinges, and then will I not hyde my self from
the.
21 Withdrawe thine honde fro me, & let not the fearfull drede of the make me
afrayed.
22 And then sende for me to the lawe, yt I maye answere for my self: or els, let
me speake, and geue thou the answere.
23 How greate are my my?dedes & synnes? Let me knowe my trasgressions &
offences.
24 Wherfore hydest thou thy face, and holdest me for thine enemye?
25 Wilt thou be so cruell & extreme vnto a flyenge leaf, and folowe vpon drye
stubble?
26 that thou layest so sharply to my charge, and wilt vtterly vndoo me, for ye
synnes of my yougth?
27 Thou hast put my fote in the stockes: thou lokest narowly vnto all my pathes,
& marckest the steppes of my fete:
28 where as I (notwithstondinge) must consume like as a foule carion, and as a
cloth that is moth eaten.

Chapter 14

1 Man that is borne of a woman, hath but a shorte tyme to lyue, and is full of
dyuerse miseries.
2 He cometh vp, and falleth awaye like a floure. He flyeth as it were a shadowe,
and neuer continueth in one state.
3 Thinkest thou it now well done, to open thine eyes vpon soch one, and to
brynge me before the in iudgment?
4 Who can make it cleane, that commeth of an vncleane thinge? No body.
5 The dayes of man are shorte, ye nombre of his monethes are knowne only vnto
the. Thou hast apoynted him his boundes, he can not go beyonde them.
6 Go from him, that he maye rest a litle: vntill his daye come, which he loketh
for, like as an hyrelinge doth.
7 Yf a tre be cutt downe, there is some hope yet, that it will sproute and shute
forth the braunches againe:
8 For though a rote be waxen olde and deed in the grounde, yet whe the stocke
9 getteth the sent of water, it will budde, and brynge forth bowes, like as when
it was first planted.
10 But as for man, when he is deed, perished and consumed awaye, what becommeth
of him?
11 The floudes when they be dryed vp, & the ryuers when they be emptie, are
fylled agayne thorow the flowinge waters of the see:
12 but when man slepeth, he ryseth not agayne, vntill the heauen perish: he shal
not wake vp ner ryse out of his slepe.
13 O that thou woldest kepe me, and hyde me in the hell, vntill thy wrath were
stilled: & to appoynte me a tyme, wherin thou mightest remembre me.
14 Maye a deed man lyue agayne? All the dayes of this my pilgremage am I
lokynge, when my chaunginge shal come.
15 Yf thou woldest but call me, I shulde obeie the: only despyse not the worke
of thine owne hondes.
16 For thou hast nombred all my goynges, yet be not thou to extreme vpon my
synnes.
17 Thou hast sealed vp myne offences, as it were in a bagg: but be mercifull
vnto my wickednesse.
18 The mountaynes fall awaye at the last, the rockes are remoued out of their
place,
19 the waters pearse thorow the very stones by litle and litle, the floudes
wa?she awaye the grauell & earth: Euen so destroyest thou the hope of man in
like maner.
20 Thou preuaylest agaynst him, so that he passeth awaye: thou chaungest his
estate, and puttest him from the.
21 Whether his children come to worshipe or no, he can not tell: And yf they be
men of lowe degre, he knoweth not.
22 Whyle he lyueth, his flesh must haue trauayle: and whyle the soule is in him,
he must be in sorowe.

Chapter 15

1 Then answered Eliphas the Themanite, and sayde:
2 Shulde a wyse man geue soch an answere (as it were one that spake in the
wynde) and fyll his stomacke with anger?
3 Thou reprouest wt wordes, that are nothinge wroth: and speakest the thinges,
which can do no good.
4 As for shame, thou hast set it asyde, els woldest thou not make so many wordes
before God:
5 but thy wickednesse teacheth thy mouth, and so thou hast chosen the a craftie
tonge.
6 Thine owne mouth condemneth the, and not I: yee thine owne lippes shappe the
an answere.
7 Art thou the first man, that euer was borne? Or, wast thou made before the
hylles?
8 hast thou herde the secrete councell of God, that all wy?dome is to litle for
ye?
9 What knowest thou, yt we knowe not? What vnderstondest thou, but we can the
same?
10 With vs are olde and aged men, yee soch as haue lyued longer then thy
forefathers.
11 Dost thou nomore regarde the comforte of God? but thy wicked wordes wil not
suffre the.
12 Why doth thine herte make the so proude? Why stondest thou so greatly in
thine owne conceate? Where vnto loke thine eyes,
13 yt thy mynde is so puft vp agaynst God & lettest soch wordes go out of thy
mouth?
14 What is man, that he shulde be vncleane? what hath he (which is borne of a
woman) wherby he might be knowne to be rightuous?
15 Beholde, he hath founde vnfaithfulnesse amoge his owne sanctes: yee the very
heauens are vnclene in his sight.
16 How moch more then an abhominable and vyle ma, which dryncketh wickednesse
like water?
17 I will tell the, heare me: I wil shewe the a thinge, that I knowe:
18 which wyse men haue tolde, & hath not bene hyd from their fathers:
19 vnto whom only the londe was geuen, that no straunger shulde come amonge
them.
20 The vngodly despayreth all the dayes of his life, & the nombre of a tyrauntes
yeares is vnknowne.
21 A fearfull sounde is euer in his eares, & when it is peace, yet feareth he
destruccion:
22 He beleueth neuer to be delyuered out of darcknesse, the swearde is allwaye
before his eyes.
23 When he goeth forth to get his lyuinge, he thinketh planely, that the daye of
darcknesse is at honde.
24 Sorow and carefulnesse make him afrayed, & copasse him rounde aboute, like as
it were a kinge with his hoost redy to the battayll.
25 For he hath stretched out his honde agaynst God, & armed himself agaynst ye
Allmightie.
26 He runneth proudly vpon him, & with a stiff necke fighteth he agaynst him:
27 where as he couereth his face with fatnesse, and maketh his body well
lykynge.
28 Therfore shall his dwellynge be in desolate cities, & in houses which no ma
inhabiteth, but are become heapes of stones.
29 He shall not be rich, nether shall his substaunce continue, ner encrease vpon
earth.
30 He shal neuer come out of darcknesse, the flame shal drye vp his braunches,
with ye blast of the mouth of God shal he be take awaie.
31 He wil nether applye himself to faithfulnes ner treuth, so sore is he
disceaued wt vanite.
32 He shall perish, afore his tyme be worne out, and his honde shal not be
grene.
33 He shalbe pluckte of as an vntymely grape from ye vyne, and shal let his
floure fall, as the olyue doth.
34 For the congregacion of Ypocrites is vnfrutefull, & the fyre shal consume the
houses of soch, as are gredy to receaue giftes.
35 He conceaueth trauayle, he beareth myschefe, & his body bryngeth forth
disceate.

Chapter 16

1 Iob answered, and sayde:
2 I haue oft tymes herde soch thinges. Miserable geuers of comforte are ye, all
the sorte of you.
3 Shall not thy vayne wordes come yet to an ende? Or, hast thou yet eny more to
saye?
4 I coude speake, as ye do also. But wolde God, that youre soule were in my
soules steade: then shulde I heape vp wordes agaynst you, and shake my heade at
you.
5 I shulde comforte you with my mouth, and release youre payne with ye talkinge
of my lyppes.
6 But what shall I do? For all my wordes, my sorow wil not ceasse: and though I
holde my toge, yet wil it not departe fro me.
7 And now that I am full of payne, and all that I haue destroied
8 (wherof my wryncles beare wytnesse) there stodeth vp a dyssembler to make me
answere with lyes to my face.
9 He is angrie at me, he hateth me, and gnassheth vpon me with his teth. Myne
enemy skouleth vpon me with his eyes.
10 They haue opened their mouthes wyde vpon me, and smytten me vpon the cheke
despitefully, they haue eased the selues thorow myne aduersite.
11 God hath geuen me ouer to the vngodly, and delyuered me in to the hondes of
ye wicked.
12 I was somtyme in wealth, but sodenly hath he brought me to naught. He hath
taken me by the neck, he hath rente me, and set me, as it were a marck for him
to shute at.
13 He hath compased me rounde aboute with his dartes, he hath wounded my loynes,
& not spared. My bowels hath he poured vpon the grounde.
14 He hath geue me one wounde vpon another, and is falle vpon me like a giaunte.
15 I haue sowed a sack cloth vpon my skynne, and lye with my strength in the
dust.
16 My face is swolle with wepinge, & myne eyes are waxen dymne.
17 Howbeit there is no wickednesse in my hondes, and my prayer is clene.
18 O earth, couer not my bloude, and let my crienge fynde no rowme.
19 For lo, my witnesse is in heauen, and he that knoweth me, is aboue in the
heyth.
20 My frendes laugh me to scorne, but myne eye poureth out teares vnto God.
21 Though a body might pleate wt God, as one man doth with another,
22 yet the nombre of my yeares are come, & I must go the waye, from whence I
shal not turne agayne.

Chapter 17

1 My breth fayleth, my dayes are shortened, I am harde at deathes dore.
2 I haue disceaued no man, yet must myne eye cotinue in heuynesse
3 O delyuer me, and set me by the, who shall then be able to thrust my hondes
together?
4 Thou hast withholde their hertes from vnderstodinge, therfore shall they not
be set vp an hye.
5 He promiseth his fredes parte of his good, but his owne childre spende it.
6 He hath made me as it were a byworde of the comon people, I am his gestinge
stocke amoge the.
7 My countenaunce is heuy for very anger, & the membres of my body are become
like a shadowe.
8 Vertuous me therfore shall wel cosidre this, and the innocent shal take parte
agaynst the Ypocrite.
9 The rightuous wil kepe his waye, and he yt hath cleane handes, wil euer be
stronger & stronger.
10 As for you, turne you, & get you hence, for I can not se one wyse ma amonge
you.
11 My dayes are past, my thoughtes are vanished awaye, which haue vexed myne
herte,
12 chaunginge the night in to daye, & ye light in to darcknes.
13 Though I tary neuer so moch, yet the graue is my house, and I must make my
bed in the darcke.
14 I call corrupcion my father, and the wormes call I my mother and my sister.
15 What helpeth then my longe tarienge? Or, who wil fulfill the thinge, that I
loke for?
16 All that I haue, shall go downe in to the pytt, & lye with me in the dust.

Chapter 18

1 Then answered Baldad the Suhite, and sayde:
2 when wil ye make an ende of youre wordes? Marcke well, and considre, we wil
speake also.
3 Wherfore are we counted as beestes, & reputed so vyle in youre sight?
4 Why destroyest thou thy self with anger? Shal ye earth be forsaken, or the
stones remoued out of their place because of ye?
5 Shal not the light of the vngodly be put out? yee the flame of his fyre shal
not burne.
6 The light shalbe darcke in his dwellinge, & his candle shalbe put out with
him.
7 His presumptuous goinges shal be kepte in, and his owne councell shal cast him
downe.
8 For his fete shalbe taken in the nett, and he shal walke in the snare.
9 His fote shalbe holden in the gilder, and the thurstie shal catch him.
10 The snare is layed for him in the grounde, and a pytfall in the waye.
11 Fearfulnesse shal make him afrayed on euery syde, that he shall not knowe,
where to get out.
12 Honger shalbe his substaunce, and my?fortune shall hange vpon him.
13 He shall eate his owne skynne, yee his owne armes shall he deuoure, beynge a
firstborne of death.
14 All his comforte and hope shalbe roted out of his dwellynge, very
fearfulnesse shall brynge him to the kynge.
15 Other men shall dwel in his house (which now is none of his) and brymstone
shalbe scatered vpon his habitacion.
16 His rotes shalbe dryed vp beneth, & aboue shall his haruest be cut downe.
17 His remembraunce shall perish from the earth, & his name shall not be praysed
in the stretes:
18 he shalbe dryuen from the light into darcknesse, and be cast clene out of the
worlde.
19 He shall nether haue children ner kyn?folkes amonge his people, no ner eny
posterite in his countre:
20 yonge & olde shalbe astonyshed at his death.
21 Soch are now the dwellynges of the wicked, and this is ye place of him that
knoweth not God.

Chapter 19

1 Iob answered, & sayde:
2 How loge wil ye vexe my mynde, & trouble me with wordes?
3 Lo, ten tymes haue ye reproued me: are ye not ashamed, for to laugh me so to
scorne?
4 yf I go wronge, I go wronge to my self.
5 But yf ye wil enhaunce yor selues agaynst me, & accuse me to be a wicked
personne because of the shame that is come vpon me:
6 knowe this then, yt it is God, which hath handled me so violetly, & hath
compased me aboute with his scourges.
7 Beholde, though I crie, yet violece is done vnto me, I can not be herde:
Though I complane, there is none to geue sentece with me.
8 He hath hedged vp my path, I ca not get awaye, he hath set darcknesse in my
gate.
9 He hath spoyled me of myne honoure, & taken the crowne awaye fro my heade.
10 He hath destroyed me on euery syde, and I am vndone: My hope hath he taken
awaye fro me, as it were a tre plucte vp by the rote.
11 His wrath is kyndled agaynst me, he taketh me, as though I were his enemy.
12 His men of warre came together, which made their waye ouer me, and beseged my
dwellinge rounde aboute.
13 He hath put my brethren farre awaye fro me, and soch as were of myne
acquauntaunce, are become straugers vnto me.
14 Myne owne kyn?folkes haue forsaken me, and my frendes haue put me out of
remembraunce.
15 The seruauntes and maydens of myne owne house take me for a strauger, and I
am become as an aleaunt in their sight.
16 When I call vpon my seruaut, he geueth me no answere: no though I praie him
with my mouth.
17 Myne owne wyfe maye not abyde my breth, I am fayne to speake fayre vnto the
children of myne owne body.
18 Yee the very deserte fooles despyse me, and when I am gone from them, they
speake euell vpon me.
19 All soch as were my most familiers, abhorre me: and they whom I loued best,
are turned agaynst me.
20 My bone hangeth to my skynne, and the flesh is awaye, only there is left me
the skynne aboute my teth.
21 Haue pite vpon me, haue pite vpon me (o ye my frendes) for the hande of the
LORDE hath touched me.
22 Seynge God persecuteth me, wil ye vexe me also? Haue ye not yet ynough of the
trouble of my flesh?
23 O that my wordes were written, O that they were put in a boke:
24 wolde God they were graue wt an yron pene in leade or in stone.
25 For I am sure, that my redemer lyueth, and that I shall ryse out of the earth
in the latter daye:
26 that I shal be clothed againe with this skynne, and se God in my flesh.
27 Yee I my self shal beholde him, not with other but with these same eyes. My
reynes are consumed within me,
28 when yee saye: Why do not we persecute him? we haue founde an occasion
agaynst him.
29 But bewarre of the swearde, for the swearde wylbe avenged of wickednesse, and
be sure, that there is a iudgment.

Chapter 20

1 Then answered Sophar the Naamathite, and sayde:
2 For the same cause do my thoughtes compell me to answere. And why? my mynde is
tossed here and there.
3 I haue sufficiently herde the checkynge & reprofe, therfore am I purposed to
make answere after my vnderstodinge.
4 Knowest thou not this, namely: that from the begynninge (euer sence the
creacion of man vpon earth)
5 the prayse of the vngodly hath bene shorte, and that the ioye of Ypocrytes
continued but ye twincklinge of an eye?
6 Though he be magnified vp to the heaue, so that his heade reacheth vnto the
cloudes:
7 yet he perisheth at the last like donge: In so moch yt they which haue sene
him, saye: Where is he?
8 He vanysheth as a dreame, so that he can nomore be founde, & passeth awaye as
a vision in ye night.
9 So that the eye which sawe him before, getteth now no sight of him, & his
place knoweth him nomore.
10 His childre go a begginge, their handes bringe the to sorow and heuynesse.
11 From his youth his bones are ful of vyce, which shal lie downe wt him in ye
earth.
12 Whe wickednesse is swete in his mouth, he hydeth it vnder his tonge.
13 That he fauoureth, that wyll he not forsake, but kepeth it close in his
throte.
14 The meate that he eateth, shalbe turned to the poyson of serpetes within his
body.
15 The riches yt he deuoureth, shall he perbreake agayne, for God shal drawe
them out of his bely.
16 The serpentes heade shall sucke him, and the adders tonge shall slaye him:
17 so that he shal nomore se the ryuers and brokes of hony and butter:
18 But laboure shal he, & yet haue nothinge to eate. Greate trauayle shal he
make for riches, but he shal not enioye them.
19 And why? he hath oppressed the poore, and not helped them: houses hath he
spoyled, and not buylded them.
20 His bely coude neuer be fylled, therfore shall he perish in his
couetousnesse.
21 He deuoured so gredely, yt he left nothinge behynde, therfore his goodes shal
not prospere.
22 Though he had plenteousnesse of euerythinge, yet was he poore, & therfore he
is but a wretch on euery syde.
23 For though ye wicked haue neuer so moch to fyll his bely, yet God shal sende
his wrath vpon him, and cause his battayll to rayne ouer him:
24 so that yf he fle the yron weapens, he shall be shott with the stele bowe.
25 The arowe shal be taken forth, & go out at his backe, and a glisteringe
swearde thorow ye gall of him, feare shal come vpo him.
26 There shal no darcknes be able to hyde him. An vnkyndled fyre shal consume
him, and loke what remayneth in his house, it shall be destroyed.
27 The heauen shall declare his wickednesse, & the earth shal take parte agaynst
him.
28 The substaunce that he hath in his house, shalbe taken awaye and perish, in
the daye of the LORDES wrath.
29 This is the porcion that ye wicked shal haue of God, and the heretage that he
maye loke for of the LORDE.

Chapter 21

1 Iob answered, and sayde:
2 O heare my wordes, and amende yor selues.
3 Suffre me a litle, that I maye speake also, and the laugh my wordes to scorne,
yf ye will.
4 Is it with a man, that I make this disputacio? Which yf it were so, shulde not
my sprete be the in sore trouble?
5 Marck me well, be aba?shed, and laye youre hade vpon youre mouth.
6 For whe I pondre & considre this, I am afrayed, and my flesh is smytten with
feare.
7 Wherfore do wicked me lyue in health and prosperite, come to their olde age, &
increase in riches?
8 Their childers children lyue in their sight, & their generacion before their
eyes.
9 Their houses are safe from all feare, for the rodd of God doth not smyte the.
10 Their bullocke gendreth, and that not out of tyme: their cow calueth, and is
not vnfrutefull.
11 They sende forth their children by flockes, and their sonnes lede the daunce.
12 They beare with them tabrettes and harpes, and haue instrumentes of musick at
their pleasure.
13 They spende their dayes in welthynesse: but sodenly they go downe to hell.
14 They saye vnto God: go from vs, we desyre not the knowlege of thy wayes.
15 What maner of felowe is the Allmightie, that we shulde serue him? What profit
shulde we haue, to submitte oure selues vnto him?
16 Lo, there is vtterly no goodnesse in them, therfore will not I haue to do
with the councell of the vngodly.
17 How oft shal the candle of ye wicked be put out? how oft commeth their
destruccion vpon them? O what sorowe shall God geue them for their parte in his
wrath?
18 Yee they shal be euen as chaffe before the wynde, and as dust that the storme
carieth awaye.
19 And though God saue their childre from soch sorowe, yet wil he so rewarde
theselues, that they shal knowe it.
20 Their owne destruccion and misery shal they se with their eyes, and drynke of
the fearfull wrath of the Allmighty.
21 For whath careth he, what become of his housholde after his death? whose
monethes passe awaye swifter then an arowe.
22 In as moch the as God hath ye hyest power of all, who can teach him eny
knowlege?
23 One dyeth now when he is mightie & at his best, rich and in prosperite:
24 euen when his bowels are at the fattest, and his bones full of mary.
25 Another dyeth in sorowe and heuynesse, and neuer had good daies.
26 Now slepe they both a like in the earth, & the wormes couer them.
27 But I knowe what ye thinke, yee and what ye ymagin agaynst me vnrightuously.
28 For ye saye: where is the prynces palace? where is the dwellynge of the
vngodly:
29 Axe eny man that goeth by the waye, and (yf ye will not regarde their tokens
& dedes) he shal tell you,
30 that the wicked is kepte vnto the daye of destruccion, and that the vngodly
shalbe brought forth in the daye of wrath.
31 Who darre reproue him for his wayes to his face? who rewardeth him for the
vngraciousnesse that he doth?
32 Yet shal he be brought to his graue, and watch amonge the heape of the deed.
33 The shal he be fayne to be buried amoge the stones by the broke syde. All men
must folowe him, & there are innumerable gone before him.
34 O how vayne is the comforte yt ye geue me? Are not youre answeres cleane
contrary to right and treuth?

Chapter 22

1 So Eliphas the Themanite gaue answere, & sayde:
2 Maye a man be copared vnto God in wy?dome, though he seme to himself, for to
be like him?
3 What pleasure hath God in yt thou art rightuous? Or what doth it profite him,
yt thy waies are perfecte?
4 Is he afrayed to reproue the, & to steppe forth wt the in to iudgment?
5 Cometh not this for ye greate wickednesse, & for thine vngracious dedes which
are innumerable?
6 Thou hast take the pledge from thy brethre for naught, & robbed the naked of
their clothinge:
7 To soch as were weery, hast thou geue no water to drynke, thou hast withdrawe
bred fro the hungrie:
8 Shulde soch one the as vseth violece, wroge & oppression (doinge all thinges
of parcialyte, & hauynge respecte of personnes) dwell in the lode?
9 Thou hast sent wyddowes awaye emptie and oppressed the poore fatherlesse.
10 Therfore art thou compased aboute with snares on euery syde, & sodely vexed
wt feare.
11 Shuldest thou the se no darcknesse? Shulde not the water floude runne ouer
the?
12 Now because yt God is hyer the the heauens, & because thou seist yt the
starres are so hye,
13 wilt thou therfore saye: Tush, how shulde God knowe? Doth his dominion reach
beyonde the cloudes?
14 Tush, the cloudes couer him, yt he maye not se, for he dwelleth in heauen.
15 Well, thou wilt kepe the olde waye, yt all wicked me haue gone:
16 both olde & yonge, whose foundacion is a runnynge water,
17 which saye vnto God: go from vs, and after this maner: Tush, what wil the
Allmightie do vnto vs?
18 where as he (not with stodinge) fylleth their houses wt all good. Which
meanynge of the vngodly be farre fro me.
19 For wt ioy shal the godly, and with gladnesse shal the innocent se,
20 that their increase shal be hewen downe, & their posterite consumed with the
fyre.
21 Therfore recocile the vnto God, & be content, so shal all thinges prospere wt
the right well.
22 Receaue the lawe at his mouth, & laye vp his wordes in thine herte.
23 For yf thou wilt turne to the Allmightie, thou shalt stonde fast, & all
vnrightuousnesse shall be farre from thy dwellinge:
24 He shal geue the an haruest, which in plenty & abundaunce shall exceade the
dust of the earth, and the golde of Ophir like ryuer stones.
25 Yee the Allmightie his owne self shalbe thine haruest, & the heape of thy
money.
26 Then shalt thou haue thy delyte in the Allmightie, & lift vp thy face vnto
God.
27 The shalt thou make thy prayer vnto him, & he shal heare the, & thou shalt
kepe thy promyses.
28 The, loke what thou takest in honde, he shal make it to prospere with the,
and the light shall shyne in thy wayes.
29 For who so humbleth himself, him shal he set vp: and who so loketh mekely,
shalbe healed.
30 Yf thou be innocet, he shal saue the: and thorow the vngiltynesse of thyne
handes shalt thou be delyuered.

Chapter 23

1 Iob answered, and sayd:
2 My sayenge is yet this daye in bytternes, and my hande heuy amonge my
groninges.
3 O that I might se him & fynde him: O that I might come before his seate,
4 to pleate my cause before him, and to fyll my mouth with argumentes:
5 That I might knowe, what answere he wolde geue me: & that I might vnderstonde,
what he wolde saye vnto me.
6 Wil he pleate agaynst me with his greate power & strength, or wyll he leane
him self vtterly vpon me?
7 Oh no, let him not do so with me. But let hym geue me like power to go to
lawe, then am I sure to wynne my matter.
8 For though I go before, I fynde him not: yf I come behynde, I ca get no
knowlege of him:
9 Yf I go on the left syde to pondre his workes, I can not atteyne vnto them:
Agayne, yf I go on the right syde, he hydeth himself, yt I can not se him.
10 But as for my waye, he knoweth it: & trieth me as ye golde in ye fyre.
11 Neuertheles my fete kepe his path, his hye strete haue I holden, and not gone
out of it.
12 I haue not forsaken the comaundemet of his lippes, but loke what he charged
me with his mouth, that haue I shutt vp in my herte.
13 It is he himself alone, who will turne him back? He doth as him listeth, and
bryngeth to passe what he wil.
14 He rewardeth me into my bosome, & many other thinges mo doth he, as he maye
by his power.
15 This is ye cause, that I shrenke at his presence, so that when I considre
him, I am afrayed of him.
16 For in so moch as he is God, he maketh my herte soft: and seynge that he is
Allmightie, he putteth me in feare.
17 Thus can not I get out of darcknesse, the cloude hath so couered my face.

Chapter 24

1 Consideringe then that there is no tyme hyd from the Allmightie, how happeneth
it, that they which knowe him, wil not regarde his dayes?
2 For some me there be, that remoue other mes londe markes: that robbe them of
their catell, and kepe the same for their owne:
3 that dryue awaye the asse of the fatherlesse: that take ye wyddowes oxe for a
pledge:
4 that thrust the poore out of the waye, & oppresse the symple of the worlde
together.
5 Beholde, the wilde asses in ye deserte go by tymes (as their maner is) to
spoyle: Yee the very wildernesse ministreth foode for their children.
6 They reape the corne felde that is not their owne: and gather the grapes out
of his vynyarde, whom they haue oppressed by violence.
7 They are the cause yt so many men are naked and bare, hauynge no clothes to
couer them and kepe them from colde:
8 So that when the showers in the mountaynes haue rayned vpon them, & they be
all wett, they haue none other sucoure, but to kepe them amonge the rockes.
9 They spoyle the suckinge fatherlesse children, and put the poore in preson:
10 In so moch that they let them go naked without clothinge, and yet the hungrie
beare the sheeues.
11 The poore are fayne to laboure in their oyle mylles, yee and to treade in
their wyne presses, and yet to suffre thyrst.
12 The whole cite crieth vnto the LORDE with sighinge, the soules of the slayne
make their complaynte: But God destroyeth them not for all this,
13 where as they (not wt stodinge) are rebellious and disobedient enemies: which
seke not his light and waye, ner turne agayne in to his path.
14 Tymely in the mornynge do they aryse, to murthur the symple and poore, & in
the night they go a stealinge.
15 The eye of the vngodly is like the aduouterer, that wayteth for the
darcknesse, and sayeth thus in him self: Tush, there shal no ma se me, & so he
disgyseth his face.
16 In the night season they search the houses, and hyde them selues in the daye
tyme, but wil not knowe ye light
17 For as soone as the daye breaketh, the shadowe of death commeth vpo them, and
they go in horrible darcknesse.
18 The vngodly is very swyft: O yt his porcio also vpo earth were swyfter then
ye runnynge water, which suffreth not ye shipma to beholde the fayre & pleasaut
vyniardes.
19 O yt they (for the wickednesse which they haue done) were drawen to the hell,
sooner the snowe melteth at the heate.
20 O yt all copassion vpon the were forgotte: yt their daynties were wormes:
that they were clene put out of remembraunce, & vtterly hewe downe like an
vnfrutefull tre.
21 For they manteyne the baren, & make them yt they can not beare, & vnto
wyddowes they do no good.
22 They plucke downe the mightie wt their power, & when they them selues are
gotten vp, they are neuer without feare, as longe as they liue.
23 And though they might be safe, yet they wil not receaue it, for their eyes
loke vpon their owne wayes.
24 They are exalted for a litle, but shortly are they gone, brought to extreme
pouerte, & take out of the waye: yee & vtterly plucte of as the eares of corne.
25 Is it not so? Who wil the reproue me as a lyar, & saye yt my wordes are
nothinge worth?

Chapter 25

1 Then answered Baldad the Suhite, & sayde:
2 Power & feare is with him aboue, that maketh peace (sittinge) in his hynesse,
3 whose men of warre are innumerable, and whose light aryseth ouer all.
4 But how maye a man copared vnto God, be iustified? Or, how can he be clene,
that is borne of a woman?
5 Beholde, the Moone shyneth nothinge in comparison to him, & the starres are
vnclene in his sight.
6 How moch more the, ma, that is but corrupcion: and the sonne of man, which is
but a worme?

Chapter 26

1 Iob answered, and sayde:
2 O how helpest thou the weake? what comforte geuest thou vnto him that hath no
stregth?
3 Where is ye coucell yt thou shuldest geue him, which hath no wy?dome? Wilt
thou so shewe thine excellent rightuousnes?
4 Before whom hast thou spoken those wordes? Who made the breth to come out of
ye mouth?
5 The giauntes & worthies yt are slayne, & lye vnder ye worlde wt their
copanions:
6 yee & all they which dwell beneth in the hell are not hyd fro him, & the very
destruccion it self ca not be kepte out of his sight.
7 He stretcheth out ye north ouer the emptie, & hageth ye earth vpo nothinge.
8 He byndeth ye water in his cloudes, that they fall not downe together.
9 He holdeth back his stole, that it caa not be sene, and spredeth his cloudes
before it.
10 He hath copased the waters wt certayne boundes, vntill the daye & night come
to an ende.
11 The very pilers of heaue treble & quake at his reprofe.
12 He stilleth the see with his power, & thorow his wy?dome hath he set forth ye
worlde.
13 With his sprete hath he garnished the heaues, & with his hande hath he
wounded the rebellious serpet.
14 This is now a shorte summe of his doynges. But who is able sufficiently to
rehearce his workes? Who can perceaue and vnderstonde ye thondre of his power?

Chapter 27

1 Iob also proceaded and wete forth in his communicacion, sayege:
2 As truly as God lyueth (which hath taken awaye my power fro me) & the
Allmightie, that hath vexed my mynde:
3 My lippes shall talke of no vanite, and my tonge shal speake no disceate,
4 whyle my breth is in me, and as longe as the wynde (that God hath geuen me) is
in my nostrels.
5 God forbydde, that I shulde graunte youre cause to be right. As for me, vntill
myne ende come wil I neuer go fro myne innocency.
6 My rightuous dealynge wil I kepe fast, & not forsake it: For my conscience
reproueth me not in all my conuersacion.
7 Therfore myne enemy shalbe founde as the vngodly, & he yt taketh parte agaynst
me, as the vnrightuous.
8 What hope hath ye Ypocrite, though he haue greate good, and though God geue
him riches after his hertes desyre?
9 Doth God heare him the sooner, whe he crieth vnto him in his necessite?
10 Hath he soch pleasure & delyte in the Allmightie, that he darre allwaye call
vpon God?
11 I wil teach you in the name of God, & the thinge that I haue of ye
Allmightie, wil I not kepe from you.
12 Beholde, ye stonde in yor owne conceate, as though ye knew all thinges.
Wherfore then do ye go aboute wt soch vayne wordes,
13 sayege: This is the porcion that the wicked shall haue of God, & the heretage
that Tyrauntes shal receaue of ye Allmightie.
14 Yf he get many childre, they shal perish wt the swearde, & his posterite
shall haue scarcenesse of bred.
15 Loke whom he leaueth behinde him, they shal dye & be buried, & no man shall
haue pite of his wyddowes.
16 Though he haue as moch money as the dust of the earth, & raymet as ready as
the claye,
17 he maye well prepare it: but the godly shal put it vpon him, and the innocet
shal deale out the money.
18 His house shal endure as the moth, & as a bothe that the watch man maketh.
19 When the rich man dyeth, he carieth nothinge with him: he is gone in ye
twincklynge of an eye.
20 Destruccion taketh holde vpo him as a water floude, & ye tepest stealeth him
awaye in the night season.
21 A vehement wynde carieth him hence, & departeth: a storme plucketh him out of
his place.
22 It ru?sheth in vpon him, and spareth him not, he maye not escape from the
power therof.
23 Than clappe me their hodes at him, yee and ieast of him, whe they loke vpon
his place.

Chapter 28

1 There are places where syluer is molte, & where golde is tryed:
2 where yron is dygged out of the grounde, & stones resolued to metall.
3 The darcknes shal once come to an ende, he can seke out the grounde of all
thinges: the stones, the darcke, & the horrible shadowe,
4 wt the ryuer of water parteth he a sunder the straunge people, yt knoweth no
good neghbourheade: soch as are rude, vnmanerly & boysteous.
5 He bryngeth foode out of the earth, & yt which is vnder, consumeth he with
fyre.
6 There is founde a place, whose stones are clene Saphirs, and where ye clottes
of the earth are golde.
7 There is a waye also that the byrdes knowe not, that no vulturs eye hath sene:
8 wherin ye proude & hye mynded walke not, & where no lyon commeth.
9 There putteth he his honde vpon the stony rockes, & ouerthroweth the
mountaynes.
10 Ryuers flowe out of the rockes, & loke what is pleasaunt, his eye seyth it.
11 Out of droppes bryngeth he greate floudes together, & the thinge that is hyd
bryngeth he to light.
12 How commeth a man then by wy?dome? Where is the place that men fynde
vnderstondinge?
13 Verely no man can tell how worthy a thinge she is, nether is she foude in the
lode of the lyuynge.
14 The depe sayeth: she is not in me. The see sayeth: she is not with me.
15 She can not be gotten for the most fyne golde, nether maye the pryce of her
be bought with eny moneye.
16 No wedges of golde of Ophir, no precious Onix stones, no Saphirs maye be
compared vnto her.
17 No, nether golde ner Christall, nether swete odours ner golden plate.
18 There is nothinge so worthy, or so excellet, as once to be named vnto her:
for parfecte wy?dome goeth farre beyonde the all.
19 The Topas that cometh out of Inde, maye in no wyse be lickened vnto her: yee
no maner of apparell how pleasaunt and fayre so euer it be.
20 From whece then commeth wy?dome? & where is the place of vnderstondinge?
21 She is hyd from the eyes of all men, yee & fro the foules of the ayre.
22 Destruccion & death saie: we haue herde tell of her wt oure eares.
23 But God seyth hir waie, & knoweth hir place.
24 For he beholdeth the endes of the worlde, and loketh vpon all that is vnder
the heaue.
25 When he weyed the wyndes, & measured ye waters:
26 when he set the rayne in ordre, and gaue the mightie floudes a lawe:
27 Then dyd he se her, the declared he her, prepared her and knewe her.
28 And vnto man he sayde: Beholde, to feare the LORDE, is wy?dome: & to forsake
euell, is vnderstondinge.

Chapter 29

1 So Iob proceaded and wete forth in his communicacion, sayenge:
2 O yt I were as I was in the monethes by past, & in the dayes whe God preserued
me:
3 when his light shyned vpon my heade: whe I wente after the same light & shyne
eue thorow the darcknesse.
4 As it stode wt me, whe I was welthy & had ynough: whe God prospered my house:
5 when the allmightie was with me: when my housholde folkes stode aboute me:
6 whe my wayes ranne ouer wt butter, & when the stony rockes gaue me ryuers of
oyle:
7 when I wente thorow the cite vnto the gate, & whe they set me a chayre in ye
strete:
8 whe the yonge me (as soone as they sawe me) hyd the selues, & when the aged
arose, & stode vp vnto me:
9 whe the princes left of their talkinge, & laied their hade to their mouth:
10 whe the mightie kepte still their voyce, and whe their tonges cleued to the
rofe of their mouthes.
11 When all they yt herde me, called me happie: & when all they yt sawe me,
wysshed me good.
12 For I delyuered ye poore whe he cried, & the fatherlesse yt wanted helpe.
13 He yt shulde haue bene lost, gaue me a good worde, & ye widdowes hert praised
me.
14 And why? I put vpon me rightuousnes, which couered me as a garmet, & equite
was my crowne.
15 I was an eye vnto the blynde, & a fote to the lame.
16 I was a father vnto the poore, & whe I knew not their cause, I sought it out
diligetly.
17 I brake the chaftes of ye vnrightuous, & plucte the spoyle out of their teth.
18 Therfore, I thought verely, yt I shulde haue dyed in my nest: & yt my dayes
shulde haue bene as many as the sondes of the see.
19 For my rote was spred out by the waters syde, & the dew laye vpo my corne.
20 My honor encreased more & more, and my bowe was euer the stronger in my
hande.
21 Vnto me men gaue eare, me they regarded, & wt sylence they taried for my
coucell.
22 Yf I had spoken, they wolde haue it none other wayes, my wordes were so well
taken amonge the.
23 They wayted for me, as the earth doth for the rayne: & gaped vpon me, as the
groude doth to receaue the latter shower.
24 When I laughed, they knew well it was not earnest: & this testimony of my
coutenaunce pleased the nothinge at all.
25 When I agreed vnto their waye, I was the chefe, & sat as a kynge amonge his
seruauntes: Or as one that comforteth soch as be in heuynesse.

Chapter 30

1 Bvt now they that are my inferiours & yonger then I, haue me in derision: yee
eue they, whose fathers I wolde haue thought scorne to haue set wt the dogges of
my catell.
2 The power & stregth of their hades might do me no good, & as for their age, it
is spet & past awaye without eny profit.
3 For very misery & honger, they wente aboute in the wildernesse like wretches &
beggers,
4 pluckynge vp herbes from amonge the bu?shes, & the Iunipers rote was their
meate.
5 And when they were dryuen forth, men cried after them, as it had bene after a
thefe.
6 Their dwellinge was beside foule brokes, yee in the caues & dennes of the
earth.
7 Vpo the drye heeth wete they aboute crienge, & in the brome hilles they
gathered them together.
8 They were the children of fooles & vylanes, which are deed awaye fro the
worlde.
9 Now am I their songe, & am become their iestinge stocke.
10 they abhorre me, they fle farre fro me & stayne my face wt spetle.
11 For ye LORDE hath opened his quyuer, he hath hytt me, & put a brydle in my
mouth.
12 Vpon my right hade they rose together agaynst me, they haue hurte my fete,
made awaye to destroye me,
13 & my path haue they clene marred. It was so easy for them to do me harme,
that they neded no man to helpe the.
14 They fell vpon me, as it had bene ye breakynge in of waters, & came in by
heapes to destroye me.
15 Fearfulnesse is turned agaynst me. Myne honoure vanisheth awaye more swiftly
then wynde, & my prosperite departeth hece like as it were a cloude.
16 Therfore is my mynde poured full of heuynesse, & ye dayes of trouble haue
take holde vpon me.
17 My bones are pearsed thorow in ye night season, & my synewes take no rest.
18 With all their power haue they chaunged my garmet, & gyrded me therwith, as
it were wt a coate.
19 I am eue as it were claye, & am become like asshes & dust.
20 Whe I crie vnto the, thou doest not heare me: & though I stonde before the,
yet thou regardest me not.
21 Thou art become myne enemye, & wt yi violet hade thou takest parte agaynst
me.
22 In tymes past thou didest set me vp an hye, as it were aboue ye winde, but
now hast thou geue me a very sore fall.
23 Sure I am, yt thou wilt delyuer me vnto death: where as a lodgyng is prepared
for all me
24 Now vse not me to do violece vnto the, yt are destroyed allready: but where
hurte is done, there vse thei to helpe.
25 Dyd not I wepe in ye tyme of trouble? Had not my soule copassion vpo ye
poore?
26 Yet neuerthelesse where as I loked for good, euell happened vnto me: and
where as I waited for light, there came darcknesse.
27 My bowels seeth wt in me & take no rest, for ye dayes of my trouble are come
vpo me.
28 Mekely & lowly came I in, yee & without eny displeasure: I stode vp in ye
cogregacion, & commoned with the
29 But now. I am a copanyon of dragons, & a felowe of Esiriches.
30 My skynne vpo me is turned to black, & my bones are bret wt heate:
31 my harpe is turned to sorow, & my pipe to wepinge.

Chapter 31

1 I made a couenaunt wt myne eyes, yt I wolde not loke vpo a dasell.
2 For how greate a porcio shal I haue of God fro aboue? & what enheritauce fro
ye Almightie on hie?
3 As for the vngodly & he yt ioyneth himself to ye copani of wicked doers shal
not destruccion & misery came vpon him?
4 Doth not he se my wayes, & tell all my goinges?
5 Yf I haue cleued vnto vanite, or yf my fete haue runne to disceaue:
6 let me be weyed in an eauen balaunce, that God maye se my innocency.
7 Yf so be that I haue withdrawen my fote out of the right waye, yf my hert hath
folowed myne eyesight, yf I haue stayned or defyled my hodes:
8 O then is it reason that I sowe, and another eate: yee that my generacion and
posterite be clene roted out.
9 Yf my hert hath lusted after my neghbours wife, or yf I haue layed wayte at
his dore:
10 O then let my wife be another mans harlot, and let other lye with her.
11 For this is a wickednesse and synne, that is worthy to be punyshed,
12 yee a fyre that vtterly shulde consume, & rote out all my substaunce.
13 Dyd I euer thynke scorne to do right vnto my seruautes and maydens, when they
had eny matter agaynst me?
14 But seynge that God wil sytt in iudgment, what shal I do? And for so moch as
he wil nedes vyset me, what answere shal I geue him?
15 He that fashioned me in my mothers wombe, made he not him also? were we not
both shappen alyke in oure mothers bodies?
16 When the poore desyred enythinge at me, haue I denyed it them? Haue I caused
ye wyddowe stonde waytinge for me in vayne?
17 Haue I eaten my porcion alone, that the fatherles hath had no parte with me?
18 (for mercy grewe vp with me fro my youth, & compassion fro my mothers wombe.)
19 Haue I sene eny man perish thorow nakednes & want of clothinge? Or, eny poore
man for lack of rayment,
20 whose sydes thanked me not, because he was warmed wt ye woll of my shepe?
21 Dyd I euer lyft vp my honde to hurte the fatherlesse? Yee in the gate where I
sawe my self to be in auctorite:
22 The let myne arme fall fro my shulder, & myne arme holes be broken from the
ioyntes.
23 For I haue euer feared ye vengeaunce & punyshmet of God, & knew very well, yt
I was not able to beare his burthe.
24 Haue I put my trust in golde? Or, haue I sayde to the fynest golde of all:
thou art my cofidence?
25 Haue I reioysed because my substaunce was greate, and because my honde gat so
moch?
26 Dyd I euer greatly regarde the rysinge of the Sonne? Or, had I the goinge
downe of ye Moone in greate reputacion?
27 Hath my hert medled priuely wt eny disceate? Or, dyd I euer kysse myne owne
honde
28 (that were a wickednesse worthy to be punyshed, for then shulde I haue denyed
the God that is aboue.)
29 Haue I euer reioysed at the hurte of myne enemy? Or, was I euer glad, yt eny
harme happened vnto him? Oh no,
30 I neuer suffred my mouth to do soch a sinne, as to wysh him euell.
31 Yet they of myne owne housholde saye: who shal let vs, to haue oure bely ful
of his flesh?
32 I haue not suffred a straunger to lye wt out, but opened my dores vnto him.
33 Haue I euer done eny wicked dede where thorow I shamed my self before men: Or
eny abhominacion, yt I was fayne to hyde it?
34 For yf I had feared eny greate multitude of people: Or yf I had bene dispysed
of ye symple, Oh then shulde I haue bene afrayed. Thus haue I quyetly spent my
lyfe, and not gone out at ye dore.
35 O that I had one which wolde heare me. Lo, this is my cause. Let ye
Allmightie geue me answere: & let him that is my cotrary party, sue me with a
lybell.
36 Then shall I take it vpon my shulder, & as a garlade aboute my heade.
37 I haue tolde the nombre of my goinges, and delyuered them vnto him as to a
prynce.
38 But yf case be that my londe crie agaynst me, or yt the forowes therof make
eny complaynte:
39 yf I haue eaten the frutes therof vnpayed for, yee yf I haue greued eny of
the plow men:
40 Than, let thistles growe in steade of my wheate, & thornes for my barlye.Here
ende the wordes of Iob.

Chapter 32

1 So these thre men wolde stryue nomore wt Iob, because he helde himself a
rightuous man.
2 But Eliu the sonne of Barachel the Bussite of the kynred of Ram, was very sore
displeased at Iob, that he called himself iust before God.
3 And with Iobs thre fredes he was angrie also, because they had founde no
reasonable answere to ouercome him.
4 Now taried Eliu till they had ended their communicacion with Iob, for why?
they were elder then he.
5 So when Eliu ye sonne of Barachel ye Bussite sawe, that these thre men were
not able to make Iob answere, he was myscontent:
6 so that he gaue answere himself, and sayde: Considerinve yt I am yonge, & ye
be men of age, I was afrayed, & durst not shewe forth my mynde,
7 for I thought thus within my self: It becometh olde men to speake, & the aged
to teach wy?dome.
8 Euery ma (no doute) hath a mynde, but it is the inspyracion of the Allmightie
that geueth vnderstondinge.
9 All men are not wyse, nether doth euery aged man vnderstonde the thinge that
is laufull.
10 Therfore wil I speake also (in so farre as I maye be herde) & wil shewe yow
myne opinyon.
11 For whe I had wayted till ye made an ende of youre talkynge, & herde youre
wy?dome, what argumetes ye made in youre communicacion:
12 yee when I had diligently pondred what ye sayde, I founde not one of you that
made eny good argument agaynst Iob, or that directly coude make answere vnto his
wordes:
13 lest ye shulde prayse youre selues, to haue founde out wy?dome: because it is
God that hath cast him out, & no man.
14 Neuerthelesse, seynge he hath not spoken vnto me, therfore will not I answere
him as ye haue done
15 (for they were so aba?shed, that they coude not make answere, ner speake one
worde)
16 but in so moch as ye wil not speake, stondinge still like dom men & makinge
no answere:
17 I haue a good hope for my parte to shappe him an answere & to shewe him my
meanynge.
18 For I am full of wordes, & the sprete that is within me, copelleth me.
19 Beholde, I am as the new wyne which hath no vente, & bursteth the new vessels
in sunder.
20 Therfore wil I speake, that I maye haue vete: I wil open my lyppes, and make
answere.
21 I will regarde no maner of personne, no man wil I spare.
22 For yf I wolde go aboute to please me, I knowe not how soone my maker wolde
take me awaye.

Chapter 33

1 Wherfore, heare my wordes (O Iob) & herken vnto all, that I wyll saye:
2 Beholde, I wil open my mouth, & my tonge shal speake out of my chawes.
3 My hert shall ordre my wordes a right, & my lyppes shal talke of pure wy?dome.
4 The sprete of God hath made me, & the breth of the Allmightie hath geue me my
life.
5 Yf thou cast, then geue me answere: prepare thy self to stode before me face
to face.
6 Beholde, before God am I euen as thou, for I am fashioned and made eue of the
same moulde.
7 Therfore, thou nedest not be afrayed of me, nether nedest thou to feare, that
my auctorite shal be to heuy for the.
8 Now hast thou spoken in myne eares, & I haue herde ye voyce of thy wordes:
9 I am clene without eny fawte, I am innocent, & there is no wickednesse in me.
10 But lo, he hath pyked a quarell agaynst me, & taketh me for his enemy:
11 he hath put my fote in the stockes, & loketh narowly vnto all my pathes.
12 Beholde, vnto these vnreasonable wordes of thyne wil I make answere. Shulde
God be reproued of man?
13 Why doest thou then stryue agaynst him, because he geueth the no accomptes of
all his doinges?
14 For whe God doth once commaunde a thinge, there shulde no man be curious, to
search whether it be right.
15 In dreames and visions of the night season (when slombrynge cometh vpo me,
that they fall a slepe in their beddes)
16 he rowneth them in the eares, he infourmeth them, & sheweth the planely,
17 that it is he, which withdraweth man from euell, delyuereth him from pryde,
18 kepeth his soule from destruccion, & his life from ye swearde.
19 he chasteneth him with sicknesse, & bringeth him to his bed: he laieth sore
punyshmet vpo his bones,
20 so that his life maye awaye wt no bred, & his soule abhorreth to eate eny
dayntie meate:
21 In so moch, that his body is clene consumed awaye, & his bones appeare
nomore.
22 His soule draweth on to destruccion, & his life to death.
23 Now yf there be an angel (one amonge a thousande) sent for to speake vnto ma,
and to shewe him the right waye:
24 the the LORDE is mercifull vnto him, & sayeth: He shalbe delyuered, yt he
fall not downe to destruccion, for I am sufficiently recociled.
25 Than his flesh (which hath bene in misery & trouble) shalbe, as it was in his
youth.
26 For yf he submitte himself vnto God, he is gracious, & sheweth him his
countenaunce ioyfully, & rewardeth man for his rightuousnes.
27 Soch a respecte hath he vnto me. Therfore let a man cofesse, (& saye:) I
offended, but he hath chastened & refourmed me: I dyd vnrightuously,
neuerthelesse he hath not recopensed me therafter.
28 Yee he hath delyuered my soule from destruccion, & my life, that it seyth ye
light.
29 Lo, thus worketh God allwaie with ma,
30 that he kepeth his soule from perishinge, & latteth him enioye the light of
ye lyuinge.
31 Marke well (O Iob) & heare me: holde the still, vntill I haue spoken.
32 But yf thou hast eny thinge to saye, then answere me and speake, for thy
answere pleaseth me.
33 Yf thou hast nothinge, then heare me, and holde thy tonge, so shal I teach
the wy?dome.

Chapter 34

1 Eliu proceaded forth in his comunicacion, & sayde:
2 Heare my wordes (O ye wyse men) herken vnto me, ye yt haue vnderstondinge.
3 For like as the mouth tasteth the meates, so the eare proueth & discerneth the
wordes.
4 As for the iudgmet, let vs seke it out amonge or selues, yt we maye knowe what
is right.
5 And why? Iob hath sayde: I am rightuous, but God doth me wronge.
6 I must nedes be a lyar, though my cause be right: & violetly am I plaged,
where as I made no fawte.
7 where is there soch one as Iob, yt drinketh vp scornefulnes like water?
8 which goeth in ye company of wicked doers, & walketh wt vngodly me?
9 For he saieth: Though a ma be good, yet is he naught before God.
10 Therfore herke vnto me, ye yt haue vnderstondinge. Farre be it from God, that
he shulde medle with wickednesse: and farre be it from the Allmightie, yt he
shulde medle with vnrightuous dealynge:
11 but he rewardeth the workes of man, and causeth euery man to fynde acordinge
to his wayes.
12 For sure it is, that God codemneth no man wrongeously, and the iudgmet of the
Allmightie is not vnrightuous.
13 Who ruleth the earth in his steade? Or, whom hath he set to gouerne the whole
worlde?
14 To whom hath he geuen his herte, for to drawe his sprete and breth vnto him?
15 All flesh shal come together vnto naught, & all me shal turne agayne vnto
earth.
16 Yf thou now haue vnderstodinge, heare what I saye and herken to the voyce of
my wordes.
17 Maye he be made whole, that loueth no right? Yf thou were a very innocent
man, shuldest thou then be punyshed?
18 For he is euen the same, yt knoweth the rebellious kynges, & sayeth to
princes:
19 Vngodly men are ye He hath no respecte vnto the personnes of ye lordly, &
regardeth not the rich more the poore. For they be all the worke of his hondes.
20 In the twincklinge off an eye shall they be slayne: and at mydnight, when the
people & the tyrauntes rage, then shal they perish, ad be taken awaye with out
hondes.
21 And why? his eyes loke vpon the wayes of man, and he seyth all his goinges.
22 There is no darcknes ner thicke shadowe, yt can hyde the wicked doers from
him.
23 For no ma shalbe suffred to go into iudgment with God.
24 Many one, yee innumerable doth he punyshe and setteth other in their steades.
25 For he knoweth their euell & darcke workes, therfore shal they be destroyed.
26 They that were in ye steade of Seers, dealt like vngodly me.
27 Therfore turned they back traytorously and vnfaithfully fro hi, & wolde not
receaue his wayes.
28 In so moch that they haue caused ye voyce of the poore to come vnto him, &
now he heareth the coplaynte of soch as are in necessite.
29 Yf he delyuer & graunte pardo, who will iudge or condemne? But yf he hyde
awaye his countenaunce, who wil turne it aboute agayne, whether it be to the
people or to eny man?
30 For the wickednesse & synne of ye people, he maketh an ypocrite to reigne
ouer the.
31 For so moch then as I haue begonne to talke of God, I wil not hyndre the.
32 Yf I haue gone amysse, enfourme me: yf I haue done wronge, I wil leaue of.
33 Wilt thou not geue a reasonable answere? Art thou afrayed of eny thinge,
seynge thou beganest first to speake, & not I?
34 For els the men of vnderstodinge & wisdome that haue herde me, might saye:
What cast thou speake?
35 As for Iob he hath nether spoken to the purpose ner wysely.
36 O father, let Iob be well tryed, because he he hath turned himself to ye
wicked:
37 yee aboue his synnes he hath blasphemed, which offence he hath done euen
before vs, in yt he stryueth agaynst God with his wordes.

Chapter 35

1 Eliu spake morouer, and sayde:
2 Thinkest thou it right that thou sayest: I am rightuous before God
3 Seinge thou sayest so, how doest thou knowe it? What thinge hast thou more
excellet, the I yt am a synner?
4 Therfore will I geue answere vnto the & thy frendes:
5 loke vnto the heaue, & beholde it: cosidre ye cloudes, how they are hyer then
thou.
6 Yf thou synnest, what dost thou vnto him? Yf thine offences be many, how
gettest thou his fauoure?
7 Yf thou be rightuous, what geuest thou him? Or, what receaueth he of thy
handes?
8 Of soch an vngodly personne as thou, & of ye sonne of man that is rightuous as
thou pretendest to be:
9 there is a greate crie & coplaynte made by the that are oppressed with
violence, yee eueryman complayneth vpon the cruell arme of tyrauntes.
10 For soch one neuer sayeth: Where is God that made me? ad yt shyneth vpon vs,
that we might prayse him in the night?
11 Which geueth vs more vnderstodinge then he doth the beastes of the earth, and
teacheth vs more then the foules off heaue.
12 Yf eny soch complayne, no ma geueth answere, and yt because of the
wickednesse off proude tyrauntes.
13 But yf a man call vpon God, doth not he heare him? Doth not the Almightie
accepte his crie?
14 Wha thou speakest then, shulde not he pardon the, yff thou open thyself
before him, and put thy trust in him?
15 Then vseth he no violence in his wrath nether hath he pleasure in curious and
depe inquisicions.
16 Therfore hath Iob opened his mouth but in vayne, ad folishly hath he made so
many wordes.

Chapter 36

1 Eliu proceaded forth in his talkinge, & sayde:
2 holde the still a litle, and I shal shewe the, what I haue yet to speake on
Gods behalfe.
3 I wil open vnto ye yet more of myne vnderstondinge, and proue my maker
rightuous.
4 True are my wordes, & no lye: and the knowlege wherwithall I argue agaynst
the, is perfecte.
5 Beholde, God casteth not awaye ye mightie, for he himselff is mightie in power
and wisdome.
6 As for the vngodly, he preserueth the not but helpeth the poore to their
right.
7 He turneth not his eyes awaye from the rightuous he setteth vp kynges in their
Trone, and cofirmeth them, so that they allwaye syt therin.
8 But yf they be layed in preson and cheynes, or bounde with the bondes of
pouerte:
9 then sheweth he them their workes ad dedes and the synnes wherwt they haue
vsed cruell violence.
10 He with punyshinge and nurturinge off them, rowneth them in the eares,
warneth them to leaue of from their wickednesse, and to amende.
11 Yf they now will take hede and be obedient, they shall weere out their dayes
in prosperite, and their yeares in pleasure ad ioye.
12 But yff they will not obeye, they shall go thorow the swearde, & perish or
euer they be awarre.
13 As for soch as be fayned, dyssemblers and ypocrytes, they heape vp wrath for
them selues: for they call not vpon him, though they be his presoners.
14 Thus their soule perisheth in foolishnesse, and their lyfe wt ye condened.
15 The poore delyuereth he out of his straytnesse, and comforteth soch as be in
necessite and trouble.
16 Euen so shall he kepe the (yf thou wilt be content) from the bottomlesse
pytte that is beneth: & yf thou wilt holde the quyete, he shal fyll thy table
with plenteousnesse.
17 Neuerthelesse, thou hast condemned the iudgment of the vngodly, yee euen soch
a iudgment and sentence shalt thou suffre.
18 For then shal not thy cause be stilled with crueltie, ner pacified with many
giftes.
19 Hath God ordened then, that the glorious life off the & all soch mightie men
shulde not be put downe?
20 Prolonge not thou the tyme, till there come a night for the, to set other
people in thy steade.
21 But bewarre that thou turne not asyde to wickednesse and synne, which hyther
to thou hast chosen more then mekenesse.
22 Beholde, God is of a mightie hye power: Where is there soch a gyde and
lawegeuer as he?
23 Who wil reproue him of his waye? who wil saye vnto him: thou hast done
wronge?
24 O considre how greate and excellent his workes be, whom all men loaue and
prayse:
25 yee wondre at him, and yet they se him but afarre of.
26 Beholde, so greate is God, that he passeth oure knowlege, nether are we able
to come to ye experiece of his yeares.
27 He turneth ye water to smaldroppes, he dryueth his cloudes
28 together for to rayne, so that they poure downe and droppe vpon men.
29 He can sprede out the cloudes (a couerynge off his tabernacle)
30 and cause his light to shyne vpo them, and to couer the botome of the see.
31 By these thinges gouerneth he his people, and geueth the abundaunce of meate.
32 In ye turnynge of a hande he hydeth the light, & at his commaundement it
commeth agayne.
33 The rysinge vp therof sheweth he to his frendes and to the catell.

Chapter 37

1 At this my hert is astonnied, and moued out of his place.
2 Heare then the sounde of his voyce, and the noyse yt goeth out of his mouth.
3 He gouerneth euery thinge vnder the heauen, and his light reacheth vnto the
ende of the worlde.
4 A roaringe voyce foloweth him: for his glorious magesty geueth soch a thondre
clappe, that (though a man heare it) yet maye he not perceaue it afterwarde. It
geueth an horrible sownde,
5 when God sendeth out his voyce: greate thinges doth he, which we can not
coprehende.
6 When he commaundeth the snowe, it falleth vpon the earth: As soone as he
geueth the rayne a charge, Immediatly the showers haue their strength and fall
downe
7 He sendeth feare vpon euery man, that they might knowe their owne workes.
8 The beestes crepe in to their dennes, & take their rest.
9 Out of the south commeth the tempest, and colde out of the north.
10 At the breth of God, the frost commeth, & the waters are shed abrode.
11 The cloudes do their laboure in geuynge moystnesse, the cloudes poure downe
their rayne.
12 He distributeth also on euery syde, acordinge as it pleaseth him to deale out
his workes, that they maye do, what so euer he commaundeth the thorow the whole
worlde:
13 whether it be to punysh eny londe, or to do good vnto them, that seke him.
14 Herken vnto this (o Iob) stonde still, and considre the wonderous workes of
God.
15 Art thou of coucel with God, when he doth these thinges? When he causeth the
light to come forth of his cloudes?
16 Art thou of his coucell, when he spredeth out the cloudes? Hast thou the
perfecte knowlege of his wonders?
17 and how thy clothes are warme, whe the lode is still thorow the south wynde?
18 hast thou helped him to spred out the heauen, which is to loke vpo, as it
were cast of cleare metall?
19 Teach vs what we shal saye vnto hi, for we are vnmete because of darcknes.
20 Shal it be tolde him, what I saye? Shulde a man speake, or shulde he kepe it
backe?
21 For euery ma seith not the light, yt he kepeth cleare in the cloudes, which
he clenseth whan he maketh the wynde to blowe.
22 Golde is brought out of the north, but the prayse and honoure off Gods feare
commeth fro God himself.
23 It is not we that can fynde out the allmightie: for in power, equite and
rigtuousnesse he is hyer then can be expressed.
24 Seinge then that euery body feareth him, why shulde not all wyse men also
stode in feare of hi?

Chapter 38

1 Then spake the LORDE vnto Iob out of the storme, and sayde:
2 what is he, that hydeth his mynde with foolysh wordes?
3 Gyrde vp thy loynes like a ma, for I will question the, se thou geue me a
dyrecte answere.
4 Where wast thou, when I layed ye foundacions of the earth? Tell planely yff
thou hast vnderstondinge.
5 Who hath measured it, knowest thou? Or, who hath spred ye lyne vpon it?
6 Where vpon stode the pilers of it? Or, who layed ye corner stone?
7 where wast thou when the mornynge starres gaue me prayse, ad when all the
angels of God reioysed?
8 Who shutt the see with dores, when it brake forth as a childe out off his
mothers wombe?
9 When I made the cloudes to be a coueringe for it, and swedled it with ye
darcke?
10 when I gaue it my comaundement, makynge dores & barres for it,
11 sayenge: Hither to shalt thou come, but no further, and here shalt thou laye
downe thy proude and hye wawes.
12 Hast thou geue the mornynge his charge (as soone as thou wast borne) and
shewed the dayespringe his place,
13 yt it might take holde of the corners of the earth, & yt the vngodly might be
shake out?
14 Their tokes & weapes hast thou turned like claye, & set the vp agayne as the
chaunginge of a garment.
15 Yee thou hast spoyled the vngodly off their light, & broke the arme of the
proude.
16 Camest thou euer into the groude of the see, Or, hast thou walked in ye lowe
corners of ye depe?
17 Haue the gates of death bene opened vnto the or hast thou sene the dore of
euerlastige treasure?
18 Hast thou also perceaued, how brode ye earth is? Now yf thou hast knowlege of
all,
19 the shewe me where light dwelleth, and where darcknes is:
20 yt thou mayest bringe vs vnto their quarters, yf thou cast tell the waye to
their houses.
21 Knewest thou (when thou wast borne) how olde thou shuldest be?
22 Wentest thou euer in to the treasuries off the snowe, or hast thou sene ye
secrete places of the hale:
23 which I haue prepared agaynst the tyme of trouble, agaynst the tyme of batell
& warre?
24 By what waye is the light parted, & the heate dealt out vpon earth?
25 Who deuydeth the abundauce of waters in to ryuers, or who maketh a waye for
the stormy wether,
26 yt it watereth & moystureth ye drye & baren grounde:
27 to make the grasse growe in places where no body dwelleth, & in the wildernes
where no ma remayneth?
28 Who is the father of rayne? Or, who hath begotten the droppes of dew?
29 Out of whose wobe came the yse? who hath gendred the coldnes of ye ayre?
30 yt the waters are as harde as stones, & lye congeeled aboue the depe.
31 Hast thou brought ye vij. starres together? Or, art thou able to breake the
Circle of heaue?
32 Cast thou bringe forth the mornynge starre or the euenynge starre at
couenient tyme, & coueye the home agayne?
33 Knowest thou the course off heaue, yt thou mayest set vp the ordinaunce
therof vpo earth?
34 Morouer, cast thou lift vp thy voyce to ye cloudes, yt they maye poure downe
a greate rayne vpo the?
35 Canst thou thodre also yt they maye go their waye, & be obediet vnto the,
sayege: lo, here are we?
36 Who geueth sure wisdome, or stedfast vnderstodinge?
37 who nombreth the cloudes in wisdome? who stilleth ye vehement waters of the
heaue?
38 who turneth the clottes to dust, & the to be clottes agayne?
39 Huntest thou the praye fro the Lyon, or fedest thou his whelpes
40 lyege in their denes & lurkinge in their couches?
41 who prouydeth meate for the rauen, whe his yonge ones crie vnto God, ad fle
aboute for want of meate?

Chapter 39

1 Knowest thou the tyme when the wilde gotes brige forth their yoge amoge the
stony rockes? Or layest thou wayte when the hindes vse to fawne?
2 Rekenest thou the monethes after they ingendre, yt thou knowest the tyme of
their bearinge?
3 Or when they lye downe, when they cast their yonge ones, & when they are
delyuered off their trauayle & payne?
4 How their yoge ones growe vp & waxe greate thorow good fedinge?
5 who letteth the wilde asse go fre, or who lowseth the bodes of the Moole?
6 Vnto who I haue geuen the wyldernes to be their house, & the vntilled londe to
be their dwellinge place.
7 That they maye geue no force for the multitude off people in the cities,
nether to regarde the crienge of the dryuer:
8 but to seke their pasture aboute the moutaynes, & to folowe vpon the grene
grasse.
9 Wyll the vnicorne be so tame as to do ye seruyce, or to abyde still by thy
cribbe?
10 Cast thou bynde ye yock aboute him in thy forowes, to make him plowe after
the in ye valleis?
11 Mayest thou trust hi (because he is stroge) or comitte thy labor vnto hi?
12 Mayest thou beleue hi, yt he wil brige home yi corne, or to cary eny thinge
vnto yi barne?
13 The Estrich (whose fethers are fayrer the ye wynges of the sparow hauke)
14 whe he hath layed his egges vpon the grounde, he bredeth them in the dust,
15 and forgetteth them: so that they might be troden with fete, or broken with
somme wilde beast.
16 So harde is he vnto his yong ones, as though they were not his, and laboureth
in vayne without eny feare.
17 And that because God hath taken wisdome from him, & hath not geuen him
vnderstondinge.
18 When his tyme is, he flyeth vp an hye, and careth nether for horse ner man.
19 Hast thou geuen the horse is strength, or lerned him to bowe downe his neck
with feare:
20 that he letteth him self be dryuen forth like a greshopper, where as the
stoute neyenge that he maketh, is fearfull?
21 he breaketh ye grounde with the hoffes of his fete chearfully in his
strength, and runneth to mete the harnest men.
22 He layeth asyde all feare, his stomack is not abated, nether starteth he a
back for eny swerde.
23 Though the quyuers rattle vpon him, though the speare and shilde glistre:
24 yet russheth he in fearsly, and beateth vpon the grounde. He feareth not the
noyse of the trompettes,
25 but as soone as he heareth the shawmes blowe, tush (sayeth he) for he
smelleth the batell afarre of, ye noyse, the captaynes and the shoutinge.
26 Commeth it thorow thy wysdome, that the goshauke flyeth towarde the south?
27 Doth the Aegle mounte vp & make his nest on hye at thy commaundement?
28 He abydeth in the stony rockes, ad vpon the hye toppes of harde mountaynes,
where no man can come.
29 From thence maye he beholde his praye, and loke farre aboute with his eyes.
30 His yonge ones are fed with bloude, and where eny deed body lyeth, there is
he immediatly.

Chapter 40

1 Morouer, God spake vnto Iob and sayde:
2 Can he that stryueth with the Allmightie, be at rest? Shulde not he which
disputeth with God, geue him an answere?
3 Iob answered the LORDE, sayenge:
4 Beholde, I am to vyle a personne, to answere the, therfore will I laye my
hande vpon my mouth.
5 Once or twyse haue I spoken, but I will saye nomore.
6 Then spake the LORDE vnto Iob out of the storme, and sayde:
7 gyrde vp yi loynes like a man, and tell me the thige that I will axe the.
8 Wilt thou disanulle my iudgment? Or, wilt thou condemne me, yt thou thy self
mayest be made rightuous?
9 Is thine arme then like the arme of God? Maketh thy voyce soch a soude as his
doth?
10 Then arme thy self with thine owne power, vp, decke the in thy ioly araye,
11 poure out the indignacion of thy wrath: se that thou cast downe all ye
proude,
12 loke well, that thou makest all soch as be stubburne, to obeye: treade all
the vngodly vnder thy fete,
13 cast the downe in to the myre, and couer their faces with darcknesse:
14 Then will I confesse also, that thyne owne right honde hath saued the.
15 Beholde, the cruell beaste (whom I made wt the) which eateth haye as an oxe:
16 lo, how stronge he is in his loynes, and what power he hath in the nauell of
his body.
17 He spredeth out his tale like a Cedre tre, all his vaynes are stiff.
18 His shynnes are like pipes off brasse, his rygge bones are like staues of yro
19 First when God made him, he ordened the wyldernesse for him,
20 yt the mountaynes shulde geue him grasse, where all the beastes off the felde
take their pastyme.
21 He lyeth amoge the redes in the Mosses, the fennes
22 hyde him with their shadowe, and the wylowes of the broke couer him rounde
aboute.
23 Lo, without eny laboure might he drynke out the whole floude, and suppe off
Iordane without eny trauayle.
24 Who darre laye honde vpon him openly, and vndertake to catch him? Or, who
darre put an hoke thorow his nose, ad laye a snare for him?

Chapter 41

1 Darrest thou drawe out Leuiathan with an angle, or bynde his tonge with a
snare?
2 Canst thou put a rynge in the nose of him, or bore his chaftes thorow with a
naule?
3 Wyll he make many fayre wordes with the (thynkest thou) or flatre the:
4 Wyll he make a couenaunt with the? Or, art thou able for to compell him to do
the contynuall seruyce?
5 Wilt thou take thy pastyne wt him as with a byrde, or geue him vnto thy
maydens,
6 that thy companyons maye hew him in peces, to be parted amonge the marchaunt
men?
7 Canst thou fyll the nett wt his skynne, or ye fysh panyer with his heade?
8 Darrest thou laye honde vpon him? It is better for the to considre what harme
might happe the there thorow and not to touch him.
9 For when thou thynkest to haue holde vpon him, he shall begyle the: Euery man
also that seyth him, shall go backe. And why?
10 There darre none be so bolde, as to rayse him vp. Who is able to stonde
before me?
11 Or, who hath geuen me eny thynge afore hande, that I am bounde to rewarde him
agayne? All thinges vnder heauen are myne.
12 I feare him not, whether he threaten or speake fayre.
13 Who lifteth him vp and stripeth him out of his clothes, or who taketh him by
the bytt of his brydle?
14 Who openeth the dore of his face? for he hath horrible tethe rounde aboute.
15 His body is couered with scales as it were with shyldes, lockte in, kepte,
and well copacte together.
16 One is so ioyned to another, that no ayre can come in:
17 Yee one hangeth so vpon another, and sticke so together, that they can not be
sundered.
18 His nesinge is like a glisteringe fyre, and his eyes like the mornynge shyne.
19 Out of his mouth go torches and fyre brandes,
20 out off his nostrels there goeth a smoke, like as out off an hote seetinge
pott.
21 His breth maketh the coales burne, the flame goeth out of his mouth.
22 In his necke remayneth strength, and before his face sorowe is turned to
gladnesse.
23 The membres of his body are ioyned so strayte one to another, and cleue so
fast together, that he can not be moued.
24 His hert is as harde as a stone, ad as fast as the styth ye that the hammer
man smyteth vpon.
25 When he goeth: the mightiest off all are afrayed, and the wawes heuy.
26 Yff he drawe out the swearde, there maye nether speare ner brest plate abyde
him.
27 He setteth as moch by a strawe as by yro, and as moch by a rotten stocke as
by metall.
28 He starteth not awaye for him that bendeth the bowe, & as for slynge stones,
he careth as moch for stubble as for them
29 He counteth the hammer no better then a strawe, he laugheth him to scorne
that shaketh the speare.
30 He treadeth the golde in the myre like ye sharpe potsherdes.
31 He maketh the depe to seeth and boyle like a pott, and stereth the see
together like an oyntment.
32 The waye is light after him, the depe is his walkynge place.
33 Vpon earth is there no power like vnto his, for he is so made, that he
feareth not.
34 Yff a man will cosidre all hye thinges, this same is a kynge ouer all the
children off pryde.

Chapter 42

1 The Iob answered the LORDE, and sayde:
2 I knowe that thou hast power of all thinges, and that there is no thought hyd
vnto the.
3 For who can kepe his owne councell so secrete, but it shall be knowne?
Therfore haue I spoken vnwysely, seynge these thinges are so hye, and passe myne
vnderstondinge.
4 O herken thou vnto me also, and let me speake: answere me vnto the thinge that
I will axe the.
5 I haue geuen diligent eare vnto the, and now I se ye with myne eyes.
6 Wherfore I geue myne owne self ye blame, and take repentaunce in the dust and
asshes.
7 Now whe the LORDE had spoken these wordes vnto Iob, he sayde vnto Eliphas ye
Themanite: I am displeased with the & thy two frendes, for ye haue not spoken
the thinge yt is right before me, like as my seruaunt Iob hath done.
8 Therfore take vij. oxen and seuen rammes, and go to my seruaunt Iob, offre vp
also for youre selues a brentofferynge, and lat my seruaunt Iob praye for you.
Him will I accepte, and not deale with you after youre foolishnesse: in that ye
haue not spoke ye thinge which is right, like as my seruaunt Iob hath done.
9 So Eliphas the Themanite, Baldad ye Suhite and Sophar the Naamathite wete
their waye, and did acordynge as the LORDE commaunded them. The LORDE also
accepted the personne off Iob,
10 and the LORDE turned him vnto Iob, whe he prayed for his frendes: Yee the
LORDE gaue Iob twyse as moch as he had afore.
11 And the came there vnto him all his brethren, all his sisters with all them
that had bene off his acquatauce afore, and ate bred with him in his house,
wondringe at him, ad comfortinge him ouer all the trouble, that the LORDE had
brought vpon him. Euery ma gaue him a shepe and a Iewell of golde.
12 And the LORDE made Iob richer then he was before: for he had xiiij.M. shepe,
vi.M. camels, a M. yock oxe, and a M. asses.
13 He had children also: vij. sonnes and iij. doughters.
14 The first he called Daye, the seconde, pouerte: the thirde, All plenteousnes.
15 In all the londe were none founde so fayre, as the doughters of Iob, & their
father gaue them enheritaunce amonge their brethren.
16 After this lyued Iob xl. yeares, so that he sawe his children, & his childers
children vnto the fourth generacion.
17 And so he dyed, beinge olde & of a perfecte age.


Psalms

Psalm 1

1 O blessed is ye man, yt goeth not in the councell of ye vngodly: yt abydeth
not in the waye off synners, & sytteth not in ye seate of the scornefull.
2 But delyteth in the lawe of ye LORDE, & exercyseth himself in his lawe both
daye and night.
3 Soch a ma is like a tre plated by ye watersyde, yt brigeth forth his frute in
due season. His leeues shal not fall off, ad loke what soeuer he doth, it shal
prospere.
4 As for the vngodly, it is not so with them: but they are like the dust, which
ye wynde scatereth awaye from of the grounde.
5 Therfore the vngodly shall not be able to stonde in the iudgmet, nether the
synners in the congregacion off the rightuous.
6 For the LORDE aloweth ye waye of the rightuous, but the waye of the vngodly
shal perishe.

Psalm 2

1 Why do the Heithe grudge? why do the people ymagyn vayne thinges?
2 The kynges of the earth stode vp, and the rulers are come together, agaynst
the LORDE ad agaynst his anoynted.
3 Let vs breake their bondes a sunder, and cast awaye their yocke from vs.
4 Neuerthelesse, he that dwelleth in heauen, shall laugh the to scorne: yee euen
the LORDE himselff shall haue them in derision.
5 Then shal he speake vnto them in his wrath, and vexe them in his sore
dispeasure.
6 Yet haue I set my kynge vpon my holy hill of Sion.
7 As for me I will preach the lawe, wherof the LORDE hath sayde vnto me: Thou
art my sonne, this daye haue I begotten the.
8 Desyre off me, and I shall geue the the Heithen for thine enheritaunce, Yee
the vttemost partes of the worlde for thy possession.
9 Thou shalt rule them with a rodde of yron, and breake the in peces like an
erthen vessell.
10 Be wyse now therfore (o ye kynges) be warned, ye that are iudges of the
earth.
11 Serue the LORDE with feare, and reioyse before him with reuerence.
12 Kysse the sonne, lest the LORDE be angrie, and so ye perish from the right
waye. For his wrath shalbe kindled shortly: blessed are all they that put their
trust in him.

Psalm 3

1 Why are they so many (o LORDE) yt trouble me? a greate multitude are they,
that ryse agaynst me.
2 Yee many one there be that saye off my soule: there is no helpe for him in
God.
3 Sela But thou (o LORDE) art my defender, my worshipe, ad the lifter vp of my
heade.
4 I call vpon the LORDE with my voyce, and he heareth me out of his holy hill.
5 Sela I layed me downe and slepte, but I rose vp agayne, for the LORDE
susteyned me.
6 I am not afrayed for thousandes of the people, that copasse me rounde aboute.
7 Vp LORDE, and helpe me, o my God: for thou smytest all myne enemies vpon the
cheke bones, and breakest the teth of the vngodly.
8 Helpe belongeth vnto the LORDE, therfore let thy blessynge be vpon thy people.

Psalm 4

1 Heare me whe I cal, o God of my rightuousnes, thou that comfortest me in my
trouble: haue mercy vpon me, and herken vnto my prayer.
2 O ye sonnes off men: how longe will ye blaspheme myne honoure? why haue ye
soch pleasure in vanyte, & seke after lyes?
3 Sela Knowe this, that the LORDE dealeth maruelously with his saynte: and when
I call vpon the LORDE, he heareth me.
4 Be angrie, but synne not: como wt youre owne hertes vpo yor beddes, & remebre
yor selues.
5 Sela. Offre ye sacrifice of rightuousnes, & put yor trust in ye LORDE.
6 There be many yt saye: who wil do vs eny good? where as thou (o LORDE) hast
shewed vs the light of yi countenauce.
7 Thou reioysest myne herte, though their encreace be greate both in corne &
wyne.
8 Therfore wil I laye me downe in peace, & take my rest: for thou LORDE only
settest me in a sure dwellynge.

Psalm 5

1 Heare my wordes (o LORDE) considre my callynge.
2 O marke the voyce of my peticion, my kynge & my God: for vnto the wil I make
my prayer.
3 Heare my voyce by tymes (o LORDE) for early in the morninge wil I gett me vnto
the, yee & yt wt diligece.
4 For thou art not the God yt hath pleasure in wickednesse, there maye no
vngodly personne dwel with the.
5 Soch as be cruell maye not stonde in thy sight, thou art an enemie vnto all
wicked doers. Thou destroyest the lyers: the LORDE abhorreth the bloude thurstie
and disceatfull.
6 But as for me, I wil come in to thy house, euen vpon the multitude of thy
mercy: ad in thy feare wyll I worshipe towarde thy holy teple.
7 Lede me (o LORDE) in thy rightuousnesse, because of myne enemyes, ad make thy
waye playne before me.
8 For there is no faithfulnesse in their mouthes: they dyssemble in their
hertes:
9 their throte is an open sepulchre: with their tonges they disceaue.
10 Punysh them (o God) that they maye perish in their owne ymaginacions: cast
them out because of the multitude of their vngodlinesse, for they rebell agaynst
the.
11 Agayne, let all them that put their trust in the, reioyse: yee let them euer
be geuynge of thankes, because thou defendest them: that they which loue thy
name, maye be ioyfull in the.
12 For thou LORDE geuest thy blessinge vnto the rightuous: and with thy
fauorable kyndnes thou defendest him, as with a shylde.

Psalm 6

1 Oh LORDE, rebuke me not in thine anger: Oh chaste me not in thy heuy
displeasure.
2 Haue mercy vpon me (o LORDE) for I am weake: o LORDE heale me, for all my
bones are vexed.
3 My soule also is in greate trouble, but LORDE how longe?
4 Turne the (o LORDE) & delyuer my soule: Oh saue me, for thy mercies sake.
5 For in death no man remebreth the: Oh who wil geue the thankes in the hell?
6 I am weery of gronynge: Euery night wasshe I my bedde, & water my couche with
my teares.
7 My coutenauce is chaunged for very inwarde grefe, I cosume awaye, I haue so
many enemies.
8 Awaye fro me all ye wicked doers, for the LORDE hath herde the voyce off my
wepinge.
9 The LORDE hath herde myne humble peticio, the LORDE hath receaued my prayer.
10 All myne enemies shalbe cofounded & sore vexed: yee they shalbe turned backe
and put to shame, and that right soone.

Psalm 7

1 O Lorde my God, in ye do I trust: saue me fro all the yt persecute me, &
delyuer me.
2 Lest he hantch vp my soule like a lyon, & teare it in peces, whyle there is
none to helpe.
3 O LORDE my God, yff I haue done eny soch thinge: yf there be eny
vnrightuousnes in my hades:
4 Yff I haue rewarded euell vnto the yt dealt frendly wt me or hurte the yt wt
out eny cause are myne enemies:
5 Then let myne enemie persecute my soule, & take me: yee let hi treade my life
downe in the earth, & laye myne honor in the dust.
6 Sela. Stode vp (o LORDE) in yi wrath, lift vp thyself ouer the furious
indignacio of myne enemies: aryse vp (for me) in the vengeaunce that thou hast
promysed.
7 That the congregacion of the people maye come aboute the, for their sakes
therfore lift vp thyselff agayne,
8 The LORDE is iudge ouer the people: Auenge me then (o LORDE) acordinge to my
rightuousnes & innocency.
9 Oh let the wickednes of the vngodly come to an ende: but manteyne the iust,
10 thou rightuous God, yt triest the very hertes & the reynes.
11 My helpe cometh of God, which preserueth them yt are true of herte.
12 God is a rightuous iudge, & God is euer threateninge. Yf men wil not turne,
he hath whet his swearde: he hath bent his bowe & made it ready.
13 He hath prepayred him the weapens of death, & ordened his arowes to destroye.
14 Beholde, he trauayleth with myschefe, he hath coceaued vnhappynesse, and
brought forth a lye.
15 He hath grauen and dygged vp a pytte, but he shal fall himself in to ye pytte
yt he hath made.
16 For his vnhappynes shall come vpon his owne heade, & his wickednes shall fall
vpon his owne pate.
17 As for me, I will geue thankes vnto the LORDE for his rightuousnes sake, and
wil prayse the name of the LORDE the most hyest.

Psalm 8

1 O Lorde oure gouernoure: how wonderfull is thy name in all the worlde? how
excellent is thy glory aboue the heauens?
2 Out of the mouth of the very babes & sucklinges thou hast ordened prayse,
because of thine enemies, yt thou mightest destroye the enemie and the auenger.
3 For I considre thy heauens, euen the worke off thy fyngers: the Moone and the
starres which thou hast made.
4 Oh what is man, yt thou art so myndfull of him? ether the sonne of ma that
thou visitest him?
5 After thou haddest for a season made him lower the the angels, thou crownedest
him with honor & glory.
6 Thou hast set him aboue the workes off thy hondes: thou hast put all thinges
in subieccion vnder his fete.
7 All shepe and oxen, yee and the beastes of the felde.
8 The foules of the ayre: the fysh of the see, and what so walketh thorow the
wayes of the see.
9 O LORDE oure gouernoure, how wonderfull is thy name in all the worlde?

Psalm 9

1 I wil geue thakes vnto the (o LORDE) with my whole herte, I wil speake of all
thy maruelous workes.
2 I wil be glad & reioyse in the, yee my songes wil I make of thy name, o thou
most hyest.
3 Because thou hast dryue myne enemies abacke, they were discofited, & perished
at thy presence.
4 For thou hast manteyned my right and my cause: thou syttest in the Trone that
art the true iudge.
5 Thou rebukest the Heithen, and destroyest the vngodly, thou puttest out their
name for euer and euer.
6 The enemies swerdes are come to an ende, thou hast ouerthrowen their cities,
their memoriall is perished with the.
7 But ye LORDE endureth for euer, he hath prepared his seate vnto iudgmet.
8 He gouerneth ye worlde with rightuousnes & ministreth true iudgmet vnto the
people.
9 The LORDE is a defence for the poore, a defence in the tyme of trouble.
10 Therfore they yt knowe thy name, put their trust in ye: for thou (LORDE)
neuer faylest the, that seke the.
11 O prayse the LORDE, which dwelleth in Sion shewe ye people of his doinges.
12 And why? he maketh inquysicion for their bloude, and remembreth them: he
forgetteth not the complaynte of the poore.
13 Haue mercy vpo me (o LORDE) considre the trouble that I am in amoge myne
enemies, thou that liftest me vp from ye gates of death.
14 That I maye shewe all thy prayses within the portes off the doughter Sion,
and reioyse in thy sauynge health.
15 As for the Heithen, the are suncke downe in the pytte that they made: in the
same nette, which they spred out priuely, is their owne fote take.
16 Thus ye LORDE is knowne to execute true iudgment, whe the vngodly is trapped
in the workes of his owne handes.
17 Sela. The wicked must be turned vnto hell, and all the Heithen yt forget God.
18 But the poore shal not allwaye be out of remembraunce, the paciet abydinge of
soch as be in trouble shall not perish for euer.
19 Vp LORDE, let not man haue the vpper hade, let the Heithe be codemned before
the.
20 O LORDE, set a scolemaster ouer the, that the Heithe maye knowe them selues
to be but me. Sela.

Psalm 10

1 Why art thou gone so farre of, o LORDE? wilt thou hyde thyselff in tyme of
trouble?
2 Whyle ye vngodly hath the ouer hande, the poore must suffre persecucion: O
that they were taken in the ymaginacions which they go aboute.
3 For the vngodly maketh boost of his owne hertes desyre, the cuvetous blesseth
him self, and blasphemeth the LORDE.
4 The vngodly is so proude and full of indignacio, that he careth not: nether is
God before his eyes.
5 His wayes are allwaye filthie, thy iudgmentes are farre out of his sight, he
defyeth all his enemies.
6 For he sayeth in his herte: Tush, I shal neuer be cast downe, there shal no
harme happe vnto me. His mouth is full of cursynge, fraude and disceate: vnder
his toge is trauayle & sorow.
7 He sytteth lurkynge in the gardens, that he maye pryuely murthur the innocent,
his eyes are set vpo the poore.
8 He lyeth waytinge secretly, as it were a lyon in his denne. He lurketh that he
maye rauysh the poore,
9 yee to rauish the poore, when he hath gotten him in to his nett.
10 Then smyteth he, then oppresseth he & casteth downe the poore with his
auctorite.
11 For he sayeth in his herte: Tush, God hath forgotten, he hath turned awaye
his face, so yt he will neuer se it.
12 Aryse o LORDE God, lift vp thine honde, and forget not the poore.
13 Wherfore shulde the wicked blaspheme God, and saye in his herte: Tush, he
careth not for it?
14 This thou seist, for thou considrest the mysery and sorowe: The poore geueth
himselff ouer in to thy hande, and committeth him vnto the, for thou art the
helper of the frendlesse.
15 Breake thou ye arme off the vngodly and malycious, search out the wickednesse
which he hath done, that he maye perish.
16 The LORDE is kynge for euer, ye Heithen shal perish out off his londe.
17 LORDE, thou hearest the desyrous longinge off the poore: their herte is sure,
that thine eare herkeneth therto.
18 Helpe the fatherlesse and poore vnto their right, that the vngodly be nomore
exalted vpon earth.

Psalm 11

1 In the LORDE put I my trust: how will ye then saye to my soule: that she
shulde fle as a byrde vpon youre hill?
2 For lo, the vngodly haue bet their bowe, and made redy their arowes in the
quyuer: that they maye priuely shute at them, which are true of herte.
3 The very foundacion haue they cast downe, what ca the rightuous the do
withall?
4 But the LORDE is in his holy temple, the LORDES seate is in heauen: He
cosidereth it with his eyes, his eye lyddes beholde the children of men.
5 The LORDE seith both the rightuous and vngodly, but who so deliteth in
wickednes, him his soule abhorreth.
6 Vpon the vngodly he shal rayne snares, fyre, brymstone, storme and tempest:
this rewarde shal they haue to drynke.
7 For the LORDE is rightuous, ad he loueth rightuousnes, his countenaunce
beholdeth the thige yt is iust.

Psalm 12

1 Helpe LORDE, for there is not one saynte more: very fewe faithfull are there
amonge the children off men.
2 Euery man telleth lyes to his neghbor, they do but flater with their lippes
and dissemble in their herte.
3 O that the LORDE wolde rote out all disceatfull lippes, ad the tonge that
speaketh proude thinges.
4 Which saye: Oure toge shulde preuayle: we are they that ought to speake, who
is lorde ouer vs?
5 Now for the troubles sake off the oppressed, & because of the complaynte of
the poore, I wil vp (sayeth the LORDE) I wil helpe the, and set the at rest.
6 The wordes of the LORDE are pure wordes: eue as ye syluer, which from earth is
tried and purified vij. tymes in the fyre.
7 Kepe the therfore (o LORDE) and preserue vs fro this generacion for euer.
8 And why? when vanite and ydylnes getteth the ouer hande amonge the children of
men, all are full of ye vngodly.

Psalm 13

1 How longe wilt thou forget me, o LORDE? for euer? how longe wilt thou hyde thy
face fro me?
2 Oh how loge shall I seke councell in my soule? how longe shall I be so vexed
in my herte? how longe shal myne enemie triumphe ouer me?
3 Considre, ad heare me, o LORDE my God: lighten myne eyes, that I slepe not in
death.
4 Lest myne enemie saye: I haue preuayled agaynst hi for yf I be cast downe,
they that trouble me will reioyse at it.
5 But my trust is in thy mercy, and my hert is ioyfull in thy sauynge health.
6 I wil synge of the LORDE, that dealeth so louyngly with me. (Yee I wil prayse
the name of the LORDE the most hyest)

Psalm 14

1 The foolish bodyes saye in their hertes: Tush, there is no God. They are
corrupte, ad become abhominable in their doynges, there is not one yt doth good.
2 The LORDE loked downe fro heaue vpo the children of men, to se yf there were
eny, that wolde vnderstonde & seke after God. But they are all gone out of the
waye, they are alltogether become vnprofitable: there is none that doth good, no
not one.
3 Their throte is an open sepulcre, with their tonges they haue disceaued, the
poyson of Aspes is vnder their lippes.
4 Their mouth is full of cursinge and bytternes, their fete are swift to shed
bloude. Destruccion & wretchednes are in their wayes, ad the waye of peace haue
they not knowne: there is no feare off God before their eyes.
5 How can they haue vnderstondinge, yt worke myschefe, eatinge vp my people, as
it were bred, & call not vpo ye LORDE?
6 Therfore shal they be brought in greate feare, for God stondeth by the
generacion of the rightuous.
7 As for you, ye haue made a mocke at the coucell of the poore, because he
putteth his trust in the LORDE. Oh yt the sauynge health were geuen vnto Israel
out off Sion. Oh that the LORDE wolde delyuer his people out of captiuyte. The
shulde Iacob reioyse, and Israel shulde be right glad.

Psalm 15

1 Lorde, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? who shal rest vpo yi holy hill?
2 Euen he yt ledeth an vncorrupte life: that doth the thinge which is right, ad
that speaketh the treuth from his herte.
3 He yt vseth no disceat in his tonge: he that doth no euell to his neghboure, &
slaundreth not his neghbours.
4 He yt setteth not by the vngodly but maketh moch of the that feare the LORDE:
he yt sweareth vnto his neghboure & dispoynteth him not.
5 He that geueth not his money vpon vsury, and taketh no rewarde agaynst the
innocet. Who so doth these thiges, shal neuer be remoued.

Psalm 16

1 Preserue me (o God) for in the do I trust.
2 I haue sayde vnto ye LORDE: thou art my God, my goodes are nothinge vnto the.
3 All my delyte is vpon the sanctes that are in the earth, and vpon soch like.
4 But they yt runne after another, shall haue greate trouble.
5 Their drynkofferynges of bloude wil not I offre, nether make mencion of their
name in my mouth.
6 The LORDE himself is my good and my porcion, thou manteynest my enheritauce.
7 The lott is fallen vnto me in a fayre grounde, yee I haue a goodly heretage.
8 I wil thanke the LORDE for geuynge me warnynge: my reynes also haue chastened
me in the night season.
9 Afore honde sawe I God allwayes before me, for he is on my right honde, that I
shulde not be moued.
10 Therfore dyd my hert reioyce, & my tunge was glad, my flesh also shall rest
in hope.
11 For why? thou shalt not leaue my soule in hell, nether shalt thou suffre thy
saynte to se corrupcion. Thou hast shewed me the wayes off life: thou shalt make
me full of ioye wt thy countenaunce. At thy right hande there is pleasure and
ioye for euermore.

Psalm 17

1 Heare ye right (O LORDE) cosidre my coplaynte: herken vnto my prayer, that
goeth not out of a fayned mouth.
2 Let my sentence come forth fro thy presence, and loke vpon the thinge that is
equall.
3 Thou hast proued & visited myne herte in the night season: thou hast tried me
in the fyre, & hast founde no wickednes in me: for I vtterly purposed, that my
mouth shulde not offende.
4 Because of the wordes of thy lippes, I haue kepte me fro the workes of men, in
ye waye off the murthurer.
5 Oh ordre thou my goynges in thy pathes, that my fote steppes slippe not.
6 For vnto the I crie, heare me o God: enclyne thine eares to me, and herke vnto
my wordes.
7 Shewe yi maruelous louinge kindnesse, thou that sauest them which put their
trust in the, from soch as resist thy right honde.
8 Kepe me as the apple of an eye, defende me vnder the shadowe of thy wynges.
9 From the vngodly that trouble me, fro myne enemies which compasse my soule
rounde aboute.
10 Which manteyne their owne welthynesse with oppression, & their mouth speaketh
proude thinges.
11 They lye waytinge in or waye on euery syde, turnynge their eyes downe to the
grounde.
12 Like as a lyon that is gredy of his pray, & as it were a lyons whelpe
lurckynge in his denne.
13 Vp LORDE, dispoynte him & cast him downe: delyuer my soule with thy swerde
from the vngodly.
14 Fro the men of thy honde (o LORDE) from the men off the worlde, which haue
their porcion in this life: whose belies thou fyllest with thy treasure.
15 They haue children at their desyre, and leaue the reste of their substauce
for their babes. But as for me, I will beholde thy presence in rightuousnes: and
when thy glory appeareth, I shal be satisfied.

Psalm 18

1 I wil loue the (o LORDE) my stregth. The LORDE is my sucor, my refuge, my
Sauior: my god, my helper i who I trust: my buckler, ye horne of my health, & my
proteccio.
2 I wil prayse ye LORDE & call vpon him, so shal I be safe fro myne enemies.
3 The sorowes of death copassed me, & the brokes of vngodlynes made me afrayed.
4 The paynes of hell came aboute me, the snares of death toke holde vpo me.
5 Yet in my trouble I called vpo the LORDE, & coplayned vnto my God.
6 So he herde my voyce out off his holy teple, & my coplaynte came before hi,
yee eue into his eares.
7 The the earth trembled & quaked, the very foudacios of the hilles shoke & were
remoued, because he was wrothe.
8 There wete a smoke out of his nostrels, ad a cosumynge fyre out of his mouth,
so yt coales were kyndled at it.
9 He bowed the heaues & came downe, & it was darcke vnder his fete.
10 He rode vpo the Cherubins & dyd fle: he came flyenge with the wynges of the
wynde.
11 He made darcknesse his pauylion rounde aboute hi, with darcke water & thicke
cloudes to couer him.
12 At the brightnes off his presence the cloudes remoued, with hale stones &
coales of fyre.
13 The LORDE also thondred out of ye heaue, & the heyth gaue his thondre wt hale
stones & coales of fyre.
14 He sent out his arowes & scatred the, he cast sore lighteninges, & destroyed
the.
15 The springes of waters were sene, & the foundacios of the roude worlde were
discouered at yi chiding (o LORDE) at the blastinge & breth of thy displeasure.
16 He sent downe fro the heyth to fetch me, & toke me out of greate waters.
17 He delyuered me fro my stronge enemies, and fro my foes which were to mightie
for me.
18 They preuented me in the tyme of my trouble, but ye LORDE was my defence.
19 He brought me forth also into lyberte: & delyuered me, because he had a fauor
vnto me.
20 The LORDE shall rewarde me after my rightuous dealynge, & acordinge to the
clenesse of my hodes shal he recopense me.
21 For I haue kepte the wayes of the LORDE, & haue not behaued myself wickedly
agaynst my God.
22 I haue an eye vnto all his lawes, & cast not out his commaundemetes fro me.
23 Vncorrupte will I be before hi, & wil eschue myne owne wickednes.
24 Therfore shal ye LORDE rewarde me after my rightuous dealinge, & acordinge
vnto ye clenesse of my hodes in his eye sight.
25 With the holy thou shalt be holy, & wt ye innocet thou shalt be innocet.
26 With the clene thou shalt be clene & with the frowarde thou shalt be
frowarde.
27 For thou shalt saue the poore oppressed, & brige downe the hye lokes of the
proude.
28 Thou lightest my cadle, o LORDE my God: thou makest my darcknesse to be
light.
29 For in the I can discofit an hoost of me: yee in my God I ca leape ouer the
wall.
30 The waye of God is a perfecte waye: the wordes of the LORDE are tried in the
fyre: he is a shylde of defence, for all them that trust in him.
31 For who is God, but the LORDE? Or, who hath eny strength, but oure God?
32 It is God that hath gyrded me with stregth and made my waye vncorrupte.
33 He hath made my fete like hartes fete, and set me vp an hye.
34 He teacheth myne hondes to fight, and maketh myne armes to breake euen a bowe
off stele.
35 Thou hast geue me the defence of thy health, thy right hande vpholdeth me,
and thy louynge correccion maketh me greate.
36 Thou hast made rowme ynough vnder me for to go, that my fote steppes shulde
not slyde.
37 I will folowe vpon myne enemies, and take them: I will not turne till they be
discomfited.
38 I will smyte them, they shall not be able to stonde, but fall vnder my fete.
39 Thou hast gyrded me with strength vnto ye batell, thou hast throwe them all
downe vnder me, that rose vp agaynst me.
40 Thou hast made myne enemies to turne their backes vpon me, thou hast
destroyed the yt hated me.
41 They cried, but there was none to helpe the: yee euen vnto the LORDE, but he
herde the not.
42 I will beate them as small as the dust before the wynde, I will cast them out
as ye claye in the stretes.
43 Thou shalt delyuer me from the stryuinges of the people, thou shalt make me
the heade of the Heithe.
44 A people whom I haue not knowne, shall serue me.
45 As soone as they heare of me, they shall obeye me, but the straunge childre
dyssemble with me.
46 The straunge children are waxe olde, and go haltinge out of their pathes.
47 The LORDE lyueth: ad blessed be my helper, praysed be the God of my health.
48 Eue ye God which seyth that I be auenged, and subdueth the people vnto me.
49 It is he that delyuereth me fro my cruell enemies: thou shalt lift me vp from
them that ryse agaynst me, thou shalt ryd me from the wicked man.
50 For this cause I wil geue thankes vnto ye (o LORDE) amonge the Gentiles, and
synge prayses vnto thy name. Greate prosperite geueth he vnto his kynge, and
sheweth louinge kyndnesse vnto Dauid his anoynted, yee & vnto his sede for
euermore.

Psalm 19

1 The very heaues declare the glory off God, ad the very firmamet sheweth his
hadye worke.
2 One daye telleth another, and one night certifieth another.
3 There is nether speach ner laguage, but their voyces are herde amoge the.
4 Their soude is gone out in to all londes, and their wordes in to the endes of
the worlde.
5 In the hath he sett a tabernacle for ye Sone, which cometh forth as a
brydegrome out of his chambre, & reioyseth as a giaunte to rune his course.
6 It goeth forth fro the one ende of the heauen, and runneth aboute vnto the
same ende agayne, & there maye no ma hyde himself fro the heate therof.
7 The lawe of the LORDE is a perfecte lawe, it quickeneth the soule. The
testimony of ye LORDE is true, & geueth wisdome euen vnto babes.
8 The statutes of the LORDE are right, & reioyse the herte: ye comaundemet of ye
LORDE is pure, and geueth light vnto the eyes.
9 The feare of the LORDE is cleane, & endureth for euer: the iudgmentes of the
LORDE are true and rigtuous alltogether.
10 More pleasunt are they then golde, yee then moch fyne golde: sweter then hony
& the hony combe.
11 These thy seruaunt kepeth, & for kepinge of them there is greate rewarde.
12 Who can tell, how oft he offendeth? Oh clese thou me fro my secrete fautes.
13 Kepe thy seruaute also from presumptuous synnes, lest they get the dominion
ouer me: so shal I be vndefyled & innocet fro the greate offence.
14 Yee the wordes of my mouth & the meditacio of my herte shalbe acceptable vnto
the, o LORDE, my helper and my redemer.

Psalm 20

1 The LORDE heare the in the tyme off trouble, the name of the God of Iacob
defende the.
2 Sende the helpe fro the Sanctuary, & strength ye out of Sion
3 Remembre all thy offerynges, and accepte thy brent sacrifice.
4 Sela. Graunte the thy hertes desyre, & fulfill all thy mynde.
5 We will reioyse in thy health, & triuphe in ye name of the LORDE oure God: the
LORDE perfourme all thy peticios.
6 Now knowe I, that the LORDE helpeth his anoynted, and will heare him fro his
holy heauen: mightie is the helpe of his right hode.
7 Some put their trust in charettes, & some in horses: but we wil remebre ye
name of the LORDE oure God.
8 They are brought downe and fallen, but we are rysen and stonde vp right.
9 Saue (LORDE) & helpe vs (o kynge) when we call vpon the.

Psalm 21

1 Lorde, how ioyfull is the kynge in yi strength? O how exceadinge glad is he of
thy sauynge health?
2 Thou hast geuen him his hertes desyre, & hast not put him fro the request of
his lippes.
3 Sela. For thou hast preueted him wt liberall blessinges, & set a crowne of
golde vpon his heade.
4 He asked life of the, & thou gauest him a longe life, eue for euer & euer.
5 His honoure is greate in thy sauynge health, glory and greate worshipe shalt
thou laye vpon him.
6 For thou shalt geue him euerlastige felicite, & make him glad wt the ioye of
yi coutenauce.
7 And why? because the kinge putteth his trust in the LORDE, & in the mercy of
the most hiest he shal not myscary.
8 Let all thine enemies fele thy honde, let thy right honde fynde out all the yt
hate the.
9 Thou shalt make the like a fyre ouen in tyme of thy wrath: the LORDE shal
destroye the in his displeasure, & the fyre shall consume them.
10 Their frute shalt thou rote out of the earth, & their sede fro amoge the
childre of men.
11 For they inteded myschefe agaynst the, & ymagined soch deuyces, as they were
not able to perfourme.
12 Therfore shalt thou put the to flight, & with thy stringes thou shalt make
ready thine arowes agaynst the faces off them.
13 Be thou exalted (LORDE) in thine owne strength, so wil we synge and prayse
thy power.

Psalm 22

1 My God, my God: why hast thou forsaken me? ye wordes of my coplaynte are farre
fro my health.
2 O my God, I crie in the daye tyme, but thou hearest not: and in the night
season also I take no rest.
3 Yet dwellest thou in the Sanctuary, o thou worshipe of Israel.
4 Oure fathers hoped in the, they trusted in the, ad thou dyddest delyuer them.
5 They callled vpon the, and were helped: they put their trust in the, and were
not cofounded.
6 But as for me, I am a worme and no man: a very scorne of me and the outcast of
the people.
7 All they yt se me, laugh me to scorne: they shute out their lippes, and shake
their heades.
8 He trusted in God, let him delyuer him: let him helpe hi, yf he wil haue him.
9 But thou art he that toke me out of my mothers wobe: thou wast my hope, when I
hanged yet vpon my mothers brestes.
10 I haue bene left vnto the euer sence I was borne, thou art my God, eue fro my
mothers wombe.
11 O go not fro me the, for trouble is harde at honde, and here is none to helpe
me.
12 Greate bulles are come aboute me, fatt oxen close me in on euery syde.
13 They gape vpon me with their mouthes, as it were a rampinge and roaringe
lyon.
14 I am poured out like water, all my bones are out of ioynt: my hert in the
myddest off my body is euen like meltinge waxe.
15 My strength is dried vp like a potsherde, my tunge cleueth to my goomes, and
thou hast brought me in to the dust of death.
16 For dogges are come aboute me, the coucell of ye wicked hath layed sege
agaynst me.
17 They pearsed my hondes and my fete, I might haue tolde all my bones: as for
them, they stode staringe and lokinge vpon me.
18 They haue parted my garmentes amonge them, ad cast lottes vpon my vesture.
19 But be not thou farre fro me, o LORDE: thou art my sucoure, haist the to
helpe me.
20 Delyuer my soule from the swearde, my dearlinge from the power of the dogge.
21 Saue me from the lyons mouth, and heare me fro amonge the hornes off the
vnicornes.
22 So will I declare thy name vnto my brethren, in the myddest off the
congregacion will I prayse the.
23 O prayse the LORDE ye that feare him: Magnifie him all ye sede of Iacob, &
let all ye sede of Israel feare hi.
24 For he hath not despysed ner abhorred the myserable estate of the poore: he
hath not hyd his face fro me, but whe I called vnto him, he herde me.
25 I wil prayse the in the greate congregacion, and perfourme my vowes in the
sight off all the that feare the.
26 The poore shal eate ad be satisfied: they yt seke after ye LORDE shal prayse
him: youre herte shal lyue for euer.
27 All the endes of the worlde shal remembre themselues, & be turned vnto the
LORDE: and all the generacions of the Heithen shal worsh pe before him.
28 For the kyngdome is the LORDES, and he shal be the gouernoure of ye Heithen.
29 All soch as be fat vpo earth, shal eate also and worshipe:
30 All they that lye in the dust, and lyue so hardly, shall fall downe before
him.
31 The sede shall serue him, and preach of the LORDE for euer. They shal come, &
declare his rightuousnes: vnto a people that shal be borne, who the LORDE hath
made.

Psalm 23

1 The LORDE is my shepherde, I can wante nothinge.
2 He fedeth me in a grene pasture, ad ledeth me to a fresh water.
3 He quickeneth my soule, & bringeth me forth in the waye of rightuousnes for
his names sake.
4 Though I shulde walke now in the valley of the shadowe of death, yet I feare
no euell, for thou art with me: thy staffe & thy shepehoke coforte me.
5 Thou preparest a table before me agaynst mine enemies: thou anoyntest my heade
with oyle, & fyllest my cuppe full.
6 Oh let thy louynge kyndnes & mercy folowe me all the dayes off my life, that I
maye dwell in the house off the LORDE for euer.

Psalm 24

1 The earth is the LORDES, & all that therin is: the copase of the worlde, ad
all yt dwell therin.
2 For he hath fouded it vpo the sees, & buylded it vpon the floudes.
3 Who shal go vp in to the hill off the LORDE? Or, who shal remayne in his holy
place?
4 Eue he yt hath innocet hodes & a clene herte: which lifteth not vp his mynde
vnto vanite, & sweareth not to disceaue.
5 He shal receaue the blessinge fro the LORDE, ad mercy fro God his sauioure.
6 This is ye generacio of the yt seke him, of the yt seke yi face, o Iacob.
7 Sela. Open yor gates (o ye prices) let the euerlastinge dores be opened, yt ye
kynge of glory maye come in.
8 Who is this kynge of glory? It is the LORDE stroge and mightie, euen the LORDE
mightie in batell.
9 Open youre gates (o ye prynces) let the euerlastinge dores be opened, yt the
kynge off glory maye come in.
10 Who is this kynge off glory? It is the LORDE of hoostes, he is the kynge of
glory. Sela.

Psalm 25

1 Unto the (o LORDE) I lift vp my soule.
2 My God, I trust in ye: Oh let me not be confounded, lest myne enemies triuphe
ouer me.
3 For all they yt hope in ye shal not be ashamed: but soch as be scornefull
despysers wt out a cause. they shall be put to cofucio.
4 Shewe me thy wayes (o LORDE) & teach me thy pathes.
5 Lede me in yi trueth and lerne me, for thou art the God off my health, and in
the is my hope all the daye longe.
6 Call to remembraunce, O LORDE, thy tender mercyes & thy louinge kyndnesses,
which haue bene euer of olde.
7 Oh remebre not ye synnes & offences of my youth, but acordinge vnto thy mercy
thynke vpon me (O LORDE) for thy goodnesse.
8 O how fredly & rightuous is the LORDE, therfore wil he teach synners in the
waye.
9 He ledeth the symple a right, and soch as be meke the lerneth he his wayes.
10 All the wayes of the LORDE are very mercy & faithfulnesse, vnto soch as kepe
his testament and couenaunt.
11 For thy names sake, O LORDE, be mercifull vnto my synne, for it is greate.
12 What so euer he be that feareth the LORDE, he shal shewe him the waye that he
hath chosen.
13 His soule shall dwell at ease, and his sede shall possesse the londe.
14 The secrete of the LORDE is amonge them that feare him, and he sheweth them
his couenaunt.
15 Myne eyes are euer lokynge vnto the LORDE, for he shal plucke my fete out of
ye nett.
16 Turne the vnto me and haue mercy vpon me, for I am desolate and in misery.
17 The sorowes of my herte are greate, O brynge me out of my troubles.
18 Loke vpon my aduersite and misery, and forgeue me all my synnes.
19 Considre how myne enemies are many, and beare a malicious hate agaynst me.
20 O kepe my soule, and delyuer me: let me not be confounded, for I haue put my
trust in the.
21 Let innocency and rightuous dealinge wayte vpon me, for my hope is in the.
22 Delyuer Israel (O God) out of all his trouble.

Psalm 26

1 Be thou my iudge (O LORDE) for I walke innocently: my trust is in the LORDE,
therfore shall I not fall.
2 Examen me O LORDE, and proue me: trie out my reynes and my hert.
3 For thy louynge kyndnesse is before myne eyes, and I walke in thy trueth.
4 I syt not amoge vayne personnes, and haue no fellishepe with the disceatfull.
5 I hate the congregacion of the wicked, and I will not syt amonge the vngodly.
6 I wa?she my hondes with innocency O LORDE, and so go I to thine aulter.
7 That I maye shewe the voyce of thy prayse, and tell of all thy wonderous
workes.
8 LORDE, I loue the habitacion of thy house, and ye place where thy honoure
dwelleth.
9 O destroye not my soule with the synners, ner my life with the bloudthurstie.
10 In whose hondes is wickednesse, and their right honde is full of giftes.
11 But as for me I will walke innocently: O delyuer me, and be mercifull vnto
me.
12 My fote stondeth right: I wil prayse the (O LORDE) in the congregacions.

Psalm 27

1 The LORDE is my light and my health: whom then shulde I feare? the LORDE is
the strength of my life, for whom the shulde I be afrayed?
2 Therfore when the wicked (euen myne enemies & my foes) came vpon me, to eate
vp my flesh, they stombled and fell.
3 Though an hoost of men were layed agaynst me, yet shal not my hert be afrayed:
and though there rose vp warre against me, yet wil I put my trust in him.
4 One thinge haue I desyred of the LORDE, which I wil requyre: namely, that I
maye dwell in the house of the LORDE all the dayes of my life, to beholde the
fayre beutie of the LORDE, and to vyset his temple.
5 For in the tyme of trouble he hath hyd me in his tabernacle, yee in the
secrete place of his dwellinge hath he kepte and set me vp vpon a rocke of
stone.
6 And now hath he lift vp my heade aboue myne enemies, that copassed me rounde
aboute.
7 Therfore wil I offre in his dwellinge, the oblacion of thakesgeuynge: I wil
both synge & speake prayses vnto the LORDE.
8 Herke vnto my voyce (O LORDE) when I crie vnto the: haue mercy vpon me & heare
me.
9 My hert speaketh vnto the, my face seketh the, yee LORDE, thy face wil I seke.
O hyde not thou thy face fro me, cast not thy seruaunt of in displeasure.
10 Thou art my succoure, leaue me not, nether forsake me, O God my Sauioure.
11 For my father and my mother haue forsaken me, but the LORDE hath taken me vp.
Shewe me thy waye O LORDE, and lede me in the right path, because of myne
enemies.
12 Delyuer me not into the wylles of myne aduersaries, for there are false
wytnesses rysen vp against me, and they ymagyn myschefe.
13 Neuerthelesse, I beleue verely to se the goodnesse of the LORDE in the londe
of the lyuynge.
14 O tary thou ye LORDES leysure, be stronge, let thine hert be of good
comforte, and wayte thou still for the LORDE.

Psalm 28

1 Unto the wil I crie, o my stronge defence: thinke no scorne of me, lest (yf
thou make the as though thou herdest not) I become like them, that go downe into
ye pytte.
2 Heare the voyce of my humble peticion, when I crie vnto the, and holde vp my
hondes towarde thy holy temple.
3 O plucke me not awaye amonge the vngodly and wicked doers, which speake
frendly to their neghboure, but ymagin myschefe in their hertes.
4 Rewarde them acordinge to their dedes and wickednesse of their owne
inuencions.
5 Recompense them after ye workes of their hodes, paye them that they haue
deserued.
6 For they regarde not the workes of the LORDE, ner the operacion of his hades:
therfore shal he breake them downe, and not buylde them vp.
7 Praysed be ye LORDE, for he hath herde the voyce of my humble peticio.
8 The LORDE is my stregth and my shylde: my herte hoped in him, & I am helped:
therfore my hert dauseth for ioye, and I will synge prayses vnto him.
9 The LORDE is the strength of his people, he is the defender and Sauioure of
his anoynted. O helpe thy people, geue thy blessynge vnto thy enheritaunce: fede
them, and set them vp for euer.

Psalm 29

1 A scrybe vnto the LORDE (o ye mightie) ascribe vnto the LORDE worshipe and
strength.
2 Geue the LORDE the honoure of his name, bowe youre selues to the holy magesty
of the LORDE
3 It is the LORDE that commaundeth the waters: It is the glorious God that
maketh ye thonder:
4 it is the LORDE yt ruleth the see.
5 The voyce of the LORDE is mightie in operacion, the voyce of the LORDE is a
glorious voyce
6 The voyce of the LORDE breaketh the Cedre trees: yee the LORDE breaketh the
Ceders of Libanus.
7 He maketh them to skippe like a calfe: Libanus and Sirion like a yonge
vnycorne.
8 The voyce of the LORDE deuideth the flames of fyre: the voyce of the LORDE
shaketh the wildernesse, yee the LORDE shaketh the wildernesse of Cades.
9 The voyce of the LORDE moueth ye hyndes & discouereth the thicke bu?shes: in
his temple shal euery man speake of his honoure.
10 The LORDE stilleth the water floude, & ye LORDE remayneth a kynge for euer.
11 The LORDE shall geue power vnto his people, the LORDE shal geue his people
the blessynge of peace.

Psalm 30

1 I wil magnifie ye (O LORDE) for thou hast set me vp, & not suffred my foes to
triuphe ouer me.
2 O LORDE my God, I cried vnto the, and thou hast healed me.
3 Thou LORDE hast brought my soule out of hell: thou hast kepte my life, where
as they go downe to the pytte.
4 Synge prayses vnto the LORDE (o ye sayntes of his) geue thankes vnto him for a
remembraunce of his holynesse.
5 For his wrath endureth but the twincklinge of an eye, and his pleasure is in
life: heuynesse maye well endure for a night, but ioye commeth in the mornynge.
6 As for me, whe I was in prosperite, I sayde: Tush, I shal neuer fall more.
(And why? thou LORDE of thy goodnesse haddest made my hill so stronge.)
7 But as soone as thou turnedest thy face fro me, I was brought in feare.
8 The cried I vnto ye (O LORDE) yee vnto ye LORDE made I my prayer.
9 What profit is there in my bloude, yf I go downe to corrupcion?
10 Maye the dust geue thankes vnto ye? Or shal it declare thy faithfulnesse?
11 Hear (O LORDE) and haue mercy vpon me: LORDE be thou my helper.
12 And so thou hast turned my heuynesse into ioye: thou hast put of my sack
cloth, & gyrded me wt gladnesse. That my honor might synge prayses vnto the wt
out ceassynge: O LORDE my God, I wil geue thankes vnto the for euer.

Psalm 31

1 In the, O LORDE, is my trust: let me neuer be put to cofucion, but delyuer me
in thy rightuousnesse.
2 Bowe downe thine eare to me, make haist to delyuer me:
3 be thou my stronge rocke and a house of defence, that thou mayest saue me.
4 For thou art my stronge holde & my castell: O be thou my gyde, & lede me for
thy names sake.
5 Drawe me out of the nett yt they haue layed priuely for me, for thou art my
stregth.
6 Into thy hondes I commende my sprete: thou hast delyuered me O LORDE thou God
of treuth.
7 I hate them that holde of vanities, and my trust is in the LORDE.
8 I will be glad and reioyse in thy mercy: for thou hast considred my trouble,
thou hast knowne my soule in aduersite.
9 Thou hast not delyuered me ouer in to the hodes of the enemie, but hast set my
fete in a large rowme.
10 Haue mercy vpon me, O LORDE, for I am in trouble, myne eye is consumed for
very heuynesse, yee my soule and my body.
11 My life is waxen olde with heuynesse, and my yeares wt mournynge.
12 My stregth fayleth me because of my aduersite, and my bones are corrupte.
13 I am become a very reprofe amonge all myne enemies, my neghbours & they of
myne owne acquauntaunce are afrayed of me: they yt se me in the strete, coveye
them selues fro me.
14 I am clene forgotten and out of mynde, as a deed man: I am become like a
broken vessell.
15 For I haue herde the blasphemy of the multitude: euery man abhorreth me: they
haue gathered a councel together agaynst me, and are purposed to take awaye my
life.
16 But my hope is in ye O LORDE, & I saye: thou art my God.
17 My tyme is in thy honde: delyuer me from the honde of myne enemies, & from
them yt persecute me.
18 Shewe thy seruaunt the light of thy countenaunce, helpe me for thy mercies
sake.
19 Let me not be confounded (o LORDE) for I call vpon the: let the vngodly
rather be put to confucion, and brought vnto the hell.
20 Let the lyenge lippes be put to sylence, which cruelly, di?danedly &
despitefully speake agaynst the rightuous.
21 O how greate and manifolde is thy good, which thou haist hyd for them that
feare ye? O what thinges bringest thou to passe for them, that put their trust
in the, euen before the sonnes of men?
22 Thou hydest them priuely by thine owne presence from the proude men, thou
kepest them secretly in thy tabernacle, from the strife of tonges.
23 Thankes be to the LORDE, for he hath shewed me maruelous greate kyndnesse in
a stronge cite. For when the sodane feare came vpon me, I sayde: I am cast out
of thy sight.
24 Neuertheles, thou herdest myne humble prayer, when I cried vnto the. O loue
the LORDE (all ye his sayntes) for the LORDE preserueth the faithfull, and
plenteously rewardeth he the proude doer. Be stroge therfore & take a good herte
vnto you, all ye that put youre trust in the LORDE.

Psalm 32

1 Blessed are they, whose vnrightuousnesse is forgeuen, and whose synnes are
couered.
2 Blessed is the man, vnto whom the LORDE imputeth no synne, in whose sprete
there is no gyle.
3 For whyle I helde my tonge, my bones consumed awaye thorow my daylie
complaynynges.
4 And because thy hande was so heuy vpon me both daye and night, my moysture was
like the drouth in Sommer. Sela.
5 Therfore I confessed my synne vnto the, and hyd not myne vnrightuousnesse.
6 I saide: I will knowlege myne offence, and accuse my self vnto the LORDE, and
so thou forgauest me the wickednesse of my synne.
7 Sela. For this shal euery saynte make his prayer vnto the in due season,
therfore shall not the greate water floudes come nye him.
8 Thou art my defence in the trouble that is come aboute me, O copasse thou me
aboute also with the ioye of delyueraunce.
9 Sela. I wil enforme the, and shewe the the waye wherin thou shalt go: I wil
fasten myne eyes vpon the.
10 Be not ye now like horses & mooles, which haue no vnderstondinge. Whose
mouthes thou must holde with bytt & brydle, yf they wil not obeie the.
11 Greate plages shall ye vngodly haue, but who so putteth his trust in the
LORDE, mercy shall compasse him on euery syde. Be glad (o ye rightuous) and
reioyse in the LORDE, be ioyfull all ye that are true of herte.

Psalm 33

1 Reioyse in ye LORDE (o ye rightuous) for it becommeth well the iust to be
thankfull.
2 Prayse the LORDE with harpe: synge psalmes vnto him with the lute and
instrument of ten strynges.
3 Singe him a new songe, yee synge lustely vnto him & with a good corage.
4 For the worde of ye LORDE is true, and all his workes are faithfull.
5 He loueth mercy & iudgment, ye earth is full of the goodnesse of the LORDE
6 By the worde of the LORDE were the heauens made, & all the hoostes of them by
ye breth of his mouth.
7 He gathereth ye waters together as it were in a bottell, & laieth vp the depe
in secrete.
8 Let all the earth feare the LORDE, and let all them that dwell in the worlde,
stode in awe of him.
9 For loke what he sayeth, it is done: and loke what he comaudeth, it stondeth
fast.
10 The LORDE bryngeth the councell of the Heithen to naught, and turneth the
deuyces of the people.
11 But the coucell of the LORDE endureth, and the thoughtes of his hert from
generacion to generacion.
12 Blessed are the people that holde the LORDE for their God, & blessed are the
folke whom he hath chosen to be his heretage.
13 The LORDE loketh downe from heauen, & beholdeth all the children of men:
14 from his stronge seate he considreth all them yt dwell in the worlde.
15 He only hath fashioned all the hertes of them, & knoweth all their workes.
16 A kynge is not helped by his owne greate hoost, nether is a giaunte saued
thorow the might of his owne stregth.
17 A horse is but a vayne thynge to saue a man, it is not the power of his
stregth that can delyuer him.
18 Beholde, the eye of the LORDE loketh vnto them that feare him, & put their
trust in his mercy.
19 That he maye delyuer their soules from death, and to fede them in the deare
tyme.
20 Let oure soule paciently abyde the LORDE, for he is oure helpe and shilde.
21 So shal oure herte reioyse in him, because we haue hoped in his holy name.
22 Let thy mercifull kyndnesse (o LORDE) be vpon vs, like as we put oure trust
in the.

Psalm 34

1 I wil allwaye geue thankes vnto the LORDE, his prayse shal euer be in my
mouth.
2 My soule shall make hir boast in the LORDE: the poore oppressed shal heare
therof, and be glad.
3 O prayse ye LORDE with me, and let vs magnifie his name together.
4 I sought the LORDE, and he herde me, yee he delyuered me out of all my feare.
5 They that haue an eye vnto him, shalbe lightened, & their faces shall not be
ashamed.
6 This poore man cried vnto the LORDE, and he herde him, yee and delyuered him
out of all his troubles.
7 The angell of the LORDE pitcheth his tente rounde aboute them that feare him,
and delyuereth them.
8 O taist and se how frendly the LORDE is, blessed is the man yt trusteth in
him.
9 O feare the LORDE, ye yt be his sayntes: for they that feare him, lacke
nothinge.
10 The rich shal want and suffre hunger, but they which seke the LORDE, shal wat
no maner of thinge, that is good.
11 Come hither (o ye children) herken vnto me, I wil teach you the feare of the
LORDE.
12 Who so listeth to lyue, & wolde fayne se good dayes.
13 Let him refrayne his tonge from euell, and his lippes that they speake no
gyle.
14 Let him eschue euell, and do good: Let him seke peace & ensue it.
15 For the eyes of the LORDE are ouer the rightuous, and his eares are open vnto
their prayers.
16 But the face of the LORDE beholdeth them that do euel, to destroye the
remembraunce of them out of the earth.
17 When the rightuous crie, the LORDE heareth them, and delyuereth the out of
all their troubles.
18 The LORDE is nye vnto them yt are contrite in hert, & wil helpe soch as be of
an huble sprete.
19 Greate are ye troubles of the rightuous, but the LORDE delyuereth them out of
all.
20 He kepeth all their bones, so yt not one of them is broken.
21 But mi?fortune shal slaye the vngodly, and they that hate ye rightuous shal
be giltie.
22 The LORDE delyuereth the soules of his seruautes, and all they that put their
trust in him, shal not offende.

Psalm 35

1 Stryue thou with them (o LORDE) that stryue wt me, fight thou agaynst them
that fight agaynst me.
2 Laye honde vpon the shylde and speare, and stonde vp to helpe me.
3 Drawe out thy swearde, and stoppe the waye agaynst them that persecute me,
saye vnto my soule: I am yi helpe.
4 Let them be cofounded and put to shame, that seke after my soule: let the be
turned back and brought to confucion, that ymagin myschefe for me.
5 Let the be as ye dust before the wynde, and the angell of the LORDE scaterynge
the.
6 Let their waye be darcke and slippery, and the angell of the LORDE to
persecute them.
7 For they haue pryuely laied their nett to destroye me without a cause, yee and
made a pitte for my soule, which I neuer deserued.
8 Let a sodane destruccio come vpon him vnawarres, and ye nett that he hath
layed priuely, catch him self, that he maye fall in to his owne myschefe.
9 But let my soule be ioyfull in the LORDE, and reioyse in his helpe.
10 All my bones shal saie: LORDE, who is like vnto the? which delyuerest ye
poore from those that are to stronge for him, yee the poore and the nedy from
his robbers.
11 False witnesses are rysen vp, & laye to my charge thinges that I knowe not.
12 They rewarde me euell for good, to the greate discomforth of my soule.
13 Neuertheles, when they were sick, I put on a sack cloth: I humbled my soule
with fastinge, and my prayer turned in to myne owne bosome.
14 I behaued myself as though it had bene my frende or my brother, I wete
heuely, as one yt mourneth for his mother.
15 But in my aduersite they reioyse, and gather them together: yee ye very lame
come together agaynst me vnawarres, makynge mowes at me, & ceasse not.
16 With ye gredy & scornefull ypocrites, they gna?shed vpon me with theirteth.
17 LORDE, whan wilt thou loke vpo this? O restore my soule from ye wicked
rumoure of the, my dearlinge from the lyons.
18 So wil I geue ye thankes in the greate congregacion, & prayse the amonge moch
people.
19 O let the not triuphe ouer me, that are myne enemies for naught: O let them
not wyncke wt their eyes, that hate me without a cause.
20 And why? their comonynge is not for peace, but they ymagin false wordes
agaynst ye outcastes of the londe.
21 They gape vpon me wt their mouthes, sayenge: there there: we se it with oure
eyes.
22 This thou seist, o LORDE: holde not thy tonge the: go not farre fro me, o
LORDE.
23 Awake (LORDE) and stonde vp: auenge thou my cause, my God, and my LORDE.
24 Iudge me (o LORDE my God) acordinge to thy rightuousnesse, yt they triuphe
not ouer me.
25 O let the not saye in their hertes: there there, so wolde we haue it. O let
them not saye: we haue ouercome him.
26 Let them be put to confucion and shame, that reioyse at my trouble: let the
be clothed with rebuke and dishonoure, that boost the selues agaynst me.
27 Let them also be glad and reioyse, that fauoure my rightuous dealinge: yee
let them saye allwaye: blessed be ye LORDE, which hath pleasure in the
prosperite of his seruaunt.
28 And as for my tonge, it shall be talkynge of thy rightuousnes and of thy
prayse, all the daye longe.

Psalm 36

1 My hert sheweth me the wickednesse of the vngodly, that there is no feare of
God before his eyes.
2 For he dyssembleth before his face, so longe till his abhominable synne be
founde out.
3 The wordes of his mouth are vnrightuousnesse and disceate, he wil not be
lerned to do good.
4 He ymagineth myschefe vpon his bedde, he will come in no good waye, ner refuse
the thinge that is euell.
5 Thy mercy (O LORDE) reacheth vnto the heauen, and thy faithfulnesse vnto the
cloudes.
6 Thy rightuousnesse stondeth like the stronge mountaynes, & thy iudgment like
the greate depe.
7 Thou LORDE preseruest both me & beestes. How precious is thy mercy (O God)
that the children of men maye put their trust vnder ye shadowe of thy wynges?
8 They shalbe satisfied with the pleteousnesse of thy house, and thou shalt geue
them drynke of the ryuer of thy pleasures.
9 For by the is ye well of life, & in thy light, shall we se light.
10 O sprede forth thy louynge kyndnesse vnto them that knowe the, & thy
rightuousnes vnto the that are true of hert.
11 O let not the fote of pryde ouertake me, O let not the hande of ye vngodly
cast me downe.
12 As for wicked doers, they fall, they are cast downe, & are not able to stode.

Psalm 37

1 Frett not thy self at the vngodly, be not thou envious agaynst the euell
doers.
2 For they shall soone be cut downe like ye grasse, & be wythered euen as ye
grene herbe.
3 Put thou thy trust in ye LORDE, & be doinge good: so shalt thou dwell in the
londe, & verely it shal fede the.
4 Delyte thou in the LORDE, & he shal geue the thy hertes desyre.
5 Comitte thy waye vnto ye LORDE, set thy hope in him, and he shal brynge it to
passe.
6 Yee he shall make thy rightuousnesse as cleare as the light, & thy iust
dealinge as the noone daye.
7 Holde the still in ye LORDE, and abyde pacietly vpon him: but greue not thy
self at one that hath prosperite, and lyueth in abhominacion.
8 Leaue of from wrath, let go displeasure, let not thy gelousy moue the also to
do euell.
9 For wicked doers shal be roted out, but they that pacietly abyde the LORDE,
shal enheret the londe.
10 Suffre yet a litle whyle, & ye vngodly shalbe clene gone: thou shalt loke
after his place, & he shal be awaye.
11 But the meke spreted shal possesse the earth, & haue pleasure in moch rest.
12 The vngodly layeth wayte for the iust, & gna?sheth vpon him wt his tethe.
13 But ye LORDE laugheth him to scorne, for he seith yt his daye is cominge.
14 The vngodly drawe out the swerde & bende their bowe, to cast downe ye symple
& poore, and to slaye soch as go ye right waye.
15 Neuertheles, their swerde shal go thorow their owne hert, and their bowe
shalbe broke.
16 A small thinge yt the rightuous hath, is better then greate riches of the
vngodly.
17 For the armes of ye vngodly shalbe broken, but the LORDE vpholdeth the
rightuous.
18 The LORDE knoweth the dayes of the godly, & their enheritauce shal endure for
euer.
19 They shal not be cofounded in ye perlous tyme, & in ye dayes of derth they
shall haue ynough.
20 As for ye vngodly, they shall perishe: & whe ye enemies of ye LORDE are in
their floures, they shal cosume, yee euen as the smoke shal they cosume awaye.
21 The vngodly boroweth and paieth not agayne, but the rightuous is mercifull &
liberall.
22 Soch as be blessed of him, shal possesse the londe: & they whom he curseth,
shalbe roted out.
23 The LORDE ordreth a good mans goinge, & hath pleasure in his waye.
24 Though he fall, he shal not be hurte, for the LORDE vpholdeth him wt his
hade.
25 I haue bene yonge, & now am olde: yet sawe I neuer the rightuous forsake, ner
his sede to seke their bred.
26 The rightuous is euer mercifull, & ledeth getly, therfore shal his sede be
blessed.
27 Fle fro euell, & do ye thinge that is good, so shalt thou dwell for euer.
28 For ye LORDE loueth ye thinge yt is right, he forsaketh not his sayntes, but
they shal be preserued for euermore:
29 as for the sede of the vngodly, it shalbe roted out.
30 Yee the rightuous shal possesse ye lode, & dwell therin for euer.
31 The mouth of the rightuous is exercised in wy?dome, & his toge talketh of
iudgment.
32 The lawe of his God is in his hert, therfore shal not his fotesteppes slyde.
33 The vngodly seyth the rightuous, & goeth aboute to slaye him.
34 But the LORDE wil not leaue him in his hodes, ner codemne him when he is
iudged.
35 Hope thou in the LORDE, & kepe his waye: & he shal so promote the, that thou
shalt haue the lode by enheritauce, & se, when the vngodly shall perishe.
36 I myself haue sene the vngodly in greate power, & florishinge like a grene
baye tre:
37 but when I wente by, lo, he was gone: I sought him, but he coude no where be
founde.
38 Kepe innocency, and take hede vnto the thinge that is right, for that shall
brynge a man peace at the last.
39 As for the trasgressours, they shal perishe together, and the vngodly shal be
roted out at ye last. The helpe of the rightuous commeth of the LORDE, he is
their strength in the tyme of trouble.
40 The LORDE shal stode by them, and saue them: he shal delyuer them from the
vngodly, and helpe the, because they put their trust in him.

Psalm 38

1 Pvt me not to rebuke (Oh LORDE) in thine anger: Oh chaste me not in thy heuy
displeasure.
2 For thy arowes stick fast in me, and thy honde presseth me sore.
3 There is no whole parte in my body, because of thy displeasure: there is no
rest in my bones, by reason of my synnes.
4 For my wickednesses are gone ouer my heade, and are like a sore burthen, to
heuy forme to beare.
5 My woundes styncke & are corrupte, thorow my folishnesse.
6 I am brought into so greate trouble and misery, that I go mournynge all the
daye longe.
7 For my loynes are clene dried vp, and there is no whole parte in my body.
8 I am feble and sore smytte, I roare for the very disquietnes of my hert.
9 LORDE, thou knowest all my desyre, & my gronynge is not hyd from the.
10 My hert paunteth, my strength hath fayled me, & the light of myne eyes is
gone fro me.
11 My louers & frendes stonde lokynge vpon my trouble, and my kynsmen are gone a
farre of.
12 They that sought after my life, and to do me euell, spake of lyes and
ymagined disceate all the daye longe.
13 As for me, I was like a deaf ma, and herde not: and as one that were domme,
not openynge his mouth.
14 I am become as a man that heareth not, and that can make no resistaunce wt
his mouth.
15 For in the (O LORDE) is my trust, thou shalt heare me, O LORDE my God.
16 My desyre is, yt myne enemies triumphe not ouer me: for yf my fote slippe,
they reioyse greatly against me.
17 I am redy to suffre trouble, and my heuynesse is euer in my sight.
18 For I cofesse my wickednesse, & my synne greueth me.
19 But myne enemies lyue, and are mightie: and they that hate me without a
cause, are many in nombre.
20 They that rewarde me euell for good, speake euell of me, because I folowe the
thinge that good is.
21 Forsake me not (O LORDE my God) O go not farre fro me.
22 Haist the to helpe me, O LORDE my succoure.

Psalm 39

1 I sayde: I wil kepe my waies, that I offended not in my tonge.
2 And so I shut my mouth, whyle the vngodly layed wayte for me.
3 I helde my tonge, I was domme, I kepte sylence, yee eue from good wordes, but
it was payne and grefe to me.
4 My hert was hote within me, & whyle I was thus musynge, the fyre kyndled: so
that I spake with my tonge.
5 LORDE, let me knowe myne ende, and the nombre of my dayes: that I maye be
certified what I wante.
6 Beholde, thou hast made my dayes a spanne longe, and my life is as it were
nothinge before the. O how vayne are all men lyuynge?
7 Sela. Yee euery man walketh as it were a shadowe, and disquieteth him self in
vayne: he heapeth vp riches, and can not tell to whom he gathereth them.
8 And now LORDE, wherin shall I comforte me? my hope is in the.
9 Delyuer me from all myne offences, and make me not a scorne vnto the foolish.
10 I kepe sylece, and open not my mouth, for thou hast done it. Turne thy plages
awaye fro me, for I am cosumed thorow the feare of thy hade.
11 When thou punyshest man for synne, thou chastenest him: so that his beutie
consumeth awaye, like as it were a mothe. O how vayne are all men?
12 Sela. Heare my prayer o LORDE, and considre my callinge: shewe not thy self
as though thou sawest not my teares. For I am a straunger and pilgrymme with
the, as all my forefathers were.
13 Oh spare me a litle, that I maye refresh myself, before I go hence, and be
nomore sene.

Psalm 40

1 I wayted paciently for the LORDE, which enclyned himself vnto me, and herde my
callinge.
2 He brought me out of the horrible pitte, out of the myre and claye: he set my
fete vpo the rocke, and ordred my goinges.
3 He hath put a new songe in my mouth, euen a thankesgeuynge vnto oure God. Many
men seynge this, shal feare the LORDE, & put their trust in him.
4 Blessed is the man that setteth his hope in the LORDE, and turneth not vnto
the proude, & to soch as go aboute with lies.
5 O LORDE my God, greate are yi wonderous workes which thou hast done: & in thy
thoughtes towarde vs there maye none be lickened vnto the.
6 I wolde declare them, and speake of the: but they are so many, that they can
not be tolde.
7 Sacrifice and offeringe thou woldest not haue but a body hast thou ordeined
me: burntofferynges and sacrifice for synne thou hast not alowed. Then sayde I:
Lo, I come.
8 In the begynnynge of the boke it is written of me, that I shulde fulfill thy
wil O my God, & that am I contet to do: yee thy lawe is within my hert.
9 I wil preach of yi rightuousnesse in the greate congregacion: Lo, I wil not
refrayne my lippes, o LORDE, & that thou knowest.
10 I do not hyde yi rightuousnes in my hert, my talkynge is of thy treuth and
sauynge health: I kepe not thy louynge mercy and faithfulnesse backe from the
greate congregacion.
11 Turne not thou thy mercy fro me o LORDE, but let thy louynge kyndnesse and
treuth allwaye preserue me.
12 For innumerable troubles are come aboute me: my synnes haue taken soch holde
vpon me, that I am not able to loke vp: yee they are mo in nombre then the
hayres of my heade, and my hert hath fayled me.
13 O LORDE, let it be thy pleasure to deliuer me, make haist (o LORDE) to helpe
me. Let them be ashamed and cofounded, that seke after my soule, to destroie it:
let them fall backwarde and be put to confucion, that wysh me euell.
14 Let the soone be brought to shame, that crie ouer me: there there.
15 But let all those that seke the, be ioyfull and glad in the: and let all soch
as delyte in thy sauynge health, saye allwaye: the LORDE be praysed.
16 As for me, I am poore & in mysery, but the LORDE careth for me.
17 Thou art my helper & redemer, make no longe tariege, o my God.

Psalm 41

1 Blessed is he, yt considreth ye poore: ye LORDE shal delyuer him in the tyme
of trouble.
2 The LORDE shal preserue him, and kepe him alyue: he shal make him to prospere
vpon earth, and shal not delyuer him into ye wil of his enemies.
3 The LORDE shal refresh him, when he lyeth sick vpon his bedd, yee thou makest
his bed in all his sicknesse.
4 I sayde: LORDE be mercifull vnto me, heale my soule, for I haue synned agaynst
the.
5 Myne enemies speake euell vpo me: whan shal he dye, and his name perishe?
6 Though he came in to se, yet meaned he falsede in his hert, heapinge myschefe
vpon himself.
7 All they that hate me, runne together agaynst me, and ymagin euell agaynst me.
8 They haue geuen a wicked sentence vpon me: when he lyeth, he shal ryse vp
nomore.
9 Yee euen myne owne familier frende, whom I trusted, which dyd eate my bred,
hath lift vp his hele agaynst me.
10 But be thou mercifull vnto me (o LORDE) rayse thou me vp, and I shal rewarde
them.
11 By this I knowe thou fauourest me, that my enemie shal not triumphe ouer me.
12 Thou hast vpholden me because of my innocency, and set me before thy face for
euer.
13 O blessed be ye LORDE God of Israel, from hece forth and for euermore. Amen,
Amen.

Psalm 42

1 Like as the hert desyreth the water brokes, so longeth my soule after the, o
God. My soule is a thurste for God, yee eue for the lyuynge God: wha shal I
come, & beholde the face of God?
2 My teares are my meate daye and night, whyle it is daylie sayde vnto me: where
is now thy God?
3 Now when I thinke there vpo, I poure out my hert by my self: for I wolde fayne
go hence with the multitude, & passe ouer with them vnto the house of God, in ye
voyce of prayse & thankesgeuynge, amonge soch as kepe holy daye.
4 Why art thou so full of heuynes (o my soule) & why art thou so vnquiete within
me?
5 O put thy trust in God, for I wil yet geue him thankes, for the helpe of his
countenauce.
6 My God, my soule is vexed within me: therfore I remebre the londe of Iordane,
& the litle hill of Hermonim. One depe calleth another wt the voyce of thy
whystles, all thy wawes & water floudes are gone ouer me.
7 The LORDE hath promised his louynge kyndnesse daylie, therfore wil I prayse
him in the night season, and make my prayer vnto ye God of my life.
8 I wil saye vnto God my stony rock: why hast thou forgotten me? why go I thus
heuely, whyle the enemie oppresseth me?
9 Whyle my bones are broken, & whyle myne enemies cast me in the tethe,
10 daylie sayenge vnto me: where is now thy God?
11 Why art thou so heuy (o my soule) & why art thou so disquieted within me? O
put thy trust in God, for I wil yet thanke him for the helpe of his
countenaunce, and because he is my God.

Psalm 43

1 Geue sentence vpon me (o God) & defende my cause agaynst the vnholy people: Oh
delyuer me from the disceatfull & wicked man.
2 For thou (o God) art my stregth: why hast thou shot me from the? Why go I then
so heuely, whyle the enemie oppresseth me?
3 Oh sende out yi light & thy trueth, yt they maye lede me & brynge me vnto thy
holy hill and to thy dwellinge.
4 That I maye go into the aulter of God, euen vnto the God which is my ioye &
pleasure, & vpon the harpe to geue thakes vnto ye, o God, my God.
5 Why art thou so heuy (o my soule) & why art thou so disquieted within me? O
put thy trust in God, for I wil yet geue him thakes for ye helpe of his
countenauce, and because he is my God.

Psalm 44

1 We haue herde with or eares (o God) or fathers haue tolde vs, what thou hast
done in their tyme, of olde.
2 How thou hast dryue out the Heithen wt thy honde, & plated the in: how thou
hast destroyed the nacions & cast the out.
3 For they gat not the londe in possession thorow their owne swerde, nether was
it their owne arme that helped them.
4 But thy right hade, thyne arme & the light of thy countenaunce, because thou
haddest a fauoure vnto them.
5 Thou art ye kinge & my God, thou sendest helpe vnto Iacob.
6 Thorow ye, wil we ouerthrowe oure enemies: & in thy name will we treade them
vnder, that ryse vp agaynst vs.
7 For I will not trust in my bowe, it is not my swerde yt shal helpe me.
8 But it is thou that sauest vs fro oure enemies, and puttest them to confucion
that hate vs.
9 We will allwaye make oure boast of God, and prayse thy name for euer.
10 Sela. But now thou forsakest vs, & puttest vs to confucion, and goest not
forth with oure hoostes.
11 Thou makest vs to turne oure backes vpon oure enemies, so that they which
hate vs, spoile oure goodes.
12 Thou lettest vs be eaten vp like shepe, & scatrest vs amonge the Heithen.
13 Thou sellest thy people for naught, & takest no moneye for them.
14 Thou makest vs to be rebuked of or neghbours, to be laughed to scorne aud had
in derision, of them that are rounde aboute vs.
15 Thou hast made vs a very byworde amonge the Heithen, & that the people shake
their heades at vs.
16 My cofucion is daylie before me, & the shame of my face couereth me.
17 For the voyce of the slaunderer & blasphemer, for the enemie and auenger.
18 All this is come vpon vs, & yet haue we not forgotten the, ner behaued oure
selues vnfaithfully in thy couenaunt.
19 Oure hert is not turned backe, nether oure steppes gone out of thy waye.
20 That thou smytest vs so in the place of the serpet, & couerest vs with ye
shadowe of death.
21 Yf we had forgotten the name of oure God, & holde vp oure hondes to eny
straunge God: Shulde not God fynde it out? for he knoweth the very secretes of
the hert.
22 But for thy sake we are kylled all the daie longe, and are counted as shepe
apoynted to be slayne.
23 Vp LORDE, why slepest thou? Awake, and cast vs not of for euer.
24 Wherfore hydest thou thy face? wilt thou clene forget oure misery and
oppressio?
25 For oure soule is brought lowe euen vnto the dust, and oure bely cleueth vnto
the grounde.
26 Arise o LORDE, helpe vs, and delyuer vs for thy mercie sake.

Psalm 45

1 My hert is dytinge of a good matter, I speake of that, which I haue made of
the kynge:
2 My tonge is ye penne of a ready wryter.
3 Thou art the fayrest amonge the children of me, full of grace are thy lippes,
therfore God blesseth the for euer.
4 Gyrde the with thy swerde vpon thy thee (o thou mightie) with worshipe and
renowne.
5 Good lucke haue thou with thine honoure, ryde on with the treuth, mekenesse &
rightuousnes: & thy right hode shal teach ye woderfull thinges.
6 Thy arowes are sharpe, the people shalbe subdued vnto the, euen in the myddest
amonge the kynges enemies.
7 Thy seate (o God) endureth for euer: the cepter of thy kyngdome is a right
cepter.
8 Thou hast loued rightuousnesse, & hated iniquite: wherfore God (which is thy
God) hath anoynted the with the oyle of gladnes aboue thy felowes.
9 All thy garmentes are like myrre, Aloes & Cassia, when thou comest out of
thine yuerie palaces in thy beutifull glory.
10 Kynges doughters go in thy goodly araye, & vpon thy right honde stondeth the
quene in a vesture of the most fyne golde.
11 Herken (o doughter) considre, & enclyne thine eare: forget thine owne people,
& thy fathers house.
12 So shal the kynge haue pleasure in thy beutie, for he is thy LORDE, & thou
shalt worshipe him.
13 The doughters of Tyre shal be there with giftes, the riche amonge the people
shal make their supplicacion before the.
14 The kynges doughter is all glorious within, hir clothinge is of wrought
golde.
15 She shalbe brought vnto the kynge in rayment of nedle worke, and maydens
after her: soch as be next her shalbe brought vnto the.
16 With ioye and gladnesse shal they be brought, and go in to the kynges palace.
17 In steade of thy fathers thou hast gotten children, whom thou shalt make
prynces in all londes. I wil remembre thy name from one generacio to another:
therfore shal the people geue thankes vnto the, worlde without ende.

Psalm 46

1 In oure troubles and aduersite, we haue founde, that God is oure refuge, oure
strength and helpe.
2 Therfore wil we not feare, though the earth fell, and though the hilles were
caried in to the myddest of the see.
3 Though the waters of the see raged & were neuer so troublous, & though the
mountaynes shoke at the tepest of the same.
4 Sela. For there is a floude, which wt his ryuers reioyseth ye cite of God, the
holy dwellynge of the most hyest.
5 God is in ye myddest of her, therfore shall she not be remoued: for God
helpeth her, & yt right early.
6 The Heithen are madd, the kyngdomes make moch adoo: but whe he sheweth his
voyce, ye earth melteth awaye.
7 The LORDE of hoostes is wt vs, the God of Iacob is oure defence.
8 Sela. O come hither, & beholde ye workes of the LORDE, what destruccios he
hath brought vpo ye earth.
9 He hath made warres to ceasse in all the worlde: he hath broken the bowe, he
hath knapped the speare in sonder, & bret the charettes in the fyre.
10 Be still the & confesse yt I am God: I wil be exalted amonge the Heithe, & I
wil be exalted vpon earth.
11 The LORDE of hoostes is wt vs, the God of Iacob is oure defence. Sela.

Psalm 47

1 O clappe youre hodes together (all ye people) O synge vnto God with the voyce
of thakesgeuynge.
2 For the LORDE the most hyest is to be feared, & he is the greate kynge vpo all
ye earth.
3 He shal subdue the people vnder vs, & the Heithe vnder oure fete.
4 He choseth vs for an heretage, the beutie of Iacob whom he loued.
5 Sela. God is gone vp wt a mery noyse, & the LORDE wt the sownde of the tropet.
6 O synge prayses, synge prayses vnto God: O synge prayses, synge prayses vnto
oure kynge.
7 For God is kynge of all the earth, O synge prayses vnto him with
vnderstondinge.
8 God is kynge ouer the Heithe, God sitteth in his holy seate.
9 The prynces of the people are gathered together vnto the God of Abraham: for
God is farre farre hyer exalted, then the mightie lordes of the earth.

Psalm 48

1 Greate is ye LORDE & hyelie to be praysed, in ye cite of or God, eue vpo his
holy hill.
2 The hill of Sion is like a fayre plate, wherof all the londe reioyseth: vpon
the north syde lyeth the cite of the greate kinge.
3 God is well knowne in hir palaces, yt he is the defence of the same.
4 For lo, kynges are gathered, and gone by together.
5 They marveled, to se soch thinges: they were astonied, & sodely cast downe.
6 Feare came there vpon the, & sorowe as vpo a woman in hir trauayle.
7 Thou shalt breake ye shippes of the see, thorow the east wynde.
8 Like as we haue herde, so se we in the cite of the LORDE of hoostes, in the
cite of or God: God vpholdeth the same for euer.
9 Sela. We wayte for thy louynge kyndnesse (o God) in the myddest of thy temple.
10 O God, acordinge vnto thy name, so is yi prayse vnto the worldes ende: thy
right hode is full of rightuousnes.
11 Oh let the mout Sion reioyse, & ye doughters of Iuda be glad because of thy
iudgmetes.
12 Walke aboute Sion, go rounde aboute her, and tell hir towres.
13 Marke well hir walles, set vp hir houses: that it maye be tolde them yt come
after.
14 For this God is or God for euer & euer, and he shal allwaie be or gyde.

Psalm 49

1 O heare this, all ye people: pondre it well, all ye that dwell vpo the earth.
2 Hye & lowe, riche & poore, one wt another.
3 My mouth shal speake of wy?dome, and my hert shal muse of vnderstondinge.
4 I wil encline myne eare to the parable, & shewe my darcke speach vpon the
harpe.
5 Wherfore shulde I feare the euell dayes, whe the wickednesse of my heles
copaseth me rounde aboute?
6 They that put their trust in their good, & boost them selues in the multitude
of their riches.
7 No man maye deliuer his brother, ner make agrement for him vnto God.
8 For it costeth more to redeme their soules, so that he must let that alone for
euer.
9 Yee though he lyue loge, & se not ye graue.
10 For it shal be sene, yt soch wyse me shal dye & perishe together, as well as
the ignoraunt and foolish, & leaue their goodes for other.
11 Loke what is in their houses, it cotinueth still: their dwellinge places
endure from one generacion to another, & are called after their owne names vpon
the earth,
12 Neuerthelesse ma abydeth not insoch honor, but is copared vnto ye brute
beastes, & becometh like vnto the.
13 This waie of theirs is very foolishnesse, & yet their posterite prayse it wt
their mouth.
14 Sela. They lye in the hell like shepe, death shal gnawe vpon them, & the
rightuous shal haue dominacion of them in the mornynge by tymes: their stregth
shal consume, & hell shalbe their dwellinge.
15 But God shal deliuer my soule from the power of hell, when he receaueth me.
16 Sela. O be not thou afrayed, whan one is made riche, & the glory of his house
increased.
17 For he shal cary nothinge awaye wt him when he dyeth, nether shal his pompe
folowe him.
18 Whyle he lyueth, he is counted an happie man: & so loge as he is in
prosperite, me speake good of him.
19 But whe he foloweth his fathers generacion, he shal neuer se light eny more.
20 When a man is in honoure and hath no vnderstodinge, he is compared vnto the
brute beastes, and becommeth like vnto them.

Psalm 50

1 The LORDE euen the mightie God hath spoke, & called the worlde from the
rysinge vp of the sonne vnto the goinge downe of the same.
2 Out of Sion apeareth the glorious beutie of God.
3 Oure God shal come, and not kepe sylence: there goeth before him a consumynge
fyre, and a mightie tempest rounde aboute him.
4 He shal call the heauens from aboue, and the earth, that he maye iudge his
people.
5 Gather my sayntes together vnto me, those yt set more by the couenaunt then by
eny offeringe.
6 And the heauens shal declare his rightuousnesse, for God is iudge himself.
7 Sela. Heare, o my people: let me speake, let me testifie amonge you, o Israel:
I am God, euen thy God.
8 I reproue the not because of thy sacrifice, yi burntofferinges are allwaye
before me.
9 I wil take no bullockes out of thy house, ner gotes out of thy foldes.
10 For all the beestes of the felde are myne, and thousandes of catell vpon the
hilles.
11 I knowe all the foules vpon the mountaynes, and the wilde beastes of the
felde are in my sight.
12 Yf I be hongrie, I wil not tell the: for ye whole worlde is myne, and all
that therin is.
13 Thynkest thou, that I wil eate the flesh of oxen, or drynke the bloude of
goates?
14 Offre vnto God prayse and thankesgeuynge, and paye thy vowes vnto the most
hyest.
15 And call vpo me in the tyme of trouble, so wil I heare the, that thou shalt
thanke me.
16 But vnto the vngodly sayeth God: Why doest thou preach my lawes, and takest
my couenaunt in thy mouth?
17 Where as thou hatest to be refourmed, and castest my wordes behynde the?
18 Yf thou seist a thefe, thou runnest with him, and art partaker with the
aduouterers.
19 Thou lettest yi mouth speake wickednesse, & thy tonge paynteth disceate.
20 Thou syttest and speakest agaynst thy brother, yee and slaundrest thine owne
mothers sonne.
21 This thou doest, whyle I holde my tonge: and thinkest me to be eue soch one
as thy self: but I wil reproue the, & set my self agaynst the.
22 O considre this, ye that forget God: lest I plucke you awaie, and there be
none to delyuer you.
23 Who so offreth me thakes and prayse, he honoureth me: & this is the waye,
wherby I wil shewe him the sauynge health of God.

Psalm 51

1 Haue mercy vpon me (o God) after thy goodnes, & acordinge vnto thy greate
mercies, do awaye myne offences.
2 Wash me well fro my wickednesse, & clense me fro my synne.
3 For I knowlege my fautes, and my synne is euer before me.
4 Agaynst the only, agaynst the haue I synned, and done euell in thy sight: that
thou mightest be iustified in thy saynges, and shuldest ouercome when thou art
iudged.
5 Beholde, I was borne in wickednesse, and in synne hath my mother conceaued me.
6 But lo, thou hast a pleasure in the treuth, and hast shewed me secrete
wy?dome.
7 O reconcile me with Isope, and I shal be clene: wash thou me, and I shalbe
whyter then snowe.
8 Oh let me heare of ioye and gladnesse, that the bones which thou hast broken,
maye reioyse.
9 Turne thy face fro my synnes, and put out all my my?dedes.
10 Make me a clene hert (o God) and renue a right sprete within me.
11 Cast me not awaie from thy presence, and take not thy holy sprete fro me.
12 O geue me the comforte of thy helpe agayne, and stablish me with thy fre
sprete.
13 Then shal I teach thy wayes vnto the wicked, that synners maye be conuerted
vnto the.
14 Delyuer me from bloudegyltynesse o God, thou that art the God of my health,
that my tonge maye prayse thy rightuousnesse.
15 Open my lippes (O LORDE) that my mouth maye shewe thy prayse.
16 For yf thou haddest pleasure in sacrifice, I wolde geue it the: but thou
delytest not in burntofferynges.
17 The sacrifice of God is a troubled sprete, a broken and a cotrite hert (o
God) shalt thou not despise.
18 O be fauorable and gracious vnto Sion, that the walles of Ierusalem maye be
buylded.
19 For then shalt thou be pleased with the sacrifice of rightuousnesse, with the
burntofferynges and oblacions: then shal they laye bullockes vpon thine aulter.

Psalm 52

1 Why boastest thou thy self (thou Tyraunt) that thou canst do myschefe?
2 Where as the goodnesse of God endureth yet daylie.
3 Thy tonge ymagineth wickednesse, and with lyes it cutteth like a sharpe
rasoure.
4 Thou louest vngraciousnesse more the good, to talke of lyes more then
rightuousnesse.
5 Sela. Thou louest to speake all wordes yt maye do hurte, O thou false toge.
6 Therfore shal God cleane destroyethe, smyte the in peces, plucke the out of
thy dwellinge, and rote the out of the londe of the lyuinge.
7 Sela.The rightuous shal se this, & feare, and laugh him to scorne.
8 Lo, this is the ma, yt toke not God for his stregth, but trusted vnto the
multitude of his riches, & was mightie in his wickednesse.
9 As forme, I am like a grene olyue tre in ye house of God: my trust is in the
tender mercy of God for euer & euer. I wil allwaye geue thankes vnto the, for
that thou hast done: and wil hope in thy name, for thy sayntes like it well.

Psalm 53

1 The foolish bodies saye in their hertes: Tush, there is no God. Corrupte are
they, and become abhominable in their wickednesses: there is not one, that doth
good.
2 God loked downe from heauen vpo the children of men, to se yf there were eny
that wolde vnderstonde, or seke after God.
3 But they are all gone out of ye waye, they are all become vnprofitable: there
is none yt doth good, no not one.
4 How ca they haue vnderstondinge, that are the workers of wickednes, eatinge vp
my people as it were bred, & call not vpon God?
5 They are afrayed, where no feare is: for God breaketh the bones of them that
besege the: thou puttest them to confucion, for God despiseth them.
6 Oh yt the sauynge health were geuen vnto Israel out of Sion: Oh that the LORDE
wolde delyuer his people out of captiuyte. Then shulde Iacob reioyse, & Israel
shulde be right glad.

Psalm 54

1 Helpe me (o God) for thy names sake, and delyuer me in thy stregth.
2 Heare my prayer (o God) considre the wordes of my mouth.
3 For straungers are rysen vp agaynst me, and the mightie (which haue not God
before their eyes) seke after my soule.
4 Sela. But lo, God is my helper: it is he that vpholdeth my soule.
5 He shall rewarde euell vnto myne enemies, and in thy treuth shalt thou
destroye them.
6 A frewil offeringe wil I geue the, and prayse thy name o LORDE, because it is
so comfortable.
7 For thou hast delyuered me out of all my trouble, so that myne eye seyth his
desyre vpo myne enemies.

Psalm 55

1 Heare my prayer (o God) and hyde not thy self fro my peticion. Take hede vnto
me and heare me, how piteously I mourne & coplayne.
2 The enemie crieth so, & the vngodly commeth on so fast: for they are mynded to
do me some myschefe, so maliciously are they set agaynst me.
3 My herte is heuy within me, and the feare of death is fallen vpon me.
4 Fearfullnesse and tremblinge are come vpon me, and an horrible drede hath
ouerwhelmed me.
5 And I sayde: O that I had wynges like a doue, that I might fle somwhere, and
be at rest.
6 Lo, then wolde I get me awaye farre of, and remayne in the wildernesse.
7 Sela. I wolde make haist to escape, from the stormy wynde and tempest.
8 Destroie their tonges (o LORDE) and deuyde them, for I se vnrightuousnes &
strife in ye cite.
9 This goeth daye and night aboute the walles, myschefe and vyce are in the
myddest of it.
10 Wickednesse is therin, disceate and gyle go not out of hir stretes.
11 Yf it were myne enemie that reuyled me, I coude beare it: or yf one that
ought me euell will dyd threaten me, I wolde hyde myself from him.
12 But it is thou my companyon, my gyde and myne owne familier frede.
13 We had swete and secrete communicacion together, and louyngly walked we
together in ye house of God.
14 Let death come hastely vpon them, and let them go downe quick into hell, for
wickednes is amonge them in their dwellinges.
15 As for me, I will call vnto God, and the LORDE shall helpe me.
16 In the eueninge, mornynge and at noone daye wil I mourne and complayne: and
he shal heare my voyce.
17 It is he that delyuereth my soule in peace, from them that laye waite for me:
for they are many agaynst me.
18 Yee euen God that endureth for euer, shal heare me, and brynge them downe.
Sela. For they wil not turne: and why? they feare not God.
19 Yee they laye hondes vpon soch as be at peace with him, and so thei breake
his couenaunt.
20 Their mouthes are softer then butter, & yet haue they batell in their mynde:
their wordes are smoother then oyle, and yet be they very swerdes.
21 O cast thy burthen (or care) vpon the LORDE, he shal norish the, and not
leaue the rightuous in vnquietnesse.
22 But as for them, thou (o God) shalt cast them downe in to the pitte of
destruccion.
23 The bloudthurstie and disceatfull shal not lyue out half their daies.
Neuerthelesse my trust is in the.

Psalm 56

1 Be mercifull vnto me (o God) for men wil treade me downe: they are daylie
fightinge & troublinge me.
2 Myne enemies treade me daylie vnder their fete, for they be many, yt proudly
fight agaynst me.
3 Neuerthelesse, whe I am afrayed, I put my trust in the.
4 I wil comforte my self in Gods worde, yee I wil hope in God, and not feare:
What can flesh then do vnto me?
5 They vexe me daylie in my wordes: all yt they ymagin, is to do me euell.
6 They holde alltogether, & kepe them selues close: they marck my steppes, how
they maye catch my soule.
7 But in vayne, for it shal escape the: and why? thou (o God) in thy displeasure
shalt cast downe soch people.
8 Thou tellest my flittinges, thou puttest my teares in thy botell, and nombrest
them.
9 When so euer I call vpon the, myne enemies are put to flight: wherby I knowe,
that thou art my God.
10 In Gods worde wil I reioyse, in the LORDES worde wil I comforte me.
11 Yee in God do I trust, & am not afraied: what ca man the do vnto me?
12 Vnto the (o God) wil I paye my vowes, vnto ye wil I geue thakes & prayse.
13 For thou hast delyuered my soule fro death, & my fete fro fallinge, yt I maye
walke before God in ye light of ye lyuynge.

Psalm 57

1 Be mercifull vnto me (o God) be mercifull vnto me, for my soule trusteth in
ye: & vnder the shadowe of thy wynges shalbe my refuge, vntill wickednesse be
ouerpast.
2 I call vnto God ye most hyest, eue ye God yt shal helpe me vp agayne.
3 He shal sende fro heauen, & saue me fro the reprofe of him that wolde swalowe
me vp.
4 Sela. This shal God sende, for his mercy and faithfulnesse sake. I lye with my
soule amonge the cruell lyons:
5 euen amonge the children of men, whose tethe are speares and arowes, and their
tonge a sharpe swerde.
6 Set vp thy self (o God) aboue the heaues, and thy glory aboue all the earth.
7 They haue layed a nett for my fete, & pressed downe my soule: they haue dygged
a pyt before me, and are fallen in to it them selues.
8 Sela. My hert is ready (o God) my hert is ready, to synge and geue prayse.
9 Awake (o my glory) awake lute and harpe, I my self wil awake right early.
10 I wil geue thakes vnto the (o LORDE) amonge the people, I wil synge prayses
vnto the amonge the Heithe.
11 For ye greatnes of thy mercy reacheth vnto the heauens, and thy faithfulnesse
vnto the cloudes. Set vp thy self (o God) aboue the heaues, & thy glory aboue
all ye earth.

Psalm 58

1 Yf youre myndes be vpon rightuousnesse in dede, then iudge the thinge that is
right, o ye sonnes of men.
2 But ye ymagin myschefe in youre hertes, and youre hondes deale with
wickednesse.
3 The vngodly are frowarde, eue from their mothers wombe: as soone as they be
borne, they go astraie & speake lyes.
4 They are as furious as the serpent, euen like the deaf Adder that stoppeth hir
eares.
5 That she shulde not heare the voyce of the charmer, charme he neuer so wysely.
6 Breake their teth (o God) in their mouthes, smyte the chaft bones of the lyons
whelpes in sonder, o LORDE.
7 That they maye fall awaye, like water yt runneth a pace: and that when they
shote their arowes, they maye be broke.
8 Let the cosume awaye like a snale, & like the vntymely frute of a woman, and
let them not se the Sonne.
9 Or euer youre thornes be sharpe, the wrath shal take them awaye quycke, like a
stormy wynde.
10 The rightuous shal reioyse when he seyth the vengeaunce, and shal wash his
fete in the bloude of the vngodly.
11 So that men shal saye: verely, there is a rewarde for ye rightuous: doutles,
there is a God that iudgeth the earth.

Psalm 59

1 Delyuer me fro myne enemies (o my God) & defende me fro the yt ryse vp agaynst
me.
2 O delyuer me fro the wicked doers, & saue me fro the bloudthurstie me.
3 For lo, they lye waytinge for my soule: ye mightie me are gathered together
against me, wt out eny offence or faute of me, o LORDE.
4 They rune & prepare the selues, wt out my faute: Arise, come thou helpe me, &
beholde.
5 Stode vp o LORDE God of hoostes, thou God of Israel, to vyset all Heithen: be
not mercifull vnto the yt offende of malicious wickednesse.
6 Sela. Let the go to & fro, & runne aboute the cite youlinge like dogges.
7 Beholde, they speake (agaynst me) wt their mouth, swerdes are vnder their
lippes, for who reproueth the?
8 But thou (o LORDE) shalt haue them in derision, thou shalt laugh all Heithe to
scorne.
9 My stregth do I ascrybe vnto the, for thou (o God) art my defender.
10 God sheweth me his goodnesse plenteously, God letteth me se my desyre vpo
myne enemies.
11 Slaye the not, lest my people forget it: but scatre the abrode with thy power
& put the downe, o LORDE oure defence.
12 For ye synne of their mouth, for the wordes of their lippes, & because of
their pryde, let the be taken: & why? their preachinge is of cursynge & lyes.
13 Cosume them in yi wrath, cosume the yt they maye perish, & knowe yt it is
God, which ruleth in Iacob and in all the worlde.
14 Sela. Let the go to & fro, & rune aboute the cite, youlinge like dogges.
15 Let the runne here & there for meate, and grudge when they haue not ynough.
16 As for me, I wil synge of thy power, ad prayse thy mercy betymes in the
mornynge: for thou art my defence and refuge in the tyme of my trouble.
17 Vnto the (o my strength) wil I synge, for thou (o God) art my defence, and my
merciful God.

Psalm 60

1 O God, thou yt hast cast vs out and scatred vs abrode, thou yt hast bene so
sore displeased at vs, coforte vs agayne.
2 Thou yt hast remoued the lode & deuyded it, heale the sores therof, for it
shaketh.
3 Thou hast shewed thy people heuy thinges, thou hast geuen vs a drynke off
wyne, yt we slobre withall.
4 Yet hast thou geue a toke for soch as feare the, yt they maye cast it vp in ye
treuth.
5 Sela. That thy beloued might be delyuered, helpe them with thy right hande,
and heare me.
6 God hath spoke in his Sactuary (which thinge reioyseth me) I wil deuyde Siche,
& mete out the valley of Suchoth
7 Galaad is myne, Manasses is myne, Ephraim is the strength of my heade, Iuda is
my captayne.
8 Moab is my washpotte, ouer Edom wil I stretch out my shue, Philistea shal be
glad of me.
9 Who will lede me in to the stronge cite? Who will bringe me in to Edom?
10 Shalt not thou do it, o God, thou yt hast cast vs out: thou God, yt wentest
not out wt or hoostes?
11 O be thou oure helpe in trouble, for vayne is the helpe of man.
12 Thorow God we shal do greate actes, for it is he that shal treade downe oure
enemies.

Psalm 61

1 Heare my crienge (o God) geue hede vnto my prayer.
2 From the endes of ye earth wil I call vnto the, whe my herte is in trouble:
3 Oh set me vp vpo an hye rocke. For thou art my hope, a stronge tower for me
agaynst the enemie.
4 I will dwell in thy tabernacle for euer, that I maye be safe vnder the
couerynge of thy wynges.
5 Sela. For thou (o LORDE) hast herde my desyres, thou hast geuen an heretage
vnto those that feare thy name.
6 Thou shalt graunte the kynge a loge life, that his yeares maye endure thorow
out all generacions.
7 That he maye dwell before God for euer: Oh let thy louynge mercy & faithfulnes
preserue him.
8 So wil I allwaye synge prayses vnto thy name, yt I maye daylie perfourme my
vowes.

Psalm 62

1 My soule wayteth only vpon God, for of him commeth my helpe.
2 He only is my stregth, my saluacion, my defence, so yt I shal not greatly
fall.
3 How longe wil ye ymagin myschefe agaynst euery man? ye shal be slayne all ye
sorte of you: yee as a tottringe wall shal ye be, & like a broken hedge.
4 Their deuyce is only how to put him out, their delyte is i lyes: they geue
good wordes wt their mouth but curse wt their herte.
5 Sela. Neuertheles, my soule abydeth only vpon God, for he is my God.
6 He only is my stregth, my saluacion, my defence: so yt I shal not fall.
7 In God is my health, my glory, my might, & in God is my trust.
8 Oput yor trust in him allwaye (ye people) poure out yor hertes before him, for
God is oure hope.
9 Sela. As for men, they are but vayne, me are disceatfull: vpo the weightes
they are al together lighter then vanite itself.
10 O trust not in wronge & robbery, geue not yor selues vnto vanite: yf riches
increase, set not yor herte vpon them.
11 God spake once a worde, twyse haue I herde the same: that power belongeth
vnto God.
12 That thou LORDE art mercifull, & that thou rewardest euery man acordinge to
his workes.

Psalm 63

1 O God, thou art my God: early wil I seke the.
2 My soule thursteth for the, my flesh longeth after the in a bare & drie lode,
where no water is.
3 Thus do I loke for the in thy Sactuary, that I might beholde yi power & glory.
4 For thy louynge kyndnesse is better then life, my lyppes shal prayse the.
5 As loge as I liue wil I magnifie the, & lift vp my hondes in thy name.
6 My soule is satisfied eue as it were with marry & fatnesse, when my mouth
prayseth the with ioyfull lippes.
7 In my bedde wil I remembre ye, & whe I wake, my talkynge shalbe of the.
8 For thou hast bene my helper, & vnder the shadowe of yi wynges wil I reioyse.
9 My soule hangeth vpon the, thy right honde vpholdeth me.
10 They seke after my soule, but in vayne, for they shal go vnder the earth.
11 They shal fall in to the swerde, & be a porcio for foxes. But ye kynge shal
reioyse in God: all they that sweare by hym, shal be commeded, for the mouth of
lyers shalbe stopped.

Psalm 64

1 Heare my voyce (o God) in my coplaynte, preserue my life fro feare of ye
enemie.
2 Hyde me from the gatheringe together of ye frowarde, fro ye heape of wicked
doers.
3 Which whette their tuges like a swerde, & shute wt their venimous wordes like
as wt arowes.
4 That they maye preuely hurte ye innocet, & sodely to hit him wt out eny feare.
5 They haue deuysed myschefe, and commoned amonge them selues, how they maye
laye snares: tush (saye they) who shall se them?
6 They ymagin wickednesse, and kepe it secrete amonge them selues, euery man in
ye depe of his herte.
7 But God shall sodenly shute with an arowe, yt they shall be wounded.
8 Yee their owne tunges shall make them fall, In so moch that who so seyth the,
shal laugh the to scorne.
9 And all men that se it, shal saye: this hath God done for they shal perceaue,
yt it is his worke.
10 The rightuous shal reioyse in the LORDE, and put his trust in him: and all
they yt are true off herte, shalbe glad therof.

Psalm 65

1 Thou (o God) art praysed in Sion, and vnto the is the vowe perfourmed.
2 Thou hearest the prayer, therfore cometh all flesh vnto the.
3 Oure my?dedes preuayle agaynst vs, oh be thou mercyfull vnto oure synnes.
4 Blessed is the man who thou chosest and receauest vnto the, that he maye dwell
in thy courte: he shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thy house, euen off
thy holy temple.
5 Heare vs acordinge vnto thy woderfull rightuousnesse, o God oure saluacio:
thou that art the hope of all the endes of ye earth, and off the brode see.
6 Which in his strength setteth fast the moutaynes, & is gyrded aboute with
power.
7 Which stilleth ye ragige of the see, the roaringe off his wawes, and the
woodnes of the people.
8 They that dwell in ye vttemost partes are afrayed at thy tokens, thou makest
both the mornynge and euenynge starres to prayse ye.
9 Thou visetest the earth, thou watrest it, and makest it very plenteous.
10 The ryuer of God is full of waters, thou preparest man his corne, ad thus
thou prouydest for the earth.
11 Thou watrest hir forowes, thou breakest the harde clottes therof, thou makest
it soft with ye droppes of rayne, and blessest the increase of it.
12 Thou crownest the yeare with thy good, and thy fotesteppes droppe fatnesse.
13 The dwellinges of the wildernes are fatt also, yt they droppe withall, & the
litle hilles are pleasaunt on euery syde. The foldes are full of shepe, the
valleys stonde so thicke with corne yt they laugh and synge.

Psalm 66

1 O be ioyfull in God (all ye lodes) synge prayses vnto the honor of his name
make his prayse to be glorious.
2 Saye vnto God: O how wonderfull are thy workes? thorow the greatnesse of thy
power shal thine enemies be confouded.
3 O yt all the worlde wolde worshipe the, synge of the and prayse thy name.
4 Sela. O come hither and beholde the workes of God, which is so wonderfull in
his doinges amonge the children of men.
5 He turned the see in to drye lode, so that they wente thorow the water on
fote: therfore wil we reioyse in him.
6 He ruleth with his power for euer, his eyes beholde the people: the rennagates
shal not be able to exalte them selues.
7 Sela. O magnifie or God (ye people) make ye voyce off his prayse to be herde.
8 Which holdeth or soule in life, and suffreth not oure fete to slippe.
9 For thou (o God) hast proued vs, thou hast tried vs like as syluer is tried.
10 Thou hast brought vs in to captiuyte, and layed trouble vpon or loynes.
11 Thou hast suffred men to ryde ouer or heades,
12 we wete thorow fyre and water, butt thou hast brought vs out, and refreshed
vs.
13 Therfore will I go into thy house wt bretofferinges, to paye the my vowes,
14 which I promised wt my lippes, and spake with my mouth, when I was in
trouble.
15 I wil offre vnto the fatte brentsacrifices with the smoke of rames, I will
offre bullockes and goates.
16 Sela. O come hither and herke (all ye that feare God) I wil tell you, what he
hath done for my soule.
17 I called vnto hi wt my mouth and gaue him prayses with my tuge.
18 (Yff I enclyne vnto wickednes with my herte, ye LORDE wil not heare me.)
19 Therfore God hath herde me, ad considred the voyce off my prayer.
20 Praysed be God, which hath not cast out my prayer, ner turned his mercy fro
me.

Psalm 67

1 God be mercifull vnto vs, blesse vs, & shewe the light off his countenauce
apon vs.
2 Sela. That we maye knowe yi waye vpo earth, yi sauynge health amonge all
Heithen.
3 Let the people prayse the (o God) yee let all people prayse the.
4 O let the people reioyse and be glad, that thou iudgest the folke rightuously,
and gouernest the nacions vpo earth.
5 Let the people prayse the (o God) let all people prayse the.
6 God (euen oure owne God) geue vs his blessinge, that the earth maye bringe
forth hir increase
7 God blesse vs, and let all the endes of ye worlde feare him.

Psalm 68

1 Let God aryse, so shal his enemies be scatered, and they that hate him, shal
fle before him.
2 Like as the smoke vanisheth, so shalt thou dryue them awaye: and like as waxe
melteth at the fyre, so shall the vngodly perish at the presence off God.
3 But the rightuous shal be glad & reioyse before God, they shalbe mery &
ioyful.
4 Oh synge vnto God, synge prayses vnto his name: magnifie him yt rydeth aboue
the heaues (whose name is ye LORDE) & reioyse before hi.
5 He is a father of ye fatherlesse, he is a defender of widdowes: eue God in his
holy habitacio.
6 He is the God yt maketh me to be of one mynde in a house, & bryngeth ye
presoners out of captiuite in due season, but letteth ye rennagates cotinue in
scarcenesse.
7 O God, when thou wetest forth before yi people, whe thou wetest thorow ye
wildernes.
8 Sela. The earth shoke, & ye heauens dropped at the presence of God in Sinai,
at ye presence of God which is ye God of Israel.
9 Thou o God sendest a gracious rayne vpon thyne enheritauce, & refreshest it,
when it is drye.
10 That thy beastes maye dwell therin, which thou of thy goodnes hast prepared
for the poore.
11 The LORDE shal geue the worde, wt greate hoostes of Euagelistes.
12 Kinges wt their armies shal fle, & they of ye housholde shal deuyde ye
spoyle.
13 Yf so be yt ye lye amoge the pales, the doues fethers shalbe couered with
syluer, & hir winges of the color of golde.
14 When the Allmightie setteth kynges vpo the earth, it shalbe cleare euen in
the darcknesse.
15 The hill of Basan is Gods hill, the hill of Basan is a pleteous hill.
16 Why hoppe ye so, ye greate hilles? It pleaseth God to dwell vpo this hill,
yee the LORDE wil abyde in it for euer.
17 The charettes of God are many M. tymes a thousande, the LORDE is amoge them
in the holy Sinai.
18 Thou art gone vp an hye, thou hast led captyuite captyue, & receaued giftes
for me: Yee euen for thy enemies, that they might dwell with the LORDE God.
19 Praysed be the LORDE daylie, eue ye God which helpeth vs, & poureth his
benefites vpo vs.
20 Sela. The God yt is or Sauior, eue God the LORDE by who we escape death.
21 The God that smyteth his enemies vpo the heades & vpon the hayrie scalpes:
soch as go on still in their wikednes.
22 The LORDE hath sayde: some wil I bringe agayne from Basan, some wil I bringe
agayne fro the depe of the see.
23 That thy fote maye be dipped in the bloude of thine enemies, & that thy
dogges maye licke it vp.
24 It is well sene (o God how thou goest, how thou my God and kynge goest in the
Sanctuary.
25 The syngers go before, and then the mynstrells amonge the maydens with the
tymbrels.
26 O geue thankes vnto God the LORDE in the congregacion, for the welles of
Israel.
27 There litle Beniamin, the prynces of Iuda, the prynces of Zabulo, and the
prynces of Nephthali beare rule amoge them.
28 Thy God hath comitted stregth vnto the, stablish the thinge (o God) that thou
hast wrought in vs.
29 For thy teples sake at Ierusalem shal kynges brynge presentes vnto the.
30 Reproue the beestes amonge the redes, the heape of bulles with the calues:
those that dryue for money. Oh scatre the people that delyte in batayle.
31 The prynces shal come out of Egipte, the Morians lode shal stretch out hir
hondes vnto God.
32 Synge vnto God, o ye kyngdomes of the earth: o synge prayses vnto the LORDE.
33 Sela. Which sytteth in the heauens ouer all fro the begynnge: Lo, he shal
sende out his voyce, yee and that a mightie voyce.
34 Ascrybe ye the power vnto God, his glory is in Israel, and his might in the
cloudes.
35 God is wonderfull in his Sanctuary, he is the God of Israel, he will geue
strength and power vnto his people. Blessed be God.

Psalm 69

1 Helpe me (o God) for the waters are come in eue vnto my soule.
2 I sticke fast in the depe myre, where no grounde is: I am come into depe
waters, and the floudes wil drowne me.
3 I am weery of crienge, my throte is drye, my sight fayleth me, for waytinge so
longe vpon my God.
4 They yt hate me without a cause, are mo then the hayres of my heade: they that
are myne enemies & wolde destroye me giltlesse, are mightie:
5 I am fayne to paye the thinges yt I neuer toke. God, thou knowest my
symplenesse, and my fautes are not hyd from the.
6 Let not them that trust in the (o LORDE God of hoostes) be ashamed for my
cause: let not those yt seke the, be confounded thorow me, o God of Israel.
7 And why? for thy sake do I suffre reprofe, shame couereth my face.
8 I am become a straunger vnto my brethren, and an aleaunt vnto my mothers
children.
9 For the zele of thine house hath euen eaten me, and the rebukes of them that
rebuked the, is fallen vpon me.
10 I wepte and chastened my self wt fastinge, and that was turned to my reprofe.
11 I put on a sackecloth, and therfore they iested vpon me.
12 They that satt in the gate, spake agaynst me, and the dronckardes made songes
vpon me.
13 But LORDE, I made my prayer vnto the in an acceptable tyme:
14 Heare me (o God) with thy greate mercy & sure helpe.
15 Take me out of the myre, yt I syncke not: Oh let me be delyuered fro the yt
hate me, & out of ye depe waters.
16 Lest ye water floude drowne me, that the depe swalowe me not vp, & yt the
pitte shut not hir mouth vpon me.
17 Heare me (o LORDE) for thy louynge kyndnesse is confortable: turne the vnto
me acordinge vnto yi greate mercy.
18 Hyde not thy face from thy seruaut, for I am in trouble: O haist ye to helpe
me.
19 Drawe nye vnto my soule, and saue it: Oh delyuer me because of myne enemies.
20 Thou knowest my reprofe, my shame & my dishonor: my aduersaries are all in
thy sight.
21 The rebuke breaketh my hert, & maketh me heuy: I loke for some to haue pitie
vpon me, but there is no man: & for some to coforte me, but I fynde none.
22 They gaue me gall to eate, & whe I was thurstie, they gaue me vyneger to
drynke.
23 Let their table be made a snare to take them selues withall, an occasion to
fall & a rewarde vnto them.
24 Let their eyes be blynded, that they se not: & euer bowe downe their backes.
25 Poure out thy indignacion vpon them, & let thy wrothfull displeasure take
holde of them.
26 Let their habitacion be voyde, & no man to dwell in their tentes.
27 For they persecute him whom thou hast smytten, & besyde thy woundes they haue
geuen him moo.
28 Let them fall fro one wickednesse to another, & not come into thy
rightuousnesse.
29 Let the be wyped out of ye boke of the lyuinge, & not be written amonge the
rightuous.
30 As for me, I am poore & in heuynesse, let thy helpe defende me, o God.
31 That I maye prayse ye name of God with a songe, & magnifie it with
thankesgeuynge.
32 This shal please the LORDE better then a bullocke, that hath hornes & hoffes.
33 O considre this & be glad (ye that be in aduersite) seke after God, & yor
soule shal lyue.
34 For the LORDE heareth the poore, & despyset not his presoners.
35 Let heauen & earth praise him, the see & all that moueth therin.
36 For God wil saue Sion, & buylde the cities of Iuda, that men maye dwell
there, & haue the in possession. The sede of his seruauntes shal iheret it, &
they that loue his name, shal dwell therin.

Psalm 70

1 Haist the (o God) to delyuer me, & to helpe me, o LORDE.
2 Let the be shamed & confounded that seke after my soule: let them be turned
backwarde & put to confucio, that wysh me euell.
3 Let them soone be brought to shame, yt crie ouer me: there there.
4 But let all those that seke the, be ioyfull & glad in the: and let all soch as
delyte in thy sauynge health, saye alwaye: ye LORDE be praysed.
5 As for me, I am poore & in misery, haist the God for to helpe me. Thou art my
helpe, my redemer & my God: oh make no longe tarienge.

Psalm 71

1 In the, o LORDE, is my trust, let me neuer be put to cofucio, but rydde me &
delyuer me thorow thy rightuousnesse: encline thine eare vnto me, & helpe me.
2 Be thou my stronge holde (where vnto I maye allwaye fle) thou that hast
promised to helpe me: for thou art my house of defence & my castell.
3 Delyuer me (o my God) out of ye hade of the vngodly, out of the hande of the
vnrightuous & cruell man.
4 For thou (o LORDE God) art the thinge that I loge for, thou art my hope euen
fro my youth.
5 I haue leaned vpo ye euer sens I was borne, thou art he that toke me out of my
mothers wombe, therfore is my prayse allwaye of the.
6 I am become a wonder vnto the multitude, but my sure trust is in the.
7 Oh let my mouth be fylled with thy prayse & honoure all the daye loge.
8 Cast me not awaye in myne olde age, forsake me not when my strength fayleth
me.
9 For myne enemies speake agaynst me, & they that laye wayte for my soule, take
their councell together, sayenge: God hath forsake him, persecute him, take him,
for there is none to helpe him.
10 Go not farre fro me, o God: my God, haist the to helpe me.
11 Let them be cofounded & perish, that are agaynst my soule: let the be couered
with shame & dishonoure, that seke to do me euell.
12 As for me, I wil pacietly abyde allwaye, & wil euer encrease thy prayse.
13 My mouth shal speake of thy rightuousnesse & sauynge health all the daye
loge, for I knowe no ende therof.
14 Let me go in (o LORDE God) & I wil make mencion of thy power and
rightuousnesse only.
15 Thou (o God) hast lerned me fro my youth vp vntill now, therfore wil I tell
of yi wonderous workes.
16 Forsake me not (o God) in myne olde age, when I am gray headed: vntill I haue
shewed thyne arme vnto childers children, & thy power to all them that are yet
for to come.
17 Thy rightuousnes (o God) is very hie, thou that doest greate thinges: o God,
who is like vnto the?
18 O what greate troubles & aduersite hast thou shewed me? & yet didest thou
turne & refresh me, yee & broughtest me from the depe of the earth agayne.
19 Thou hast brought me to greate honoure, & comforted me on euery syde.
20 Therfore wil I prayse the & thy faithfulnesse (o God) playege vpon the lute,
vnto the wil I synge vpon the harpe. o thou holy one of Israel.
21 My lippes wolde fayne synge prayses vnto the:
22 & so wolde my soule, whom thou hast delyuered.
23 My tonge talketh of thy rightuousnesse all the daye longe,
24 for they are confounded & brought vnto shame, yt sought to do me euel.

Psalm 72

1 Geue the kinge thy iudgmet (o God) and thy rightuousnesse vnto the kynges
sonne.
2 That he maye gouerne thy people acordinge vnto right, and defende thy poore.
3 That the mountaynes maye brynge peace, and the litle hilles rightuousnes vnto
the people.
4 He shal kepe the symple folke by their right, defende the childre of the
poore, and punysh the wrongeous doer.
5 Thou shalt be feared as longe as ye Sonne and the Moone endureth, from one
generacion to another.
6 He shal come downe like the rayne in to a flese of woll, and like the droppes
that water ye earth.
7 In his tyme shal rightuousnesse florish, yee and abundauce of peace, so longe
as the Moone endureth.
8 His dominion shalbe from the one see to the other, and from the floude vnto
the worldes ende.
9 They that dwell in the wildernes, shal knele before him, & his enemies shal
licke the dust.
10 The kynges of the see and of the Iles shal brynge presentes, ye kinges of
Araby & Saba shall offre giftes.
11 All kynges shal worshipe him, & all Heithe shal do him seruyce.
12 For he shal deliuer the poore whe he crieth, & the nedy yt hath no helpe.
13 He shall be fauorable to the symple & poore, he shal preserue the soules of
soch as be in aduersite.
14 He shal deliuer their soules from extorcion & wronge, & deare shal their
bloude be in his sight.
15 He shal lyue, & vnto him shalbe geue of ye golde of Arabia: Prayer shal be
made euer vnto him, & daylie shal he be praysed.
16 There shalbe an heape of corne in the earth hye vpon the hilles, his frute
shal shake like Libanus,
17 & shal be grene in the cite, like grasse vpo the earth.
18 His name shal endure for euer, his name shal remayne vnder the sonne amonge
the posterites, which shalbe blessed thorow him, & all the Heithen shal prayse
him.
19 Blessed be the LORDE God, euen the God of Israel, which only doth woderous
thinges.
20 And blessed be the name of his maiesty for euer, and all londes be fulfilled
with his glory. Amen, Amen.

Psalm 73

1 O how louynge is God vnto Israel, to soch as are of a clene hert?
2 Neuerthelesse my fete were allmost gone, my treadinges had wel nye slipte.
3 And why. I was greued at ye wicked, to se the vngodly in soch prosperite.
4 For they are in no parell of death, but stonde fast like a palace.
5 They come in no misfortune like other folke, nether are they plaged like other
men.
6 And this is the cause that they be so puft vp in pryde, & ouerwhelmed with
cruelte and vnrigthuousnesse.
7 Their eyes swell for fatnesse, they do euen what they lyst.
8 Corrupte are they, and speake blasphemies maliciously, proude and presumptuous
are their wordes.
9 They stretch forth their mouth vnto the heauen, & their tonge goeth thorow the
worlde.
10 Therfore fall the people vnto them, and there out sucke they no small
auauntage.
11 Tush (saye they) how shulde God perceaue it? is there knowlege in the most
hyest?
12 Lo, these are the vngodly, these prospere in the worlde, these haue riches in
possession.
13 Shulde I then clense my hert in vayne (thought I) & wash my hondes in
innocency?
14 Wherfore shulde I be then punyshed daylie, & be chastened euery mornynge?
15 Yee I had allmost also sayde euen as they: but lo, then shulde I haue
condemned the generacion of thy children.
16 Then thought I to vnderstonde this, but it was to harde for me.
17 Vntill I wete in to ye Sanctuary of God, & considered the ende of these men.
18 Namely, how thou hast set the in a slippery place, that thou maiest cast the
downe headlynges & destroye the.
19 O how sodenly do they consume, perish, & come to a fearfull ende?
20 Yee euen like as a dreame when one awaketh, so makest thou their ymage to
vanish out of the cite.
21 Thus my hert was greued, & it wente euen thorow my reynes.
22 So foolish was I and ignoraunt, and as it were a beest before the.
23 Neuerthelesse, I am allwaye by the, thou holdest me by my right hande.
24 Thou ledest me with thy coucel, and afterwarde receauest me vnto glory.
25 O what is there prepared for me in heauen? there is nothinge vpo earth, that
I desyre in comparison of the.
26 My flesh and my herte fayleth, but God is the strength of my hert, and my
porcion for euer.
27 For lo, they that forsake the, shal perishe, thou destroyest all them that
committe fornicacion agaynst the.
28 But it is good for me, to holde me fast by God, to put my trust in the LORDE
God, and to speake of all thy workes.

Psalm 74

1 O God, wherfore doest thou cast vs so cleane awaye? why is yi wrath so hote
agaynst ye shepe of yi pasture?
2 O thynke vpon thy congregacion, whom thou hast purchased fro the begynnynge:
3 the staff of thine inheritaunce, whom thou hast redemed, euen this hill of
Sion wherin thou dwellest.
4 Treade vpon them with thy fete, & cast them downe to the grounde, for the
enemie hath destroyed alltogether in the Sactuary.
5 Thy aduersaries roare in thy houses, & set vp their banners for tokens.
6 Men maye se the axes glister aboue, like as those that hewe in the wod.
7 They cutt downe all the sylinge worke of ye Sactuary wt bylles & axes.
8 They haue set fyre vpon yi Sactuary they haue defiled ye dwellynge place of yi
name, eue vnto the groude.
9 Yee they saye in their hertes: Let vs spoyle the all together, thus haue they
brent vp all the houses of God in the londe.
10 We se oure tokens nomore, there is not one prophet more, no not one that
vnderstondeth enymore.
11 Oh God, how loge shal the aduersary do this dishonoure, how loge shal the
enemie blaspheme thy name? foreuer?
12 Why withdrawest thou thine honde? why pluckest thou not thy right hode out of
thy bosome, to consume thine enemies?
13 But God is my kynge of olde, the helpe that is done vpon earth he doth it
himself.
14 Thou denydest ye see thorow thy power, thou breakest the heades of the dragos
in the waters.
15 Thou smytest the heades of Leuiathan in peces, & geuest him to be meate for
the people in the wildernesse.
16 Thou dyggest vp welles & brokes, thou dryest vp mightie waters.
17 The daye is thyne, & the night is thine: thou hast prepared the lightes & the
Sonne.
18 Thou hast set all ye borders of the earth thou hast made both Sommer &
wynter.
19 Remembre this (o LORDE) how the enemie rebuketh, & how the foolish people
blaspheme thy name.
20 O delyuer not the soule of thy turtle doue vnto the beestes, & forget not the
congregacon of the poore for euer.
21 Loke vpon the couenaunt, for the darcke houses of the earth are full of
wickednesse.
22 O let not the symple go awaye ashamed, for the poore & nedy geue prayses vnto
thy name.
23 Aryse (o God) & manteyne thine owne cause, remembre how the foolish ma
blasphemeth the daylie. Forget not the voyce of thine enemies, for the
presumpcion of them that hate the, increaseth euer more & more.

Psalm 75

1 Unto the (o God) will we geue thakes, yee vnto the wyll we geue thankes,
2 & seynge thy name is so nye, we will tell of thy wonderous workes.
3 When I maye get a conuenient tyme, I shal iudge acordinge vnto right.
4 The earth is weake & all that is therin, but I beare vp hir pilers.
5 Sela. I sayde vnto the madde people: deale not so madly, & to the vngodly: set
not vp youre hornes.
6 Set not vp youre hornes an hye, & speake not with a stiff necke.
7 For promocio commeth nether from the east ner from the west, ner yet fro the
wyldernesse.
8 And why? God is the iudge: he putteth downe one & setteth vp another.
9 For in the honde of the LORDE there is a cuppe full of stronge wyne, & he
poureth out of the same: As for the dregges therof, all ye vngodly of the earth
shal drynke them, & sucke them out.
10 But I wil talke of the God of Iacob, & prayse him for euer. All the hornes of
the vngodly will I breake, & ye hornes of the rightuous shalbe exalted.

Psalm 76

1 In Iuda is God knowne, his name is greate in Israel.
2 At Salem is his tabernacle, & his dwellinge in Sion.
3 There breaketh he the arowes of the bowe, ye shylde, the swerde & the whole
battayll.
4 Sela. Thou art of more honoure & might the the hilles of robbers.
5 The proude shalbe robbed & slepe their slepe, & ye mightie shalbe able to do
nothinge with their hodes.
6 Whe thou rebukest them (o God of Iacob) both the charettes & horsmen shal fall
on slepe.
7 Thou art feareful, for who maye abyde in yi sight, when thou art angrie?
8 When thou lattest thy iudgment be herde from heauen, the erth trembleth & is
still.
9 Yee when God aryseth to geue iudgment, & to helpe all them that be in
aduersite vpon earth.
10 Sela. When thou punyshest one man, he must knowlege, that thou art redy to
punysh other mo.
11 Loke what ye promyse vnto the LORDE youre God, se that kepe it, all ye that
be roude aboute him: brynge presentes vnto him yt ought to be feared.
12 Which taketh awaye the breth of prynces, & is wonderfull amoge the kynges of
the earth.

Psalm 77

1 I cried vnto God with my voyce, yee euen vnto God cried I with my voyce, & he
herde me.
2 In the tyme of my trouble I sought the LORDE, I helde vp my hondes vnto him in
the night season, for my soule refused all other comforte.
3 When I was in heuynesse, I thought vpo God: whe my hert was vexed, then dyd I
speake.
4 Sela. Thou heldest myne eyes wakynge, I was so feble, that I coude not speake,
5 Then remembred I the tymes of olde, & the yeares that were past.
6 I called to remembraunce my songe in the night, I commoned with myne owne
herte, and sought out my sprete.
7 Wil the LORDE cast out for euer? Wil he be nomore intreated?
8 Is his mercy cleane gone? Is his promyse come vtterly to an ende for euermore?
9 Hath the LORDE forgotten to be gracious? Or, hath he shut vp his louynge
kyndnesse in displeasure?
10 Sela. At the last I came to this poynte, that I thought: O why art thou so
foolish? the right honde of the most hyest can chaunge all.
11 Therfore wil I remembre the workes of the LORDE, and call to mynde thy
wonders of olde tyme.
12 I wil speake of all thy workes, and my talkynge shalbe of thy doinges.
13 Thy waye (o God) is holy, who is so greate & mightie as God?
14 Thou art the God, that doth wonders, thou hast declared thy power amonge the
people.
15 Thou with thine arme hast delyuered thy people, euen the sonnes of Iacob and
Ioseph.
16 Sela. The waters sawe ye (o God) ye waters sawe ye, & were afrayed: ye
depthes were moued.
17 The thicke cloudes poured out water, ye cloudes thodered, and thy arowes
wente abrode.
18 Thy thonder was herde rounde aboute, the lighteninges shone vpon the grounde,
the earth was moued and shoke withall.
19 Thy waye was in the see, and thy pathes in the greate waters, yet coude no
man knowe thy fotesteppes.
20 Thou leddest thy people like a flocke of shepe, by the honde of Moses and
Aaron.

Psalm 78

1 Heare my lawe (o my people) encline yor eares vnto ye wordes of my mouth.
2 I wil open my mouth in parables, and speake of thinges of olde.
3 Which we haue herde and knowne, and soch as oure fathers haue tolde vs.
4 That we shulde not hyde them from the children of the generacions to come: but
to shewe the honoure of the LORDE, his might and wonderfull workes that he hath
done.
5 He made a couenaunt with Iacob, and gaue Israel a lawe, which he comaunded
oure forefathers to teach their children.
6 That their posterite might knowe it, and the children which were yet vnborne.
7 To the intent yt when they came vp, they might shewe their children the same.
8 That they also might put their trust in God, & not to forget what he had done,
but to kepe his comaundementes.
9 And not to be as their forefathers, a frowarde and ouerthwarte generacion, a
generacion that set not their herte a right, and whose sprete was not true
towarde God.
10 Like as the children of Ephraim, which beynge harnessed and carienge bowes,
turned them selues backe in the tyme of battayll.
11 They kepte not the couenaut of God, & wolde not walke in his lawe.
12 They forgat what he had done, and the wonderfull workes that he had shewed
for them.
13 Maruelous thinges dyd he in the sight of their fathers in the londe of
Egipte, euen in the felde of Zoan.
14 He deuyded the see and let them go thorow it, and made the waters to stonde
like a wall.
15 In the daye tyme he led them with a cloude, and all the night thorow with a
light of fyre.
16 He cloaue the hard rockes in the wildernesse, and gaue them drynke therof, as
it had bene out of the greate deapth.
17 He brought waters out of the stony rocke, so that they gusshed out like the
ryuers.
18 Yet for all this they synned agaynst him, and prouoked the most hyest in the
wildernesse.
19 They tempted God in their hertes, and requyred meate for their lust,
20 For they spake agaynst God and sayde: Yee yee, God shal prepare a table in
the wyldernesse, shall he?
21 Lo, he smote the stony rocke, that the watery streames gusshed out, and the
streames flowed withall: but how can he geue bred and prouyde flesh for his
people?
22 When the LORDE herde this, he was wroth: so the fyre was kyndled in Iacob,
and heuy displeasure agaynst Israel.
23 Because they beleued not in God, and put not their trust in his helpe.
24 So he commauded the cloudes aboue, and opened the dores of heauen.
25 He rayned downe Manna vpo them for to eate, and gaue them bred from heauen.
26 Then ate they angels fode, for he sent them meate ynough.
27 He caused the east wynde to blowe vnder the heauen, and thorow his power he
brought in the south wynde.
28 He made flesh to rayne vpon them as thicke as dust, and fethered foules like
the sonde of ye see.
29 He let it fall amoge their tetes roude aboute their habitacios.
30 So they ate & were fylled, for he gaue them their owne desyre. They were not
dispoynted of their lust.
31 But whyle ye meate was yet in theyr mouthes: The heuy wrath of God came vpo
the, slewe ye welthiest of the, & smote downe ye chosen men of Israel.
32 But for all this they synned yet more, and beleued not his woderous workes.
33 Therfore their dayes were consumed in vanite, and sodenly their yeares were
gone.
34 When he slewe them, they sought him, and turned them early vnto God.
35 They thought then that God was their socoure, and that the hye God was their
redemer.
36 Neuerthelesse, they dyd but flater him in their mouthes, and dissembled with
him in their tonges.
37 For their herte was not whole with him, nether continued they in his
couenaunt.
38 But he was so mercifull, that he forgaue their mysdedes, and destroyed them
not:
39 Yee many a tyme turned he his wrath awaye, and wolde not suffre his whole
displeasure to aryse.
40 For he considered yt they were but flesh: euen a wynde that passeth awaye,
and commeth not agayne.
41 O how oft haue they greued him in the wildernesse? How many a tyme haue they
prouoked him in the deserte?
42 They turned backe & tempted God, and moued the holy one in Israel.
43 They thought not of his hade, in ye daye when he delyuered them from the
hande of ye enemie.
44 How he had wrought his miracles in Egipte, and his woders in the londe of
Zoan.
45 How he turned their waters in to bloude, so that they might not drynke of the
ryuers.
46 How he sent lyse amonge them, to eate them vp, and frogges to destroye them.
47 How he gaue their frutes vnto the catirpiller, and their laboure vnto the
greshopper.
48 How he bett downe their vynyardes with hayle stones, and their Molbery trees
with the frost.
49 How he smote their catell with haylestones, and their flockes with hote
thoder boltes.
50 How he sent vpon them ye furiousnesse of his wrath, anger & displeasure: with
trouble and fallinge in of euel angels.
51 When he made a waye to his fearfull indignacio, and spared not their soules
from death, yee and gaue their catell ouer to the pestilence.
52 When he smote all the firstborne in Egipte, the most principall and mightiest
in ye dwellinges of Ham.
53 But as for his owne people, he led them forth like shepe, and caried them in
the wyldernesse like a flocke.
54 He brought them out safely, that they shulde not feare, and ouerwhelmed their
enemies with the see.
55 He caried them vnto the borders of his Sanctuary: euen in to this hill, which
he purchased with his right hande.
56 He dyd cast out the Heithen before them, caused their londe to be deuyded
amonge them for an heretage, and made ye tribes of Israel to dwell in their
tetes.
57 For all this they tempted and displeased the most hye God, and kepte not his
couenaunt.
58 But turned their backes and fell awaye like their forefathers, startinge
asyde like a broken bowe.
59 And so they greued him with their hie places, & prouoked him with their
ymages.
60 When God herde this, he was wroth, and toke sore displeasure at Israel.
61 So that he forsoke the tabernacle in Silo, euen his habitacion wherin he
dwelt amonge men.
62 He delyuered their power in to captiuyte, and their glory in to the enemies
hode.
63 He gaue his people ouer in to the swerde, for he was wroth with his heretage.
64 The fyre consumed their yonge men, and their maydes were not geuen to
mariage.
65 Their prestes were slayne with the swerde, and there were no wyddowes to make
lamentacion.
66 So the LORDE awaked as one out of slepe, and like a giaunte refreshed with
wyne.
67 He smote his enemies in ye hynder partes, and put them to a perpetuall shame.
68 He refused the tabernacle of Ioseph, and chose not the trybe of Ephraim.
69 Neuerthelesse, he chose ye trybe of Iuda, eue the hill of Sion which he
loued.
70 And there he buylded his temple on hye, and layed ye foundacion of it like ye
grounde, that it might perpetually endure.
71 He chose Dauid also his seruaut, and toke him awaye from the shepe foldes.
72 As he was folowinge the yowes greate with yonge, he toke him, that he might
fede Iacob his people, and Israel his enheritaunce. So he fed them with a
faithfull and true hert, and ruled them with all ye diligence of his power.

Psalm 79

1 O God, ye Heithen are fallen in to thine heretage: thy holy temple haue they
defyled, and made Ierusalem an heape of stones.
2 The deed bodies of thy seruauntes haue they geuen vnto ye foules of the ayre
to be deuoured, and the flesh of thy sayntes vnto ye beestes of the londe.
3 Their bloude haue they shed like water on euery syde of Ierusalem, and there
was no ma to burie them.
4 We are become an open shame vnto oure enemies, a very scorne and derision vnto
them that are rounde aboute vs.
5 LORDE, how longe wilt thou be angrie? shal thy gelousy burne like fyre for
euer?
6 Poure out thy indignacion vpon the Heithen that knowe the not, and vpon the
kyngdomes that call not vpon thy name.
7 For they haue deuoured Iacob, and layed waiste his dwellinge place.
8 O remebre not oure olde synnes, but haue mercy vpon vs (& that soone) for we
are come to greate mysery.
9 Helpe vs (O God or Sauyor) for ye glory of yi name: o delyuer vs, & forgeue vs
or synnes for yi names sake.
10 Wherfore shall ye Heithe saye: where is now their God?
11 O let the vengeaunce of thy seruauntes bloude that is shed, be openly shewed
vpon the Heithe in oure sight.
12 O let the soroufull sighinge of the presoners come before the, and acordinge
vnto ye power of thine arme, preserue those yt are appoynted to dye.
13 And for the blasphemy wher wt or neghbours haue blasphemed ye, rewarde the (o
LORDE) seuefolde in to their bosome. So we yt be yi people & shepe of thy
pasture, shal geue the thankes for euer, & wil allwaye be shewinge forth thy
prayse more & more.

Psalm 80

1 Heare o thou shepherde of Israel, thou yt ledest Iacob like a flocke of shepe:
shewe yi self, thou yt syttest vpo ye Cherubins.
2 Before Ephraim, Be Iamin & Manasses: stere vp thy power & come helpe vs.
3 Turne vs agayne (o God) shewe the light of thy countenauce & we shalbe whole.
4 O LORDE God of hoostes, how loge wilt thou be angrie ouer the prayer of thy
people?
5 Thou hast fed the with the bred of teares, yee thou hast geuen the pleteousnes
of teares to drynke.
6 Thou hast made vs a very strife vnto or neghbours, & or enemies laugh vs to
scorne.
7 Turne vs agayne (thou God of hoostes) shewe the light of thy coutenauce, & we
shalbe whole.
8 Thou hast brought a vynyarde out of Egipte, thou didest cast out ye Heithe, &
plate it.
9 Thou maydest rowme for it, & caused it to take rote, so yt it fylled the lode.
10 The hilles were couered with the shadowe of it, & so were the stronge
Cedretrees wt the bowes therof.
11 She stretched out hir brauches vnto the see, & hir bowes vnto the water:
12 Why hast thou then broken downe hir hedge, that all they which go by, plucke
of hir grapes?
13 The wilde bore out of the wod hath wrutt it vp, & the beestes of the felde
haue deuoured it.
14 Turne ye agayne (thou God of hoostes) loke downe from heauen, beholde & viset
this vynyarde.
15 Manteyne it, that thy right hode hath plated, & the sonne whom thou maydest
so moch of for thy self.
16 For why? it is bret with fyre, & lyeth waist: o let the perishe at the rebuke
of thy wrath.
17 Let thy honde be vpon the man of thy right honde, & vpon the man who thou
maydest so moch off for thine owne self.
18 And so wil not we go backe from the: oh let vs lyue, & we shal call vpon thy
name.
19 Turne vs agayne o LORDE God of hoostes, shewe the light of thy coutenauce, &
we shal be whole.

Psalm 81

1 Synge merely vnto God which is or stregth make a chearful noyse vnto ye God of
Iacob.
2 Take ye psalme, brynge hither the tabret, the mery harpe & lute.
3 Blowe vp the tropettes in the new Moone, vpon or solepne feast daye.
4 For this is the vse in Israel, & a lawe of the God of Iacob.
5 This he ordened in Ioseph for a testimony, when he came out of Egipte, & had
herde a strauge laguage.
6 When he eased his shulder from the burthe, & when his hondes were delyuered
fro the pottes.
7 Whe thou calldest vpon me in trouble, I helped the & herde the, what tyme as
the storme fell vpo the,
8 I proued the also at the water of strife.
9 Sela. Heare o my people, for I assure the o Israel, yf thou wilt herken vnto
me:
10 There shal no straunge God be in the, nether shalt thou worshipe eny other
God.
11 I am the LORDE thy God, which brought the out of the lode of Egipte: ope thy
mouth wyde, & I shal fyll it.
12 But my people wolde not heare my voyce, & Israel wolde not obeye me.
13 So I gaue the vp vnto their owne hertes lust, & let the folowe their owne
ymaginacions.
14 Oy my people wolde obeye me, for yf Israel wolde walke in my wayes.
15 I shulde soone put downe their enemies, & turne myne hode agaynst their
aduersaries.
16 The haters of ye LORDE shulde mysse Israel, but their tyme shulde endure for
euer. He shulde fede them with the fynest wheate floure, & satisfie them with
hony out of the stony rocke.

Psalm 82

1 God stondeth in the congregacion of the goddes, & is a iudge amonge the
iudges.
2 How longe wil ye geue wroge iudgment, & accepte the personnes of the vngodly?
3 Sela. Defende the poore & fatherlesse, se that soch as be in nede & necessite
haue right.
4 Delyuer the outcaste & poore, & saue hym from the hande of the vngodly.
5 Neuertheles, they wil not be lerned & vnderstonde, but walke on still in
darcknesse: therfore must all the foundacions of the londe be moued.
6 I haue sayde: ye are goddes, ye all are the childre of ye most hyest.
7 But ye shal dye like men, & fall like one of the tyrauntes.
8 Aryse (o God) & iudge thou the earth, for all Heithen are thine by
enheritaunce.

Psalm 83

1 Holde not thy tonge (o God) kepe not still sylece,, refrayne not yi self, o
God.
2 For lo, thy enemies make a murmuringe, & they yt hate the, lift vp their
heade.
3 They ymagin craftely agaynst thy people, & take councell agaynst thy secrete
ones.
4 Come (saye they) let vs rote them out from amonge the people, that the name of
Israel maye be put out of remebraunce.
5 For they haue cast their heades together with one consent, & are cofederate
agaynst the.
6 The tabernacles of the Edomites & Ismaelites, the Moabites & Hagarenes.
7 Gebal, Ammon and Amalech: the Philistynes with them that dwell at Tyre.
8 Assur also is ioyned vnto the & helpe the children of Loth.
9 Sela. But do thou to them as vnto the Madianites, vnto Sisera and vnto Iabin
by ye broke of Cyson.
10 Which perished at Endor, & became as the doge of ye earth.
11 Make their prynces like Oreb and Zeeb: Yee make all their prynces like as
Zebea and Salmana.
12 Which saye: we wil haue the houses of God in possession?
13 O my God, make them like vnto a whele, and as the stuble before the wynde.
14 Like as a fyre that burneth vp the wodd, & as the flame that consumeth the
mountaynes.
15 Persecute them euen so with thy tempest, & make them afrayed with thy storme.
16 Make their faces ashamed (o LORDE) yt they maye seke thy name.
17 Let the be cofounded & vexed euer more & more: Let the be put to shame &
perish.
18 That they maye knowe, that thou art alone, that thy name is the LORDE, and
that thou only art the most hyest ouer all the earth.

Psalm 84

1 O how amiable are yi dwelliges, thou LORDE of hoostes?
2 My soule hath a desyre & loginge for ye courte of ye LORDE, my hert & my flesh
reioyse in ye lyuynge God.
3 For the sparow hath founde hir an house, & the swalowe a nest, where she maye
laye hir yoge: eue yi aulters O LORDE of hoostes, my kynge & my God.
4 O how blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they are allwaye praysinge ye.
5 Blessed are ye men whose stregth is in ye, in whose herte are yt wayes.
6 Which goinge thorow the vale of mysery, vse it for a well, and the poles are
fylled with water.
7 They go from strength to strength and so the God of Gods apeareth vnto the in
Sion.
8 O LORDE God of hoostes, heare my prayer: herken o God of Iacob.
9 Beholde o God oure defence, loke vpon the face of thyne anoynted.
10 For one daye in thy courte is better then a thousande:
11 I had rather be a dore keper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the
tentes of the vngodly.
12 For the LORDE God is a light and defence, the LORDE wil geue grace &
worshipe, and no good thinge shal he witholde from them, that lyue a godly life.
O LORDE God of hoostes, blessed is the man, yt putteth his trust in the.

Psalm 85

1 Lorde, thou barest a loue vnto thy londe, thou didest bringe agayne the
captiuyte of Iacob.
2 Thou diddest forgeue the offence of thy people, and couerdest all their
synnes.
3 Sela. Thou tokest awaye all thy displeasure, & turnedest thy self from thy
wrothful indignacion.
4 Turne vs then (o God or Sauioure) & let thine anger ceasse from vs.
5 Wilt thou be displeased at vs for euer? wilt thou stretch out thy wrath from
one generacion to another?
6 Wilt thou not turne agayne, & quycken vs, that thy people maye reioyse in the?
7 Shew us thy mercy, O Lord: and grant vs thy salvation.
8 I wil herken what the LORDE God wil saie, for he shal speake peace vnto his
people and to his sayntes, that they turne not them selues vnto foolishnes.
9 For his saluacion is nye them that feare him, so that glory shal dwell in oure
londe.
10 Mercy and trueth are met together, rightuousnesse and peace kysse ech other.
11 Trueth shal ryse out of ye earth, and rightuousnesse shall loke downe from
heauen.
12 And why? the LORDE shal shewe louinge kyndnesse, and oure londe shal geue hir
encrease.
13 Rightuousnesse shal go before him, and prepare the waye for his commynge.

Psalm 86

1 Bowe downe thine eare (o LORDE) and heare me, for I am cofortles and poore.
2 O kepe my soule, for I am holy: my God, helpe thy seruaunt that putteth his
trust in the.
3 Be mercifull vnto me (o LORDE) for I call daylie vpon the.
4 Coforte the soule of thy seruaunt, for vnto the (o LORDE) do I lift vp my
soule.
5 For thou LORDE art good and gracious, & of greate mercy vnto all them that
call vpon the.
6 Geue eare LORDE vnto my prayer, and pondre my humble desyre.
7 In the tyme of my trouble I call vpon the, for thou hearest me.
8 Amonge the goddes there is none like the o LORDE, there is not one that ca do
as thou doest.
9 All nacions whom thou hast made, shall come and worshipe before the o LORDE,
and shal glorifie thy name.
10 For thou art greate, thou doest wonderous thinges, thou art God alone.
11 Lede me in thy waye (o LORDE) that I maye walke in thy trueth: O let my hert
delyte in fearynge thy name.
12 I thanke the o LORDE my God, & wil prayse thy name for euer.
13 For greate is thy mercy towarde me, thou hast delyuered my soule from ye
nethermost hell.
14 O God, the proude are rysen agaynst me, and the cogregacion of ye mightie
seketh after my soule, & set not ye before their eyes.
15 But thou (o LORDE God) art full of compassion and mercy, longesuffrynge,
greate in goodnesse & trueth.
16 O turne the then vnto me, haue mercy vpo me: geue thy strength vnto thy
seruaunt, & helpe the sonne of thy handmayde.
17 Shewe some toke vpon me for good, that they which hate me, maye se it and be
ashamed: because thou LORDE hast helped me, & comforted me.

Psalm 87

1 Hir foundacions are vpo the holy hilles: the LORDE loueth the gates of Sion
more, the all ye dwelliges of Iacob.
2 Very excellet thiges are spoke of ye, thou cite of God.
3 Sela. I wil thinke vpo Rahab & Babilo, so that they shal knowe me:
4 Yee the Philistynes also & they of Tyre with the Morians. Lo, there was he
borne.
5 And of Sion it shalbe reported, that he was borne in her, euen the most hyest
which hath buylded her.
6 The LORDE shal cause it be preached & written amonge the people, that he was
borne there.
7 Sela. Therfore the dwellinge of all syngers & daunsers is in the.

Psalm 88

1 O Lorde God my Sauyor, I crie daye & night before the: Oh let my prayer entre
in to thy presence, encline thine eare vnto my callynge.
2 For my soule is full of trouble, & my life draweth nye vnto hell.
3 I am couted as one of the that go downe vnto the pytte, I am eue as a ma that
hath no stregth.
4 Fre amoge the deed, like vnto the yt lye in the graue, which be out of
remembrauce, and are cutt awaye from thy honde.
5 Thou hast layed me in the lowest pytte, in ye darcknesse and in the depe.
6 Thy indignacion lieth hard vpon me, and thou vexest me with all thy floudes.
7 Sela. Thou hast put awaye myne acquataunce farre fro me, & made me to be
abhorred of them:
8 I am so fast in preson, that I can not get forth.
9 My sight fayleth for very trouble: LORDE, I call daylie vpo the, and stretch
out my hondes vnto the.
10 Doest thou shewe wonders amonge the deed? Can the physicias rayse them vp
agayne, that they maye prayse the?
11 Maye thy louynge kyndnes be shewed in the graue, or thy faithfulnesse in
destruccion?
12 Maye thy wonderous workes be knowne in the darcke, or thy righteousnes in the
londe where all thinges are forgotte?
13 Vnto the I crie (o LORDE) and early cometh my prayer before the.
14 LORDE, why puttest thou awaye my soule? Wherfore hydest thou thy face fro me?
15 My strength is gone for very sorow and misery, with fearfulnesse do I beare
thy burthens.
16 Thy wroth full displeasure goeth ouer me, the feare of the oppresseth me.
17 They come rounde aboute me daylie like water, and compase me together on
euery syde.
18 My louers and fredes hast thou put awaye fro me, and turned awaye myne
acquantaunce.

Psalm 89

1 My songe shal be allwaye of the louynge kyndnesse of the LORDE, wt my mouth
wil I euer be shewinge thy faithfulnesse fro one generacion to another.
2 For I haue sayde: mercy shal be set vp for euer, thy faithfulnesse shalt thou
stablish in the heauens.
3 I haue made a couenaunt with my chosen, I haue sworne vnto Dauid my seruaunt.
4 Thy sede wil I stablish for euer, and set vp thy Trone from one generacion to
another.
5 Sela. O LORDE, the very heaues shal prayse thy wonderous workes, yee & thy
faithfulnes in ye congregacion of the sayntes.
6 For who is he amonge the cloudes, that maye be copared vnto the LORDE?
7 Yee what is he amonge the goddes, that is like vnto the LORDE?
8 God is greatly to be feared in the councell of the sayntes, & to be had in
reuerence of all the that are aboute him.
9 O LORDE God of hoostes, who is like vnto the in power? thy trueth is rounde
aboute the.
10 Thou rulest the pryde of the see, thou stillest the wawes therof, whe they
arise.
11 Thou breakest the proude, like one that is wounded, thou scatrest thine
enemies abrode with thy mightie arme.
12 The heaues are thine, the earth is thine: thou hast layed the foundacio of
the roude worlde and all that therin is.
13 Thou hast made the north and the south, Tabor and Hermon shal reioyse in thy
name.
14 Thou hast a mightie arme, stronge is thy hande, and hye is thy right hande.
15 Rightuousnes and equite is the habitacion of thy seate, mercy and trueth go
before thy face.
16 Blessed is the people (o LORDE) that can reioyse in the, and walketh in the
light of thy countenaunce.
17 Their delite is in thy name all the daye longe, and thorow thy rightuousnesse
they shalbe exalted.
18 For thou art the glory of their strength, & thorow thy fauoure shalt thou
lift vp oure hornes.
19 The LORDE is oure defence, and the holy one of Israel is oure kynge.
20 Thou spakest somtyme in visios vnto thy sayntes, and saydest: I haue layed
helpe vpon one that is mightie, I haue exalted one chosen out of the people.
21 I haue founde Dauid my seruaut, with my holy oyle haue I anoynted him.
22 My honde shal holde him fast, and my arme shal strength him.
23 The enemie shal not ouercome him, and the sonne of wickednesse shal not hurte
him.
24 I shal smyte downe his foes before his face, and plage them that hate him.
25 My trueth also & my mercy shalbe with him, and in my name shal his horne be
exalted.
26 I wil set his honde in the see, and his right honde in the floudes.
27 He shal call me: thou art my father, my God, and the strength of my
saluacion.
28 And I wil make him my firstborne, hyer then the kinges of the earth.
29 My mercy wil I kepe for him for euermore, and my couenaunt shall stonde fast
with him.
30 His sede wil I make to endure for euer, yee and his Trone as the dayes of
heauen.
31 But yf his childre forsake my lawe, and walke not in my iudgmentes.
32 Yf they breake myne ordinaunces, and kepe not my commaundementes.
33 I wil vyset their offences with the rodde, and their synnes with scourges.
34 Neuerthelesse, my louynge kyndnesse wil I not vtterly take from him, ner
fuffre my trueth to fayle.
35 My couenaunt wil I not breake, ner disanulle the thinge yt is gone out of my
lippes.
36 I haue sworne once by my holynesse, that I wil not fayle Dauid.
37 His sede shal endure for euer, and his seate also like as the Sonne before
me.
38 He shal stonde fast for euermore as the Moone, and as the faithfull witnesse
in heauen.
39 Sela. But now thou forsakest and abhorrest thyne anoynted, and art displeased
at him.
40 Thou hast turned backe the couenaunt of thy seruaunt, and cast his crowne to
the grounde.
41 Thou hast ouerthrowne all his hedges, and broke downe his stronge holdes.
42 Al they that go by, spoyle him, he is become a rebuke vnto his neghbours.
43 Thou settest vp the right hade of his enemies, and makest all his aduersaryes
to reioyse.
44 Thou hast taken awaye the strength of his swerde, and geuest him not victory
in the battayll.
45 Thou hast put out his glory, and cast his Trone downe to the grounde.
46 The dayes of his youth hast thou shortened, and couered him with dishonoure.
47 Sela. LORDE, how longe wilt thou hyde thy self? For euer? shal thy wrath
burne like fyre?
48 O remembre how shorte my tyme is, hast thou made all men for naught?
49 What man is he that lyueth, and shal not se death? Maye a ma delyuer his owne
soule from the honde of hell?
50 Sela. LORDE, where are thy olde louynge kyndnesses, which thou sworest vnto
Dauid in thy trueth?
51 Remebre LORDE the rebuke that ye multitude of the people do vnto thy
seruauntes, & how I haue borne it in my bosome.
52 Wher wt thine enemies blasphemethe, & slauder ye fotesteppes of yi anoynted.
Thankes be to the LORDE for euermore: Amen, Amen.

Psalm 90

1 Lorde, thou art oure refuge from one generacion to another.
2 Before the mountaynes were brought forth, or euer the earth & the worlde were
made, thou art God from euerlastinge and worlde withoute ende.
3 Thou turnest man to destruccion, Agayne, thou sayest: come agayne ye children
of men.
4 For a thousande yeares in thy sight are but as yesterdaye that is past, and
like as it were a night watch.
5 As soone as thou scatrest them, they are euen as a slepe, and fade awaye
sodenly like the grasse.
6 In the mornynge it is grene and groweth vp, but in the euenynge it is cutt
downe and wythered.
7 For we consume awaye in thy displeasure, and are afrayed at thy wrothfull
indignacion.
8 Thou settest oure mi?dedes before the, and oure secrete synnes in the light of
thy countenaunce.
9 For when thou art angrie, all or dayes are gone, we brynge or yeares to an
ende, as it were a tayle that is tolde.
10 The dayes of oure age are iij. score yeares & ten: & though men be so stronge
that they come to iiij. score yeares, yet is their strength then but laboure and
sorowe: so soone passeth it awaye, & we are gone.
11 But who regardeth the power of thy wrath, thy fearfull & terrible
displeasure?
12 O teach vs to nombre oure dayes, that we maye applie oure hertes vnto
wy?dome.
13 Turne the agayne (o LORDE) at the last, and be gracious vnto thy seruauntes.
14 O satisfie vs with thy mercy, and that soone: so shal we reioyse and be glad
all the dayes of oure life.
15 Comforte vs agayne, now after the tyme that thou hast plaged vs, and for the
yeares wherin we haue suffred aduersite.
16 Shewe thy seruauntes thy worke, & their children thy glory.
17 And the glorious maiesty of the LORDE oure God be vpon vs: O prospere thou
the worke of oure hondes vpon vs, o prospere thou oure hondy worke.

Psalm 91

1 Who so dwelleth vnder ye defence of the most hyest, & abydeth vnder ye shadowe
of ye allmightie:
2 He shal saye vnto ye LORDE: o my hope, & my stronge holde, my God, in who I
wil trust.
3 For he shal deliuer the fro the snare of the hunter, & fro the noysome
pestilence.
4 He shal couer the vnder his wynges, that thou mayest be safe vnder his
fethers: his faithfulnesse and trueth shal be thy shylde and buckler.
5 So yt thou shalt not nede to be afrayed for eny bugges by night, ner for arowe
that flyeth by daye.
6 For the pestilece that crepeth in ye darcknesse, ner for the sicknesse yt
destroyeth in the noone daye.
7 A thousande shal fall besyde the, and ten thousande at thy right honde, but it
shal not come nye the.
8 Yee with thyne eyes shalt thou beholde, and se the rewarde of the vngodly.
9 For thou LORDE art my hope, thou hast set thy house of defence very hye.
10 There shal no euell happen vnto the, nether shal eny plage come nye thy
dwellinge.
11 For he shall geue his angels charge ouer the, to kepe the in all thy wayes.
12 They shal beare the in their hondes, that thou hurte not thy fote agaynst a
stone.
13 Thou shalt go vpo the Lyon and Adder, the yonge Lyon and the Dragon shalt
thou treade vnder thy fete.
14 Because he hath set his loue vpon me, I shal delyuer him: I shal defende him,
for he hath knowne my name.
15 When he calleth vpon me, I shall heare him: yee I am with him in his trouble,
wherout I wil delyuer him, and brynge him to honoure.
16 With loge life wil I satisfie him, & shewe him my saluacion.

Psalm 92

1 It is a good thinge to geue thankes vnto the LORDE, and to synge prayses vnto
yi name, o most hyest.
2 To tell of thy louynge kyndnesse early in the mornynge, and of thy trueth in
the night season.
3 Vpon an instrumet of ten strynges, vpon the lute and with a songe vpon the
harpe.
4 For thou LORDE hast made me glad thorow thy workes, and I wil reioyse ouer the
operacion of thy hondes.
5 O LORDE, how glorious are thy workes, thy thoughtes are very depe.
6 An vnwyse man wil not knowe this, & a foole wil not vnderstode it.
7 That the vngodly are grene as the grasse, and that all the workes of wickednes
do florish, to be destroyed for euer.
8 But thou LORDE o most hyest, abydest worlde without ende.
9 For lo, thy enemies (o LORDE) lo, thy enemies shal perishe, and all the
workers of wickednes shalbe scatred abrode.
10 But my horne shalbe exalted like the horne of an Vnicorne, & shal be anoynted
with fresh oyle.
11 Myne eye also shal se his lust of myne enemies,
12 & myne eare shall heare his desyre of the wicked yt ryse vp agaynst me.
13 The rightuous shal florish like a palme tre, and growe like a Cedre of
Libanus.
14 Soch as be planted in the house of the LORDE,be frutefull, plenteous & grene.
15 That they maye shewe, how true the LORDE my stregth is, and that there is no
vnrightuousnesse in him.

Psalm 93

1 The LORDE is kynge, and hath put on glorious apparell, the LORDE hath put on
his apparell, & gyrded himself with stregth:
2 he hath made the rounde worlde so sure, that it can not be moued.
3 From that tyme forth hath yi seate bene prepared, thou art from euerlastinge.
4 The floudes aryse (o LORDE) the floudes lift vp their noyse, ye floudes lift
vp their wawes.
5 The wawes of the see are mightie, & rage horribly: but yet the LORDE that
dwelleth on hye, is mightier. Thy testimonies (o LORDE) are very sure, holynesse
becommeth thyne house for euer.

Psalm 94

1 O Lorde God, to whom vengeaunce belogeth: thou God to whom vengeaunce
belongeth, shewe thy self.
2 Arise thou iudge of the worlde, & rewarde the proude after their deseruynge.
3 LORDE, how longe shal the vngodly, how longe shal the vngodly tryumphe?
4 How longe shal all wicked doers speake so di?daynedly, and make soch proude
boastynge?
5 They smyte downe thy people (o LORDE) and trouble thine heretage.
6 They murthur the widdowe and the straunger, and put the fatherlesse to death.
7 And yet they saie: Tush, the LORDE seyth not, the God of Iacob regardeth it
not.
8 Take hede, ye vnwise amonge the people: o ye fooles, when wil ye vnderstonde?
9 He that planted the eare, shal he not heare? he that made the eye, shal not he
se?
10 He that nurtureth the Heithen, and teacheth a man knowlege, shal not he
punysh?
11 The LORDE knoweth the thoughtes of men, that they are but vayne.
12 Blessed is the ma, whom thou lernest (o LORDE) and teachest him in thy lawe.
13 That thou mayest geue him pacience in tyme of aduersite, vntill the pytte be
dygged vp for the vngodly.
14 For the LORDE wil not fayle his people, nether wil he forsake his
inheritaunce.
15 And why? iudgment shalbe turned agayne vnto rightuousnesse, and all soch as
be true of hert shal folowe it.
16 Who ryseth vp with me agaynst the wicked? who taketh my parte agaynst the
euell doers?
17 Yf the LORDE had not helped me, my soule had allmost bene put to sylence.
18 When I sayde: my fote hath slipped, thy mercy (o LORDE) helde me vp.
19 In ye multitude of the sorowes that I had in my herte, thy comfortes haue
refreshed my soule.
20 Wilt thou haue eny thinge to do with the stole of wickednesse, which
ymagineth myschefe in the lawe?
21 They gather them together agaynst the soule of the rightuous, & condemne the
innocent bloude.
22 But the LORDE is my refuge, my God is the stregth of my confidece.
23 He shal recompence the their wickednesse, and destroye them in their owne
malice: yee the LORDE oure God shal destroye them.

Psalm 95

1 O come, let vs prayse the LORDE, let vs hertely reioyse in the strength of
oure saluacion.
2 Let vs come before his presence with thakesgeuynge, & shewe oure self glad in
him wt psalmes.
3 For the LORDE is a greate God, and a greate kynge aboue all goddes.
4 In his honde are all ye corners of the earth, and the strength of the hilles
is his also.
5 The see is his, for he made it, and his hondes prepared the drie lode.
6 O come, let vs worshipe and bowe downe oure selues: Let vs knele before the
LORDE oure maker.
7 For he is oure God: as for vs, we are the people of his pasture, and the shepe
of his hodes.
8 Todaye yf ye wil heare his voyce, harde not youre hertes, as whe ye prouoked
in tyme of temptacion in the wildernes.
9 Where yor fathers tepted me, proued me, and sawe my workes.
10 XL. yeares longe was I greued with that generacion, & sayde: they euer erre
in their hertes, they verely haue not knowne my wayes.
11 Therfore I sware vnto the in my wrath, that they shulde not enter in to my
rest.

Psalm 96

1 O synge vnto the LORDE a new songe, synge vnto the LORDE all the whole earth.
2 Synge vnto ye LORDE, & prayse his name, be tellynge of his saluacion from daye
to daye.
3 Declare his honoure amonge the Heithe, and his wonders amonge all people.
4 For ye LORDE is greate, and can not worthely be praysed: he is more to be
feared then all goddes.
5 As for all ye goddes of the Heithe, they be but Idols, but it is the LORDE
that made the heaues.
6 Thankesgeuynge and worshipe are before him, power and honoure are in his
Sanctuary.
7 Ascrybe vnto the LORDE (o ye kinredes of the Heithen) ascrybe vnto the LORDE
worshipe and strength.
8 Ascrybe vnto the LORDE the honoure of his name, brynge presentes, and come in
to his courte.
9 O worshipe the LORDE in the beutye of holynesse, let the whole earth stonde in
awe of him.
10 Tell it out amonge the Heithe, that the LORDE is kynge: and that it is he
which hath made the rounde worlde so fast, that it cannot be moued, and how that
he shal iudge the people rightuously.
11 Let the heaues reioyse, and let the earth be glad: let the see make a noyse,
yee & all that therin is.
12 Let the felde be ioyfull and all that is in it, let all the trees of the wodd
leape for ioye.
13 Before the LORDE, for he commeth: for he cometh to iudge the earth: yee with
rightuousnesse shal he iudge the worlde, and ye people with his trueth.

Psalm 97

1 The LORDE is kynge, the earth maye be glad therof: yee the multitude of the
Iles maie be glad therof.
2 Cloudes and darcknesse are rounde aboute him, rightuousnesse and iudgment are
the habitacion of his seate.
3 There goeth a fyre before him, to burne vp his enemies on euery syde.
4 His lightenynges geue shyne vnto the worlde, the earth seyth it & is afraied.
5 The hilles melt like wax at the presence of ye LORDE, at the presence of the
LORDE of the whole earth.
6 The very heauens declare his rightuousnes, & all people se his glory.
7 Cofounded be all they that worshipe ymages, and delite in their Idols:
worshipe him all ye goddes.
8 Sion heareh of it and reioyseth: yee all ye doughters of Iuda are glad because
of thy iudgmentes, o LORDE.
9 For thou LORDE art the most hyest ouer all the earth, thou art exalted farre
aboue all goddes.
10 O ye that loue the LORDE, se that ye hate the thinge which is euell: the
LORDE preserueth the soules of his sayntes, he shal delyuer the from the honde
of the vngodly.
11 There is spronge vp a light for the rightuous, and a ioyfull gladnesse for
soch as be true herted.
12 Reioyse therfore in the LORDE, ye rightuous: and geue thankes for a
remembraunce of his holynesse.

Psalm 98

1 O synge vnto the LORDE a new songe, for he hath done maruelous thinges.
2 With his owne right honde and with his holy arme hath he gotten the victory.
3 The LORDE hath declared his sauynge health, and his rightuousnes hath he
openly shewed in the sight of the Heithe.
4 He hath remembred his mercy and trueth towarde the house of Israel: so that
all the endes of the worlde se the sauynge health of oure God.
5 Shewe youre self ioyfull vnto the LORDE all ye londes, synge, reioyse and geue
thankes.
6 Prayse the LORDE vpon the harpe, synge to the harpe with a psalme of
thankesgeuynge.
7 With trompettes also & shawmes: O shewe youre selues ioyfull before the LORDE
the kynge.
8 Let the see make a noyse and all yt therin is, yee the whole worlde & all that
dwell therin.
9 Let the floudes clappe their hondes, and let all the hilles be ioyfull
together. Before the LORDE, for he is come to iudge the earth. Yee with
rightuousnes shall he iudge the worlde, and the people with equite.

Psalm 99

1 The LORDE is kynge, be the people neuer so vnpacient: he sytteth vpon the
Cherubins, be the earth neuer so vnquiete.
2 The LORDE is greate in Sion, & hye aboue all people.
3 O let men geue thakes vnto thy greate & wonderful name, for it is holy.
4 The kynges power loueth iudgment, thou preparest equite, thou executest
iudgmet & rightuousnes in Iacob.
5 O magnifie the LORDE or God, fall downe before his fote stole, for he his
holy.
6 Moses & Aaron amonge his prestes, & Samuel amonge soch as call vpo his name:
these called vpon the LORDE, & he herde the.
7 He spake vnto the out of the cloudy piler, for they kepte his testimonies, &
the lawe that he gaue them.
8 Thou herdest the (o LORDE or God) thou forgauest the o God, & punyshedst their
owne invencions.
9 O magnifie the LORDE oure God, and worshipe him vpo his holy hill, for the
LORDE oure God is holy.

Psalm 100

1 O be ioyfull in God (all ye lodes) serue the LORDE wt gladnes, come before his
presence wt ioye.
2 Be ye sure, yt the LORDE he is God:
3 It is he yt hath made vs, & not we oure selues: we are but his people, & the
shepe of his pasture.
4 go youre waye in to his gates the with thankesgeuynge, & in to his courtes wt
prayse: be thakfull vnto him, & speake good of his name.
5 For the LORDE is gracious, his mercy is euerlastinge, and his treuth endureth
from generacion to generacion.

Psalm 101

1 My songe shalbe of mercy and iudgment, yee vnto the (o LORDE) wil I synge.
2 O let me haue vnderstondinge in the waye of godlynesse, vntill the tyme that
thou come vnto me: & so shal I walke in my house wt an innocent herte.
3 I wil take no wicked thinge in honde, I hate the synne of vnfaithfulnesse, it
shal not cleue vnto me.
4 A frowarde herte shal departe fro me, I wil not knowe a wicked personne.
5 Who so preuely slaundreth his neghboure, him wil I destroye: Who so hath a
proude loke & an hye stomacke, I maye not awaye with him.
6 Myne eyes shal loke for soch as be faithfull in the londe, yt they maye dwell
with me: and who so ledeth a godly life, shalbe my seruaunt.
7 There shall no disceatfull personne dwell in my house, he that telleth lyes
shal not tary in my sight.
8 I shal soone destroye all the vngodly of the londe, that all wicked doers maye
be roted out of the cite of the LORDE.

Psalm 102

1 Heare my prayer (o LORDE) and let my criege come vnto the.
2 Hyde not thy face fro me in the tyme of my trouble: enclyne thine eares vnto
me when I call, O heare me, and that right soone.
3 For my dayes are consumed awaye like smoke, & my bones are brent vp as it were
a fyre brande.
4 My hert is smytte downe and wythered like grasse, so that I forget to eate my
bred.
5 For the voyce of my gronynge, my bone wil scarse cleue to my flesh.
6 I am become like a Pellicane in the wildernes, and like an Oule in a broken
wall.
7 I wake, and am euen as it were a sparow sittinge alone vpon the house toppe.
8 Myne enemies reuyle me all the daye longe, they laugh me to scorne, and are
sworne together against me.
9 I eate ashes with my bred, and mengle my drynke with wepynge.
10 And that because of ye indignacion and wrath, for thou hast taken me vp, and
cast me awaye.
11 My dayes are gone like a shadowe, and I am wythered like grasse.
12 But thou (o LORDE) endurest for euer, and thy remembraunce thorow out all
generacions.
13 Arise therfore and haue mercy vpon Sion, for it is tyme to haue mercy vpon
her, yee the tyme is come.
14 And why? thy seruauntes haue a loue to hir stones, & it pitieth them to se
her in the dust.
15 The Heithen shal feare thy name (o LORDE) and all the kynges of the earth thy
maiesty.
16 For the LORDE shal buylde vp Sion, and shal apeare in his glory.
17 He turneth him vnto the prayer of the poore destitute, and despyseth not
their desyre.
18 This shalbe written for those yt come after, that the people which shalbe
borne, maye prayse the LORDE.
19 For He loketh downe from his Sanctuary, out of the heauen doth the LORDE
beholde the earth.
20 That he maye heare the mournynges of soch as be in captiuyte, and delyuer the
children of death.
21 That they maie preach the name of the LORDE in Sion, and his worshipe at
Ierusalem.
22 When the people are gathered together, and the kyngdomes also to serue ye
LORDE.
23 He hath brought downe my strength in my iourney, and shortened my dayes.
24 Yet wil I saye: O my God, take me not awaye in ye myddest of myne age: as for
thy yeares, they endure thorow out all generacions.
25 Thou LORDE in the begynnynge hast layed ye foundacion of the earth, and the
heauens are the workes of thy hondes.
26 They shal perishe, but thou shalt endure: they all shall wexe olde as doth a
garment,
27 & as a vesture shalt thou chaunge the, and they shalbe chaunged. But thou art
the same, and thy yeares shal not fayle.
28 The children of thy seruauntes shall contynue, & their sede shal prospere in
yi sight.

Psalm 103

1 Prayse the LORDE (o my soule) & all that is within me prayse his holy name.
2 Prayse the LORDE o my soule, & forget not all his benefites.
3 Which forgeueth all thy synnes, and healeth all thy infirmities.
4 Which saueth thy life from destruccion, and crowneth the with mercy & louynge
kyndnesse.
5 Which satisfieth thy desyre with good thinges, makynge the yonge and lusty as
an Aegle.
6 The LORDE executeth rightuousnesse and iudgment, for all them yt suffre
wronge.
7 He shewed his wayes vnto Moses, and his workes vnto the children of Israel.
8 The LORDE is full of compassion and mercy, longe sufferinge, and of greate
goodnesse.
9 He wil not allwaye be chydinge, nether wil he kepe his anger for euer.
10 He hath not dealt with vs after oure synnes, ner rewarded vs acordinge to
oure wickednesses.
11 For loke how hye the heaue is in comparison of the earth, so greate is his
mercy also towarde them that feare him.
12 Loke how wyde the east is from the west, so farre hath he set oure synnes
from vs.
13 Yee like as a father pitieth his owne children, euen so is the LORDE
mercifull vnto the that feare him.
14 For he knoweth wherof we be made, he remembreth that we are but dust.
15 That a man in his tyme is but as is grasse, & florisheth as a floure of the
felde.
16 For as soone as the wynde goeth ouer it, it gone, and the place therof
knoweth it nomore.
17 But the mercifull goodnesse of ye LORDE endureth for euer and euer, vpon them
yt feare him, and his rightuousnesse vpon their childers children.
18 Soch as kepe his couenaunt, and thinke vpon his commaundementes to do them.
19 The LORDE hath prepared his seate in heaue, and his kyngdome ruleth ouer all.
20 O prayse the LORDE ye angels of his, ye that be mightie instregth,
fulfillinge his commaundement, that me maye heare the voyce of his wordes.
21 O prayse the LORDE all ye his hoostes, ye seruauntes of his, that do his
pleasure.
22 O speake good of the LORDE all ye workes of his, in euery place of his
dominion: prayse thou the LORDE, o my soule.

Psalm 104

1 Prayse the LORDE o my soule: O LORDE my God, thou art become exceadinge
glorious, thou art clothed with maiesty and honoure.
2 Thou deckest thy self with light, as it were wt a garment, thou spredest out
the heauen like a curtayne.
3 Thou voltest it aboue with waters, thou makest the cloudes thy charet, and
goest vpon the wynges of the wynde.
4 Thou makest thine angels spretes, and thy ministers flammes of fyre.
5 Thou hast layed ye earth vpon hir foundacion, that it neuer moueth at eny
tyme.
6 Thou couerest it with the depe like as with a garmet, so that the waters
stonde aboue the hilles.
7 But at thy rebuke they fle, at the voyce of thy thonder they are afrayed.
8 Then are the hilles sene alofte, & the valleys beneth in their place which
thou hast appoynted for the.
9 Thou hast set them their boundes, which they maie not passe, that they turne
not agayne to couer ye earth.
10 Thou causest the welles to sprynge vp amonge the valleys, and the waters
runne amonge ye hilles.
11 That all the beastes of the felde maye haue drynke, & that the wylde asses
maye quench their thyrste.
12 Aboue vpon the hilles haue the foules of the ayre their habitacion, and synge
amonge the braunches.
13 Thou watrest the hylles from aboue, the erth is fylled with ye frutes of thy
workes.
14 Thou bryngest forth grasse for the catell, and grene herbe for the seruyce of
men.
15 Thou bryngest fode out of the earth: wyne to make glad ye herte of ma, oyle
to make him a chearfull countenaunce, & bred to strength mans herte.
16 The trees of the LORDE are full of sappe, euen the trees of Libanus which he
hath planted.
17 There make the byrdes their nestes, and the fyrre trees are a dwellinge for
the storcke.
18 The hilles are a refuge for the wylde goates, and so are the stony rockes for
ye conyes.
19 Thou hast appoynted the Moone for certayne seasons, the Sonne knoweth his
goinge downe.
20 Thou makest darcknesse, that it maye be night, wherin all the beastes of the
forest do moue.
21 Yee and the yonge lyons which roare after the praye, and seke their meate at
God.
22 But when the Sonne ariseth, they get them awaye together, and lye them downe
in their dennes.
23 Then goeth man forth to his worke, and to till his londe vntill the euenynge.
24 O LORDE, how manifolde are thy workes, right wysely hast thou made the all:
yee the earth is full of thy riches.
25 So is this greate and wyde see also, wherin are thinges crepinge innumerable,
both small and greate beastes.
26 There go the shippes ouer, and there is that Leuiathan, whom thou hast made,
to take his pastyme therin.
27 They wayte all vpo the, that thou mayest geue them meate in due season.
28 Whe thou geuest it them, they gather it: whe thou openest thine honde, they
are fylled with good.
29 But when thou hydest thy face, they are soroufull: yf thou takest awaye their
breth, they dye, & are turned agayne to their dust.
30 Agayne, when thou lattest thy breth go forth, they are made, and so thou
renuest the face of the earth.
31 The glorious magesty of the LORDE endureth for euer, and the LORDE reioyseth
in his workes.
32 The earth trebleth at the loke of him, he doth but touch ye hilles and they
smoke.
33 I will synge vnto the LORDE as longe as I lyue, I wil prayse my God whyle I
haue my beinge.
34 O that my wordes might please him, for my ioye is in the LORDE.
35 As for synners, they shalbe cosumed out of the earth, and the vngodly shal
come to an ende: but prayse thou the LORDE, o my soule. Halleluya.

Psalm 105

1 O geue thankes vnto the LORDE, and call vpon his name: tell the people what
thinges he hath done.
2 O let youre songes be of him: prayse him, and let youre talkynge be of all his
wonderous workes.
3 Geue his holy name a good reporte, let their hertes reioyse that seke the
LORDE.
4 Seke the LORDE, and his strength, seke his face euermore.
5 Remembre the maruelous workes that he hath done, his wonders and the
iudgmentes of his mouth.
6 O ye sede of Abraham his seruaunt, ye children of Iacob his chosen.
7 He is the LORDE oure God, whose punyshmentes are thorow out all the worlde.
8 He is allwaye myndfull of his couenaunt, and promyse that he made to a
thousande generacions.
9 Yee the couenaunt that he made wt Abraham, and the ooth that he swore vnto
Isaac.
10 And apoynted the same vnto Iacob for a lawe, and to Israel for an
euerlastinge testament.
11 Sayenge: vnto the wil I geue the londe of Canaan, the lott of youre heretage.
12 When there was yet but a fewe of them, and they straungers therin.
13 What tyme as they wente from one nacion to another, from one kyngdome to
another.
14 He suffred no man to hurte them, but reproued euen kynges for their sakes.
15 Touch not myne anoynted, do my prophetes no harme.
16 Morouer he called for a derth vpon the lode, and destroyed all the prouysion
of bred.
17 But he had sent a man before them, euen Ioseph which was solde to be a bonde
seruaunt.
18 They hurte his fete in the stockes, the yron pearsed his herte.
19 Vntill the tyme that his worde came, and till the worde of ye LORDE had tried
him.
20 Then sent the kinge and caused him be delyuered, the prynce of the people bad
let him go.
21 He made him lorde of his house, & ruler of all his substaunce.
22 That he might enfourme his prynces after his wil, and teach his Senatours
wysdome.
23 Israel also came in to Egipte, and Iacob was a straunger in the lode of Ham.
24 But he increased his people exceadingly, and made them stronger then their
enemies.
25 Whose hert turned, so that they hated his people, and dealt vntruly with his
seruauntes.
26 Then sent he Moses his seruaunt, and Aaron whom he had chosen.
27 These dyd his tokens amoge them, and wonders in the londe of Ham.
28 He sent darcknesse and it was darcke, for they were not obedient vnto his
worde.
29 He turned their waters in to bloude, and slewe their fishe.
30 Their londe brought forth frogges, yee euen in their kynges chambers.
31 He spake the worde, & their came all maner of flies & lise in all their
quarters.
32 He gaue them hale stones for rayne, and flammes of fyre in their lode.
33 He smote their vynyardes & fige trees, and destroyed the trees that were in
their coastes.
34 He spake ye worde, and their came greshoppers & catirpillers innumerable.
35 These ate vp all the grasse in their lode, and deuoured the frutes of their
groude.
36 He smote all ye first borne in their lode, euen the chefe of all their
substaunce.
37 He brought them forth wt syluer & golde, there was not one feble personne
amoge their trybes.
38 Egipte was glad of their departinge, for they were afraied of the.
39 e spred out a cloude to be a couerynge, and fyre to geue light in the night
season.
40 At their desyre, there came quales, and he fylled them with the bred of
heaue.
41 He opened the rocke of stone, & the waters flowed out: so that ryuers ranne
in the wildernesse.
42 For why, he remembred his holy promyse which he had made vnto Abraham his
seruaunt.
43 Thus he brought forth his people with ioye, and his chosen with gladnesse.
44 And gaue them the lodes of the Heithe, where they toke the labours of the
people in possession.
45 That they might kepe his statutes, and obserue his lawes. Halleluya.
Halleluya.

Psalm 106

1 O geue thankes vnto the LORDE, for he is gracious, and his mercy endureth for
euer.
2 Who can expresse ye noble actes of the LORDE, or shewe forth all his prayse?
3 Blessed are they that allwaye kepe iudgment, and do rightuousnes.
4 Remembre vs (o LORDE) acordinge to the fauoure that thou bearest vnto thy
people: o vyset vs wt thy sauinge health.
5 That we might se the pleasure of thy chosen, that we might reioyse in the
gladnesse of thy people, and geue thankes with thine enheritaunce.
6 We haue synned with oure fathers, we haue done amysse, we haue dealt wickedly.
7 Oure fathers regarded not thy wonders in Egipte, they kepte not thy greate
goodnesse in remebraunce: but were dishobediet at the see, eue at the reed see.
8 Neuertheles, he helped the for his names sake, that he might make his power to
be knowne.
9 He rebuked the reed see, and it was dried vp: so he led the thorow the depe as
in a wildernesse.
10 Thus he saued them from the honde of the hater, & delyuered them from the
honde of the enemie.
11 As for those yt troubled them, the waters ouerwhelmed the, there was not one
of the left.
12 Then beleued they in his worde, and songe prayse vnto him.
13 But within a whyle they forgat his workes, & wolde not abyde his councell.
14 A lust came vpo them in the wildernesse, so that they tempted God in the
deserte.
15 Yet he gaue them their desyre, and sent the ynough at their willes.
16 They angred Moses in the tetes, and Aaron the saynte of the LORDE.
17 So the earth opened & swalowed vp Dathan, and couered the congregacio of
Abiram.
18 The fyre was kyndled in their company, the flame brent vp the vngodly.
19 They made a calfe in Horeb, and worshipped the molte ymage.
20 Thus they turned his glory into the similitude of a calfe, yt eateth haye.
21 They forgat God their Sauior, which had done so greate thinges in Egipte.
22 Wonderous workes in the londe of Ham, and fearfull thinges in the reed see.
23 So he sayde he wolde haue destroyed them, had not Moses his chosen stonde
before him in yt gappe: to turne awaie his wrothfull indignacion, lest he shulde
destroye the.
24 Yee they thought scorne of yt pleasaunt londe, and gaue no credence vnto his
worde.
25 But murmured in their tentes, and herkened not vnto the voyce of the LORDE.
26 Then lift he vp his honde agaynst them, to ouerthrowe them in the wildernes.
27 To cast out their sede amonge the nacions, and to scater them in the londes.
28 They ioyned them selues vnto Baal Peor, and ate the offeringes of the deed.
29 Thus they prouoked him vnto anger with their owne invecions, and the plage
was greate amonge them.
30 Then stode vp Phineas and excuted iustice, & so the plage ceased.
31 And that was counted vnto him for rightuousnesse, amonge all posterites for
euermore.
32 They angerd him also at the waters of strife, so that Moses was punyshed for
their sakes.
33 Because they prouoked his sprete, and he tolde the planely with his lippes.
34 Nether destroyed they the Heithen, as the LORDE commaunded them.
35 But were mengled amonge the Heithen, and lerned their workes.
36 In so moch that they worshipped their ymages, which turned to their owne
decaye.
37 Yee they offred their sonnes & their doughters vnto deuels.
38 And shed the innocent bloude of their sonnes and of their doughters, whom
they offred vnto the ymages of Canaan, so that the londe was defyled with
bloude.
39 Thus were they stayned wt their owne workes, and wente a whoringe with their
owne invencions.
40 Therfore was the wrath of the LORDE kyndled agaynst his people, in so moch
that he abhorred his owne enheritaunce.
41 And gaue them ouer in to the honde of the Heithe, and they that hated them,
were lordes ouer them.
42 Their enemies oppressed the, and had them in subieccion.
43 Many a tyme dyd he delyuer them, but they prouoked him with their owne
invecions, and were brought downe for their wickednesse.
44 Neuerthelesse whe he sawe their aduersite, he herde their complaynte.
45 He thought vpo his couenaunt, and pitied the, acordinge vnto the multitude of
his mercies.
46 Yee he made all those yt had led them awaye captiue, to pitie them.
47 Delyuer vs (o LORDE oure God) & gather vs from amoge the Heithen: that we
maye geue thankes to thy holy name, & make oure boast of thy prayse.
48 Blessed be the LORDE God of Israel from euerlastinge and worlde without ende,
and let all people saye: Amen, Amen. Halleluya.

Psalm 107

1 O geue thankes vnto the LORDE, for he is gracious, and his mercy endureth for
euer.
2 Let them geue thakes whom the LORDE hath redemed, & delyuered from the hande
of the enemie.
3 And gathered the out of the londes, fro the east, fro the west, fro the north
& from the south.
4 They wente astraye in the wildernesse in an vntroden waye, & founde no cite to
dwell in.
5 Hongrie & thirstie, & their soule faynted in the.
6 So they cried vnto the LORDE in their trouble, & he delyuered the from their
distresse.
7 He led the forth by ye right waie, yt they might go to ye cite where they
dwelt.
8 O that me wolde prayse the goodnesse of the LORDE, & the wonders that he doth
for the childre of me.
9 For he satisfied the emptie soule, & fylled the hongrie soule wt good.
10 Soch as sat in darcknesse and in the shadowe of death, beynge fast bounde in
misery & yron.
11 Because they were not obediet to the comaundementes of God, but lightly
regarded the councell of the most highest.
12 Their herte was vexed with labor, they fell downe, & there was none to helpe
them.
13 So they cried vnto the LORDE in their trouble, & he delyuered them out of
their distresse.
14 He brought the out of darcknesse & out of the shadowe of death, & brake their
bondes in sonder.
15 O that men wolde prayse the goodnesse of the LORDE, & the woders that he doth
for the childre of men.
16 For he hath broken the gates of brasse, & smitte the barres of yron in
sonder.
17 Foolish me were plaged for their offence, & because of their wickednesse.
18 Their soule abhorred all maner of meate, they were eue harde at deathes dore.
19 So they cried vnto the LORDE in their trouble, & he delyuered the out of
their distresse.
20 He sent his worde & healed the, & saued the from destruccion.
21 O that men wolde prayse the goodnesse of the LORDE, & the wonders that he
doth for the children of men.
22 That they wolde offre vnto him the sacrifice of thankesgeuynge, and tell out
his workes with gladnes.
23 They that go downe to the see in shippes, & occupie their busynesse in greate
waters.
24 These men se the workes of the LORDE, & his wonders in the depe.
25 For at his worde, the stormy wynde aryseth, and lifteth vp the wawes therof.
26 They are caried vp to the heauen, & downe agayne to the depe, their soule
melteth awaye in the trouble.
27 They rele to and fro, they stacker like a droncken man, and are at their
wittes ende.
28 So they crie vnto the LORDE in their trouble, & he delyuereth the out of
their distresse.
29 He maketh the storme to ceasse, so that the wawes are still.
30 The are they glad because they be at rest, & so he bryngeth them vnto the
hauen where they wolde be.
31 O that men wolde prayse the goodnes of the LORDE, and the wonders that he
doth for the children of men.
32 That they wolde exalte him in the cogregacion of the people, & loaue him in
the seate of the elders.
33 Which turneth the floudes in to drie londe, and drieth vp the water sprynges.
34 A frutefull londe maketh he baren, for the wickednesse of them that dwell
therin.
35 Agayne, he maketh the wildernes a stondinge water, and water sprynges of a
drye grounde.
36 There he setteth the hongrie, that they maye buylde them a cite to dwell in.
37 That they maye sowe their groude, plante vynyaydes, to yelde them frutes of
increase.
38 He blesseth them, so that they multiplie exceadingly, and suffreth not their
catell to decrease.
39 Whe they are minished & brought lowe thorow oppressio, thorow eny plage or
trouble.
40 Though he suffre the to be euell intreated thorow tyrauntes, or let them
wandre out of the waye in the wildernesse:
41 Yet helpeth he the poore out of misery (at the last) and maketh him an
housholde like a flocke of shepe.
42 The rightuous wil cosidre this and reioyse, the mouth of all wickednesse
shall be stopped.
43 Who so is wyse, and pondreth these thinges well, shall vnderstonde the
louynge kyndnesses of the LORDE.

Psalm 108

1 O God, my hert is ready to synge, & to geue prayse.
2 Awake (o my glory) awake lute & harpe, I my selfe will awake right early.
3 I wil geue thakes vnto the (o LORDE) amonge the people, I wil synge prayses
vnto the amonge the Heithe.
4 For the greatnesse of thy mercy is higher then the heauens, and thy
faithfulnesse reacheth vnto the cloudes.
5 Set vp thy self (o God) aboue the heaues, & thy glory aboue all the earth.
6 That thy beloued maye be delyuered: helpe then with thy right hande, & heare
me.
7 God hath spoken in his Sanctuary (which thinge reioyseth me.) I will deuyde
Sichem, and mete out the valley of Suchoth.
8 Galaad is myne, Manasses is myne, Ephraim is the stregth of my heade,
9 Iuda is my captaine. Moab is my wash potte, ouer Edom wil I stretch out my
shue, Philistea shal be glad of me.
10 Who wil lede me in to the stronge cite? Who wil brynge me in to Edom?
11 Shalt not thou do it (o God) which hast cast vs out: thou God, yt wentest not
forth with oure hoostes?
12 O be thou or helpe in trouble, for vayne is the helpe of man.
13 Thorow God we shall do greate actes, for it is he yt shal treade downe oure
enemies.

Psalm 109

1 Holde not thy toge, o God of my prayse. For the mouth of the vngodly, yee and
the mouth of the disceatfull is opened vpon me,
2 and speake agaynst me with false toges. They compase me aboute with wordes of
hatred, & fight agaynst me without a cause.
3 For the loue that I had vnto them, they take now my contrary parte, but I geue
my self vnto prayer.
4 Thus they rewarde me euell for good, & hatred for my good will.
5 Set an vngodly man to be ruler ouer him, & let Satan stonde at his right
hande.
6 When sentence is geuen vpon him, let him be codempned, and let his prayer be
turned in to synne.
7 Let his dayes be fewe, and his bishopricke another take.
8 Let his children be fatherlesse, & his wife a wyddowe.
9 Let his children be vagabundes, and begg their bred: let them seke it, as they
that be destroyed.
10 Let the extorcioner cosume all that he hath, and let straungers spoyle his
laboure.
11 Let there be no man to petie, ner to haue compassion vpon his fatherlesse
children.
12 Let his ende be destruccion, and in the nexte generacion let his name be
clene put out.
13 Let the wickednesse of his fathers be had in remembraunce in the sight of the
LORDE, and let not the synne of his mother be done awaye.
14 Let them be allwaye before the LORDE, but as for the memoriall of them
selues, let it perish from out of the earth.
15 And that because his mynde was not to do good, but persecuted the poore
helplesse, and him that was vexed at the herte, to slaye him.
16 His delite was in cursynge, and therfore shall it happe vnto him: he loued
not blessynge, and that shall be farre fro him.
17 He clothed him self with cursynge like as with a rayment: yee it wente in to
his bowels like water, and like oyle in to his bones.
18 Let it be vnto him as the cloke that he hath vpon him, and as the gyrdle that
he is gyrded withall.
19 Let it thus happen from the LORDE vnto myne enemies, and to those that speake
euell agaynst my soule.
20 But deale thou with me (o LORDE God) acordinge vnto thy name, for swete is
thy mercy.
21 O delyuer me, for I am helplesse & poore, & my herte is wounded within me,
22 I go hence like ye shadowe that departeth, and am dryuen awaye as ye
greshoppers.
23 My knees are weake thorow fastinge, my flesh is dried vp for want of
fatnesse.
24 I am become a rebuke vnto them, they loke vpo me and shake their heades.
25 Helpe me o LORDE my God, oh saue me for thy mercies sake.
26 That they maye knowe, how that this is thy hande, and that thou hast done it.
27 Though they curse, yet blesse thou:
28 and let them be cofounded, that ryse vp agaynst me, but let thy seruaunt
reioyse.
29 Let myne aduersaries be clothed with their owne shame, as with a cloake.
30 As for me, I wil geue thankes vnto the LORDE with my mouth, and prayse him
amonge the multitude.
31 For he stondeth at the right hande of the poore, to saue him from soch as
condempne his soule.

Psalm 110

1 The LORDE sayde vnto my LORDE: Syt thou on my right hande, vntill I make thine
enemies thy fotestole.
2 The LORDE shal sende the rodde of thy power out of Sion, be thou ruler euen in
ye myddest amonge thine enemies.
3 In the daye of thy power shal thy people offre the frewill offeringes with an
holy worshipe, ye dewe of thy byrth is of the wobe of the mornynge.
4 The LORDE sware, and wil not repent: Thou art a prest for euer after ye order
of Melchisedec.
5 The LORDE vpon thy right honde, shal smyte euen kynges in the daye of his
wrath.
6 He shal be iudge amoge the Heithen, he shal fyll them with deed bodies, and
smyte in sonder the heades ouer dyuerse countres.
7 He shal drynke of the broke in the waye, therfore shal he lift vp his heade.

Psalm 111

1 I wil geue thankes vnto the LORDE with my whole herte: secretly amonge the
faithfull, and in the congregacion.
2 The workes of the LORDE are greate, sought out of all the that haue pleasure
therin.
3 His worke is worthy to be praysed and had in honoure, and his rightuousnesse
endureth for euer.
4 The mercifull & gracious LORDE hath so done his marvelous workes, yt they
ought to be had in remebrauce.
5 He geueth meate vnto the yt feare him, he is euer myndfull of his couenaut.
6 He sheweth his people the power of his workes, that he maye geue them the
heretage of the Heithen.
7 The workes of his hodes are verite & iudgment, all his comaundemetes are true.
8 They stonde fast for euer & euer, & are done in trueth & equite.
9 He sent redempcion vnto his people, he hath commaunded his couenaunt for euer,
holy & reuerent is his name.
10 The feare of the LORDE is the begynnynge of wy?dome, a good vnderstondinge
haue all they that do therafter: the prayse of it endureth for euer.

Psalm 112

1 Blessed is the man yt feareth the LORDE, & hath greate delite in his
commaundementes.
2 His sede shall be mightie vpon earth, the generacion of the faithfull shalbe
blessed.
3 Riches & pleteousnesse shalbe in his house, & his rightuousnes endureth for
euer.
4 Vnto the godly there ariseth vp light in the darcknesse: he is merciful,
louynge & rightuous.
5 Wel is him that is mercifull, & lendeth gladly, & podreth his wordes wt
discrecion.
6 For he shal neuer be moued, the rightuous shal be had in an euerlastinge
remembraunce.
7 He wil not be afrayed for eny euell tydinges, his herte stondeth fast, &
beleueth in ye LORDE.
8 His herte is stablished, he wil not shrencke, vntill he se his desyre vpon his
enemies.
9 He hath sparsed abrode, & geue to the poore, his rightuousnes remayneth for
euer, his horne shalbe exalted wt honor.
10 The vngodly shal se it, & it shal greue him: he shall gnash wt his teth &
consume awaye, & the desyre of the vngodly shal perish.

Psalm 113

1 Prayse the LORDE (O ye seruauntes) O prayse the name of the LORDE.
2 Blessed be the name of the LORDE, fro this tyme forth for euermore.
3 The LORDES name is worthy to be praysed, fro the rysinge vp of the Sonne vnto
the goinge downe of the same.
4 The LORDE is hye aboue all Heithen, and his glory aboue the heaues.
5 Who is like vnto the LORDE oure God, yt hath his dwellinge so hye,
6 which humbleth himself, to beholde that is in heauen and earth?
7 Which taketh vp the symple out of the dust, and lifteth the poore out of the
myre.
8 That he maye set him amonge the prynces, euen amonge the prynces of his
people.
9 Which maketh the baren woman to kepe house, and to be a ioyfull mother of
children. Halleluya.

Psalm 114

1 When Israel came out of Egipte, & the house of Iacob from amonge that straunge
people.
2 Iuda was his Sactuary, Israel his dominion.
3 The see sawe that, and fled, Iordan turned backe.
4 The mountaynes skipped like rammes, & the litle hilles like yonge shepe.
5 What ayled the (o thou see) that thou fleddest? and thou Iordan, that thou
turnedest backe?
6 Ye mountaynes, that ye skipped like rammes? and ye litle hilles, like yonge
shepe?
7 The earth trembled at the presence of the LORDE, at the presence of the God of
Iacob.
8 Which turned the harde rocke in to a stondinge water, & the flynt stone in to
a sprynginge well.

Psalm 115

1 Not vnto vs (o LORDE) not vnto vs, but vnto thy name geue the prayse, for thy
louinge mercy and faithfulnes.
2 Wherfore shal the Heithen saye: where is now their God?
3 As for oure God, he is in heauen, he doth what soeuer it pleaseth him.
4 Their ymages are but syluer and golde, euen the worke of mens hodes.
5 They haue mouthes, and speake not: eyes haue they, but they se not.
6 They haue eares, and heare not: noses haue they, but they smell not.
7 They haue handes and handle not, fete haue they, but they can not go, nether
can they speake thorow their throte.
8 They that made them, are like vnto them, and so are all soch as put their
trust in them.
9 But let Israel trust in ye LORDE, for he is their sucoure & defence.
10 Let the house of Aaron put their trust in ye LORDE, for he is their sucoure &
defence.
11 They that feare the LORDE, let the put their trust in the LORDE, for he is
their sucoure and defence.
12 The LORDE is myndefull of vs, & blesseth vs: he blesseth ye house of Israel,
he blesseth ye house of Aaron.
13 Yee he blesseth all them that feare the LORDE, both small & greate.
14 The LORDE encrease you more & more: you, and youre childre.
15 For ye are ye blessed of the LORDE, which made heauen & earth.
16 All the whole heauens are the LORDES, but the earth hath he geue vnto ye
childre of men.
17 The deed prayse not the (o LORDE) nether all they that go downe in to
sylence.
18 But we will prayse the LORDE, from this tyme forth for euermore. Halleluya.

Psalm 116

1 I am wel pleased, yt the LORDE hath herde ye voyce of my prayer.
2 That he hath enclyned his eare vnto me, therfore wil I call vpo him as longe
as I lyue.
3 The snares of death copased me rounde aboute, the paynes of hell gat holde
vpon me,
4 I founde trouble and heuynesse. Then called I vpon ye name of the LORDE: o
LORDE, delyuer my soule.
5 Gracious is ye LORDE & rightuous, yee oure God is mercifull.
6 The LORDE preserueth ye symple, I was brought downe, and he helped me.
7 Turne agayne then vnto thy rest (o my soule) for the LORDE hath geuen the thy
desyre.
8 And why? thou hast delyuered my soule from death, myne eyes from teares, and
my fete from fallinge.
9 I wil walke before ye LORDE, in the londe of the lyuynge.
10 I beleued, and therfore haue I spoke, but I was sore troubled.
11 I sayde in my haist: All men are lyers.
12 What rewarde shal I geue vnto ye LORDE, for all the benefites yt he hath done
vnto me?
13 I wil receaue the cuppe of saluacio, and call vpon the name of the LORDE.
14 I wil paye my vowes in the presence of all his people, right deare in the
sight of ye LORDE is the death of his sayntes.
15 O LORDE, I am thy seruaunt, I am thy seruaunt,
16 and the sonne of thy handmayden, thou hast broken my bondes in sonder.
17 I wil offre the the sacrifice of thankes geuynge, and wil call vpon the name
of the LORDE.
18 I wil paye my vowes vnto the LORDE in the sight of all his people,
19 in the courtes of the LORDES house, eue in the myddest of the, o Ierusalem.
Halleluya.

Psalm 117

1 O prayse the LORDE all ye Gentiles, laude him all ye people.
2 For his mercifull kyndnes is euer more and more towarde vs, & the trueth of
the LORDE endureth for euer. Halleluya.

Psalm 118

1 O Geue thankes vnto the LORDE, for he is gracious, and his mercy endureth for
euer.
2 Let Israel now confesse, yt his mercy endureth for euer.
3 Let the house of Aaron now confesse, that his mercy endureth for euer.
4 Yee let the now that feare the LORDE, confesse, that his mercy endureth for
euer.
5 I called vpon the LORDE in trouble, and the LORDE herde me at large.
6 The LORDE is my helper, I wil not feare what man doeth vnto me.
7 The LORDE is my helper, & I shal se my desyre vpon myne enemies.
8 It is better to trust in the LORDE, then to put eny confidence in man.
9 It is better to trust in the LORDE, then to put eny confidece in prynces.
10 All Heithen compased me rounde aboute, but in the name of the LORDE wil I
destroye the.
11 They kepte me in on euery syde, but in the name of the LORDE, I wil destroye
them.
12 They came aboute me like bees, & were as hote as the fyre in the thornes, but
in the name of the LORDE I wil destroye them.
13 They thrust at me, that I might fall, but the LORDE was my helpe.
14 The LORDE is my stregth, & my songe, & is become my saluacion.
15 The voyce of ioye & myrth is in the dwellynges of ye rightuous, for ye right
hande of the LORDE hath gotte the victory.
16 The right hande of the LORDE hath the preemynence, the right hade of the
LORDE hath gotte the victory.
17 I wil not dye, but lyue, and declare the workes of the LORDE.
18 The LORDE hath chastened & correcte me, but he hath not geuen me ouer vnto
death.
19 Open me the gates of rightuousnes, yt I maye go in there thorow, & geue
thakes vnto the LORDE.
20 This is the dore of the LORDE, the rightuous shall entre in thorow it.
21 I thanke the, yt thou hast herde me, & art become my saluacio.
22 The same stone which the buylders refused, is become the heade stone in the
corner.
23 This was the LORDES doinge, & it is maruelous in or eyes.
24 This is the daye which the LORDE hath made, let vs reioyse and be glad in it.
25 Helpe now o LORDE, o LORDE sende vs now prosperite.
26 Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the LORDE, we wish you good lucke,
ye that be of the house of the LORDE.
27 God is the LORDE, & hath shewed vs light: O garnish the solempne feast with
grene braunches, eue vnto the hornes of ye aulter.
28 Thou art my God, & I wil thanke the: thou art my God, and I wil prayse the.
29 O geue thankes vnto the LORDE, for he is gracious, & his mercy endureth for
euer.

Psalm 119

1 Blessed are those yt be vndefiled in the waye: which walke in the lawe of ye
LORDE.
2 Blessed are they that kepe his testimonies, & seke him with their whole herte.
3 Which walke in his wayes, & do no wickednesse.
4 Thou hast geuen strayte charge to kepe thy commaundementes.
5 O that my wayes were stablished to kepe thy statutes.
6 So shulde I not be confounded, whyle I haue respecte vnto all thy
commaundementes.
7 I wil thanke the with an vnfayned herte, because I am lerned in the iudgmentes
of thy rightuousnesse.
8 I wil kepe thy statutes, o forsake me not vtterly.
9 Where withall shall a yonge man clense his waye? Euen by rulinge himself after
thy worde.
10 With my whole herte do I seke ye, O let me not go wronge out of thy
comaundemetes.
11 Thy wordes haue I hyd within my herte, yt I shulde not synne agaynst the.
12 Praysed be thou O LORDE, O teach me thy statutes.
13 With my lippes wil I be tellynge out all the iudgmentes of thy mouth.
14 I haue as greate delite in the waye of thy testimonies, as in all maner of
riches.
15 I wil exercise my self in thy comaundementes, & haue respecte vnto thy
fotepathes.
16 My delite shalbe in thy statutes, I will not forget thy wordes.
17 O do well vnto thy seruaunt, that I maye lyue and kepe thy wordes.
18 Open thou myne eyes, & so shal I spie out wonderous thinges in yi lawe.
19 I am a strauger vpo earth, O hyde not thy commaundementes fro me.
20 My soule breaketh out, for the very feruent desyre that I haue allwaye vnto
thy iudgmentes.
21 Thou rebukest the proude, cursed are they that departe from thy
commaundemetes
22 O turne fro me shame & rebuke, for I kepe thy testimonies.
23 Prynces also syt & speake agaynst me, but thy seruaut is occupied in thy
statutes.
24 In thy testimonies is my delite, they are my councelers.
25 My soule cleueth to the dust, O quicken thou me acordinge to thy worde.
26 I knowleged my wayes, & thou herdest me, O teach me then thy statutes.
27 Make me to vnderstonde the waye of thy commaundemetes, & so shal I talke of
thy wonderous workes.
28 My soule melteth awaye for very heuynesse, o set me vp acordinge vnto thy
worde.
29 Take fro me the waye of lyenge, & graunte me thy lawe.
30 I haue chosen the waye of treuth, thy iudgmentes haue I layed before me.
31 I sticke vnto thy testimonies, o LORDE cofounde me not.
32 I wil rune the waye of thy commaundementes, when thou hast comforted my
herte.
33 Teach me o LORDE the waye of thy statutes, and I shal kepe it vnto the ende.
34 O geue me vnderstondinge, and I shal kepe yi lawe, yee I shal kepe it with my
whole herte.
35 Lede me in the path of thy commaundemetes, for that is my desyre,
36 Enclyne myne herte vnto thy testimonies, & not to cuvetousnes.
37 O turne awaye myne eyes, lest they beholde vanite, & quicke me in thy waie.
38 O stablish thy worde in thy seruaunt, yt I maye feare the.
39 Take awaye the rebuke yt I am afraied of, for thy iudgmetes are amiable.
40 Beholde, my delite is in thy commaudemetes, o quycke me in thy
rightuousnesse.
41 Let thy louynge mercy come vnto me (o LORDE) and thy sauynge health acordinge
vnto thy worde.
42 That I maye geue answere vnto my blasphemers, for my trust is in yi worde.
43 O take not ye worde of treuth vtterly out of my mouth, for my hope is in thy
iudgmentes.
44 So shal I allwaye kepe thy lawe, yee for euer and euer.
45 And I wil walke at liberty, for I seke thy commaundementes.
46 I wil speake of thy testimonies euen before kynges, and wil not be ashamed.
47 My delite shalbe in thy commaundementes, which I loue.
48 My hondes also will I lift vp vnto thy commaundemetes which I loue, & my
talkynge shalbe of thy statutes.
49 O thynke vpon thy seruaunt as concernynge yi worde, wherin thou hast caused
me to put my trust.
50 For it is my comforte in my trouble, yee thy worde quyckeneth me.
51 The proude haue me greatly in derision, yet shrencke not I from thy lawe.
52 I remembre thy euerlastinge iudgmentes (o LORDE) and am comforted.
53 I am horribly afrayed for ye vngodly, that forsake thy lawe.
54 Thy statutes are my songes in the house of my pilgremage.
55 I thynke vpon thy name (o LORDE) in the night season, and kepe thy lawe.
56 It is myne owne, for I kepe thy commaundementes.
57 Thou art my porcion (o LORDE) I am purposed to kepe thy lawe.
58 I make myne humble peticion in thy presence wt my whole herte, o be mercifull
vnto me acordinge vnto yi worde.
59 I call myne owne wayes to remembraunce, and turne my fete in to thy
testimonies.
60 I make haist, and prolonge not the tyme, to kepe thy commaundemetes.
61 The congregacions of the vngodly haue robbed me, but I forget not thy lawe.
62 At mydnight stonde I vp, to geue thakes vnto the, for the iudgmentes of thy
rightuousnesse.
63 I am a companyon of all them that feare the, and kepe thy commaundementes.
64 The earth (o LORDE) is full of thy mercy, O teach me thy statutes.
65 O LORDE, thou hast dealt frendly with thy seruaunt, acordinge vnto thy worde.
66 O lerne me kyndnesse, nourtoure & knowlege, for I beleue thy commaundementes.
67 Before I was troubled, I wente wronge, but now I kepe thy worde.
68 Thou art good and frendly, O teach me thy statutes.
69 The proude ymagin lyes vpon me, but I kepe thy commaundemetes with my whole
herte.
70 Their herte is as fat as brawne, but my delite is in thy lawe.
71 It is good for me that I haue bene in trouble, that I maye lerne thy
statutes.
72 The lawe of thy mouth is dearer vnto me, the thousandes of golde & syluer.
73 Thy hades haue made me and fashioned me, O geue me vnderstondinge, that I
maye lerne thy commaundementes.
74 They that feare the, wil be glad when they se me, because I put my trust in
thy worde.
75 I knowe (o LORDE) yt thy iudgmentes are right, and yt thou of very
faithfulnesse hast caused me be troubled.
76 O let thy mercifull kyndnesse be my comforte, acordinge to the promyse that
thou hast made vnto thy seruaunt.
77 O let thy louynge mercies come vnto me, that I maye lyue, for thy lawe is my
delyte.
78 Let the proude be confounded, which handle so falsly agaynst me.
79 But let soch as feare the, & knowe thy testimonies, be turned vnto me.
80 O let my herte be vndefyled in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed.
81 My soule longeth for thy sauynge health, for my trust is in thy worde.
82 Myne eyes loge sore for thy worde, sayege: Oh when wilt thou coforte me?
83 For I am become like a botell in ye smoke, yet do not I forget thy statutes.
84 How many are the dayes of thy seruaunt? Whe wilt thou be auenged of my
aduersaries?
85 The proude haue dygged pittes for me, which are not after thy lawe.
86 All thy commaundemetes are true, they persecute me falsly, O be thou my
helpe.
87 They haue almost made an ende of me vpon earth, but I forsake not thy
commaundemetes.
88 O quycke me after yi louinge kyndnes, & so shall I kepe the testimonies of
thy mouth.
89 O LORDE, thy worde endureth for euer in heaue.
90 Thy treuth also remayneth from one generacion to another: thou hast layed the
foundacion of the earth, and it abydeth.
91 They cotinue this daye acordinge to thy ordinaunce, for all thinges serue
the.
92 Yf my delyte were not in thy lawe, I shulde perishe in my trouble.
93 I wil neuer forget thy comaundementes, for with the thou quyckenest me.
94 I am thine, oh helpe me, for I seke thy commaundementes.
95 The vngodly laye wayte for me to destroye me, but I considre thy testimonies.
96 I se that all thinges come to an ende, but thy commaundemet is exceadinge
brode.
97 O what a loue haue I vnto thy lawe? all the daye longe is my talkynge of it.
98 Thou thorow thy commaundement hast made me wyser the myne enemies, for it is
euer by me.
99 I haue more vnderstondinge then all my teachers, for thy testimonies are my
studye.
100 Yee I am wyser then the aged, for I kepe thy comaundementes.
101 I refrayne my fete from euery euell waye, that I maye kepe thy wordes.
102 I shrenck not from thy iudgmentes, for thou teachest me.
103 O how swete are thy wordes vnto my throte? Yee more the hony vnto my mouth.
104 Thorow thy commaundementes I get vnderstondinge, therfore I hate all false
wayes.
105 Thy worde is a lanterne vnto my fete & a light vnto my pathes.
106 I haue sworne & am sted fastly purposed, to kepe the iudgmetes of thy
rightuousnesse.
107 I am troubled aboue measure, quycken me (o LORDE) acordinge vnto thy worde.
108 Let the frewil offeringes of my mouth please the (o LORDE) & teach me yi
iudgmetes.
109 My soule is allwaye in my hode, yet do not I forget thy lawe.
110 The vngodly haue laied a snare for me, but yet swarue not I fro thy
comaundemetes.
111 Thy testimonies haue I claymed as myne heretage for euer: & why? they are
the very ioye of my herte.
112 I applye myne herte to fulfill thy statutes all waye, euen vnto the ende.
113 I hate ye vngodly, but thy lawe do I loue.
114 Thou art my defence & shylde, my trust is in thy worde.
115 Awaye fro me ye wicked, I wil kepe the commaundementes of my God.
116 O stablish me acordinge vnto thy worde, yt I maye lyue, & let me not be
disapoynted of my hope.
117 Holde thou me vp, & I shall be safe: yee I shal euer be talkynge of thy
statutes.
118 Thou treadest downe all the yt departe from thy statutes, for they ymagin
but disceate.
119 Thou puttest awaye all the vngodly of the earth like drosse, therfore I loue
thy testimonies.
120 My flesh trebleth for feare of the, and I am afrayed of thy iudgmetes.
121 I deale wt the thinge yt is laufull & right, O geue me not ouer vnto my
oppressours.
122 Be thou suertie for thy seruaut to do him good, that the proude do me no
wronge.
123 Myne eyes are waysted awaye wt lokynge for thy health, & for ye worde of thy
rightuousnesse.
124 O deale with thy seruaunt acordinge vnto thy louynge mercy, and teach me thy
statutes.
125 I am thy seruaunt, O graunte me vnderstodinge, that I maye knowe thy
testimonies.
126 It is tyme for the (o LORDE) to laye to thine hode, for they haue destroyed
thy lawe.
127 For I loue thy comaundemetes aboue golde and precious stone.
128 Therfore holde I straight all thy commaundemetes, and all false wayes I
vtterly abhorre.
129 Thy testimonies are wonderfull, therfore doth my soule kepe them.
130 When thy worde goeth forth, it geueth light and vnderstodinge, eue vnto
babes.
131 I ope my mouth & drawe in my breth, for I desyre thy commaundemetes.
132 O loke thou vpon me, and be mercyfull, as thou vsest to do vnto those yt
loue yi name.
133 Ordre my goinges after thy worde, that no wickednesse raigne in me.
134 O delyuer me from the wrogeous dealinges of me, and so shal I kepe thy
commaundemetes.
135 Shewe the light of thy countenaunce vnto thy seruaunt, and lerne me thy
statutes.
136 Myne eyes gusshe out with water, because men kepe not thy lawe.
137 Rightuous art thou (o LORDE) & true is yi iudgmet.
138 The testimonies that thou hast commauded, are exceadinge rightuous and true.
139 My zele hath euen consumed me, because myne enemies haue forgotten thy
wordes.
140 Thy worde is tried to the vttermost, & thy seruaunte loueth it.
141 I am small and of no reputacio, yet do not I forget thy comaudementes.
142 Thy rightuousnesse is an euerlastinge rightuousnes, and thy lawe is true.
143 Trouble and heuynesse haue take holde vpo me, yet is my delite in thy
commaundementes.
144 The rightuousnes of thy testimonies is euerlastinge, o graunte me
vnderstondinge, and I shal lyue.
145 I call wt my whole herte, heare me (o LORDE) I wil kepe thy statutes.
146 Yee euen vpo the do I call, helpe me, and I shal kepe yi testimonies.
147 Early in ye mornynge do I crie vnto the, for in thy worde is my trust.
148 Myne eyes preuete ye night watches, yt I might be occupied in thy wordes.
149 Heare my voyce (o LORDE) acordige vnto thy louynge kyndnesse, quycke me
acordige as thou art wot.
150 They drawe nye yt of malice persecute me, & are farre fro yi lawe.
151 Be thou nye at hode also (o LORDE) for thy promises are faithfull.
152 As concernynge thy testimonies, I haue knowne euer sens the begynnynge, that
thou hast grounded them for euer.
153 O considre my aduersite, & delyuer me, for I do not forget thy lawe.
154 Manteyne thou my cause and defende me, quycken me acordinge vnto thy worde.
155 Health is farre fro the vngodly, for they regarde not thy statutes.
156 Greate is thy mercy (o LORDE) quycken me as thou art wont.
157 Many there are that trouble me, and persecute me, yet do not I swarue fro
thy testimonies.
158 It greueth me, whan I se, that the transgressours kepe not thy lawe.
159 Considre (LORDE) how I loue thy comaundementes, O quycken me wt thy louinge
kyndnesse.
160 Thy worde is true from euerlastinge, all the iudgmentes of thy
rightuousnesse endure for euermore.
161 The prynces persecute me without cause, but my herte stodeth in awe of thy
wordes.
162 I am as glad of thy worde, as one yt fyndeth greate spoyles.
163 As for lyes, I hate & abhorre them, but thy lawe do I loue
164 Seuen tymes a daye do I prayse the, because of thy rightuous iudgmentes.
165 Greate is the peace yt they haue which loue yi lawe, & they are not offended
at it.
166 LORDE, I loke for yi sauynge health, & do after thy comaundemetes.
167 My soule kepeth thy testimonies, & loueth the exceadingly.
168 I kepe thy comaundemetes & testimonies, for all my wayes are before the.
169 Let my coplaynte come before the (o LORDE) geue me vnderstondinge, acordinge
vnto thy worde.
170 Oh let my supplicacio come before the, delyuer me acordinge to thy promyse.
171 My lippes shall speake of thy prayse, seynge thou hast taught me thy
statutes.
172 Yee my toge shall synge of thy worde, for all thy comaundemetes are right.
173 Let thy hade helpe me, for I haue chosen thy comaudementes.
174 I longe for thy sauynge health (o LORDE) & in thy lawe is my delyte.
175 Oh let my soule lyue & prayse the, yt thy iudgmentes maye helpe me.
176 I go astraye, like a shepe that is lost: Oh seke thy seruaunt, for I do not
forget thy commaundementes.

Psalm 120

1 When I am in trouble, I call vpon ye LORDE, & he answereth me.
2 Delyuer my soule (o LORDE) fro lyenge lippes, & fro a disceatfull toge.
3 What rewarde shalbe geuen or done vnto the, thou false tonge?
4 Euen mightie & sharpe arowes, wt hote burnige coales.
5 Wo is me yt my banishmet endureth sologe: I dwell in the tabernacles of the
soroufull.
6 My soule hath loge dwelt amonge them, that be enemies vnto peace.
7 I laboured for peace, but when I spake therof, they made them to batayll.

Psalm 121

1 I lift vp myne eyes vnto the hilles, fro whence commeth my helpe?
2 My helpe cometh euen from the LORDE, which hath made heauen and earth.
3 He will not suffre thy fote to be moued, and he yt kepeth the, slepeth not.
4 Beholde, he that kepeth Israel, doth nether slombre ner slepe.
5 The LORDE himself is thy keper, the LORDE is thy defence vpon yi right honde.
6 So that the Sonne shal not burne the by daye, nether the Moone by night.
7 The LORDE preserueth the from all euell, yee it is the LORDE thath kepeth thy
soule.
8 The LORDE preserueth thy goinge out and thy comynge in, from this tyme forth
for euermore.

Psalm 122

1 I was glad, when they sayde vnto me: we wil go in to the house of the LORDE.
2 Oure fete shal stonde in thy gates, O Ierusalem.
3 Ierusale is buylded as a cite, that is at vnite in it self.
4 For there ye trybes go vp, euen the trybes of the LORDE: to testifie vnto
Israel, to geue thanckes vnto the name of the LORDE.
5 For there is the seate of iudgement, eue the seate of the house of Dauid.
6 O praye for the peace of Ierusale, they shal prospere that loue the.
7 Peace be within yi walles, and plenteousnes within thy palaces,
8 For my brethren and companyons sakes, I wil wish the prosperite.
9 Yee because of ye house of the LORDE oure God, I wil seke to do the good.

Psalm 123

1 Unto the lift I vp myne eyes, thou yt dwellest in the heauens.
2 Beholde, euen as the eyes of seruautes loke vnto the handes of their masters:
and as the eyes of a mayden vnto the handes of hir mastresse, euen so oure eyes
wayte vpon the LORDE or God, vntill he haue mercy vpo vs.
3 Haue mercy vpo vs (o LORDE) haue mercy vpon vs, for we are vtterly despysed.
4 Oure soule is fylled wt the scornefull reprofe of the welthy, & with ye
despitefulnesse of the proude.

Psalm 124

1 If the LORDE had not bene of oure syde (now maye Israel saye) Yf the LORDE had
not bene of oure syde, whe me rose vp agaynst vs:
2 They had swalowed vs vp quycke, when they were so wrothfully displeased at vs.
3 Yee the waters had drowned vs, the streame had gone ouer oure soule.
4 The depe waters of the proude had gone eue vnto oure soule.
5 But praysed be ye LORDE, which hath not geuen vs ouer for a pray vnto their
teth.
6 Oure soule is escaped, euen as a byrde out of the snare of ye fouler:
7 ye snare is broke, and we are delyuered.
8 Oure helpe stodeth in the name of the LORDE, which hath made heauen and earth.

Psalm 125

1 They that put their trust in ye LORDE, are eue as the mount Sion, which maye
not be remoued, but stodeth fast for euer.
2 The hilles stonde aboute Ierusalem, euen so stondeth the LORDE rounde aboute
his people, fro this tyme forth for euermore.
3 That the rodd of the vngodly come not into the lott of the rightuous, lest the
rightuous put their honde vnto wickednesse.
4 Do wel (o LORDE) vnto those that be good and true of herte.
5 As for soch as turne backe vnto their owne wickednesse, the LORDE shal lede
them forth with the euell doers: but peace be vpon Israel.

Psalm 126

1 When the LORDE turneth agayne ye captiuyte of Sion, then shal we be like vnto
them that dreame.
2 The shal oure mouth be fylled with laughter, and oure tonge with ioye.
3 Then shal it be sayed amonge the Heithen: the LORDE hath done greate thinges
for them.
4 Yee the LORDE hath done greate thinges for vs allready, wherof we reioyse.
5 Turne oure captiuyte (o LORDE) as the ryuers in the south.
6 They that sowe in teeres, shal reape in ioye. He yt now goeth his waye wepige
& beareth forth good sede, shal come agayne with ioye, and brynge his sheaues
with him.

Psalm 127

1 Excepte the LORDE buylde the house, their labour is but lost that buylde it.
2 Excepte the LORDE kepe the cite, the watchman waketh but in vayne.
3 It is but lost labour that ye ryse vp early, and take no rest, but eate the
bred of carefulnesse: for loke to whom it pleaseth him, he geueth it in slepe.
4 Lo, children and ye frute of the wombe are an heretage and gift, that cometh
of the LORDE.
5 Like as the arowes in the hode of the giaute, eue so are the yonge childre.
Happie is the ma, yt hath his quyuer full of them: they shal not be ashamed,
when they speake with their enemies in the gate.

Psalm 128

1 Blessed are all they that feare the LORDE, & walke in his wayes.
2 For thou shalt eate the laboures of thine owne hondes: o well is the, happie
art thou.
3 Thy wife shalbe as a frutefull vyne vpon the walles of thy house.
4 Thy children like the olyue braunches roude aboute yi table.
5 Lo, thus shal ye ma be blessed, yt feareth the LORDE.
6 The LORDE shal so blesse the out of Sion, that thou shalt se Ierusale in
prosperite all thy life longe. Yee that thou shalt se thy childers childre, &
peace vpo Israel.

Psalm 129

1 Many a tyme haue they fought agaynst me fro my youth vp (maye Israel now
saie).
2 Yee many a tyme haue they fought agaist me fro my youth vp, but they haue not
ouercome me.
3 The plowers plowed vpo my backe, & made loge forowes.
4 But the rightous LORDE hath hewen ye yocke of ye vngodly in peces.
5 Let them be confounded & turned backwarde, as many as haue euell will at Sion.
6 Let the be eue as the haye vpon the house toppes, which wythereth afore it be
pluckte vp.
7 Wherof the mower fylleth not his hande, nether he that byndeth vp the sheaues,
his bosome.
8 So that they which go by, saye not so moch as: the LORDE prospere you, we wish
you good lucke in the name of the LORDE.

Psalm 130

1 Ovt of the depe call I vnto the (o LORDE) LORDE heare my voyce.
2 Oh let thine eares considre well the voyce of my complaynte.
3 Yf thou (LORDE) wilt be extreme to marcke what is done amysse, Oh LORDE, who
maye abyde it?
4 But there is mercy with the, that thou mayest be feared.
5 I loke for the LORDE, my soule doth wayte for him, and in his worde is my
trust.
6 My soule doth paciently abyde the LORDE, fro the one mornynge to the other.
7 Let Israel trust in the LORDE, for with the LORDE there is mercy and plenteous
redempcion.
8 And he shal redeme Israel from all his synnes.

Psalm 131

1 Lorde, I am not hye mynded, I haue no proude lokes.
2 I do not exercise myself in greate matters, which are to hye for me.
3 But I refrayne my soule and kepe it lowe, like as a childe yt is weened from
his mother, yee my soule is euen as a weened childe. Let Israel trust in the
LORDE, fro this tyme forth for euermore.

Psalm 132

1 Lorde, remembre Dauid and all his trouble.
2 How he swore vnto ye LORDE, & vowed a vowe vnto ye mightie one of Iacob:
3 I wil not come within the tabernacle of my house, ner clymme vp i to my bedde.
4 I wil not suffre myne eyes to slepe, ner myne eye lyddes to slober.
5 Vntill I fynde out a place for the LORDE, an habitacio for the mightie one of
Iacob.
6 Lo, we herde of the same at Ephrata, & foude it in ye wod.
7 We wil go into his tabernacle, & fall downe before his fotestole.
8 Arise (o LORDE) in to thy restinge place, thou & ye arke of yi stregth.
9 Let thy prestes be clothed with rightuousnesse, and let thy sayntes reioyse.
10 For thy seruaunte Dauids sake turne not awaye the presence of thine anoynted.
11 The LORDE hath made a faithfull ooth vnto Dauid, & he shal not shrenke from
it:
12 Of the frute of thy body shal I set vpon thy seate.
13 Yf thy children wil kepe my couenaunt, & my testimony yt I shal lerne the,
their childre also shal syt vpo thy seate for euermore.
14 For the LORDE hath chosen Sio, to be an habitacio for him self hath he chosen
her.
15 This shalbe my rest, here wil I dwel, for I haue a delite therin.
16 I will blesse hir vytales wt increase, & wil satisfie hir poore with bred.
17 I wil decke hir prestes with health, & hir sayntes shal reioyse & be glad.
18 There shall I make the horne of Dauid to florish, I haue ordened a lanterne
for myne anoynted. As for his enemies, I shal clothe the wt shame, but vpon
himself shal his crowne florish.

Psalm 133

1 Beholde, how good & ioyfull a thinge it is, brethre to dwell together in
vnite. It is like yt precious oyntment vpon the heade, that ranne downe vnto the
beerd, eue vnto Aarons beerd, & wete downe to the skyrtes of his clothinge.
2 Like the dewe of Hermon, which fell vpon the hill of Sion.
3 For there the LORDE promised his blessynge, and life for euermore.

Psalm 134

1 Beholde, O prayse the LORDE all ye seruauntes of the LORDE, ye that by night
stode in the house of the LORDE.
2 O lift vp youre handes in the Sanctuary, and prayse the LORDE.
3 The LORDE yt made heauen & earth, blesse the out of Sion.

Psalm 135

1 O prayse ye name of ye LORDE, praise it o ye seruautes of ye LORDE.
2 Ye yt stode iu ye house of ye LORDE, in the courtes of the house of oure God.
3 O prayse the LORDE, for the LORDE is gracious: o synge prayses vnto his name,
for it is louely.
4 For why, the LORDE hath chosen Iacob vnto him self, & Israel for his owne
possessio.
5 For I knowe yt ye LORDE is greate. & yt or LORDE is aboue all goddes.
6 What so euer ye LORDE pleaseth, yt doth he in heaue & in earth, in the see &
in all depe places.
7 He bryngeth forth the cloudes from the endes of the worlde, he turneth ye
lighteniges vnto rayne, bringige the wyndes out of their treasuries.
8 Which smote the firstborne of Egipte, both of man and beest.
9 He hath sent tokens and wonders in to the myddest of the (o thou londe of
Egipte) vpon Pharao and all his seruauntes.
10 Which smote dyuerse nacions, & slewe mightie kynges.
11 Sihon kynge of ye Amorites, Og the kynge of Basan, and all the kyngdomes of
Canaa.
12 And gaue their lode for an heretage, for an heretage vnto Israel his people.
13 Thy name (o LORDE) endureth for euer, so doth thy memoriall (o LORDE) from
one generacion to another.
14 For the LORDE wil auege his people, & be gracious vnto his seruautes.
15 As for the ymages of the Heithe, they are but syluer and golde, the worke of
mens hades.
16 They haue mouthes, & speake not: eyes haue they, but they se not.
17 They haue eares, and yet they heare not, nether is there eny breth i their
mouthes.
18 They that make them, are like vnto them, & so are all they that put their
trust in the.
19 Prayse the LORDE ye house of Israel, prayse the LORDE ye house of Aaron.
20 Prayse the LORDE ye house of Leui, ye that feare ye LORDE, prayse the LORDE.
21 Praysed be the LORDE out of Sion, which dwelleth at Ierusale. Halleluya.

Psalm 136

1 O geue thankes vnto the LORDE, for he is gracious, and his mercy endureth for
euer.
2 O geue thakes vnto the God of all goddes, for his mercy endureth for euer.
3 O thanke the LORDE of all lordes, for his mercy endureth for euer.
4 Which only doth greate wonders, for his mercy endureth for euer.
5 Which by his wysdome made the heauens, for his mercy endureth for euer.
6 Which layed out the earth aboue the waters, for his mercy endureth for euer.
7 Which hath made greate lightes, for his mercy endureth for euer.
8 The Sonne to rule the daye, for his mercy endureth for euer.
9 The Moone and the starres to gouerne the night, for his mercy endureth for
euer.
10 Which smote Egipte with their firstborne, for his mercy endureth for euer.
11 And brought out Israel from amonge them, for his mercy endureth for euer.
12 With a mightie hade and a stretched out arme, for his mercy endureth for
euer.
13 Which deuyded the reed see in to partes, for his mercy endureth for euer.
14 And made Israel to go thorow ye myddest of it, for his mercy endureth for
euer
15 But as for Pharao and his hoost, he ouerthrewe them in the reed see, for his
mercy endureth for euer.
16 Which led his people thorow the wyldernesse, for his mercy endureth for euer.
17 Which smote greate kynges, for his mercy endureth for euer.
18 Yee and slewe mightie kynges, for his mercy endureth for euer.
19 Sihon kynge of the Amorites, for his mercy endureth for euer.
20 And Og the kynge of Basan, for his mercy endureth for euer.
21 And gaue a waye their londe for an heretage, for his mercy endureth for euer.
22 Euen for an heretage vnto Israel his seruaunt, for his mercy endureth for
euer.
23 Which remebreth vs, whe we are in trouble, for his mercy endureth for euer.
24 Which geueth foode vnto all flesh, for his mercy endureth for euer.
25 O geue thankes vnto the God of heauen, for his mercy endureth for euer.
26 (Omitted Text)

Psalm 137

1 By the waters of Babilon we sat downe and wepte, when we remebred Sion.
2 As for oure harpes, we hanged them vp vpon the trees, that are therin.
3 The, they that led vs awaye captyue, requyred of vs a songe and melody in or
heuynes: synge vs one of the songes of Sion.
4 How shal we synge the LORDES songe in a strauge lode?
5 Yf I forget the (o Ierusalem) let my right hande be forgotten.
6 Yf I do not remembre the, let my tonge cleue to the rofe of my mouth: yee yf I
preferre not Ierusalem in my myrth.
7 Remembre the childre of Edom (o LORDE) in the daye of Ierusalem, how they
sayde: downe with it, downe with it, eue to the grounde.
8 O doughter Babilo, thou shalt come to misery thy self: yee happie shal he be,
that rewardeth ye as thou hast serued vs.
9 Blessed shal he be, that taketh thy children, and throweth them agaynst the
stones

Psalm 138

1 I wil geue thakes vnto the (o LORDE) with my whole hert, euen before the
goddes wil I synge prayses vnto the.
2 I wil worshippe towarde thy holy teple, and prayse thy name because of thy
louynge kyndnesse and treuth, for thou hast magnified thy worde, acordynge vnto
thy greate name.
3 When I call vpo the, thou hearest me, and endewest my soule with moch stregth.
4 All the kynges of the earth shal prayse the (o LORDE) when they heare the
wordes of thy mouth.
5 Yee they shal synge in the wayes of the LORDE, that greate is the glory of the
LORDE.
6 For though the LORDE be hye, yet hath he respecte vnto ye lowly: as for ye
proude, he beholdeth him afarre off.
7 Though I walke i ye myddest of trouble, yet shalt thou refresh me: thou shalt
stretch forth thine hade vpo the furiousnes of myne enemies, & yi righthande
shal saue me.
8 The LORDE shal make good for me, yee thy mercy (o LORDE) endureth for euer:
despyse not then the worke of thine owne handes.

Psalm 139

1 O Lorde, thou searchest me out, and knowest me. Thou knowest my downe syttinge
& my vprisynge, thou vnderstodest my thoughtes a farre of.
2 Thou art aboute my path & aboute my bedd, & spyest out all my wayes.
3 For lo, there is not a worde i my toge, but thou (o LORDE) knowest it
alltogether.
4 Thou hast fashioned me behinde & before, & layed thine hode vpon me.
5 Soch knowlege is to wonderfull & excellet for me, I can not atteyne vnto it.
6 Whither shal I go then from thy sprete? Or, whither shal I fle from thy
presence?
7 Yf I clymme vp in to heauen, thou art there: yf I go downe to hell, thou art
there also.
8 Yf I take the wynges of the mornynge, & remayne in the vttemost parte of the
see:
9 Euen there also shal thy honde lede me, and thy right hande shal holde me.
10 Yf I saye: peradueture the darcknesse shal couer me, then shal my night be
turned to daye.
11 Yee the darcknesse is no darcknesse with the, but the night is as cleare as
the daye, the darcknesse & light are both alike.
12 For my reynes are thyne, thou hast couered me in my mothers wombe.
13 I wil geue thakes vnto the, for I am woderously made: maruelous are thy
workes, and that my soule knoweth right well.
14 My bones are not hyd from the, though I be made secretly, and fashioned
beneth in the earth.
15 Thine eyes se myne vnparfitnesse, they stonde all writte i thy boke:
16 my dayes were fashioned, when as yet there was not one of them
17 How deare are yi coucels vnto me o God? O how greate is the summe of them?
18 Yf I tell them, they are mo in nombre then the sonde: when I wake vp, I am
present with the.
19 Wilt thou not slaye ye wicked (oh God) that the bloudethyrstie mighte departe
fro me?
20 For they speake vnright of the, thine enemies exalte them selues
presumptuously.
21 I hate them (o LORDE) that hate the, & I maye not awaye with those that ryse
vp agaynst the?
22 Yee I hate them right sore, therfore are they myne enemies.
23 Trye me (o God) and seke the grounde of myne hert: proue me, & examen my
thoughtes.
24 Loke well, yf there be eny waye of wickednesse in me, & lede me in the waye
euerlastinge.

Psalm 140

1 Delyuer me (o LORDE) from the euell men, oh preserue me from the wicked men.
2 Which ymagin myschefe in their hertes, & stere vp strife all the daye longe.
3 They sharpen their tonges like a serpent, Adders poyson is vnder their lippes.
4 Sela. Kepe me (o LORDE) from the hande of the vngodly, preserue me from the
wicked men, which are purposed to ouerthrowe my goinges.
5 The proude haue layed a snare for me, & spred a nett abrode with coardes, yee
& sett trappes in my waye.
6 Sela. But my sayenge is vnto the LORDE: thou art my God, heare the voyce of my
prayer o LORDE.
7 O LORDE God, thou strength of my health, thou hast couered my heade in ye daye
of battayll.
8 Let not ye vngodly haue his desyre (o LORDE) let him not haue his purpose,
lest they be to proude.
9 Sela. Let the myschefe of their owne lippes fall vpon ye head of the, yt
copase me aboute.
10 Let hote burnynge coales fall vpo the, let the be cast in to the fyre, and in
to the pytt, that they neuer ryse vp agayne.
11 A man full of wordes shal not prospere vpon earth: a malicious & wicked
person shal be hunted awaye and destroyed.
12 Sure I am, that the LORDE wil auenge the poore, and manteyne the cause of the
helplesse.
13 The rightuous also shal geue thakes vnto thy name, & the iust shal continue
in thy sight.

Psalm 141

1 Lorde, I call vpon the: haist the vnto me, and consider my voyce, whe I crie
vnto the.
2 Let my prayer be set forth in thy sight as the incese, and let the liftinge vp
of my hades be an euenynge sacrifice.
3 Set a watch (o LORDE) before my mouth, yee a watch at the dore of my lippes.
4 O let not myne hert be enclyned to eny euell thige, to be mynded as the
vngodly or wicked men, lest I eate of soch thinges as please the
5 Let the rightuous (rather) smyte me frendly, and reproue me:
6 so wil I take it, as though he had poured oyle vpo my heade: it shal not hurte
my heade, yee I wil praye yet for their wickednesse.
7 Their iudges stoble at the stone, yet heare they my wordes, yt they be
ioyfull.
8 Oure bones lye scatered before ye pytt, like as when one graueth and dyggeth
vp the grounde.
9 But myne eyes loke vnto ye, o LORDE God: in the is my trust, oh cast not out
my soule.
10 Kepe me fro ye snare which they haue layed for me, and fro the trappes of the
wicked doers. Let the vngodly fall in to their owne nettes together, vntill I be
gone by them.

Psalm 142

1 I crie vnto the LORDE with my voyce, yee eue vnto the LORDE do I make my
supplicacion. I poure out my complaynte before him, and shewe him of my trouble.
2 When my sprete is in heuynesse, for thou knowest my path: in the waye where in
I walke, haue they preuely layed a snare for me.
3 I loke vpon my right honde & se, there is no man that wil knowe me. I haue no
place to fle vnto, no man careth for my soule.
4 Therfore do I crie vnto the (o LORDE) and saye: thou art my hope and my
porcion, in the londe of the lyuynge.
5 Cosidre my complaynte, for I am brought very lowe.
6 Oh delyuer me fro my persecuters, for they are to stronge for me:
7 Brynge my soule out of preson, that I maye geue thakes vnto thy name: which
thinge yf thou wilt graute me, then shal the rightuous resorte vnto my copany.

Psalm 143

1 Heare my prayer (o LORDE) considre my desyre: answere me for thy treuth &
rightuousnesse sake.
2 And entre not in to iudgment with thy seruaunt, for in thy sight shal no man
lyuynge be iustified.
3 For the enemie persecuteth my soule, he smyteth my life downe to the grounde,
he layeth me in the darcknesse, as the deed men of the worlde.
4 Therfore is my sprete vexed within me, and my herte within me is desolate.
5 Yet do I remebre the tymes past, I muse vpo all yi workes, yee I exercise my
self in the workes of thy hondes.
6 I stretch forth my hondes vnto the, my soule crieth vnto the out of the
thyrstie londe.
7 Sela. Heare me (o LORDE) and that soone, for my sprete waxeth faynte: hyde not
yi face fro me, lest I be like vnto the that go downe in to the graue.
8 Oh let me heare thy louynge kyndnesse by tymes in the mornynge, for in the is
my trust: shewe thou me the waye that I shulde walke in, for I lift vp my soule
vnto the.
9 Delyuer me (o LORDE) fro myne enemies, for I resorte vnto the.
10 Teach me to do the thinge that pleaseth the, for thou art my God: let thy
louynge sprete lede me forth vnto the londe of rightuousnesse.
11 Quycke me (o LORDE) for thy names sake, and for thy rightuousnesse sake
brynge my soule out of trouble.
12 And of thy goodnesse scater myne enemies abrode, and destroye all them that
vexe my soule, for I am thy seruaunt.

Psalm 144

1 Blessed be the LORDE my refuge, which teacheth my hades to warre, & my fyngers
to fight.
2 My hope and my castell, my defence and my delyuerer, my shylde in whom I
trust, which gouerneth the people that is vnder me.
3 LORDE, what is ma, that thou hast soch respecte vnto him? Or the sonne of man,
that thou so regardest him?
4 Man is like a thinge of naught, his tyme passeth awaye like a shadowe.
5 Bowe thy heaues (o LORDE) & come downe, touch the mountaynes, yt they maye
smoke withall.
6 Sende forth the lightenynge & scater the, shute out thine arowes and consume
them.
7 Sende downe thine hande from aboue, delyuer me and take me out of ye greate
waters, from the hande of straunge childre.
8 Whose mouth talketh of vanite, & their right hade is a righthande of falsede.
9 That I maye synge a new songe vnto the (o God) & synge prayses vnto the vpon a
tenstrynged lute,
10 Thou that geuest victory vnto kynges, and hast delyuered Dauid thy seruaunt
from the parell of the swerde.
11 Saue me and delyuer me from the honde of straunge childre, whose mouth
talketh of vanite, and their right hande is a right hande of falsede.
12 That or sonnes maye growe vp as the yoge plantes, and that oure doughters
maye be as the polished corners of the temple.
13 That or garners maye be full and plenteous with all maner of stoare: that or
shepe maye brynge forth thousandes and hundreth thousands in oure villages.
14 That oure oxen maye be stronge to laboure, that there be no myschaunce, no
decaye, and no complayninge in oure stretes.
15 Happie are the people that be in soch a case: yee blessed are the people,
which haue the LORDE for their God.

Psalm 145

1 I wil magnifie the (o my God & kynge) I wil prayse yi name for euer & euer.
2 Euery daye wil I geue thankes vnto the, and prayse yi name for euer and euer.
3 Greate is the LORDE, & maruelous worthy to be praysed, there is no ende of his
greatnesse.
4 One generacion shal prayse thy workes vnto another, and declare thy power.
5 As for me I wil be talkige of thy worshipe, thy glory, thy prayse and woderous
workes.
6 So that men shal speake of the might of thy maruelous actes, and tell of yi
greatnes.
7 The memoriall of yi abundaunt kyndnes shalbe shewed, and me shal synge of thy
righteousnesse.
8 The LORDE is gracious and mercifull, longe sufferynge & of greate goodnesse.
9 The LORDE is louynge vnto euery man, and his mercy is ouer all his workes.
10 All thy workes prayse the (o LORDE) and thy sayntes geue thankes vnto the.
11 They shewe the glory of thy kyngdome, and talke of yi power.
12 That yi power, thy glory & mightynesse of thy kyngdome might be knowne vnto
men.
13 Thy kyngdome is an euerlastinge kyngdome, & thy dominion endureth thorow out
all ages.
14 The LORDE vpholdeth all soch as shulde fall, and lifteth vp all those that be
downe.
15 The eyes of all wayte vpon the, and thou geuest them their meate in due
season.
16 Thou openest thine hade, and fyllest all thinges lyuynge with plenteousnesse.
17 The LORDE is righteous in all his wayes, & holy in all his workes.
18 The LORDE is nye vnto all them that call vpon him, yee all soch as call vpon
him faithfully.
19 He fulfilleth the desyre of them that feare him, he heareth their crie, and
helpeth them.
20 The LORDE preserueth all them that loue him, but scatereth abrode all the
vngodly.
21 My mouth shal speake the prayse of the LORDE, And let all flesh geue thankes
vnto his holy name for euer and euer. Halleluya.

Psalm 146

1 Prayse the LORDE (o my soule:) whyle I lyue wil I prayse the LORDE, yee as
loge as I haue eny beynge, I wil synge prayses vnto my God.
2 O put not yor trust in prynces, ner in the childe of man, for there is no
helpe in the.
3 For when ye breth of man goeth forth, he shal turne agayne to his earth, and
so all his thoughtes perishe.
4 Blessed is he that hath ye God of Iacob for his helpe, and whose hope is in
the LORDE his God.
5 Which made heauen and earth, ye see and all that therin is, which kepeth his
promise for euer
6 Which helpeth them to right yt suffre wronge, which fedeth ye hongrie.
7 The LORDE lowseth men out of preson, the LORDE geueth sight to the blynde.
8 The LORDE helpeth the vp that are fallen, the LORDE loueth the righteous.
9 The LORDE careth for the straungers, he defendeth ye fatherlesse and wyddowe:
as for the waye of ye vngodly, he turneth it vpsyde downe.
10 The LORDE thy God (o Sion) is kynge for euermore, and thorow out all
generacions. Halleluya.

Psalm 147

1 O prayse the LORDE, for it is a good thinge to synge prayses vnto or God: yee
a ioyfull and pleasaunt thinge is it to be thankfull.
2 The LORDE shal buylde vp Ierusale, & gather together ye outcastes of Israel.
3 He healeth the contrite in herte, and byndeth vp their woundes.
4 He telleth the nombre of the starres, and calleth them all by their names.
5 Greate is or LORDE, and greate is his power, yee his wy?dome is infinite.
6 The LORDE setteth vp ye meke, & bryngeth ye vngodly downe to ye groude
7 O synge vnto ye LORDE wt thankesgeuynge, synge prayses vpo ye harpe vnto or
God.
8 Which couereth ye heauen wt cloudes, prepareth rayne for ye earth, & maketh ye
grasse to growe vpon the mountaynes.
9 Which geueth foder vnto ye catell, & fedeth ye yonge rauens yt call vpo him.
10 He hath no pleasure in the strength of an horse, nether delyteth he in eny
mas legges.
11 But the LORDES delyte is in them that feare him, and put their trust in his
mercy.
12 Prayse ye LORDE o Ierusale, prayse yi God o Sion.
13 For he maketh fast ye barres of yi gates, & blesseth yi childre within ye.
14 He maketh peace in yi borders, & fylleth ye with ye flor of wheate.
15 He sendeth forth his comaundemet vpo earth, his worde runeth swiftly.
16 He geueth snowe like woll, & scatereth ye horefrost like ashes.
17 He casteth forth his yse like morsels, who is able to abyde his frost?
18 He sendeth out his worde and melteth them, he bloweth wt his wynde, & the
waters flowe.
19 He sheweth his worde vnto Iacob, his statutes & ordinaunces vnto Israel.
20 He hath not dealte so wt all the Heithen, nether haue they knowlege of his
lawes. Halleluya.

Psalm 148

1 O prayse the LORDE of heauen, prayse him in the heyth.
2 Prayse him all ye angels of his, prayse hi all his hoost.
3 Prayse him Sonne & Moone, prayse him all ye starres & light.
4 Prayse him all ye heauens, & ye waters yt be vnder the heauens.
5 Let them prayse the name of the LORDE, for he comaunded, & they were made.
6 He hath made the fast for euer and euer, he hath geue them a lawe which shal
not be broke.
7 Prayse the LORDE vpon earth, ye whalfishes and all depes.
8 Fyre and hayle, snowe & vapors wynde and storme, fulfillynge his worde.
9 Mountaynes and all hilles, frutefull trees & all Ceders.
10 Beastes and all catell, wormes & fethered foules.
11 Kynges of the earth & all people, princes & all iudges of ye worlde.
12 Yonge men & maydes, olde men and children.
13 Let them prayse the name of the LORDE, for his name only is excellent, and
his prayse aboue heauen and earth.
14 He exalteth the horne of his people, all his sayntes shal prayse him, the
children of Israel, euen the people that serueth him. Halleluya.

Psalm 149

1 Halleluya. O synge vnto ye LORDE a new songe, let the cogregacion of sayntes
prayse him.
2 Let Israel reioyse in him that made him, and let the children of Sion be
ioyfull in their kynge.
3 Let them prayse his name in the dauce, let them synge prayses vnto him with
tabrettes and harpes.
4 For the LORDE hath pleasure in his people, and helpeth the mekeharted.
5 Let the sayntes be ioyfull with glory, let them reioyse in their beddes.
6 Let the prayses of God be in their mouth, and sharpe swerdes in their handes.
7 To be auenged of the Heithe, & to rebuke the people.
8 To bynde their kynges in cheynes, & their nobles with lynckes of yron.
9 That they maye be auenged of them, as it is written, Soch honoure haue all his
sayntes. Halleluya.

Psalm 150

1 Halleluya. O prayse the LORDE in his Sanctuary, prayse him in the firmament of
his power.
2 Prayse him in his noble actes, prayse him in his excellet greatnesse.
3 Prayse him in the sounde of the trompet, prayse him vpo the lute and harpe.
4 Prayse him in the cymbals and daunse, prayse him vpon the strynges and pype.
5 Prayse him vpo the welltuned cymbals, prayse him vpon the loude cymbals.
6 Let euery thinge yt hath breth, prayse the LORDE. Halleluya.


Proverbs

Chapter 1

1 These are the prouerbes of Salomon the sonne of Dauid kynge of Israel:
2 to lerne wy?dome nurtoure, vnderstondinge, prudence,
3 rightuousnesse, iudgment and equite.
4 That the very babes might haue wyt, and that yonge men might haue knowlege and
vnderstondinge.
5 By hearinge, the wyse ma shal come by more wysdome: and by experience,
6 he shal be more apte to vnderstonde a parable, and the interpretacion therof:
the wordes of the wyse, and the darcke speaches of the same.
7 The feare of the LORDE is the begynnynge of wysdome. But fooles despyse
wysdome and nurtoure.
8 My sonne, heare thy fathers doctryne, and forsake not the lawe of yi mother:
9 for that shal brynge grace vnto thy heade, & shalbe a cheyne aboute thy necke.
10 My sonne, cosente not vnto synners,
11 yf they entyse the, and saye: come wyth us, let us laye wayte for bloude, &
lurke preuely for the innocet wythout a cause:
12 let us swalowe the vp like ye hell, let us deuoure the quycke and whole, as
those that go downe in to the pytt.
13 So shal we fynde all maner of costly riches, and fyll oure houses wyth
spoyles.
14 Cast in thy lott amonge us, we shal haue all one purse.
15 My sonne, walke not thou wt them, refrayne yi fote fro their wayes.
16 For their fete rune to euell, & are haistie to shed bloude.
17 But in vayne is ye net layed forth before the byrdes eyes.
18 Yee they the selues laye wayte one for anothers bloude, and one of the wolde
slaye another.
19 These are the wayes of all soch as be couetous, that one wolde rauysh
anothers life.
20 Wy?dome crieth without, & putteth forth hir voyce in the stretes.
21 She calleth before ye congregacion in ye open gates, and sheweth hir wordes
thorow ye cite, sayenge:
22 O ye childre, how loge wil ye loue childyshnesse? how longe wil ye scorners
delyte in scornynge, & ye vnwyse be enemies vnto knowlege?
23 O turne you vnto my correccion: lo, I wil expresse my mynde vnto you, and
make you vnderstode my wordes.
24 Seinge then that I haue called, and ye refused it: I haue stretched out my
honde, and no ma regarded it,
25 but all my coucels haue ye despysed, and set my correccios at naught.
26 Therfore shal I also laugh in yor destruccion, and mocke you, when ye thinge
that ye feare cometh vpon you:
27 euen whe ye thinge that ye be afrayed of, falleth in sodenly like a storme,
and yor misery like a tempest: yee wha trouble and heuynesse cometh vpon you.
28 Then shal they call vpo me, but I wil not heare: they shal seke me early, but
they shal not fynde me:
29 And yt because they hated knowlege, and receaued not ye feare of ye LORDE,
30 but abhorred my councell, and despysed my correccion.
31 Therfore shal they eate ye frutes of their owne waye, and be fylled wt their
owne councels:
32 for ye turnynge awaye of ye vnwyse shal slaye the, & ye prosperi of fooles
shalbe their owne destruccio.
33 But who so harkeneth vnto me, shal dwell safely, and haue ynough without eny
feare of euell.

Chapter 2

1 My sonne, yf thou wilt receaue my wordes, and kepe my comaundemetes by the,
2 that thine eare maye herken vnto wysdome, applie thine herte then to
vnderstodinge.
3 For yf thou criest after wy?dome, & callest for knowlege:
4 yf thou sekest after her as after money, and dyggest for her as for treasure:
5 The shalt thou vnderstonde ye feare of the LORDE, and fynde ye knowlege of
God.
6 For it is the LORDE that geueth wy?dome, out of his mouth commeth knowlege and
vnderstondinge.
7 He preserueth ye welfare of the rightuous, and defendeth them yt walke
innocently:
8 he kepeth them in ye right path, and preserueth ye waye of his sayntes.
9 Then shalt thou vnderstonde rightuousnesse, iudgment and equite, yee and euery
good path.
10 Yf wy?dome entre in to thine herte, and yi soule delyte in knowlege:
11 then shal councell preserue the, and vnderstondinge shal kepe the.
12 That thou mayest be delyuered fro ye euell waye, and from the man yt speaketh
frowarde thinges.
13 From soch as leaue the hye strete, and walke i ye wayes of darcknesse:
14 which reioyse in doynge euell, and delyte i wicked thinges:
15 whose wayes are croked, and their pathes slaunderous.
16 That thou mayest be delyuered also from the straunge woman, and from her that
is not thine owne: which geueth swete wordes,
17 forsaketh the hu?bande of hir youth, and forgetteth the couenaunt of hir God.
18 For hir house is enclyned vnto death, and hir pathes vnto hell.
19 All they that go in vnto her, come not agayne, nether take they holde of the
waye of life.
20 That thou mayest walke in ye good waye, and kepe the pathes of the rightuous.
21 For the iust shal dwell in the londe, and the innocentes shal remayne in it:
22 but the vngodly shalbe roted out of ye londe, and the wicked doers shalbe
taken out of it.

Chapter 3

1 My sonne, forget not my lawe, but se yt thine hert kepe my comaundemetes.
2 For they shal prologe ye dayes & yeares of yi lyfe, & brynge ye peace.
3 Let mercy & faithfulnes neuer go from ye: bynde the about yi necke, & wryte
them in the tables of thine herte.
4 So shalt thou fynde fauor and good vnderstondinge in ye sight of God and men.
5 Put thy trust in ye LORDE with all thine herte, and leane not vnto thine owne
vnderstondinge.
6 In all thy wayes haue respecte vnto him, and he shal ordre thy goinges.
7 Be not wyse in thine owne conceate, but feare ye LORDE and departe from euell:
8 so shal thy nauel be whole, and thy bones stronge.
9 Honoure the LORDE wt yi substaunce, & wt ye firstlinges of all thine encrease:
10 so shal thy barnes be fylled with plenteousnesse, and thy presses shal flowe
ouer with swete wyne.
11 My sonne, despyse not the chastenynge of ye LORDE, nether faynte when thou
art rebuked of him.
12 For who the LORDE loueth, him he chasteneth: and yet delyteth in him euen as
a father in his owne sonne.
13 Well is him that fyndeth wy?dome, & opteyneth vnderstondinge,
14 for the gettinge of it is better then eny marchaundise of syluer, & the
profit of it is better then golde.
15 Wy?dome is more worth the precious stones, & all ye thinges yt thou canst
desyre, are not to be compared vnto her.
16 Vpon hir right hande is longe life, & vpon hir left hande is riches & honor.
17 Hir wayes are pleasaunt wayes, and all hir pathes are peaceable.
18 She is a tre of life to them that laye holde vpon her, and blessed are they
that kepe her fast.
19 With wy?dome hath ye LORDE layed the foudacion of ye earth, & thorow
vnderstondinge hath he stablished ye heaues.
20 Thorow his wi?dome ye depthes breake vp, & ye cloudes droppe downe the dew.
21 My sonne, let not these thinges departe from thyne eyes, but kepe my lawe and
my councell:
22 so shal it be life vnto thy soule, & grace vnto yi mouth.
23 Then shalt thou walke safely in yi waye, & thy fote shal not stomble.
24 Yf thou slepest, thou shalt not be afrayed, but shalt take thy rest & slepe
swetely.
25 Thou neddest not to be afrayed of eny sodane feare, nether for the violent
russhinge in of the vngodly, when it commeth.
26 For the LORDE shal be besyde the, & kepe thy fote yt thou be not taken.
27 Refuse not to do good vnto him that shulde haue it, so longe as thine hande
is able to do it.
28 Saye not vnto thy neghboure: go thy waye & come agayne, tomorow wil I geue
the:
29 where as thou hast now to geue him. Intende no hurte vnto thy neghboure,
seynge he hopeth to dwell in rest by the.
30 Stryue not lightly wt eny man, where as he hath done ye no harme.
31 Folowe not a wicked man, and chose none of his wayes:
32 for the LORDE abhorreth the frowarde, but his secrete is amonge the
righteous.
33 The curse of the LORDE is in the house of the vngodly, but he blesseth the
dwellinges of the righteous.
34 As for the scornefull, he shal laugh the to scorne, but he shal geue grace
vnto the lowly.
35 The wyse shal haue honor in possession, but shame is the promocio that fooles
shal haue.

Chapter 4

1 Heare (O ye children) the fatherly exortacio, & take good hede, that ye maye
lerne wy?dome.
2 Yee I shal geue you a good rewarde, yf ye wil not forsake my lawe.
3 For when I myself was my fathers deare sonne, and tenderly beloued of my
mother,
4 he taught me also, sayenge: let thine herte receaue my wordes, kepe my
commaundementes, and thou shalt lyue.
5 Get the wy?dome, get the vnderstondinge, forget not ye wordes of my mouth, &
shreke not from them.
6 Forsake her not, and she shal preserue the: loue her, and she shal kepe the.
7 The chefe poynte of wy?dome is, that thou be wyllynge to opteyne wy?dome, and
before all thy goodes to get the vnderstondynge.
8 Make moch of her, and she shal promote the: Yee yf thou embracest her, she
shal brynge the vnto honoure.
9 She shal make the a gracious heade, and garnish the with ye crowne of glory.
10 Heare my sonne, and receaue my wordes, that the yeares of thy life maye be
many.
11 I wil shewe the ye waye of wy?dome, and lede the in the right pathes.
12 So that yf thou goest therin, there shal no straytnesse hynder the: and when
thou runnest, thou shalt not fall.
13 Take fast holde of doctryne, let her not go: kepe her, for she is thy life.
14 Come not in the path of the vngodly, and walke not in the waye of the wicked.
15 Eschue it, & go not therin: departe asyde, & passe ouer by it.
16 For they can not slepe, excepte they haue first done some myschefe: nether
take they eny rest, excepte they haue first done some harme.
17 For they eate the bred of wickednesse, and drike the wyne of robbery.
18 The path of the rightuous shyneth as the light, and is euer brighter &
brighter vnto the parfecte daye.
19 But ye waye of the vngodly is as the darcknesse, wherin me fall, or they be
awarre.
20 My sonne, marcke my wordes, and enclyne thine eare vnto my saynges.
21 Let them not departe from thine eyes, kepe them euen in the myddest of thine
herte.
22 For they are life vnto all those that finde the, and health vnto all their
bodies.
23 Kepe thine hert with all diligence, for there vpon hangeth life.
24 Put awaye from the a frowarde mouth, and let the lippes of slaunder be farre
from the.
25 Let thine eyes beholde the thinge yt is right, & let thine eye lyddes loke
straight before the.
26 Podre the path of thy fete, so shal all yi wayes be sure.
27 Turne not asyde, nether to the right hande ner to the lefte, but witholde thy
fote from euell.

Chapter 5

1 My sonne, geue hede vnto my wysdome, & bowe thine eare vnto my prudece:
2 yt thou mayest regarde good councell, and that thy lippes maye kepe nurtoure.
3 For the lippes of an harlot are a droppinge hony combe, and hir throte is
softer then oyle.
4 But at ye last she is as bitter as wormwod, and as sharpe as a two edged
swerde.
5 Hir fete go downe vnto death, and hir steppes pearse thorow vnto hell.
6 She regardeth not the path of life, so vnstedfast are hir wayes, that thou
canst not knowe them.
7 Heare me therfore (o my sonne) and departe not fro the wordes of my mouth.
8 Kepe thy waye farre from her, and come not nye ye dores of hir house.
9 That thou geue not thine honor vnto another, and thy yeares to the cruell.
10 That other men be not fylled with thy goodes, & that thy labours come not in
a straunge house.
11 Yee that thou mourne not at the last (when thou hast spent thy body and
goodes)
12 and then saye: Alas, why hated I nurtoure? why dyd my hert despyse
correccion?
13 Wherfore was not I obedient vnto the voyce of my teachers, & herkened not
vnto them that infourmed me?
14 I am come almost in to all mysfortune, in the myddest of the multitude and
congregacion.
15 Drinke of the water of thine owne well, and of the ryuers that runne out of
thine owne spriges.
16 Let yi welles flowe out a brode, that there maye be ryuers of water in the
stretes.
17 But let them be only thine owne, & not straungers with the.
18 Let thy well be blessed, and be glad with the wife of thy youth.
19 Louynge is the hynde, and frendly is the Roo: let her brestes alwaye satisfie
the, and holde the euer content with hir loue.
20 My sonne, why wilt thou haue pleasure in an harlot, and embrace the bosome of
another woma?
21 For euery mas wayes are open in the sight of the LORDE, and he podereth all
their goinges.
22 The wickednesses of the vngodly shal catch himself, and with the snares of
his owne synnes shal he be trapped.
23 Because he wolde not be refourmed, he shal dye: and for his greate
foolishnesse he shal be destroyed.

Chapter 6

1 My sone, yf thou be suertie for yi neghboure, thou hast fastened thine hode wt
another ma:
2 yee thou art boude with thine owne wordes, and taken wt thine owne speach.
3 Therfore (my sonne) do this, discharge thy self, for thou art come i to yi
neghbours daunger. Go thy waye then soone, & intreate thy neghboure:
4 let not thyne eyes slepe, ner thine eye lyddes slomber.
5 Saue thy self as a doo fro ye honde, & as a byrde fro the hode of the fouler.
6 Go to the Emmet (thou slogarde) cosidre hir wayes, & lerne to be wyse.
7 She hath no gyde, no teacher, no leder:
8 yet in the sommer she prouideth hir meate, & gathereth hir foode together i ye
haruest.
9 How loge wilt thou slepe, thou slogish ma? Wha wilt thou aryse out of thy
slepe?
10 Yee slepe on still a litle, slober a litle, folde thine handes together yet a
litle, that thou mayest slepe:
11 so shal pouerte come vnto the as one yt trauayleth by the waye, & necessite
like a wapened man.
12 A dissemblynge person, a wicked man goeth with a frowarde mouth:
13 he wyncketh with his eyes, he tokeneth wt his fete, he poynteth wt his
fyngers,
14 he is euer ymageninge myschefe & frowardnesse in his hert, & causeth
discorde.
15 Therfore shal his destruccion come hastely vpo him, sodenly shal he be all
tobroken, and not be healed.
16 There be sixe thinges, which the LORDE hateth, & the seuenth he vtterly
abhorreth:
17 A proude loke, a dyssemblynge tonge, hades that shed innocent bloude,
18 an herte yt goeth aboute wt wicked ymaginacios, fete that be swift in
rennynge to do myschefe,
19 a false wytnesse yt bringeth vp lyes, & soch one as soweth discorde amonge
brethren.
20 My sonne, kepe thy fathers comaundemetes, & forsake not ye lawe of thy
mother.
21 Put the vp together in thine herte, and bynde the aboute thy necke.
22 That they maye lede the where thou goest, preserue the when thou art aslepe,
& yt when thou awakest, thou mayest talke of the
23 (For the commaundement is a lanterne, and the lawe a light: yee chastenynge &
nurtoure is ye waye of life)
24 that they maye kepe the fro the euell woman, & from the flaterynge tonge of
the harlott:
25 yt thou lust not after her beuty in thine herte, & lest thou be take wt hir
fayre lokes.
26 An harlot wil make a ma to begg his bred, but a maried woman wil hunt for ye
precious life.
27 Maye a man take fyre in his bosome, and his clothes not be brent?
28 Or can one go vpon hote coales, and his fete not be hurte?
29 Euen so, who so euer goeth in to his neghbours wife, and toucheth her, can
not be vngiltie.
30 Men do not vtterly despyse a thefe, that stealeth to satisfie his soule, when
he is hongerie:
31 but yf he maye be gotten, he restoreth agayne seuen tymes asmoch, or els he
maketh recompence with all the good of his house.
32 But who so comitteth aduoutrie with a woma, he is a foole, and bryngeth his
life to destruccion.
33 He getteth him self also shame & dishonor, soch as shal neuer be put out.
34 For the gelousy & wrath of the ma will not be itreated,
35 no though thou woldest ofre him greate giftes to make amendes, he will not
receaue them.

Chapter 7

1 My sonne, kepe my wordes, & laye vp my comaundemetes by the.
2 Kepe my comaundemetes & my lawe, eue as the aple of thine eye, & thou shalt
lyue.
3 Bynde them vpon thy fyngers, & wryte the in the table of thine hert.
4 Saye vnto wysdome: thou art my sister, and call vnderstondinge thy kynswoman:
5 that she maye kepe ye fro ye strauge woma, & fro ye harlot which geueth swete
wordes.
6 For out of the wyndowe of my house I loked thorow the trelies,
7 & behelde the simple people: & amonge other yonge folkes I spyed one yonge
foole
8 goinge ouer the stretes, by the corner in the waye towarde the harlottes house
9 in the twylight of of the euenynge, when it begane now to be night and darcke.
10 And beholde, there mett him a woma in an harlottes apparell
11 (a disceatfull, waton & an vnstedfast woma: whose fete coude not abyde in ye
house,
12 now is she without, now i ye stretes, & lurketh i euery corner)
13 she caught ye yoge ma, kyssed him & was not ashamed, sayege:
14 I had a vowe to paye, & this daye I perfourme it.
15 Therfore came I forth to mete the, that I might seke thy face, and so I haue
founde the.
16 I haue deckte my bed with coueringes & clothes of Egipte.
17 My bed haue I made to smell of Myrre, Aloes and Cynamom.
18 Come, let vs lye together, & take oure pleasure till it be daye light.
19 For the good man is not at home, he is gone farre of.
20 He hath taken the bagg of moneye with him, who can tell whe he cometh home?
21 Thus with many swete wordes she ouercame him, and with hir flateringe lippes
she wanne him.
22 Immediatly he foloweth her, as it were an oxeled to the slaughter (and like
as it were to the stockes, where fooles are punyshed)
23 so longe till she hath wounded his lyuer with hir darte: like as yf a byrde
haisted to the snare, not knowinge that the parell of his life lyeth there vpo.
24 Heare me now therfore (o my sonne) and marcke the wordes of my mouth.
25 Let not thine herte wandre in hir wayes, & be not thou disceaued in hir
pathes.
26 For many one hath she wouded and cast downe, yee many a stronge ma hath she
slayne.
27 Hir house is the waye vnto hell, where men go downe to the chambers of death.

Chapter 8

1 Doth not wysdome crie? doth not vnderstondinge put forth hir voyce?
2 Stondeth she not in the hye places in the stretes & wayes?
3 doth she not crie before the whole cite, & in the gates where men go out & in?
4 It is you, o ye men (sayeth she) whom I call. Unto you (o ye childre of me)
lift I vp my voyce.
5 Take hede vnto knowlege o ye ignoraut, be wyse in herte o ye fooles.
6 Geue eare, for I wil speake of greate matters, & open my lippes to tell
thinges that be right.
7 For my throte shal be talkynge of ye trueth, & my lippes abhorre vngodlynesse.
8 All the wordes of my mouth are rightuous, there is no frowardnesse ner falsede
therin.
9 They are all playne to soch as wil vnderstode, & right to the that fynde
knowlege.
10 Receaue my doctryne therfore and not syluer, & knowlege more then fyne golde.
11 For wysdome is more worth then precious stones, yee all the thinges that thou
cast desyre, are not to be compared vnto it.
12 I wysdome haue my dwellynge wt knowlege, and prudent councell is myne owne.
13 With me is the feare of the LORDE, and ye eschuynge of euell. As for pryde,
disdayne, an euell waye, & a mouth that speaketh wicked thiges, I vtterly
abhorre the.
14 I can geue councell, and be a gyde: I haue vnderstondinge, I haue strength.
15 Thorow me, kynges reigne: thorow me, prices make iust lawes.
16 Thorow me, lordes beare rule, and all iudges of ye earth execute iudgmet.
17 I am louynge vnto those that loue me, and they that seke me early, shal fynde
me.
18 Riches & honoure are wt me, yee excellent goodes & rightuousnes.
19 My frute is better the golde & precious stone, & myne encrease more worth
then fyne syluer.
20 I walke in ye waye of rightuousnes, & in the strete of iudgment.
21 That I maye sende prosperite to those that loue me, & to encrease their
treasure.
22 The LORDE himself had me in possessio in the begynnynge of his wayes, or euer
he begame his workes aforetyme.
23 I haue bene ordened fro euerlastige, & fro ye beginnynge or euer the earth
was made.
24 When I was borne, there were nether depthes ner springes of water.
25 Before the foundacions of ye mountaynes were layed, yee before all hilles was
I borne.
26 The earth and all that is vpon the earth was not yet made, no not the grounde
it self.
27 For when he made the heauens, I was present: wha he set the depthes in ordre:
28 whan he hanged the cloudes aboue: whan he fastened the sprynges of the depe:
29 Whan he shutt the see within certayne bowndes, that ye waters shulde not go
ouer their marckes. When he layed the foundacions of the earth,
30 I was with him, ordringe all thinges, delytinge daylie & reioysynge allwaye
before him.
31 As for the roude copase of his worlde, I make it ioyfull, for my delyte is to
be amoge the children of men.
32 Therfore harken vnto me (o ye children) for blessed are they that kepe my
wayes.
33 O geue eare vnto nurtoure, be wyse, and refuse it not.
34 Blessed is ye man that heareth me, watchinge daylie at my gates, & geuynge
attendaunce at the postes of my dores.
35 For who so fyndeth me, fyndeth life, and shal optayne fauoure of the LORDE.
36 But who so offendeth agaynst me, hurteth his owne soule. All they that hate
me, are the louers of death.

Chapter 9

1 Wysdome hath buylded herself an house, and hewen out seuen pilers:
2 she hath slaughted, poured out hir wyne, and prepared hir table.
3 She hath sent forth hir maydens to crie vpo the hyest place of the cite:
4 Who so is ignoraut, let him come hither. And to the vn wise she sayde:
5 O come on youre waye, eate my bred, and drynke my wyne, which I haue poured
out for you.
6 Forsake ignorauce, and ye shal lyue: and se that ye go in the waye of
vnderstondinge.
7 Who so reproueth a scornefull personne, getteth him self dishonoure: and he
that rebuketh the vngodly, stayneth himself.
8 Reproue not a scorner, lest he owe the euell wil: but rebuke a wyse man, and
he wil loue the.
9 Geue a discrete man but an occasion, & he wilbe the wyser: teach a rightuous
man, and he wil increase.
10 The feare of the LORDE is the begynnynge of wysdome, & the knowlege of holy
thinges is vnderstondinge.
11 For thorow me yi dayes shalbe prolonged, and the yeares of thy life shal be
many.
12 Yf thou be wyse, yi wysdome shal do yi selfe good: but yf thou thynkest
scorne therof, it shalbe thine owne harme.
13 A foolish restlesse woman, full of wordes, and soch one as hath no knowlege,
14 sytteth in the dores of hir house vpo a stole aboue in the cite,
15 to call soch as go by and walke straight in their wayes.
16 Who so is ignoraunt (sayeth she) let him come hither, and to the vnwyse she
sayeth:
17 stollen waters are swete, & the bred that is preuely eaten, hath a good
taist.
18 But they cosider not that death is there, and that hir gestes go downe to
hell.

Chapter 10

1 These are prouerbes of Salomon. A wyse sonne maketh a glad father, but an
vndiscrete sonne is the heuynesse of his mother.
2 Treasures that are wickedly gotten, profit nothinge, but rightuousnesse
delyuereth from death.
3 The LORDE wil not let the soule of the rightuous suffre hoger, but he putteth
ye vngodly fro his desyre.
4 An ydle hande maketh poore, but a quycke laboringe hande maketh riche.
5 Who so gathereth in Sommer, is wyse: but he that is slogish in haruest,
bringeth himself to confucion.
6 Louynge and fauorable is the face of the rightuous, but ye fore heade of the
vngodly is past shame, and presumptuous.
7 The memoriall of the iust shall haue a good reporte, but the name of the
vngodly shal stynke.
8 A wyse man wil receaue warnynge, but a foole wil sooner be smytten in the
face.
9 He that leadeth an innocent life, walketh surely: but who so goeth a wroge
waye, shalbe knowne.
10 He yt wynketh with his eye, wil do some harme: but he that hath a foolish
mouth, shalbe beaten.
11 The mouth of a rightuous man is a well of life, but ye mouth of the vngodly
is past shame, & presumptuous.
12 Euell will stereth vp strife, but loue couereth ye multitude of synnes.
13 In ye lippes of him yt hath vnderstodinge a ma shal fynde wysdome, but ye
rodde belogeth to ye backe of ye foolish.
14 Wyse me laye vp knowlege, but ye mouth of ye foolish is nye destruccio.
15 The rich mas goodes are his stroge holde, but pouerte oppresseth the poore.
16 The rightuous laboureth to do good, but the vngodly vseth his increase vnto
synne.
17 To take hede vnto ye chastenynge of nurtoure, is ye waye of life: but he that
refuseth to be refourmed, goeth wroge.
18 Dissemblynge lippes kepe hatred secretly, and he that speaketh eny slaunder,
is a foole.
19 Where moch bablinge is, there must nedes be offence: he that refrayneth his
lippes, is wysest of all.
20 An innocent tonge is a noble treasure, but the herte of the vngodly is
nothinge worth.
21 The lippes of the rightuous fede a whole multitude, but fooles shal dye in
their owne foly.
22 The blessynge of the LORDE maketh rich me, as for carefull trauayle, it doth
nothinge therto.
23 A foole doth wickedly & maketh but a sporte of it: neuertheles it is wysdome
for a man to bewarre of soch.
24 The thinge that the vngodly are afrayed of, shal come vpon them, but the
rightuous shal haue their desyre.
25 The vngodly is like a tempest that passeth ouer & is nomore sene, but the
rightuous remayneth sure for euer.
26 As vyneger is to the teth, and as smoke is vnto ye eyes, eue so is a slogish
personne to them that sende him forth.
27 The feare of ye LORDE maketh a loge life, but ye yeares of ye vngodly shal be
shortened.
28 The pacient abydinge of the rightuous shalbe turned to gladnesse, but the
hope of the vngodly shal perish.
29 The waye of the LORDE geueth a corage vnto ye godly, but it is a feare for
wicked doers.
30 The rightuous shal neuer be ouerthrowne, but ye vngodly shal not remayne in
the londe.
31 The mouth of the iust wilbe talkynge of wysdome, but the tonge of the
frowarde shal perish.
32 The lippes of the rightuous are occupied in acceptable thinges, but the mouth
of the vngodly taketh them to the worst.

Chapter 11

1 A false balaunce is an abhominacion vnto the LORDE, but a true weight pleaseth
him.
2 Where pryde is, there is shame also and confucion: but where as is lowlynes,
there is wysdome.
3 The innocent dealynge of the iust shal lede them, but the vnfaithfulnesse of
the despysers shalbe their owne destruccion.
4 Riches helpe not in the daye of vengeaunce, but rightuousnesse delyuereth fro
death.
5 The rightuousnes of ye innocent ordreth his waye, but the vngodly shal fall in
his owne wickednesse.
6 The rightuousnesse of the iust shal delyuer them, but the despysers shalbe
taken in their owne vngodlynesse.
7 When an vngodly man dyeth, his hope is gone, the confydence of riches shal
perish.
8 The rightuous shalbe delyuered out of trouble, & the vngodly shal come in his
steade.
9 Thorow ye mouth of ye dyssembler is his neghboure destroyed, but thorow
knowlege shal the iust be delyuered.
10 When it goeth well with the rightuous, the cite is mery: and when the vngodly
perish, there is gladnesse.
11 When the iust are in wealth, the cite prospereth: but whan the vngodly haue
the rule, it decayeth.
12 A foole bryngeth vp a slaunder of his neghboure, but a wyse man wil kepe it
secrete.
13 A dyssemblynge person wil discouer preuy thinges, but he that is of a
faithfull hert, will kepe councel.
14 Where no good councel is there the people decaye: but where as are many that
can geue councell, there is wealth.
15 He that is suertye for a straunger, hurteth himself: but he that medleth not
with suerteshippe, is sure.
16 A gracious woma manteyneth honestie, as for the mightie, they manteyne
ryches.
17 He yt hath a gentle liberall stomacke, is mercifull: but who so hurteth his
neghbor, is a tyraut.
18 The laboure of the vngodly prospereth not, but he that soweth rightuosnes,
shal receaue a sure rewarde.
19 Like as rightuousnes bryngeth life, eue so to cleue vnto euell, bryngeth
death.
20 The LORDE abhorreth a fayned hert, but he hath pleasure in them that are
vndefyled.
21 It shal not helpe ye wicked, though they laye all their hondes together, but
the sede of the rightuous shalbe preserued.
22 A fayre woman without discrete maners, is like a rynge of golde in a swynes
snoute.
23 The iust laboure for peace and traquylite, but the vngodly for disquyetnesse.
24 Some man geueth out his goodes, and is the richer, but ye nygarde (hauynge
ynough) wil departe from nothinge, and yet is euer in pouerte.
25 He that is lyberall in geuynge, shal haue plenty: and he that watereth,
shalbe watered also himself.
26 Who so hoordeth vp his corne, shalbe cursed amonge the people: but blessynge
shal light vpon his heade that selleth it.
27 He that laboureth for honesty fyndeth his desyre: but who so seketh after
myschefe, it shal happe vnto him.
28 He that trusteth in his riches, shal haue a fall, but ye rightuous shal
florish as the grene leaf.
29 Who so maketh disquyetnesse in his owne house, he shal haue wynde for his
heretage, and the foole shal be seruaunt to the wyse.
30 The frute of the rightuous is as the tre of life, a wyse man also wynneth
mens soules.
31 Yf ye rightuous be recopesed vpo earth how moch more the the vngodly & ye
synner?

Chapter 12

1 Who so loueth wy?dome, wil be content to be refourmed: but he that hateth to
be reproued, is a foole.
2 A good man is acceptable vnto the LORDE, but ye wicked wyl he condempne.
3 A man ca not endure in vngodlynesse, but ye rote of ye righteous shal not be
moued.
4 A stedfast woman is a crowne vnto hir hu?bonde: but she that behaueth herself
vnhonestly, is a corrupcion in his bones.
5 The thoughtes of ye righteous are right, but the ymaginacion of the vngodly
are disceatfull.
6 The talkynge of the vngodly is, how they maye laye wayte for bloude, but the
mouth of ye righteous wil delyuer them.
7 Or euer thou canst turne the aboute, the vngodly shal be ouerthrowne, but the
house of the righteous shal stode.
8 A man shalbe commended for his wy?dome, but a foole shal be despysed.
9 A simple man which laboureth and worketh, is better the one that is gorgious
and wanteth bred.
10 A righteous man regardeth the life of his catell, but the vngodly haue cruell
hertes.
11 He that tilleth his lode, shal haue plenteousnesse of bred: but he yt
foloweth ydylnes, is a very foole.
12 The desyre of ye vngodly hunteth after myschefe, but the rote of the
righteous bryngeth forth frute.
13 The wicked falleth in to the snare thorow ye malyce of his owne mouth, but
the iust shal escape out of parell.
14 Euery man shal enioye good acordinge to the innocency of his mouth, and after
the workes of his hades shal he be rewarded.
15 Loke what a foole taketh in honde, he thinketh it well done: but he that is
wyse, wyl be couceled.
16 A foole vttereth his wrath in all the haist, but a discrete man forgeueth
wronge.
17 A iust man will tell the trueth, & shewethe thinge yt is right: but a false
wytnesse disceaueth.
18 A slaunderous personne pricketh like a swerde, but a wyse mans tonge is
wholsome.
19 A true mouth is euer constat, but a dyssemblinge toge is soone chaunged.
20 They that ymagin euell in their mynde, wil disceaue: but the councelers of
peace shal heaue ioye folowinge the.
21 There shal no mysfortune happen vnto the iust, but the vngodly shal be fylled
with misery.
22 The LORDE abhorreth disceatfull lippes, but they that laboure for treuth,
please him.
23 He that hath vnderstodinge, can hyde his wysdome: but an vndiscrete herte
telleth out his foolishnesse.
24 A diliget hande shal beare rule, but the ydle shal be vnder tribute.
25 Heuynesse discorageth ye herte of man, but a good worde maketh it glad
agayne.
26 The righteous is liberall vnto his neghboure, but the waye of the vngodly wil
disceaue them selues.
27 A disceatfull man shal fynde no vautage, but he that is content wt that he
hath, is more worth the golde.
28 In the waye of righteousnesse there is life, as for eny other waye, it is the
path vnto death.

Chapter 13

1 A wyse sonne wyll receaue his fathers warnynge, but he yt is scornefull, wyll
not heare when he is reproued.
2 A good ma shal enioye the frute of his mouth, but he that hath a frowarde
mynde, shalbe spoyled.
3 He that kepeth his mouth, kepeth his life: but who so speaketh vnaduysed,
fyndeth harme.
4 The slogarde wolde fayne haue, and can not get his desyre: but the soule of
the diligent shal haue plenty.
5 A righteous man abhorreth lyes, but the vngodly shameth both other and
himself.
6 Righteousnesse kepeth the innocet in the waye, but vngodlynesse shal
ouerthrowe the synner.
7 Some men are riche, though they haue nothinge: agayne, some me are poore
hauynge greate riches.
8 With goodes euery man delyuereth his life, and the poore wyl not be reproued.
9 The light of the righteous maketh ioyfull, but the candle of the vngodly shal
be put out.
10 Amonge the proude there is euer strife, but amonge those that do all thinges
with aduysement, there is wy?dome.
11 Hastely gotte goodes are soone spent, but they that be gathered together with
the hande, shal increase.
12 Longe tarienge for a thinge that is dyfferred, greueth ye herte: but when the
desyre commeth, it is a tre of life.
13 Who so despyseth the worde, destroyeth himself: but he that feareth the
comaundement, shal haue peace.
14 The lawe is a wel of life vnto the wyse, that it maye kepe him from the
snares of death.
15 Good vnderstondinge geueth fauoure, but harde is the waye of the despysers.
16 A wyse man doth all thinges with discrecion, but a foole wil declare his
foly.
17 An vngodly messauger bryngeth myschefe, but a faithfull embassitoure is
wholsome.
18 He that thinketh scorne to be refourmed, commeth to pouerte and shame: but
who so receaueth correccion, shal come to honoure.
19 When a desyre is brought to passe, it delyteth the soule: but fooles abhorre
him that eschueth euell.
20 He that goeth in the company of wyse men, shal be wyse: but who so is a
copanyo of fooles, shal be hurte.
21 Myschefe foloweth vpon synners, but the rightuous shal haue a good rewarde.
22 Which their childers childre shal haue in possessio, for the riches of the
synner is layed vp for ye iust.
23 There is plenteousnesse of fode in the feldes of the poore, & shalbe
increased out of measure.
24 He that spareth the rodde, hateth his sonne: but who so loueth him, holdeth
him euer in nurtoure.
25 The rightuous eateth, and is satisfied, but ye bely of the vngodly hath neuer
ynough.

Chapter 14

1 A wyse woma vpholdeth hir house, but a foolish wife plucketh it downe.
2 Who so feareth the LORDE, walketh in the right path: & regardeth not him that
abhorreth the wayes of the LORDE.
3 In the mouth of the foolish is the boostinge of lordshipe, but ye lippes of ye
wyse wilbe warre of soch.
4 Where no oxen are, there the crybb is emptie: but where the oxen laboure,
there is moch frute.
5 A faithfull wytnesse wyl not dyssemble, but a false recorde wil make a lye.
6 A scornefull body seketh wy?dome, & fyndeth it not: but knowlege is easy to
come by, vnto him that wil vnderstonde.
7 Se yt thou medle not with a foole, & do as though thou haddest no knowlege.
8 The wy?dome of him that hath vnderstondinge is, to take hede vnto his waye,
but the foolishnesse of the vnwyse disceaueth.
9 Fooles make but a sporte of synne, but there is fauourable loue amoge the
rightuous.
10 The herte of him that hath vnderstondinge wil nether dispare for eny sorow,
ner be to presumptuous for eny sodane ioye.
11 The houses of the vngodly shalbe ouerthrowne, but the tabernacles of ye
righteus shal florishe.
12 There is a waye, which some men thinke to be right, but the ende therof
ledeth vnto death.
13 The herte is soroufull euen in laughter, and the ende of myrth is heuynesse.
14 An vnfaithfull personne shal be fylled with his owne wayes, but a good ma wyl
bewarre of soch.
15 An ignoraut body beleueth all thinges, but who so hath vnderstondinge, loketh
well to his goinges.
16 A wyse man, feareth, and departeth from euell, but a foole goeth on
presumptuously.
17 An vnpacient man handeleth foolishly, but he that is well aduysed, doth other
wayes.
18 The ignoraut haue foolishnes in possessio, but the wyse are crowned with
knowlege.
19 The euell shal bowe them selues before ye good, and the vngodly shal wayte at
the dores of the rightuous.
20 The poore is hated euen of his owne neghbours, but the riche hath many
frendes.
21 Who so despyseth his neghbor, doth amysse: but blessed is he that hath pyte
of the poore.
22 They that ymagin wickednes, shalbe disapoynted: but they that muse vpo good
thinges, vnto soch shal happen mercy and faithfulnesse.
23 Diliget labor bryngeth riches, but where many vayne wordes are, truly there
is scarcenesse.
24 Riches are an ornament vnto the wyse, but the ignoraunce of fooles is very
foolishnesse.
25 A faithfull wytnesse delyuereth soules, but a lyar dysceaueth them.
26 The feare of the LORDE is a stroge holde, for vnto his he wyl be a sure
defence.
27 The feare of the LORDE is a well of life, to auoyde the snares of death.
28 The increase and prosperite of the comons is the kynges honoure, but the
decaye of the people is the confucio of the prynce.
29 Pacience is a token of wi?dome, but wrath and haistie displeasure is a token
of foolishnesse.
30 A mery herte is the life of the body, but rancoure consumeth awaye the bones.
31 He that doth a poore man wroge, blasphemeth his maker: but who so hath pitie
of the poore, doth honoure vnto God.
32 The vngodly is afrayed of euery parell, but the rightuous hath a good hope
eue in death.
33 Wy?dome resteth in the herte of him that hath vnderstondinge, and he wyll
teach them that are vnlerned.
34 Rightuousnes setteth vp the people, but wyckednesse bryngeth folke to
destruccion.
35 A discrete seruaunt is a pleasure vnto ye kynge, but one yt is not honest,
prouoketh him vnto wrath.

Chapter 15

1 A softe aswere putteth downe displeasure, but frowarde wordes prouoke vnto
anger.
2 A wyse tonge commendeth knowlege, a foolish mouth blabbeth out nothinge but
foolishnesse.
3 The eyes of the LORDE loke in euery place, both vpon ye good and badd.
4 A wholsome tonge is a tre of life, but he that abuseth it, hath a broken
mynde.
5 A foole despyseth his fathers correccion, but he yt taketh hede whan he is
reproued, shal haue ye more vnderstodinge.
6 In the house of the rightuous are greate riches, but in the increase of the
vngodly there is mysordre.
7 A wyse mouth poureth out knowlege, but ye herte of the foolish doth not so.
8 The LORDE abhorreth ye sacrifice of the vngodly, but the prayer of the
rightuous is acceptable vnto him.
9 The waye of the vngodly is an abhominacio vnto ye LORDE, but who so foloweth
righteousnes, him he loueth.
10 He that forsaketh ye right strete, shalbe sore punyshed: & who so hateth
correccion, falleth in to death.
11 The hell wt hir payne is knowne vnto the LORDE, how moch more then the hertes
of men?
12 A scornefull body loueth not one yt rebuketh him, nether wil he come amonge
ye wyse.
13 A mery herte maketh a chearfull countenaunce, but an vnquyet mynde maketh it
heuy.
14 A wyse herte wil seke after knowlege, but ye mouth of fooles medleth with
foolishnesse.
15 All the dayes of the poore are miserable, but a quyete herte is as a
cotynuall feast.
16 Better is a litle with the feare of the LORDE then greate treasure, for they
are not without sorowe.
17 Better is a meace of potage with loue, then a fat oxe wt euell will.
18 An angrie man stereth vp strife, but he yt is pacient stilleth discorde.
19 The waye of ye slouthfull is full of thornes, but ye strete of the rightuous
is well clensed.
20 A wyse sonne maketh a glad father, but an vndiscrete body shameth his mother.
21 A foole reioyseth in foolish thinges, but a wyse man loketh well to his owne
goinges.
22 Vnaduysed thoughtes shal come to naught, but where as are men yt can geue
councell, there is stedfastnesse.
23 O how ioyfull a thinge is it, a man to geue a conuenient answere? O how
pleasaunt is a worde spoken in due season?
24 The waye of life ledeth vnto heaue, yt a man shulde bewarre of hell beneth.
25 The LORDE wyl breake downe ye house of ye proude, but he shal make fast ye
borders of ye wyddowe.
26 The LORDE abhoreth ye ymaginacions of ye wicked, but pure wordes are
pleasaunt vnto him.
27 The couetous man wrutteth vp his owne house, but who so hateth rewardes, shal
lyue.
28 A rightuous ma museth in his mynde how to do good, but ye mynde of the
vngodly ymagineth, how he maye do harme.
29 The LORDE is farre from the vngodly, but he heareth ye prayer of the
rightuous.
30 Like as ye clearnesse of ye eyes reioyseth ye herte, so doth a good name fede
ye bones.
31 The eare yt harkeneth vnto wholsome warnynge, and enclyneth therto, shall
dwell amonge ye wyse.
32 He that refuseth to be refourmed, despyseth his owne soule: but he that
submytteth himself to correccion, is wyse.
33 The feare of ye LORDE is ye right scyece of wy?dome, and lowlynes goeth
before honor.

Chapter 16

1 A man maye well purpose a thinge in his harte, but ye answere of ye tonge
cometh of ye LORDE.
2 A ma thinketh all his waies to be clene, but it is ye LORDE yt fashioneth ye
myndes.
3 Commytte thy workes vnto ye LORDE, and loke what thou deuysest, it shal
prospere.
4 The LORDE doth all thinges for his owne sake, yee & when he kepeth ye vngodly
for ye daye of wrath.
5 The LORDE abhorreth all presumptuous & proude hertes, there maye nether
strength ner power escape.
6 With louynge mercy & faithfulnesse synnes be forgeuen, and who so feareth ye
LORDE eschueth euell.
7 When a mans wayes please ye LORDE, he maketh his very enemies to be his
frendes.
8 Better is it to haue a litle thinge wt rightuousnes, the greate rentes
wrongeously gotten.
9 A ma deuyseth a waye in his herte, but it is ye LORDE yt ordreth his goinges.
10 When ye prophecy is in ye lippes of ye kynge, his mouth shal not go wroge in
iudgment.
11 A true measure & a true balauce are ye LORDES, he maketh all weightes.
12 It is a greate abhominacio when kynges are wycked, for a kynges seate shulde
be holden vp wt righteousnesse.
13 Righteous lippes are pleasaut vnto kynges, and they loue him yt speaketh ye
trueth.
14 The kynges displeasure is a messaunger of death, but a wyse man wyl pacifie
him.
15 The cherefull countenauce of ye kynge is life, and his louynge fauor is as
the euenynge dewe.
16 To haue wy?dome in possession is better then golde, and to get
vnderstondynge, is more worth then syluer.
17 The path of ye righteous eschueth euell, & who so loketh well to his wayes,
kepeth his owne soule.
18 Presumptuousnes goeth before destruccion, and after a proude stomake there
foloweth a fall.
19 Better it is to be of humble mynde wt the lowly, then to deuyde ye spoyles wt
ye proude.
20 He yt handleth a matter wysely, opteyneth good: & blessed is he, yt putteth
his trust in ye LORDE.
21 Who so hath a wyse vnderstondinge, is called to councell: but he yt can
speake fayre, getteth more riches.
22 Vnderstondinge is a well of life vnto him yt hath it, as for ye chastenynge
of fooles, it is but foolishnesse.
23 The herte of the wyse enfourmeth his mouth, and amendeth ye doctryne in his
lyppes.
24 Fayre wordes are an hony combe, a refreshinge of ye mynde, & health of ye
bones.
25 There is a waye yt men thinke to be right, but the ende therof leadeth vnto
death.
26 A troublous soule disquyeteth hir selfe, for hir owne mouth hath brought her
therto.
27 An vngodly personne stereth vp euell, and in his lippes he is as an whote
burnynge fyre.
28 A frowarde body causeth strife, and he yt is a blabbe of his tonge, maketh
deuysion amonge prynces.
29 A wicked ma begyleth his neghbor, & ledeth him ye waye yt is not good.
30 He that wyncketh wt his eyes, ymagineth myschefe: and he yt byteth his
lippes, wyl do some harme.
31 Age is a crowne of worshipe, yf it be founde in the waye of righteousnes.
32 A pacient man is better then one that is stroge: and he that can rule him
selfe, is more worth then he yt wynneth a cite.
33 The lottes are cast in to the lappe, but their fall stodeth in the LORDE.

Chapter 17

1 Better is a drye morsell wt quyetnesse, the a full house and many fatt catell
wt stryfe.
2 A discrete seruaut shal haue more rule then the sonnes yt haue no wysdome, and
shal haue like heretage wt the brethren.
3 Like as syluer is tried in the fyre and golde in the fornace, euen so doth the
LORDE proue the hertes.
4 A wicked body holdeth moch of false lippes, & a dyssemblynge persone geueth
eare to a disceatfull toge.
5 Who so laugheth ye poore to scorne, blasphemeth his maker: and he yt is glad
of another mans hurte, shal not be vnpunyshed.
6 Childers children are a worshipe vnto the elders, and the fathers are the
honor of the children.
7 An eloquent speach becometh not a foole, a dyssemblinge mouth also besemeth
not a prynce.
8 Liberalite is a precious stone vnto him that hath it, for where so euer he
becometh, he prospereth.
9 Who so couereth another mans offence, seketh loue: but he yt discloseth the
faute, setteth frendes at variaunce.
10 One reprofe only doth more good to him yt hath vnderstodinge, then an C.
stripes vnto a foole.
11 A sedicious personne seketh myschefe, but a cruell messaunger shal be sent
agaynst him.
12 It were better to come agaynst a she Bere robbed of hir whelpes, then agaynst
a foole in his foolishnes.
13 Who so rewardeth euell for good, the plage shal not departe fro his house.
14 He yt soweth discorde & strife, is like one yt dyggeth vp a water broke: but
an open enemie is like the water yt breaketh out & reneth abrode.
15 The LORDE hateth as well him yt iustifieth ye vngodly, as him yt condempneth
the innocet.
16 What helpeth it to geue a foole money in his hode, where as he hath no mynde
to bye wy?dome?
17 He is a frende that allwaye loueth, and in aduersite a man shal knowe who is
his brother.
18 Who so promiseth by the hande, & is suertie for another, he is a foole.
19 He yt loueth strife, delyteth in synne: & who so setteth his dore to hye,
seketh after a fall.
20 Who so hath a frowarde herte, opteyneth no good: and he yt hath an
ouerthwarte tonge, shal fall into myschefe.
21 An vnwyse body bryngeth himselfe in to sorowe, and ye father of a foole can
haue no ioye.
22 A mery herte maketh a lusty age, but a sorowfull mide dryeth vp ye bones.
23 The vngodly taketh giftes out of the bosome, to wraist the wayes of iudgment.
24 Wy?dome shyneth in ye face of him yt hath vnderstondinge, but ye eyes of
fooles wandre thorow out all lodes.
25 An vndiscrete sonne is a grefe vnto his father, and heuynesse vnto his mother
yt bare him.
26 To punysh ye innocent, and to smyte ye prynces yt geue true iudgmet, are both
euell.
27 He is wyse and discrete, yt tempereth his wordes: and he is a ma of
vnderstodinge, yt maketh moch of his sprete.
28 Yee a very foole (when he holdeth his tonge) is counted wyse, and to haue
vnderstodinge, when he shutteth his lippes.

Chapter 18

1 Who so hath pleasure to sowe discorde, piketh a quarell in euery thinge.
2 A foole hath no delyte in vnderstodinge, but only in those thinges wherin his
herte reioyseth.
3 Where vngodlynes is, there is also di?dayne: & so there foloweth shame &
dishonor.
4 The wordes of a mas mouth are like depe waters, and the well of wy?dome is
like a full streame.
5 It is not good to regarde ye personne of the vngodly, or to put backe ye
righteous in iudgmet.
6 A fooles lippes are euer brawlinge, and his mouth prouoketh vnto batayll.
7 A fooles mouth is his owne destruccion, and his lippes are ye snare for his
owne soule.
8 The wordes of a slaunderer are very woudes, and go thorow vnto the ynmost
partes of the body.
9 Who so is slouthfull and slacke in his labor, is ye brother of him ye is a
waister.
10 The name of ye LORDE is a stronge castell, ye righteous flyeth vnto it, and
shalbe saued.
11 But ye rich mas goodes are his stronge holde, yee he taketh them for an hye
wall roude aboute him.
12 After pryde cometh destruccio, and honor after lowlynes.
13 He that geueth sentece in a matter before he heare it, is a foole, and worthy
to be confounded.
14 A good stomacke dryueth awaye a mas disease, but wha ye sprete is vexed, who
maye abyde it?
15 A wyse herte laboureth for knowlege, and a prudent eare seketh
vnderstondinge.
16 Liberalite bryngeth a man to honor and worshipe, & setteth him amonge greate
men.
17 The righteous accuseth hi self first of all, yf his neghbor come, he shal
fynde him.
18 The lot pacifieth ye variauce, & parteth ye mightie asunder.
19 The vnite of brethren is stronger then a castell, and they that holde
together are like the barre of a palace.
20 A mans bely shalbe satisfied with the frute of his owne mouth, and with the
increase of his lippes shal he be fylled.
21 Death and life stonde in the power of the tonge, he that loueth it, shal
enioye the frute therof.
22 Who so fyndeth a wife fyndeth a good thynge, & receaueth an wholsome benefite
of the LORDE.
23 The poore maketh supplicacion and prayeth mekely, but the riche geueth a
rough answere.
24 A frende that delyteth in loue, doth a man more fredshipe, and sticketh
faster vnto him then a brother.

Chapter 19

1 Better is the poore that lyueth godly, the the blasphemer that is but a foole.
2 Where no discrecion is, there the soule is not well: and who so is swifte on
fote, stombleth hastely.
3 Foolishnesse maketh a man to go out of his waye, & then is his herte vnpacient
agaynst the LORDE.
4 Riches make many frendes, but the poore is forsake of his owne frendes.
5 A false wytnesse shal not remayne vnpunyshed, and he that speaketh lyes shal
not escape.
6 The multitude hageth vpo greate men, & euery man fauoureth him that geueth
rewardes.
7 As for the poore, he is hated amonge all his brethren: yee his owne frendes
forsake him, & he that geueth credece vnto wordes, getteth nothinge.
8 He that is wyse, loueth his owne soule: and who so hath vnderstondinge, shal
prospere.
9 A false wytnesse shal not remayne vnpunyshed, & he yt speaketh lyes shal
perishe.
10 Delicate ease becometh not a foole, moch more vnsemely is it, a bonde man to
haue ye rule of prynces.
11 A wyse man putteth of displeasure, & it is his honor to let some fautes
passe.
12 The kynges disfauor is like ye roaringe of a Lyo, but his fredshpe is like
the dewe vpo ye grasse.
13 An vndiscrete sonne is ye heuynes of his father, & a braulynge wife is like
the topp of an house, where thorow it is euer droppynge.
14 House & riches maye a ma haue by ye heretage of his elders, but a discrete
woma is the gifte of the LORDE.
15 Slouthfulnes bryngeth slepe, & an ydell soule shal suffer hoger.
16 Who so kepeth the comaundemet, kepeth his owne soule: but he yt regardeth not
his waye, shal dye.
17 He yt hath pitie vpon the poore, ledeth vnto ye LORDE: & loke what he layeth
out, it shalbe payed him agayne.
18 Chaste yi sonne whyle there is hope, but let not yi soule be moued to slaye
hi.
19 For greate wrath bryngeth harme, therfore let him go, and so mayest thou
teach him more nurtoure.
20 O geue eare vnto good councell, & be content to be refourmed, that thou
mayest bewyse here after.
21 There are many deuices in a mas herte, neuertheles the coucell of ye LORDE
shal stode.
22 It is a mans worshipe to do good, & better it is to be a poore ma, then a
dyssembler.
23 The feare of the LORDE preserueth the life, yee it geueth pleteousnes,
without the visitacio of any plage.
24 A slouthfull body shuteth his honde in to his bosome, so yt he can not put it
to his mouth.
25 Yf thou smytest a scorneful personne, the ignoraut shal take better hede: &
yf thou reprouest one yt hath vnderstondinge, he wil be ye wyser.
26 He yt hurteth his father or shuteth out his mother, is a shamefull & an
vnworthy sonne.
27 My sonne, heare nomore the doctrine yt leadeth the awaye from the wordes of
vnderstondinge.
28 A false wytnes laugheth iudgmet to scorne, & the mouth of the vngodly eateth
vp wickednes.
29 Punyshmentes are ordened for the scornefull, and stripes for fooles backes.

Chapter 20

1 Wyne is a voluptuous thinge, & drockennes causeth sedicion: who so delyteth
therin, shal neuer be wyse.
2 The kynge ought to be feared as the roaringe of a lyon, who so prouoketh him
vnto anger, offendeth agaynst his owne soule.
3 It is a mans honoure to kepe himself from strife, but they yt haue pleasure in
braulinge, are fooles eueryone.
4 A slouthfull body wyl not go to plowe for colde, therfore shal he go abegginge
in Sommer, and haue nothinge.
5 Wyse councell in the herte of man is like a water in the depe of the earth,
but he that hath vnderstondinge, bryngeth it forth.
6 Many there be that are called good doers, but where shal one fynde a true
faithful ma?
7 Who so ledeth a godly and an innocent life, happie shal his children be, whom
he leaueth behynde him.
8 A kynge that sytteth in iudgment, and loketh well aboute him, dryueth awaye
all euell.
9 Who can saye: my hert is cleane, I am innocent from synne?
10 To vse two maner of weightes, or two maner of measures, both these are
abhominable vnto the LORDE.
11 A childe is knowne by his conuersacion, whether his workes be pure and right.
12 As for the hearinge of the eare & the sight of ye eye, ye LORDE hath made the
both.
13 Delyte not thou in slepe, lest thou come vnto pouerte: but ope thine eyes, &
thou shalt haue bred ynough.
14 It is naught, It is naught (saye men) whan they haue it, but whan it is gone,
they geue it a good worde.
15 A mouth of vnderstodinge is more worth then golde, many precious stones, and
costly Iewels.
16 Take his garment that is suertie for a straunger, & take a pledge of him for
ye vnknowne mans sake.
17 Euery ma liketh the bred that is gotten with disceate, but at the last is
mouth shalbe fylled with grauell.
18 Thorow councell the thinges that men deuyse go forwarde: & with discrecion
ought warres to be taken in honde.
19 Medle not with him that bewrayeth secretes, and is a slaunderer, and
disceaueth with his lippes.
20 Who so curseth his father and mother, his light shalbe put out in the myddest
of darcknesse.
21 The heretage that commeth to haistely at the first, shal not be praysed at
the ende.
22 Saye not thou: I will recompence euell, but put yi trust in the LORDE, & he
shal defende ye.
23 The LORDE abhorreth two maner of weightes, and a false balauce is an euell
thinge.
24 The LORDE ordreth euery mas goinges, for what is he, that vnderstondeth his
owne wayes?
25 It is a snare for a man to blaspheme that which is holy, & then to go aboute
wt vowes.
26 A wyse kynge destroyeth ye vngodly, & bryngeth the whele ouer them.
27 The lanterne of ye LORDE is ye breth of man, & goeth thorow all the inwarde
partes of the body.
28 Mercy & faithfulnes preserue the kynge, & with louynge kyndnes his seate is
holden vp.
29 The strength of yonge men is their worshipe, & a gray heade, is an honor vnto
ye aged.
30 Woundes dryue awaye euell, and so do stripes the inwarde partes of the body.

Chapter 21

1 The kynges hert is in the hande of the LORDE, like as are the ryuers of water:
he maye turne it whyther so euer he wyll.
2 Euery man thinketh his owne waye to be right, but the LORDE iudgeth ye hertes.
3 To do rightuousnesse and iudgmet is more acceptable to the LORDE the
sacrifice.
4 A presumptuous loke, a proude stomacke, & the lanterne of the vngodly is
synne.
5 The deuyses of one that is diligent, brynge plenteousnes: but he yt is
vnaduysed, commeth vnto pouerte.
6 Who so hoordeth vp riches wt ye disceatfulnes of his tonge, he is a foole, &
like vnto them that seke their owne death.
7 The robberies of the vngodly shalbe their owne destruccion, for they wolde not
do the thynge that was right.
8 The wayes of the frowarde are straunge, but ye workes of him yt is cleane, are
right.
9 It is better to dwell in a corner vnder ye house toppe, then with a braulinge
woman in a wyde house.
10 The soule of the vngodly wysheth euell, and hath no pitie vpon his neghboure.
11 When the scornefull is punyshed, the ignoraunt take ye better hede: & when a
wyse man is warned, he wil receaue the more vnderstondinge.
12 The rightuous enfourmeth the house of the vngodly, but ye vngodly go on still
after their owne wickednesse.
13 Who so stoppeth his eare at the criege of the poore, he shal crie himself and
not be herde.
14 A preuy rewarde pacifieth displeasure, and a gifte in the bosome stilleth
furiousnesse.
15 The iust delyteth in doynge the thynge that is right, but the workers of
wickednesse abhorre the same.
16 The man that wandreth out of the waye of wy?dome, shal remayne in the
cogregacion of ye deed.
17 He yt hath pleasure in banckettes, shal be a poore man: Who so delyteth in
wyne and delicates, shal not be riche.
18 The vngodly shalbe geuen for the rightuous, & the wicked for the iust.
19 It is better to dwell in a wyldernesse, the with a chydinge and an angrie
woman.
20 In a wyse mans house there is greate treasure and plenteousnesse, but a
foolish body spendeth vp all.
21 Who so foloweth rightuousnesse and mercy, fyndeth both life, rightuousnesse
and honor.
22 A wyse man wynneth the cite of the mightie, and as for the strength yt they
trust in, he bryngeth it downe.
23 Who so kepeth his mouth and his tonge, the same kepeth his soule from
troubles.
24 He yt is proude & presumptuous, is called a scornefull ma, which in wrath
darre worke maliciously.
25 The voluptuousnesse of the slouthfull is his owne death, for his hades wyll
not labor.
26 He coueteth and desyreth all the daye longe, but the rightuous is allwaye
geuynge & kepeth nothinge backe.
27 The sacrifice of the vngodly is abhominacion, for they offre the thinge yt is
gotten wt wickednes.
28 A false wytnesse shal perishe, but he yt wilbe content to heare, shal allwaye
haue power to speake himself.
29 An vngodly man goeth forth rashly, but the iust refourmeth his owne waye.
30 There is no wy?dome, there is no vnderstondinge, there is no councell agaynst
the LORDE.
31 The horse is prepared agaynst ye daye of battayll, but the LORDE geueth the
victory.

Chapter 22

1 A good name is more worth then greate riches, and louynge fauor is better then
syluer and golde.
2 Whether riches or pouerte do mete vs, it commeth all of God.
3 A wyse man seyth the plage and hydeth himself, but the foolish go on still and
are punyshed.
4 The ende of lowlynes & the feare of God, is riches, honor, prosperite and
health.
5 Speares and snares are in ye waye of the frowarde, but he yt wil kepe his
soule, let him fle fro soch.
6 Yf thou teachest a childe in his youth what waye he shulde go, he shall not
leaue it when he is olde.
7 The rich ruleth the poore, and ye borower is seruaunt to ye lender.
8 He yt soweth wickednesse, shal reape sorowe, & the rodde of his plage shal
destroye him.
9 A louynge eye shalbe blessed, for he geueth of his bred vnto ye poore.
10 Cast out ye scornefull man, and so shal strife go out wt him, yee variaunce
and slaunder shal cease.
11 Who so delyteth to be of a clene herte and of gracious lyppes, ye kynge shal
be his frende.
12 The eyes of ye LORDE preserue knowlege, but as for ye wordes of ye
despyteful, he bryngeth them to naught.
13 The slouthfull body sayeth: there is a lyo wt out, I might be slayne in ye
strete.
14 The mouth of an harlot is a depe pytt, wherin he falleth that ye LORDE is
angrie withall.
15 Foolishnes sticketh in the herte of ye lad, but ye rod of correccion driueth
it awaye.
16 Who so doth a poore man wronge to increase his owne riches, geueth (comoly)
vnto the rich, and at the last commeth to pouerte himself.
17 My sonne, bowe downe thine eare, and herken vnto the wordes of wy?dome,
applye yi mynde vnto my doctryne:
18 for it is a pleasaunt thinge yf thou kepe it in thine herte, and practise it
in thy mouth:
19 that thou mayest allwaye put yi trust in the LORDE.
20 Haue not I warned ye very oft with councell and lerninge?
21 yt I might shewe ye the treuth and that thou wt the verite mightest answere
them yt laye eny thinge against ye?
22 Se yt thou robbe not ye poore because he is weake, and oppresse not ye simple
in iudgment:
23 for ye LORDE himself wyl defende their cause, and do violence vnto them yt
haue vsed violence.
24 Make no fredshipe with an angrie wylfull man, and kepe no company wt ye
furious:
25 lest thou lerne his wayes, and receaue hurte vnto thy soule.
26 Be not thou one of them yt bynde ther hande vpo promyse, and are suertie for
dett:
27 for yf thou hast nothinge to paye, they shal take awaye thy bed from vnder
the.
28 Thou shalt not remoue the lande marcke, which thy fore elders haue sett.
29 Seist thou not, yt they which be diligent in their busines stonde before
kynges, and not amonge the symple people?

Chapter 23

1 When thou syttest at the table to eate wt a lorde, ordre thy self manerly wt
ye thinges
2 that are set before ye Measure thine appetite:
3 and yf thou wilt rule thine owne self, be not ouer gredy of his meate, for
meate begyleth and disceaueth.
4 Take not ouer greate trauayle and labor to be riche, bewarre of soch a
purpose.
5 Why wilt thou set thine eye vpon ye thinge, which sodenly vanisheth awaye? For
riches make them selues wynges, and take their flight like an Aegle in to ye
ayre.
6 Eate not thou wt ye envyous, and desyre no his meate,
7 for he hath a maruelous herte. He sayeth vnto ye: eate and drynke, where as
his herte is not wt ye.
8 Yee ye morsels that thou hast eaten shalt thou perbreake, and lese those swete
wordes.
9 Tel nothinge in to ye eares of a foole, for he wyl despyse the wy?dome of thy
wordes.
10 Remoue not ye olde lande marke, and come not within ye felde of the
fatherlesse:
11 For he yt deliuereth them is mightie, euen he shal defende their cause
agaynst the.
12 Applie thine herte vnto lernynge, and thine eare to the wordes of knowlege.
13 Witholde not correccion from ye childe, for yf thou beatest him wt the rodde,
he shal not dye therof.
14 Thou smytest him wt the rodde, but thou delyuerest his soule from hell.
15 My sonne, yf yi herte receaue wy?dome, my herte also shal reioyce:
16 yee my reynes shalbe very glad, yf yi lyppes speake the thinge yt is right.
17 Let not thine herte be gelous to folowe synners, but kepe ye still in the
feare of the LORDE all the daye loge:
18 for the ende is not yet come, and thy pacient abydinge shal not be in vayne.
19 My sonne, ue eare & be wyse, so shal thine hert prospere in the waye.
20 Kepe no company wt wyne bebbers and ryotous eaters of flesh:
21 for soch as be dronckardes and ryotous, shal come to pouerte, & he that is
geuen to moch slepe, shal go wt a ragged cote.
22 Geue eare vnto thy father that begat the, and despyse not thy mother whan she
is olde.
23 Labor for to get ye treuth: sell not awaye wy?dome, nourtor & vnderstodinge
24 (for a righteous father is maruelous glad of a wyse sonne, & delyteth in hi)
25 so shal thy father be glad, and thy mother that bare the, shal reioyse.
26 My sonne, geue me thyne herte, and let thine eyes haue pleasure in my wayes.
27 For an whore is a depe graue, and an harlot is a narow pytt.
28 She lurketh like a thefe, and those that be not awarre she brigeth vnto her.
29 Where is wo? where is sorow? where is strife? where is braulynge? where are
woundes without cause? where be reed eyes?
30 Euen amonge those that be euer at the wyne, and seke out where the best is.
31 Loke not thou vpon the wyne, how reed it is, and what a color it geueth in
the glasse.
32 It goeth downe softly, but at the last it byteth like a serpet, and styngeth
as an Adder.
33 So shal thine eyes loke vnto straunge women, & thine herte shal muse vpon
frowarde thinges.
34 Yee thou shalt be as though thou slepte, in ye myddest of ye see, or vpo ye
toppe of the mast.
35 They wounded me (shalt thou saie) but it hath not hurte me, they smote me,
but I felt it not. Whe I am wel wakened, I wil go to ye drynke agayne.

Chapter 24

1 Be not thou gelous ouer wicked me, & desyre not thou to be amonge them.
2 For their herte ymagineth to do hurte, & their lippes talke of myschefe.
3 Thorow wy?dome an house shalbe buylded, & wt vnderstondinge it shalbe set vp.
4 Thorow discrecion shal ye chabers be fylled wt all costly & pleasaunt riches.
5 A wyse ma is stroge, yee a ma of vnderstodinge is better, the he yt is mightie
of stregth.
6 For with discrecion must warres be take in honde, and where as are many yt can
geue councell, there is ye victory.
7 Wy?dome is an hie thinge, yee eue to ye foole, for he darre not ope his mouth
in ye gate.
8 He yt ymagineth myschefe, maye wel be called an vngracious personne.
9 The thoughte of ye foolish is synne, & ye scornefull is an abhominacion vnto
me.
10 Yf thou be ouersene & necliget in tyme of nede, the is thy stregth but small.
11 Delyuer the yt go vnto death, & are led awaie to be slaine, & be not necliget
therin.
12 Yf thou wilt saye: I knewe not of it. Thynkest thou yt he which made ye
hertes, doth not cosidre it? & yt he which regardeth yi soule, seith it not?
Shal not he recopence euery man acordinge to his workes?
13 My sonne, thou eatest hony & ye swete hony cobe, because it is good & swete
in thy mouth.
14 Euen so shall ye knowlege of wysdome be vnto yi soule, as soone as thou hast
gotte it. And there is good hope, yee yi hope shal not be in vayne.
15 Laye no preuy waite wickedly vpon ye house of ye rightuous, & disquiete not
his restinge place.
16 For a iust ma falleth seuen tymes, & ryseth vp agayne, but ye vngodly fall in
to wickednes.
17 Reioyce not thou at ye fall of thine enemie, and let not thine herte be glad
whan he stombleth.
18 Lest ye LORDE (when he seyth it) be angrie, & turne his wrath from him vnto
the.
19 Let not yi wrath & gelousy moue ye, to foolow ye wicked and vngodly.
20 And why? ye wicked hath nothinge to hope for, & ye cadle of the vngodly shall
be put out.
21 My sonne, feare thou ye LORDE & ye kinge, & kepe no copany wt ye slaunderous:
22 for their destruccion shal come sodenly, & who knoweth ye fall of the both?
23 These are also ye saieges of ye wyse. It is not good, to haue respecte of any
personne in iudgmet.
24 He yt saieth to ye vngodly: thou art rightuous, him shall the people curse,
yee ye comotie shal abhorre him.
25 But they yt rebuke ye vngodly shalbe comended, & a riche blessinge shal come
vpo the.
26 He maketh him self to be well loued, that geueth a good answere.
27 First make vp yi worke yt is wt out, & loke well vnto yt which thou hast in
ye felde, & the buylde thine house.
28 Be no false wytnesse agaynst yi neghbor, & hurte him not wt yi lyppes.
29 Saye not: I wil hadle him, eue as he hath dealte wt me, & wil rewarde euery
ma acordinge to his dedes.
30 I wente by ye felde of ye slouthfull, & by ye vynyarde of the foolish ma.
31 And lo, it was all couered wt nettels, & stode full of thistles, & ye stone
wall was broke downe.
32 This I sawe, & cosidered it wel: I loked vpo it, & toke it for a warnynge.
33 Yee slepe on still a litle, slobre a litle, folde thine hodes together yet a
litle:
34 so shall pouerte come vnto the as one yt trauayleth by ye waye, & necessite
like a wapened man.

Chapter 25

1 These also are Salomons prouerbes, which the men of Ezechias kinge of Iuda
gathered together.
2 It is the honor of God to kepe a thinge secrete, but ye kinges honor is to
search out a thinge.
3 The heauen is hie, ye earth is depe, and ye kinges hert is vnsearcheable.
4 Take ye drosse from ye syluer, & there shalbe a cleane vessell therof.
5 Take awaye vngodlinesse fro ye kynge, & his seate shal be stablished wt
rightuousnes.
6 Put not forth yi self in ye presence of ye kynge, & prease not in to ye place
of greate men.
7 Better it is yt it be sayde vnto ye: come vp hither, then thou to be set downe
in ye presence of ye prynce, whom thou seyst with thine eyes.
8 Be not haistie to go to the lawe, lest happlie thou ordre yi self so at ye
last, yt thy neghbor put ye to shame.
9 Handle thy matter wt yi neghbor himself, & discouer not another mans secrete:
10 lest whan men heare therof, it turne to yi dishonor, & lest thine euell name
do not ceasse.
11 A worde spoken in due season, is like apples of golde in a syluer dyshe.
12 The correccion of the wyse is to an obedient eare, a golden cheyne and a
Iewel of golde.
13 Like as the wynter coole in the haruest, so is a faithfull messaunger to him
that sent him, & refre?sheth his masters mynde.
14 Who so maketh greate boastes & geueth nothinge, is like cloudes & wynde
without rayne.
15 With pacience maye a prynce be pacified, & wt a soft tonge maye rigorousnes
be broke.
16 Yf thou findest hony, eate so moch as is sufficiet for ye: lest thou be ouer
full, & perbreake it out againe.
17 Withdrawe yi foote fro thy neghbours house, lest he be weery of the, and so
abhorre the.
18 Who so beareth false wytnesse agaynst his neghboure, he is a very speare, a
swearde & a sharpe arowe.
19 The hope of the vngodly in tyme of nede, is like a rotten toth and a slippery
foote.
20 Who so syngeth a songe to a wicked herte, clotheth hi with ragges in the
colde, and poureth vyneger vpon chalke.
21 Yf thine enemie honger, fede him: yf he thyrst, geue him drynke:
22 for so shalt thou heape coales offyre vpo his heade, and the LORDE shal
rewarde the.
23 The north wynde dryueth awaye the rayne, euen so doth an earnest sober
countenauce a backbyters tonge.
24 It is better to syt in a corner vnder the rofe, then wt a braulynge woman in
a wyde house.
25 A good reporte out of a farre countre, is like colde water to a thyrstie
soule.
26 A righteous man fallynge downe before the vngodly, is like a troubled well
and a sprynge yt is destroyed.
27 Like as it is not good to eate to moch hony, euen so he that wyll search out
hye thynges, it shal be to heuy for him.
28 He that can not rule himself, is like a cite, which is broken downe, and hath
no walles.

Chapter 26

1 Like as snowe is not mete in sommer, ner rayne in haruest: euen so is worshipe
vnsemely for a foole.
2 Like as ye byrde and the swalowe take their flight and fle here and there, so
the curse that is geuen in vayne, shal not light vpon a man.
3 Vnto the horse belongeth a whyppe, to the Asse a brydle, and a rodde to the
fooles backe.
4 Geue not the foole an answere after his foolishnesse, lest thou become like
vnto him:
5 but make ye foole an answere to his foolishnesse, lest he be wyse in his owne
coceate.
6 He is lame of his fete, yee droncken is he in vanite, that comitteth eny
thinge to a foole.
7 Like as it is an vnsemely thige to haue legges & yet to halte, eue so is a
parable in ye fooles mouth.
8 He yt setteth a foole in hye dignite, yt is eue as yf a man dyd cast a
precious stone vpo ye galous.
9 A parable in a fooles mouth, is like a thorne yt pricketh a droncken man in ye
hande.
10 A man of experience discerneth all thinges well, but whoso hyreth a foole,
hyreth soch one as wyl take no hede.
11 Like as the dogg turneth agayne to his vomite, euen so a foole begynneth his
foolishnesse agayne afresh.
12 Yf thou seyest a man yt is wyse in his owne conceate, there is more hope in a
foole then in hi.
13 The slouthfull sayeth: there is a leoparde in ye waye, and a lyon in ye
myddest of the stretes.
14 Like as the dore turneth aboute vpon the tresholde, euen so doth the
slouthfull welter himself in his bedd.
15 The slouthfull body thrusteth his hode in to his bosome, and it greueth him
to put it agayne to his mouth.
16 The slogarde thinketh him self wyser, then vij. men that sytt and teach.
17 Who so goeth by and medleth with other mens strife, he is like one yt taketh
a dogg by ye eares.
18 Like as one shuteth deadly arowes and dartes out of a preuy place, euen so
doth a dyssembler with his neghboure,
19 And then sayeth he: I dyd it but in sporte.
20 Where no wodd is, there the fyre goeth out: and where the bacbyter is taken
awaye, there the strife ceaseth.
21 Coles kyndle heate, and wodd ye fyre: euen so doth a braulinge felowe stere
vp variaunce.
22 A slaunderers wordes are like flatery, but they pearse ye inwarde partes of
ye body.
23 Venymous lippes & a wicked herte, are like a potsherde couered wt syluer
drosse.
24 An enemie dyssembleth with his lippes, and in the meane season he ymagineth
myschefe:
25 but wha he speaketh fayre, beleue him not, for there are seuen abhominacios
in his herte.
26 Who so kepeth euell will secretly to do hurte, his malyce shalbe shewed
before the whole congregacion.
27 Who so dyggeth vp a pytt, shal fal therin: and he yt weltreth a stone, shal
stomble vpon it hymselfe.
28 A dyssemblynge tonge hateth one that rebuketh him, and a flaterige mouth
worketh myschefe.

Chapter 27

1 Make not thy boost of tomorow, for thou knowest not what maye happen todaye.
2 Let another ma prayse the, & not thine owne mouth: yee other folkes lippes,
and not thyne.
3 The stone is heuy, and the sonde weightie: but a fooles wrath is heuyer then
they both.
4 Wrath is a cruell thige, and furiousnesse is a very tempest: yee who is able
to abyde envye?
5 An open rebuke is better, then a secrete loue.
6 Faithfull are the woundes of a louer, but ye kysses of an enemie are
disceatfull.
7 He that is full, abhorreth an hony combe: but vnto him that is hogrie, euery
sower thinge is swete.
8 He that oft tymes flytteth, is like a byrde yt forsaketh hir nest.
9 The herte is glad of a swete oyntment and sauoure, but a stomacke that ca geue
good councell, reioyseth a mans neghboure.
10 Thyne owne frende and thy fathers frende se thou forsake not, but go not in
to thy brothers house in tyme of thy trouble. Better is a frende at hode, then a
brother farre of.
11 My sonne, be wyse, and thou shalt make me a glad herte: so that I shal make
answere vnto my rebukers.
12 A wyse man seynge the plage wyl hyde him self, as for fooles they go on
still, and suffer harme.
13 Take his garment that is suertie for a straunger, & take a pledge of him for
the vnknowne mans sake.
14 He that is to hastie to praise his neghboure aboue measure, shalbe taken as
one yt geueth him an euell reporte.
15 A brawlynge woman and the rofe of the house droppynge in a raynie daye, maye
well be compared together.
16 He that refrayneth her, refrayneth the wynde, and holdeth oyle fast in his
hode.
17 Like as one yro whetteth another, so doth one man comforte another.
18 Who so kepeth his fyge tre, shal enioye the frutes therof: he that wayteth
vpon his master, shal come to honoure.
19 Like as in one water there apeare dyuerse faces, eue so dyuerse men haue
dyuerse hertes.
20 Like as hell & destruccion are neuer full, euen so the eyes of me can neuer
be satisfied.
21 Syluer is tryed in the moulde, & golde in the fornace, & so is a man, whan he
is openly praysed to his face.
22 Though thou shuldest bray a foole wt a pestell in a morter like otemeell, yet
wil not his foolishnesse go from him.
23 Se yt thou knowe the nombre of thy catell thy self, and loke well to thy
flockes.
24 For riches abyde not allwaye, & the crowne endureth not for euer.
25 The hay groweth, ye grasse cometh vp, & herbes are gathered in ye mountaines.
26 The lambes shal clothe the, & for the goates thou shalt haue money to yi
hu?bondry.
27 Thou shalt haue goates mylck ynough to fede the, to vpholde thy husholde, &
to susteyne thy maydens.

Chapter 28

1 The vngodly flyeth no man chasynge him, but the rightuous stondeth stiff as a
lyon.
2 Because of synne ye londe doth oft chaunge hir prynce: but thorow men of
vnderstondinge & wy?dome a realme endureth longe.
3 One poore man oppressinge another by violence, is like a contynuall rayne that
destroyeth ye frute.
4 They that forsake the lawe, prayse ye vngodly; but soch as kepe the lawe,
abhorre them.
5 Wicked men discerne not the thinge yt is right, but they that seke after the
LORDE, discusse all thinges.
6 A poore man ledynge a godly life, is better then the riche that goeth in
frowarde wayes.
7 Whoso kepeth the lawe, is a childe of vnderstondinge: but he yt fedeth ryotous
men, shameth his father.
8 Who so increaseth his riches by vautage & wynnynge, let him gather them to
helpe the poore withall.
9 He that turneth awaye his eare from hearinge ye lawe, his prayer shalbe
abhorred.
10 Who so ledeth ye rightuous in to an euell waye, shal fall in to his owne
pytt, but ye iust shal haue the good in possession.
11 The rich man thynketh him self to be wyse, but the poore that hath
vnderstondinge, ca perceaue him wel ynough.
12 When rightuous men are in prosperite, the doth honoure florish: but when the
vngodly come vp, ye state of men chaungeth.
13 He that hydeth his synnes, shall not prospere: but who so knowlegeth them and
forsaketh them, shall haue mercy.
14 Well is him that stodeth allwaye in awe: as for him that hardeneth his herte,
he shal fall in to mischefe.
15 Like as a roaringe lyon and an hongrie beer, euen so is an vngodly prynce
ouer the poore people.
16 Where the prynce is without vnderstondinge, there is greate oppression &
wronge: but yf he be soch one as hateth couetousnesse, he shal longe raigne.
17 He that by violece sheddeth eny mans bloude, shal be a rennagate vnto his
graue, and no man shal be able to sucor him.
18 Who so leadeth a godly and an innocet life, shalbe safe: but he that goeth
frowarde wayes, shall once haue a fall.
19 He yt tylleth his londe, shal haue plenteousnesse of bred: but he that
foloweth ydilnesse, shal haue pouerte ynough.
20 A faithfull man is greatly to be commeded, but he that maketh to moch haist
for to be riche, shal not be vngiltie.
21 To haue respecte of personnes in iudgment is not good: And why? he will do
wronge, yee euen for a pece of bred.
22 He that will be rich all to soone, hath an euell eye, and considereth not,
that pouerte shall come vpon him.
23 He that rebuketh a man, shall fynde more fauoure at ye last, the he that
flatreth him.
24 Who so robbeth his father and mother, and sayeth it is no synne: the same is
like vnto a mortherer.
25 He that is of a proude stomacke, stereth vp strife: but he that putteth his
trust in ye LORDE, shalbe well fedd.
26 He that trusteth in his owne hert, is a foole: but he that dealeth wisely,
shalbe safe.
27 He that geueth vnto the poore, shal not wante: but he that turneth awaye his
eyes from soch as be in necessite, shall suffre greate pouerte himself.
28 Whan the vngodly are come vp, men are fayne to hyde them selues: but whe they
perish, the rightuous increase.

Chapter 29

1 He that is stiffnecked & wyll not be refourmed, shal sodenly be destroyed wt
out eny helpe.
2 Where ye rightuous haue the ouer hande, ye people are in prosperite: but where
the vngodly beareth rule, there ye people mourne.
3 Who so loueth wy?dome, maketh his father a glad man: but he yt kepeth
harlottes, spedeth awaye yt he hath.
4 With true iudgment ye kynge setteth vp the londe, but yf he be a man yt taketh
giftes, he turneth it vpsyde downe.
5 Who so flatreth his neghbor, layeth a nette for his fete.
6 The synne of ye wicked is his owne snare, but ye righteous shal be glad and
reioyse.
7 The righteous considreth the cause of the poore, but the vngodly regardeth no
vnderstondynge.
8 Wicked people brynge a cite in decaye, but wyse men set it vp agayne.
9 Yf a wyse man go to lawe with a foole (whether he deale with him frendly or
roughly) he getteth no rest.
10 The bloudethyrstie hate the rightuous, but the iust seke his soule.
11 A foole poureth out his sprete alltogether, but a wyse man kepeth it in till
afterwarde.
12 If a prynce delyte in lyes, all his seruauntes are vngodly.
13 The poore and the lender mete together, the LORDE lighteneth both their eyes.
14 The seate of the kinge yt faithfully iudgeth the poore, shal continue sure
for euermore.
15 The rodde and correccion mynistre wy?dome, but yf a childe be not loked vnto,
he bryngeth his mother to shame.
16 When the vngodly come vp, wickednesse increaseth: but the rightuous shall se
their fall.
17 Nurtoure thy sonne with correccion, and he shal comforte the, yee he shal do
the good at thine hert.
18 Where no prophet is, there the people perishe: but well is him that kepeth
the lawe.
19 A seruaut wil not be the better for wordes, for though he vnderstonde, yet
wil he not regarde them.
20 Yf thou seyst a man that is haistie to speake vnaduysed, thou mayest trust a
foole more then him.
21 He that delicately bryngeth vp his seruaunt from a childe, shal make him his
master at length.
22 An angrie man stereth vp strife, and he that beareth euell wyll in his mynde,
doth moch euell.
23 After pryde commeth a fall, but a lowly sprete bryngeth greate worshipe.
24 Who so kepeth company wt a thefe, hateth his owne soule: he heareth
blasphemies, & telleth it not forth.
25 He that feareth men, shal haue a fall: but who so putteth his trust in the
LORDE, shal come to honor.
26 Many there be that seke ye prynces fauoure, but euery mans iudgment commeth
from the LORDE.
27 The rightuous abhorre the vngodly: but as for those that be in ye right waye,
ye wicked hate them.

Chapter 30

1 The wordes of Agur the sonne of Iake. The prophecie of a true faithfull man,
who God hath helped, whom God hath coforted & norished.
2 For though I am ye leest of all, & haue no mas vnderstodige
3 (for I neuerlerned wi?dome) yet haue I vnderstodinge & am wel enfourmed in
godly thinges.
4 Who hath clymmed vp i to heauen? Who hath come downe from thence? Who hath
holden ye wynde fast in his hade? Who hath coprehended ye waters in a garment?
Who hath set all the endes of ye worlde? What is his name, or his sonnes name?
Canst thou tell?
5 All the wordes of God are pure & cleane, for he is a shylde vnto all them,
that put their trust in him.
6 Put thou nothinge therfore vnto his wordes, lest he reproue the, and thou be
founde as a lyar.
7 Two thinges I requyre of the, that thou wilt not denye me before I dye.
8 Remoue fro me vanite and lyes: geue me nether pouerte ner riches, only graunte
me a necessary lyuynge.
9 Lest yf I be to full, I denye ye, & saye: what felowe is ye LORDE? And lest I
beinge constrayned thorow pouerte, fall vnto stealinge, and forsweare the name
of my God.
10 Accuse not a seruaunt vnto his master, lest he speake euell of the also, and
thou be hurte.
11 He that bryngeth vp an euell reporte vpo the generacion of his father and
mother, is not worthy to be commended.
12 The generacion that thynke them selues cleane, shal not be clensed from their
fylthynesse.
13 There are people yt haue a proude loke, and cast vp their eye lyddes.
14 This peoples tethe are swerdes, and with their chaft bones they consume and
deuoure the symple of the earth, and the poore from amonge me.
15 This generacion (which is like an horsleche) hath two doughters: ye one is
called, fetch hither: the other, brynge hither.
16 There be thre thinges that are neuer satisfied, and the fourth saieth neuer
hoo. The hell, a womans wombe, and the earth hath neuer water ynough. As for
fyre, it sayeth neuer: hoo.
17 Who so laugheth his father to scorne, and setteth his mothers commaudement at
naught: the rauens pycke out his eyes in the valley, and deuoured be he of the
yongle Aegles.
18 There be thre thinges to hye for me, and as for the fourth, it passeth my
knowlege.
19 The waye of an Aegle in ye ayre, ye waye of a serpent ouer ye stone, ye waye
of a shippe in ye see, & ye waye of a ma wt a yonge woma.
20 Soch is the waye also of a wyfe yt breaketh wedlocke, which wypeth hir mouth
like as wha she hath eate, & sayeth: As for me, I haue done no harme.
21 Thorow thre thinges the earth is disquieted, & the fourth maye it not beare:
22 Thorow a seruaut yt beareth rule, thorow a foole yt hath greate riches,
23 thorow an ydle houswife, & thorow an handmayden yt is heyre to hir mastres.
24 There be foure thinges in the earth, the which are very litle: but in wy?dome
they exceade the wyse.
25 The Emmettes are but a weake people, yet gather they their meate together in
ye haruest.
26 The conyes are but a feble folke, yet make they their couches amonge the
rockes.
27 The greshoppers haue not a gyde, yet go they forth together by heapes.
28 The spyder laboureth wt hir hades, & yt in ye kynges palace.
29 There be thre thinges yt go stiffly, but the goinge of the fourth is the
goodliest of all.
30 A Lyon which is kynge of beastes, & geueth place to no man:
31 A cock ready to fight: A rame: And a kynge yt goeth forth wt his people.
32 Yf thou be so foolish to magnifie yi self, or medlest wt eny soch thinge, the
laye thine hade vpon yi mouth.
33 Who so chyrneth mylck, maketh butter: he that rubbeth his nose, maketh it
blede, and he that causeth wrath, bryngeth forth strife.

Chapter 31

1 These are the wordes of Kynge Lamuel, & ye lesson yt his mother taught him.
2 My sonne, thou sonne of my body: O my deare beloued sonne,
3 geue not ouer thy substaunce & mynde vnto women, which are the destruccio eue
of kynges.
4 O Lamuel, geue kinges no wyne, geue kynges & prynces no stronge drynke:
5 lest they beinge dronken forget the lawe, & regarde not ye cause of the poore,
& of all soch as be in aduersite.
6 Geue stronge drynke vnto soch as are condempned to death, & wyne vnto those yt
mourne:
7 that they maye drynke it, & forget their misery & aduersite.
8 Be thou an aduocate & stonde in iudgment thyself, to speake for all soch as be
dome & sucourles.
9 With yi mouth defende ye thinge yt is laufull and right, and ye cause of ye
poore and helplesse.
10 Who so fyndeth an honest faithful woma, she is moch more worth the perles.
11 The herte of hir husbande maye safely trust in her, so that he shal haue no
nede of spoyles.
12 She wil do him good & not euel all ye dayes of hir life.
13 She occupieth woll & flax, & laboureth gladly wt hir handes.
14 She is like a marchauntes shippe, that bryngeth hir vytayles from farre.
15 She is vp in ye night season, to prouyde meate for hir housholde, & foode for
hir maydens.
16 She considreth lode, & byeth it, and wt the frute of hir handes she planteth
a vynyarde.
17 She gyrdeth hir loynes with strength, and courageth hir armes.
18 And yf she perceaue that hir houswifrie doth good, hir candle goeth not out
by night.
19 She layeth hir fyngers to the spyndle, & hir hande taketh holde of ye rocke.
20 She openeth hir hande to ye poore, yee she stretcheth forth hir hades to soch
as haue nede.
21 She feareth not yt the colde of wynter shal hurte hir house, for all hir
housholde folkes are duble clothed.
22 She maketh hir self fayre ornametes, hir clothige is whyte sylke & purple.
23 Hir hu?bade is moch set by in ye gates, whe he sytteth amonge ye rulers of ye
londe.
24 She maketh cloth of sylke & selleth it, and delyuereth a gyrdle vnto ye
marchaut.
25 Stregth and honoure is hir clothinge, & in the latter daye she shal reioyse.
26 She openeth hir mouth with wy?dome, & in hir toge is the lawe of grace.
27 She loketh wel to the wayes of hir housholde, & eateth not hir bred with
ydilnes.
28 Hir children arise & call hir blessed, & hir hu?bande maketh moch of her.
29 Many daughters there be yt gather riches together, but thou goest aboue the
all.
30 As for fauor, it is disceatfull, and beutie is a vayne thinge: but a woman
that feareth the LORDE, she is worthy to be praysed.
31 Geue her of the frute of hir handes, and let hir owne workes prayse her in
the gates.


Ecclesiastes

Chapter 1

1 These are the wordes of the Preacher, the sonne of Dauid, kynge of Ierusalem.
2 All is but vanite (saieth ye preacher) all is but playne vanite.
3 For what els hath a ma, of all the labor yt he taketh vnder the Sonne?
4 One generacio passeth awaye, another commeth, but the earth abydeth still.
5 The Sone aryseth, the Sonne goeth downe, & returneth to his place, yt he maye
there ryse vp agayne.
6 The wynde goeth towarde ye South, & fetcheth his copase aboute vnto the North,
& so turneth in to himself agayne.
7 All floudes runne in to the see, & yet the see is not fylled: for loke vnto
what place the waters runne, thence they come agayne.
8 All thinges are so harde, yt no ma can expresse them. The eye is not satisfied
wt sight, the eare is not fylled wt hearinge.
9 The thinge yt hath bene, cometh to passe agayne: & ye thinge yt hath bene
done, is done agayne, there is no new thinge vnder the Sonne.
10 Is there eny thinge, wherof it maye be sayde: lo, this is new? For it was
loge agoo in the tymes yt haue bene before vs.
11 The thinge yt is past, is out of remebraunce: Eue so the thiges that are for
to come, shal no more be thought vpo amoge the that come after.
12 I myself ye Preacher, beynge kynge of Israel & Ierusale,
13 applyed my mynde to seke out & search for the knowlege of all thiges yt are
done vnder heaue. Soch trauayle & labor hath God geue vnto ye childre of me, to
exercyse the selues theri.
14 Thus I haue considered all the thinges that come to passe vnder the Sone, &
lo, they are all but vanite & vexacion of mynde.
15 The croked can not be mayde straight, & the fautes ca not be nobred.
16 I comoned wt myne owne herte, sayege: lo, I am come to a greate estate, and
haue gotte more wy?dome, the all they yt haue bene before me in Ierusalem. Yee
my hert had greate experiece of wy?dome & knowlege,
17 for there vnto I applyed my mynde: yt I might knowe what were wy?dome &
vnderstodinge, what were error & foolishnes. And I perceaued yt this also was
but a vexacion of mynde:
18 for where moch wy?dome is, there is also greate trauayle & disquietnes: & ye
more knowlege a man hath, the more is his care.

Chapter 2

1 The sayde I thus in my hert: Now go to, I wil take myne ease & haue good
dayes. But lo, that was vanite also:
2 in so moch that I sayde vnto laughter: thou art madd, and to myrth: what doest
thou?
3 So I thought in my herte, to withdrawe my flesh from wyne, to applye my mynde
vnto wy?dome, and to comprehede foolishnes vntill the tyme that (amonge all ye
thinges which are vnder ye Sonne) I might se what were best for men to do, so
longe as they lyue vnder heauen.
4 I made gorgious fayre workes, I buylded me houses, and planted vynyardes:
5 I made me ortchardes and gardens of pleasure, and planted trees in them of all
maner frutes.
6 I made poles of water, to water ye grene and frutefull trees withall.
7 I bought seruauntes and maydes, and had a greate housholde. As for catell and
shepe, I had more substaunce of them, then all they yt were before me in
Ierusalem.
8 I gathered syluer & golde together, euen a treasure of kynges & londes. I
prouided me syngers and wome which coude playe of instrumentes, to make men
myrth and pastime. I gat me drynkynge cuppes also and glasses.
9 (Shortly) I was greater & in more worshipe, then all my predecessours in
Ierusale. For wy?dome remayned with me:
10 & loke what so euer myne eyes desyred, I let them haue it: & wherin so euer
my herte delyted or had eny pleasure, I with helde it not fro it. Thus my hert
reioysed in all yt I dyd, and this I toke for the porcion of all my trauayle.
11 But whan I considered all the workes yt my handes had wrought, and all the
labours that I had taken therin: lo, all was but vanite and vexacion of mynde, &
nothinge of eny value vnder ye Sonne.
12 Then turned I me to considre wy?dome, erroure and foolishnesse (for what is
he amonge men, that might be compared to me ye kynge in soch workes?)
13 and I sawe, that wy?dome excelleth foolishnesse, as farre as light doth
darknesse.
14 For a wyse man beareth his eyes aboute in his heade, but the foole goeth in
the darknesse. I perceaued also that they both had one ende.
15 Then thought I in my mynde: Yf it happen vnto the foole as it doth vnto me,
what nedeth me then to laboure eny more for wy?dome? So I confessed within my
harte, that this also was but vanite.
16 For the wyse are euer as litle in remembraunce as the foolish, and all the
dayes for to come shalbe forgotten, yee the wyse man dyeth as well as ye foole.
17 Thus begane I to be weery of my life, in so moch that I coude awaye with
nothinge that is done vnder the Sonne, for all was but vanite & vexacion of
mynde:
18 Yee I was weery of all my laboure, which I had taken vnder the Sonne, because
I shulde be fayne to leaue them vnto another man, that cometh after me:
19 for who knoweth, whether he shalbe a wyse ma or a foole? And yet shal he be
lorde of all my labours, which I with soch wy?dome haue taken vnder the Sonne.
Is not this a vayne thinge?
20 So I turned me to refrayne my mynde from all soch trauayle, as I toke vnder
the Sonne:
21 for so moch as a man shulde weery him self with wy?dome, with vnderstondinge
and opportunite, and yet be fayne to leaue his labours vnto another, yt neuer
swett for them. This is also a vayne thinge and a greate misery.
22 For what getteth a ma of all ye labor & trauayle of his mynde, yt he taketh
vnder the Sonne,
23 but heuynesse, sorowe & disquyetnes all ye dayes of his life? In so moch that
his herte can not rest in the night. Is not this also a vayne thinge?
24 Is it not better then for a ma to eate and drynke, and his soule to be mery
in his laboure? Yee I sawe that this also was a gifte of God:
25 For who maye eate, drynke, or brynge eny thige to passe without him? And why?
26 he geueth vnto ma, what it pleaseth him: whether it be wy?dome.
vnderstondinge, or gladnesse. But vnto the synner he geueth weerynes and sorow,
that he maye gather and heape together ye thinge, yt afterwarde shalbe geuen
vnto him whom it pleaseth God. This is now a vayne thinge, yee a very
disquietnesse and vexacio of mynde.

Chapter 3

1 Every thinge hath a tyme, yee all that is vnder the heauen, hath is conuenient
season.
2 There is a tyme to be borne, and a tyme to dye. There is a tyme to plate, and
a tyme to plucke vp the thinge, yt is planted:
3 A tyme to slaye, and a tyme to make whole: A tyme to breake downe, and a tyme
to buylde vp:
4 A tyme to wepe, and a tyme to laugh: A tyme to mourne, and a tyme to daunse:
5 A tyme to cast awaye stones, and a tyme to gather stones together: A tyme to
enbrace, & a tyme to refrayne from enbracynge:
6 A tyme to wynne, and a tyme to lese: A tyme to spare, and a tyme to spende:
7 A tyme to cutt in peces, and a tyme to sowe together: A tyme to kepe sylece,
and a tyme to speake:
8 A tyme to loue, & a tyme to hate: A tyme of warre, and a tyme of peace.
9 What hath a ma els (that doth eny thinge) but weerynesse and laboure?
10 For as touchinge the trauayle and carefulnesse which God hath geuen vnto me,
I se that he hath geuen it them, to be exercised in it.
11 All this hath he ordened maruelous goodly, to euery thinge his due tyme. He
hath plated ignoraunce also in the hertes of men, yt they shulde not fynde out
ye grounde of his workes, which he doth from ye beginninge to ye ende.
12 So I perceaued, yt in these thinges there is nothinge better for a man, the
to be mery & to do well so longe as he lyueth.
13 For all yt a man eateth & drynketh, yee what so euer a ma enioyeth of all his
labor, ye same is a gift of God.
14 I cosidered also yt what so euer God doth, it cotinueth for euer, & yt
nothinge can be put vnto it ner take from it: & yt God doth it to ye intent, yt
men shulde feare him.
15 The thinge yt hath bene, is now: & the thinge yt is for to come, hath bene
afore tyme, for God restoreth agayne the thinge that was past.
16 Morouer, I sawe vnder ye Sonne, vngodlynesse in the steade of iudgment, &
iniquite in steade of rightuousnesse.
17 Then thought I in my mynde: God shal separate the rightuous from the vngodly,
& then shal be the tyme & iudgmet of all councels & workes.
18 I comoned wt myne owne herte also cocernynge the childre of men: how God hath
chosen them, and yet letteth the apeare, as though they were beastes:
19 for it happeneth vnto men as it doth vnto beastes, & as the one dyeth, so
dyeth ye other: yee they haue both one maner of breth, so yt (in this) a man
hath no preemynence aboue a beest, but all are subdued vnto vanite.
20 They go all vnto one place, for as they be all of dust, so shal they all
turne vnto dust againe.
21 Who knoweth the sprete of man yt goeth vpwarde, and the breth of the beest yt
goeth downe in to the earth?
22 Wherfore I perceaue, yt there is nothyinge better for a man, then to be
ioyfull in his laboure, for that is his porcion. But who wil brynge him to se
the thinge, that shal come after him?

Chapter 4

1 So I turned me, and considered all the violent wronge that is done vnder the
Sonne: and beholde, the teares of soch as were oppressed, and there was no man
to comforte them, or that wolde delyuer and defende them from the violence of
their oppressours.
2 Wherfore I iudged those that are deed, to be more happie then soch as be
alyue:
3 yee him that is yet vnborne to be better at ease the they both, because he
seith not the miserable workes that are done vnder the Sonne.
4 Agayne, I sawe that all trauayle and diligence of laboure was hated of euery
man. This is also a vaine thinge, and a vexacion of mynde.
5 The foole foldeth his handes together, & eateth vp his owne flesh.
6 One handfull (saieth he) is better wt rest, the both ye handes full with labor
and trauayle.
7 Morouer, I turned me, and beholde yet another vanite vnder the Sonne.
8 There is one man, no mo but himself alone, hauynge nether childe ner brother:
yet is there no ende of his carefull trauayle, his eyes can not be satisfied
with riches, (yet doth he not remembre himself, & saye:) For whom do I take soch
trauayle? For whose pleasure do I thus consume awaye my lyfe? This is also a
vayne and miserable thinge.
9 Therfore two are better then one, for they maye well enioye the profit of
their laboure.
10 Yf one of them fall, his companyon helpeth him vp againe: But wo is him that
is alone, for yf he fall, he hath not another to helpe him vp.
11 Agayne, when two slepe together, they are warme: but how can a body be warme
alone?
12 One maye be ouercome, but two maye make resistauce: A thre folde cable is not
lightly broken.
13 A poore childe beynge wyse, is better then an olde kinge, that doteth, and
can not bewarre in tyme to come.
14 Some one commeth out of preson, & is made a kynge: & another which is borne
in the kyngdome, commeth vnto pouerte.
15 And I perceaued, yt all men lyuynge vnder the Sonne, go wt the seconde
childe, that commeth vp in the steade of the other.
16 As for the people that haue bene before him, and that come after him, they
are innumerable: yet is not their ioye the greater thorow him. This is also a
vayne thinge and a vexacion of mynde.

Chapter 5

1 Whan thou commest in to the house of God, kepe thy fote, and drawe nye, that
thou mayest heare: that is better then the offeringes of fooles, for they knowe
not what euell they do.
2 Be not hastie with thy mouth, & let not thine hert speake eny thige rashly
before God. For God is in heauen, & thou vpon earth, therfore let thy wordes be
fewe.
3 For where moch carefulnesse is, there are many dreames: & where many wordes
are, there men maye heare fooles.
4 Yf thou make a vowe vnto God, be not slacke to perfourme it. As for foolish
vowes, he hath no pleasure in them.
5 Yf thou promyse eny thinge, paye it: for better it is that thou make no vowe,
then that thou shuldest promise, and not paye.
6 Vse not thy mouth to cause yi flesh for to synne, yt thou saye not before the
angell: my foolishnesse is in ye faute. For the God wil be angrie at thy voyce,
and destroye all ye workes of thine handes.
7 And why? where as are many dreames & many wordes, there are also dyuerse
vanities: but loke yt thou feare God.
8 Yf thou seyst the poore to be oppressed and wrongeously dealt withall, so yt
equite & the right of the lawe is wraisted in the londe: maruell not thou at
soch iudgmet, for one greate ma kepeth touch with another, and the mightie helpe
the selues together.
9 The whole londe also with the feldes and all that is therin, is in subieccion
and bondage vnto ye kinge.
10 He that loueth money, wil neuer be satisfied with money: and who so delyteth
in riches, shal haue no profit therof. Is not this also a vayne thinge?
11 Where as many riches are, there are many also that spende them awaye. And
what pleasure more hath he that possesseth them, sauynge that he maye loke vpon
them with his eyes?
12 A labouringe man slepeth swetely, whether it be litle or moch that he eateth:
but the abundaunce of the riche wil not suffre him to slepe.
13 Yet is there a sore plage, which I haue sene vnder the Sonne (namely) riches
kepte to the hurte of him yt hath them in possession.
14 For oft times they perishe with his greate misery and trouble: and yf he haue
a childe, it getteth nothinge.
15 Like as he came naked out of his mothers wombe, so goeth he thither agayne,
and carieth nothinge awaye with him of all his laboure.
16 This is a miserable plage, yt he shal go awaye euen as he came. What helpeth
it him then, yt he hath labored in the wynde?
17 All the daies of his life also must he eate in the darcke, with greate
carefulnesse, sicknesse & sorow.
18 Therfore me thinke it a better and a fayrer thinge, a man to eate and drynke,
and to be refreshed of all his laboure, yt he taketh vnder the Sonne all the
dayes of his life which God geueth him, for this is his porcion.
19 For vnto whom so euer God geueth riches, goodes and power, he geueth it him
to enioye it, to take it for his porcion, and to be refreshed of his laboure:
this is now the gifte of God.
20 For he thinketh not moch how longe he shal lyue, for so moch as God fylleth
his hert with gladnesse.

Chapter 6

1 There is yet a plage vnder ye Sonne, & it is a generall thinge amonge me:
2 when God geueth a man riches, goodes & honoure, so that he wanteth nothinge of
all that his herte can desyre: and yet God geueth him not leue to enioye the
same, but another man spedeth them. This is a vayne thinge & a miserable plage.
3 Yf a man begett an hundreth children, and lyue many yeares, so that his dayes
are many in nombre, and yet can not enioye his good, nether be buried: as for
him I saye, that an vntymely byrth is better then he.
4 For he cometh to naught, & goeth his waye in to darcknes, and his name is
forgotten.
5 Morouer, he seyth not the Sonne, and knoweth of no rest nether here ner there:
6 Yee though he lyued two thousande yeares, yet hath he no good life. Come not
all to one place?
7 All the laboure that a man taketh, is for himself, and yet his desyre is neuer
fylled after his mynde.
8 For what hath the wyse more then the foole? What helpeth it the poore, that he
knoweth to walke before the lyuynge?
9 The sight of the eyes is better, then that the soule shulde so departe awaye.
Howbeit this is also a vayne thinge and a disquietnesse of mynde.
10 What is more excellent then man? yet can he not in the lawe get the victory
of him that is mightier the he:
11 A vayne thinge is it to cast out many wordes, but what hath a man els?
12 For who knoweth what is good for man lyuynge, in ye dayes of his vayne life,
which is but a shadowe? Or, who wil tell a man, what shal happen after him vnder
the Sonne?

Chapter 7

1 A good name is more worth then a precious oyntment, and the daye of death is
better the ye daye of byrth.
2 It is better to go in to an house of mournynge, then in to a bancket house.
For there is the ende of all men, and he that is lyuinge, taketh it to herte.
3 It is better to be sory then to laugh, for whe the countenaunce is heuy, the
herte is ioyfull.
4 The herte of ye wyse is in the mournynge house, but the hert of the foolish is
in the house of myrth.
5 It is better to geue eare to the chastenynge of a wyse man, then to heare the
songe of fooles.
6 For the laughinge of fooles is like ye crackynge of thornes vnder a pott. And
yt is but a vayne thinge.
7 Who so doeth wronge, maketh a wyse man to go out of his witt, and destroyeth a
gentle hert.
8 The ende of a thinge is better then the begynnynge. The pacient of sprete is
better then the hie mynded.
9 Be not haistely angrie in yi mynde, for wrath resteth in the bosome of a
foole.
10 Saye not thou: What is the cause that ye dayes of ye olde tyme were better,
then they yt be now? for that were no wyse question.
11 Wy?dome is better then riches, yee moch more worth then the eye sight.
12 For wy?dome defendeth as well as moneye, and the excellent knowlege and
wy?dome geueth life vnto him that hath it in possession.
13 Considre the worke of God, how that no man can make the thinge straight,
which he maketh croked.
14 Vse well the tyme of prosperite, and remembre the tyme of mysfortune: for God
maketh the one by the other, so that a man can fynde nothinge els.
15 These ij. thiges also haue I cosidred in ye tyme of vanite: yt the iust man
perisheth for his rightuousnes sake, & the vngodly liueth in his wickednesse.
16 Therfore be thou nether to rightuous ner ouer wyse, yt thou perish not:
17 be nether to vnrightuous also ner to foolish, lest thou die before thy tyme.
18 It is good for the to take holde of this, & not to let yt go out of thy
hande. For he yt feareth God shal escape them all.
19 Wy?dome geueth more corage vnto the wyse, then ten mightie men of the citie:
20 for there is not one iust vpo earth, yt doth good, & sinneth not.
21 Take not hede vnto euery worde yt is spoken, lest thou heare thy seruaunt
curse the:
22 for thine owne hert knoweth, that thou thy self also hast oft tymes spoke
euell by other men.
23 All these thinges haue I proued because of wy?dome: for I thought to be wyse,
but she wente farther fro me
24 then she was before, yee & so depe that I might not reach vnto her.
25 I applied my mynde also vnto knowlege, and to seke out sciece, wisdome and
vnderstondinge: to knowe the foolishnesse of the vngodly, and the erroure of
dotinge fooles.
26 And I founde, that a woman is bytterer then death: for she is a very angle,
hir hert is a nett, and hir handes are cheynes. Who so pleaseth God shal escape
from her, but the synner will be taken wt her.
27 Beholde (sayeth ye preacher) this haue I diligently searched out & proued, yt
I might come by knowlege: which as yet I seke, and fynde it not.
28 Amonge a thousande men I haue founde one, but not one woman amonge all.
29 Lo, this onely haue I founde, that God made man iust & right, but they seke
dyuerse sotylties,

Chapter 8

1 where as no man hath wy?dome & vnderstodinge, to geue answere there vnto.
Wy?dome maketh a mas face to shyne, but malice putteth it out of fauoure.
2 Kepe the kynges commaundemet (I warne the) & the ooth yt thou hast made vnto
God.
3 Be not haistie to go out of his sight, & se thou cotynue in no euell thinge:
for what so euer it pleaseth him, yt doeth he.
4 Like as when a kynge geueth a charge, his commaundement is mightie: Euen so
who maye saye vnto him: what doest thou?
5 Who so kepeth the commaundement, shall fele no harme: but a wyse mans herte
discerneth tyme and maner:
6 For euery thinge wil haue opportunite and iudgment, and this is the thinge
that maketh men full of carefulnes & sorowe.
7 And why? a man knoweth not what is for to come, for who wyll tell him?
8 Nether is there eny ma yt hath power ouer ye sprete, to kepe stil ye sprete,
ner to haue eny power in the tyme of death: It is not he also that can make an
ende of the batayll, nether maye vngodlynes delyuer him yt medleth withall.
9 All these thinges haue I considered, and applied my mynde vnto euery worke
that is vnder the Sonne: how one man hath lordshipe vpon another to his owne
harme.
10 For I haue oft sene ye vngodly brought to their graues, and fallen downe from
the hye and glorious place: in so moch yt they were forgotten in the cite, where
they were had in so hye & greate reputacion. This is also a vayne thinge.
11 Because now that euell workes are not haistely punyshed, the hert of man
geueth him self ouer vnto wickednesse:
12 But though an euell personne offende an hundreth tymes, and haue a longe
life: yet am I sure, that it shal go well with the that feare God, because they
haue him before their eyes.
13 Agayne, as for the vngodly, it shall not be well with him, nether shal he
prologe his dayes: but euen as a shadowe, so shall he be that feareth not God.
14 Yet is there a vanite vpon earth: There be iust men, vnto whom it happeneth,
as though they had the workes of the vngodly: Agayne, there be vngodly, with
whom it goeth as though they had the workes of ye rightuous. This me thinke also
a vaine thinge.
15 Therfore I commende gladnesse, because a man hath no better thinge vnder the
Sonne, then to eate and drynke, and to be mery: for that shal he haue of his
laboure all the daies of his life, which God geueth him vnder the Sonne.+
16 When I applied my mynde to lerne wy?dome, and to knowe the trauayle that is
in the worlde (and that of soch a fashion, yt I suffred not myne eyes to slepe
nether daye ner night)
17 I vnderstode of all ye workes of God, that it is not possible for a man, to
attayne vnto ye workes that are done vnder ye Sonne: and though he bestowe his
laboure to seke them out, yet can he not reach vnto the: yee though a wyse man
wolde vndertake to knowe them, yet might he not fynde them.

Chapter 9

1 For all these thinges purposed I in my mynde to seke out. The righteus and
wyse yee and their workes also are in the hande of God: and there is no man that
knoweth ether the loue or hate of the thinge that he hath before him.
2 It happeneth vnto one as vnto another: It goeth with the rightuous as with the
vngodly: with the good & cleane as with the vncleane: with him that offereth as
with him that offereth not: like as it goeth with the vertuous, so goeth it also
with the synner: As it happeneth vnto the periured, so happeneth it also vnto
him that is afrayed to be man sworne.
3 Amonge all thinges yt come to passe vnder the Sonne, this is a misery, that it
happeneth vnto all alyke. This is the cause also that the hertes of men are full
of wickednesse, & madd foolishnesse is in their hertes as longe as they lyue,
vntill they dye.
4 And why? As longe as a man lyueth, he is careles: for a quyck dogg (saye they)
is better the a deed lion:
5 for they that be lyuynge, knowe yt they shall dye: but they yt be deed, knowe
nothinge, nether deserue they eny more. For their memoriall is forgotte,
6 so yt they be nether loued, hated ner envyed: nether haue they eny more parte
in ye worlde, in all yt is done vnder the Sonne.
7 Go thou yi waye then, eate thy bred with ioye, & drynke yi wyne wt gladnesse,
for thy workes please God.
8 Let thy garmetes be all waye whyte, & let yi heade want no oyntmet.
9 Vse thy self to lyue ioyfully wt thy wife whom thou louest, all ye daies of
thy life (which is but vayne) yt God hath geue the vnder the Sonne, all ye dayes
of thy vanite: for yt is thy porcion in this life, of all thy labor & trauayle
yt thou takest vnder the Sonne.
10 What so euer thou takest in hande to do, that do with all thy power: for
amoge the deed (where as thou goest vnto) there is nether worke, councell,
knowlege ner wy?dome.
11 So I turned me vnto other thinges vnder ye Sonne, and I sawe, that in
runnynge, it helpeth not to be swift: in batayll, it helpeth not to be stronge:
to fedynge, it helpeth not to be wyse: to riches, it helpeth not to be sutyll:
to be had in fauoure, it helpeth not to be connynge: but that all lyeth in tyme
& fortune.
12 For a man knoweth not his tyme, but like as the fyshe are take with the
angle, and as the byrdes are catched wt the snare: Eue so are men taken in the
perilous tyme, when it commeth sodenly vpon them.
13 This wi?dome haue I sene also vnder ye Sone, & me thought it a greate thinge.
14 There was a litle cite, & a few me within it: so there came a greate kynge &
beseged it, & made greate bulworkes agaynst it.
15 And in the cite there was founde a poore man (but he was wyse) which wt his
wy?dome delyuered the cite: yet was there no body, yt had eny respecte vnto soch
a symple man.
16 Then sayde I: wy?dome is better then strength. Neuertheles, a symple mans
wy?dome is despysed, & his wordes are not herde.
17 A wise mans councell that is folowed in sylence, is farre aboue the crienge
of a captaine amoge fooles.
18 For wy?dome is better then harnesse: but one vnthrift alone destroyeth moch
good.

Chapter 10

1 Deed flyes yt corruppe swete oyntment & make it to styncke, are somthinge more
worth then the wy?dome & honor of a foole.
2 A wyse mans hert is vpon the right hande, but a fooles hert is vpon the left.
3 A dotinge foole thinketh, yt euery ma doth as foolishly as himself.
4 Yf a principall sprete be geue the to beare rule, be not negliget the in thine
office: for so shal greate wickednesse be put downe, as it were wt a medecyne.
5 Another plage is there, which I haue sene vnder the Sonne: namely, ye
ignoraunce yt is comonly amonge prynces:
6 in yt a foole sytteth in greate dignite, & the rich are sett downe beneth:
7 I se seruauntes ryde vpon horses, & prynces goinge vpon their fete as it were
seruauntes.
8 But he yt dyggeth vp a pytt, shall fall therin himself: & who so breaketh
downe the hedge, a serpent shal byte him.
9 Who so remoueth stones, shall haue trauayle withall: and he that heweth wod,
shalbe hurt therwith.
10 When an yron is blont, and ye poynt not sharpened, it must be whett againe,
and that with might: Euen so doth wi?dome folowe diligence.
11 A babler of his tonge is no better, then a serpent that styngeth without
hyssynge.
12 The wordes out of a wyse mans mouth are gracious, but the lippes of a foole
wil destroye himself.
13 The begynnynge of his talkynge is foolishnes, and the last worde of his mouth
is greate madnesse.
14 A foole is so full of wordes, that a man can not tell what ende he wyll make:
who wyl then warne him to make a conclucion?
15 The laboure of ye foolish is greuous vnto the, while they knowe not how to go
in to the cite.
16 Wo be vnto the (O thou realme and londe) whose kynge is but a childe, and
whose prynces are early at their banckettes.
17 But well is the (O thou realme and londe) whose kinge is come of nobles, and
whose prynces eate in due season, for strength and not for lust.
18 Thorow slouthfulnesse the balkes fall downe, and thorow ydle hades it rayneth
in at the house.
19 Meate maketh men to laugh, and wyne maketh them mery: but vnto money are all
thinges obedient.
20 Wysh the kynge no euell in yi thought, and speake no hurte of ye ryche in thy
preuy chambre: for a byrde of the ayre shal betraye thy voyce, and wt hir
fethers shal she bewraye thy wordes.

Chapter 11

1 Sende thy vytayles ouer the waters, and so shalt thou fynde the after many
yeares.
2 Geue it awaye amonge seuen or eight, for thou knowest not what misery shal
come vpo earth.
3 Whe the cloudes are full, they poure out rayne vpon the earth. And whe ye tre
falleth, (whether it be towarde the south or north) in what place so euer it
fall, there it lyeth.
4 He that regardeth ye wynde, shal not sowe: and he that hath respecte vnto the
cloudes, shal not reape.
5 Now like as thou knowest not the waye of the wynde, ner how ye bones are
fylled in a mothers wombe: Euen so thou knowest not the workes of God, which is
the workemaster of all.
6 Cease not thou therfore with thy handes to sowe thy sede, whether it be in ye
mornynge or in the euenynge: for thou knowest not whether this or that shall
prospere, & yf they both take, it is the better.
7 The light is swete, & a pleasaunt thinge is it for the eyes to loke vpon the
Sonne.
8 Yf a man lyue many yeares, and be glad in them all, let him remembre the dayes
of darcknesse, which shalbe many: & when they come, all thinges shalbe but
vanite.
9 Be glad then (O thou yonge man) in thy youth, and lat thine hert be mery in
thy yonge dayes: folowe the wayes of thine owne hert, and the lust of thine
eyes: but be thou sure, that God shal bringe the in to iudgment for all these
thinges.
10 Pvt awaye displeasure out of yi hert, & remoue euell from thy body: for
childehode and youth is but vanite.

Chapter 12

1 Remembre thy maker in thy youth, or euer the dayes of aduersite come, and or
the yeares drawe nye, when thou shalt saye: I haue no pleasure in them:
2 before the Sonne, ye light, ye Moone and the starres be darckened, and or the
cloudes turne agayne after the rayne:
3 when the kepers of the house shall tremble, and when the stronge men shal bowe
them selues: when the Myllers stonde still because they be so fewe, and when the
sight of the wyndowes shal waxe dymme:
4 whan the dores in the stretes shal be shutt, and whan ye voyce of the Myller
shall be layed downe: whan men shall ryse vp at the voyce of the byrde, and whan
all ye doughters of musyck shalbe brought lowe:
5 whan men shal feare in hye places, and be afrayed in the stretes: whan the
Almonde tre shalbe despysed, the greshopper borne out, and whan greate pouerte
shall breake in: when man goeth to his longe home, and the mourners go aboute
the stretes.
6 Or euer the syluer lace be taken awaye, and or the golden bende be broken: Or
the pott be broken at the well, & the whele vpon the Cisterne:
7 Or dust be turned againe vnto earth from whence it came, and or the sprete
returne vnto God, which gaue it.
8 All is but vanite (sayeth the preacher) all is but playne vanite.
9 The same preacher was not wyse alone, but taught the people knowlege also: he
gaue good hede, sought out the groude and set forth many parables.
10 His diligence was to fynde out acceptable wordes, right scripture, and the
wordes of trueth.
11 For the wordes of ye wyse are like prickes and nales that go thorow, wherwith
men are kepte together: for they are geuen of one shepherde onely.
12 Therfore bewarre (my sonne) that aboue these thou make the not many &
innumerable bokes, nor take dyuerse doctrynes in hande, to weery thy body
withall.
13 Lat vs heare the conclucion of all thinges: Feare God, and kepe his
comaundementes, for that toucheth all men:
14 For God shall iudge all workes and secrete thinges, whether they be good or
euell.


Song of Solomon

Chapter 1

1 Salomons Balettes, called Cantica Canticorum.
2 O that thy mouth wolde geue me a kysse, for yi brestes are more pleasaunt then
wyne,
3 & that because of the good and pleasaunt sauoure. Thy name is a swete
smellynge oyntment, therfore do the maydens loue the:
4 yee that same moueth me also to renne after the. The kynge hath brought me
into his preuy chambre. We wil be glad & reioyce in the, we thynke more of thy
brestes then of wyne: well is them that loue the.
5 I am black (o ye doughters of Ierusale) like as the tentes of the Cedarenes,
and as the hanginges of Salomon:
6 but yet am I faire & welfauoured withal. Maruell not at me yt I am so black, &
why? ye Sonne hath shyned vpo me. For whan my mothers childre had euell wil at
me, they made me ye keper of the vynyarde. Thus was I fayne to kepe a vynyarde,
which was not myne owne.
7 Tell me (o thou whom my soule loueth) where thou fedest, where thou restest at
the noone daye: lest I go wronge, and come vnto the flockes of thy companyons,
8 Yf thou knowe not yi self (o thou fayrest amoge women) tha go yi waye forth
after ye fotesteppes of the shepe, as though thou woldest fede yi goates besyde
ye shepherdes tentes.
9 There wil I tary for the (my loue) wt myne hoost & with my charettes, which
shalbe no fewer then Pharaos.
10 Then shal thy chekes & thy neck be made fayre, & hanged wt spages & goodly
iewels:
11 a neck bande of golde wil we make ye wt syluer bottons.
12 When the kynge sytteth at the table, he shal smell my Nardus:
13 for a bodell of Myrre (o my beloued) lyeth betwixte my brestes.
14 A cluster of grapes of Cypers, or of the vynyardes of Engaddi, art thou vnto
me, O my beloued.
15 O how fayre art thou (my loue) how fayre art thou? thou hast doues eyes.
16 O how fayre art thou (my beloued) how well fauored art thou? Oure bed is
decte with floures,
17 ye sylinges of oure house are of Cedre tre, & oure balkes of Cypresse.

Chapter 2

1 I am the floure of the felde, and lylie of the valleys:
2 as the rose amonge the thornes, so is my loue amonge the daughters.
3 Like as the aple tre amonge the trees of the wodd, so is my beloued amonge the
sonnes. My delite is to sitt vnder his shadowe, for his frute is swete vnto my
throte.
4 He bryngeth me in to his wyne seller, and loueth me specially well.
5 Refresh me wt grapes, coforte me with apples, for I am sick of loue.
6 His left hade lyeth vnder my heade, & his right hande enbraceth me.
7 I charge you (o ye doughters of Ierusalem (by the Roes & hyndes of the felde,
yt ye wake not vp my loue ner touch her, till she be content herself.
8 Me thynke I heare the voyce of my beloued: lo, there commeth he hoppinge vpon
ye mountaynes, and leapinge ouer the litle hilles.
9 My beloued is like a Roo or a yonge hart. Beholde, he stondeth behynde or
wall, he loketh in at the wyndowe, & pepeth thorow the grate.
10 My beloued answered & sayde vnto me: O stode vp my loue, my doue, my
beutyfull, & come:
11 for lo, the wynter is now past, the rayne is awaie & gone.
12 The floures are come vp in the felde, the twystinge tyme is come, the voyce
of the turtle doue is herde in oure londe.
13 The fyge tre bryngeth forth hir fyges, the vynes beare blossoms, and haue a
good smell. O stode vp my loue, my beutyfull, and come
14 (my doue) out of the caues of the rockes, out of the holes of the wall: O let
me se thy countenaunce and heare thy voyce, for swete is thy voyce and fayre is
thy face.
15 Gett vs the foxes, yee the litle foxes that hurte ye vynes, for oure vynes
beare blossoms.
16 My loue is myne, and I am his, (which fedeth amoge the lylies)
17 vntill the daye breake, and till the shadowes be gone. Come agayne preuely (o
my beloued) like as a Roo or a yonge harte vnto the mountaynes.

Chapter 3

1 By night in my bedd, I sought him, whom my soule loueth: yee diligently sought
I him, but I founde him not.
2 I wil get vp (thought I) and go aboute the cite: vpon the market and in all ye
stretes will I seke him whom my soule loueth, but whan I sought him, I founde
him not.
3 The watchmen that go aboute ye cite, founde me. Sawe ye not him, whom my soule
loueth?
4 So whan I was a litle past them, I foude him whom my soule loueth. I haue
gotten holde vpon him, and wyl not let him go, vntill I brynge him into my
mothers house, and in to hir chambre that bare me.
5 I charge you (o ye doughters of Ierusale) by the Roes and hyndes of the felde,
that ye wake not vp my loue ner touch her, till she be content herself.
6 Who is this, that commeth out of ye wyldernesse like pilers of smoke, as it
were a smell of Myrre, frankencense and all maner spyces of the Apotecary?
7 Beholde, aboute Salomos bedsteade there stonde LX. valeauut men of the mightie
in Israel.
8 They holde swerdes euery one, & are experte in warre. Euery man hath his
swerde vpo his thee, because of feare in the night.
9 Kynge Salomon hath made himself a bedsteade of the wodd of Libanus,
10 the pilers are of syluer, the coueringe of golde, ye seate of purple, ye
grounde pleasauntly paued for the doughters of Ierusalem.
11 Go forth (o ye doughters of Sion) and beholde kynge Salomon in the crowne,
wherwith his mother crowned him in the daye of his mariage, and in the daye of
the gladnesse of his hert.

Chapter 4

1 O how fayre art thou (my loue) how fayre art thou? thou hast doues eyes besyde
that which lyeth hid within.
2 Thy hayrie lockes are like a flocke of shepe that be clypped, which go first
vp from the washinge place: where euery one beareth two twyns, and not one
vnfrutefull amoge them.
3 Thy lippes are like a rose coloured rybende, thy wordes are louely: thy chekes
are like a pece of a pomgranate, besydes that which lyed hyd within.
4 Thy neck is like the tower of Dauid buylded with bulworkes, wher vpon there
hage a thousande sheldes, yee all the weapes of the giautes.
5 Thy two brestes are like two twyns of yonge roes, which fede amoge the lilies.
6 O that I might go to the mountayne of Myrre, and to the hyll of frankynsense:
till the daye breake, and till the shadowes be past awaye.
7 Thou art all fayre (o my loue) & no spott is there in the.
8 Come to me from Libanus (o my spouse) come to me from Libanus: come soone the
next waye from the toppe of Amana, from the toppe of Sanir and Hermon, from the
Lyons dennes and from the mountaynes of ye leopardes.
9 Thou hast wouded my hert (o my sister, my spouse) thou hast wounded my hert,
with one of thine eyes, and with one cheyne of thy neck.
10 O how fayre and louely are thy brestes, my sister, my spouse? Thy brestes are
more pleasaunt then wyne, and the smell of thy oyntmentes passeth all spices.
11 Thy lippes (o my spouse) droppe as the hony combe, yee mylck and hony is
vnder thy tonge, and the smell of thy garmentes is like the smell of
frankynsense.
12 Thou art a well kepte garden (o my sister, my spouse) thou art a well kepte
water sprynge, a sealed well.
13 The frutes that sproute in the, are like a very paradyse of pogranates wt
swete frutes:
14 as Cypresse, Nardus, Saffron, Calmus, and all the trees of Libanus: Myrre,
Aloes, and all the best spyces.
15 Thou art a well of gardens, a well of lyuynge waters, which renne downe from
Libanus.
16 Vp thou northwynde, come thou southwynde, and blowe vpo my garde, that the
smell therof maye be caried on euery syde: Yee that my beloued maye come in to
my garden, & eate of the frutes and apples that growe therin.

Chapter 5

1 Come in to my garden o my sister, my spouse: I haue gathered my Myrre wt my
spyce. I wil eate my hony and my hony cobe, I wil drynke my wyne & my mylk Eate
o (ye frendes) drynke and be mery, o ye beloued.
2 As I was a slepe, & my hert wakynge, I herde the voyce of my beloued, wha he
knocked. Open to me (sayde he) o my sister, my loue, my doue, my derlinge: for
my heade is full of dew, and ye lockes of my hayre are full of the night
droppes.
3 I haue put off my cote, how ca I do it on agayne? I haue washed my fete, how
shal I fyle them agayne?
4 But whan my loue put in his hande at the hole, my hert was moued towarde him:
5 so that I stode vp to open vnto my beloued. My hades dropped wt Myrre, & the
Myrre ranne downe my fyngers vpon ye lock.
6 Neuerthelesse wha I had opened vnto my beloued, he was departed, and gone his
waye. Now like as afore tyme whan he spake, my hert coude no longer refrayne:
Euen so now I sought hi, but I coude not fynde him: I cried vpon him,
neuerthelesse he gaue me no answere.
7 So the watchmen that wente aboute the cite, foude me, smote me, and wounded
me: Yee they that kepte the walles, toke awaye my garmet fro me.
8 I charge you therfore (o ye doughters of Ierusalem) yf ye fynde my beloued,
that ye tell him, how that I am sick for loue.
9 Who is thy loue aboue other louers, O thou fayrest amonge wemen? Or, what can
thy loue do, more then other louers, that thou chargest vs so straitly?
10 As for my loue, he is whyte and reade coloured, a synguler personne amonge
many thousandes:
11 his heade is the most fyne golde, the lockes of his hayre are bu?shed, browne
as the euenynge:
12 His eyes are as the eyes of doues by the water brokes, washen with mylck, and
remaynynge in a plenteous place:
13 His chekes are like a garden bedd, where in the Apotecaryes plate all maner
of swete thinges: His lippes droppe as the floures of the most pryncipall Myrre,
14 his hades are full of golde rynges and precious stones. His body is as the
pure yuery, decte ouer with Saphyres:
15 His legges are as the pilers of Marbell, sett vpon sokettes of golde: His
face is as Libanus, and as the bewty of the Cedre trees:
16 His throte is swete, yee he is alltogether louely. Soch one is my loue (o ye
doughters of Ierusalem) soch one is my loue.

Chapter 6

1 Whither is thy loue gone the (o thou fayrest amonge weme) whither is thy loue
departed, that we maye seke him with the?
2 My loue is gone downe in to his garden, vnto ye swete smellinge beddes, that
he maye refresh himself in the garden, and gather floures.
3 My loue is myne, and I am his, which fedeth amonge the lilies.
4 Thou art pleasaunt (o my loue) euen as louelynesse itself, thou art fayre as
Ierusalem, glorious as an armye of men with their baners
5 (Turne awaye thine eyes fro me, for they make me to proude) Thy hayrie lockes
are like a flocke of goates vpon ye mount of Galaad.
6 Thy teth are like a flock of shepe yt be clypped, which go out of the washinge
place: where euery one beareth two twyns, & not one vnfrutefull amoge them.
7 Thy chekes are like a pece of a pomgranate, besydes yt which lyeth hid within.
8 There are thre score quenes, foure score concubynes, and yonge weme without
nombre.
9 But one is my doue, my derlynge. She is the onely beloued of hir mother, &
deare vnto her that bare her. Wha the daughters sawe her, they sayde she was
blessed: Yee the quenes and concubines praysed her.
10 What is she this, that pepeth out as the mornynge? fayre as the Moone,
excellent as the Sonne, glorious as an armye of men with their banners?
11 I wente downe in to the nutt garden, to se what grew by the brokes, to loke
yf the vynyarde florished, and yf the pomgranates were shot forth.
12 Then the charettes of the prynce of my people made me sodenly afrayed.
13 Turne againe, turne againe (O thou Sulamite) turne agayne, turne agayne, that
we maye loke vpon the. What pleasure haue ye more in ye Sulamite, than when she
daunseth amonge the men of warre?

Chapter 7

1 O how pleasaunt are thy treadinges with thy shues, thou prynces daughter? Thy
thees are like a fayre iewell, which is wrought by a connynge workmaster:
2 Thy nauell is like a rounde goblett, which is neuer without drynke: Thy wombe
is like an heape of wheate, sett aboute with lilies:
3 Thy two brestes are like two twyns of yonge roes:
4 Thy neck is as it were a tower of yuery: Thyne eyes are like ye water poles in
Hesebon, besyde the porte of Bathrabbim: Thy nose is like the tower of Libanus,
which loketh towarde Damascus:
5 That heade that stondeth vpon the is like Carmel: The hayre of thy heade is
like the kynges purple folden vp in plates.
6 O how fayre and louely art thou (my derlynge) in pleasures?
7 Thy stature is like a date tre, and thy brestes like the grapes. I sayde:
8 I wil clymme vp into the date tre, and take holde of his braunches. Thy
brestes also shalbe as the vyne grapes, the smell of thy nostrels like the smell
of apples,
9 and thy throte like the best wyne. This shalbe pure & cleare for my loue, his
lippes and teth shal haue their pleasure.
10 There wil I turne me vnto my loue, and he shal turne him vnto me.
11 O come on my loue, let vs go forth in to the felde, and take oure lodginge in
the vyllages.
12 In the mornynge wil we ryse by tymes, and go se the vynyarde: yf it be
spronge forth, yf the grapes be growne, & yf the pomgranates be shott out. There
wil I geue the my brestes:
13 There shal the Mandragoras geue their smell besyde oure dores: There (o my
loue) haue I kepte vnto the all maner of frutes, both new and olde.

Chapter 8

1 O that I might fynde the without & kysse ye, whom I loue as my brother which
suckte my mothers brestes: & that thou woldest not be offended,
2 yf I toke the and brought the in to my mothers house: that thou mightest teach
me, and that I might geue the drynke of spyced wyne and of the swete sappe of my
pomgranates.
3 His left hande lyeth vnder my heade, & his right hande embraceth me.
4 I charge you (o ye daughters of Ierusale) that ye wake not vp my loue ner
touch her, tyll she be content herself.
5 What is she this, that cometh vp from the wildernes, and leaneth vpon hir
loue? I am the same that waked the vp amonge the aple trees, where thy mother
beare ye, where yi mother brought the in to the worlde.
6 O set me as a seale vpo thine hert, and as a seale vpon thine arme: for loue
is mightie as the death, & gelousy as the hell. Hir coales are of fyre, and a
very flamme of the LORDE:
7 so yt many waters are not able to quench loue, nether maye ye streames drowne
it. Yee yf a man wolde geue all the good of his house for loue, he shulde counte
it nothinge.
8 When oure loue is tolde oure yonge sister, whose brestes are not yet growne,
what shal we do vnto her?
9 Yf she be a wall, we shal buylde a syluer bollworke there vpon: Yf she be a
tower, we shal festen her with bordes of Cedre tre.
10 Yf I be a wall, & my brestes like towres, then am I as one that hath founde
fauoure in his sight.
11 Salomon had a vynyarde at Baal Hamon, this vynyarde delyuered he vnto the
kepers: yt euery one for the frute therof shulde geue him a thousande peces of
syluer.
12 But my vynyarde (o Salomon) geueth the a thousande, and two hundreth to ye
kepers of the frute.
13 Thou that dwellest in the gardens, O let me heare thy voyce, that my
companyons maye herken to the same.
14 O get the awaye (my loue) as a roo or a yonge hert vnto the swete smellinge
moutaynes.


Isaiah

Chapter 1

1 This is the prophecy of Esay the sonne of Amos, which he shewed vpon Iuda and
Ieruasalem: In the tyme of Osias, Ioathan, Ahas, and Ezechias kynges of Iuda.
2 Heare o heauen, herken o earth, for the LORDE speaketh: I haue norished &
brought vp children, and they are fallen awaye fro me.
3 An oxe knoweth his LORDE, and an Asse his masters stall, but Israel knoweth
nothinge, my people hath no vnderstondinge.
4 Alas for this synful people, which are experte in blasphemies, a frawerde
generacion, vnnatural children. They haue forsaken the LORDE, they haue prouoked
the holy one of Israel vnto anger, and are gone bacward.
5 Wherfore shulde ye be plaged eny more? For ye are euer fallinge awaye. The
whole heade is sick, and the herte is very heuy.
6 From the sole of the foote vnto the heade, there is no whole parte in all yor
body: but all are woundes, botches, sores and strypes, which can nether be
helped, bounde vp, molified, ner eased with eny oyntment.
7 Youre londe lieth waist, youre cities are brent vp, youre enemies deuoure
youre londe, and ye must be fayne to stonde, and loke vpon it: and it is
desolate, as it were with enemies in a batell.
8 Morouer ye doughter of Syon is left alone like a cotage in a vynyearde, like a
watchouse in tyme of warre, like a beseged citie.
9 And excepte the LORDE of hostes had left us a few alyue: we shulde haue bene
as Sodoma, & like vnto Gomorra.
10 Heare the worde of the LORDE ye tyrauntes of Sodoma: and herken vnto the lawe
of oure God, thou people of Gomorra.
11 Why offre ye so many sacrifices vnto me? I am discontent for the
brentoffringes of wethers, and with ye fatnesse offedbeastes. I haue no pleasure
in the bloude of bullockes, lambes and gootes.
12 When ye apeare before me, who requyreth you to treade within my porches?
13 Offre me no mo oblacions, for it is but lost laboure. I abhorre youre
incense. I maye not awaye with youre newmoones, youre Sabbathes and solempne
dayes. Youre fastinges are also in vayne.
14 I hate youre new holy dayes and fastinges, euen fro my very harte. They make
me weery, I can not abyde them.
15 Though ye holde out yor hondes, yet turne I myne eyes from you. And though ye
make many prayers, yet heare I nothinge at all, for youre hondes are full of
bloude.
16 Wash you, make you clene, put awaye yor euell thoughtes out of my sight,
cease from doinge of euell and violence.
17 Lerne to do right, applie youre selues to equyte, delyuer the oppressed,
helpe the fatherlesse to his right, let the wydowes complaynte come before you.
18 Now go to (saieth the LORDE) we wil talke together. Is it not so? Though
youre synnes be as read as scarlet, shal they not be whyter then snowe? And
though they were like purple, shall they not be like whyte woll?
19 Is it not so? Yf ye be louynge & obedient, ye shal enioye the best thinge
that groweth in the londe.
20 But yf ye be obstinate and rebellious, ye shalbe deuoured with the swerde:
for thus the LORDE hath promised with his owne mouth.
21 How happeneth it then that the rightuous citie (which was full of equite) is
become vnfaithfull as an whore? rightuousnes dwelt in it, but now murthur.
22 Thy Siluer is turned to drosse, and thy wyne myxte wt water.
23 Thy prynces are traytours and companyons of theues. They loue giftes
altogether, and folowe rewardes. As for the fatherles, they helpe him not to his
right, nether wil they let the wydowes causes come before them.
24 Therfore speaketh the LORDE God of hostes the mighty one of Israel: Ah I must
ease me of myne enemies, and a venge me vpo the.
25 And therfore shal I laye my honde vpon the, and burne out thy drosse from the
fynest and purest, and put out all thy leade,
26 & set thy iudges agayne as they were somtyme, and thy Senatours as they were
from ye begynnynge. Then shalt thou be called the rightuous citie, the faithful
citie.
27 But Sion shalbe redemed with equyte, and hyr captiuyte with rightuousnesse
28 For the transgressours and vngodly, and soch as are become vnfaithfull vnto
the LORDE, must all together be vtterly destroyed.
29 And excepte ye be ashamed of the oketrees wherin ye haue so delited, and of
the gardes that ye haue chosen:
30 ye shalbe as an oke whose leaues are fallen awaye, and as a garden that hath
no moystnesse.
31 And as for the glory of these thinges, it shalbe turned to drie strawe, and
he that made them to a sparke. And they shal both burne together, so that no man
shalbe able to quench them.

Chapter 2

1 Morouer this is the worde that was opened vnto Esaye the sonne of Amos, vpon
Iuda and Ierusalem.
2 It will be also in processe of tyme: That the hill where the the house of the
LORDE is buylded, shal be ye chefe amoge hilles, and exalted aboue al litle
hilles. And al heithe shal prease vnto him and the multitude of people shall go
vnto him,
3 speakinge thus one to another: vp, let us go to the hill of the LORDE, and to
the house of ye God of Iacob: yt he maye shewe us his waye, and yt we maye walke
in his pathes. For ye lawe shal come out of Syon, and the worde of God from
Ierusalem,
4 and shal geue sentence amonge the heithen, and shal reforme the multitude of
people: So that they shal breake their swerdes and speares, to make sythes,
sycles & sawes therof. From that tyme forth shal not one people lift vp wapen
agaynst another, nether shal they lerne to fight from thensforth.
5 It is to the that I crie (o house of Iacob) vp, let us walke in the light of
the LORDE.
6 But thou art scatred abrode with thy people (o house of Iacob) for ye go farre
beyonde yor fathers, whether it be in Sorcerers) whom ye haue as the phylistynes
had) or in calkers of mens byrthes, wherof ye haue to many.
7 As soone as youre londe was ful of syluer and golde, and no ende of youre
treasure: so soone as youre londe was ful of stronge horses and no ende of youre
charettes:
8 Inmediatly was it ful of Idols also, euen workes of youre owne hondes, which
ye youre selues haue facioned, and youre fyngers haue made.
9 There kneleth the man, there falleth the man downe before them, so yt thou
canst not bringe him awaye from thence.
10 And therfore get ye soone in to some rock, vnd hyde the in the grounde from
the sight of the fearful iudge, and from ye glory of his Magestie.
11 Which casteth downe ye high lokes of presumptuous personnes, and bryngeth
lowe the pryde of ma, and he only shall be exalted in ye daye.
12 For the daye of ye LORDE of hostes shal go ouer all pryde & presumpcio, vpon
all the that exalte the selues, and shal bringe them all downe?
13 vpo all high & stoute Cedre trees of Libanus, and vpon all the okes of Basan,
14 vpon all high hilles, and vpon all stoute mountaynes,
15 vpon all costly towres, and vpon all stronge walles,
16 vpon all shippes of the see, and vpon euery thinge yt is glorious and
pleasaunt to loke vpon.
17 And it shall bringe downe the pryde of man, and laye mans presumptuousnesse
full lowe, and the LORDE shal only haue the victory in that daye.
18 But the Idols shal utterly be roted out.
19 Men shal crepe in to holes of stone, and in to caues of the earth, from the
sight of the fearfull iudge, and from the glory of his magesty: what tyme as he
shal make him vp to shake the earth.
20 Then, the shal ma cast awaye his goddes of syluer and golde (which he
neuertheles had made to honoure the) vnto Molles and Backes:
21 that he maye the better crepe in to the caues and rockes, and in to the
cliffes of hard stones, from ye sight of the fearful iudge and from the glory of
his Magesty.
22 Every man can eschue a persone moued in anger, for what doth he wysely?

Chapter 3

1 Euen so shal ye LORDE of hoostes take awaye fro Ierusale & Iuda, all
possessios & power, all meat and drinke,
2 ye captayne and the soudyare, ye iudge and the prophete, the wyse and the aged
ma,
3 the worshipful of fiftie yeare olde, and the honorable: the Senatours, and men
of vnderstondinge: the masters of craftes and oratours.
4 And I shal geue you children to be youre prynces (saieth the LORDE) and babes
shall haue the rule of you.
5 One shall euer be doinge violence and wronge to another. The boye shal presume
agaynst the elder, and the vyle persone agaynst the honorable.
6 Yee one shal take a frende of his owne kynred by ye bosome, and saye: thou
hast clothinge, thou shalt be oure heade, for thou mayest kepe us from this fall
and parell.
7 Then shall he sweare and saye: I can not helpe you. Morouer, there is nether
meate ner clothinge in my house, make me no rueler of the people.
8 For Ierusalem and Iuda must decaye, because that both their wordes and
councels are agaynst the LORDE, they prouoke the presence of his magesty vnto
anger.
9 The chaunginge of their countenaunce bewrayeth them, yee they declare their
owne synnes them selues, as the Sodomites, & hyde the not. Wo be vnto their
soules, for they shalbe heuely rewarded.
10 Then shal they saye: O happie are the godly, for they maye enioye the frutes
of their studies.
11 But wo be to ye vngodly and vnrightuous for they shalbe rewarded after their
workes.
12 O my people, rybaudes oppresse ye, and women haue rule of the. O my people,
thy leders deceaue the, and treade out the waye of thy footsteppes.
13 The LORDE is here to comon of the matter, and stondeth to geue iudgment with
the people.
14 The LORDE shal come forth to reason with the Senatours and prynces of his
people, and shal saye thus vnto them: It is ye that haue burnt vp my vynyearde,
the robbery of the poore is in youre house.
15 Wherfore do ye oppresse my people, and marre ye faces of the innocentes? thus
shal the God of hoostes reuyle them.
16 Morouer thus saieth ye LORDE: Seinge the doughters of Sion are become so
proude, and come in with stretched out neckes, and with vayne wanton eyes:
seinge they come in trippinge so nycely with their fete:
17 Therfore shal the LORDE shaue the heades of the doughters of Sion, and make
their bewtie bare in that daye.
18 In that daye shal the LORDE take awaye the gorgiousnes of their apparel, and
spanges, cheynes, partlettes,
19 and colares, bracelettes and hooues,
20 ye goodly floured, wyde and broderd raymet, brusshes and headbandes,
21 rynges and garlades,
22 holy daye clothes and vales, kerchues and pynnes,
23 glasses and smockes, bonettes and taches.
24 And in steade of good smell there shalbe stynck amonge them. And for their
gyrdles there shalbe lowse bondes. And for wellset hayre there shalbe baldnesse.
In steade of a stomacher, a sack cloth, and for their bewty wythrednesse and
sonneburnynge.
25 Their husbondes and their mightie men shall perish with the swerde in batell.
26 At that tyme shall their gates mourne and complayne, and they shal syt as
desolate folck vpon the earth.

Chapter 4

1 Then shal seuen wyues take holde of one man, and saye: we will laye all oure
meat and cloothinge together in comon, only that we maye be called thy wyues,
and that this shamefull reprofe maye be take from us.
2 After that tyme shal the braunch of ye LORDE be beutiful and mightie, and ye
frute of the earth shalbe fayre and pleasaunt for those Israelites that shall
springe therof.
3 Then shall the remnaunt in Sion and the remnaunt at Ierusalem be called holy:
namely all soch as are written amonge the lyuynge at Ierusalem:
4 what tyme as the LORDE shall wash awaye the desolacion of the doughters of
Sio, ad pourge the bloude out from Ierusale, wt ye wynde of his smoke and fyre.
5 Morouer vpon all the dwellinges of the hill of Sion and vpon their whole
congregacion, shal the LORDE prouyde a cloude and smoke by daye, and the
shyninghe of a flammynge fyre by night, for all their glory shalbe preserued.
6 And Ierusalem shall be a tabernacle for a shadowe because of hete in the daye
tyme, a place and refuge where a man maye kepe him for wether and rayne.

Chapter 5

1 Now well than, I will synge my beloued frende a songe of his vynyearde. My
beloued frende hath a vyneyearde in a very frutefull plenteous grounde.
2 This he hedged, this he walled rounde aboute, and planted it with goodly
grapes. In the myddest of it buylded he a towre, and made a wyne presse therin
And afterwarde when he loked yt it shulde bringe him grapes, it brought forth
thornes.
3 I shewe you now my cause (o ye Citysens of Ierusalem and whole Iuda:) Iudge I
praye you betwixte me: and my wynegardinge.
4 What more coude haue bene done for it, that I haue not done? Wherfore then
hath it geuen thornes, where I loked to haue had grapes of it?
5 Well, I shall tell you how I will do wt my vynyarde: I will take the hedge
from it, that it maye perish, and breake downe ye wall, that it maye be troden
vnder fote.
6 I will laye it waist, that it shall nether be twysted nor cut, but beare
thornes and breares. I wil also forbyd ye cloudes, that they shal not rayne vpon
it.
7 As for the vynyarde of the LORDE of hoostes it is the house of Israel, and
whole Iuda his fayre plantinge. Of these he loked for equyte, but se there is
wronge: for rightuousnesse, lo, It is but misery.
8 Wo to you that ioyne one house to another, and bringe one londe so nigh vnto
another, till ye can get no more grounde. Wil ye dwell vpon the earth alone?
9 The LORDE of hoostes rowneth me thus i myne eare: shal not many greater and
more gorgions houses be so waist, that no man shall dwell in the?
10 And ten akers of vynes shal geue but a Quarte, and xxx. bushels of sede shal
geue but thre.
11 Wo be vnto them that ryse vp early to vse them selues in dronkynnes, and yet
at night are more superfluous with wyne.
12 In whose companies are harpes and lutes, tabrettes and pipes, and wyne. But
they regarde not the worke of the LORDE, and cosidre not the operacio of his
hondes.
13 Therfore cometh my folck also in captiuyte, because they haue no
vnderstondynge. Their glory shalbe myxte with huger, and their pryde shalbe
marred for thurste.
14 Therfore gapeth hel, and openeth hyr mouth marvelous wyde: that pryde,
boostinge and wisdome, with soch as reioyse therin, maye descende in to it.
15 Thus shal man haue a fall, he shalbe brought lowe, and the high lokes of the
proude layde downe.
16 But the LORDE of hoostes, yt holy God: shalbe exalted and vntouched, when he
shal declare his equyte and rightuousnesse after this maner.
17 Then shal ye lambes eate their apoynted foder, and shal fede plenteously in
the mountaynes
18 Wo vnto vayne persones, that drawe wickednes vnto the, as it were with a
coorde: and synne, as it were with a cart rope.
19 Which vse to speake on this maner: let him make haist now, and go forth wt
his worke, that we maye se it. Let the councel of ye holy one of Israel come,
and drawe nie, yt we maye knowe it.
20 Wo vnto them that call euel good, and good euel: which make darcknesselight,
& light darcknesse, yt make sower swete, and swete sower.
21 Wo vnto them that are wyse in their owne sight, and thinke them selues to
haue vnderstodinge.
22 Wo vnto them, yt are connynge men to suppe out wyne, and experte to set vp
drokenesse.
23 These gyue sentence with the vngodly for rewardes, but condemne the iust
cause of the rightuous.
24 Therfore, like as fyre licketh vp the strawe, and as the flame cosumeth the
stubble: Euen so (when their root is ful,) their blossome shal vanish awaye like
dust or smoke. for they despyse the lawe of the LORDE of hoostes, and blaspheme
the worde of the holy maker of Israel.
25 Therfore is the wrath of the LORDE kyndled also agaynst his people, and he
shaketh his honde at them: yee he shal smyte so, that the hilles shal tremble.
And their carcases shal lye in the ope stretes, like myre. After all this, the
wrath of God shall not ceasse, but he shal stretch his hode wyder.
26 And he shal gyue a toke vnto a straunge people, and call vnto them in a farre
countre: and beholde, they shal come hastely with spede.
27 There is not one faynt nor feble amonge them, no not a slogish nor slepery
parsone. There shal not one of them put of the gyrdle from his loynes, ner lowse
the lachet of his shue.
28 Their arowes are sharpe, and their bowes bent. Their horse hoofes are like
flynt, and their cartwheles like a stormy wynde.
29 Their crie is as it were of a lyon, and the roaringe of them like lyons
whelpes. They shal roare, and hatch vp the praye, and no man shal recouer it or
get it from the.
30 In that daye they shalbe so fearce vpon them, as the see. And yf we loke vnto
the londe, beholde, it shalbe all darcknesse and sorowe. Yf we loke to heauen:
beholde, it shalbe darck with careful desperacion.

Chapter 6

1 In the same yeare yt kynge Osias dyed, I sawe the LORDE sittinge vpon an high
and glorious seate, and his trayne fylled ye palace.
2 From aboue flakred the Seraphins, wherof euery one had sex wynges. With twayne
ech couered his face, wt twayne his fete, and with twayne dyd he flye.
3 They cried also ech one to other on this maner: holy, holy, holy is the LORDE
of hoostes. The whole worlde is ful of his glory.
4 Yee the geastes and dorechekes moued at their crienge, and the house was ful
of smoke.
5 Then I sayde: O wo is me. For I was astonished: that I (which am a man of
vnclene lippes, and dwell amonge people yt hath vnclene lippes also:) Shulde se
ye Kynge and LORDE of hoostes with myne eyes.
6 Then flewe one of the Seraphins vnto me, hauinge a hote cole in his honde,
which he had taken from the aulter with the tonges,
7 and touched my mouth, and sayde: lo, this hath touched thy mouth, & thy
vnrightouousnes is taken a waye, and thy synne forgeuen.
8 After this I herde the voyce of the LORDE takinge advysement on this maner:
Whom shall I sende, and who wilbe oure messaunger? The I sayde: here am I, sende
me.
9 And so he sayde: go, and tel this people: ye shall heare in dede, but ye shal
not vnderstonde, ye shal planely se, and not perceaue.
10 Harden the harte of this people, stoppe their eares, and shut their eyes,
that they se not wt their eyes, heare not with their eares, and vnderstonde not
with their hartes, and conuerte and be healed.
11 Then spake I: LORDE, how longe? he answered: vntil the cities be vtterly
without inhabitours, and ye houses without men, till the lode be also desolate,
and lye vnbuylded.
12 For the LORDE shal take the men farre awaye, so that the londe shall lye
waist
13 Neuertheles, the tenth parte shal remayne therin, for it shal conuerte and be
fruteful. And likewise as the Terebyntes and Oketrees bringe forth their frutes,
so shal the holy sede haue frute.

Chapter 7

1 It happened in the tyme of Ahas the sonne of Ionathas, which was the sonne of
Ioathan Kynge of Iuda: that Rezin the Kinge of Siria, and Poca Romelies sonne,
Kynge of Israel: wente vp toward Ierusalem to besege it (but wanne it not.)
2 Now when the house of Dauid (that is Ahas) herde worde therof, yt Siria and
Ephraim were confederate together: his herte quaked (yee and ye hertes also of
his people) like as a tre in the felde, that is moued with the wynde.
3 Then sayde God vnto Esay: go mete Ahas (thou and thy sonne Sear Iasub) at the
heade of ye ouer pole, in the fote path by the fullers grounde,
4 and saye vnto him: take hede to thyself and be still, but feare not, nether be
faynt harted, for these two tales: that is: for these two smokynge fyre brandes,
the wrath and furiousnes of Rezin the Sirian and Romelies sonne:
5 because that the Kynge of Siria Ephraim and Romelies sonne haue wekedly
conspyred agaynst the,
6 sayenge: We will go downe in to Iuda, vexe the, and brynge them vnder vs, and
set a Kynge there, euen the sonne of Taball.
7 For thus saieth the LORDE God ther to, It shall not so go forth, nether come
so to passe:
8 for the headcitie of ye Sirians is Damascus, but the head of Damascus is
Rezin. And after fyue and threscore yeare, shal Ephraim be nomore a people.
9 And the chefe citie of Ephraim is Samaria, but the head of Samaria is Romelies
sonne. And yf ye beleue not, there shall no promyse be kepte with you.
10 Morouer, God spake vnto Ahas, sayenge:
11 requyre a token of the LORDE thy God, whether it be towarde the depth beneth
or towarde ye hight aboue.
12 The sayde Ahas: I will requyre none, nether will I tempte the LORDE.
13 The LORDE answered: Then heare to, ye of the house of Dauid: Is it not ynough
for you, that ye be greuous vnto men, but ye must greue my God also?
14 And therfore the LORDE shal geue you a token of himself: Beholde, a virgin
shal coceaue and beare a sonne, and shal call his name Emanuel.
15 Butter and hony shal he eate, yt he maye knowe the euel, and chose ye good.
16 But or euer that childe come to knowlege, to eschue the euel and chose the
good: The londe (that thou art so afrayde for) shalbe desolate of both hir
kynges.
17 The LORDE also shal sende a tyme vpon the, vpon thy people, and vpo thy
fathers house (soch as neuer came sence the tyme yt Ephraim departed from Iuda)
thorow ye kynge of the Assirians.
18 For at the same tyme shal the LORDE whistle for the flyes yt are aboute the
water of Egipte, and for ye Beyes in the Assirians londe.
19 These shall come, and shal light all in the valeyes, in ye vowtes of stone,
vpon all grene thinges, and in all corners.
20 At the same tyme shal the LORDE shaue the hayre of the heade and the fete and
the beerd clene of, with the rasoure that he shall paye them withall beyonde the
water: namely, with ye kynge of the Assirians.
21 At the same tyme shall a man lyue with a cowe, and two shepe.
22 Then because of the aboundaunce of mylck, he shal make butter and eat it. So
that euery one which remayneth in the londe, shal eate butter and hony.
23 At the same tyme all vynyardes (though there be a thousand vynes in one, and
were solde for a thousand siluerlinges) shalbe turned to brears and thornes.
24 Like as they shal come in to the londe with arowes and bowes, so shal all the
londe become brears and thornes.
25 And as for all hilles that now are hewen downe, thou shalt not come vpo them,
for feare of brears and thornes. But the catel shalbe dryuen thither, and the
shepe shal fede there.

Chapter 8

1 Morouer the LORDE sayde vnto me: Take the a greate leaf, and wryte in it, as
men do with a penne, that he spede him to robbe, and haist him to spoyle.
2 And Inmediatly I called vnto me faithful wytnesses: Vrias the prest, and
Zacharias ye sonne of Barachias.
3 After that went I vnto the prophetisse, that now had conceaued and borne a
sonne. Then sayde the LORDE to me: geue him this name: Maherschalal haschbas,
that is: a spedie robber, an hastie spoyler.
4 For why, or euer the childe shal haue knowlege to saye: Abi and Im, yt is
father, and mother: shal ye riches of Damascus and ye substaunce of Samaria be
take awaye, thorow the Kynge of ye Assirians.
5 The LORDE spake also vnto me, sayenge:
6 for so moch as the people refuseth the stilrenninge water of Silo, and put
their delite in Rezin and Romelies sonne:
7 Beholde, the LORDE shal bringe mightie and great floudes of water vpon them:
namely, ye kynge of the Assirians with all his power. Which shall poure out his
furyousnes vpo euery man, and renne ouer all their bankes.
8 And shal breake in vpon Iuda, increasinge in power, till he get him by the
throte. He shal fyl also the wydenesse of thy londe wt his brode wynges, O
Emanuel.
9 Go together ye people, and gather you, herken to all ye of farre countrees.
Mustre you, and gather you: mustre you and gather you,
10 take youre councel together, yet must youre councel come to nought: go in
honde withal, yet shal it not prospere. Excepte Emanuel: (that is God) be with
11 For the LORDE chastised me, and toke me by ye honde, and warned me, sayenge
vnto me: that I shulde not walcke in the waye of this people. He sayde morouer:
12 rounde with none of the, who so euer saye: yonder people are bounde together.
Neuertheles feare them not, nether be afrayde of them,
13 but sanctifie the LORDE of hoostes, let him be youre feare and drede.
14 For he is the sanctifienge, and stone to stomble at, ye rock to fall vpon, a
snare and net to both the houses: to Israel, and the inhabitours of Ierusalem.
15 And many shal stomble, fall, and be broke vpon him: yee they shalbe snared
and taken.
16 Now laye the witnesses together (sayde the LORDE) and seale the lawe with my
disciples.
17 Thus I waite vpon the LORDE, that hath turned his face from the house of
Iacob, and I loke vnto him.
18 But lo, as for me, and the children which the LORDE hath geuen me: we are a
token and a wondre in Israel, for the LORDE of hoostes sake, which dwelleth vpon
the hill of Syon.
19 And therfore yf they saye vnto you: aske councel at the soythsayers, witches,
charmers and coniurers, then make them this answere: Is there a people enywhere,
that axeth not councel at his God: whether it be concernynge the dead, or the
lyuynge?
20 Yf eny man want light, let him loke vpon the lawe and the testimony, whether
they speake not after this meanynge.
21 Yf he do not this, he stombleth and suffreth huger. And yf he suffre honger,
he is out of pacience, and blasphemeth his kynge and his God. Then loketh he
vpwarde, and downewarde to the earth,
22 and beholde, there is trouble and darcknesse, vexacion is rounde aboute him,
and the cloude of erroure And out of soch aduersite, shall he not escape.

Chapter 9

1 Even like as in tyme past it hath bene well sene, that ye londe of Zabulon and
the londe of Nepthali (where thorow the see waye goeth ouer Iordane in to the
londe of Galilee) was at the first in litle trouble, but afterward sore vexed.
2 Neuertheles ye people that haue dwelt in darcknesse, shal se a greate light.
As for them that dwel in the londe of the shadowe of death, vpon them shal the
light shyne.
3 Shalt thou multiplie the people, and not increase the ioye also? They shal
reioyse before the euen as men make mery in haruest, and as men that haue gotten
the victory, when they deale the spoyle.
4 For thou shalt breake the yocke of the peoples burthen: the staff of hys
shulder, and the rod of his oppressoure, as in ye daye at Madia.
5 Morouer all temerarious and sedicious power (yee where there is but a cote
fyled wt bloude) shalbe burnt, and fede the fyre.
6 For vnto us a childe shalbe borne, and vnto us a sonne shalbe geue. Vpo his
shulder shal the kyngdome lye, and he shalbe called wt his owne name: The
woderous geuer of councel, the mightie God, the euerlastinge father, the prynce
of peace,
7 he shal make no ende to encrease the kyngdome and peace, and shal syt vpon the
seate of Dauid and in his kyngdome, to set vp the same, to stablish it with
equyte and rightuousnesse, from thence forth for euermore. This shal the gelousy
of the LORDE of hoostes bringe to passe.
8 The LORDE sent a worde in to Iacob, the same is come in to Israel.
9 All the people also of Ephraim, and they that dwel in Samaria, can saye with
pryde and hie stomackes, on this maner:
10 The tyle worcke is fallen downe, but we will buylde it with harder stones.
The Molbery tymbre ys broken, but we shal set it vp agayne with Cedre.
11 Neuertheles, the LORDE shal prepare Rezin the enemie agaynst the, and so
ordre their aduersaries,
12 that ye Sirians shal laye holde vpon them before, and the Philistynes
behynde, and so deuoure Israel with open mouth. After all this, the wrath of the
LORDE shal not ceasse, but yet his hande shable stretched out still.
13 For the people turneth not vnto him, that chastiseth them, nether do they
seke the LORDE of hoostes.
14 Therfore the LORDE shal rote out of Israel both heade and tale, braunch and
twygge in one daye.
15 By the heade, is vnderstonde the Senatoure and honorable man, and by ye tale,
the prophet that preacheth lyes.
16 For all they which enfourme the people that they be in a right case, soch be
disceauers. Soch as men thynke also to be perfecte amonge these, are but cast
awaye.
17 Therfore shal the LORDE haue no pleasure in their yonge me, nether fauoure
their fatherlesse and wydowes. For thei are altogether ypocrites and wicked, and
all their mouthes speake foly. After all this shal not the LORDEs wrath ceasse,
but yet his honde shalbe stretched out still.
18 For the vngodly burne, as a fyre in the bryers and thornes: And as it were
out of a fyre in a wod or a redebush, so ascendeth the smoke of their pryde.
19 For this cause shal ye wrath of the LORDE of hoostes fall vpon the londe, and
the people shalbe consumed, as it were with fyre, no man shal spare his brother.
20 Yf a man do turne him to the right honde, he shal famesh, or to the lefte
hande to eat, he shal not haue ynough. Euery man shal eate the flesh of his owne
arme:
21 Manasses shal eate Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasses, and they both shal eate
Iuda. After all this shal not the LORDES wrath ceasse, but yet shal his honde be
stretched out still.

Chapter 10

1 Wo be vnto you yt make vnrightuous lawes, and devyse thinges, which be to
harde for to kepe:
2 wherthorow the poore are oppressed, on euery syde, and the innocetes of my
people are there with robbed of iudgment: that wyddowes maye be youre praye, and
that ye maye robbe the fatherlesse.
3 What will ye do in tyme of the visitacion and destruction, that shal come from
farre? To whom will ye renne for helpe? or to whom will ye geue youre honoure,
that he maye kepe it?
4 that ye come not amonge the presoners, or lye amonge the deed? After all this
shal not the wrath of the LORDE ceasse, but yet shal his honde be stretched out
still.
5 Wo be also vnto Assur, which is a staff of my wrath, in whose honde is the rod
of my punyshment.
6 For I shal sende him amonge those ypocritish poeple, amonge the people that
haue deserued my disfauoure shal I send him: that he maye utterly robbe them,
spoyle them, and treade them downe like the myre in the strete.
7 Howbeit his meanynge is not so, nether thinketh his harte of this fashion. But
he ymagineth only, how he maye ouerthrowe and destroye moch people,
8 for he saieth: are not my princes all kynges?
9 Is not Calno as easie to wynne, as Charchamis? Is it harder to conquere
Antiochia then Arphad? Or is it lighter to ouercome Damascus the Samaria?
10 As who say: I were able to wynne the kingdome of the Idolaters and their
goddes, but not Ierusalem and Samaria.
11 Shal I not do vnto Ierusalem and their ymages, as I dyd vnto Samaria and
their ymages?
12 Wherfore the LORDE saieth: As soone as I haue perfourmed my whole worcke vpon
the Hyl of Syon and Ierusalem: the will I also vyset the noble and stoute kynge
of Assiria, with his wysdome and pryde.
13 For he stondeth thus in his owne coceate: This do I, thorow the power of myne
owne honde, and thorow my wisdome: For I am wyse, I am he that remoue the londes
of the people, I robbe their prynces: and (like one of the worthies) I dryue
them from their hie seates.
14 My honde hath founde out the hoostes of the people, as it were a nest. And
like as egges, that were layde here and there, are gathered together: So do I
gather all countrees. And there is no man, yt darre be so bolde, as to touch a
fether, that darre open his mouth, or once whisper.
15 But doth the axe boost itself, agaynst him yt heweth therwith, or doth the
sawe make eny krakinge, agaynst him that ruleth it? That were euen like, as yf
the rod dyd exalte it self agaynst him, that beareth it: or as though ye staff
shulde magnifie it self, as who saye: it were no wodd.
16 Therfore shal the LORDE of hoostes sende him pouerte in his riches, and burne
vp his power, as it were with a fyre.
17 But the light of Israel shalbe yt fyre, and his Sanctuary shalbe the flame,
and it shal kyndle, and burne vp his thornes and breyers in one daye,
18 yee all the glory of his woddes and feldes shalbe consumed with body and
soule. As for him self, he shalbe as one chased awaye.
19 The trees also of his felde shalbe of soch a nombre, that a childe maye tell
them.
20 After yt daye shal the remnaunt of Israel, and soch as are escaped out of the
house of Iacob, seke no more coforte at him that smote them, but shal conforte
them selues with faithfulnesse and treuth in the LORDE, the holy, one of Israel.
21 The remnaunt, yee and the Posteryte of Iacob, shal couerte vnto God the
mighty one
22 For though thy people (o Israel) be as the sonde of the see, yet shal but the
remnaunt of them only conuerte vnto him. Perfecte is the iudgmet of him that
floweth in rightuousnesse:
23 and therfore ye LORDE of hoostes shal perfectly fulfil the thinge, that he
hath determyned in the myddest of the whole worlde.
24 Therfore thus saieth the LORDE God of hoostes: Thou my people, that dwellest
in Sion, be not afrayde for the kinge of the Assirians: He shal wagg his staff
at the, yee and beate the with the rodd, as the Egiptias dyd sometyme:
25 But soone after, shal my wrath and my indignacion be fulfylled agaynst their
blasphemies.
26 Morouer the LORDE of hoostes shal prepare a scourge for him, like as was the
punyshmet of Madia vpo ye mount of Oreb. And he shal lift vp his rod ouer the
see, as he dyd somtyme ouer the Egiptians.
27 Then shal his burthen be taken from thy shulders, and his yock from thy neck,
yee the same yock shal corrupte for very fatnesse.
28 He shal come to Aiath, and go thorow toward Migron. But at Machnias shal he
muster his hooste,
29 and go ouer ye foorde. Gaba shalbe their restinge place, Rhama shalbe
afrayde, Gabea Saul shal fle awaye.
30 The voyce of ye noyse of thy horses (o doughter Gallim) shalbe herde vnto
lais and to Anathoth, which also shalbe in trouble.
31 Madmena shal tremble for feare, but the citesyns of Gabim are maly,
32 yet shal he remayne at Nob that daye. After that, shal he lift vp his honde
agaynst the mount Sion, and agaynst the hill of Ierusalem.
33 But se, the LORde God of hoostes shal take awaye the proude from thence, wt
feare. He shal hew downe the proude, and fel the hie mynded.
34 The thornes of the wod shal be rooted out wt yron, and Libanus shal haue a
mightie fal.

Chapter 11

1 After this there shal come a rod forth of ye Kynrede of Iesse, and a blossome
out of his rote.
2 The sprete of the LORDE shal light vpon it: the sprete of wysdome, and
vnderstondinge: the sprete of councel, and strength: ye sprete of knowlege, and
of the feare of God:
3 and shal make him feruent in the feare of God. For he shal not geue sentece,
after the thinge yt shal be brought before his eies, nether reproue a matter at
the first hearinge:
4 but with rightousnesse shal he iudge the poore, and with holynes shal he
refourme the symple of the worlde. He shal smyte ye worlde with ye staff of his
mouth, & with ye breath of his mouth shal he slaye the wicked.
5 Rightuousnesse shalbe the gyrdle of his loynes, treuth and faithfulnesse the
gyrdinge vp of his raynes.
6 The shal ye wolfe dwel with the labe, and the leoparde shal lye downe by the
gote. Bullokes, lyons and catel shal kepe company together, so that a litle
childe shal dryue them forth.
7 The cowe and the Bere shal fede together, and their yongones shal lye
together. The lyo shal eate strawe like the oxe, or the cowe.
8 The childe whyle he sucketh, shal haue a desyre to the serpentes nest, and whe
he is weened, he shal put his hande in to the Cockatryce denne.
9 Noman shal do euel to another, no man shal destro another, in all the hill of
my Sanctuary. For the earth shalbe ful of ye knowlege of ye LORDE, euen as
though the water of the see flowed ouer the earth.
10 Then shal the Gentiles enquere after the rote of Iesse (which shalbe set vp
for a token vnto the Gentiles) for his dwellinge shalbe glorious.
11 At the same tyme shal the LORDE take in honde agayne, to conquere ye remnaunt
of his people (which are lefft alyue) From the Assirias, Egiptians, Arabians,
Morians, Elamites, Caldeyes, Antiochias and Ilodes of the see.
12 And he shal set vp a toke amonge the Gentiles, and gather together ye
dispersed of Israel, yee and the outcastes of Iuda from the foure corners of ye
worlde.
13 The hatred of Ephraim, and ye enmyte of Iuda shalbe clene rooted out. Ephraim
shal beare no euel wil to Iuda, and Iuda shal not hate Ephraim:
14 but they both together shal flye vpo the shulders of the Philistynes toward
the West, and spoyle them together that dwell toward the East. The Idumytes and
the Moabites shal let their hodes fall, and the Ammonites shalbe obedient vnto
them.
15 The LORDE also shal cleue the tunges of the Egipcias see, and with a mightie
wynde shal he lift vp his honde ouer Nilus, and shal smyte his seue streames and
make men go ouer drye shod.
16 And thus shal he make a waye for his people, yt remayneth from the Assirians,
like as it happened to ye Israelites, what tyme they departed out of the londe
of Egipte.

Chapter 12

1 So that then thou shalt saye: O LORDE, I thanke the, for thou wast displeased
at me, but thou hast refrayned thy wrath, and hast mercy vpon me.
2 Beholde, God is my health, in whom I trust, and am not afrayde. For the LORDE
God is my strength, and my prayse, he also shalbe my refuge.
3 Therfore with ioye shal ye drawe water out of the welles of the Sauioure,
4 and then shal ye saye: Let vs geue thankes vnto the lorde, and call vpon his
name, and declare his councels amonge the people, and kepe them in remembraunce,
for his name is excellet.
5 O synge praises vnto the LORDE, for he doth greate thinges, as it is knowne in
all the worlde.
6 Crie out, and be glad, thou that dwellest in Sion, for greate is thy prince:
the holy one of Israel.

Chapter 13

1 This is ye heuy burthe of Babilo, which Esaye the sonne of Amos dyd se.
2 Make some tokes to the hie hilles, call vnto them, holde vp youre hode, that
the prynces maye go in at the dore.
3 For I will sende for my debites and my gyautes (sayeth the LORDE) and in my
wrath I will call for soch, as tryumphe in my glory.
4 With that, me thought I herde in the moutaynes, a noyse, like as it had bene
of a greate people: and a ru?shinge, as though the kyngdomes of all nacions had
come together. (And the LORDE of hoostes was the captayne of the whole armye.)
5 As they had come not only out of farre countrees, but also from the endes of
the heaues: Eue the LORDE himself with the ministers of his wrath, to destroye
the whole lode.
6 Mourne therfore, for the daye of the LORDE is at honde, and commeth as a
destroyer from ye allmighty.
7 Then shall all hondes be letten downe, and all mens hertes shal melt awaie,
8 they shal stonde in feare, carefulnesse and sorowe shal come vpo them, and
they shal haue payne, as a woman that traueleth with childe. One shall euer be
aba?shed of another, & their faces shal burne, like ye flame.
9 For lo, the daye of the LORDE shall come, terrible, full of indignacion and
wrath: to make the londe waist, and to root out the synne therof.
10 For the starres and planetes of heauen shal not geue their light, the Sonne
shalbe quenched in the rysinge, and the Mone shal not shyne with his light.
11 And I wil punysh the wickednesse of the worlde, & the synnes of the vngodly,
sayeth the LORDE. The hye stomackes of the proude will I take awaye, and will
laye downe the boostinge of tyrauntes.
12 I will make a man dearer the fyne golde, and a man to be more worth, the a
golden wedge of Ophir.
13 Morouer, I will so shake the heaue, that the earth shall remo out of hir
place. Thus shall it go wt Babilon, in the wrath of the LORDE of hoostes in ye
daye of his fearfull indignacio.
14 And Babilon shalbe as an hunted or chased doo, and as a flocke wt out a
shepherde. Euery ma shal turne to his owne people, & fle echone into his owne
londe.
15 Who so is founde alone, shalbe shot thorow: And who so gather together,
shalbe destroyed wt the swerde.
16 Their children shalbe slayne before their eyes, their houses spoyled, & their
wyues rauyshed.
17 For lo, I shall bringe vp ye Medes agaynst the, which shal not regarde
syluer, nor be desyrous of golde.
18 Then shall yonge mens bowes be knapped asunder. The Medes shal haue no pitie
vpo wome wt childe, & their faces shall not spare ye childre.
19 And Babilo (yt glory of kigdomes and bewtie of the Caldees honor) shalbe
destroyed, eue as God destroyed Sodom & Gomorra.
20 It shal neuer be more inhabited, nether shal there be eny more dwellinge
there, from generacion to generacion. The Arabians shall make no mo tentes
there, nether shall the shepardes make their foldes there eny more:
21 but wylde beastes shal lie there, & ye houses shalbe full of greate Oules.
Estriches shal dwell there, & Apes shal daunse there:
22 The litle Oules shall crie in the palaces, one after another, & Dragos shalbe
in the pleasaut perlours. And as for Babilons tyme, it is at honde, & hir dayes
maye not be longe absent.

Chapter 14

1 Bvt ye LORDE wilbe mercyfull vnto Iacob, & wyll take vp Israel agayne, & set
the in their owne lode. Straugers shal cleue vnto the, & get the to ye house of
Iacob.
2 They shal take ye people, & cary the home wt the. And ye house of Israel shal
haue the in possession, for seruautes & maydes in ye lode of ye LORDE. They shal
take those prisoners, whose captyues they had bene afore: & rule those, yt had
oppressed the.
3 When ye LORDE now shal bringe ye to rest, fro ye trauayle, feare, & harde
bondage yt thou wast laden withall:
4 then shalt thou vse this mockage vpon ye kinge of Babilon, & saye: How
happeneth it yt ye oppressour leaueth of? It ye golden tribute come to an ende?
5 Doutles the LORDE hath broken the staff of the vngodly, & the cepter of ye
lordly.
6 Which whe he is wroth, smyteth ye people wt durable strokes, & in his woders
he persecuteth the, & tameth the cotinually.
7 And therfore ye whole worlde is now at rest and quyetnesse, & men synge for
ioye.
8 Yee euen the Fyrre trees and Cedres of Libanus reioyse at thy fall, sayenge:
Now yt thou art layde downe, there come no mo vp to destroye vs.
9 Hell also trembleth at thy commynge, All mightie men and prynces of the earth,
steppe forth before the. All kynges of the earth stonde vp fro their seates,
10 that they maye all (one after another) synge and speake vnto the. Art thou
wounded also as we? art thou become like vnto vs?
11 Thy pompe and thy pryde is gone downe to hell: Mothes shalbe layde vnder the,
& wormes shalbe thy coueringe.
12 How art thou fallen from heauen (o Lucifer) thou faire mornige childe? hast
thou gotten a fall euen to the grounde, thou that (notwithstondinge) dyddest
subdue the people?
13 And yet thou thoughtest in thine harte: I will clymme vp in to heauen, and
make my seate aboue the starres of God, I wyll syt vpon the glorious mount
toward the North,
14 I wyll clymme vp aboue the cloudes, & wilbe like the highest of all.
15 Yet darre I laye, yt thou shalt be brought downe to the depe of hell.
16 They that se the, shal narowly loke vpo the, and thinke in them selues,
sayenge: Is this the man, that brought all londes in feare, and made ye
kingdomes afrayde:
17 Is this he that made the worlde in a maner waist, & and layde the cities to
the grounde, which let not his prisoners go home?
18 How happeneth it, that the kynges of all people lie, euery one at home in his
owne palace, with worshipe,
19 and thou art cast out of thy graue like a wilde braunch: like as dead mens
rayment that are shott thorow with the swerde: as they that go downe to the
stones of the depe: as a dead coarse that is troden vnder fete:
20 and art not buried wt them? Euen because that thou hast waisted thy lode, and
destroyed thy people. For the generacion of the wicked shalbe without honor, for
euer.
21 There shal a waye be sought to destroye their childre, for their fathers
wickednes: they shal not come vp agayne to possesse the londe, and fyll the
worlde ful of castels and townes.
22 I wil stonde vp agaynst them (sayeth the LORDE of hoostes) and root out ye
name and generacion of Babilon (saieth the LORDE)
23 & wil geue it to the Otters, and wil make water poddels of it. And I wil
swepe them out with the besome of destruccion, sayeth the LORDE of hoostes.
24 The LORDE of hoostes hath sworne an ooth, sayege: It shal come to passe as I
haue determined: & shalbe fulfilled as I haue deuysed.
25 The Assirians shalbe destroyed in my londe, and vpon my mountaytaines wyll I
treade them vnder fote. Wherthorow his yocke shall come from you, & his burthen
shalbe taken from youre shulders.
26 This deuyce hath God taken thorow the whole worlde, and thu s is his honde
stretched out ouer all people.
27 For yf the LORDE of hoostes determe a thinge, who wyl dysanulle it? And yf he
stretch forth his honde, who wil holde it in agayne?
28 The same yeare that kynge Achas dyed, God threatned by Esay on this maner:
29 Reioyse not (thou whole Palestina) as though ye rod of him yt beateth the
were broken: For out of ye serpentes rote, there shal waxe a kockatrice, & the
frute shalbe a fyrie worme.
30 But the poore shall fede of the best thinges, and the symple shal dwell in
safetie. Thy rotes wil I destroye wt honger, and it shall slaye yi remnaunt.
31 Mourne ye portes, wepe ye Cities And feare thou (o whole Palestina) for there
shal come fro the North a smoke, whose power no man maye abyde.
32 Who shall then maynteyne the messages of the Gentyles? But the LORDE
stablisheth Syon, & the poore of my people shall put their trust in him.

Chapter 15

1 This is ye heuy burthe vpo Moab: Ar of Moab was destroyed (as me thought) in
the night season: The walles of Moab perished in the night, & vanished awaye:
2 They wete to Baith and Dibon in the hie places, for to wepe: Moab did mourne
fro Nebo to Medba: All their heades were colled, and al their beardes shauen.
3 In their stretes were they gyrded aboute with sack cloth. In all the toppes of
their houses & stretes was there nothinge, but mournynge and wepinge.
4 Hesebon and Eleale cried, that their voyce was herde vnto Iahaz. The worthies
also of Moab bleared and cried for very sorow of their myndes:
5 Wo is my hert for Moabs sake. They fled vnto the cite of Zoar, which is like a
fayre fruteful bullock, they went vp to Luhith, wepinge. The waye toward
Horonaim was ful of lamentacion for ye hurte.
6 The waters of Nimrim were dried vp, the grasse was wythred, the herbes
destroyed, & what necessary grene thinge there was besyde.
7 In like maner the thinge yt was left them of their substaunce, they caried it
by water to Araby.
8 The crie went ouer the whole londe of Moab: from Eglaim vnto Beer, was there
nothinge but mouanynge.
9 The waters of Dimon were full of bloude, for ye enemie had sent thither a
bonde of men, which as a lyon, layde waite foe the remnaunt of the londe, and
for them yt were escaped.

Chapter 16

1 Then sent the lordes of the lode a ma of warre, from the rocke that lieth
toward the deserte, vnto the hill of the doughter Sion
2 (For as for the doughters of Moab, they were as it had bene a trymblinge
byrde, yt is put out of hir nest, by the fery of Arnon) which messaunger sayde:
3 gather youre councel, come together, couer vs with youre shadowe in the
myddaye, as the night doth: hyde the chased, & bewraye not the that are fled,
4 let the persecuted Moabites dwel amoge you, be oure open refuge agaynst the
destroyer: for the aduersary oppresseth vs, the robber vndoeth vs, & the
tyraunte dryueth vs out of oure londe.
5 But ye Trone of youre kingdome is ful of grace, therfore he that sytteth vpon
it wt faitfulnesse & treuth in the house of Dauid, knowe the thinge & do his
diligence to helpe shortly, acordinge to Equite and rightuousnes.
6 As for Moabs pride (shal they answere) it is wel knowne. And all though they
be excellent, proude, arrogant, & hie mynded: yet is their strength nothinge
like.
7 And therfore Moab complayneth vnto Moab, wherthorow they come all to mourne: &
now yt they be smytten, they take their deuyce beneth by the bryck wall, and
make their coplaynte.
8 The suburbes also of Hesebon were made waist, & the princes of the Gentyles
hewed downe ye vynyardes of Sibma, which were planted with noble grapes, and
spred vnto Iazer, and went vnto the ende of the deserte, whose braunches
stretched their selues forth beyonde the see.
9 Therfore I mourned for Iazer, & for ye vynyardes of Sibma wt greate sorow. I
poured my teares vpon Hesebon & Eleale, for all their songes were layde downe,
in their haruest & gatheringe of their grapes:
10 Myrth and chere was gone out of ye felde & vynyardes, in so moch, that no man
was glad ner sunge. There wete no treader in to the wynepresse, their mery chere
was layde downe.
11 Wherfore my bely robled (as it had bene a lute) for Moabs sake, & myne
inwarde membres, for the bryck walles sake.
12 For it happened thus also: whe Moab sawe that she was turned vp syde downe:
she went vp an hie in to hir sanctuary, to make hir prayer there, but she might
not be helped.
13 This is the deuyce, which the LORDE toke in honde at that tyme agaynst Moab.
14 But now the LORDE sayeth thus: In thre yeare shal ye power of Moab wt their
pope (which is greate) be minished, like as ye burthe of an hyred seruaunte: And
as for ye remnaunt of them, they shalbe lesse then a fewe, and not rekened moch
worth.

Chapter 17

1 This is the heuy burthe vpo Damascus: Beholde, Damascus shal be nomore a cite,
but an heape of broken stones.
2 The cities of Aroer shalbe waist, The catel shal lie there, & noma shal fraye
the awaye.
3 Ephraim shal no more be stroge, & Damascus shal nomore be a kyngdome. And as
for ye glory of ye remnaunt of ye Sirians, it shalbe as the glory of the childre
of Israel, saieth ye LORDE of hoostes.
4 At that tyme also shal ye glory of Iacob be very poore, & his fatnes leane.
5 It shal happe to the, as when one sheareth in haruest, which cutteth his
handful wt the sickle, & when one gathreth ye sheaues together in the valley, of
Rephaim,
6 there remayneth yet some ears ouer. Or as whe one shaketh an olyue tre, which
fyndeth but two or thre olyue beries aboue in the toppe, and foure or fyue in
the braunches. Thus the LORDE God of Israel hath spoken.
7 Then shal man couerte agayne vnto his maker, & turne his eyes to the holy one
of Israel
8 And shal not turne to the aulters that are ye worke of his owne hodes, nether
shal he loke vpon groaues & ymages, which his fyngers haue wrought.
9 At the same tyme shal their stronge cities be desolate, like as were once ye
forsake plowes & corne, which they forsoke, for feare of ye children of Israel.
10 So shalt thou (o Damascus) be desolate, because thou hast forgotte God yi
Sauioure, & hast not called to remebraunce ye rock of thi stregth, Wherfore thou
hast also set a fayre plate, & grafted a straunge braunch.
11 In the daye when thou diddest plante it, it was greate, and gaue soone the
frute of thi sede: But in the daye of haruest, thou shalt reape an heape of
sorowes & miseries.
12 Wo be to the multitude of moch people, that russh in like the see, and to the
heape of folke, that renne ouer all like greate waters.
13 For though so many people increase as the flowinge waters, and though they be
armed, yet they fle farre of, and vanish awaye like the dust with the wynde vpon
an hill, and as the whyrle wynde thorow a storme.
14 Though they be fearful at night, yet in the morninge it is gone with the,
This is their porcion, that do vs harme, and heretage of them, that robbe vs.

Chapter 18

1 Wo be to the londe of flienge shippes, which is of this syde ye floude of
Ethiopia:
2 which sendeth hir message ouer the see in shippes of redes vpo ye water, and
sayeth: go soone, and do yor message vnto a straunge and harde folke: to a
fearful people, & to a people yt is further then this: to a desperate and pylled
folke, whose londe is deuyded from vs with ryuers of water.
3 Yee all ye yt syt in the compasse of the worlde, and dwell vpon the earth:
when the token shalbe geuen vpo the mountaynes, then loke vp: and when the horne
bloweth, then herken to,
4 for thus hath ye LORDE sayde vnto me. I layde me downe, and pondred the matter
in my house, at the noone daye when it was hote: and there fel a myslinge
shower, like a dew, as it happeneth in haruest.
5 But the frutes, were not yet ripe cut of, and the grapes were but yonge and
grene. Then one smote of the grapes with an hoke, yee he hewed downe also the
buwes and the braunches, & dyd cast the awaye.
6 And thus they were layde waist, for the foules of the mountaynes, and for ye
beastes of the earth together. So yt the foules sat ther vpon, and the beastes
of the earth wyntered there.
7 Then shal there be a present brought vnto the LORDE of hoostes: euen that
harde folke, that fearful folke, and that further is the this: yt desperate and
pylled folke (whose londe is deuyded from vs with floudes of water) vnto the
place of the name of the LORDE of hoostes: euen vnto the hill of Sion.

Chapter 19

1 This is the heuy burthen vpon Egipte: Beholde, the LORDE wil ryde vpon a
swifte cloude, and come in to Egipte. And the goddes of Egipte shal trymble at
his comynge, and the hert of Egipte shal quake within her.
2 For thus saieth the LORDE: I wil stere vp the Egiptians one agaynst another
amonge them selues, so that one shalbe euer agaynst his brother and neghboure,
yee one cite agaynst another, and one kyngdome agaynst another.
3 And Egipte shalbe choked in hir self. Whe they axe councel at their goddes, at
their Prophetes, at their soythsayers and witches: then will I bringe their
councel to naught.
4 I wil delyuer Egipte also in to the hondes of greuous rulers, and a cruel
kinge shal haue the rule of them.
5 The water of the see shalbe drawe out, Nilus shal synke awaye, & be dronke vp.
6 The ryuers also shalbe drawen out, the welles shal decreace and drie awaye.
Rede and rush shal fayle,
7 the grasse by the waters syde or vpon ye ryuers bancke, yee and what so euer
is sowen by the waters, shalbe wythered, destroyed, & brought to naught.
8 The fyshers shall mourne, all soch as cast angles in the water, shal
complayne, & they that sprede their nettes in the water, shalbe faynt harted.
9 Soch as laboure vpon flax & sylcke, shal come to pouerte, & they also that
weeue fyne workes.
10 All the poundes of Egipte, all the policie of their Moates & diches shal come
to naught.
11 Yee the vndiscrete prynces of Zoan, the councel of the wyse Senatours of
Pharao, shal turne to foolishnesse: Those that darre boast & saye of Pharaos
behalfe: I am come of wyse people.
12 I am come of ye olde regall Progeny. But where are now thy wyse me? Let them
tel the & shewe the, what the LORDE of hoostes hath taken in honde agaynst
Egypte.
13 Fooles are those prynces of Zoan, & proude are the prynces of Noph: yee they
dysceaue Egypte mith the nobilite of their stocke.
14 For the LORDE hath made Egypte droncke with the sprete of erroure, and they
shal vse it in all matters: eue like as a dronke ma goeth spewinge aboute.
15 For Egipte shal lacke good councel, so yt they shal not knowe what to do,
nether beginnynge nor ende, nether vpon the lode nor water.
16 The shal ye Egiptias be like vnto wome, afrayde & astoied, at the liftinge vp
of the hode, which ye LORDE of hoostes shal lifte vp ouer them.
17 The londe of Iuda also shal make the Egiptians afrayde, who so doth but
speake vpon it, shal put them in feare: And that because of the councel, which
ye LORDE of hoostes hath devysed agaynst them.
18 Then shal the fyue cities of Egipte speake with the Canaanites tunge, ande
sweare by the LORDE of hoostes, & Heliopolis shalbe one of them.
19 At the same tyme shal the LORDE of hoostes haue an aulter in the myddest of
the londe of Egipte, with this title ther by: Vnto the LORDE.
20 This shalbe a token or testimony vnto the LORDE of hoostes in the londe of
Egipte, when they shal crie vnto him, because of those that oppresse them: that
he shal sende them a captayne and a Sauioure to delyuer them.
21 Morouer, Egipte shalbe bought vnto the LORDE, and the Egiptians also shal
knowe the LORDE at the same tyme: they shal do him reuerence with peace
offringes, and with meatoffringes: they shal promyse him offringes, yee & paye
him also.
22 Thus the LORDE shal smyte Egipte, & heale it agayne: & so shal they turne to
ye LORDE, and he also shal haue mercy vpo them, and saue them.
23 Then shal there be a comon waye out of Egipte in to Assiria. The Assirians
shal come in to Egipte, and the Egypcians in to Assiria. The Egipcians also and
the Assirians shal both haue one Gods seruyce.
24 Then shal Israel with honoure be the thirde to Egipte and Assur.
25 And the LORDE of hoostes shal blesse them, sayenge: Blissed is my people of
the Egipcians, Assur is the worke of my hodes, but Israel is myne enheritaunce.

Chapter 20

1 The same yeare that Harthan came to Aschod, where Sarge the kinge of the
Assirians sent him, what tyme as he also beseged Aschdod, & wane it ye same
season:
2 The spake the LORDE vnto Esaye ye sonne of Amos, sayenge: go and lowse of yt
sack cloth fro thy loynes, and put of yi shues from thy fete. And so he dyd,
goinge naked & barefote.
3 Then sayde the LORDE: where as my seruaunt Esaye goeth naked and barefote, it
is a token and signifienge of the thinge, that after thre yeare shal come vpo
Egipte and Ethiopia.
4 For euen thus shal the kinge of the Assirians driue both yonge and olde, as
prisoners naked and barefote, out of Egipte and Ethiopia, And shal dyscouer ye
shame of Egipte.
5 They shalbe also at their wittes ende, and ashamed one of another: the
Egipcians of the Moryans, and the Morians of the Egipcians, at the sight of
their glory.
6 Morouer they that dwel in ye Iles shal saye euen the same daye: beholde, this
is oure hope, to whom we fled to seke helpe, that we might be delyuered from the
kinge of ye Assirians. How will we escape?

Chapter 21

1 This is the heuy burthe of the waist see: A greuous visio was shewed vnto me,
like as when a storme of wynde and rayne russheth in from the wyldernesse, that
terrible londe.
2 Who so maye disceaue (sayde the voyce) let him disceaue: Who so maye distroye,
let him distroye. Vp Elam, besege it o Madai, for I will still all their
gronynges.
3 With this, the raynes of my backe were ful of payne: Panges came vpon me, as
vpon a woman in hir trauayle. When I herde it, I was abasshed: and whe I loked
vp, I was afrayde.
4 Myne herte paunted, I trembled for feare. The darcknesse made me fearfull in
my mynde.
5 Yee soone make redy the table (sayde this voyce) kepe the watch, eate and
drynke: Vp ye captaynes, take you to youre shylde,
6 for thus the LORDE hath charged me: go thy waye, and set a watchma, that he
maye tell what he seyth.
7 And whe he had wayted diligetly, he sawe two horsmen: the one rydinge vpon an
Asse, the other vpon a camel.
8 And the lyon cried: LORDE, I haue stonde waytinge all the whole daye, and haue
kepte my watch all the night.
9 With yt came there one rydinge vpon a charet, which answered, and sayde
Babilon is fallen, she is turned vpsyde downe, and all ye ymages of hir goddes
are smytten to ye grounde.
10 This (o my felowe throsshers and fanners) haue I herde of the LORDE of
hoostes the God of Israel, to shewe it vnto you.
11 The heuy burthen of Duma. One of Seir cried vnto me: watchman, what hast thou
espied by night? Watchman, what hast thou espied by night?
12 The watchman answered: The daye breaketh on, and the night is comynge: Yf
youre request be earnest, then axe, and come agayne.
13 The heuy burthen vpon Arabia. At euen ye shal abyde in the wod, in the waye
toward Dedanim.
14 Mete the thurstie with water, (o ye citisens of Hema) mete those with bred
that are fled.
15 For thei shal runne awaye from the weapen, from the drawe swerde, from the
bet bowe, and from the greate batell.
16 For thus hath the LORDE spoken vnto me: ouer a yeare shal all the power of
Cedar be gone, like as when the office of an hyred seruaunte goeth out:
17 And the remnaunt of the good Archers of Cedar, shalbe very few: For the LORDE
God of Israel hath spoken it.

Chapter 22

1 The heuy burthen, apon the valley of Visions. What hast thou there to do, that
thou clymnest vp in to the house toppe,
2 o thou citie of miracles, sedicious and wilfull? seinge, thy slayne me are
nether killed wt swerde, ner deed in batel?
3 For all thy captaynes gat them to their horses from the ordinaunce, yee they
are altogether rydden awaye, and fled farre of.
4 When I perceaued yt, I sayde: awaye fro me, yt I maye wepe bytterly. Take no
laboure for to coforte me, as touchinge the destruction of my people.
5 For this is ye daye of the LORDE of hoostes, wherin he will plage, treade
downe, and wede out the valley of Visios, and breake downe the walles, with soch
a crack, that it shal geue a sownde in the mountaynes.
6 I sawe the Elamites take the quyuers to carte and to horse, and that the
walles were bare from harnesse.
7 Thy goodly valleys were ful of Charettes, the horse men made them soone to
besege the gates.
8 Then was the coueringe of Iuda put from thence, and then was sene the sege of
the tymbre house.
9 There shal ye se the riftes in the walles of the cite of Dauid, wherof there
shalbe many. Ye shal gather together the waters of the lower pole,
10 and tel the houses of Ierusale, and break of some of the to kepe ye walles.
11 And ye shal make a pyt betwyxte ye twayne walles of the water of the olde
pole, and nothinge regarde him, that toke it in honde and made it.
12 And at the same tyme shal ye LORDE of hoostes cal me to wepinge mourninge, to
baldnesse and puttinge on of sack clothe.
13 But they to fulfil their lust and wilfulnes, slaugter oxe, they kyll shepe,
they eate costly meate, & drynke wyne: let vs eate and drinke, tomorow we shal
die.
14 Neuertheles whe the LORDE of hoostes herde of it, he sayde: yee, yf this
wickednes of yours shalbe remitted, ye must die for it. This hath ye LORDE God
of hoostes spoken.
15 Thus sayeth the LORDE God of hoostes: Go in to the treasury vnto Sobna the
gouernoure, and saye vnto him:
16 What hast thou here to do? & from whece comest thou? that thou hast made the
a graue here? For he had caused a costly tombe of stone to be made for himself,
and a place to lye in to be hewen out of a rock.
17 Beholde the LORDE shal cast the out by violence, he will deck the of another
fashion, and put vpon the a straunge clothe.
18 He shal carie ye in to a farre coutre, like a ball with his hondes, There
shalt thou die, there shal the pompe of thy charettes haue an ende: thou
vylleyne of the house of thy LORDE:
19 I wil shute the out of thine office, and put the from thine estate.
20 After this wil I cal my seruaunt Eliakim, ye sonne of Helkia,
21 and araye him with thy cote, and gyrde him with thy gyrdle, and I wil geue
thy power in to his honde He shalbe a father of the citisens of Ierusalem, and
of the Kynred of Iuda.
22 I will also laye the keye of Dauids house vpon his shulders, and yf he open,
no man shal shit, and yf he do shyt, no man shal open.
23 I wil fasten him to a nale in the place of the most hie faithfulnesse, and he
shalbe vpon the glorius trone of his fathers house.
24 They shal hage vpon him all the glory of his fathers house, of the children
and childers childre, all apparel small and great, all instrumentes of measure &
musike.
25 This shal come to passe, (saieth the LORDE of hoostes) when the nale, yt is
fastened to the place of the highest faithfulnesse: shalbe pluckt of, And whe
the weight that hangeth vpon it, shal fall, be broken, and hewen in peces. For
the LORDE himself hath sayde it.

Chapter 23

1 An heuy burthen vpon Tirus. Mourne ye shippes of Tharsis, for she is throwne
downe to the grounde, and conquered of them, that are come from Cithim.
2 The Indwellers of the Ilondes, the marchauntes of Sidon, and they that
occupied the see (of whom thou wast ful somtyme) are at a poynte.
3 For by see were there frutes brought vnto the, and all maner of corne by
water. Thou wast the comon marcket of al people.
4 Sido is sory for it, yee and all ye power of the see coplaneth, and saieth: O
yt I had neuer traueled with childe, that I had neuer borne eny, yt I had nether
norished boye, ner brought vp doughter.
5 As soone as Egipte perceaueth it, she wilbe as sory as Tirus it self.
6 Go ouer the see, Mourne ye yt dwel in the Iles.
7 Is not that the glorious cite, which hath bene of longe antiquite? whose
natyues dwellinge farre of, commende her so greatly?
8 Who hath deuysed soch thinges vpon Tirus the crowne of al cities, whose
marchautes and captaynes were the highest and principal of the worlde?
9 Eue the LORDE of hoostes hath deuysed it, that he maye put downe al pompe, and
minish all the glory of the worlde.
10 Go thorow thy londe (o thou doughter of the see) as men go ouer the water,
and there is not a gyrdle more.
11 Thus the LORDE that remoueth the kingdomes, and hath taken in hande agaynst
that mightie Canaan to rote it out:) hath stretched out his honde ouer the see,
12 and sayde: From hence forth shalt thou make no more myrth (o thou doughter
Sidon) for thou shalt be put downe of the Cethes. Stonde vp therfore, and go
where the enemie wil carie the, where thou shalt also haue no rest.
13 Beholde (for thyne ensample:) The Caldees were soch a people, that no man was
like them, Assur buylded them: he set vp his castels & palaces, and broke them
downe agayne.
14 And therfore mourne (ye shippes of the see) for youre power shalbe throwne
downe.
15 After that, shal the lxx yeares of Tirus (euen as longe as their kinges life
was) be forgotten. And after lxx. yeares, it shal happe to Tirus as with an
harlot that playeth vpon a lute.
16 Take thy lute (saie men to her) and go aboute the citie, thou art yet an
vnknowne wensche, make pastyme with dyuerse balettes, wherby thou mayest come in
to acquantaunce.
17 Thus shal it happen after lxx. yeares. The LORDE shal uiset the citie of
Tirus, and it shal come agayne to hyr Marchaundyse, and shal occupie with al the
Kingdomes that be in the worlde.
18 But all hir occupiege and wynnynge, shalbe halowed vnto the LORDE. For then
shal they laye vp nothinge behinde them nor vpon heapes: but the marchaudise of
Tirus shal beloge vnto the citisens of the LORDE, to the fedinge and susteninge
of the hugrie, and to the clothinge of the aged.

Chapter 24

1 Beholde, ye LORDE shal waist and plage the worlde, he shal make the face of
the earth desolate, & scatre abrode ye inhabitours therof.
2 Then shal the prest be as the people, the master as the seruaunt, the dame
like the mayde, the seller like the byer, he that ledeth vpon vsury, like him yt
boroweth vpo vsury, the creditoure, as the detter.
3 Yee miserably shal ye worlde be waysted & clene destroyed. For ye LORDE hath
so determed in himself.
4 The earth shalbe heuye and decaye: The face of ye earth shal perish & fal
awaye, the proude people of ye worlde shal come to naught,
5 For ye earth is corrupte of hir indwellers. For why they haue offended ye
lawe, chaunged the ordinauces, and made the euerlastinge testamet of none
effecte,
6 And therfore shal the curse deuoure the earth: for they yt dwel thero, haue
synned. wherfore they shalbe brent also, and those that remayne, shalbe very
few.
7 The swete wyne shal mourne, the grapes shalbe weake, and all yt haue bene mery
in harte, shal sighe.
8 The myrth of tabrettes shalbe layde downe, the chere of the ioyful shal
ceasse, and the pleasure of lutes shal haue an ende:
9 there shal no more wyne bedronke with myrth, the beer shal be bytter to the
that drinke it,
10 the wicked cities shalbe broken downe, all houses shalbe shut, that no man
maye come in.
11 In the stretes shal there be lift vp a crie because of wyne, all mens chere
shal vanish awaye, and all ioye of the earth shal passe.
12 Desolacion shal remayne in the cities, and the gates shalbe smytten with
waistnesse.
13 For it shal happen vnto all londes and to all people, like as when a ma
smyteth downe ye olyues, yt are left vpon the tre: or seketh after grapes, when
the wyne gatheringe is out.
14 And those same (that remayne) shal lift vp their voyce, and be glad, & shal
magnifie the glory of the LORDE, euen from the see,
15 & prayse the name of the LORDE God of Israel, in the valeis and Ilodes.
16 We heare songes sunge to the prayse of the rightuous, fro al the endes of the
worlde. Therfore I must speake: O my vnfrutfulnesse, o my pouerte, Wo is me, all
is ful of synneres, which offende of purpose and malice.
17 And therfore, (o thou that dwellest vpon the earth) there is at hode for the,
feare, pyt and snare.
18 Who so escapeth the terrible crie, shal fall in to the pyt. And yf he come
out of the pyt, he shalbe take with the snare. For the wyndowes aboue shalbe
opened, and the foundacion of the earth shal moue.
19 The earth shal geue a greate crack, it shal haue a sore ruyne, and take an
horrible fall.
20 The earth shal stacker like a dronken man, and be take awaye like a tent. Hir
misdedes shal lie so heuye vpo her, yt she must fall, and neuer rise vp agayne.
21 At the same tyme shal the LORDE mustre together the hie hooste aboue, and ye
kynges of the worlde vpon the earth.
22 These shalbe coupled together as prisoners be, and shalbe shut in one warde
and punished innumerable daies.
23 The Moone and the Sonne shalbe ashamed, when the LORDE of hoostes shal rule
them at Ierusalem vpon the mount Sion, before and with his excellent councel.

Chapter 25

1 O Lorde, thou art my God, I wil prayse the, and magnifie yi name: For thou
bringest marvelous thinges to passe, acordinge to thine olde councels, truly and
stedfastly.
2 Thou makest of townes, heapes of stone: and of head cities, broken walles: The
palaces of the wicked destroyest thou out of the citie, that they shal neuer be
buylded againe.
3 Therfore the very rude people must magnifie the, and the cities of the cruel
heithen must feare the.
4 For thou art the poore mans helpe, a stregth for the neadful in his necessite.
Thou art a defence agaynst euel wether, a schadowe agaynst the hete. But vnto
the presumptuous, thou art like a stroge whyrle wynde, that casteth downe
5 the boostinge of the vngodly, thou kepest men from heate with the shadow of
the cloudes, thou cuttest of the braunches of tyrauntes.
6 Morouer the LORDE of hoostes shal once prepare a feast for all people vpo the
hill: A plenteous, costly, pleasaunt feast, of fat and welfed beastes, of swete
and most pure thinges.
7 Vpon the hill shal he take awaye the syde vale yt hageth before ye face of al
people, and the coueringe wherwith all Gentiles are couered.
8 As for death, he shal vtterly cosume it, The LORDE God shal wipe awaye the
teares from all faces, and take awaye the confucio of his people thorow ye whole
worlde. For ye LORDE himself hath sayde it.
9 At the same tyme shal it be sayde: lo, this is oure God in who we put oure
trust, and he hath healed vs. This is the LORDE that we haue wayted for: Let vs
reioyse & delyte in his health.
10 For the hode of ye LORDE ceaseth vpo this hil. But Moab shalbe throsshe downe
vnder him, like as the straw is trode vnder fete in a doge hill.
11 For he shal stretch out his hodes vpon him, like as a swimmer doth to swymme.
And wt the power of his hondes shal he cast downe his hie pompe.
12 As for his stroge holdes & hie walles: he shal buwe them, cast the downe, and
sell the to the grounde in to dust.

Chapter 26

1 Then shal this songe be sunge in the londe of Iuda: We haue a stroge citie,
the walles & the ordinauce shal kepe vs.
2 Ope ye gates, yt the good people maye go in, which laboureth for the treuth.
3 And thou, which art the doer and hast the matter in honde: shalt prouyde for
peace, eue the peace yt me hope for in the.
4 Hope stil in the LORDE, for in the LORDE God is euerlastinge stregth.
5 For why, it is he, yt bringeth lowe the hie mynded citesyns, & casteth downe
the proude cities. He casteth the to the groude, yee eue in to ye myre, yt they
maye be trode
6 vnder the fete of the symple, & with the steppes of the poore.
7 Thou (LORDE) cosidrest the path of ye rigtuous, whether it be right, whether
the waye of ye rightuous be right.
8 Therfore (LORDE) we haue a respecte vnto the waye of thy iudgmentes, thy name
and thy remebraunce reioyse the soule.
9 My soule lusteth after the all the night loge, & my mynde haisteth frely to
the. For as soone as thy iudgment is knowne to the worlde, the the inhabitours
of the earth lerne rightuousnesse.
10 But the vngodly (though he haue recaued grace) yet lerneth he not
rightuousnesse, but in that place where he is punished, he offendeth, & feareth
not the glory of the LORDE.
11 LORDE, they wil not se thine hie honde, but they shal se it, and be
confounded: whe thou shalt deuoure them with the wrath of the people, and with
the fyre of thine enemies.
12 But vnto vs (LORDE) prouyde for peace: for thou workest in vs all or workes.
13 O LORDE oure God, though soch lordes haue dominacion vpon vs as knowe not
the: yet graute, that we maye only hope in the, and kepe thy name in
remembraunce.
14 The malicious Tyrauntes whe they die, are nether in life nor in the
resurrectio, for thou visitest the and rootest the out, and destroyest all the
memoryall of them.
15 Agayne, thou increacest the people (o LORDE), thou increacest the people,
thou shalt be praysed and magnified in all ye endes of the worlde.
16 The people that seke vnto the in trouble, that same aduersite which they
complane of, is vnto the a chastenynge before the.
17 Like as a wife wt childe (whe hir trauayle cometh vpo her) is ashamed, crieth
and suffreth the payne: Eue so are we (o LORDE) in thy sight.
18 We are with childe, we trauayle, & beare, & with the sprete we bringe forth
health, wherethorow the earth is vndestroyed, and the inhabitours of the worlde
perish not.
19 But as for thy dead men and ours, that be departed, they are in life and
resurrection. They lie in the earth, they wake, & haue ioye: for yi dew is a dew
of life & light. But ye place of the malicious Tyrauntes is falle awaye.
20 So go now my people in to thy chabre, and shut the doore to the, and suffre
now ye twicklinge of an eye, till the wrath be ouerpast
21 For beholde, the LORDE wil go out of his habitacion, & vyset the wickednes of
the that dwell vpon earth. He wil discouer the bloude that she hath deuoured,
she shal neuer hyde the, that she hath murthured.

Chapter 27

1 Then the LORDE with his heuye, great and loge swearde shal vyset Leuiatha,
that invincible serpet: eue Leuiatha yt croked serpent, and shal slaye the
Wallfish in ye see.
2 At the same tyme shal me synge of the vynyarde of Muscatel.
3 I the LORDE kepe it, and water it in due season. I watch daye & night, that no
man breake in to it. I beare no euel wil in my mynde.
4 Who will compell me, that I greatly forgettinge all faithfulnesse, shulde
burne it vp at once wt thornes & bushes?
5 Or who will enforce me to kepe or make peace?
6 It wil come to this poynte, yt Iacob shalbe rooted againe, and Israel shalbe
grene & beare floures, & they shal fyll ye whole worlde wt their frute.
7 Smyteth he not his smyter, as euel as he is smytte himself? Destroieth he not
ye murtherers, as he is murthured?
8 Euery ma recopenseth wt ye measure yt he receaueth: He museth vpo his sore
wynde, as vpo the dayes of extreme heate.
9 And therfore shal the iniquite of Iacob be thus reconciled. And so shal he
take awaye all ye frute of his synnes. As for aulter stones, he shal make them
all as stones beaten to poulder: the Groues and Idols shal not stonde.
10 The stronge cities shalbe desolate, and ye fayre cities shalbe left like a
wildernes. The catel shal fede and lie there, and the shepe shal eate it vp.
11 Their haruest shal be brent, their wyues which were their bewtie when they
came forth: shalbe defyled. For it is a people without vnderstodinge, and
therfore he yt created them, shal not fauoure them: and he yt made them, shal
not be merciful to the.
12 In yt tyme shal ye LORDE shute from ye swifte water of Euphrates, vnto ye
ryuer of Egipte. And there shal the children be chosen out one by one.
13 Then shal the greate trompet be blowen, so that those which haue bene
destroyed in the Assirians londe, and those that be scatred abrode in Egipte:
shal come & worshipe the LORDE at Ierusale, vpo the holy mount.

Chapter 28

1 Wo be to ye crowne of pryde, to ye dronke Ephraemites, and to the faydinge
floure, to the glory of his pope, yt is vpo the toppe of the pleteous valley:
which me be ouerladen wt wyne.
2 Beholde, the strength and power of the LORDE shal breake in to the londe on
euery syde, like a tempest of hale, that beareth downe stronge holdes, and like
an horrible, mightie and ouer flowinge water.
3 And the proude crowne of the dronken Ephraemites, shal be troden vnderfoote.
4 And as for the faydinge floure, the glory of his pompe, which is vpon the
toppe of the plenteous valley: it shal happen vnto him, as to an vntymely frute
before the haruest come. Which as soone as it is sene, is by and by deuoured, or
euer it come well in a mans honde.
5 And then shal the LORDE of hoostes be a ioyful crowne, and a glorious garlade
vnto the remnaunt of his people.
6 Vnto the lowly, he shalbe a sprete of iudgment, and vnto them that dryue awaye
the enemies from ye gates, he shalbe a sprete of stregth.
7 But they go wronge by ye reason of wyne, they fall and stacker because of
stroge drynke. Yee eue the prestes and prophetes them selues go amisse, they are
dronken with wyne, and weake braned thorow stronge drynke. They erre in seinge,
and in iudgmet they fayle.
8 For all tables are so ful of vomyte and fylthynes, yt no place is clene.
9 What is he amonge them, yt can teach, instructe or enfourme the childre, which
are weened from suck or taken from the brestes: of eny other fashion, then:
10 Commaunde yt maye be commaunded, byd yt maye be bydde, forbyd that maye be
forbydde, kepe backe yt maye be kepte backe, here a litle, there a litle.
11 And therfore the LORDE also shal speake wt lispinge lippes and wt a straunge
laguage vnto this people, to whom he spake afore of this maner:
12 This shal bringe rest, yf one refresh the weery, ye this shal bringe rest.
But they had no will to heare.
13 And therfore the LORDE shal answere their stubbournes (Comaunde yt maye be
comaunded, byd yt maye be bydden, forbyd yt maye be forbydde, kepe backe yt maye
be kepte backe, here a litle, there a litle) That they maye go forth, fall
backwarde, be brussed, snared and taken.
14 Wherfore heare the worde of the LORDE, ye mockers that rule the LORDES
people, which is at Ierusale.
15 For ye coforte yor selues thus: Tush, death & we are at a poynte, & as for
hell, we haue made a codicion with it: that though there breake out eny sore
plage, it shal not come vpon vs. For with disceate wil we escape, and with
nymblenes will we defende or selues.
16 Therfore thus saieth the LORDE God: Beholde, I wil laye a stone in Sion, a
greate stone, a costly corner stone for a sure foundacion: yt who so putteth his
trust in him, shal not be confouded.
17 Rightuousnes wil I set vp agayne in ye balaunce, and iudgment in the
weightes. The tepest of hale shal take awaye yor refuge, that ye haue to
disceaue withal, and ye ouerflowinge waters shal breake downe yor stroge holdes
of dissimulacio.
18 Thus the appoyntmet that ye haue made wt death, shalbe done awaye, and the
codicion that ye made with hell, shal not stode. When the greate destructio
goeth thorow, it shal all to treade you, It shal take you quyte awaye before it.
19 For it shal go forth early in the mornynge, and contynue only yt daye and yt
night. And the very feare only shal teach you, when ye heare it.
20 For ye bedde shalbe so narow yt a ma ca not lye vpon it. And the coueringe to
small, that a ma maye not wynde him self therin.
21 For the LORDE shal steppe forth as he dyd vpon the mount Perazim, and shal
take on as he dyd vpo the dale of Gabaon: that he maye bringe forth his deuyce,
his straunge deuyce: and fulfil his worke, his wonderful worcke.
22 And therfore make no mockes at it, that youre captiuyte increase not: for I
haue herde the LORDE of hoostes saye, that there shal come a soden destruction
and plage vpon the whole earth.
23 Take hede, and heare my voyce, pondre and merck my wordes wel.
24 Goeth not the husbonde man euer in due season earnestly to his londe? he
moweth & ploweth his grounde to sowe.
25 And whe he hath made it playne, he soweth it with fitches or comyn. He soweth
ye wheate and Barlye in their place, Milium and Rye also in their place.
26 And yt he maye do it right, his God teacheth him and sheweth him.
27 For he treadeth not the fitches out with a wayne, nether bringeth he the cart
here and there ouer the comyn, but he throssheth ye fitches out with a flale,
and the comyn with a rod.
28 As for the wheate, he gryndeth it to make bred therof, In as moch as he can
not bringe it to passe wt treadinge out. For nether the brussinge that the cart
wheles make, ner his beastes can grynde it.
29 This and soch like thinges come of the LORDE of hostes which is maruelous in
councel, and greate in rightuousnesse.

Chapter 29

1 Wo vnto the o Ariel Ariel, thou cite that Dauid wane. Take yet some yeares,
and let some feastes yet passe ouer:
2 then shal Ariel be beseged, so that she shal be heuy and sorouful, and shal be
vnto me euen as a lyon.
3 For I wil laye sege to the rounde aboute, and kepe ye in with towers, and
graue vp dykes agaynst ye.
4 And thou shalt be brought lowe, and speake out of the earth, and thy wordes
shal go humbly out of ye grounde.
5 Thy voyce shal come out of the earth, like the voyce of a witch, and thy
talkinge shal groane out of the myre. For the multitude of thine enemies shalbe
like mealdust. And the nombre of Tyrauntes shalbe as ye dust that the wynde
taketh awaye sodenly.
6 Thou shalt be visited of the LORDE of hoostes with thondre, earth quake, and
with a greate crack, with the whyrle wynde, tempest, and with the flame of a
consumynge fyre.
7 But now the multitude of all the people, that went out agaynst Ariel: the
whole hooste, the stronge holdes, and sege: is like a dreame which apeareth in
the night.
8 It is like as when an hungrie man dreameth that he is eatynge, and when he
awaketh, he hath nothinge: like as when a thurstie man dreameth that he is
drinkinge, and when he awaketh, he is faynt, and his soule vnpacient. So is the
multitude of all people, that mustre them selues agaynst the hill of Sion.
9 But ye shalbe at youre wittes ende, ye shalbe abasshed: ye shal stackre, and
rele to and fro. Ye shalbe dronken, but not of wyne. Ye shal fall, but not
thorow dronkenes:
10 For the LORDE shal geue you an hard slepinge sprete, and holde downe youre
eyes: namely yor prophetes and heades which shulde se, them shal he couer.
11 And all visions shalbe vnto you, as the wordes that stonde in a sealed
lettre, when one offreth it to a man that is lerned, and sayeth: rede vs this
lettre. The he answereth: I ca not rede it, for it is shutt.
12 But yf it be geue to one yt is not lerned, or sayde vnto him: rede this
lettre: Then sayeth he. I can not rede.
13 Therfore thus sayeth the LORDE: For so moch as this people draweth nye me wt
their mourh, and prayseth me highly with their lippes (where as there herte
neuertheles is farre fro me, and the feare which they owe vnto me, that turne
they to mens lawes and doctrynes)
14 therfore wil I also shewe vnto this people, a maruelous terrible and greate
thinge (Namely this:) I wil destroye the wisdome of their wise, and the
vnderstodinge of their lerned men shal perish.
15 Wo be vnto them that seke so depe, to hyde their ymaginacion before the
LORDE, which rehearce their coucels in ye darknes, and saye: who seith vs, or
who knoweth vs?
16 Which ymaginacion of yours is euen as when the potters claye taketh
advisemet, as though the worke might saye to ye worke master: make me not, or as
when an erthen vessel saieth of the potter: he vnderstondeth not.
17 Se ye not that it is hard by, that Libanus shalbe turned in to Charmel, and
that Charmel shalbe taken as a wodde?
18 Then shal deaf men vnderstonde the wordes of the boke, and the eyes of the
blynde shal se without eny cloude or darknes.
19 The oppressed shal holde a mery feast in the LORDE, and the poore people shal
reioyse in the holy one of Israel.
20 Then shal the furious people ceasse, and ye mockers shal be put awaye, and
all they yt do wronge shalbe rooted out,
21 soch as laboure to drawe me vnto synne: and yt disceaue him, which reproueth
them in the gate, & soch as turne good personnes to vanite.
22 And therfore the LORDE (euen the defender of Abraham) saieth thus vnto the
house of Iacob: Now shal not Iacob be ashamed, nor his face cofounded,
23 when he seith amonge his children (whom my hondes haue made) soch as halowe
my name amonge them: that they maye sancifie the holy one of Iacob, and feare
the God of Israel:
24 and that they which afore tyme were of an erroneous sprete, haue now
vnderstondinge, and yt soch as before coude not speake, are now lerned in my
lawe.

Chapter 30

1 Wo be to those shrenkinge children (saieth the LORDE) which seke councel, but
not at me: which take a webbe in honde, but not after my will: that they maye
heape one synne vpon another.
2 They go downe in to Egipte, (and axe me no councel) to seke helpe at the power
of Pharao, and coforte in the shadowe of the Egipcias.
3 But Pharaos helpe shalbe youre cofucion, and the comforte in the Egipcians
shadowe shalbe youre owne shame.
4 Youre rulers haue bene at Zoan, and yor messaungers came vnto Hanes.
5 But ye shal all be ashamed of the people yt maye not helpe you, which shal not
bringe you strength or comforte, but shame and confucion.
6 Youre beastes haue borne burthens vpo their backes towarde the South, thorow
the waye that is ful of parell and trouble, because of the lyo and lyones, of
the Cockatrice and shutynge dragon. Yee the Mules bare youre substaunce, and the
Camels brought yor treasure vpon their croked backes, vnto a people that can not
helpe you.
7 For the Egipcians helpe shalbe but vane and lost. Therfore I tolde you also yt
youre pryde shulde haue an ende.
8 Wherfore go hece, and write them this in their tables, and note it in a booke:
that it maye remayne by their posterite, and be stil kepte.
9 For it is an obstinate people, vnfaithful children, children that will not
heare the lawe of the LORDE.
10 They darre saye to the prophetes: Intromitte youre selues with nothinge, and
vnto ye Soythsayers: tell us of nothinge for to come, but speake frendly wordes
vnto vs, and preach vs false thinges.
11 Treade out of the waye, go out of the path, turne the holy one of Israel from
vs.
12 Therfore thus saieth the holy one of Israel: In as moch as ye haue cast of
youre bewtie, and conforted youre selues with power and nymblenesse, and put
youre confidence therin:
13 therfore shal ye haue this myschefe agayne for youre destruction and fall,
like as an hie wall, that falleth because of some rift (or blast,) whose
breakinge cometh sodenly.
14 And youre destruction shalbe like as an erthe pot, which breaketh no man
touchinge it, yee and breaketh so sore, that a man shal not fynde a sheuer of it
to fetch fyre in, or to take water with all out of the pyt.
15 For the LORDE God, euen the holy one of Israel hath promised thus: With
stilsittinge and rest shal ye be healed, In quyetnesse and hope shal youre
strength lie.
16 Notwithstondinge ye regarde it not, but ye will saie: No, for thus are we
costrayned to fle vpo horses. (And therfore shall ye fle) we must ryde vpon
swift beastes, and therfore youre persecutours shal yet be swifter.
17 A thousand of you shal fle for one, or at the most for fyue, which do but
only geue you euell wordes: vntil ye be desolate, as a shipmast vpon an hie
mountayne, and as a beaken vpon an hill.
18 Yet stondeth the LORDE waitinge, that he maye haue mercy vpon you, and
lifteth him self vp, that he maye receaue you to grace. For the LORDE God is
rightuous. Happie are all thei that wate for him.
19 For thus (o thou people of Sion and ye citisens of Ierusalem) shal ye neuer
be in heuynes, for doutlesse he will haue mercy vpon the. As soone as he heareth
the voyce of thy crie, he will helpe the.
20 The LORDE geueth you the bred of aduersite, and the water of trouble. But
thine instructer fleyth not farre from the, yf thine eyes loke vnto thine
instructer,
21 and thine eares harken to his worde, that crieth after the and saieth: This
is the waye, go this, and turne nether to the right honde nor the leffte.
22 Morouer yf ye destroye the syluer workes of youre Idols, and cast awaye the
golden coapes that ye deckt them withall (as fylthynes) and saie, get you hence:
23 The wil he geue rayne to the sede, that ye shal sowe in the earth, and geue
you breade of the encrease of the earth, so that all shalbe plenteous aud
abundaunt. Thy catel also shal he fede in the brode medowes.
24 yee thyne oxe and Mules that till the grounde, shal eate good fodder, which
is pourged wt ye fanne.
25 Goodly ryuers shal flowe out of all his mountaynes and hilles. In the daye of
the greate slaughter when the towers shal fall,
26 the Moone shal shyne as the Sonne and ye Sone shyne shalbe seuefolde, and
haue as moch shyne, as in seuen dayes beside. In that daye shal the LORDE bynde
vp ye brussed sores of his people, and heale their woundes.
27 Beholde, the glory of the LORDE shal come from farre, his face shal burne,
that no man shalbe able to abyde it, his lippes shal wagge for very indignacion,
and his tunge shal be as a consumynge fyre.
28 His breath like a vehement floude of water, which goeth vp to the throte.
That he maye take awaye ye people, which haue turned them selues vnto vanite,
and the brydle of erroure, that lieth in other folkes chawes.
29 But ye shal synge, as the vse is in ye night of the holy solempnite. Ye shal
reioyse from youre hert, as they that come with the pipe, when they go vp to the
mount of the LORDE, vnto ye rock of Israel.
30 The LORDE also shal set vp the power of his voyce, and declare his terrible
arme, with his angrie countenaunce, yee and the flame of the consumynge fyre,
with earth quake, tempest of wynde, and hale stones.
31 Then shal the Assirian feare also, because of the voyce of the LORDE, which
shal smyte him with the rodde.
32 And the same rodde which the LORDE wil sende vpon him, shal moue the whole
foundacion: with trompet, with noyse of warre and batell to destroye.
33 For he hath prepared the fyre of payne from the begynnynge, yee euen for
kynges also. This hath he made depe & wyde, ye norishinge therof is fyre and
wodde innumerable, which the breath ofte LORDE kyndleth, as it were a match of
brymstone.

Chapter 31

1 Wo vnto them that go downe in to Egipte for helpe, and trust in horses, and
conforte them selues in Charettes, because they be many, and in horse me because
they be lustie and stronge. But they regarde not the holy one of Israel, and
they aske no question at the LORDE.
2 Where as he neuertheles plageth ye wicked, and yet goeth not from his worde,
wha he steppeth forth and taketh the victory agaynst the housholde of the
frauwerde, and against the helpe of euel doers.
3 Now the Egiptians are men, and not God, and their horses flesh and not sprete.
And as soone as the LORDE stretcheth out his honde, then shal the helper fall,
and he that shulde haue bene helped, and shal altogether be destroyed.
4 For thus hath the LORDE spoke vnto me: Like as the Lyon or lyos whelpe roareth
vpon the pray that he hath gotten, and is not afrayde, though ye multitude of
shepardes crie out vpon him, nether abashed for all the heape of them: So shal
the LORDE of hoostes come downe from the mount Sion, and defende his hill.
5 Like as byrdes flotre aboute their nestes, so shal the LORDE of hoostes kepe,
saue, defende and deliuer Ierusalem.
6 Therfore (o ye childre of Israel turne agayne, like as ye hahaue exceaded in
youre goinge back.
7 For in yt daye euery man shal cast out his Idols of syluer and golde, which ye
haue made with youre synful hondes.
8 Assur also shalbe slayne with the swerde, not wt a mans swerde. A swerde shal
deuoure him, but not a mans swerde. And he shal fle from the slaughter, and his
seruauntes shalbe taken prisoners.
9 He shal go for feare to his stronge holdes, and his prynces shal fle from his
badge. This hath ye LORDE spoke, whose light burneth in Sion, and his fyre in
Ierusalem.

Chapter 32

1 Beholde, the kinge shal gouerne after ye rule of rightuousnes, and ye princes
shal rule acordinge to the balaunce of equite.
2 He shalbe vnto me, as a defence for the wynde, and as a refuge for the
tempest, like as a ryuer of water in a thurstie place, and ye schadowe of a
greate rock in a drie lode.
3 The eyes of the seinge shall not be dymme, and the eares of them that heare,
shal take diliget hede.
4 The hert of the vnwise, shal attayne to knowlege, and the vnparfite tuge shal
speake planely and distinctly.
5 Then shal the nygarde be no more called gentle, ner the churle lyberall.
6 But the churle wil be churlishly mynded, and his hert wil worke euell and
playe the ypocrite, and ymagyn abhominacios agaynst God, to make the hungrie
leane, and to withholde drinke from the thurstie:
7 These are the perlous weapons of the cuvetous, these be his shameful councels:
that he maye begyle the poore with disceatful workes, yee euen there as he
shulde geue sentence with the poore.
8 But the liberall person ymagineth honest thinges, and commeth vp with honesty.
9 Vp (ye rich and ydle cities), harken vnto my voyce. Ye careles cities, marcke
my wordes.
10 After yeares and dayes shal ye be brought in feare, o ye carelesse cities.
For Haruest shalbe out, and the grape gatheringe shal not come.
11 O ye rich ydle cities, ye that feare no parell, ye shalbe abashed and
remoued: when ye se the barennesse, the nakednesse and preparinge to warre.
12 Ye shal knock vpo youre brestes, because of the pleasaunt felde, and because
of the fruteful vynyarde.
13 My peoples felde shal bringe thornes and thistels, for in euery house is
voluptuousnes & in the cities, wilfulnes.
14 The palaces also shalbe broken, and the greatly occupide cities desolate. The
towers and bulwerckes shalbe become dennes for euermore, the pleasure of Mules
shalbe turned to pasture for shepe:
15 Vnto the tyme that ye sprete be poured vpon vs from aboue. Then shal the
wildernesse be a fruteful felde & the plenteous felde shalbe rekened for a
wodde.
16 Then shal equyte dwel in the deserte, and rightuousnesse in a fruteful londe.
17 And the rewarde of rightuousnesse shalbe peace, and hir frute rest and
quietnesse for euer.
18 And my people shal dwel in the ynnes of peace, in my tabernacle and pleasure,
where there is ynough in the all.
19 And whe the hale falleth, it shal fall in the wodde and in the citie.
20 O how happy shal ye be, whe ye shal safely sowe youre sede besyde all waters
& dryue thither the fete of youre oxe & asses.

Chapter 33

1 Therfore wo vnto the (o robber) shalt not thou be robbed also? and vnto the
that laiest wait, as who saye there shulde no waite be layde for the? Wo vnto
the which doest hurte, euen so shalt thou be hurt also. And as thou layest
waite, so shal wait be layde for the also.
2 LORDE be merciful vnto vs, we wait for the. Thine arme is at a poynte to vyset
vs, but be thou oure health in the tyme of trouble.
3 Graute that the people maye fle at the anger of thy voyce, & that at thy
vpstondinge the Gentiles maye be scatred abrode,
4 and that their spoyle maye be gathered, as the greshoppers are comonly
gathered together in to the pyt.
5 Stonde vp LORDE, thou that dwellest on hie: Let Sio be fylled with equyte and
rightuousnesse.
6 Let treuth and faithfulnesse be in hir tyme: power, health, wisdome, knowlege
& the feare of God are hir treasure.
7 Beholde, their aungels crie with out, the messaungers of peace wepe bytterly.
8 The stretes are waist, there walketh no man therin, the appoyntmen is broken,
the cities are despised, they are not regarded,
9 the desolate earth is in heuynes. Libanus taketh it but for a sporte, that it
is hewen downe: Saron is like a wyldernes: Basa & Charmel are turned vpside
downe.
10 And therfore saieth ye LORDE: I wil vp, now wil I get vp, now wil I aryse.
11 Ye shal conceaue stubble, and beare strawe, & youre sprete shalbe the fyre,
that it maye consume you:
12 & the people shalbe burnt like lyme, & as thornes burne that are hewen of, &
cast in the fyre.
13 Now herken to (ye that are farre of) how I do with them, & cosidre my glory,
ye that be at honde.
14 The synners at Sion are afrayde, a sodane fearfulnesse is come vpon the
ypocrytes. What is he amonge us (saye they) that will dwell by that consumynge
fyre? which of vs maye abyde that euerlastinge heate?
15 He that ledeth a godly life (saye I) & speaketh the treuth: He that abhorreth
to do violence and disceate: he that kepeth his hode that he touch no rewarde:
which stoppeth his eares, that he heare no councel agaynst the innocent: which
holdeth downe his eyes, that he se no euel.
16 He it is, that shal dwel on hie, whose sauegarde shalbe in the true rocke, to
him shalbe geuen the right true meat & drynke.
17 His eyes shal se the kynge in his glory: & in the wyde worlde,
18 and his herte shal delite in the feare of God. What shal then become of the
scrybe? of the Senatoure? what of him that teacheth childre?
19 There shalt thou not se a people of a straunge tuge, to haue so diffused a
laguage, that it maye not be vnderstonde: nether so straunge a speache, but it
shal be perceaued.
20 There shal Sion be sene, the head citie of oure solempne feastes. There shal
thine eyes se Ierusalem that glorious habitation: the tabernacle that neuer shal
remoue, whose nales shal neuer be taken out worlde without ende, whose coardes
euerychone shal neuer corruppe:
21 for the glorious Magesty of the LORDE shal there be present amoge vs. In that
place (where fayre broade ryuers & streames are) shal nether Gallye rowe, ner
greate shippe sale.
22 For the LORDE shalbe oure capteyne, the LORDE shalbe oure lawe geuer, The
LORDE shalbe oure kinge, & he himself shalbe oure Sauioure.
23 There are the coardes so layd abrode, that they ca not be better: The mast
set vp of soch a fashion, that no baner ner sale hageth thero: but there is
dealed greate spoyle, yee lame men runne after the pray.
24 There lieth no ma that saieth: I am sick, but all euel is taken awaye from
the people, that dwel there.

Chapter 34

1 Come ye Heithen & heare, take hede ye people. Herke thou earth & all that is
therin: thou rounde copasse & al that groweth thervpon:
2 for the LORDE is angrie with al people, & his displeasure is kindled agaynst
all the multitude of them, to curse them, & to slaye them.
3 So that their slayne shalbe cast out, & their bodies stincke: that eue the
very hilles shalbe wet with the bloude of them.
4 All the starres of heauen shalbe consumed, & the heauen shal folde together
like a roll, & all the starres therof shall fall, like as the leaues fall from
the vynes and fygetrees.
5 For my swearde (saieth he) shalbe bathed in heauen, & shal immediatly come
downe vpon Idumea, and vpon the people which I haue cursed for my vengeaunce.
6 And the LORDES swearde shalbe full of bloude, & be rustie with the fatnesse &
bloude of lambes and gootes, with the fatnesse of neeres of the wethers. For the
LORDE shal kyl a great offringe in Bosra, and in the londe of Idumea.
7 There shal the Vnicornes fall with the Bulles, (that is with the giauntes) and
their londe shalbe washed with bloude, & their grounde corrupte with fatnesse.
8 Vnto the also (o Sion) shal come the daye of the vengeaunce of God, and the
yeare when as thyne owne iugdmentes shalbe recompensed.
9 Thy floudes shalbe turned to pytch, and thine earth to brymstone, & therwith
shal the londe be kyndled,
10 so that it shal not be quenched daye ner night: But smoke euermore, & so
forth to lie waist. And no man shal go thorow thy londe for euer:
11 But Pellicanes, Storkes, great Oules, and Rauens shall haue it in possession,
& dwell therein. For God shal sprede out the lyne of desolacion vpon it, & weye
it with the stones of emptynes.
12 When kinges are called vpo, there shalbe none, and all princes shalbe awaye.
13 Thornes shal growe in their palaces, nettels & thistles in their stronge
holdes, yt the dragons maye haue their pleasure therin, & that they maye be a
courte for Estriches.
14 There shal straunge visures and monstruous beastes mete one another, & the
wylde kepe company together. There shal the lamia lye, & haue hir lodginge.
15 There shall the hedghogge buylde, digge, be there at home, and bringe forth
his yongeones. There shal the kytes come together, ech one to his like.
16 Seke thorow the scripture of the LORDE & rede it. There shal none of these
thinges be left out, there shal not one (ner soch like) fayle. For what his
mouth commaundeth, that same doth his sprete gather together (or fulfilleth).
17 Vpon whom so euer ye lot fallet, or to whom he dealeth it with the line:
those shal possesse the enheritaunce from generacion to generacion, and dwel
therin.

Chapter 35

1 Bvt the deserte & wildernesse shal reioyse, ye waist grounde shal be glad, and
florish as the lilly.
2 She shal florish pleasauntly, and be ioyful, and euer be geuynge of thankes
more and more. For ye glory of libanus, the bewty of Charmel & Saro shalbe geuen
her. These shal knowe the honoure of the LORDE, and the magesty of oure God.
3 And therfore strength ye weake hodes, and conforte the feble knees.
4 Saye vnto them that are of a fearful hert: Be of good chere, and feare not.
Beholde: youre God cometh, to take vengeaunce & to rewarde, God cometh his owne
self, and wil delyuer you.
5 Then shal the eyes of the blinde be lightned, and the eares of the deaff
opened.
6 Then shal the lame man leape as an herte, & the domme mas tuge shal geue
thankes. In the wildernesse also there shal welles springe, and floudes of water
in the deserte.
7 The drie grounde shal turne to ryuers, and the thurstie to springes of water.
Where as dragons dwelt afore, there shal growe swete floures and grene russhes.
8 There shalbe footpathes & comon stretes, this shalbe called the holywaye. No
vnclene person shal go thorow it, for the LORDE himself shal go with the that
waye, and the ignoraut shal not erre.
9 There shalbe no lyon, and no rauyshinge beast shall come therin nor be there,
but men shal go there fre and safe.
10 And the redemed of the LORDE shal conuerte, and come to Sion with
thankesgeuinge. Euerlastinge ioye shal they haue, pleasure & gladnesse shalbe
amoge them, And as for all sorow and heuynes, it shal vanish awaye.

Chapter 36

1 In the xiiij. yeare of kinge Ezechias, came Sennacherib kinge of the Assirians
downe, to laye sege vnto all the stronge cities of Iuda
2 And the kinge of the Assirias sent Rabsaches from Lachis toward Ierusalem,
agaynst kinge Ezechias, with a greuous hooste, which set him by the condite of
the ouerpole, in the waye that goeth thorow ye fullers lode.
3 And so there came forth vnto him Eliachim Helchias sonne the presydent, Sobna
the scribe, and Ioah Asaphs sonne the Secretary.
4 And Rabsaches sayde vnto them: Tel Ezechias, that the greate kinge of Assiria
sayeth thus vnto him: What presumpcion is this, that thou trustest vnto?
5 Thou thinkest (peradueture) that thou hast councel & power ynough, to mayntene
this warre: or els wher to trustest thou, that thou castest thi self of fro me?
6 lo, Thou puttest thy trust in a broken staff of rede (I meane Egipte) which he
that leaneth vpon, it goeth in to his honde & shuteth him thorow. Euen so is
Pharao the kinge of Egipte, vnto all the that trust in him.
7 But yf thou woldest saye to me: We trust in ye LORDE oure God: A goodly god,
in dede: whose hie places & aulteres Ezechias toke downe, and commaunded Iuda
and Ierusalem, to worshipe only before the aulter.
8 Abyde the, thou hast made a condicion with my lorde the kinge of the Assirias,
that he shulde geue the two thousande horses: Art thou able to set me there vp?
9 Seinge now that thou canst not resist the power of the smallest prynce that my
LORDE hath, how darrest thou trust in yt charettes and horse men of Egipte?
10 Morouer, thinkest thou yt I am come downe hither, to destroye this londe with
out the LORDES will? The LORDE sayde vnto me: go downe in to that londe, that
thou mayest destroye it.
11 Then sayde Eliachim, Sobna & Iohah vnto Rabsaches: Speake to vs thy
seruauntes (we praye the) in the Sirians language, for we vnderstonde it well:
And speake not to vs in the Iewes tunge, lest the folcke heare, which lieth vpon
the wall.
12 Then answered Rabsaches: Thinke ye, yt the kinge sent me to speake this only
vnto you? Hath he not sent me to the also, that lie vpo the wall? that they be
not copelled to eate their owne donge, and drinke their owne stale with you?
13 And Rabsaches stode stiff, & cried with a loude voyce in the Iewes tuge, and
sayde: Now take hede, how the greate kinge of the Assirias geueth you warnynge.
14 Thus saieth the kinge: Let not Ezechias disceaue you, for he shal not be able
to delyuer you.
15 Morouer, let not Ezechias comforte you in the LORDE, when he saieth: The
LORDE with out doute shal defende vs, & shal not geue ouer this cite in to the
hondes of the kinge of the Assirias, beleue him not.
16 But thus saieth the kinge of Assiria: opteyne my fauoure, enclyne to me: So
maye euery ma enioye his vynyardes and fygetrees, and drinke the water of his
cisterne:
17 vnto the tyme that I come myself, & bringe you in to a londe, yt is like
youre owne: wher in is wheat and wyne, which is both sowen with sede, and
planted with vynyardes.
18 Let not Ezechias disceaue you, when he sayeth vnto you: the LORDE shal
delyuer us. Might the goddes of the Gentiles kepe euerymans londe, from the
power of the kinge of the Assirians?
19 Wher is the God of hemath & Arphad? Where is the God of Sepharnaim? And who
was able to defende Samaria out of my honde?
20 Or which of all the goddes of the lodes, hath deliuered their countre out of
my power, so that the LORDE shulde delyuer Ierusalem fro my honde?
21 Vnto this, Ezechias messaungers helde their tunges, and answered not one
worde: for the kinge had charged them, that they shulde geue him none answere.
22 So came Eliachim Elchias sonne the presidet, Sobna the scrybe, and Ioah
Asaphs sonne the Secretary, vnto Ezechias with rente clothes, & tolde him the
wordes of Rabsaches.

Chapter 37

1 When Ezechias herde that, he rente his clothes, & put on a sack cloth, & went
in to the temple of the LORDE.
2 But he sent Eliachim the Presidet, Sobna the scrybe wt the eldest prestes
cloothed in sack, vnto the Prophet Esay the sonne of Amos,
3 & they sayde vnto him: Thus saieth Ezechias: this is the daye of trouble, of
plage & of wrath: like as when a childe cometh to the byrth, but the woman hath
no power to bringe it forth.
4 The LORDE thy God (no doute) hath well considered the wordes of Rabsaches,
whom his lorde ye kinge of the Assirians hath sent, to defie & blaspheme the
lyuynge God: with soch wordes, as the LORDE yi God hath herde rightwell. And
therfore lift vp yi prayer for the remnaunt, that yet are left.
5 So the seruauntes of kinge Ezechias came to Esay.
6 And Esay gaue them this answere: Saie thus vnto youre lorde: thus saieth the
LORDE: Be not afrayde of the wordes that thou hast herde, wherwith the kinge of
Assirias seruauntes haue blasphemed me.
7 Beholde, I will cause a wynde go ouer him, as soone as he heareth it, he shal
go agayne in to his countre, there will I distroye him with the swerde.
8 Now when Rabsaches returned, he founde ye kinge of Assiria layenge sege to
Lobna, for he had vnderstonde, that he was departed from Lachis.
9 For there came a rumoure, yt Taracha kinge of Ethiopia was come forth to warre
agaynst him. And when the kinge of Assiria herde yt, he sent other messaungers
to kinge Ezechias, with this commaundement.
10 Saye thus to Ezechias kinge of Iuda: Let not thy God disceaue the, in whom
thou hopest, & sayest: Ierusale shal not be geue in to the hondes of the kinge
of Assiria.
11 For thou knowest well, how the kinges of Assiria haue handled all the londes,
that they haue subuerted, & hapest thou to escape?
12 Were the people of the Getiles (whom my progenitours coquered) deliuered at
eny tyme thorow their goddes? As namely, Gozan, Haran, Rezeph, & the childre of
Eden, which dwell at Thalassar.
13 Where is the kinge of Hemath, & the kinge of Arphad, & the kinge of the citie
Sepharnaim, Ena and Aua?
14 Now when Ezechias had receaued ye lettre of the messaungers, & red it, he
went vp in to the house of the LORDE, & opened the lettre before ye LORDE.
15 And Ezechias prayed before the LORDE on this maner:
16 O LORDE of hoostes, thou God of Israel, which dwellest vpo Cherubin. Thou art
the God, that only is God of all the kingdomes of the worlde, for thou only hast
created haue & earth.
17 Encline thine eare LORDE & cosidre, open thine eyes (o LORDE,) & se, and
pondre all the wordes of Senacherib, which hath sent his embassage to blaspheme
the, the lyuynge God.
18 It is true (o LORDE) that the kinges of Assiria haue coquered all kingdomes &
londes,
19 & cast their goddes in the fyre. Notwithstodinge those were no goddes but the
workes of mens hondes, of wodd or stone, therfore haue they destroyed them.
20 Delyuer vs then (o LORDE oure God) from the hondes of Sennacherib, yt all
kingdomes of the earth maye knowe, that thou only art ye LORDE.
21 Then Esay the sonne of Amos sent vnto Ezechias, sayenge: Thus saieth ye LORDE
God of Israel: Where as thou hast made thy prayer vnto me, as touchinge
Sennacherib,
22 this is the answere, that the LORDE hath geuen concernynge him: Despised art
thou, & mocked (o doughter of Sion) he hath shaken his heade at the, o doughter
of Ierusalem.
23 But thou Sennacherib, whom hast thou defied or blaspemed? And agaynst who
hast thou lifted vp thy voyce, & exalted thy proude lokes? euen agaynst the holy
one of Israel.
24 Thou with thy seruauntes hast blasphemed the LORDE, and thus holdest thou of
thyself: I couer the hie mountaynes, & sydes of Libanus with my horsmen. And
there wil I cut downe the hie Cedre trees & the fayrest Fyrre trees. I will vp
in to the heyth of it & in to the chefest of his timbre woddes.
25 Yf there be no water, I wil graue & drynke. And as for waters of defence, I
shal drie them vp with the fete of myne hooste.
26 Yee (saiest thou) hast thou not herde, what I haue taken in honde, & brought
to passe of olde tyme? That same wil I do now also: waist, destroye, & bringe
the stronge cities vnto heapes of stones.
27 For their inhabitours shalbe like lame men, brought in feare & confounded.
They shalbe like the grasse & grene herbes in the felde, like the hay vpo house
toppes, that wythereth, afore it be growne vp.
28 I knowe thy wayes, thy goinge forth & thy comynge home, yee & thy madnesse
agaynst me.
29 Therfore thy furiousnesse agaynst me, & thy pryde is come before me. I wil
put a rynge in yi nose, & a bridle byt in the chawes of the, & turne the aboute,
eue the same waye thou camest.
30 I wil geue the also this token (o Ezechias) this yeare shalt thou eate that
is kepte in stoare, & the next yeare soch as groweth of himself, and in the
thirde yeare ye shal sowe and reape, yee ye shal plante vynyardes, and enioye
the frutes therof.
31 And soch of the house of Iuda as are escaped, shal come together, and the
remnaunt shal take rote beneth, & bringe forth frute aboue.
32 For the escaped shal go out of Ierusale, & the remnaunte from the mount Sion.
And this shal the gelousy of the LORDE of hoostes bringe to passe.
33 Therfore thus saieth the LORDE, cocernynge the kinge of the Assirians: He
shall not come in to the citie, and shal shute no arowe in to it, there shall no
shilde hurte it, nether shal they graue aboute it.
34 The same waye that he came, shal he returne, and not come at this citie,
saieth the LORDE.
35 And I wil kepe and saue the citie (saieth he) for myne owne, & for my
seruaunte Dauids sake.
36 Thus the angel went forth, and slewe of the Assirians hooste, an clxxxv.
thousande. And when men arose vp early (at Ierusale:) Beholde, all laye ful of
deed bodies.
37 So Sennacherib the kinge of the Assirians brake vp, and dwelt at Niniue.
38 Afterwarde it chaunsed, as he prayed in the Teple of Nesrah his god, that
Adramalech and Sarazer his owne sonnes slewe him with the swearde, and fled in
to the londe of Ararat. And Esarhadon his sonne reigned after him.

Chapter 38

1 Not longe afore this, was Ezechias deadsick: And the prophet Esay the sonne of
Amos came vnto him, and sayde: Thus commaundeth the LORDE: Set thyne house in
ordre, for thou must dye, and shalt not escape.
2 Then Ezechias turned his face towarde the wall, & prayed vnto the LORDE,
3 and sayde: Remembre (o LORDE) that I haue walked before the in treuth and a
stedfast hert, and haue done the thinge that is pleasaunt to the. And Ezechias
wepte sore.
4 The sayde God vnto Esay:
5 Go and speake vnto Ezechias: The LORDE God of Dauid thy father sendeth ye this
worde: I haue herde thy prayer, and considred thy teares: beholde, I will put xv
yeares mo vnto thy life,
6 and delyuer the and the citie also, from the honde of the kinge of Assiria,
for I will defende the cite.
7 And take the this token of the LORDE, yt he will do it, as he hath spoken:
8 Beholde, I will returne the shadowe of Achas Diall, yt now is layed out with
the Sonne, and bringe it ten degrees bacward. So the Sonne turned ten degrees
bacward, the which he was descended afore.
9 A thankesgeuynge, which Ezechias kinge of Iuda wrote, when he had bene sicke,
& was recouered.
10 I thought I shulde haue gone to the gates of hell in my best age, and haue
wanted the residue of my yeares.
11 I spake within my self: I shal neuer viset the LORDE God in this life: I shal
neuer se man, amonge the dwellers of the worlde
12 Myne age is folden vp together and taken awaye fro me, like a sheperdes
cotage: my lyfe is hewen of, like as a weeuer cutteth of his webb. Whyl I was
yet takinge my rest, he hewed me of, & made an ende of me in one daie.
13 I thought I wolde haue lyued vnto the morow, but he brussed my bones like a
lyon, and made an ende of me in one daye.
14 Then chatred I like a swalowe, and like a Crane, and mourned as a doue. I
lift vp myne eyes in to ye hight: O LORDE, (sayde I) violence is done vnto me,
be thou suertie for me.
15 What shal I speake or say, ethat he maye this doo? yt I maye lyue out all my
yeares, yee in the bytternesse of my life?
16 Verely (LORDE,) men must lyue in bytternesse, & all my life must I passe ouer
therin: For thou raysest me vp, and wakest me. But lo, I wilbe wel content with
this bytternes.
17 Neuertheles my couersacion hath so pleased ye, that thou woldest not make an
ende of my life, so that thou hast cast all my synnes behynde thy backe.
18 For hell prayseth not the, death doth not magnifie the. They that go downe
into the graue, prayse not thy treuth:
19 but the lyuynge, yee the lyuynge acknowlege the, like as I do this daye. The
father telleth his children of thy faithfulnesse.
20 Delyuer vs (o LORDE) and we wil synge prayses in thy house, all the dayes of
oure life.
21 And Esay sayde: take a playster offyges, and laye it vpon the sore, so shal
it be whole.
22 Then saide Ezechias: O what a greate thinge is this, that I shal go vp in to
the house of the LORDE.

Chapter 39

1 At the same tyme Merodach Balada, Baladas sonne kinge of Babilon, sent lettres
and presentes to Ezechias. For he vnderstode, how that he had bene sick, & was
recouered agayne.
2 And Ezechias was glad therof, & shewed them the comodities of his treasure: of
syluer, of golde, of spyces & rootes, of precious oyles, all that was in his
cubboordes and treasure houses. There was not one thinge in Ezechias house, & so
thorow out all his kingdome, but he let them se it.
3 The came Esay the prophet to kinge Ezechias, and sayde vnto him: What haue ye
men sayde, and from whence came they vnto the? Ezechias answered: They came out
of a farre countre vnto me: out of Babilon.
4 Esay sayde: what haue they looked vpon in thyne house? Ezechias answerde: All
that is in myne house, haue they sene: and there is nothinge in my treasure, but
I shewed it them.
5 Then sayde Esay vnto Ezechias: Vnderstode the worde of the LORDE of hoostes,
6 Beholde, the tyme wil come, that euery thinge which is in thine house, and all
that thy progenitours haue layde vp in stoare vnto this daye, shalbe caried to
Babilon, and nothinge left behinde. This sayeth the LORDE.
7 Yee and parte of thy sonnes that shal come of the, and whom thou shalt get,
shalbe caried hence, and become gelded chamberlaines in the kinge of Babilons
courte:
8 Then sayde Ezechias to Esay: Now God prospere his owne councel, which thou
hast tolde me. He sayde morouer: So that there be peace, and faithfulnesse in my
tyme.

Chapter 40

1 Be of good chere my people, be of good chere (saieth youre God)
2 Conforte Ierusalem, and tell her: that hir trauale is at an ende, that hir
offence is pardoned, that she hath receaued of the LORDES honde sufficient
correction for all hir synnes.
3 A voyce crieth: Prepare ye waye for the LORDE in the wyldernesse, make
straight ye path for oure God in the deserte.
4 Let all valleis be exalted, and euery mountayne and hill be layde lowe. What
so is croked, let it be made straight, and let the rough places be made playne
feldes.
5 For the glory of the LORDE shal apeare, & all flesh shal se it, for why, ye
mouth of the LORDE hath spoken it.
6 The same voyce spake: Now crie. And I sayde: what shal I crie? Then spake it:
that, all flesh is grasse, and that all the bewtie therof, is as the floure of
the felde.
7 When the grasse is wytthered, the floure falleth awaye. Euen so is the people
as grasse, when the breath of the LORDE bloweth vpon them.
8 Neuerthelesse whether the grasse wyther, or the floure fade awaye: Yet the
worde of oure God endureth for euer. Morouer the voyce cried thus:
9 Go vp vnto the hill (o Sion) thou that bringest good tidinges, lift vp thy
voyce with power, o thou preacher Ierusalem. Lift it vp without feare, and say
vnto the cities of Iuda: Beholde, youre God:
10 beholde, the LORDE, euen the almightie sha come with power, & beare rule with
his arme. Beholde, he bringeth his treasure with him, and his workes go before
him.
11 He shal fede his flock like an hirdman. He shal gather the lambes together
with his arme, and carie them in his bosome, & shal kindly intreate those that
beare yonge.
12 Who hath holden the waters in his fist? Who hath measured heauen with his
spanne, and hath comprehended all the earth of ye worlde in thre fyngers? Who
hath weyed the mountaynes and hilles?
13 Who hath refourmed the mynde of the LORDE? Or who is of his councel to teach
him?
14 At whom hath he asked coucel, to make him vnderstode, and to lerne him the
waye of iudgment: to teach him science, and to enstructe him in the waye of
vnderstodinge?
15 Beholde, all people are in coparison of him, as a droppe to a bucketfull, and
are counted as the leest thinge yt the balaunce weyeth. Beholde, ye Iles are in
comparison of him, as the shadowe of the Sonne beame.
16 Libanus is not sufficiet to ministre fyre for his offringe, and all the
beastes therof are not ynough to one sacrifice.
17 All people in comparison of him, are rekened, as nothinge, yee vayne vanite
and emptynesse.
18 To whom then will ye licke God? or what similitude will ye set vp vnto him?
19 Shal the caruer make him a carued ymage? and shal the goldsmyth couer him
with golde, or cast him in to a fourme of syluer plates?
20 Morouer shal the ymage maker (yt the poore man which is disposed, maye haue
somthinge to set vp also) seke out and chose a tre, that is not rotten, and
carue ther out an ymage, yt moueth not?
21 Knowe ye not this? Herde ye neuer of it? Hath it not bene preached vnto you
sence the hegynnynge? Haue ye not bene enfourmed of this, sence the foundacion
of ye earth was layde:
22 That he sytteth vpon the Circle of the worlde, and that all the inhabitours
of the worlde are in coparison of him, but as greshoppers: That he spredeth out
the heaues as a coueringe, that he stretcheth them out, as. a tent to dwell in:
23 That he bringeth princes to nothinge, and the iudges of the earth to dust:
24 so that they be not planted nor sowen agayne, nether their stocke rooted
agayne in the earth? For as soone as he bloweth vpon them, they wither & fade
awaye, like the strawe in a whirle wynde.
25 To whom now wil ye licken me, & whom shal I be like, saieth the holy one?
26 Lift vp youre eyes an hie, and considre. Who hath made those thinges, which
come out by so greate heapes? and he can call them all by their names. For there
is nothinge hyd vnto the greatnesse of his power, strength, and might.
27 How maye then Iacob thinke, or how maye Israel saye: My wayes are hyd from
the LORDE, and my God knoweth not of my iudgmentes.
28 Knowest thou not, or hast thou not herde, that the euerlastinge God, the
LORDE which made all the corners of the earth, is nether weery nor faynt, and
that his wisdome can not be comprehended:
29 but that he geueth strength vnto the weery, and power vnto the faynte?
30 Children are weery and faynt, and the strongest men fall:
31 But vnto them that haue the LORDE before their eyes, shal strength be
encreased, Aegles wynges shal growe vpon them: When they runne, they shal not
fall: and when they go, they shal not be weery.

Chapter 41

1 Be still (ye Ilondes) and herken vnto me. Be stronge ye people, Come hither,
and shew youre cause, we will go to the lawe together.
2 Who rayseth vp ye iuste from the rysinge of the Sonne, and calleth him to go
forth? Who casteth downe the people, and subdueth the kinges before him: that he
maye throwe them all to the groude with his swearde, and scatre them like stuble
with his bowe?
3 He foloweth vpon them, and goeth safely himself, and cometh in no footpath
with his fete.
4 Who hath made, created, and called the generacions from the begynnynge? Euen I
the LORDE, which am the first, and with the last.
5 Beholde ye Iles, that ye maye feare, and ye endes of the earth, that ye maye
be abasshed, draw nye, and come hither.
6 Euery man hath exorted his neghboure, and brother, and bydden him be stronge.
7 The Smyth conforted the moulder, & the Ironsmyth the hammerman, sayenge: It
shalbe good, that we fasten this cast worke: and then they fastened it with
nales, that it shulde not be moued.
8 And thou Israel my seruaunt: Iacob my electe sede of Abraha my beloued,
9 whom I led from the endes of the earth by the honde: For I called the from
farre, & saide vnto the: Thou shalt be my seruaunt: I haue chosen the, & will
not cast ye awaye:
10 be not afrayde, for I wil be with ye. Lake not behinde ye, for I wil be thy
God, to stregth ye, helpe ye, & to kepe ye with this right hode of myne.
11 Beholde, all they that resist the, shal come to confucion and shame: and
thine aduersaries shalbe destroyed & brought to naught.
12 So that who so seketh after them, shal not fynde them. Thy destroyers shal
perish, & so shall they that vndertake to make batell agaynst the.
13 For I thy LORDE & God, wil strength thy right honde. Euen I that saye vnto
the: Feare not, I will helpe the.
14 Be not afrayde thou litle worme Iacob, and thou despysed Israel: For I will
helpe the, saieth the LORDE, & the holyone of Israel thine avenger.
15 Beholde, I wil make the a treadinge cart & a new flale, yt thou mayest
throsshe & grynde the mountaynes, and bringe the hilles to poulder.
16 Thou shalt fanne them, & the wynde shal carie them awaye, & the whyrlwynde
shal scatre the. But thou shalt reioyse in the LORDE, and shalt delite in
praysinge the holyone of Israel.
17 When the thurstie and poore seke water & fynde none, & when their tunge is
drie of thurst: I geue it them, saieth the LORDE. I the God of Israel forsake
them not.
18 I bringe forth floudes in the hilles, & welles in the playne feldes. I turne
ye wildernes to ryuers, and the drie londe to condytes of water.
19 I plante in the wayst grounde trees of Cedre, Boxe, Myrre and olyues. And in
the drie, I set Fyrre trees, elmes and hawthornes together.
20 All this do I, yt they altogether maye se and marcke, perceaue with their
hertes, & considre: that the honde of the LORDE maketh these thinges, and that
the holyone of Israel bringeth them to passe.
21 Stonde at youre cause (saieth the LORDE) and bringe forth youre strogest
grounde, counceleth the kinge of Iacob.
22 Let the goddes come forth them selues, and shewe vs the thinges ye are past,
what they be: let the declare the vnto vs, yt we maye take them to herte, and
knowe them herafter.
23 Ether, let the shewe vs thinges for to come, and tel vs what shalbe done
herafter: so shal we knowe, that they be goddes. Shewe somthinge, ether good or
bad, so wil we both knowlege ye same, & tel it out.
24 Beholde, ye goddes are of naught, & yor makinge is of naught, but
abhomination hath chosen you.
25 Neuertheles I haue waked vp one from the North, & he shal come. And another
from the East, which shal call vpo my name, & shal come to the prynces, as the
Potter to his claye, & as ye Potter treadeth downe the myre.
26 Who tolde yt afore? So wil we confesse & saye, that he is rightuous. But
there is none that sheweth or declareth eny thinge, there is none also that
heareth youre wordes.
27 Beholde, I will first graute the of Sion & Ierusalem to be Euangelistes.
28 But when I cosidre: there is not one amonge the yt prophecieth, nether (when
I axe him) yt answereth one worde.
29 Lo, wicked are they & vayne, with the thinges also that they take in honde:
yee wynde are they, and emptynesse, with their ymages together.

Chapter 42

1 Beholde now therfore, this is my seruaunt whom I will kepe to my self: my
electe, In whom my soule shalbe pacified. I will geue him my sprete, that he
maye shewe forth iudgment & equyte amonge the Gentiles.
2 He shal not be an outcryer, ner an hie mynded person. His voyce shall not be
herde in ye stretes.
3 A brussedrede shal he not breake, & the smokinge flax shal he not quench: but
faithfully & truly shal he geue iudgmet.
4 He shal nether be ouersene ner haistie, that he maye restore rightuousnesse
vnto the earth: & the Getiles also shal kepe his lawes.
5 For thus saieth God the LORDE vnto him (Euen he that made the heauens, and
spred them abrode, & set forth the earth with hir encrease: which geueth breath
vnto the people that is in it, & to them that dwel therin)
6 I the LORDE haue called ye in rightuousnesse, & led the by the honde. Therfore
wil I also defende the, & geue the for a couenaunt of the people, & to be the
light of the Getiles.
7 That thou mayest open the eyes of the blinde, let out the prysoners, & them
that syt in darknesse, out of the dongeon house.
8 I my self, whose name is the LORDE, which geue my power to none other, nether
myne honoure to the goddes:
9 shewe you these new tidinges, and tel you them or they come, for olde thinges
also are come to passe.
10 Synge therfore vnto the LORDE, a new songe of thakes geuynge, blow out his
prayse vnto the ende of the worlde. They that be vpon the see, & all that is
therin, prayse him, the Iles & they that dwel in them.
11 Let the wildernes with hir cities lift vp hir voyce, the townes also that be
in Cedar. Let them be glad that syt vpon rockes of stone, and let them crie
downe from the hie mountaynes:
12 ascribinge almightynes vnto the LORDE, & magnifienge him amonge the Getiles.
13 The LORDE shal come forth as a gyaunte, and take a stomacke to him like a
fresh man of warre. He shal roare and crie, and ouercome his enemies.
14 I haue longe holden my peace (saieth the LORDE) shulde I therfore be still,
and kepe sylence for euer? I will crie like a trauelinge woman, and once wil I
destroye, and deuoure.
15 I wil make waist both mountayne & hill, & drie vp euery grene thinge, that
groweth theron. I wil drie vp the floudes of water, & drinke vp the ryuers.
16 I wil bringe the blinde into a strete, that they knowe not: and lede them in
to a fotepath, that they are ignoraunt in. I shal make darknesse light before
the, & the thinge yt is croked, to be straight. These thinges will I do, & not
forget them.
17 And therfore let them conuerte, and be ashamed earnestly, that hope in Idols,
& saye to fashioned ymages: ye are oure godes.
18 Heare, o ye deaf men, and sharpen youre sightes to se (o ye blinde.)
19 But who is blynder, the my seruaunt? Or so deaf, as my messaungers, whom I
sent vnto them? For who is so blynde as my people, & they yt haue the rule of
them?
20 They are like, as yf thou vnderstodest moch, and keptest nothinge: or yf one
herde well, but were not obedient.
21 The LORDE be merciful vnto them for his rightuousnesse sake, that his worde
might be magnified & praysed.
22 But it is a myscheuous & wiked people. Their yonge men belonge all to the
snare, & shalbe shut in to preson houses. They shal be caried awaye captyue and
no man shal lowse them. They shal be trode vnder fote, & no man shal laboure to
bringe the agayne.
23 But who is he amonge you, yt pondreth this in his mynde, yt considreth it, &
taketh it for a warnynge in tyme to come?
24 Who suffred Iacob to be trodden vnder fote, and Israel to be spoyled? dyd not
the LORDE? Now haue we synned agaynst him, and haue had no delite to walke in
his wayes, nether bene obedient vnto his lawe.
25 Therfore hath he poured vpon vs his wroothful displeasure, and stroge batell,
which maketh vs haue to do on euery syde, yet will we not vnderstode: He burneth
vs vp, yet syncketh it not in to oure hartes.

Chapter 43

1 Bvt now, the LORDE that made the (o Iacob) and he that fashioned the (o
Israel) saieth thus: Feare not, for I will defende ye. I haue called ye by thy
name, thou art myne owne.
2 When thou wentest in the water, I was by the, that the stroge floudes shulde
not pluck ye awaye: When thou walkest in the fyre, it shal not burne ye, and the
flame shall not kindle vpon the.
3 For I am the LORDE thy God, the holyone of Israel, thy Sauioure. I gaue Egipte
for yi delyueraunce, the Moryas and the Sabees for the:
4 because thou wast deare in my sight, and because I set by the, and loued the.
I pilled all men for the, and delyuered vp all people for thy sake,
5 that thou shuldest not feare, for I was with the. I wil bringe thy sede from
the east, and gather the together from the west.
6 I wil saye to the north: let go. And to the south, kepe not backe: But bringe
me my sonnes from farre, and my doughters from the endes of the worlde:
7 Namely, all those that be called after my name: For the haue I created,
fashioned, and made for myne honoure.
8 Bringe forth that people, whether they haue eyes or be blynde, deaf or haue
eares.
9 All nacions shal come in one, and be gathered in one people. But which amonge
yonder goddes shall declare soch thinges, & tell vs what is to come? Let them
bringe their witnesses, so shal they be fre: for the men shal heare it, and
saye: it is truth.
10 But I bringe you witnesses (saith the LORDE) euen those that are my
seruauntes, whom I haue chosen: to the intent that ye might be certified, and
geue me faithful credence: yee and to cosidre, that I am he, before whom there
was neuer eny God, and that there shalbe none after me.
11 I am only the LORDE, and without me is there no Sauioure.
12 I geue warnynge, I make whole, I teach you, that there shulde be no straunge
God amonge you. And this recorde must ye beare me youre selues (saieth the
LORDE) that I am God.
13 And euen he am I from the begynnynge, and there is none, that can take eny
thinge out of my honde. And what I do, can no man chaunge.
14 Thus saieth the LORDE the holy one of Israel youre redemer: For youre sake I
will sende to Babilon, and bringe all the strongest of them from thence: Namely,
the Caldees that boost them of their shippes:
15 Euen I the LORDE youre holy one which haue made Israel, and am youre kinge.
16 Morouer, thus saieth the LORDE (Euen he that maketh a waye in the see, and a
footpath in the mightie waters:
17 which bringeth forth the charettes and horses, the hooste and the power, that
they maye fall a slepe and neuer ryse, and be extincte, like as tow is quenched.
18 Ye remembre not thinges of olde, and regarde nothinge that is past.
19 Therfore beholde, I shal make a new thinge, and shortly shall it apeare: Ye
shall well knowe it, I tolde it you afore, but I will tell it you agaane. I will
make stretes in the deserte, and ryuers of water in the wildernesse.
20 The wilde beastes shal worshippe me: the dragon, and the Estrich. For I shall
geue water in ye wildernesse, and streames in the deserte: that I maye geue
drike to my people, whom I chose.
21 This people haue I made for my self, and they shal shewe forth my prayse.
22 For thou (Iacob) woldest not call vpon me, but thou haddest an vnlust towarde
me, o Israel.
23 Thou gauest me not thy yonge beastes for burntoffringes, nether didest
honoure me with thy sacrifices. Thou boughtest me no deare spice with thi money,
nether pouredest the fat of thy sacrifices vpon me. Howbeit I haue not bene
chargeable vnto the in offriges, nether greuous in Incense.
24 But thou hast lade me with thy synnes, and weeried me with thy vngodlynes:
25 Where as I yet am euen he only, that for myne owne selfes sake do awaye thine
offences, & forget thy synnes: so that I wil neuer thinke vpon them.
26 Put me now in remembraunce (for we will reason together) & shewe what thou
hast for the, to make the quyte.
27 Thy first father offended sore, and thy rulers haue synned agaynst me
28 Therfore I ether suspended, or slewe the chefest prynces: I dyd curse Iacob,
and gaue Israel into reprofe.

Chapter 44

1 So heare now, o Iacob my seruaunt, and Israel whom I haue chose.
2 For thus saieth the LORDE, that made the, fashioned the, and helped the, euen
from thy mothers wombe: Be not afrayde (o Iacob my seruaunte,) thou rightuous,
whom I haue chosen.
3 For I shal poure water vpon the drie grounde, and ryuers vpon the thurstie. I
shal poure my sprete vpon thi sede, and myne encrease vpo thy stocke.
4 They shal growe together, like as the grasse, and as the Willies by the waters
side.
5 One will saye: I am the LORDES. Another wil call vnder the name of Iacob. The
thirde shal subscrybe with his honde vnto ye LORDE, and geue him self vnder the
name of Israel.
6 Morouer, thus hath the LORDE spoke: euen the kinge of Israel, and his avenger,
ye LORDE of hoostes: I am the first, and the last, and without me is there no
God.
7 For what is he, that euer was like me, which am from euerlastinge? Let him
shewe his name and do wherthorow he maye be lickened vnto me. Let him tell you
forth planely thiges, that are past and for to come:
8 yee and that without eny feare or stoppe. For haue not I euer tolde you hyther
to, & warned you? Ye can beare me recorde youre selues. Is there eny God excepte
me? or eny maker, that I shulde not knowe him?
9 Wherfore all caruers of Idols are but vayne, and their laboure lost. They must
beare recorde them selues, that (seinge they can nether se ner vnderstonde) they
shalbe confounded.
10 Who shulde now make a god, or fashio an Idol, that is profitable for
nothinge?
11 Beholde all the felashippe of the must be brought to confucion. Let all the
workmasters of them come and stonde together from amonge men: they must be
abashed and confouded one with another.
12 The smyth taketh yron, and tempreth it with hote coles, and fashioneth it
with hammers, & maketh it wt all the strength of his armes: Yee somtyme he is
faynt for very hunger, and so thurstie, that he hath no more power.
13 The carpenter (or ymage caruer) taketh me the tymbre, and spredeth forth his
lyne: he marketh it with some coloure: he playneth it, he ruleth it, ad squareth
it, and maketh it after the ymage of a man, and acordinge to the bewtie of a
man: that it maye stonde in the temple.
14 Morouer, he goeth out to hewe downe Cedre trees: He bringeth home Elmes and
okes, and other tymbre of the wodd. Or els the Fyrre trees which he planted
himself, ad soch as the rayne hath swelled,
15 which wodde serueth for me to burne. Of this he taketh and warmeth himself
withall: he maketh a fyre of it to bake bred. And after warde maketh a god there
of, to honoure it: and an Idol, to knele before it.
16 One pece he burneth in the fyre, with another he rosteth flesh, that he maye
eate roste his bely full: with the thirde he warmeth himself, and saieth: Aha: I
am well warmed, I haue bene at the fyre.
17 And of the residue, he maketh him a god, and an Idol for himself. He kneleth
before it, he worshippeth it, he prayeth vnto it, and sayeth: delyuer me, for
thou art my god.
18 Yet men nether considre ner vnderstonde, because their eyes are stopped, that
they can not se: and their hertes, that they cannot perceaue.
19 They pondre not in their myndes (for they haue nether knowlege ner
vnderstodinge) to thinke thus: I haue bret one pece in the fyre, I haue baked
bred wt ye coles there of, I haue rosted flesh withall, & eaten it: Shal I now
of the residue make an abhominacion, and fall downe before a rotten pece of
wodd?
20 The kepinge of dust, and folishnesse of herte hath turned them a syde: so
that none of them can haue a fre conscience to thinke: maye not I erre?
21 Cosidre this (o Iacob and Israel) for thou art my seruaut. I haue made the,
that thou mightest serue me. O Israel, forget me not.
22 As for thyne offences, I dryue them awaye like the cloudes, and thy synnes as
the myst. Turne ye agayne vnto me, & I will delyuer ye.
23 Be glad ye heauens, whom the LORDE hath made, let all yt is here beneth vpon
the earth, be ioyfull. Reioyse ye mountaynes & woddes, with all the trees that
are in you: for ye LORDE shal redeme Iacob, & shewe his glory vpon Israel.
24 For thus saieth the LORDE thy redemer, euen he that fashioned the from thy
mothers wombe: I am the LORDE, which do all thinges my self alone. I only haue
spred out the heauens, and I only haue layde the foundacion of the earth.
25 I destroye the tokens of witches, and make the Sothsayers go wronge. As for
the wise, I turne them bacward, and make their conninge folishnesse.
26 But I set vp the purpose of my seruauntes, and fulfil the councel of my
messaugers. I saye to Ierusale: turne agayne: And to the cities of Iuda, be ye
buylded agayne: and I repayre their decayed places.
27 I saye to the grounde: be drie. And I drie vp thy water floudes.
28 I saye to Cirus: thou art myne hyrd man, so that he shal fulfill all thinges
after my will. I saye to Ierusalem: be thou buylded, and to the teple: be thou
fast grounded.

Chapter 45

1 Thus saieth the LORDE vnto Cirus his anoynted, whom he ledeth by ye right
hode: that the people maye fall downe before him: I wil lowse the gyrdle of
kinges, yt they shal open the gates before thy face, and not to shut their
dores.
2 I wil go before the, and make the croked straight. I shal breake the brasen
dores, & burst the yron barres.
3 I shall geue the the hyd treasure, & the thinge which is secretly kepte: that
thou mayest knowe, yt I the God of Israel haue called the by thy name:
4 and that for Iacob my seruaunt sake, & for Israel my chosen. For I called the
by yi name, and ordened the, or euer thou knewest me:
5 Euen I the LORDE, before whom there is none other, for wt out me there is no
God I haue prepared the, or euer thou knewest me:
6 that it might be knowne from the risynge of the Sonne to the goinge downe of
the same, that all is nothinge without me. For I am the LORDE, & there is els
none.
7 It is I yt created the light and darcknes, I make peace and trouble: Yee euen
I the LORDE do all these thinges.
8 The heauens aboue shal droppe downe, and the cloudes shal rayne rightuousnes.
The earth shal open itself, and brynge forth health, and therby shal
rightuousnes florish. Euen I the LORDE shal bringe it to passe.
9 Wo be vnto him that chydeth wt his maker, the potsherde with the potter.
Saieth ye claye to the potter: What makest thou? or, yi worke serueth for
nothige?
10 Wo be vnto him, yt saieth to his father: why begettest thou? And to his
mother: why bearest thou?
11 Thus saieth the LORDE, euen the holy one & maker of Israel: Axe me of thinges
for to come, concernynge my sonnes: and put me in remebraunce, as touchinge the
workes of my hodes:
12 I haue made the earth, and created ma vpon it. With my hondes haue I spred
forth heauen, and geuen a commaundment for all the hooste therof.
13 I shal wake him vp with rightuousnesse, and ordre all his wayes. He shal
buylde my cite, & let out my prisoners: & that nether for gift nor rewardes,
saieth the LORDE of hoostes.
14 The LORDE hath sayde morouer: The occupiers of Egipte, the marchauntes of the
Moryans and Sabees, shal come vnto the with tribute, they shalbe thine, they
shal folowe the, and go with cheynes vpon their fete. They shal fall downe
before the, and make supplicacion vnto the. For God (wt out who there is none
other God) shal be with the.
15 O how profounde art thou o God, thou God & Sauioure of Israel?
16 Confounded be ye, and put to dishonoure: go hence together with shame, all ye
that be workmasters of erroure: (that is worshippers of Idols)
17 But Israel shalbe saued in the LORDE, which is the euerlastinge saluacio:
They shal not come to shame ner confucion, worlde without ende.
18 For thus sayeth the LORDE: euen he that created heauen, the God yt made the
earth, that fashioned it, and set it forth: I haue not made it for naught, but I
made it to be enhabited: Euen I the LORDE, without whom there is none other.
19 I haue not spoken secretly, nether in darcke places of the earth. It is not
for naught, that I sayde vnto the sede of Iacob: seke me. I am the LORDE, which
whe I speake, declare the thinge that is rightuous and true.
20 Let the be gathered & come together, let the drawe nye hyther, yt are escaped
of the people: Haue they eny vnderstondinge, that set vp the stockes of their
Idols, and praye vnto a god, that ca not helpe the?
21 Let men drawe nye, let them come hither, ad aske councel one at another, and
shewe forth: What is he, that tolde this before? or, who spake of it, euer sence
the begynnynge? Haue not I ye LORDE done it: without whom there is none other
God? the true God and sauioure, and there is els none but I?
22 And therfore turne you vnto me (all ye endes of the earth) so shal ye be
saued, for I am God, & there is els none.
23 I sweare by myself: out of my mouth cometh ye worde of rightuousnesse, and
that maye no man turne: but all knees shal bowe vnto me, and all tunges shal
sweare by me,
24 sayenge: Verely in the LORDE is my rightuousnes and strength. To him shal me
come: but all they that thinke scorne of him, shalbe confounded.
25 And the whole sede of Israel shalbe iustified, & praysed in ye LORDE

Chapter 46

1 Neuertheles Bel shal fall, & Nabo shalbe broken: whose ymages are a burthe for
the beastes and catell, to ouerlade the, and to make them weery.
2 They shal syncke downe, and fall together: for they maye not ease them of
their burthen, therfore must they go in to captiuyte.
3 Herken vnto me, o house of Iacob, and all ye that remayne yet of the housholde
of Israel: whom I haue borne from youre mothers wombe, and brought you vp from
yor byrth, till ye were growen:
4 I I which shall beare you vnto youre last age: I haue made you, I will also
norish you, beare you and saue you.
5 Whom will ye make me like, in fashion or ymage, that I maye be like him?
6 Ye fooles (no doute) wil take out syluer and golde out of youre purses, and
weye it, and hyre a goldsmyth to make a god of it, that men maye knele downe and
worshipe it.
7 Yet must he be taken on mens shulders and borne, and set in his place, that he
maye stonde and not moue. Alas that men shulde crie vnto him, which geueth no
answere: and delyuereth not the man that calleth vpon him, from his trouble.
8 Considre this well, and be ashamed, Go in to youre owne selues (O ye
runnagates).
9 Remembre the thinges which are past, sence the begynnynge of the worlde: that
I am God, and that there is els no God, yee and yt there is nothinge like vnto
me.
10 In the begynnynge of a thinge, I shewe the ende therof: and I tel before,
thinges that are not yet come to passe. With one worde is my deuyce
accomplished, & fulfilleth all my pleasure.
11 I call a byrde out of the east, and all that I take in honde, out of farre
countrees. As soone as I commaunde, I bringe it hither: as soone as I thinke to
deuyse a thinge, I do it.
12 Heare me, o ye that are of an hie stomack, but farre from rightuousnesse.
13 I shal bringe forth my rightuousnesse, It is not farre, and my health shal
not tarie longe awaye. I wil laye health in Sio, and geue Israel my glory.

Chapter 47

1 But as for the (O doughter, thou virgin Babilon) thou shalt syt in the dust.
Thou shalt syt vpon the groude, and not in a trone (o thou mayden of Chaldea).
Thou shalt nomore be called tender, and pleasaut.
2 Thou shalt bringe forth the querne, & grynede meel, put downe thy stomacher,
make bare thy knees, and shalt wade thorow the water ryuers.
3 Thy shame shalbe discouered, ad thy preuyties shal be sene. For I wil auenge
me of the, and no man shal let me:
4 saieth oure redemer, which is called the LORDE of hoostes, the holy one of
Israel.
5 Syt still, holde thy tunge, and get the in to some darcke corner (O doughter
Caldea) for thou shalt nomore be called lady of kyngdomes.
6 I was so wroth with my people, yt I punyshed myne enheritaunce, and gaue them
in to thy power. Neuertheles, thou shewdest them no mercy, but euen the very
aged men of the, didest thou oppresse right sore with thy yock,
7 & thou thoughtest thus: I shalbe lady for euer. And besyde all that, thou hast
not regarded these thinges, nether cast, what shulde come after.
8 Heare now therfore, thou wilful, that syttest so carelesse, & speakest thus in
thine herte: I am alone, and without me is there none: I shal neuer be wydow,
ner desolate agayne.
9 And yet both these thiges shal come to the vpo one daye in the twincklinge of
an eye: Namely, wyddowhead, and desolacion. They shal mightely fall vpon the,
for ye multitude of thy witches, and for the greate heape of thy coniurers.
10 For thou hast conforted thy self in thy disceatfulnes, and hast sayde: No ma
seith me. Thyne owne wisdome & connynge haue disceaued the, In that thou hast
sayde: I am alone, and without me there is none.
11 Therfore shal trouble come vpo ye, & thou shalt not knowe, from whece it shal
arise. Myschefe shal fall vpo ye, which thou shalt not be able to put of. A
sodane misery shal come vpon the, or euer thou be awarre.
12 Now go to thy coniurers, and to the multitude of thy witches, (whom thou hast
bene acquanted withal from thi youth) yf they maye helpe the, or strengthe the.
13 Thou hast hither to had many councels of them, so let the heauengasers & the
beholders of starres, come on now and delyuer the: yee and let the shewe, when
these new thinges shall come vpon the.
14 Beholde, they shalbe like strawe, which yf it be kindled with fyre, no man
maye rydde it for the vehemence of the flame: And yet it geueth no zynders to
warme a ma by, ner cleare fyre to syt by.
15 Euen so shal they be vnto the, whom thou hast vsed & occupide from thy youth.
Euery one shal shewe ye his erroneous waye, yet shall none of them defende the.

Chapter 48

1 Heare this, O thou house of Iacob: ye yt are called by the name of Israel, and
are come out of one stocke wt Iuda: which sweare by the name of the LORDE, and
beare witnesse by the God of Israel (but not wt treuth and right)
2 which are called fre men of the holy citie, as they that loke for conforth in
the God of Israel, whose name is the LORDE of hoostes.
3 The thinges that I shewed you euer sence the begynnynge: Haue I not brought
the to passe, immediatly as they came out of my mouth, and declared them? And
they are come?
4 Howbeit I knewe that thou art obstinate, and that thy neck hath an yron vane,
and that thy brow is of brasse.
5 Neuertheles I haue euer sence the begynnynge shewed the of thinges for to
come, and declared the vnto the, or euer they came to passe: that thou shuldest
not saye: myne Idol hath done it, my carued or cast ymage hath shewed it.
6 Heare & considre all these thinges, whether it was ye that prophecied the: But
as for me, I tolde the before at the begynnynge, new & secrete thinges, yt thou
knewest not of:
7 And some done now not of olde time, wherof thou neuer herdest, before they
were brought to passe: that thou canst not saye: I knewe of them.
8 Morouer there be some wherof thou hast nether herde ner knowne, nether haue
they bene opened vnto thine eares afore tyme. For I knew that thou woldest
maliciousli offende, therfore haue I called the a transgressoure, euen from thy
mothers wombe.
9 Neuertheles for my names sake, I haue withdrawen my wrath, and for myne
honours sake I haue ouersene the, so that I haue not rooted the out.
10 Beholde I haue pourged the, and not for moneye. I haue chosen the in the fyre
of pouerte,
11 And that only for myne owne sake, for I geue myne Honoure to none other, that
thou shuldest not despise me.
12 Herken vnto me o Iacob, & Israel who I haue called. I am euen he that is, I
am ye first and the last.
13 My honde is the foundacion of the earth, & my right honde spanneth ouer the
heauens. As soone as I called the they were there.
14 Gather you all together, ad herken: Which of yonder goddes hath declared
this, that the LORDE wil do by the kinge of Babilon, (whom he loueth &
fauoureth) and by the Caldees his arme?
15 I my self alone haue tolde you this before. Yee I shal call him and bringe
him forth, & geue him a prosperous iourneye.
16 Come nye & heare this: haue I spoke eny thige darckly sence the begynnynge?
whe a thige begynneth, I am there. Wherfore the LORDE God with his sprete hath
sent me,
17 And thus saieth the LORDE thine avenger, the holyone of Israel: I am ye LORDE
thy God, which teach the profitable thinges, and lede ye the waye, that thou
shuldest go
18 Yf thou wilt now regarde my comaundement, thy welthynes shalbe as the water
streame: & thy rightuousnes as the wawes flowinge in the see.
19 Thy sede shalbe like as the sonde in the see, & the frute of thy body, like
the grauel stones therof: Thy name shal not be roted out, nor destroyed before
me.
20 Ye shal go awaye from Babilon, and escape the Caldees with a mery voyce. This
shalbe spoken of, declared abrode, & go forth vnto the ende of the worlde: so
that it shalbe sayde: The LORDE hath defended his seruaunte Iacob,
21 that they suffred no thurste, whe they trauayled in the wildernesse. He claue
the rockes a sonder, and the water gusshed out.
22 As for the vngodly, they haue no peace, saieth the LORDE.

Chapter 49

1 Herken vnto me, ye Iles, and take hede ye people from farre: The LORDE hath
called me fro my byrth, and made mecion of my name fro my mothers wobe:
2 he hath made my mouth like a sharpe swerde, vnder ye shadowe of his honde hath
he defended me, and hyd me in his quyuer, as a good arowe,
3 and sayde vnto me: Thou art my seruaunt Israel, I wilbe honoured in the.
4 Then answerde I: I shal lese my laboure, I shal spende my strength in vayne.
Neuertheles, I wil commytte my cause and my worke vnto the LORDE my God.
5 And now saieth the LORDE (eue he that fashioned me fro my mothers wombe to be
his seruaute, that I maye bringe Iacob agayne vnto him: howbeit, Israel will not
be gathered vnto hi agayne. In whose sight I am greate, which also is my LORDE,
my God and my stregth)
6 Let it be but a smal thinge, that thou art my seruaunt, to set vp the
kinreddes of Iacob, & to restore the destructio of Israel: yf I make the not
also the light of the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my health vnto the ende of
the worlde.
7 Morouer thus saieth the LORDE the aveger and holy one of Israel, because of
the abhorringe and despisinge amonge the Gentiles, concernynge the seruaunt of
all them yt beare rule: Kynges and prynces shal se, and arise and worshipe,
because of the LORDE that he is faithfull: and because of the holy one of
Israel, which hath chosen the.
8 And thus saieth the LORDE: In the tyme apoynted wil I be present with the. And
in the houre of health wil I helpe the, & delyuer the. I wil make the a pledge
for ye people, so yt thou shalt helpe vp the earth agayne, and chalenge agayne
the scatred heretages:
9 That thou mayest saye to ye presoners: go forth, & to them that are in
darknesse: come in to the light, that they maye fede in the hie wayes, & get
their lyuynge in all places.
10 There shal nether hunger ner thurste, heate nor Sonne hurte them. For he that
fauoureth them, shal lede them, and geue them drike of the springe welles.
11 I will make wayes vpon all my mountaynes, and my fote pathes shalbe exalted.
12 And beholde, they shal come from farre: lo, some from the north and west,
some from the south.
13 Reioyse ye heauens, and synge prayses thou earth: Talke of ioye ye hilles,
for God wil coforte his people, & haue mercy vpon his, yt be in trouble.
14 Then shal Sion saye: God hath forsaken me, and the LORDE hath forgotte me.
15 Doth a wife forget the childe of hir wombe, ad the sonne who she hath borne?
And though she do forget, yet wil not I forget the.
16 Beholde, I haue written the vp vpon my hondes, thy walles are euer in my
sight.
17 They that haue broken the downe, shal make haist to buylde the vp agayne: and
they that made the waist, shal dwell in the.
18 Lift vp thine eyes, and loke aboute the: all these shal gather them together,
and come to the. As truly as I lyue (saieth the LORDE) thou shalt put them all
vpo the, as an apparell, and gyrde the to the, as a bryde doth hir Iewels.
19 As for thy londe that lieth desolate, waisted & destroyed: it shalbe to narow
for the, that shal dwell in it. And they yt wolde deuoure the, shalbe farre
awaye.
20 Then the childe who ye bare shall bringe forth vnto ye, shal saye in thine
eare: this place is to narow, syt nye together, yt I maye haue rowme.
21 Then shalt thou thinke by thy self: Who hath begotte me these? seinge I am
bare & aloe, a captyue & an outcast? And who hath norished the vp for me? I am
desolate & alone, but fro whece come these?
22 And therfore thus saieth the LORDE God: Beholde, I will stretch out myne
honde to the Gentiles, and set vp my token to the people. They shal bringe the
thy sonnes in their lappes, & carie thy doughters vnto ye vpon their shulders.
23 For kinges shalbe thy noursinge fathers, and Quenes shalbe thy noursinge
mothers. They shal fall before the wt their faces flat vpon the earth, and lick
vp the dust of thy fete: that thou mayest knowe, how that I am the LORDE. And
who so putteth his trust in me, shal not be confounded.
24 Who spoyleth the giaunte of his pray? or who taketh the presoner from the
mightie?
25 And therfore thus saieth the LORDE: The prisoners shalbe taken from the
giaunte, and the spoyle delyuered from the violete: for I wil maynteyne thy
cause agaynst thine aduersaries, and saue thy sonnes.
26 And wil fede thine enemies with their owne fleshe, and make the drinke of
their owne bloude, as of swete wyne. And all flesh shal knowe (o Iacob) that I
am the LORDE thy Sauioure, and stronge auenger.

Chapter 50

1 Thus saieth the LORDE: Where is the bill of yor mothers deuorcemet, that I
sent vnto her? or who is the vsurer, to who I solde you? Beholde, for youre owne
offeces are ye solde: & because of youre transgression, is youre mother forsake.
2 For why wolde no ma receaue me, when I came? & when I called, no man gaue me
answere. Was my hode clene smyte of, that it might not helpe? or, had I not
power to delyuer? lo, at a worde I drike vp the see, & of water floudes I make
drie lode: so yt for want of water, the fish corruppe, and die of thurst.
3 As for heauen, I clooth it with darcknesse, and put a sack vpon it.
4 The LORDE God hath geue me a wel lerned tuge, so that I can conforte them
which are troubled, yee & yt in due season. He waked myne eare vp by tymes in ye
mornynge (as ye scolemasters do) yt I might herke.
5 The LORDE God hath opened myne eare, therfore ca I not saye naye, ner wt drawe
myself,
6 but I offre my backe vnto ye smyters, and my chees to the nyppers. I turne not
my face fro shame ad spittinge,
7 for the LORDE God helpeth me, therfore shal I not be cofounded. I haue
hardened my face like a flynt stone, for I am sure, that I shal not come to
confucion.
8 Myne aduocate speaketh for me, who wil then go with me to lawe? Let vs stode
one agaynst another: yf there be eny that wil reason with me, let him come here
forth to me.
9 Beholde, the LORDE God stondeth by me, what is he that can condempne me? lo,
they shalbe all like as an olde cloth, which ye mothes shal eate vp.
10 Therfore who so feareth the LORDE amoge you, let him heare the voyce of his
seruaut. Who so walketh in darcknesse, & no light shyneth vpo him, let him hope
in the LORDE, and holde him by his God.
11 But take hede, ye haue all kyndled a fyre, and gyrded youre selues with the
flame: Ye walke in the glistrige of youre owne fyre, and in the flame that ye
haue kyndled. This cometh vnto you fro my honde, namely, yt ye shal slepe in
sorowe.

Chapter 51

1 Herken vnto me, ye that holde of rightuousnes, ye that seke the LORDE. Take
hede vnto the stone, wherout ye are hewen, and to the graue wherout ye are
digged.
2 Considre Abraham youre father, & Sara that bare you: how that I called him
alone, prospered him wel, & encreased him:
3 how the LORDE conforted Sio, and repayred all hir decaye: makinge hir deserte
as a Paradise, and hir wildernesse as the garden of the LORDE. Myrth and ioye
was there, thankesgeuynge and ye voyce of prayse.
4 Haue respecte vnto me then (o my people) and laye thine eare to me: for a
lawe, and an ordinaunce shal go forth fro me, to lighten the Gentiles.
5 It is hard by, that my health & my rightuousnesse shal go forth, and the
people shalbe ordred with myne arme. The Ilondes (that is ye Gentiles) shal hope
in me, and put their trust in myne arme.
6 Lift vp youre eyes toward heaue, and loke vpon the earth beneth. For the
heauens shal vanish awaye like smoke, and the earth shall teare like a clothe, &
they that dwel therin, shal perish in like maner. But my health endureth for
euer, and my rightuousnes shall not ceasse.
7 Therfore hercken vnto me, ye yt haue pleasure in rightuousnes, thou people
that bearest my lawe in thine herte. Feare not the curse of men, be not afrayde
of their blasphemies & reuylinges:
8 for wormes & mothes shal eat the vp like clothe & woll. But my rightuousnesse
shal endure for euer, & my sauynge health from generacion to generacion.
9 Wake vp, wake vp, & be stronge: O thou arme of the LORDE: wake vp, lyke as in
tymes past, euer and sence the worlde beganne.
10 Art not thou he, that hast wounded that proude lucifer, and hewen the dragon
in peces? Art not thou euen he, which hast dried vp the depe of the see, which
hast made playne the see grounde, that the delyuered might go thorow?
11 That the redemed of the LORDE, which turned agayne, might come with ioye vnto
Sio, there to endure for euer? That myrth and gladnesse might be with them: that
sorowe & wo might fle from the?
12 Yee I, I am eue he, that in all thiges geueth you consolacion. What art thou
then, that fearest a mortall ma, ye childe of man, which goeth awaye as doeth
the floure?
13 And forgettest the LORDE that made the, that spred out the heauens, and layde
the foundacion of the earth. But thou art euer afrayde for the sight of thyne
oppressoure, which is ready to do harme: Where is the wrath of the oppressoure?
14 It cometh on fast, it maketh haist to apeare: It shal not perish, yt it
shulde not be able to destroye, nether shal it fayle for faute of norishinge.
15 I am the LORDE yi God, that make the see to be still, and to rage: whose name
is the LORDE of hoostes.
16 I shal put my worde also in thy mouth, and defende the with the turnynge of
my honde: that thou mayest plante the heauens, and laye the foundacions of the
earth, and saye vnto Sion: thou art my people.
17 Awake, Awake, and stonde vp o Ierusalem, thou that from the honde of the
LORDE, hast dronke out the cuppe of his wrath: thou that hast supped of, and
sucked out the slombringe cuppe to the botome.
18 For amonge all the sonnes whom thou hast begotten, there is not one that maye
holde the vp: and not one to lede the by the honde, of all the sonnes that thou
hast norished.
19 Both these thinges are happened vnto the, but who is sory for it? Yee,
destruction, waistinge, hunger & swerde: but who hath conforted the?
20 Thy sonnes lie comfortles at ye heade of euery strete like a take venyson, &
are ful of ye terrible wrath of ye LORDE, & punyshmet of thy God.
21 And therfore thou miserable & dronke (howbe it not wt wyne) Heare this:
22 Thus saieth thy LORDE: thy LORDE & God, ye defender of his people: Beholde, I
wil take ye slobrige cuppe out of thy hode, eue ye cuppe wt the dregges of my
wrath: yt fro hence forth thou shalt neuer drinke it more,
23 & wil put it i their hode that trouble the: which haue spoken to thy soule:
stoupe downe, that we maye go ouer the: make thy body eaue with the grounde, and
as the strete to go vpon.

Chapter 52

1 Vp Sion vp, take thy strength vnto the: put on thine honest rayment o
Ierusale, thou citie of the holy one. For from this tyme forth, there shal no
vncircumcised ner vncleane person come in the.
2 Shake the fro the dust, arise & stonde vp, o Ierusale. Pluck out thy neck from
the bode, o thou captyue doughter Sion.
3 For thus saieth the LORDE: Ye are solde for naught, therfore shal ye be
redemed also without eny money.
4 For thus hath the LORDE sayde: My people wete downe afore tyme in to Egipte,
there to be straungers. Afterwarde dyd the kinge of the Assirians oppresse the,
for naught.
5 And now what profit is it to me (saieth ye LORDE) yt my people is frely caried
awaye, & brought in to heuynes by their rulers, and my name euer still
blasphemed? saieth the LORDE.
6 But yt my people maye knowe my name, I my self will speake in that daye.
Beholde, here am I.
7 O how bewtiful are the fete of the Embassitoure, yt bringeth the message fro
the mountayne, & proclameth peace: yt brigeth the good tydinges, & preacheth
health, & saieth vnto Sion: Thy God is the kinge.
8 Thy watchme shal lift vp their voyce, wt loude voyce shal they preach of him:
for they shal se him present, whe the LORDE shal come agayne to Sion.
9 Be glad, o thou desolate Ierusale, & reioyse together: for the LORDE will
coforte his people, he wil delyuer Ierusale.
10 The LORDE wil make bare his holy arme, & shewe it forth in the sight of all
the Getiles, & all the endes of the earth shal se the sauynge health of oure
God.
11 Awaye, Awaye, get you out fro thence, & touch no vncleane thinge. Go out from
amonge soch, And be cleane, ye that beare the vessell of the LORDE.
12 But ye shal not go out with sedicio, ner make haist as they that fle awaye:
for the LORDE shal go before you, ad the God of Israel shal kepe the watch.
13 Beholde, my seruaunt shal deale wysely, therfore shal he be magnified,
exalted & greatly honoured.
14 Like as ye multitude shal wodre vpon him, because his face shalbe so deformed
& not as a mans face, & his bewtie like no man:
15 Euen so shal the multitude of the Getiles loke vnto him, & ye kinges shal
shut their mouthes before him. For they yt haue not bene tolde of him, shal se
him: and they yt herde nothinge of him, shal beholde him.

Chapter 53

1 Bvt who geueth credence vnto oure preachinge? Or to who is the arme of the
LORDE knowne?
2 He shal growe before the LORDE like as a brauch, & as a rote in a drie
grounde. He shal haue nether bewty ner fauoure. When we loke vpon him, there
shalbe no fayrnesse: we shal haue no lust vnto him.
3 He shalbe the most symple & despised of all, which yet hath good experience of
sorowes & infirmities. We shal reken him so symple & so vyle, that we shal hyde
oure faces fro him.
4 Howbeit (of a treuth) he only taketh awaye oure infirmite, & beareth oure
payne: Yet we shal iudge him, as though he were plaged and cast downe of God:
5 where as he (not withstodinge) shal be wouded for oure offences, & smytten for
oure wickednes. For the payne of or punyshmet shalbe layde vpo him, & wt his
stripes shal we be healed.
6 As for vs, we go all astraye (like shepe), euery one turneth his owne waye.
But thorow him, the LORDE pardoneth all or synnes.
7 He shal be payned & troubled, ad shal not ope his mouth. He shalbe led as a
shepe to be slayne, yet shal he be as still as a lambe before the shearer, & not
open his mouth.
8 He shal be had awaye, his cause not herde, & wtout eny iudgment: Whose
generacion yet no man maye nombre, when he shalbe cut of fro the grounde of the
lyvinge: Which punyshment shal go vpon him, for the transgression of my people.
9 His graue shalbe geue him with the codemned, & his crucifienge with the
theues, Where as he dyd neuer violence ner vnright, nether hath there bene eny
disceatfulnesse in his mouth.
10 Yet hath it pleased ye LORDE to smyte him with infirmite, that when he had
made his soule an offeringe for synne, he might se a loge lastinge sede. And
this device of the LORDE shal prospere in his honde.
11 With trauayle and laboure of his soule, shal he optayne greate riches. My
rightuous seruaunt shall with his wisdome iustifie & delyuer the multitude, for
he shal beare awaye their synnes.
12 Therfore wil I geue him the multitude for his parte, & he shal deuyde the
stroge spoyle because he shal geue ouer his soule to death, & shalbe rekened
amonge the transgressours, which neuertheles shal take awaye ye synnes of the
multitude, and make intercession for the my?doers.

Chapter 54

1 Therfore be glad now, thou bare that bearest not. Reioyce, synge & be mery,
thou yt art not with childe: For the desolate hath moo children, then the maried
wife, saieth the LORDE.
2 Make thy tente wyder, & sprede out the hanginges of thine habitacio: spare
not, laye forth thy coardes, and make fast thy stakes:
3 for thou shalt breake out on the right syde and on the left, & thy sede shal
haue ye Getiles in possession, ad dwel in the desolate cities.
4 Feare not, for thou shalt not be confouded: Be not ashamed, for thou shalt not
come to confucion. Yee thou shalt forget the shame off thy youth, and shalt not
remembre the dishonoure of thy wedowheade.
5 For he that made the, shalbe thy LORDE & husbonde (whose name is the LORDE of
hoostes) & thine avenger shalbe euen the holy one off Israel, the LORDE of the
whole worlde.
6 For the LORDE shal call the, beinge as a desolate soroufull woman, and as a
yonge wife that hath broken hir wedlocke: saieth thy God.
7 A litle while haue I forsaken the, but wt greate mercifulnes shal I take the
vp vnto me.
8 Whe I was angrie, I hid my face from the for a litle season, but thorow
euerlastinge goodnesse shal I pardon the, saieth the LORDE thine avenger.
9 And this must be vnto me, as the water of Noe: For like as I haue sworne yt I
wil not bringe the water off Noe eny more vpo the worlde: So haue I sworne, yt I
wil neuer be angrie wt the, ner reproue the:
10 The mountaynes shall remoue, & the hilles shal fall downe: but my louynge
kyndnesse shal not moue, and the bonde off my peace shal not fall downe fro ye,
saieth ye LORDE thy merciful louer.
11 Beholde, thou poore, vexed & despised: I wil make thy walles of precious
stones, & yi foundacio of Saphires,
12 thy wyndowes off Cristall, thi gates of fyne cleare stone, & yi borders of
pleasaut stones.
13 Thy childre shal all be taught of God, & I wil geue the plenteousnes of
peace.
14 In rightuousnes shalt thou be grounded, & be farre fro oppression: for the
which thou nedest not be afrayed, nether for hynderauce, for it shal not come
nye the.
15 Beholde, ye aleaunt yt was farre fro the, shal dwell wt the: & he yt was
somtyne a straunger vnto the, shalbe ioyned wt the:
16 Beholde, I make the smyth yt bloweth the coles in the fyre, & he maketh a
weapon after his hondy worke. I make also the waister to destroye:
17 but all the weapens yt are made agaynst the, shal not prospere. And as for
all tunges, yt shal resiste the in iudgmet, thou shalt ouercome the, & codemne
them. This is the heretage of the LORDES seruauntes, & the rightuousnes that
they shal haue of me, saieth the LORDE.

Chapter 55

1 Come to the waters all ye, yt be thurstie, & ye that haue no moneye. Come,
bye, that ye maye haue to eate. Come, bye wyne & mylck, without eny money, or
moneye worth,
2 Wherfore do ye laye out yor moneye, for the thinge yt fedeth not, and spende
youre laboure aboute the thinge that satisfieth you not? But herke rather vnto
me, ad ye shal eate of the best, & youre soule shal haue hir pleasure in
pleteousnes.
3 Enclyne youre eares, & come vnto me, take hede & youre soule shal lyue. For I
will make an euerlastinge couenaunt with you, eue the sure mercies of Dauid.
4 Beholde, I shal geue him for a witnesse amoge ye folke, for a prynce &
captayne vnto the people.
5 Lo, thou shalt call an vnknowne people: & a people that had no knowlege of
the, shall runne vnto the: because off the LORDE thy God, ye holy one of Israel,
which glorifieth the.
6 Seke the LORDE while he maye be founde, call vpo him while he is nye.
7 Let the vngodly man forsake his wayes, ad the vnrightuous his ymaginacios, &
turne agayne vnto the LORDE, so shal he be merciful vnto him: and to oure God,
for he is redy to forgeue.
8 For thus saieth the LORDE: My thoughtes are not youre thoughtes, & youre wayes
are not my wayes:
9 But as farre as the heauens are hyer then the earth, so farre do my waies
exceade yours, & my thoughtes yours
10 And like as the rayne & snowe cometh downe from heaue, & returneth not
thither agayne, but watereth the earth, maketh it frutefull & grene, that it
maye geue corne & breade vnto the sower:
11 So the worde also that commeth out of my mouth, shal not turne agayne voyde
vnto me, but shal accoplish my wil & prospere in the thinge, wherto I sende it.
12 And so shal ye go forth wt ioye, & be led with peace. The mountaynes and
hilles shal synge with you for ioye, and all the trees of the felde shal clappe
their hondes.
13 For thornes, there shal growe Fyrre trees, & ye Myrte tre in the steade of
breres. And this shal be done to the prayse of the LORDE, & for an euerlastinge
toke, that shal not be taken awaye.

Chapter 56

1 Thus saieth ye LORDE: Kepe equite, and do right, for my sauynge health shal
come shortly, & my rightuosnes shalbe opened.
2 Blissed is the man yt doth this, & the mans childe which kepeth the same. He
that taketh hede, yt he vnhalowe not the Sabbath (that is) he that kepeth
himself that he do no euel.
3 Then shal not the straunger, which cleaueth to the LORDE, saye: Alas the LORDE
hath shut me cleane out from his people. Nether shal the gelded man saye: lo, I
am a drie tre.
4 For thus saieth the LORDE, first vnto the gelded yt kepeth my Sabbath: Namely:
that holdeth greatly of the thinge that pleaseth me, and kepeth my couenaut:
5 Vnto them wil I geue in my housholde and with in my walles, a better heretage
& name: the yf they had bene called sonnes & daughters. I wil geue them an
euerlastinge name, that shall not perishe.
6 Agayne, he saieth vnto the straugers that are disposed to sticke to the LORDE,
to serue him, & to loue his name: That they shalbe no bode me. And all they,
which kepe the selues, that they vnhalowe not the Sabbath, namely: that they
fulfill my couenaut:
7 Them wil I bringe to my holy moutayne, & make the ioyfull in my house of
prayer. Their burntoffringes and sacrifices shalbe accepted vpo myne aulter. for
my house shalbe an house of prayer for all people.
8 Thus saieth the LORDE God which gathereth together the scatred of Israel: I
wil bringe yet another cogregacion to him.
9 All the beastes of the felde, & all the beastes of ye wod, shal come to
deuoure hi.
10 For his watchmen are all blinde, they haue alltogether no vnderstondinge,
they are all domme dogges, not beinge able to barcke, they are slepery: slogish
are they, & lie snortinge:
11 they are shamelesse dogges, yt be neuer sati?fied. The sheperdes also in like
maner haue no vnderstondinge, but euery man turneth his owne waye, euery one
after his owne couetousnes, wt all his power.
12 Come (saye they) I wil fetch wyne, so shal we fyll oure selues, that we maye
be dronken. And do tomorow, like as to daye, yee and moch more.

Chapter 57

1 Bvt in the meane season ye righteous perisheth, & no ma regardeth it in his
hert. Good godly people are taken awaye. & no ma cosidreth it. Namely: that the
righteous is conuayed awaye thorow ye wicked:
2 that he himself might be in rest, lie quietly vpon his bed, & lyue after his
owne pleasure.
3 Come hither therfore ye charmers children, ye sonnes of the aduoutrer & the
whore:
4 Wherin take ye youre pleasure? Vpo whom gape ye with yor mouth, & bleare out
yor tonge? Are ye not childre of aduoutry, & a sede of dissimulaicon?
5 Ye take youre pleasure vnder the okes, & vnder all grene trees, the childe
beynge slayne in the valleys, & dennes of stone.
6 Thy parte shalbe with the stony rockes by the ryuer: Yee euen these shal be
thy parte. For there thou hast poured meat and drynkoffringes vnto the. Shulde I
ouersee that?
7 Thou hast made thy bed vpon hie mountaynes, thou wentest vp thither, and there
hast thou slayne sacrifices.
8 Behynde the dores & postes, hast thou set vp thy remembraunce? When thou
haddest discouered thyself to another then me, when thou wetest downe, & made
thy bed wyder (that is) when thou didest carue the certayne of yonder Idols, &
louedest their couches, where thou sawest the:
9 Thou wentest straight to kinges with oyle & dyuerse oyntmentes (that is) thou
hast sent thy messaungers farre of, and yet art thou fallen in to the pyt
therby.
10 Thou hast had trouble for ye multitude of thyne owne wayes, yet saydest thou
neuer: I wil leaue of. Thou thinkest to haue life (or health) of thy self, and
therfore thou beleuest not that thou art sick.
11 For when wilt thou be aba?shed or feare, seinge thou hast broken thy promyse,
& remembrest not me, nether hast me in thine hert? Thinkest thou, that I also
will holde my peace (as afore tyme) yt thou fearest me not?
12 Yee verely I wil declare yi goodnes & yi workes, but they shal not profit ye.
13 whe thou criest, let yi chosen heape delyuer the. But the wynde shal take
them all awaye, & cary the in to ye ayre. Neuertheles, they yt put their trust
in me, shal inheret the londe, and haue my holy hill in possession.
14 And therfore thus he saieth: Make redy, make redy, and clense ye strete, take
vp what ye can out of the waye, that ledeth to my people.
15 For thus saieth the hie and excellet, euen he that dwelleth in
euerlastingnesse, whose name is the holyone: I dwel hie aboue and in the
sanctuary, & with him also, yt is of a cotrite and huble sprete: yt I maye heale
a troubled mynde, and a cotrite herte.
16 For I chide not euer, & am not wroth wt out ende. But ye blastinge goeth fro
me, though I make the breath.
17 I am wroth wt hi for his couetousnes & lust, I smyte him, I hyde me, and am
angrie, whe he turneth himself, and foloweth ye bywaye of his owne hert.
18 But yf I maye se his right waye agayne, I make him whole, I lede him, and
restore him vnto them whom he maketh ioyful, & that were sory for him.
19 I make the frutes of thakesgeuinge. I geue peace vnto them that are farre of,
and to them that are nye, saye I the LORDE, that make him whole.
20 But the wicked are like the raginge see, that ca not rest, whose water fometh
with the myre & grauel.
21 Eueso ye wicked haue no peace, saieth my God.

Chapter 58

1 And therfore crie now, as loude as thou canst. Leaue not of, lift vp thy voyce
like a tropet, and shewe my people their offences, and ye house of Iacob their
synnes.
2 For they seke me dalye, and wil knowe my wayes, euen as it were a people that
dyd right, and had not forsaken the statutes of their God. They argue with me
concernynge right iudgment, and wil pleate at the lawe with their God.
3 Wherfore fast we (saye they) and thou seist it not? we put oure liues to
straitnesse, and thou regardest it not?
4 Beholde, when ye fast, youre lust remayneth still: for ye do no lesse violence
to youre detters: lo, ye fast to strife and debate, and to smyte him with youre
fist, that speaketh vnto you. Ye fast not (as somtyme) that youre voyce might be
herde aboue.
5 Thynke ye this fast pleaseth me, that a ma shulde chasten himself for a daye,
and to wryth his heade aboute like an hoke in an hairy cloth, & to lye vpon the
earth? Shulde that be called fastinge, or a daye yt pleaseth ye LORDE?
6 But this fastinge pleaseth not me, till ye tyme be thou lowse him out of
bondage, that is in thy daunger: that thou breake the ooth of wicked bargaynes,
that thou let the oppressed go fre, and take from them all maner of burthens.
7 It pleaseth not me, till thou deale thy bred to the hongrie, & brynge the
poore fatherlesse home in to thy house, when thou seist the naked that thou
couer him, and hyde not thy face fro thine owne flesh.
8 Then shal thy light breake forth as ye mornynge, and thy health florish right
shortly: thy rightuousnesse shal go before the, and ye glory of the LORDE shal
embrace the.
9 Then yf thou callest, the LORDE shal answere the: yf thou criest, he shal
saye: here I am. Yee yf thou layest awaye thy burthens, and holdest thy fyngers,
and ceasest from blasphemous talkinge,
10 yf thou hast compassion vpon the hongrie, and refre?shest ye troubled soule:
Then shal thy light springe out in the darknesse, and thy darknesse shalbe as
the noone daye.
11 The LORDE shal euer be thy gyde, and satisfie the desyre of thine hert, and
fyl yi bones with marry. Thou shalt be like a freshwatred garden, and like the
founteyne of water, that neuer leaueth runnynge.
12 Then the places that haue euer bene waist, shalbe buylded of the: there shalt
thou laye a foundacion for many kynreds. Thou shalt be called the maker vp of
hedges, and ye buylder agayne of ye waye of the Sabbath.
13 Yee yf thou turne thy fete from the Sabbath, so that thou do not the thinge
which pleaseth thyself in my holy daye: then shalt thou be called vnto the
pleasaunt, holy & glorious Sabbath of the LORDE, where thou shalt be in honor:
so yt thou do not after thine owne ymaginacion, nether seke thine owne wil, ner
speake thine owne wordes.
14 The shalt thou haue yi pleasure in ye LORDE, which shal carie ye hie aboue ye
earth, & fede the wt the heretage of Iacob thy father: for the LORDES owne mouth
hath so promised.

Chapter 59

1 Beholde the LORDES honde is not so shortened yt it can not helpe, nether is
his eare so stopped yt it maye not heare.
2 But yor my?dedes haue separated you from yor God, & yor synnes hyde his face
from you, yt he heareth you not.
3 For yor hondes are defyled with bloude, and yor fyngers wt vnrighteousnesse:
Yor lippes speake lesynges, & yor tonge setteth out wickednes.
4 No man regardeth righteousnes, & no ma iudgeth truly Euery man hopeth in vayne
thinges, and ymagineth disceate, coceaueth weerynesse, & bringeth forth euell.
5 They brede cockatrice egges, & weeue ye spyders webb. Who so eateth of their
egges, dieth. But yf one treade vpon the, there cometh vp a serpent.
6 Their webbe maketh no clothe, & they maye not couer the wt their labours.
Their dedes are ye dedes of wickednes, & ye worke of robbery is in their hodes.
7 Their fete runne to euell, & they make haist to shed innocet bloude. Their
coucels are wicked coucels, harme & destruccio are in their wayes.
8 But ye waye of peace they knowe not. In their goinges is no equyte, their
wayes are so croked, yt who so euer goeth therin, knoweth nothinge of peace.
9 And this is ye cause yt equite is so farre fro vs, & yt rightuousnes cometh
not nye vs. We loke for light, lo, it is darknesse: for ye mornynge shyne, se,
we walke in ye darke.
10 We grope like ye blynde vpon ye wall, we grope euen as one yt hath none eyes.
We stomble at ye noone daye, as though it were toward night: in ye fallinge
places, like men yt are half deed.
11 We roare all like Beeres, & mourne stil like doues. We loke for equite, but
there is none: for health, but it is farre fro vs.
12 For or offences are many before ye, & or synnes testifie agaynst vs. Yee we
must cofesse yt we offende, & knowlege, yt we do amysse:
13 Namely, transgresse & dyssemble agaynst ye LORDE, & fall awaye fro or God:
vsinge presuptuous & traytorous ymaginacions, & castinge false matters in or
hertes.
14 And therfore is equyte gone asyde, & righteousnes stodeth farre of: treuth is
fallen downe in the strete, and the thinge that is playne and open, maye not be
shewed.
15 Yee ye treuth is lade in preson, and he that refrayneth himself fro euel,
must be spoyled. When the LORDE sawe this, it displeased him sore, yt there was
no where eny equite.
16 He sawe also, that there was no man, which had pitie therof, or was greued at
it. And he helde him by his owne power, and cleued to his owne rightuousnes.
17 He put rightuousnes vpo him for a brest plate, & set the helmet of health vpo
his heade. He put on wrath in steade of clothige, & toke gelousy aboute him for
a cloke:
18 (like as when a man goeth forth wrothfully to recopence his enemies, & to be
avenged of his aduersaries.) Namely, that he might recompence and rewarde the
Ilodes,
19 wherthorow the name of the LORDE might be feared, from the risynge of the
Sone: and his magesty, vnto the goinge downe of the same. For he shal come as a
violent waterstreame, which the wynde of the LORDE hath moued.
20 But vnto Sion there shal come a redemer, and vnto them in Iacob that turne
from wickednesse, saieth the LORDE.
21 I will make this conuenaunt with them (sayeth ye LORDE): My sprete that is
come vpon the, & the wordes which I haue put in yi mouth, shal neuer go out of
thy mouth, nor out of ye mouth of thy childre, no ner out of ye mouth of thy
childers childre, from this tyme forth for euer more.

Chapter 60

1 And therfore get the vp by tymes, for thy light cometh, & the glory of ye
LORDE shal ryse vp vpo ye.
2 For lo, while ye darknesse & cloude couereth the earth & the people, the LORDE
shal shewe the light, & his glory shal be sene in the.
3 The Gentiles shal come to thy light, & kynges to the brightnes yt springeth
forth vpo ye.
4 Lift vp thine eyes, & loke rounde aboute the: All these gather the selues, &
come to the. Sonnes shal come vnto ye from farre, & doughters shal gather the
selues to the on euery side.
5 When thou seist this, thou shalt maruel exceadingly, and thine hert shalbe
opened: when the power of the see shalbe couerted vnto the (that is) whe the
strength of the Gentiles shal come vnto the.
6 The multitude of Camels shal couer ye, the Dromedaries of Madia and Epha. All
they of Saba shal come, bringinge golde & incense, & shewinge the prayse of the
LORDE.
7 All the catel of Cedar shalbe gathered vnto ye, the rames of Nabaioth shal
serue the, to be offred vpo myne aulter, which I haue chosen, & in the house of
my glory which I haue garnished.
8 But what are these that fle here like the cloudes, and as the doues flienge to
their wyndowes?
9 The Iles also shal gather the vnto me, and specially the shippes of ye see:
that they maye bringe the sonnes from farre, and their syluer and their golde
with them, vnto the name of the LORDE thy God, vnto the holy one of Israel, that
hath glorified the.
10 Straugers shal buylde vp thy walles, and their kiges shal do the seruyce. For
when I am angrie, I smyte the: and when it pleaseth me, I pardon the.
11 Thy gates shal stonde open still both daye and night, and neuer be shut: that
the hooste of the Gentiles maye come, and that their kinges maye be brought vnto
the.
12 For euery people & kingdome that serueth not the, shal perish, and be
distroyed wt the swerde.
13 The glory of libanus shal come vnto the: The Fyrre trees, Boxes & Cedres
together, to garnish the place of my Sanctuary, for I wil glorifie the place of
my fete.
14 Morouer those shal come knelinge vnto the, yt haue vexed the: & all they that
despised ye, shal fall downe at yi fote. Thou shalt be called the cite of the
LORDE, the holy Sion of Israel.
15 Because thou hast bene forsake and hated, so that noman went thorow the: I
wil make the glorious for euer and euer, ad ioyful thorow out all posterities.
16 Thou shalt sucke the mylck of the Gentiles, and kinges brestes shal fede the.
And thou shalt knowe that I the LORDE am thy Sauioure and defender, the mighty
one of Iacob.
17 For brasse wil I geue the golde, and for yron syluer, for wod brasse, and for
stones yron. I wil make peace thy ruler, and rightuousnes thyne officer.
18 Violence and robbery shal neuer be herde of in thy londe, nether harme and
destruction with in thy borders. Thy walles shalbe called health, & thy gates
the prayse of God
19 The Sonne shal neuer by thy daye light, ad the light of the Moone shal neuer
shyne vnto the: but ye LORDE himself shalbe thy euerlastinge light, & thy God
shalbe thy glory.
20 The Sonne shal neuer go downe, & thy Moone shal not be taken awaye, for the
LORDE himself shalbe thy euerlastinge light, ad thy sorouful dayes shal be
rewarded ye.
21 Thy people shalbe all godly, & possesse the londe for euer: the floure of my
plantinge, the worke of my hondes, wherof I wil reioyce.
22 The yongest & leest shal growe in to a thousande, & the symplest in to a
stronge people. I the LORDE shal shortly bringe this thinge to passe in his
tyme.

Chapter 61

1 The sprete of the LORDE God is wt me, for ye LORDE hath anoynted me, & sent
me, to preach good tydiges vnto the poore, yt I might bynde vp ye wounded
hertes, yt I might preach delyueraunce to ye captyue, & open the preson to the
that are bounde:
2 yt I might declare ye acceptable yeare of ye LORDE, & the daye of ye
avegeaunce of oure God: that I might comforte all them that are in heuynesse,
3 that I might geue vnto them yt mourne in Sion, bewty in the steade of asshes,
ioyful oyntmet for sighinge, pleasaunt raymet for an heuy mide: That they might
be called excellent in rightuousnesse, a platinge of the LORDE for him to
reioyce in.
4 They shal buylde the loge rough wildernes, & set vp ye olde deserte. They shal
repayre the waist places, & soch as haue bene voyde thorow out many generacios
5 Straugers shal stode & fede yor catel, & the Aleauntes shalbe yor plowme &
reapers.
6 But ye shalbe named the prestes of the LORDE, & me shall call you the
seruautes of oure God. Ye shall enioye the goodes of ye Getiles & tryuphe in
their substauce.
7 For yor greate reprofe & shame, shal they haue ioye, yt ye maye haue parte wt
the. For they shal haue dubble possession i their lode, & euerlastinge ioye
shalbe wt them.
8 For I the LORDE, which loue right ad hate robbery (though it were offred me)
shal make their workes ful of faithfulnes, & make an euerlastinge couenaunt with
them.
9 Their sede also and their generacion shalbe knowne amoge the Gentiles, and
amoge the people. All they that se them, shall knowe, that they are the hie
blessed sede of ye LORDE.
10 And therfore I am ioyful in the LORDE, & my soule reioyseth in my God. For he
shall put vpon me the garmet of health, & couer me with the matle of
rightuousnes. He shal decke me like a brydegrome, & as a bryde that hath hir
apparell vpo her.
11 For like as ye grounde bringeth forth frute, & as the garde shuteth forth
sede: So shal the LORDE God cause rightuousnes, and the feare of God to florish
forth before all the Heithen.

Chapter 62

1 For Sions sake therfore wil I not holde my tuge, & for Ierusales sake I will
not ceasse: vntill their rightuousnes breake forth as ye shyninge light, & their
health as a burnynge lampe.
2 Then shal the Getiles se thy rightuousnesse & all kinges thy glory. Thou shalt
be named with a new name, which the mouth of ye LORDE shal shewe.
3 Thou shalt be a crowne in the honde of the LORDE, and a glorious garlade in
the hode of thy God.
4 From this tyme forth thou shalt neuer be called the forsake, & thy lode shal
nomore be called the wildernesse. But thou shalt be called Hephziba (that is, my
beloued) & yi londe Beula (that is) a maried woma: for ye LORDE loueth ye, & thy
lode shalbe inhabited.
5 And like as yonge ma taketh a doughter to mariage, so shal God mary himself
vnto yi sonnes. And as a brydegrome is glad of his bryde, so shal God reioyse
ouer the.
6 I wil set watchme vpo thy walles (o Ierusalem) which shall nether ceasse daye
nor night, to preach ye LORDE. And ye also shall not kepe him close,
7 nor leaue to speake of hi, vntill Ierusale be set vp, & made the prayse of the
worlde.
8 The LORDE hath sworne by his right honde & by his stronge arme, that fro hence
forth he wil not geue thy corne to be meate for thine enemies, ner yi wyne
(wheri thou hast laboured) to be drynke for ye straungers.
9 But they that haue gathered in the corne, shal eate it, & geue thankes to the
LORDE: & they that haue borne in the wyne, shall drynke it in the court of my
Sanctuary.
10 Stode back, & departe a sunder, ye yt stonde vnder ye gate, make rowme ye
people, repayre the strete, & take awaye ye stones, & set out a toke for the
people.
11 Beholde, ye LORDE proclameth in the endes of the worlde: tel ye doughter Sio:
se, thy Saluacio cometh, beholde, he bringeth his treasure wt him, & his workes
go before him.
12 For they who ye LORDE delyuereth, shalbe called the holy people: & as for
the, thou shalt be named the greatly occupied, and not the forsaken.

Chapter 63

1 What is he this, that cometh from Edom, with stayned reade clothes of Bosra:
(which is so costly, cloth) & cometh in so neebly with all his stregth? I am he
yt teacheth rightuousnes, & am of power to helpe.
2 Wherfore the is thy clothinge reade, & thy raymet like his yt treadeth in ye
wyne presse?
3 I haue trodde the presse my self alone, & of all people, there was not one
with me. Thus haue I trode downe myne enemies in my wrath, and set my fete vpo
them in my indignacion: And their bloude sprange vpo my cloothes, & so haue I
stayned all my rayment.
4 For the daye of vengeauce that I haue take in honde, & the yeare of my
delyueraunce is come.
5 I loked aboute me, and there was no ma to shewe me eny helpe, I fel downe, and
no man helde me vp. The I helde me by myne owne arme, & my feruetnesse susteyned
me.
6 And thus haue I troden downe the people in my wrath, and bathed them in my
displeasure: In so moch that I haue shed their bloude vpon the earth.
7 I will declare the goodnesse of the LORDE, yee and the prayse of the LORDE for
all that he hath gyuen vs, for the greate good yt he hath done for Israel: which
he hath gyuen them of his owne fauoure, & acordinge to the multitude of his
louynge kindnesses.
8 For he sayde: These no doute wilbe my people, and no shrekinge children, and
so he was their Sauioure.
9 In their troubles he forsoke the not, but the angel that went forth from his
presence, delyuered them: Of very loue & kindnesse that he had vnto them,
redemed he them. He hath borne them, and caried them vp euer, sence the worlde
begane.
10 But after they prouoked him to wrath and vexed his holy minde, he was their
enemie, and fought agaynst them him self.
11 Yet remebred he the olde tyme, of Moses & his people: How he brought them
from the water of the see, as a shepherde doth with his shepe: how he had geuen
his holy sprete amonge them:
12 how he had led Moses by the right honde with his glorious arme: how he had
deuyded the water before them (wherby he gat him self an euerlastinge name)
13 how he led them in the depe, as an horse is led in the playne, that they
shulde not stomble.
14 The sprete of the LORDE led them, as a tame beast goeth in the felde. Thus (o
God) hast thou led thy people, to make thy self a glorious name with all.
15 Loke downe then from heaue, and beholde the dwellinge place of thy sanctuary
& thy glory. How is it, yt thy gelousy, thy strength, the multitude of thy
mercies and thy louynge kyndnesse, wyl not be entreated of vs?
16 Yet art thou or father: For Abraham knoweth vs not, nether is Israel
acquanted with vs. But thou LORDE art oure father and redemer, and thy name is
euer lastinge.
17 O LORDE wherfore hast thou led vs out of thy waye? wherfore hast thou
hardened oure hertes, that we feare the not? Be at one with vs agayne, for thy
seruauntes sake yt are of the generacio of thy heretage.
18 Thy people hath had but litle of thy Sanctuary in possessio, for oure enemies
haue take it in:
19 And we are become, euen as we were from the beginnynge: but thou art not
their LORDE, for they haue not called vpon thy name.

Chapter 64

1 O that thou woldest cleue the heauen in sonder, & come downe: that the
mountaynes might melt awaye at thy presence,
2 like as at an hote fyre: and that the malicious might boyle, as the water doth
vpon the fyre: Wherby thy name might be knowne amoge thine enemies, & yt the
Getiles might treble before ye.
3 That thou mightest come downe with thy wonderous straunge workes, then shulde
the hilles melt at thy presence.
4 For sence the begynnynge of the worlde there was none (excepte thou o God)
that herde or perceaued, nether hath eny eye sene what thou dost for the, that
put their trust in the.
5 Thou helpest him that doth right with cherefulnesse, and them that thynke vpon
thy wayes. But lo, thou art angrie, for we offende, and haue bene euer in synne,
and there is not one whole.
6 We are all as an vnclene thinge, & all oure rightuousnesses are as the clothes
stayned with the floures of a woman: we fall euerychone as the leaf, for oure
synnes carie vs awaye like the wynde.
7 There is no man that calleth vpon thy name, that stondeth vp to take holde by
the. Therfore hydest thou thy face from vs, and consumest vs, because of oure
synnes.
8 But now o LORDE, thou father of ours: we are the claye, and thou art oure
potter, and we all are the worke of thy hondes.
9 Be not to sore displeased (o LORDE) and kepe not oure offences to loge in thy
remembraunce, but considre that we all are thy people.
10 The cities of thy Sanctuary lye waist, Sion is a wildernesse, and Ierusalem a
deserte.
11 Oure holy house which is oure bewty, where oure fathers praysed the, is brent
vp, yee all oure comodities and pleasures are waysted awaye.
12 Wilt thou not be intreated (LORDE) for all this? Wilt thou holde thy peace,
and scourge vs so sore?

Chapter 65

1 They shal seke me, that hitherto haue not axed for me: they shal fynde me,
that hither to haue not sought me. Then shal I saye immediatly, to the people
that neuer called vpon my name: I am here, I am here.
2 For thus longe haue I euer holden out my hondes to an vnfaithful people, that
go not the right waye, but after their owne ymaginacions:
3 To a people, that is euer defyenge me to my face. They make their oblacions in
gardens, and their smoke vpon aulters of bricke,
4 they lurck amonge the graues, and lie in the dennes all night. They eate swyne
flesh, and vnclene broth is in their vessels.
5 Yf thou comest nye them, they saie: touch me not, for I am holyer then thou.
All these men when I am angrie, shalbe turned to smoke and fyre, that shal burne
for euer.
6 Beholde, it is written before my face, & shal not be forgotten, but
recopensed. I shal rewarde it them in to their bosome:
7 I meane youre mysdedes, and the mysdedes of youre fathers together (saieth the
LORDE) which haue made their smokes vpon the mountaynes, and blasphemed me vpon
the hilles: therfore will I measure their olde dedes in to their bosome agayne.
8 Morouer thus saieth the LORDE: like as when one wolde gather holy grapes, men
saye vnto him: breake it not of, for it is holy: Euen so will I do also for my
seruauntes sakes, that I will not destroye them all.
9 But I will take a sede out of Iacob, and out of Iuda one, to take possession
of my hill. My chosen shal possesse these thinges, & my seruauntes shall dwell
there.
10 Saron shalbe a shepefolde, and the valley of Achor shal geue stallinge for
the catell of my people, that feare me.
11 But as for you, ye are they, yt haue forsaken the LORDE, and forgotten my
holy hill. Ye haue set vp an aulter vnto fortune, & geue rich drinkofferinges
vnto treasure.
12 Therfore wil I nombre you with the swerde, that ye shall be destroyed all
together. For when I called, no man gaue me answere: when I spake, ye herkened
not vnto me, but dyd wickednes before myne eyes, and chosed the thinge that
pleased me not.
13 Therfore thus saieth the LORDE God: Beholde, my seruauntes shal eate, but ye
shall haue honger. Beholde, my seruauntes shall drynke, but ye shal suffre
thurste. Beholde, my seruauntes shal be mery, but ye shal be cofounded.
14 Beholde, my seruauntes shal reioyse for very quietnesse of herte. But ye shal
crie for sorow of hert, and coplayne for vexacion of mynde.
15 Youre name shal not be sworne by amonge my chosen, for God the LORDE shal
slaye you, and call his seruauntes by another name.
16 Who so reioyseth vpo earth, shall reioyse in the true God: And Who so
sweareth vpo earth, shal sweare in the true God. For the olde enemite shalbe
forgotten, and taken awaye out of my sight.
17 For lo, I shal make a new heaue, & a new earth. And as for the olde, they
shall neuer be thought vpo, ner kepte in mynde:
18 but me shalbe glad and euermore reioyse, for the thinges, that I shall do.
For why: Beholde, I shal make a ioyfull Ierusale,
19 yee I myself will reioyse with Ierusalem, & be glad with my people: And the
voyce of wepinge and waylinge shall not be herde in her from thece forth.
20 There shall neuer be childe ner olde man, that haue not their full dayes. But
whe the childe cometh to an huderth yeare olde, it shall dye. And yf he that is
an huderth yeare of age do wronge, he shalbe cursed.
21 They shal buylde houses, and dwel in them: they shal plante vynyardes, and
eate the frute of them.
22 They shall not buylde, & another possesse: they shall not plante, and another
eate: But the life of my people shalbe like a tre, and so shal the worke of
their hondes.
23 My chosen shal lyue longe, they shall not laboure in vayne, ner beget wt
trouble: for they are the hie blessed sede of the LORDE, & their frutes with
them.
24 And it shalbe, that or euer they call, I shal answere them. Whyle they are
yet but thinkinge how to speake, I shal heare them.
25 The wolff and the lambe shal fede together, and the lyon shal eate haye like
the bullocke. But earth shalbe the serpetes meate. There shal no man hurte ner
slaye another, in all my holy hill, saieth the LORDE.

Chapter 66

1 Thus saieth the LORDE: Heaue is my seate, and the earth is my fote stole.
Where shal now the house stonde, yt ye will buylde vnto me? And where shal be
the place, yt I wil dwel in?
2 As for these thinges, my hode hath made them all, and they are all created,
saieth the LORDE. Which of them shal I then regarde? Eue him that is of a lowly
troubled sprete, and stodeth in awe of my wordes.
3 For who so slayeth an oxe for me, doth me so greate dishonoure, as he yt
kylleth a ma. He that kylleth a shepe for me, choketh a dogge. He that bringeth
me meatoffringes, offreth swynes bloude: Who so maketh me a memoriall of
Incense, prayseth the thinge yt is vnright. Yet take they soch wayes in honde,
and their soule deliteth in these abhominacions.
4 Therfore wil I also haue pleasure in laughinge them to scorne, and the thinge
that they feare, wil I bringe vpon the. For when I called, no man gaue answere:
when I spake, they wolde not heare: But dyd wickednesse before myne eyes, &
chose the thinges that displease me.
5 Heare the worde of God all ye, that feare the thinge which he speaketh. Youre
brethren that hate you, and cast you out for my names sake, saye: Let the LORDE
magnifie himself, that we maye se youre gladnesse: & yet they shalbe cofounded.
6 For as touchinge the cite and the temple, I heare the voyce of the LORDE, that
will rewarde, and recompece his enemies:
7 like as when a wife bringeth forth a man childe, or euer she suffre the payne
of the byrth and anguysh of ye trauayle.
8 Who euer herde or sawe soch thinges? doth the grounde beare in one daye? or
are the people borne all at once, as Sion beareth his sonnes?
9 For thus sayeth the LORDE: Am I he that maketh other to beare, and beare not
my self? Am not I he that beareth, and maketh baren? saieth thy God.
10 Reioyse with Ierusalem, & be glad with her, all ye that loue her. Be ioyful
with her, all ye that mourned for her.
11 For ye shal sucke coforte out of hir brestes, and be satisfied. Ye shal
taist, and haue delite in the plenteousnesse of hir power.
12 For thus sayeth the LORDE: beholde, I wil let peace i to her, like a water
floude, & ye might of the Heithe like a flowinge streame. Then shal ye sucke, ye
shal be borne vpon hir sydes, and be ioyful vpo hir knees.
13 For like as a childe is comforted of his mother, so shal I conforte you, and
ye shalbe comforted in Ierusalem.
14 And when ye se this, youre herte shal reioyse, and youre bones shal florish
like an herbe. Thus shal the honde of the LORDE be knowne amonge his seruauntes,
and his indignacion amonge his enemies.
15 For beholde, the LORDE shal come wt fyre, and his charet shal be like a
whyrlwynde, that he maye recompence his vengeaunce in his wrath, and his
indignacion with the flame of fyre.
16 For ye LORDE shal iudge all flesh with the fyre and with his swerde, and
there shalbe a greate nombre slayne of the LORDE.
17 Soch as haue made themselues holy and cleane in the gardens, and those that
haue eaten swyne flesh, myce, and other abhominacios, shalbe taken awaye
together, saieth the LORDE.
18 For I wil come to gather all people and tonges, with their workes and
ymaginacions: these shal come, and se my glory.
19 Vnto them shal I geue a toke, and sende certayne of the (that be delyuered)
amonge the Gentiles: in to Celicia, Africa and Lidia (where men can handle
bowes) into Italie also and Grekelonde. The Iles farre of, that haue not herde
speake of me, & haue not sene my glory: shal preach my prayse amonge the
Gentiles,
20 and shal bringe all youre brethre for an offringe vnto the LORDE, out of al
people, vpo horses, charettes and horse lytters, vpo Mooles and cartes to
Ierusalem my holy hill (saieth the LORDE) like as the children of Israel bringe
the offringe in cleane vessels, to the house of the LORDE.
21 And I shal take out certayne of them for to be preastes and leuites, saieth
ye LORDE.
22 For like as the new heaue and the new earth which I wil make, shalbe fast
stablished by me: (saieth the LORDE) So shal youre sede and youre name contynue,
23 and there shalbe a new Moone for the other, and a new Sabbath for the other,
& all flesh shal come to worshipe before me, (saieth ye LORDE.)
24 And they shal go forth, and loke vpo the caryons of them, that haue
transgressed agaynst me. For their wormes shal not dye, nether shal their fyre
be quenched, & all flesh shal abhorre them.


Jeremiah

Chapter 1

1 These are the Sermons of Ieremy the sonne of Helchia the prest, one of them
that dwelt at Anathot in the londe of Ben Iamin:
2 when the LORDE had first spoken with him, in the tyme of Iosias the sonne of
Amon kinge of Iuda, in the xiij yeare of his kingdome:
3 and so duringe vnto the tyme of Ioachim the sonne of Iosias kinge of Iuda, and
vnto the xj yeares of Sedechias the sonne of Iosias kinge of Iuda were ended:
when Ierusalem was taken, euen in the fyfth Moneth.
4 The worde of the LORDE spake thus vnto me:
5 Before I fasshioned the in thy mothers wobe, I dyd knowe the: And or euer thou
wast borne, I sanctified the, & ordened the, to be a prophet vnto the people.
6 The sayde I: Oh LORDE God, I am vnmete, for I am yet but yonge.
7 And the LORDE answered me thus: Saye not so, I am to yonge: For thou shalt go
to all that I shall sende the vnto, and what so euer I comaunde the, that shalt
thou speake.
8 Be not afrayed of their faces, for I wilbe with the, to delyuer the, saieth
the LORDE.
9 And with that, the LORDE stretched out his honde, and touched my mouth, and
sayde morouer vnto me: Beholde I put my wordes in thy mouth,
10 and this daye do I set the ouer the people and kingdomes: that thou mayest
rote out, breake of, destroye, and make waist: and that thou mayest buylde vp,
and plate.
11 After this, the LORDE spake vnto me sayenge: Ieremy, what seist thou? And I
sayde: I se a wakynge rodde.
12 Then sayde ye LORDE: thou hast sene right, for I will watch diligently vpon
my worde, to perfourme it.
13 It happened afterwarde, that the LORDE spake to me agayne, & sayde: What
seist thou? And I sayde: I do se a seethinge pot, lokinge from out of the north
hitherwarde.
14 Then sayde the LORDE vnto me: Out of the north shall come a plage vpon all
the dwellers of the londe.
15 For lo, I will call all the officers of the kyngdomes of the north, (saieth
the LORDE.) And they shall come, and euery one shall set his seate in the gates
of Ierusalem, and in all their walles rounde aboute, and thorow all the cities
of Iuda.
16 And thorow them shall I declare my iudgment, vpon all the wickednesse of
those men that haue forsaken me: that haue offred vnto straunge goddes, &
worshipped the workes of their owne hondes.
17 And therfore gyrde vp thy loynes, arise, and tell them all, that I geue the
in comaundement. Feare them not, I will not haue the to be afrayed of the.
18 For beholde, this daye do I make the a stroge fensed towne, an yron pyler,
and a wall of stele agaynst ye whole londe, agaynst the kinges and mightie men
of Iuda, agaynst the prestes and people of the londe.
19 They shall fight agaynst the, but they shall not be able to ouercome the: for
I am wt the, to delyuer the, saieth the LORDE.

Chapter 2

1 Morouer, the worde of the LORDE comaunded me thus:
2 Go thy waye, crie in the eares of Ierusale, & saye: Thus saieth the LORDE: I
remembre the for the kyndnesse of thy youth, and because of thy stedfast loue:
in that thou folowdest me thorow the wildernesse, in an vntilled londe.
3 Thou Israel wast halowed vnto te LORDE, and so was his first frutes. All they
that deuoured Israel, offended: mi?fortune fell vpon them, saieth the LORDE.
4 Heare therfore the worde of the LORDE, O thou house of Iacob, and all the
generacion of the house of Israel.
5 Thus saieth ye LORDE vnto you: What vnfaithfulnesse founde youre fathers in
me, that they wente so farre awaye fro me, fallinge to lightnesse, and beinge so
vayne?
6 They thought not in their hertes: Where haue we left the LORDE, yt brought vs
out of the lode of Egipte: yt led vs thorow the wildernesse, thorow a deserte
and rough londe, thorow a drie and a deedly londe, yee a londe that no man had
gone thorow, and wherein no man had dwelt.
7 And when I had brought you in to a pleasaunt welbuylded londe, that ye might
enioye the frutes and all the comodities of the same: ye went forth and defyled
my londe, & brought myne heretage to abhominacion.
8 The prestes the selues saide not once: where is ye LORDE? They yt haue the
lawe in their hondes, knowe me not: The shepherdes offende agaynst me. The
prophetes do seruyce vnto Baal, & folowe soch thinges as shall bringe them no
profit.
9 Wherfore I am constrayned (sayeth the LORDE) to make my complaynte vpon you,
and vpon youre children.
10 Go in to the Iles of Cethim, and loke wel: sende vnto Cedar, take diligent
hede: and se, whether soch thinges be done there,
11 whether the Gentiles themselues deale so falsly & vntruly with their goddes
(which yet are no goddes in dede.) But my people hath geuen ouer their hie
honoure, for a thinge that maye not helpe them.
12 Be astonished (o ye heauens) be afrayde, & abashed at soch a thinge, saieth
the LORDE.
13 For my people hath done two euels. They haue forsake me the well of the water
of life, and digged them pittes, yee vile and broken pittes, that holde no
water.
14 Is Israel a bonde seruaunt, or one of the housholde? Why is he then so
spoyled?
15 Why do they roare and crie then vpon him, as a lyon? They haue made his londe
wayst, his cities are so brent vp, that there is no man dwellinge in them.
16 Yee the children of Noph and Taphanes haue defyled thy necke.
17 Cometh not this vnto the, because thou hast forsaken the LORDE thy God, euer
sence he led the by the waye?
18 And what hast thou now to do in ye strete of Egipte? to drinke foule water?
Ether, what makest thou in the waye to Assiria? To drinke water of the floude?
19 Thine owne wickednesse shal reproue the, and thy turnynge awaye shal condemne
the: that thou mayest knowe and vnderstonde, how euel and hurtful a thinge it
is, yt thou hast forsaken the LORDE thy God, and not feared him, saieth the
LORDE God of hoostes.
20 I haue euer broken thy yock of olde, & bursten thy bondes: yet saiest thou, I
wil nomore serue, but (like an harlot) thou runnest aboute vpon all hie hilles,
& amonge all grene trees:
21 where as I planted the out of noble grapes and good rotes. How art thou
turned then into a bytter, vnfrutefull, and straunge grape?
22 Yee and that so sore: that though thou wasshest the with Nitrus & makest
thiself to sauoure with that swete smellinge herbe of Borith: yet in my sight
thou art stayned with thy wickednesse, saieth the LORDE thy God.
23 Saye not now: I am not vnclene, and I haue not folowed the goddes. Loke vpo
thyne owne waies in the woddes, valleis & dennes: so shalt thou knowe, what thou
hast done. Thou art like a swift Dromedary, that goeth easely his waye:
24 and thy wantonnes is like a wilde Asse, that vseth the wildernesse, and that
snoffeth and bloweth at his wil. Who can tame the? All they that seke the, shal
not fayle, but fynde the in thyne owne vnclennes.
25 Thou kepest thy fote from nakednes, and thy throte from thurste, and thinkest
thus in thy self: tush, I wil take no sorowe, I wil loue the straunge goddes, &
hange vpon them.
26 Like as a thefe that is taken with the dede, commeth to shame, eue so is the
house of Israel come to confucion: the comon people, their kinges and rulers,
their prestes and prophetes.
27 For they saye to a stock, thou art my father, and to a stone: thou hast
begotten me, yee they haue turned their back vpon me, & not their face. But in
the tyme of their trouble, when they saye: stonde vp, and helpe vs,
28 I shal answere the: Where are now thy goddes, that thou hast made the? byd
them stonde vp, and helpe the in the tyme of nede? For loke how many cities thou
hast (o Iuda) so many goddes hast thou also.
29 Wherfore the wil ye go to lawe with me, seinge ye all are synners agaynst me,
saieth the LORDE?
30 It is but lost laboure, that I smyte youre children, for they receaue not my
correction. Youre owne swearde destroyeth youre prophetes, like a deuouringe
lyon.
31 Yf ye be the people of the LORDE, then herke vnto his worde: Am I the become
a wildernesse vnto the people of Israel? or a londe that hath no light? Wherfore
saieth my people then: we are falle of, and we wil come no more vnto the?
32 Doth a mayden forget hir raymet, or a bryde hir stomacher? And doth my people
forget me so loge?
33 Why boostest thou thy wayes so hylie, (to optayne fauoure there thorow) when
thou hast yet stained them wt blasphemies?
34 Vpon thy wynges is founde the bloude of poore and innocent people, and that
not in corners and holes only, but opely in all these places.
35 Yet darrest thou saye: I am giltlesse: Tush, his wrath can not come vpo me.
Beholde, I wil reason with ye, because thou darrest saye: I haue not offended.
36 O how euel wil it be for the, to abyde it: when it shall be knowne, how oft
thou hast gone bacwarde? For thou shalt be confounded, as wel of Egipte, as of
the Assirians:
37 Yee thou shalt go thy waye from the, & smyte yine hondes together vpon thy
heade. Because the LORDE shal bringe that confidence and hope of thine to
naught, and thou shalt not prospere with all.

Chapter 3

1 Comonly, when a man putteth awaye his wife, and she goeth from him, and
marieth with another, then the question is: shulde he resorte vnto her eny more
after that? Is not this felde then defyled and vnclene? But as for the, thou
hast played the harlot with many louers, yet turne agayne to me, saieth the
LORDE.
2 Lift vp thine eyes on euery syde, and loke, yf thou be not defyled. Thou hast
waited for them in the stretes, and as a murtherer in the wildernesse. Thorow
thy whordome and shamefull blasphemies, is the londe defyled.
3 This is the cause, that the rayne and euenynge dew hath ceased. Thou hast
gotten the an whores foreheade, and canst not be ashamed.
4 Els woldest thou saye vnto me: O my father, thou art he that hast brought me
vp, and led me fro my youth:
5 Wilt thou then put me awaye, and cast me of foreuer? Or wilt thou withdrawe
thy self clene fro me? Neuertheles, thou speakest soch wordes, but thou art euer
doinge worse, and worse.
6 The LORDE sayde also vnto me, in the tyme of Iosias the kinge: Hast thou sene
what that shrekinge Israel hath done? how she hath runne vp vpon all hie hilles,
and amonge all thick trees, and there played the harlot?
7 hast thou sene also, (when she had done all this) how I sayde vnto her: that
she shulde turne agayne vnto me, and yet she is not returned? Iuda that
vnfaithfull sister of hirs also sawe this:
8 Namely, that affter I had well sene the aduoutrye of the shrenkinge harlot
Israel, I put her awaye, and gaue her a byll of deuorcement. For all this, hir
vnfaithfull sister Iuda was not ashamed, but wente backe and played the whore
also.
9 Yee and the noyse of hir whordome hath defyled the whole lode. For she hath
committed hir aduoutrie with stones and stockes.
10 Neuerthelesse, hir vnfaithfull sister Iuda is not turned vnto me agayne with
hir whole herte, but faynedly, saieth the LORDE.
11 And the LORDE sayde vnto me: The bacslyder Israel is more rightuous, the the
vnfaithfull Iuda:
12 and therfore go preach these wordes towarde the north, & saye: Thou
shrenkinge Israel, turne agayne (saieth the LORDE,) and I will not turne my face
from you, for I am merciful, saieth the LORDE, & I will not allwaye beare
displeasure agaynst the:
13 but on this condicion, that thou knowe thy greate blasphemy: Namely, that
thou hast vnfaithfully forsaken the LORDE thy God, & hast made thy silf partaker
of straunge goddes vnder all grene trees, but hast had no wil to heare my voyce,
saieth the LORDE.
14 O ye shrenkinge children, turne agayne, saieth the LORDE, and I wilbe maried
with you. For I will take one out of the citie and two out of one generacion
from amoge you, and bringe you out of Sion:
15 and will geue you hyrdme after myne owne mynde, which shal fede you with
lernynge and wy?dome.
16 Morouer, when ye be increased and multiplied in the londe, then (saieth the
LORDE) there shall nomore boost be made of the arke of the LORDES Testament: No
man shall thinke vpon it, nether shall eny man make mencion of it: for from
thence forth it shall nether be visited, ner honoured with giftes.
17 Then shall Ierusalem be called the LORDES seate, and all Heithen shalbe
gathered vnto it, for the name of the LORDE sake, which shalbe set vp at
Ierusalem. And from that tyme forth, they shall folowe nomore the ymaginacion of
their owne frauwerde herte.
18 The those yt be of the house of Iuda, shal go vnto the house of Israel: And
they shal come together out of the north, in to the same londe that I haue geuen
youre fathers.
19 I haue shewed also, how I toke the vp beinge but a childe, and gaue the a
pleasaunt londe for thine heretage, yee and a goodly hooste of the Heithen: and
how I commaunded the, that thou shuldest call me father only, and not to
shrencke fro me.
20 But like as a woman fayleth hir louer, so are ye vnfaithfull vnto me (o ye
house of Israel) saieth the LORDE.
21 And therfore the voyce of the children of Israel was herde on euery side,
wepinge and waylinge: for they haue defyled their waye, and forgotten God their
LORDE.
22 O ye shrenkinge children, turne agayne, (saynge: lo, we are thine, for thou
art the LORDE oure God:) And so shal I heale youre bacturnynges.
23 The hilles fall, and all the hie pryde of the mountaynes, but the health of
Israel stondeth only vpon God oure LORDE.
24 Confucion hath deuoured oure fathers laboure from oure youth vp: yee their
shepe and bullockes, their sonnes and doughters.
25 So do we also slepe in oure confucion, and shame couereth vs: for we and oure
fathers from oure youth vp vnto this daye haue synned agaynst the LORDE oure
God. and hahaue not obeyed the voyce of the LORDE oure God.

Chapter 4

1 O Israel, yf thou wilt turne the, then turne vnto me, saieth the LORDE. And yf
thou wilt put awaye thy abhominacios out of my sight, thou shalt not be moued:
2 And shalt sweare: The LORDE lyueth: in treuth, in equite and rightuousnesse:
and all people shall be fortunable and ioyfull in him.
3 For thus saieth the LORDE, to all Iuda and Ierusalem: plowe youre londe, and
sowe not amonge the thornes.
4 Be circumcided in the LORDE, and cut awaye the foreskynne of youre hertes, all
ye of Iuda, and all the indwellers of Ierusalem: that my indignacion breake not
out like fyre, & kyndle, so that no man maye quench it, because of the wickednes
of youre ymaginacions.
5 Preach in Iuda and Ierusalem, crie out and speake: blowe the trompettes in the
londe, crie that euery man maye heare, and saye: Gather you together, and we
will go in to stronge cities.
6 Set vp the token in Sion, spede you, and make no tarienge: for I will bringe a
greate plage, and a greate destruction from the north.
7 For the spoyler of the Gentiles is broken vp from his place, as a lyon out of
his dene, that he maye make the londe waist, and destroye the cities, so, that
no man maye dwell therin.
8 Wherfore gyrde youre selues aboute wt sack cloth, mourne, and wepe, for the
fearfull wrath of the LORDE shal not be withdrawen from you.
9 At the same tyme (saieth the LORDE) the hert of the kinge and of the prynces
shal be gone, the prestes shalbe astonished, and the prophetes shalbe sore
afrayed.
10 Then sayde I: O LORDE God, hast thou then disceaued this people and
Ierusalem, sayenge: ye shall haue peace, and now the swearde goeth thorow their
lyues?
11 Then shal it be saide to the people & to Ierusalem: there commeth a warme
wynde from the north thorow the waye of my people, but nether to fanne, ner to
clese.
12 After that shall there come vnto me a stronge wynde, and then wil I also geue
sentence vpon them.
13 For lo, he commeth downe like as a cloude, and his charettes are like a
stormy wynde: his horsmen are swifter then the Aegle. Wo vnto vs, for we are
destroyed.
14 O Ierusalem, wash thine hert from wickednesse, that thou mayest be helped.
How longe shal thy noysome thoughtes remayne with the?
15 For a voyce from Dan and from ye hill of Ephraim speaketh out, and telleth of
a destruction.
16 Beholde, the Heithen geue Ierusalem warnynge, and preach vnto her, that hir
destroyers are comynge from farre countrees. They tell the cities of Iuda the
same also,
17 they shall geue them warnynge in euery place, like as the watch men in the
felde. For they haue prouoked me to wrath, saieth the LORDE.
18 Thy wayes and thy thoughtes, haue brought the vnto this, this is thyne owne
wickednesse and disobediece, that hath possessed thyne hert:
19 Ah my bely, ah my bely, (shalt thou crie) how is my hert so sore? my hert
paunteth within me, I can not be still, for I haue herde the crienge of the
trompettes, and peales of warre.
20 They crie murthur vpon murthur, the whole londe shal perish. Immediathly my
tentes were destroyed, and my hanginges, in the twincklinge of an eye.
21 How longe shall I se the tokens of warre, and heare the noyse of the
trompettes?
22 Neuertheles this shall come vpon them, because my people is become foolish,
and hath vterly no vnderstondinge. They are the children of foolishnes, and
without eny discrecio. To do euell, they haue witt ynough: but to do well, they
haue no wi?dome.
23 I haue loked vpon the earth, and se, it is wayst and voyde. I loked towarde
heauen, and it had no shyne.
24 I behelde the mountaynes, and they trembled, and all the hilles were in a
feare.
25 I loked aboute me, and there was no body, and all the byrdes of the ayre were
awaye.
26 I marked well, and the plowed felde was become waist: yee all their cities
were broken downe at the presence of the LORDE, and indignacion of his wrath.
27 For thus hath the LORDE sayde: The whole londe shalbe desolate, yet will I
not then haue done.
28 And therfore let the earth mourne, and let the heauen be sory aboue: for the
thinge that I haue purposed and taken vpon me to do, shal not repente me, and I
will not go from it.
29 The whole londe shal fle, for the noyse of the horsmen and bowmen: they shall
runne in to dennes in to woddes, and clymme vp the stony rockes. All the cities
shalbe voyde, and no man dwellinge therin.
30 What wilt thou now do, thou beinge destroyed? For though thou clothest thy
self with scarlet, & deckest ye with gold: though thou payntest thy face wt
colours, yet shalt thou trymme thy self in vayne. For those that hither to haue
bene thy greate fauourers, shal abhorre the, and go aboute to slaye ye.
31 For (me thinke) I heare a noyse, like as it were of a woman trauelinge, or
one laboringe of hir first childe: Euen the voyce of the doughter Sion, that
casteth out hir armes, and swowneth, sayenge: Ah wo is me, how sore vexed and
faynte is my herte, for them that are slayne?

Chapter 5

1 Loke thorow Ierusalem, beholde and se: Seke thorow hir stretes also within, yf
ye can fynde one man, that doth equall and right, or that laboureth to be
faithfull: and I shall spare him (saieth the LORDE)
2 For though they can saye: the LORDE lyueth, yet do they sweare to disceaue:
3 Where as thou (o LORDE) lokest only vpon faith and treuth. Thou hast scourged
them, but they toke no repentaunce: thou hast correcte them for amendemet, but
they refused thy correction. They made their faces harder then a stone, and
wolde not amende.
4 Therfore I thought in my self: peraduenture they are so symple and folish,
that they vnderstonde nothinge of the LORDES waye, and iudgmentes of oure God.
5 Therfore will I go vnto their heades and rulers, and talke with them: yf they
knowe the waye of the LORDE, and the iudgmetes of oure God. But these (in like
maner) haue broken the yock, and bursten the bondes in sonder.
6 Wherfore a lyon out of the wod shal hurte them, and a wolfe in the euenynge
shal destroye them. The cat of the mountayne shal lie lurkinge by their cities,
to teare in peces all them, that come therout. For their offences are many, and
their departinge awaye is greate.
7 Shulde I then for all this haue mercy vpon the? Thy children haue forsaken me,
and sworne by them that are no goddes. And albeit they were bounde to me in
mariage, yet they fell to aduoutrie, and haunted harlottes houses.
8 In the desyre of vnclenly lust they are become like the stoned horse, euery
man neyeth at his neghbours wife.
9 Shulde I not correcke this, saieth the LORDE? Shulde I not be avenged of euery
people, that is like vnto this?
10 Clymme vp vpon their walles, beate them downe, but destroye them not vtterly:
cut of their braunches, because they are not the LORDES.
11 For vnfaithfully hath the house of Israel and Iuda forsaken me, saieth the
LORDE.
12 They haue denied the LORDE, and sayde: it is not he. Tush, there shall no
mi?fortune come vpon vs, we shall se nether swearde ner honger.
13 As for the warnynge of the prophetes, they take it but for wynde, yee there
is none of these, which will tell them, that soch thinges shal happen vnto them.
14 Wherfore thus saieth the LORDE God of hoostes: because ye speake soch wordes,
beholde: The wordes that are in thy mouth will I turne to fyre, and make the
people to be wod, that it maye consume them.
15 Lo, I will bringe a people vpo you from farre, o house of Israel (saieth the
LORDE) a mightie people, an olde people, a people whose speach thou knowest not,
nether vnderstodest what they saye.
16 Their arowes are sodane death, yee they them selues be very giauntes.
17 This people shal eate vp thy frute & thy meate, yee they shal deuoure thy
sonnes and thy doughters, thy shepe and thy bullockes. They shall eate vp thy
grapes & fyges. As for thy stronge and well fensed cities, wherin thou didest
trust, they shal destroye them with the swearde.
18 Neuertheles I will not then haue done with you, saieth the LORDE.
19 But yf they saye: wherfore doth the LORDE oure God all this vnto vs? Then
answere them: because, that like as ye haue forsake me, and serued straunge
goddes in youre owne londe, euen so shall ye serue other goddes also in a
straunge londe.
20 Preach this vnto the house of Iacob, & crie it out in Iuda, and saye thus:
21 Heare this (thou folish and vndiscrete people.) Ye haue eyes, but ye se not:
eares haue ye, but ye heare not.
22 Feare ye not me, saieth the LORDE? Are ye not ashamed, to loke me in the
face? which bynde the see with the sonde, so that it can not passe his boundes:
For though it rage, yet can it do nothinge: and though the wawes therof do
swell, yet maye they not go ouer.
23 But this people hath a false and an obstinate herte, they are departed and
gone awaye fro me.
24 They thinke not in their hartes: O let vs feare the LORDE oure God, that
geueth vs rayne early and late, when nede is: which kepeth euer still the
haruest for vs yearly.
25 Neuertheles youre mi?dedes haue turned these from you, & youre synnes haue
robbed you herof.
26 For amonge my people are founde wicked personnes, that priuely laye snares
and waite for men, to take them, and destroye them.
27 And like as a net is full of byrdes, so are their houses full of that, which
they haue gotten with falsede and disceate. Herof cometh their greate substaunce
and riches,
28 herof are they fat and welthy, and are runne awaye fro me with shamefull
blasphemies. They ministre not the lawe, they make no ende of the fatherlesses
cause, they iudge not the poore acordinge to equite.
29 Shulde I not punysh these thinges, saieth the LORDE? Shulde I not be avenged
of all soch people, as these be?
30 Horrible and greuous thinges are done in the londe.
31 The prophetes teach falsely, and the prestes folowe them, and my people hath
pleasure therin. What will come therof at the last?

Chapter 6

1 Come out of Ierusalem, ye stronge childre of BenIamin: blowe vp the trompettes
ye Tecuites, set vp a token vnto Bethacarem, for a plage and a greate misery
pepeth out from the North.
2 I will licken the doughter Sion to a fayre and tendre woman, and to her shall
come the shepherdes with their flockes.
3 Their tentes shal they pitch rounde aboute her, and euery one shal fede with
his honde.
4 Make batell agaynst her (shal they saye:) Arise, let vs go vp, while it is yet
daye. Alas, the daye goeth awaye, & the night shadowes fall downe:
5 Arise, let vs go vp by night, and destroye hir stronge holdes,
6 for thus hath the LORDE of hoostes commaunded. Hew downe hir trees, and set vp
bulworkes agaynst Ierusale. This is the cite that must be punished, for in her
is all maliciousnes.
7 Like as a codyte aboundeth in water, eue so this citie aboudeth in wickednes.
Robbery and vnrightuousnesse is herde in her, sorow & woundes are euer there in
my sight.
8 Amede the (o Ierusalem) lest I with drawe my herte from the, and make the
desolate: & thy londe also, yt no man dwel in it.
9 For thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: The residue of Israel shalbe gathered,
as the remnaunt of grapes. And therfore turne thine honde agayne in to the
ba?ket, like the grape gatherer.
10 But vnto whom shal I speake? whom shal I warne, that he maye take hede? Their
eares are so vncircumcised, that they maye not heare. Beholde, they take the
worde of God but for a scorne, and haue no lust therto.
11 And therfore I am so full of thy indignacion (o LORDE) that I maye suffre no
longer. Shed out thy wrath vpon the children that are without, and vpon all
yonge men. Yee the man must be taken presoner with the wife, and the aged with
the crepel.
12 Their houses with their londes and wiues shal be turned vnto straungers, whe
I stretchout myne hode vpon the inhabitours of this londe, saieth the LORDE.
13 For from the leest vnto the most, they hange all vpon covetousnes: and from
the prophet vnto the prest, they go all aboute with falsede and lyes.
14 And besyde that, they heale the hurte of my people with swete wordes,
sayenge: peace, peace, when there is no peace at all.
15 Therfore they must be ashamed, for they haue comitted abhominacion. But how
shulde they be ashamed, when they knowe nothinge, nether of shame ner good
nurture? And therfore they shal fall amonge the slayne, and in the houre when I
shall viset them, they shalbe brought downe, saieth the LORDE.
16 Thus saieth the LORDE: go into the stretes, considre and make inquisicion for
the olde waye: and yf it be the good and right waye, then go therin, that ye
maye fynde rest for youre soules. (But they saye: we will not walke therin)
17 and I will set watchmen ouer you, and therfore take hede vnto the voyce of
the trompet. But they saye: we will not take hede.
18 Heare therfore ye Gentiles, and thou congregacion shalt knowe, what I haue
deuysed for them.
19 Heare thou earth also: beholde, I will cause a plage come vpon this people,
euen the frute of their owne ymaginacions. For they haue not bene obedient vnto
my wordes and to my lawe, but abhorred them.
20 Wherfore bringe ye me incense from Saba, & swete smellinge Calamus from farre
countrees? Youre burnt offeringes displease me, and I reioyse not in youre
sacrifices.
21 And therfore thus saieth the LORDE: beholde, I will make this people fall,
and there shal fall from amonge them the father wt the children, one neghboure
shal perish with another.
22 Morouer thus saieth ye LORDE: Beholde, there shal come a people from the
North, & a greate people shal arise from ye endes of ye earth,
23 wt bowes & wt dartes shal they be weapened: It is a rough & fearce people, an
vnmerciful people: their voyce roareth like the see, they ride vpo horses wel
apointed to ye batell agaynst the, o doughter Sion.
24 Then shal this crie be herde: Oure armes are feble, heuynes and sorow is come
vpon vs, as vpon a woman trauelinge with childe.
25 Noman go forth in to the felde, no man come vpon the hie strete: for the
swearde and feare of the enemie shalbe on euery side.
26 Wherfore, gyrde a sack cloth aboute the (o thou doughter of my people)
sprynkle thy self with a?shes, mourne and wepe bitterly, as vpon thy only
beloued sonne: For the destroyer shal sodenly fall vpon vs.
27 The haue I set for a prouer of my harde people, to seke out and to trye their
wayes.
28 For they are all vnfaithful and fallen awaye, they hange vpon shameful lucre,
they are clene brasse and yron, for they hurte and destroye euery man.
29 The bellous are brent in the fyre, the leade is consumed, the melter melteth
in vayne, for the euel is not taken awaye from them.
30 Therfore shal they be called naughty syluer, because the LORDE hath cast them
out.

Chapter 7

1 These are the wordes, that God spake vnto Ieremy:
2 Stonde vnder the gates of the LORDES house, and crie out these wordes there,
with a loude voyce, and saye: Heare the worde of the LORDE, all ye of Iuda, that
go in at this dore, to honoure the LORDE.
3 Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel. Amende youre wayes and
youre councels, and I wil let you dwell in this place.
4 Trust not in false lyenge wordes, sayenge: here is the temple of the LORDE,
here is the temple of the LORDE, here is the temple of the LORDE.
5 For yf ye will amende youre waies and councels, yf ye wil iudge right betwixte
a man and his neghboure:
6 yf ye wil not oppresse the straunger, the fatherles & the wyddowe: yf ye will
not shed innocent bloude in this place: yf ye wil not cleue to strauge goddes to
youre owne destruction:
7 then wil I let you dwell in this place, yee in the londe that I gaue afore
tyme vnto youre fathers for euer.
8 But take hede, yee trust in councels, that begyle you and do you no good.
9 For when ye haue stolle, murthured, committed aduoutrie, and periury: Whe ye
haue offred vnto Baal, folowinge straunge & vnknowne goddes:
10 Then come ye, and stonde before me in this house (which hath my name geuen
vnto it) and saye: Tush, we are absolued quyte, though we haue done all these
abhominacions.
11 What? thinke you this house that beareth my name, is a denne of theues? And
these thinges are not done priuely, but before myne eyes, saieth the LORDE.
12 Go to my place in Silo, where vnto I gaue my name afore tyme, and loke well
what I dyd to the same place, for the wickednes of my people of Israel.
13 And now, though ye haue done all these dedes (saieth the LORDE) and I my self
rose vp euer by tymes to warne you and to comon with you: yet wolde ye not heare
me: I called, ye wolde not answere.
14 And therfore euen as I haue done vnto Silo, so wil I do to this house, that
my name is geuen vnto, (and that ye put youre trust in) yee vnto the place that
I haue geuen to you and youre fathers.
15 And I shal thrust you out of my sight, as I haue cast out all youre brethren
the whole sede of Ephraim.
16 Therfore thou shalt not praye for this people, thou shalt nether geue thakes,
nor byd prayer for them: thou shalt make no intercession to me for them, for in
no wise will I heare the.
17 Seist thou not what they do in the cities of Iuda, and without Ierusalem?
18 The children gather stickes, the fathers kyndle the fyre, the mothers kneade
the dowe, to bake cakes for the quene of heauen. They poure out drinkoffringes
vnto strauge goddes, to prouoke me vnto wrath:
19 How be it they hurte not me (saieth the LORDE) but rather confounde, and
shame them selues.
20 And therfore thus saieth the LORDE God: beholde, my wrath and my indignacion
shalbe poured out vpon this place, vpon men and catell, vpo the trees in the
felde and all frute of the londe, & it shal burne so, that no man maye quench
it.
21 Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes, the God of Israel: Ye heape vp youre
burntoffringes with youre sacrifices, & eate ye flesh.
22 But when I brought youre fathers out of Egipte, I spake no worde vnto them of
burntoffringes and sacrifices:
23 but this I commaunded them, sayenge: herken and obeye my voyce, and I shalbe
youre God and ye shal be my people: so that ye walke in all the wayes, which I
haue comaunded you, that ye maye prospere.
24 But they were not obedient, they inclyned not their eares there vnto, but
went after their owne ymagynacions and after the mocions of their owne wicked
herte, and so turned them selues awaye, and conuerted not vnto me.
25 And this haue they done, from the tyme that youre fathers came out of Egipte,
vnto this daye. Neuertheles, I sent vnto them my seruauntes all the prophetes: I
rose vp early and sent them worde,
26 yet wolde they not herke, ner offre me their eares, but were obstinate, and
worse then their fathers.
27 And thou shalt now speake all these wordes vnto them, but they shal not heare
the: thou shalt crie vpon them, but they shal not answere the.
28 Therfore shalt thou saye vnto them: this is the people, that nether heareth
the voyce of the LORDE their God, ner receaueth his correction. Faithfulnes &
treuth is clene rooted out of their mouth.
29 Wherfore cut of thine hayre, and cast it awaye, take vp a complaynte in the
whole londe: for the LORDE shal cast awaye, and scatre the people, yt he is
displeased withall.
30 For the children of Iuda haue done euell in my sight, saieth the LORDE. They
haue set vp their abhominacions, in the house yt hath my name, and haue defyled
it.
31 They haue also buylded an aulter at Tophet, which is in the valley of ye
childre of Enno: yt they might burne their sonnes and doughters, which I neuer
comaunded them, nether came it euer in my thought.
32 And therfore beholde, the dayes shal come (saieth the LORDE) that it shal no
more be called. Tophet, or the valley of the children of Ennon, but the valley
of the slayne: for in Tophet they shalbe buried, because they shal els haue no
rowme.
33 Yee ye deed bodies of this people shal be eaten vp of the foules of the ayre
& wilde beastes of the earth, & no man shal fraye them awaie.
34 And as for the voyce of myrth & gladnesse of the cities of Iuda, & Ierusalem,
the voyce of the brydegrome and of the bryde: I will make them ceasse, for the
londe shal be desolate.

Chapter 8

1 At the same tyme, saieth the LORDE, the bones of the kinges of Iuda, the bones
of his princes, the bones of the prestes and prophetes, yee and the bones of the
citisens of Ierusale, shalbe brought out of their graues
2 and layed agaynst the Sonne, the Moone and all the heauenly hooste: whom they
loued, whom they serued, whom they ranne after, whom they sought & worshipped.
They shal nether be gathered together ner buried, but shal lye vpo the earth, to
their shame and despisinge.
3 And all they that remayne of this wicked generacion, shal desyre rather to dye
the to lyue: where so euer they remayne, & where as I scatre them, saieth the
LORDE of hoostes.
4 This shalt thou saye vnto them also: Thus saieth the LORDE: Do men fall so,
that they arise not vp agayne: And turne they so farre awaye, yt they neuer
conuerte?
5 Wherfore then is this people and Ierusalem gone so farre backe, that they
turne not againe? They are euer the longer the more obstinate, and will not be
conuerted.
6 For I haue loked, and considered: but there is no ma, that speaketh a good
worde: there is no man, that taketh repetaunce for his synne, that will so moch
as saye: wherfore haue I done this? But euery man (as soone as he is turned
backe) runneth forth still, like a wilde horse in a battayl.
7 The Storke knoweth his apoynted tyme, the Turtledoue, ye Swalow and the Crane,
cosidre the tyme of their trauayle: but my people will not knowe the tyme of the
punyshment of the LORDE.
8 How darre ye saye then: we are wise, we haue the lawe of the LORDE amonge vs?
Beholde, the disceatfull penne of the scrybes, setteth forth lies:
9 therfore shal the wise be confounded, they shalbe afrayed and taken: for lo,
they haue cast out the worde of the LORDE: what wy?dome can then be amonge them?
10 Wherfore, I will geue their wynes vnto aleauntes, and their feldes to
destroyers. For from the lowest vnto the hyest, they folowe all shamefull lucre:
and from the prophet vnto the prest, they deale all with lies.
11 Neuertheles, they heale the hurte of my people with swete wordes, sayenge:
peace, peace, where there is no peace at all.
12 Fye for shame, how abhominable thinges do they? And yet they be not ashamed,
yee they knowe of no shame. Wherfore in the tyme of their visitacion, they shal
fall amonge the deed bodies, saieth the LORDE.
13 Morouer I will gather them in (saieth the LORDE) so that there shal not be
one grape vpon the vyne, nether one fyge vpon the fyge tre, and the leaues
shalbe plucte of. Then will I cause them to departe, and saye:
14 why prolonge we the tyme? Let vs gather oure selues together, and go in to
the stronge cite, there shall we be in rest: For the LORDE oure God hath put vs
to sylence, and geuen vs water myxte with gall, to drynke, because we haue
synned agaynst him.
15 We loked for peace, and we fayre not the better, we wayted for the tyme of
health, and lo, here is nothinge but trouble.
16 Then shall the noyse of his horses be herde from Dan, the whole londe shall
be afrayed at the neyege of his stronge horses: for they shal go in, and deuoure
the londe, with all that is in it: the cities, and those that dwell therin.
17 Morouer, I will sende Cockatrices & serpetes amonge you (which will not be
charmed) and they shal byte you, sayeth the LORDE.
18 Sorowe is come vpon me, and heuynes vexeth my herte:
19 for lo, the voyce of the criege of my people is herde from a farre countre:
Is not the LORDE in Sion? Is not he kinge in her? Wherfore then haue they greued
me (shall the LORDE saye) with their ymages and foolish straunge fashions?
20 The haruest is gone, the Somer hath an ende, and we are not helped.
21 I am sore vexed, because of the hurte of my people: I am heuy and abashed,
22 for there is no more Triacle at Galaad, and there is no Phisician, that ca
heale the hurte of my people.

Chapter 9

1 O who will geue my heade water ynough, & a well of teares for myne eyes: that
I maye wepe night ad daye, for the slaughter of my people?
2 Wolde God that I had a cotage some where farre from folke, that I might leaue
my people, and go from the: for they be all aduoutrers and a shrenckinge sorte.
3 They bede their tuges like bowes, to shute out lies: As for the treuth, they
maye nothinge awaye with all in the worlde. For they go from one wickednes to
another, and holde nothinge of me, saieth the LORDE.
4 Yee one must kepe himself from another, no man maye safely trust his owne
brother: for one brother vndermyneth another, & one neghboure begyleth another.
5 Yee one dissembleth with another, and they deale with no treuth. They haue
practised their tunges to lye, and taken greate paynes to do myschefe.
6 They haue set their stole in the myddest of disceate, and (for very
dissemblinge falsede) they wil not knowe me, saieth the LORDE.
7 Therfore thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes, beholde, I wil melte them and trie
the, for what shulde I els do to my people?
8 Their tunges are like sharpe arowes, to speake disceate. With their mouth they
speake peaceably to their neghboure, but preuely they laye waite for him.
9 Shulde I not punysh them for these thinges, saieth the LORDE? Or, shulde I not
be auenged of eny soch people, as this?
10 Vpon the mountaynes will I take vp a lamentacion and soroufull crie, and a
mournynge vpon the fayre playnes of the wildernes: Namely, how they are so
brente vp, that no man goeth there enymore: Yee a man shal not heare one beast
crie there. Byrdes and catell are all gone from thece.
11 I will make Ierusalem also an heape of stones, and a denne of venymous
wormes. And I wil make the cities of Iuda so waist, that no man shal dwell
therin.
12 What man is so wise, as to vnderstonde this? Or to whom hath the LORDE spoken
by mouth, that he maye shewe this, and saye: O thou londe, why perishest thou
so? Wherfore art thou so brent vp, and like a wildernesse, that no ma goeth
thorow?
13 Yee the LORDE himself tolde the same vnto them, that forsoke his lawe, and
kepte not the thynge that he gaue them in commaundement, nether lyued therafter:
14 but folowed the wickednes of their owne hertes, and serued straunge goddes,
as their fathers taught them.
15 Therfore, thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes, the God of Israel: Beholde, I
will fede this people with wormwod, and geue the gall to drynke.
16 I will scatre them also amonge the Heithen, whom nether they ner their
fathers haue knowne: and I will sende a swearde amonge them, to persecute them,
vntill I bringe them to naught.
17 Morouer, thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: loke that ye call for mournynge
wyues, and sende for wise women: that they come shortly,
18 and singe a mournynge songe of you: that the teares maye fall out of oure
eyes, and that oure eye lyddes maye gushe out of water.
19 For there is a lamentable noyse herde of Sion: O how are we so sore
destroyed? O how are we so piteously confounded? We must forsake oure owne
naturall countre, and we are shot out of oure owne lodgiges.
20 Yet heare the worde of the LORDE (o ye women). And let youre eares regarde
the wordes of his mouth: that ye maye lerne youre doughters to mourne, and that
euery one maye teach hir neghbouresse, to make lamentacion.
21 Namely thus: Deeth is clymme vp in at oure wyndowes, he is come in to oure
houses, to destroye the childe before the dore, & ye yonge man in the strete.
22 But tell thou planely, thus saieth ye LORDE: The deed bodies of men shal lye
apon ye grounde, as the donge vpon the felde, and as the hay after the mower,
and there shalbe no man to take them vp.
23 Morouer, thus saieth the LORDE: Let not the wise man reioyse in his wisdome,
ner the stronge man in his strength, nether the rich man in his riches:
24 But who so wil reioyse, let him reioyse in this, that he vnderstodeth, and
knoweth me: for I am the LORDE, which do mercie, equite and rightuousnes vpon
earth. Therfore haue I pleasure in soch thinges, saieth ye LORDE.
25 Beholde, the tyme cometh (saieth the LORDE) that I wil vyset all them, whose
foreskynne is vncircumcised:
26 The Egipcians, the Iewes, the Edomites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, and the
shauen Madianites, that dwel in the wildernes. For all ye Gentiles are
vncircumcised in the flesh, but all the house of Israel, are vncircumcised in
the herte.

Chapter 10

1 Heare the worde of the LORDE, yt he speaketh vnto the, o thou house of Israel:
2 Thus saieth the LORDE: Ye shal not lerne after the maner of the Heithe, and ye
shal not be afrayed for the tokens of heauen: for the Heithen are afrayed of
soch:
3 Yee all the customes and lawes of the Getiles are nothinge, but vanite. They
hewe downe a tre in the wod with the hondes of the worke man, and fashion it
with the axe:
4 they couer it ouer with golde or syluer, they fasten it wt nales and hammers,
that it moue not.
5 It stodeth as stiff as the palme tre, it can nether speake ner go, but must be
borne. Be not ye afrayed of soch, for they ca do nether good ner euel.
6 But there is none like vnto ye (o LORDE) thou art greate, and greate is the
name of yi power.
7 Who wolde not feare the? or what kige of the Gentiles wolde not obeye the? For
amonge all the wysemen of the Gentiles, and in all their kingdomes, there is
none, that maye be lickened vnto the.
8 They are all together vnlerned and vnwise, All their connynge is but vanite:
9 namely, wod, syluer, which is brought out of Tharsis, and beate to plates: and
golde from Ophir, a worke yt is made with the honde of the craftesman & the
caster, clothed with yalow sylck and scarlet: euen so is the worke of their wyse
men all together.
10 But the LORDE is a true God, a lyuinge God, and an euerlastinge kinge. Yf he
be wroth, the earth shaketh: all the Getiles maye not abyde his indignacion.
11 As for their goddes, it maye well be sayde of the: they are goddes, that made
nether heaue ner earth: therfore shal they perish fro the earth, and from all
thinges vnder heauen.
12 But (as for oure God) he made the earth with his power, and with his wisdome
hath he fynished the whole compasse of the worlde, with his discrecion hath he
spred out the heauens,
13 At his voyce the waters gather together in the ayre, he draweth vp ye cloudes
from the vttemost partes of ye earth: he turneth lighteninge to rayne, and
brigeth forth the wyndes out of their treasuries:
14 His wisdome maketh all men fooles. And confunded be all casters of ymages,
for that they cast, is but a vayne thinge, and hath no life.
15 The vayne craftes men with their workes, that they in their vanite haue made,
shall perish one with another in the tyme of visitacion.
16 Neuertheles, Iacobs porcio is not soch: but it is he, that hath made all
thinges, and Israel is the rodd of his inheritauce: The LORDE of hoostes is his
name.
17 Put awaye thy vnclennesse out of the londe, thou that art in the stronge
cities.
18 For thus saieth the LORDE: Beholde, I wil now thrust out the inhatours of
this londe a greate waye off, and trouble them of soch a fashio, that they shal
no more be founde.
19 Alas, how am I hurte? Alas, how panefull are my scourges vnto me? For I
cosidre this sorow by my self, & I must suffre it,
20 My tabernacle is destroyed, and all my coardes are broken. My children are
gone fro me, ad can no where be founde. Now haue I none to sprede out my tente,
or to set vp my hanginges.
21 For the hyrdmen haue done folishly, that they haue not sought the LORDE.
Therfore haue they dealt vnwisely with their catell, & all are scatred abrode.
22 Beholde, the noyse is harde at honde, and greate sedicio out of the north: to
make the cities of Iuda a wyldernesse, and a dwellinge place for Dragons.
23 Now I knowe (o LORDE) that is not in mas power to ordre his owne waies, or to
rule his owne steppes & goinges.
24 Therfore chaste thou vs (o LORDE) but with fauoure, and not in thy wrath,
bringe vs not vtterly to naught.
25 Poure out thy indignacion rather vpon the Getiles, that knowe ye not, and
vpon the people that call not on thy name: And that because they haue consumed,
deuoured and destroyed Iacob, and haue roted out his glory.

Chapter 11

1 This is another Sermon, which the LORDE commaunded Ieremy for to preach,
sayenge:
2 Heare the wordes of the couenant, and speake vnto all Iuda, and to all them
that dwel at Ierusalem,
3 And saye thou vnto the: Thus saieth the LORDE God of Israel: Cursed be euery
one, that is not obedient vnto ye wordes of this couenaut:
4 which I commaunded vnto youre fathers, what tyme as I brought them out of
Egipte, from the yron fornace, sayenge: Be obedient vnto my voyce, and do
accordinge to all that I commaunde you: so shal ye be my people, and I wil be
youre God,
5 and will kepe my promyse, yt I haue sworne vnto youre fathers: Namely, that I
wolde geue them a londe which floweth with mylke and hony, as ye se, it is come
to passe vnto this daye. Then answered I, and sayde: Amen. It is euen so LORDE,
as thou sayest.
6 Then the LORDE sayde vnto me agayne: Preach this in ye cities off Iuda and
rounde aboute Ierusalem, and saye: Heare the wordes off this couenaunt, that ye
maye kepe them.
7 For I haue diligently exorted youre fathers, euer sence the tyme that I
brought them out off the Londe off Egipte, vnto this daye. I gaue them warnynge
by tymes, sayenge: herken vnto my voyce:
8 Neuertheles, they wolde not obeye me, nor enclyne their eares vnto me, but
folowed the wicked ymaginacios of their owne hertes. And therfore haue I accused
them as transgressours of all the wordes off this conuenaunt, that I gaue them
to kepe, which they (notwithstodinge) haue not kepte.
9 And the LORDE sayde vnto me: It is foude out, that whole Israel and all the
citisens off Ierusalem are gone backe.
10 They haue turned them selues to the blasphemies off their fore fathers, which
had no lust to heare my worde. Euen likewise haue these also folowed straunge
goddes, and worshipped them. The house off Israel and Iuda haue broken my
couenaunt, which I made wt their fathers.
11 Therfore thus saieth the LORDE: Beholde, I will sende a plage amonge you,
which ye shal not be able to escape: and though ye crie vnto me, I will not
heare you.
12 The shal the townes off Iuda and the citisens of Ierusalem go, and call vpon
their goddes, vnto whom they made their oblacios: but they are not able to helpe
them in tyme off their trouble.
13 For as many cities as thou hast (o Iuda) so many goddes hast thou also: And
loke how many stretes there be in the (o Ierusalem) so many shameful aulters
haue ye set vp, to offre vpon them vnto Baal.
14 But praye not thou for this people, byd nether prayse ner prayer for them:
for though they crie vnto me in their trouble, yet will I not heare them.
15 O thou beloued, why doest thou so shamefull greate blasphemies in my house?
euen as though that holy flesh might absolue the, specially when thou hast made
thy boost off thy wickednes.
16 The LORDE called the a grene olyue tre, a fayre one, a frutefull one, a
goodly one: but now that there is a contrary reporte off the abrode, he will
burne the vp, ad destroye thy braunches.
17 For the LORDE off hoostes that plated the, hath deuysed a plage for the (o
thou house of Israel & Iuda) for ye euel that ye haue done, to prouoke him to
wrath, in that ye dyd seruyce vnto Baal.
18 This (o LORDE) haue I lerned of the, and vnderstonde it, for thou hast shewed
me their ymaginacions.
19 But I (as a meke lambe) was caried awaye to be slayne: not knowinge, that
they had deuysed soch a councel agaynst me, sayenge: We will destroye his meate
with wod, and dryue him out of the londe of the lyuynge, that his name shal
neuer be thought vpon.
20 Therfore I will beseke the now (o LORDE of hoostes) thou rightuous iudge,
thou that tryest the reynes and the hertes: let me se the auenged of them, for
vnto the haue I committed my cause.
21 The LORDE therfore spake thus of the citesens of Anothot, that sought to
slaye me, sayege: Preach not vnto vs in the name of the LORDE, or els thou shalt
dye of oure hondes.
22 Thus (I saye) spake the LORDE of hoostes: Beholde, I will viset you. Youre
yonge me shal perish with the swearde, yor sonnes and youre doughters shal
vtterly dye of honger,
23 so that none shal remayne. For vpon the citesyns off Anathot wil I bringe a
plage, and the yeare of their visitacion.

Chapter 12

1 O Lorde, thou art more rightuous, then that I shulde dispute with the:
Neuertheles, let me talke with the in thinges reasonable. How happeneth it, that
the waye off the vngodly is so prosperous? and that it goeth so wel with them,
which (with out eny shame) offede and lyue in wickednesse?
2 Thou plantest them, they take rote, they growe, and bringe forth frute. They
boost moch off the, yet doest thou not punysh them.
3 But thou LORDE (to whom I am well knowne) thou that hast sene, & proued my
herte, take them awaye, like as a flock is caried to the slaughter house, and
apoynte them for the daye off slaughtinge.
4 How longe shall the londe mourne, and all the herbes off the felde perish, for
the wickednes off them that dwell therin? The catell and the byrdes are gone,
yet saye they: tush, God will not destroye vs vtterly.
5 Seinge thou art weery in runnynge with the fote men, how wilt thou then runne
wt horses? In a peaceable sure londe thou mayest be safe, but how wilt thou do
in the furious pryde of Iordane?
6 For thy brethren ad thy kynred haue altogether despised the, and cried out
vpon the in thine absence. Beleue them not, though they speake fayre wordes to
the.
7 As for me (saye I) I haue forsaken myne owne dwellinge place, and left myne
heretage. My life also that I loue so wel, haue I geuen in to the hodes of myne
enemies.
8 Myne heretage is become vnto me, as a Lyon in the wod. It cried out vpon me,
therfore haue I forsaken it.
9 Myne heretage is vnto me, as a spreckled byrde, a byrde of dyuerse coloures is
vpon it. Go hence, and gather all the beastes of the felde together, that they
maye eate it vp.
10 Dyuerse hyrdme haue broken downe my vynyarde, and troden vpon my porcion. Of
my pleasaunt porcion, they haue made a wildernes & deserte.
11 They haue layed it waist: and now that it is waist, it sigheth vnto me. Yee
the whole londe lieth waist, and no man regardeth it.
12 The distroyers come ouer the heeth euery waye, for the swearde off the LORDE
shal consume from the one ende of ye lode to the other, and no flesh shal haue
rest.
13 They shal sowe wheat, and reepe thornes. They shal take heretage in
possession, but it shal do them no good. And ye shalbe confounded of youre owne
wynnynges, because of the greate wrath of the LORDE.
14 Thus saieth the LORDE vpon all myne euel neghbours, that laye honde on myne
heretage, which I haue geuen my people of Israel: Beholde, I wil plucke them
(namely Israel) out of their londe, and put out the house of Iuda from amonge
them.
15 And whe I haue rooted the out, I wilbe at one with the agayne, and wil haue
mercy vpon them: and brynge them agayne, euery man to his owne heretage, and in
to his lode.
16 And yf they (namely that trouble my people) wil lerne ye wayes of them, to
sweare by my name: The LORDE lyueth (like as they lerned my people to sweare by
Baal) the shal they be rekened amoge my people.
17 But yf they wil not obeye, the will I rote out the same folke, and destroye
them, saieth the LORDE,

Chapter 13

1 Morouer, thus saied the LORDE vnto me: go thy waye & get the a lynnen breche,
and gyrde it aboute thy loynes, and let it not be wet.
2 Then I got me a brech, acordinge to the commaundemet of the LORDE, and put it
aboute my loynes.
3 After this, the LORDE spake vnto me agayne:
4 Take the breche that thou hast prepared & put aboute the, and get the vp, and
go vnto Euphrates, and hyde it in a hole off the rock.
5 So wet I, and hydde it, as the LORDE commaunded me.
6 And it happened longe after this, that the LORDE spake vnto me: Vp, and get
the to Euphrates, and fet the breche from thence, which I commaunded the to hyde
there.
7 Then went I to Euphrates, and digged vp, and toke the brech from the place
where I had hyd it: and beholde, the brech was corrupte, so that it was
profitable for nothinge.
8 Then sayde the LORDE vnto me:
9 Thus saieth the LORDE: Euen so will I corruppe the pryde off Iuda, and the hie
mynde off Ierusale.
10 This people is a wicked people, they will not heare my worde, they folowe ye
wicked ymaginacions off their owne hert, & hange vpon strauge goddes, the haue
they serued & worshipped: and therfore they shalbe as this brech, that serueth
for nothinge.
11 For as strately as a brech lieth vpon a mas loynes, so strately dyd I bynde
ye whole house of Israel, and the whole house of Iuda vnto me, saieth the LORDE:
that they might be my people: that they might haue a glorious name: yt they
might be in honoure: but they wolde not obeye me.
12 Therfore laye this ryddle before them, and saye: Thus saieth the LORDE God of
Israel: euery pot shal be fylled with wyne. And they shal saye: thinkest thou we
knowe not, yt euery pot shalbe fylled with wyne?
13 Then shalt thou saye vnto them: Thus saieth the LORDE: Beholde, I shal fyll
all the inhabitours of this lode wt dronckenes, the kynges that syt vpo Dauids
stole, the prestes and prophetes, with all yt dwell at Ierusalem.
14 And I will shute them one agaynst another, yee ye fathers agaynst the sonnes,
saieth the LORDE. I wil not pardon them, I wil not spare them, ner haue pitie
vpon them: but destroye them.
15 Be obedient, geue eare, take no di?dayne at it, for it is the LORDE himself
that speaketh.
16 Honoure ye LORDE youre God herein, or he take his light from you, and or euer
youre fete stomble in darknesse at ye hill: lest whe ye loke for the light, he
turne it in to ye shadowe and darknesse of death.
17 But yf ye wil not heare me, that geue you secrete warnynge, I will mourne fro
my whole herte for youre stubburnesse. Piteously will I wepe, and the teares
shall gushe out of myne eyes. For the LORDES flocke shal be caried awaye
captiue.
18 Tell the kinge & the rulers: Humble yor selues, set you downe lowe, for ye
crowne of yor glory shal fall from youre heade.
19 The cities towarde the south shalbe shut vp, & no man shal open the. All Iuda
shal be caried awaye captyue, so that none shall remayne.
20 Lift vp youre eyes, and beholde the, that come from the North: Like a fat
flocke shal they fall vpon the.
21 To whom wilt thou make thy mone, when they come vpon the? for thou hast
taught the thy self, and made the masters ouer the. Shal not sorowe come vpo
the, as on a woman trauelinge with childe?
22 And yf thou woldest saye the in thine hert: Wherfore come these thinges vpo
me? Eue for the multitude of thy blasphemies, shall thy hynder partes & thy fete
be discouered.
23 For like as the man of Inde maye chaunge his skynne, & the cat of the
mountayne hir spottes: so maye ye that be exercised in euell, do good.
24 Therfore will I scatre you, lyke as ye stobble that is take awaye with ye
south wynde.
25 This shal be youre porcion, and the porcion of youre measure, wher with ye
shalbe rewarded of me, saieth the LORDE: because ye haue forgotten me, and put
youre trust in disceatful thinges.
26 Therfore shall I turne thy clothes ouer thy heade, and discouer thy thees,
that thy preuyties maye be sene:
27 yi aduoutrie, thy deedly malice, thy beastlynes and thy shamefull whordome.
For vpon the feldes and hilles I haue sene thy abhominacions. Wo be vnto the (o
Ierusale) whe wilt thou euer be clensed enymore?

Chapter 14

1 The worde of the LORDE shewed vnto Ieremy, cocernynge ye derth off the frutes.
2 Iuda shal mourne, men shall not go moch more thorow his gates: the londe shal
be nomore had in reputacion, & the crie of Ierusale shal breake out.
3 The lordes shall sende their seruauntes to fetch water, & when they come to
the welles, they shal fynde no water, but shal carie their vessels home emptie.
They shalbe ashamed ad confounded, & shal couer their heades.
4 For the groude shalbe dried vp, because there cometh no rayne vpon it. The
plowmen also shalbe ashamed, ad shal couer their heades.
5 The Hynde shal forsake the yonge fawne, that se brigeth forth in ye felde,
because there shalbe no grasse.
6 The wilde Asses shall stonde in the Mosse, and drawe in their wynde like the
Dragos, their eyes shal fayle for wat of grasse.
7 Doutles oure owne wickednesse rewarde vs: But LORDE do thou acordinge to yi
name, though oure transgressions and synnes be many.
8 For thou art the comforte & helpe of Israel in the tyme of trouble. Why wilt
thou be as a straunger in the Londe, and as one that goeth ouer the felde, ad
cometh in only to remayne for a night?
9 Why wilt thou make thy self a cowarde, and as it were a giaute that yet maye
not helpe? For thou art ours (o LORDE) and we beare thy name, therfore forsake
vs not.
10 Then spake the LORDE, concernynge this people yt haue pleasure to go so
nembly wt their fete, and leaue not of, and therfore displease the LORDE: in so
moch, that he will now bringe agayne to remembraunce all their my?dedes, ad
punysh all their synnes.
11 Yee euen thus sayde the LORDE vnto me: Thou shalt not praye to do this people
good.
12 For though they fast, I will not heare their prayers. And though they offre
burnt offriges & sacrifices, yet wil not I accepte them. For I will destroye
them with the swearde, honger and pestilence.
13 Then answerde I: O LORDE God, the prophetes saye vnto them: Tush, ye shal se
no swearde, and no honger shall come vpon you, but the LORDE shal geue you
continuall rest in this place.
14 And the LORDE sayde vnto me: The prophetes preach lies vnto them in my name.
I haue not spoken with them, nether gaue I them eny charge, nether dyd I sende
the: yet they preach vnto you false visions, charmynge, vanite, and
disceatfulnesse of their owne herte.
15 Therfore thus saieth the LORDE: As for those prophetes that preach in my name
(whom I neuertheles haue not sent) and yt saye: Tush, there shal nether batel
ner honger be in this londe: With swearde ad with honger shal those prophetes
perish,
16 and the people to whom they haue preached, shal be cast out of Ierusalem, dye
of honger, ad be slayne with the swearde, (and there shal be no man to burie
them) both they ad their wyues, their sonnes and their doughters. For thus wil I
poure their wickednes vpon the.
17 This shalt thou saye also vnto them: Myne eyes shal wepe without ceassinge
daye & night. For my people shalbe dtstroyed with greate harme, and shall perish
with a greate plage.
18 For yff I go in to the felde, lo, it lieth all full off slayne men: Yff I
come in to the cite, lo, they be all fameshed of honger. Yee their prophetes
also and prestes shalbe led in to an vnknowne londe.
19 Hast thou then vtterly forsaken Iuda? (sayde I) Dost thou so abhorre Sio? Or
hast thou so plaged vs, that we can be healed nomore? We loked for peace, and
there cometh no good: for the tyme of health, & lo, here is nothinge but
trouble.
20 We knowlege (o LORDE) all oure my?dedes, and the synnes of oure fathers, that
we haue offended ye.
21 Be not displeased (o LORDE) for thy names sake, forget not thy louynge
kyndnes: Remembre ye trone of thyne honoure, breake not the couenaut, that thou
hast made with vs.
22 Are there eny amonge the goddes of the Gentiles, that sende rayne, or geue
the showers of heauen? Dost not thou it o LORDE oure God, in who we trust? Yee
LORDE, thou dost all these thinges.

Chapter 15

1 Then spake the LORDE vnto me, ad sayde: Though Moses and Samuel stode before
me, yet haue I no herte to this people. Dryue them awaye, that they maye go out
of my sight.
2 And yf they saye vnto the: Whyther shal we go? The tell the: The LORDE geueth
you this answere: Some vnto death, some to the swearde, some to honger, some in
to captiuyte.
3 For I will bringe foure plages vpon them, saieth the LORDE. The swearde shal
stragle them, the dogges shal deuoure them, the foules of the ayre ad beestes of
the earth shal eate them vp, and destroye them.
4 I will scatre them aboute also in all kingdomes and londes to be plaged,
because of Manasses the sonne of Ezechias kinge of Iuda, for the thinges that he
dyd in Ierusalem.
5 Who shal then haue pite vpon the, o Ierusalem? Who shal be sory for the? Or
who shal make intercession, to opteyne peace for the?
6 seinge thou goest fro me, ad turnest bacwarde, saieth the LORDE? Therfore I
will stretch out myne honde agaynst the, to destroye the, and I will not be
intreated.
7 I will scatre the abrode with the fanne on euery side of the londe: I will
waist my people and destroye them, for they haue had no lust to turne from their
owne wayes.
8 I will make their wyddowes mo in nombre, then the sondes of the see. Vpon ye
mothers of their children, I shal bringe a destroyer in the noone daye. Sodenly
and vnawarres, shal I sende a feare vpon their cities.
9 She that hath borne vij. children, shal haue none, hir herte shalbe ful of
sorowe. The Sonne shall fayle her in the cleare daye, when she shalbe confounded
and faynte for very heuynesse. As for those yt remayne, I wil delyuer them vnto
the swearde off their enemies, saieth the LORDE.
10 O mother, alas that euer thou dydest beare me, an enemie and hated of the
whole londe: Though I neuer lente ner receaued vpon vsury, yet euery man speake
euell vpon me.
11 And ye LORDE answered me: Lede not I the then vnto good? Come not I to the,
when thou art in trouble: and helpe ye, when thine enemie oppresseth the?
12 Doth one yron hurte another, or one metall that cometh from the north,
another?
13 As for youre riches and treasure, I wil geue them out in to a pray, not for
eny money, but because of all youre synnes, that ye haue done i all youre
coastes.
14 And I wil brige you with youre enemies in to a londe, yt ye knowe not: for
the fyre that is kyndled in my indignacion, shal burne you vp.
15 O LORDE (sayde I then) thou knowest all thinges, therfore remembre me, ad
viset me, delyuer me fro my persecuters: Receaue not my cause in yi loge wrath,
yet thou knowest, that for thy sake I suffre rebuke.
16 When I had founde thy wordes, I at them vp gredely: they haue made my hert
ioyfull & glad. For I call vpon thy name, o LORDE God off hoostes.
17 I dwell not amonge the scorners, nether is my delyte therin: but I dwell only
in the feare of thy honde, for thou hast fylled me with bytternes.
18 Shall my heuynes endure for euer? Are my plages then so greate, yt they maye
neuer be healed? Wilt thou be as a water, that falleth, and can not contynue?
19 Vpon these wordes, thus sayde the LORDE vnto me: Yf thou wilt turne agayne, I
shal set the in my seruyce: and yf thou wilt take out the thinge that is
precious from the vyle, thou shalt be euen as myne owne mouth. They shal
conuerte vnto the, but turne not thou vnto the:
20 and so shal I make the a stroge wall of stele agaynst this people. They shal
fight agaynst the, but they shal not preuayle. For I myself will be with the, to
helpe the, and delyuer the, saieth the LORDE.
21 And I will ryd the out of the hondes of the wicked, and delyuer the out of
the honde of Tirauntes.

Chapter 16

1 Morouer, thus sayde the LORDE vnto me:
2 Thou shalt take ye no wife, ner beget children in this place.
3 For of the children that are borne in this place, of their mothers that haue
borne them, and of their fathers that haue begotten them in this londe, thus
saieth the LORDE:
4 They shal dye an horrible deeth, no ma shal mourne for them, ner burie them,
but they shal lye as doge vpon the earth. They shal perish thorow the swearde
and honger, and their bodies shal be meate for the foules of the ayre, and
beestes of the earth.
5 Agayne, thus saieth the LORDE: Go not vnto them, that come together, for to
mourne and wepe: for I haue taken my peace fro this people (saieth the LORDE)
yee my fauoure and my mercy.
6 And in this londe shal they dye, olde and yonge, and shall not be buried: no
man shall bewepe them, no man shall clippe or shaue himselff for them.
7 There shal not one viset another, to mourne with them for their deed, or to
comforte them. One shall not offre another the cuppe off consolacion, to forget
their heuynes for father and mother.
8 Thou shalt not go in to their feast house, to syt downe, moch lesse to eate or
drynke with them.
9 For thus saieth the LORDE off hoostes the God off Israel: Beholde, I shall
take awaye out of this place, the voyce off myrth ad gladnesse, the voyce off
the brydegrome and off the bryde: yee and that in youre dayes, that ye maye se
it.
10 Now when thou shewest this people all these wordes, and they saye vnto the:
Wherfore hath the LORDE deuysed all this greate plage for vs? Or what is the
offence and synne, that we haue done agaynst the LORDE oure God?
11 Then make thou them this answere: Because youre fathers haue forsaken me
(saieth the LORDE) and haue cleued vnto straunge goddes, whom they haue honoured
and worshipped: but me haue they forsake, and haue not kepte my lawe.
12 And ye wt youre shamefull blasphemies, haue exceaded the wickednes off youre
fathers. For euery one off you foloweth the frawerde euel ymaginacion off his
owne hert, and is not obedient vnto me.
13 Therfore wil I cast you out off this londe, in to a londe that ye and youre
fathers knowe not: and there shall ye serue straunge goddes daye and night,
there will I shewe you no fauoure.
14 Beholde therfore (saieth the LORDE) the daies are come, that it shall nomore
be sayed: The LORDE lyueth, which brought the children of Israel out of the lode
of Egipte:
15 but (it shall be sayde) the LORDE lyueth, that brought the children of Israel
from the North, & from all londes where I had scatred them. For I wil bringe the
agayne in to the lode, that I gaue vnto their fathers.
16 Beholde, (saieth the LORDE) I will sende out many fishers to take them, and
after yt wil I sende out many hunters to hunte the out, from all mountaynes and
hilles ad out of the caues of stones.
17 For myne eyes beholde all their wayes, and they can not be hyd fro my face,
nether can their wicked dedes be kepte close out of my sight.
18 But first will I sufficiently rewarde their shamefull blasphemies and synnes,
wherwith they haue defyled my londe: Namely, with their stinckinge Idols and
abhominacions, wherwt they haue fylled myne heretage.
19 O LORDE, my strength, my power, and refuge in tyme off trouble. The Gentiles
shall come vnto the from the endes off the worlde, and saye: Verely oure fathers
haue cleued vnto lies, their Idols are but vayne and vnprofitable.
20 How can a man make those his goddes, which are not able to be goddes?
21 And therfore, I will once teach them (saieth ye LORDE) I wil shewe them my
honde and my power, that they maye knowe, yt my name is ye LORDE.

Chapter 17

1 Youre synne (o ye off the trybe of Iuda) is writte in the table of yor hertes,
& graue so vpon the edges of yor aulters wt a penne of yron & with an Adamat
clawe:
2 yt youre children also maye thynke vpon youre aulters, woddes, thicke trees,
hie hilles, mountaynes & feldes.
3 Wherfore, I will make all youre substaunce & treasure be spoyled, for the
greate synne that ye haue done vpon youre hie places, thorow out all ye coostes
off youre lode.
4 Ye shal be cast out also from the heretage, that I gaue you. And I wil subdue
you vnder the heuy bodage of youre enemies, in a londe that ye knowe not. For ye
haue ministred fyre to my indignacion, which shal burne euermore.
5 Thus saieth the LORDE: Cursed be the man that putteth his trust in man, ad
that taketh flesh for his arme: and he, whose herte departeth from ye LORDE.
6 He shall be like the heeth, that groweth in the wildernes. As for the good
thinge that is for to come, he shall not se it: but dwell in a drie place off
the wildernes, in a salt and vnoccupied londe.
7 O Blissed is the man, that putteth his trust in the LORDE, and whose hope the
LORDE is himself.
8 For he shalbe as a tre, that is planted by the water syde: which spredeth out
the rote vnto moystnesse, whom the heate can not harme, when it commeth, but his
leaues are grene. And though there growe but litle frute because off drouth, yet
is he not carefull, but he neuer leaueth of to bringe forth frute.
9 Amonge all thinges lyuynge, man hath the most disceatfull and vnsercheable
hert. Who shall then knowe it?
10 Euen I the LORDE ripe out the grounde off the hert, ad search the reynes and
rewarde euery ma acordinge to his wayes, and acordinge to the frute off his
councels.
11 The disceatfull maketh a nest, but bringeth forth no yonge: He commeth by
riches, but not rightuously. In the myddest off his life must he leaue them
behinde him, and at the last be founde a very foole.
12 But thou (o LORDE) whose trone is most glorious, excellent and off most
antiquite, which dwellest in the place of oure holy rest:
13 Thou art the comforte off Israel. All they that forsake the, shalbe
confounded: all they that departe from the, shalbe written in earth, for they
haue forsaken the LORDE, the very condite of the waters of life.
14 Heale me (o LORDE) and I shall be whole: saue thou me, and I shalbe saued,
for thou art my prayse.
15 Beholde, these men saye vnto me: Where is the worde of the LORDE? Let it
come.
16 Where as I neuertheles ledinge the flock in thy wayes, haue compelled none by
violence. For I neuer desyred eny mas deeth, this knowest thou well. My wordes
also were right before the.
17 Be not now terrible vnto me (o LORDE) for thou art he, in whom I hope, when I
am in parell.
18 Let my persecuters be confounded, but not me: let them be afrayed, and not
me. Thou shalt bringe vpon the the tyme off their plage, and shalt destroye them
right sore.
19 Agayne, thus hath the LORDE sayde vnto me: Go and stonde vnder the gate,
where thorow the people and the kinges of Iuda go out and in, yee vnder all the
gates of Ierusalem,
20 and saye vnto them: Heare the worde of the LORDE, ye kinges of Iuda, and all
thou people of Iuda, and all ye citesyns of Ierusalem, that go thorow this gate:
21 Thus the LORDE commaundeth: Take hede for youre lyues, that ye carie no
burthen vpon you in the Sabbath, to bringe it thorow the gates of Ierusalem:
22 ye shall beare no burthen also out of youre houses in the Sabbath: Ye shall
do no laboure there in, but halowe the Sabbath, as I commaunded youre fathers.
23 How be it they obeyed me not, nether herkened they vnto me: but were
obstinate & stubburne, ad nether obeyed me, ner receaued my correccion.
24 Neuertheles, yf ye will heare me (saieth the LORDE) and beare no burthen in
to ye cite thorow this gate vpon the Sabbath: Yf ye will halowe the Sabbath, so
that ye do no worke there in:
25 then shal there go thorow the gates of this cite, kinges and prynces, that
shall syt vpon the stole of Dauid: They shall be caried vpon charettes, and ryde
vpon horses, both they and their princes: Yee whole Iuda and all the citesyns of
Ierusalem shall go here thorow, and this cite shall euer be the more and more
inhabited.
26 There shall come men also from the cities of Iuda, from aboute Ierusalem, ad
from ye londe of Ben Iamin, from the playne feldes, from the mountaynes and from
the wildernesse: which shall bringe burntoffringes, sacrifices, oblacions, and
incense, and offre vp thankesgeuynge in the house of the LORDE.
27 But yff ye will not be obedient vnto me, to halowe the Sabbath, so that ye
will beare youre burthens thorow the gates off Ierusalem vpon the Sabbath: Then
shall I set fyre vpon the gates off Ierusalem, ad it shal burne vp the houses
off Ierusalem, and no man shal be able to quench it.

Chapter 18

1 This is another communicacion, that God had with Ieremy, sayenge:
2 Arise, and go downe in to the Potters house, and there shall I tell the more
off my mynde.
3 Now when I came to the Potters house, I founde him makinge his worke vpon a
whele.
4 The vessel that the Potter made off claye, brake amonge his hodes: So he
beganne a new, and made a nother vessell, acordinge to his mynde.
5 Then sayde the LORDE thus vnto me:
6 Maye not I do wt you, as this Potter doth, O ye house off Israel? saieth the
LORDE? Beholde, ye house off Israel: ye are in my honde, euen as the claye in
the Potters honde.
7 When I take in honde to rote out, to destroye, or to waist awaye eny people or
kigdome:
8 yff that people (agaynst whom I haue thus deuysed) couerte from their
wickednes: Immediatly, I repente off the plage, that I deuysed to bringe vpon
the.
9 Agayne: Whe I take in honde, to buylde, or to plante a people or a kingdome:
10 yff the same people do euell before me, and heare not my voyce: Immediatly, I
repente of the good, that I deuysed to do for them.
11 Speake now therfore vnto whole Iuda, and to them that dwell at Ierusalem:
Thus saieth the LORDE: Beholde, I am deuysinge a plage for you, and am takinge a
thinge in honde agaynst you. Therfore, let euery man turne from his euell waye,
take vpon you the thinge that is good, and do right.
12 But they saye: No more of this, we will folowe oure owne ymaginacions, and do
euery ma acordinge to the wilfulnesse of his owne mynde.
13 Therfore thus saieth the LORDE: Axe amonge the Heithen, yf eny man hath herde
soch horrible thinges, as the doughter of Sion hath done.
14 Shal not ye snowe (yt melteth vpon the stony rockes of Libanus) moysture the
feldes? Or maye the springes off waters be so grauen awaye, that they runne
nomore, geue moystnesse, ner make frutefull?
15 But my people hath so forgotten me, yt they haue made sacrifice vnto vayne
goddes. And whyle they folowed their owne wayes they are come out of the hie
strete, and gone in to a fote waye not vsed to be troden.
16 Where thorow they haue brought their londe in to an euerlastinge wildernesse
and scorne: So yt who so euer trauayleth ther by, shalbe abashed, and wagge
their heades.
17 With an East wynde will I scatre the, before their enemies. And when their
destruction cometh, I will turne my backe vpo them, but not my face.
18 Then sayde they: come, let vs ymagin somthinge agaynst this Ieremy. Yee this
dyd euen the prestes, to whom ye lawe was commytted: the Senatours, yt were the
wysest: and the prophetes, which wanted not ye worde off God. Come (sayde they)
let vs cut out his tuge, and let vs not regarde his wordes.
19 Considre me (o LORDE) and heare the voyce of myne enemies.
20 Do they not recompence euell for good, when they dygg a pyt for my soule?
Remembre, how that I stode before the, to speake for the, ad to turne awaye thy
wrath from them.
21 Therfore let their childre dye of hunger, and let them be oppressed with the
swearde. Let their wyues be robbed of their childre, and become wyddowes: let
their hu?bodes be slayne, let their yonge men be kylled with the swearde in the
felde.
22 Let the noyse be herde out of their houses, when the murtherer cometh sodenly
vpon them: For they haue digged a pit to take me, and layed snares for my fete.
23 Yet LORDE, thou knowest all their coucell, that they haue deuysed, to slaye
me. And therfore forgeue them not their wickednes, and let not their synne be
put out of thy sight: but let them be iudged before the as the giltie: This
shalt thou do vnto the in ye tyme of thy indignacion.

Chapter 19

1 Morouer, thus saide the LORDE vnto Ieremy: Go thy waye, and bye the an erthen
pytcher, and bringe forth the Senatours and chefe prestes
2 in to the valley of the children off Ennon, which lieth before the porte that
is made of brick, & shewe them there the wordes, that I shall tell the,
3 and saye thus vnto them: Heare the worde of the LORDE, ye kinges of Iuda, ad
ye citesyns of Ierusalem: Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel:
Beholde, I will bringe soch a plage vpon this place, that ye eares of all that
heare it, shal glowe.
4 And that because they haue forsake me, and vnhalowed this place, and haue
offred in it vnto straunge goddes: who nether they, their fathers, ner the
kinges off Iuda haue knowne. They haue filled this place also wt the bloude of
innocentes,
5 for they haue set vp an aulter vnto Baal, to burne their children for a
burntoffringe vnto Baal, which I nether commaunded, ner charged them, nether
thought once there vpon.
6 Beholde therfore, ye tyme cometh (saieth the LORDE) yt this place shal no more
be called Tophet, ner ye valley of ye childre of Enno, but ye valley of
slaughter.
7 For in this place wil I slaye the Senatours of Iuda & Ierusale, & kill the
downe wt the swearde in ye sight of their enemies, ad of them that seke their
lyues. And their deed carca es wil I geue to be meate for the foules of the
ayre, and beestes of the felde.
8 And I wil make this cite so desolate, ad despysed: that who so goeth there by,
shal be abashed & geast vpon her, because of all hir plages.
9 I will fede them also wt the flesh of their sonnes & their doughters. Yee
euery one shal eate vp another in the beseginge & straytnesse, wher wt their
enemies (yt seke their lyues) shal kepe the in.
10 And the pitcher shalt thou breake in the sight of the me, yt shalbe wt the,
and saye vnto the:
11 Thus saieth the LORDE off hoostes: Eue so wil I destroye this people & cite:
as a Potter breaketh a vessel, that can not be made whole agayne. In Tophet shal
they be buried, for they shal haue none other place.
12 Thus wil I do vnto this place also, saieth the LORDE, and to the yt dwell
there in: yee I wil do to this cite, as vnto Tophet
13 (For the houses of Ierusale & the houses of the kinges of Iuda are defyled,
like as Tophet,) because off all the houses, in whose parlers they dyd sacrifice
vnto all the hooste of heaue, and poured out drynke offringes vnto straunge
goddes.
14 And so Ieremy came from Tophet, where the LORDE had sent him to prophecie,
and stode in the courte off the house off the LORDE, and spake to all the
people:
15 Thus saieth the LORDE off hoostes the God of Israel: Beholde, I will bringe
vpon this cite and vpon euery towne aboute it, all the plages that I haue
deuysed agaynst them: for they haue bene obstinate, ad wolde not obeye my
warnynges.

Chapter 20

1 When Pashur the preast, the sonne off Emmer, chefe in the house of ye LORDE,
herde Ieremy preach so stedfastly:
2 he smote Ieremy, and put him in the stockes, that are by the hie gate of Ben
Iamin, in the house of ye LORDE.
3 The nexte daye folowinge, Pashur brought Ieremy out of the stockes agayne.
Then sayde Ieremy vnto him: The LORDE shall call the nomore Pashur (that is
excellent and increasinge) but Magor (that is fearfull ad afrayed) euery where.
4 For thus saieth the LORDE: beholde, I will make the afrayed, the thy self, and
all that fauoure ye: which shal perish with the swearde off their enemies, euen
before yi face. And I wil geue whole Iuda vnder the power of the kinge of
Babilon, which shall carie some vnto Babilon presoners, and slaye some with the
swearde.
5 Morouer, all ye substaunce of this londe, all their precious and gorgeous
workes, all costlynesse, and all the treasure of the kinges of Iuda: wil I geue
in to the hodes of their enemies, which shal spoyle them, and carie them vnto
Babilon.
6 But as for the (o Pashur) thou shalt be caried vnto Babilon with all thine
housholde, & to Babilo shalt thou come, where thou shalt die, and be buried:
thou and all thy fauourers, to whom thou hast preached lies.
7 O LORDE, thou makest me weake, but thou refreshest me, & makest me stronge
agayne. All the daye longe am I despysed, and laughed to scorne of euery man:
8 because I haue now preached longe agaynst malicious Tyranny, and shewed them
off destruccion. For ye which cause they cast the worde off the LORDE in my
teth, and take me euer to the worst.
9 Wherfore, I thought from hence forth, not to speake of him, ner to preach eny
more in his name. But the worde off the LORDE was a very burnynge fyre in my
hert and in my bones, which when I wolde haue stopped, I might not.
10 For why, I herde so many derisios and blasphemies, yee euen of myne owne
companyons, and off soch as were conuersaunte with me: which wente aboute, to
make me afrayed sayenge: vpon him, let vs go vpon him, to feare him, and make
him holde his tonge: yt we maye ouercome him, and be avenged off him.
11 But the LORDE stode by me, like a mightie giaunte: therfore my persecuters
fell, and coude do nothinge. They shal be sore confouded, for they haue done
vnwisely, they shall haue an euerlastinge shame.
12 And now, o LORDE of hoostes, thou rightuous sercher) which knowest the reynes
and the very hertes:) let me se them punyshed, for vnto the I committe my cause.
13 Synge vnto the LORDE, and prayse him, for he hath delyuered the soule off the
oppressed, from the honde off the violent.
14 Cursed be the daye, wherein I was borne: vnhappie be ye daye, where in my
mother brought me forth.
15 Cursed be the man, that brought my father the tidinges, to make him glad,
sayenge: thou hast gotten a sonne.
16 Let it happen vnto that man, as to the cities which ye LORDE turned vpside
downe (when he had longe herde the wicked rumoure of them)
17 because he slewe me not, as soone as I came out off my mothers wombe, and
because my mother was not my graue hirselff, that the byrth might not haue come
out, but remayned still in her.
18 Wherfore came I forth off my mothers wombe? To haue experience of laboure and
sorowe? and to lede my life with shame?

Chapter 21

1 These are the wordes that the LORDE spake vnto Ieremy, what tyme as kinge
Sedechias sent vnto him Pashur the sonne off Melchia, and Sophonias the sonne of
Maasia prest, sayenge:
2 Axe councell at the LORDE (we praye the) of oure behalfe, for Nabuchodonosor
the kinge off Babilon besegeth vs, yff the LORDE (peraduenture) will deale with
vs, acordinge to his maruelous power, and take him from vs.
3 Then spake Ieremy: Geue Sedechias this answere,
4 Thus saieth the LORDE God off Israel: beholde, I will turne backe the weapens,
that ye haue in youre hondes, wherwith ye fight agaynst the kinge of Babilo &
the Caldees, which besege you rounde aboute ye walles: & I wil brige the
together in to the myddest of this cite,
5 and I myselff will fight agaynst you, with an outstretched honde, ad with a
mightie arme, in greate displeasure and terrible wrath:
6 and will smyte them, that dwell in this cite: yee both me ad catell shal dye
of the pestilence.
7 And after this (saieth the LORDE) I shall delyuer Sedechias the kinge of Iuda,
& his seruauntes, his people (and soch as are escaped in the cite, from the
pestilence, swearde, and honger) into the power of Nabuchodonosor kinge of
Babilon: yee in to the hodes of their enemies, in to the hodes of those yt
folowe vpon their lyues, which shall smyte them with ye swerde: they shal not
pite the, they shal not spare them, they shall haue no mercy vpon them.
8 And vnto this people thou shalt saye: Thus saieth the LORDE: beholde, I laye
before you the waye of life and deeth.
9 Who so abydeth in this cite, shal perish: ether wt the swearde, with honger,
or with pestilece. But who so goeth out to holde on ye Caldees parte, yt besege
it, he shal saue his life, and shall wynne his soule for a pray.
10 For I haue set my face agaynst this cite (saieth the LORDE) to plage it, and
to do it no good. It must be geue in to the honde of the kinge of Babilon, & be
brent with fyre.
11 And vnto the house of the kinge off Iuda, saye thus: Heare the worde of ye
LORDE
12 (o thou house off Dauid) for thus saieth the LORDE: Ministre rightuousnes,
and that soone, delyuer the oppressed fro violent power: or euer my terrible
wrath break out like a fyre. and burne so, that no man maye quech it, because of
the wickednes of youre ymaginacions.
13 Beholde (saieth the LORDE) I wil come vpo you, that dwel in the valleis,
rockes and feldes and saye: Tush, who will make vs afrayed? or who will come in
to oure houses?
14 For I will vyset you (saieth the LORDE) because off the wickednes off youre
invencions, and will kyndle soch a fyre in youre wod, as shall cosume all, that
is aboute you.

Chapter 22

1 Thus sayde the LORDE also: Go downe in to the house of the kinge off Iuda, and
speake there these wordes,
2 & saye: Heare the worde off the LORDE, thou kinge off Iuda that syttest in the
kyngly seate off Dauid: thou and thy seruauntes ad ye people, that go in & out
at this gate.
3 Thus the LORDE commaundeth: kepe equite and rightuousnesse, delyuer the
oppressed fro the power off the violent: do not greue ner oppresse the
straunger, the fatherlesse ner the wyddowe, ad shed no innocet bloude in this
place.
4 And yff ye kepe these thinges faithfully, then shall there come in at the dore
off this house kynges, to syt vpo Dauids seate: they shal be caried in Charettes
and ryde vpon horses, both they & their seruauntes, ad their people.
5 But yf ye wil not be obedient vnto these commaundementes, I sweare by myne
owne self (saieth ye LORDE) this house shalbe waist.
6 For thus hath the LORDE spoken vpon the kinges house of Iuda: Thou art the
heade, as Galaad is in Libanus: What wilt thou laye of it, yf I make the not so
waist (& thy cities also) that no man shal dwell there in?
7 I will prepare a destroyer with his weapes for the, to hew downe thy special
Cedre trees, and to cast them in the fyre.
8 And all the people that go by this cite, shall speake one to another: Wherfore
hath the LORDE done thus vnto this noble cite?
9 Then shall it be answered: because they haue broken the couenaunt off the
LORDE their God, and haue worshipped and serued strauge goddes.
10 Mourne not ouer the deed, and be not wo for them, but be sory for him that
departeth awaye: for he commeth not agayne, ad seeth his natyue countre no more.
11 For thus saieth the LORDE, as touchinge Sellum the sonne of Iosias kinge of
Iuda, which reygned after his father, and is caried out off this place: He shal
neuer come hither agayne,
12 for he shal dye in the place, where vnto he is led captyue, and shall se this
londe nomore.
13 Wo worth him, that buyldeth his house with vnrightuousnes, ad his perlers
with the good, that he hath gotten by violence: which neuer recompenseth his
neghburs laboure, ner payeth him his hyre.
14 He thinketh in himself: I wil buylde me a wyde house, ad gorgeous perlers: He
causeth wyndowes to be hewen there in, and the sylinges and geastes maketh he
off Cedre, and paynteth them with Zenober.
15 Thinkest thou to reigne, now that thou prouokest me to wrath with yi Cedre
trees? Dyd not thy father eate and drynke, and prospere well, as loge as he
dealt with equite ad rightuousnesse?
16 Yee when he helped ye oppressed and poore to their right, then prospered he
well. From whence came this, but only because he had me before his eyes? saieth
the LORDE.
17 Neuertheles, as for thine eyes and thine herte, they loke vpon covetousnesse,
to shed innocent bloude, to do wronge and violence.
18 And therfore, thus saieth the LORDE agaynst Ioachim, ye sonne of Iosias kynge
of Iuda: They shall not mourne for him (as they vse to do) alas brother, alas
syster: Nether shall they saye vnto him: Alas syr, alas for that noble prynce.
19 But as an Asse shall he be buried, corrupte and be cast without the gates of
Ierusalem.
20 Clymme vp the hill off Libanus (o thou doughter Sion) lift vp thy voyce vpon
Basan, crie from all partes: for all thy louers are destroyed.
21 I gaue the warninge, whyle thou wast yet i prosperite, But thou saydest: I
wil not heare. And this maner hast thou vsed from thy youth, that thou woldest
neuer heare my voyce.
22 All thy hyrdmen shalbe dryuen with the wynde, and thy derlinges shalbe caried
awaye in to captiuyte: Then shalt thou be brought to shame and confucion,
because of all thy wickednes:
23 thou that dwellest vpon Libanus, ad makest thy nest in the Cedre trees. O how
greate shal yi mournynge be, when thy sorowes come vpon the, as a woman
trauelinge with childe?
24 As truly as I lyue (saieth the LORDE.) Though Iechonias the sonne off Ioachim
kinge off Iuda were the signet off my right honde, yet will I plucke him of:
25 And I wil geue the in to ye power off the that seke to slaye the, and in to
the power off them that thou fearest: in to the power off Nabuchodonosor the
kinge off Babilon, and in to the power of the Caldees.
26 Morouer, I will sende the, and thy mother that bare the, in to a straunge
londe, where ye were not borne, ad there shall ye dye.
27 But as for the londe that ye will desyre to returne vnto, ye shall neuer come
at it agayne.
28 This ma Iechonias shalbe like an ymage robbed and torne in peces, which
pleaseth no man, for all his apparell. Wherfore both he and his sede shalbe sent
awaye, and cast out into a lode, that they knowe not.
29 O thou earth, earth, earth: heare the worde off the LORDE:
30 Wryte this man amonge the outlawes, for no prosperite shall this man haue all
his life longe. Nether shall eny of his sede be so happie, as to syt vpon the
seate of Dauid, and to beare rule in Iuda.

Chapter 23

1 Wo be vnto the shepherdes, that destroye, and scatre my flocke, saieth the
LORDE.
2 Wherfore, this is the comaundemet of the LORDE God of Israel, vnto the
shepherdes that fede my people: Ye scatre ad thrust out my flocke, and loke not
vpon them. Therfore, now will I vyset the wickednes of youre ymaginacions,
saieth ye LORDE:
3 And will gather together the remnaunt of my flocke, from all londes that I had
dryuen them vnto, and will bringe them agayne to their pastures, that they maye
growe and increace.
4 I will set shepherdes also ouer them, which shall fede them. They shall nomore
feare and drede, for there shall none off them be lost, saieth the LORDE
5 Beholde, the tyme commeth (saieth the LORDE) that I wil rayse vp the rightuous
braunch off Dauid, which shall beare rule, and discusse matters with wy?dome,
and shall set vp equyte and rightuousnes agayne in the earth.
6 In his tyme shall Iuda be saued, and Israel shal dwell with out feare. And
this is the name that they shall call him: euen the LORDE oure rightuous maker.
7 And therfore beholde, the tyme commeth (saieth the LORDE) that it shall no
more be sayde: the LORDE lyueth, which brought the children off Israel out of
the londe of Egipte:
8 But the LORDE lyueth, which brought forth, ad led the sede of the house off
Israel, out off the north londe, and from all countrees where I had scatred
them, and they shal dwell in their owne londe agayne.
9 My herte breaketh in my body because of the false prophetes, all my bones
shake: I am become like a droncken man (that by the reason of wyne can take no
rest) for very feare of the LORDE, and of his holy wordes:
10 Because the londe is full of aduoterers, where thorow it is destroyed and
mourneth, and ye pleasaunt pastures of the deserte are dryed vp. Yee the waye
that men take, is wicked, & their gouernaunce is nothinge like the holy worde of
the LORDE.
11 For the prophetes and the prestes them selues are poluted Ypocrytes, ad their
wickednes haue I founde in my house, saieth the LORDE.
12 Wherfore, their waye shall be slippery in the darcknesse, where in they maye
stacker and fall. For I will bringe a plage vpon them, euen the yeare of their
visitacion, saieth the LORDE.
13 I haue sene foly amonge the prophetes of Samaria, yt they preched for Baal,
ad disceaued my people off Israel.
14 I haue sene also amonge the Prophetes off Ierusalem foule aduoutery, and
presumptuous lies. They take the most shamefull men by the hode, flatringe them,
so that they canot returne from their wickednes. All these with their citesyns
are vnto me, as Sodom, and as the inhabitours off Gomorre.
15 Therfore thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes concernynge the prophetes: Beholde,
I wil fede them with wormwod, & make them dryncke the water of gall. For fro the
prophetes of Ierusalem is the sicknes of Ypocrisie come in to all the londe.
16 And therfore the LORDE of hoostes geueth you this warnynge: Heare not the
wordes of the prophetes, that preach vnto you, and disceaue you: for they speake
the meanynge of their owne herte, and not out of the mouth of the LORDE.
17 They saye vnto them, that despyse me: The LORDE hath spoken it: Tush, ye shal
prospere right well. And vnto all them, that walke after the lust of their owne
herte, they saye: Tush, there shall no my?fortune happen you.
18 For who hath sytten in the councell of the LORDE, that he hath herde and
vnderstonde, what he is aboute to do? Who hath marcked his deuyce, and herde it?
19 Beholde, the stormy wether of the LORDE (that is, his indignacion) shal go
forth, and shal fall downe vpon the heade of the vngodly.
20 And the wrath of the LORDE shal not turne agayne, vntill he perfourme, and
fulfull the thoughte of his herte. And in the latter dayes ye shall knowe his
meanynge.
21 I haue not sent these prophetes, (saieth the LORDE) and yet they ranne. I
haue not spoken to them, and yet they preached.
22 But yf they had continued in my councell and herde my wordes: they had turned
my people from their euell wayes and wicked ymaginacions.
23 Am I the God that seeth but the thinge, which is nye at honde, and not that
is farre of? saieth the LORDE.
24 Maye eny man hyde him self so, that I shal not se him? saieth the LORDE. Do
not I fulfill heauen and earth? saieth the LORDE.
25 I haue herde well ynough, what the prophetes saye, that preach lyes in my
name, sayege: I haue dreamed, I haue dreamed.
26 How longe wil this cotynue in the prophetes hertes, to tel lyes, and to
preach the craftie sotylte of their owne herte?
27 Whose purpose is, (with the dreames that euery one tell) to make my people
forget my name, as their fore fathers dyd, whe Baal
28 The prophet that hath a dreame, let him tell it: and he that vnderstondeth my
worde, let him shewe it faithfully. For what hath chaffe and wheat to do
together? saieth the LORDE.
29 Is not my worde like a fyre, saieth the LORDE) and like an hammer, that
breaketh the harde stone?
30 Therfore thus saieth the LORDE: beholde, I wil vpo the prophetes, that steale
my worde priuely from euery man.
31 Beholde, here am I (saieth the LORDE) agaynst the prophetes, that take vpon
their tunges to speake: The LORDE hath sayde it.
32 , that darre prophecy lies, and disceaue my people with their vanities and
miracles, whom I neuer sent, ner commaunded them. They shal do this people
greate harme, saieth the LORDE.
33 Yf this people, ether eny prophete or prest axe the, and saye: what is the
burthen of the LORDE? Thou shalt saye vnto them: What? burthen? Therfore will I
cast you fro me (saieth the LORDE) because ye youre selues are a burthen.
34 And the prophet, prest or people that vseth this terme (the burthen of the
LORDE) him will I viset, and his house also.
35 But thus shall ye saye, euery one to another: What answere hath the LORDE
geuen? or, what is the LORDES commaundement?
36 And as for the burthen of the LORDE, ye shal speake nomore of it: for euery
mans owne worde is his burthen, because ye haue altered the wordes of the
lyuynge God the LORDE of hoostes oure God.
37 Thus shall euery man saye to the prophetes: what answere hath the LORDE geuen
the? Or, what saieth the LORDE?
38 And not once to name the burthen of the LORDE. Therfore thus saieth the
LORDE: For so moch as ye haue vsed this terme (the burthen of the LORDE) where
as I notwithstondinge sent vnto you, and forbade you to speake of the LORDES
burthen:
39 Beholde therfore, I will repute you as a burthen, and will cast you out of my
presence: yee and the cite also, that I gaue you and youre fathers:
40 and will bringe you to an euerlastinge confucion, and in to soch a shame, as
shal neuer be forgotten.

Chapter 24

1 The LORDE shewed me a visio: Beholde, there stode two maundes of figes before
ye Teple of the LORDE, after yt Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babilo had led awaye
captyue Iechonias the sonne of Ioachim kinge of Iuda, the mightie men also of
Iuda, with the workemasters and conynge men of Ierusalem, vnto Babilon.
2 In the one maunde were very good fyges, euen like as those that be first ripe.
In the other maunde were very naughtie figes, which might not be eaten, they
were so euell.
3 Then sayde the LORDE vnto me: what seist thou Ieremy? I sayde: fyges, where of
some be very good, and some so euel, that no man maye eate them.
4 Then came the worde of the LORDE vnto me, after this maner:
5 Thus saieth ye LORDE the God of Israel: like as thou knowest the good fyges,
so shal I knowe the men led awaye, whom I haue sent out of this place in to the
londe of the Caldees, for their profite:
6 and I will set myne eyes vpon them for the best, for I will bringe them agayne
in to this londe: I will buylde them vp, and not breake them downe: I will
plante them, and not rote them out.
7 And I will geue them an herte, to knowe, how that I am the LORDE. They shalbe
my people, and I wilbe their God, for they shal returne vnto me with their whole
herte.
8 And like as thou knowest the naughtie fyges, which maye not be eate, they are
so euel: Euen so wil I (saieth the LORDE) let Sedechias the kinge of Iuda, (ye
and all his prynces, & the residue of Ierusalem that remayne ouer in this londe,
& them also that dwell in Egipte) to be vexed & plaged in all kingdomes &
londes.
9 And will make them to be a reprofe, a comon byworde, a laughinge stocke &
shame, in all the places, where I shal scatre them.
10 I will sende the swearde, honger & pestilence amonge them, vntill I haue
clene consumed them out of the londe, that I gane vnto them & their fathers.

Chapter 25

1 A sermone that was geuen vnto Ieremy, vpon all the people of Iuda: In the
fourth yeare of Ioachim the sonne of Iosias kinge of Iuda, that was, in the
first yeare of Nabuchodonosor kinge of Babilon.
2 Which sermone, Ieremy the prophet made vnto all the people of Iuda, & to all
ye Inhabitours of Ierusale, on this maner:
3 From the xiij yeare of Iosias the sonne of Amon kinge of Iuda, vnto this
present daye, (that is euen xxiij yeare) the worde of the LORDE hath bene
committed vnto me. And so I haue spoke to you, I haue rysen vp early, I haue
geue you warnynge in season, but ye wolde not heare me.
4 Though the LORDE hath sent his seruauntes, all the prophetes vnto you in
season: Yet wolde ye not obeye, ye wolde not encline yor eares to heare.
5 He sayde: turne agayne euery man from his euell waye, & from youre wicked
ymaginacions, & so shal ye dwell for euer in the londe, that the LORDE promised
you & youre fore fathers:
6 And go not after straunge goddes, serue them not, worshipe them not, & angre
me not with the workes of youre hodes: then will not I punysh you.
7 Neuertheles, ye wolde not heare me (saieth the LORDE) but haue defied me with
the workes of youre hodes, to youre owne greate harme.
8 Wherfore, thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: Because ye haue not herkened vnto
my worde,
9 lo, I will sende out, & call for all the people, yt dwell in the north (saieth
the LORDE) & wil prepayre Nabuchodonosor the kinge of Babilon my seruaunt, and
wil bringe them vpon this londe, and vpon all yt dwell therein, & vpon all the
people that are aboute them, and will vterly rote them out. I will make of them
a wildernesse, a mockage, and a continuall deserte.
10 Morouer, I will take from them the voyce of gladnesse and solace, the voyce
of the brydegrome & the bryde, the voyce of the anoynted, with the cre?shettes:
11 & this whole londe shal become a wildernes, & they shall serue the sayde
people and the kinge of Babilon, thre score yeares and ten.
12 When the lxx yeares are expyred, I wil viset also the wickednesse of the
kinge of Babylon & his people, saieth the LORDE: yee & the londe of the Caldees,
& wil make it a perpetuall wildernes,
13 & wil fulfil all my wordes vpon that londe, which I haue deuysed agaynst it:
yee all that is written in this boke, which Ieremy hath prophecied of all
people:
14 so that they also shal be subdued vnto dyuerse nacions & greate kynges, for I
wil recompense them, acordinge to their dedes & workes of their owne hondes.
15 For thus hath the LORDE God of Israel spoken vnto me: Take this wyne cuppe of
indignacion fro my honde, that thou mayest cause all the people (to whom I sende
the) for to drinke of it:
16 that when they haue dronke there of, they maye be madd, & out of their
wyttes, when the swearde commeth, that I wil sende amoge them.
17 Then toke I the cuppe from the LORDES honde, & made all the people drynke
there of, vnto whom the LORDE had sent me.
18 But first the cite of Ierusalem, & all the cities of Iuda, their kinges &
prynces: to make the desolate, waist, despysed & cursed, acordinge as it is come
to passe this daye.
19 Yee & Pharao ye kinge of Egipte, his seruauntes, his prynces & his people
altogether one wt another
20 and all kinges of the londe of Hus, all kinges of the Philistynes londe,
Ascalon, Gaza, Accaron & the remnaunt of A?dod,
21 the Edomites, the Moabites & the Ammonites:
22 all the kinges of Tirus & Sidon: the kinges of the Iles, that are beyonde the
see:
23 Dedan, Thema, Buz & the shauen Ismaelites:
24 all the kinges of Araby, & (generally) all the kinges that dwell in the
deserte:
25 all the kinges of Simri, all the kinges of Elam, all ye kinges of the Meedes,
26 all kinges towarde the north (whether they be farre or nye) euery one with
his neghbours: Yee and all the kingdomes that are vpon the whole earth. The
kinge of Sesach (sayde he) shal drinke with them also.
27 And saye thou vnto them: this is the commaundement of the LORDE of hoostes
the God of Israel: drinke and be droncken, spewe, and fall, that ye neuer ryse:
and that thorow the swearde, which I wil sende amonge you.
28 But yf they will not receaue the cuppe of thy honde, and drinke it, then tell
them: Thus doth the LORDE of hoostes threaten you: drynke it ye shal, and that
shortly.
29 For lo, I begynne to plage the cite, that my name is geuen vnto: thynke ye
then, that I will leaue you vnpunyshed? Ye shall not go quyte. For why, I call
for a swearde vpo all the inhabitours of the earth, saieth the LORDE of hoostes.
30 Therfore tell them all these wordes, and saye vnto them: The LORDE shal crie
from aboue, and let his voyce be herde from his holy habitacion. With a greate
noyse shall he crie from his courte regall. He shal geue a greate voyce (like
the grape gatherers) and the sounde thereof shalbe herde vnto the endes of the
worlde.
31 For the LORDE hath a iudgment to geue vpon all people, and will holde his
courte of iustice with all flesh and punyshe the vngodly, saieth the LORDE.
32 For thus sayeth ye LORDE of hoostes: Beholde, a miserable plage shall go from
one people to another, and a greate stormy water shal arise from all the endes
of the earth.
33 And the same daye shall the LORDE himself slaye them, from one ende of the
earth to another. There shall no mone be made for eny of them, none gathered vp,
none buried: but shall lie as dunge vpon the grounde.
34 Mourne (o ye shepherdes) & crie: sprinckle youre selues with a?shes, o ye
rammes of the flocke: for the tyme of youre slaughter is fulfilled, and ye shal
fall like vessels connyngly made for pleasure.
35 The shepherdes shall haue no waye to fle, and the rammes of the flocke shall
not escape.
36 Then shal the shepherdes crie horribly, and the rammes of the flocke shal
mourne: for the LORDE shal consume their pasture,
37 and their best feldes shal lie deed because of the horrible wrath of the
LORDE.
38 They shall forsake their foldes like as a lyon: For their londes shalbe
waist, because of the wrath of the destroyer, and because of his fearfull
indignacion.

Chapter 26

1 In the begynnynge of the reigne of Ioachim the sonne of Iosias kynge of Iuda,
came this worde from the LORDE, sayenge:
2 Thus saieth the LORDE: Stonde in the courte of the LORDES house, and speake
vnto all them which (out of the cities of Iuda) come to do worshippe in the
LORDES house, all the wordes yt I commaunde the to saye. Loke that thou kepe not
one worde backe,
3 yf (perauenture) they will herke, and turne euery man from his wicked waye:
that I maye also repente of the plage, which I haue determed to brynge vpon
them, because of their wicked invencions.
4 And after this maner shalt thou speake vnto them: Thus saieth the LORDE: yf ye
will not obeye me, to walke in my lawes, which I haue geuen you,
5 and to heare the wordes of my seruauntes the prophetes, whom I sent vnto you,
rysynge vp tymely, and still sendinge: Yf ye will not folowe the (I saye)
6 then will I do to this house, as I dyd vnto Silo, and will make this cite to
be abhorred of all the people of the earth.
7 And the prestes, the prophetes and all the people herde Ieremy preach these
wordes, in the house of the LORDE.
8 Now when he had spoken out all the wordes, that the LORDE commaunded him to
preach vnto all the people, then the prestes, the prophetes and all the people
toke holde vpon him, and sayde: thou shalt dye.
9 How darrest thou be so bolde, as to saye in the name of the LORDE: it shal
happen to this house as it dyd vnto Silo? and this cite shalbe so waist, that no
man shal dwell there in?
10 And when all the people were gathered aboute Ieremy in the house of the
LORDE, the prynces of Iuda herde of this rumoure, & they came soone out of the
kinges Palace in to the house of the LORDE, and sat them downe before the new
dore of the LORDE.
11 Then spake the prestes and the prophetes vnto the rulers & to all the people,
these wordes: This man is worthy to dye, for he hath preached agaynst this cite,
as ye youre selues haue herde with youre eares.
12 Then sayde Ieremy vnto the rulers and to all the people: The LORDE hath sente
me to preach agaynst this house & agaynst this cite all the wordes that ye haue
herde.
13 Therfore amende youre wayes, and youre advysementes, and be obedient vnto the
voyce of the LORDE youre God: so shal the LORDE repet of the plage, yt he had
deuysed agaynst you.
14 Now as for me: I am in youre hondes, do with me, as ye thinke expediet and
good.
15 But this shall ye knowe: yf ye put me to death, ye shal make youre selues,
this cite & all the inhabitours there of, giltie of innocent bloude. For this is
of a treuth: that the LORDE hath sente me vnto you, to speake all these wordes
in youre eares.
16 Then sayde the rulers and the people vn the prestes and prophetes: This man
maye not be condemned to death, for he hath preached vnto vs in the name of the
LORDE oure God.
17 The Elders also of the londe stode vp, & sayde thus vnto all the people:
18 Micheas the Morascite, which was a prophet vnder Ezechias kinge of Iuda,
spake to all the people of Iuda: Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: Sion shalbe
plowed like a felde, Ierusale shalbe an heape of stones, & the hill of the
LORDES house shalbe turned to an hie wod.
19 Dyd Ezechias ye kinge of Iuda & the people of Iuda put him to deeth for this?
No verely, but rather feared ye LORDE, & made their praier vnto him. For the
which cause also ye LORDE repented of the plage, yt he had deuysed agaynst them.
Shulde we then do soch a shamefull dede agaynst oure soules?
20 There was a prophet also, that preached stiffly in the name of the LORDE,
called Vrias the sonne of Semeia of Cariathiarim: this ma preached also agaynst
this cite & agaynst this lode, acordinge to all as Ieremy saieth.
21 Now when Ioachim the kinge with all the estates & prynces had herde his
wordes, the kinge went aboute to slaye him. When Vrias perceaued that, he was
afrayed, & fled, & departed in to Egipte.
22 Then Ioachim the kinge sent seruauntes into the lode of Egipte, Namely:
Elnatha the sonne of Achbor, & certayne men wt him into Egipte,
23 which fetched Vrias out of Egipte, & brought him vnto kinge Ioachim that
slewe him with the swearde, & cast his deed body into ye como peoples graue.
24 But Ahicam the sonne of Saphan helped Ieremy, that he came not in to the
hondes of the people to be slayne.

Chapter 27

1 In the begynnynge of the reigne of Ioachim the sonne of Iosias kynge of Iuda,
came this worde vnto Ieremy from the LORDE, which spake thus vnto me:
2 Make the bondes & chaynes, and put them aboute thy neck,
3 & sende the to the kinge of Edom, the kinge of Moab, the kinge of Amon, the
kinge of Tirus, & to the kinge of Sidon: & that by the messaungers, which shal
come to Ierusalem vnto Sedechias the kinge of Iuda,
4 and byd them saye vnto their masters: Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God
of Israel, speake thus vnto yor masters:
5 I am he that made the earth, the men & ye catell that are vpon the grounde,
with my greate power & outstretched arme, & haue geuen it vnto whom it pleased
me.
6 And now will I delyuer all these londes in to the power of Nabuchodonosor the
kinge of Babilon my seruaunt. The beestes also of the felde shal I geue him to
do him seruyce.
7 And all people shal serue him, & his sonne, and his childes children, vntil
the tyme of the same lode be come also: Yee many people & greate kinges shal
serue him.
8 Morouer, that people & kingdome which wil not serue Nabuchodonosor, and that
wil not put their neckes vnder ye yock of the kinge of Babilon: the same people
will I viset with swearde, with honger, with pestilence, vntill I haue consumed
them in his hondes, saieth the LORDE.
9 And therfore, folowe not youre prophetes, soythsayers, expounders of dreames,
charmers & witches, which saye vnto you: ye shal not serue the kinge of Babilon.
10 For they preach you lies, to bringe you farre from youre londe, & that I
might cast you out, & destroye you.
11 But the people that put their neckes vnder the yock of the kinge of Babilon,
& serue him, those I wil let remayne still in their owne lode (saieth the LORDE)
& they shal occupie it, & dwell there in.
12 All these thinges tolde I Sedechias the kinge of Iuda, and sayde: Put youre
neckes vnder the yock of the kinge of Babilon, and serue him & his people, that
ye maye lyue.
13 Why wilt thou and thy people perish with the swearde, with honger, with
pestilence: like as the LORDE hath deuysed for all people, that wil not serue
the kinge of Babilon?
14 Therfore geue no eare vnto those prophetes (that tell you: Ye shall not serue
the kinge of Babilon) for they preach you lies,
15 nether haue I sent them, saieth the LORDE: how be it they are bolde, falsely
for to prophecie in my name: that I might ye sooner dryue you out, & that ye
might perish with yor preachers.
16 I spake to the prestes also and to all the people: Thus saieth the LORDE:
Heare not the wordes of those prophetes, that preach vnto you, & saye: Beholde,
the vessels of the LORDES house shall shortly be brought hither agayne from
Babilon: For they prophecie lies vnto you.
17 Heare them not, but serue the kinge of Babilon, yt ye maye lyue. Wherfore
will ye make this cite to be destroyed?
18 But yf they be true prophetes in very dede, and yf the worde of the LORDE be
commytted vnto them, then let them praye the LORDE of hoostes, that the remnaunt
of the ornamentes (which are in the house of the LORDE, and remayne yet in the
house of the kinge of Iuda and at Ierusalem) be not caried to Babilon also.
19 For thus hath the LORDE of hoostes spoken concernynge the pylers, the lauer,
the seate and the residue of the ornamentes that yet remayne in this citie,
20 which Nabuchodonosor the kinge of Babilon toke not, when he caried awaye
Iechonias the sonne of Ioachim kinge of Iuda, with all the power of Iuda and
Ierusalem, from Ierusalem vnto Babilon, captyue.
21 Yee thus hath the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel spoken, as touchinge the
residue of the ornamentes of the LORDES house, of the kinge of Iudaes house, and
of Ierusalem:
22 They shalbe caried vnto Babilon, and there they shall remayne, vntil I vyset
them, saieth the LORDE. Then wil I bringe them hither agayne.

Chapter 28

1 And this was done in the same yeare: eue in the begynnynge of the reigne of
Sedechias kinge of Iuda.But in the fourth yeare of the reigne of Sedechias kinge
of Iuda, in the fifth Moneth, It happened, that Hananias ye sonne of Assur the
prophet of Gabaon, spake to me in the house of the LORDE, in the presence of the
prestes & of all the people, & sayde:
2 Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel: I haue broke the yock of
the kinge of Babilon,
3 and after two yeare will I bringe agayne in to this place, all the ornamentes
of the LORDES house, yt Nabuchodonosor kinge of Babilon caried awaye from this
place vnto Babilon.
4 Yee I will bringe agayne Iechonias the sonne of Ioachim the kinge of Iuda
himself, with all the presoners of Iuda, (yt are caried vnto Babilon,) eue in to
this place, saieth ye LORDE, for I wil breake ye yock of the kinge of Babilo.
5 Then the prophet Ieremy gaue answere vnto that prophet Hananias, before the
prestes & before all the people that were present in the house of the LORDE.
6 And the prophet Ieremy sayde: Amen, the LORDE do that, & graunte the thinge,
which thou hast prophecied: that he maye bringe agayne all the ornamentes of the
LORDES house, & restore all the presoners from Babilon in to ths place.
7 Neuertheles, herken thou also, what I will saye, that thou & all the people
maye heare:
8 The prophetes that were before vs in tymes past, which prophecied of warre, or
trouble, or pestilence,
9 ether of peace, vpon many nacions & greate kingdomes, were proued by this (yf
God had sende them in very dede) when the thinge came to passe, which that
prophet tolde before.
10 And Hananias the prophet toke the chayne from the prophet Ieremias neck, &
brake it:
11 & with that sayde Hananias, that all the people might heare: Thus hath the
LORDE spoken: Euen so will I breake the yock of Nabuchodonosor kinge of Babilo,
from the neck of all nacions, yee & that within this two yeare. And so the
prophet Ieremy wente his waye.
12 After now that Hananias the prophet had taken the chayne from the prophet
Ieremies neck, and broken it: The worde of the LORDE came vnto the prophet
Ieremy sayenge:
13 Go, and tell Hananias these wordes: Thus saieth the LORDE: Thou hast broken
the chayne of wodd, but in steade of wodd, thou shalt make chaynes of yron.
14 For thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel: I wil put a yock of
yron vpon the neck of all this people, that they maye serue Nabuchodonosor the
kinge of Babilon, yee & so shal they do. And I wil geue him ye beestes in the
felde.
15 Then sayde the prophet Ieremy vnto ye prophet Hananias: Heare me (I praye
the) Hananias: The LORDE hath not sent the, but thou bringest this people in to
a false beleue.
16 And therfore thus saieth ye LORDE: beholde, I wil sende the out of the lode,
& within a yeare thou shalt die, because thou hast falsely spoke agaynst the
LORDE.
17 So Hananias the prophet died the same yeare in the seuenth Moneth.

Chapter 29

1 This is the Copie of the lettre, yt Ieremy the prophet sent from Ierusalem
vnto the presoners: the Senatours, prestes, prophetes, & all the people, whom
Nabuchodonosor had led vnto Babilo:
2 after ye tyme yt kinge Iechonias & his Quene, his chambrelaynes, the prynces
of Iuda & Ierusale & the workmasters of Ierusale were departed thither.
3 Which lettre, Elasa ye sonne of Sapha & Gamaria ye sonne of Helchia dyd beare,
who Sedechias the kinge of Iuda sent vnto Babilo to Nabuchodonosor ye kinge of
Babilo: these were ye wordes of Ieremias lettre:
4 Thus hath ye LORDE of hoostes ye God of Israel spoke, vnto all the presoners,
yt were led fro Ierusale vnto Babilo:
5 Buylde you houses to dwell therein: plate you gardes, yt ye maye enioye the
frutes thereof:
6 take you wyues, to beare you sonnes and doughters: prouyde wyues for youre
sonnes, & hu?bondes for youre doughters: that they maye get sonnes & doughters,
and that ye maye multiplie there. Laboure not to be fewe,
7 but seke after peace & prosperite of the cite, where in ye be presoners, &
praye vnto God for it. For in the peace there of, shal yor peace be.
8 For thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel: Let not those
prophetes and soythsaiers yt be amonge you, disceaue you: & beleue not youre
owne dreames.
9 For why, they preach you lies in my name, & I haue not sent them, saieth the
LORDE.
10 But thus saieth the LORDE: When ye haue fulfilled lxx yeares at Babilon, I
wil bringe you home, and of myne owne goodnes I will carie you hither agayne
vnto this place.
11 For I knowe, what I haue deuysed for you, saieth the LORDE. My thoughtes are
to geue you peace, & not trouble (which I geue you all redie) & that ye might
haue hope agayne.
12 Ye shall crie vnto me, ye shal go & call vpo me, & I shal heare you.
13 Ye shal seke me, & fynde me: Yee, yf so be that ye seke me with youre whole
herte,
14 I will be founde of you (saieth the LORDE) and will delyuer you out of
preson, & gather you together agayne out of all places, where in I haue scatred
you, saieth the LORDE: and wil bringe you agayne to the same place, from whence
I caused you be caried awaye captyue.
15 But where as ye saye, that God hath raysed you vp prophetes at Babilon:
16 Thus hath the LORDE spoken (concernynge the kinge that sytteth in the stole
of Dauid, and all ye people that dwell in this cite, youre brethren that are not
gone with you into captiuyte.)
17 Thus (I saye) speaketh the LORDE of hoostes: Beholde, I wil sende a swearde,
honger & pestilence vpon them, & wil make them like vntymely fyges, that maye
not be eate for bytternes.
18 And I wil persecute them with the swearde, with honger & death. I will
delyuer them vp to be vexed of all kingdomes, to be cursed, abhorred, laughed to
scorne, & put to confucion of all the people, amonge whom I haue scatred them:
19 & that because they haue not bene obedient vnto my commaundementes, (saieth
the LORDE) which I sent vnto them by my seruauntes the prophetes. I stode vp
early, and sent vnto them, but they wolde not heare, saieth the LORDE.
20 Heare therfore the worde of the LORDE, all ye presoners, whom I sent from
Ierusale vnto Babilon:
21 Thus hath the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel spoken, of Achab ye sonne of
Colaias, & of Sedechias the sonne of Maasia, which prophecie lies vnto you in my
name: Beholde, I wil delyuer them in to the honde of Nabuchodonosor the kinge of
Babilon, that he maye slaye them before youre eyes.
22 And all ye presoners of Iuda that are in Babilon, shal take vpo them this
terme of cursinge, and saye: Now God do vnto the, as he dyd vnto Sedechias &
Achab, whom the kinge of Babilon rosted in the fyre,
23 because they synned shamefully in Israel. For they haue not onely defiled
their neghbours wyues, but also preached lyenge wordes in my name, which I haue
not commaunded them. This I testifie, & assure, saieth the LORDE.
24 But as for Semeia the Nehelamite, thou shalt speake vnto him:
25 Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel: Because thou hast sealed
lettres vnder thy name, vnto all the people that is at Ierusalem, & to Sophonias
the sonne of Maasia the prest, yee and sent them to all the prestes: where in
thou wrytest thus vnto him:
26 The LORDE hath ordened the to be prest in steade of Ioiada the prest, that
thou shuldest be the chefe in the house of the LORDE aboue all prophetes, &
preachers, & that thou mightest put them in preson, or in ye stockes.
27 How happeneth it then, that thou hast not reproued Ieremy of Anathot, which
neuer leaueth of his prophecienge.
28 And beside all this, he hath sent vs worde vnto Babilon, and tolde vs
planely, that oure captiuyte shal longe endure: that we shulde buylde vs houses
to dwell therin, & to plante vs gardens, that we might enioye the frutes therof.
29 Which lettre Sophonias the prest dyd rede, and let Ieremy the prophet heare
it.
30 Then came the worde of the LORDE vnto Ieremy, sayenge:
31 Sende worde to all them that be in captiuyte, on this maner: Thus hath the
LORDE spoken concernynge Semeia ye Nehelamite: Because that Semeia hath
prophecied vnto you without my commyssion, & brought you in to a false hope,
32 therfore thus the LORDE doth certifie you: Beholde, I wil vyset Semeia the
Nehelamite, & his sede: so that none of his shall remayne amonge this people, &
none of them shall se the good, yt I will do for this people, saieth the LORDE.
For he hath preached falsely of the LORDE.

Chapter 30

1 These are the wordes, that the LORDE shewed vnto Ieremy, saienge:
2 Thus saieth the LORDE God of Israel: Wryte vp diligently all the wordes, that
I haue spoken vnto the, in a boke
3 For lo, the tyme commeth (saieth the LORDE) that I will bringe agayne the
presoners of my people of Israel and Iuda, saieth the LORDE: For I will restore
them vnto the londe, that I gaue to their fathers, and they shall haue it in
possession.
4 Agayne, these wordes spake the LORDE, cocernynge Israel and Iuda:
5 Thus saieth the LORDE: We heare a terrible crie, feare and disquietnesse.
6 For what els doth this signifie, that I se? Namely, that all stronge men
smyte, euery man his honde vpon his loynes, as a woman in the payne of hir
trauayle. Who euer sawe a man trauayle with childe? Enquere therafter, & se. Yee
all their faces are maruelous pale.
7 Alas for this daye, which is so dredefull, that none maye be lickened vnto it:
and alas for the tyme of Iacobs trouble, from the which he shall yet be
delyuered.
8 For in that daye, saieth the LORDE, I will take his yock from of thy neck, &
breake thy bondes. They shall nomore serue straunge goddes vnder him,
9 but they shall do seruyce vnto God their LORDE, and to Dauid their kinge, whom
I will rayse vp vnto them.
10 And as for the, o my seruaunt Iacob, feare not (saieth ye LORDE) and be not
afrayed, o Israel. For lo, I will helpe the also from farre, & thy sede from the
londe of their captiuyte. And Iacob shall turne agayne, he shalbe in rest, and
haue a prosperous life, and no man shall make him afrayed.
11 For I am with the, to helpe the, saieth the LORDE. And though I shal destroye
all the people, amonge whom I haue scatred the, yet will I not destroye the, but
correcke the, and that with discrecion. For I knowe, that thou art in no wise
without faute.
12 Therfore thus saieth ye LORDE: I am sory for thy hurte and woundes.
13 There is no man to medle with thy cause, or to bynde vp thy woundes: there
maye no man helpe the.
14 All thy louers haue forgotten the, and care nothinge for the. For I haue
geuen the a cruell stroke, and chastened the roughly: and that for the multitude
of thy my?dedes, for thy synnes haue had the ouer hande.
15 Why makest thou mone for thy harme? I my self haue pite of thy sorowe, but
for the multitude of thy my?dedes and synnes, I haue done this vnto the.
16 And therfore all they that deuoure the, shalbe deuoured, and all thine
enemies shalbe led in to captiuyte. All they that make the waist, shalbe waisted
them selues: and all those that robbe the, will I make also to be robbed.
17 For I will geue the thy health agayne, and make thy woundes whole, saieth the
LORDE: because they reuyled the, as one cast awaye and despised, o Sion.
18 For thus saieth the LORDE: Beholde, I will set vp Iacobs tentes agayne, and
defende his dwellinge place. The cite shalbe buylded in hir olde estate, and the
houses shal haue their right foundacion.
19 And out of them shall go thankesgeuynge, and the voyce of ioye. I will
multiplie them, and they shall not mynishe: I shall endue them with honoure, and
no man shall subdue them.
20 Their children shalbe as afore tyme, and their congregacion shal cotinue in
my sight. And all those that vexe them, will I viset.
21 A captayne also shall come of them, and a prynce shall springe out from the
myddest of them: him will I chalenge to myself, and he shall come vnto me. For
what is he, that geueth ouer his herte, to come vnto me? saieth the LORDE.
22 Ye shalbe my people also, and I wilbe youre God.
23 Beholde, on the other syde shall the wrath of the LORDE breake out as a
stormy water, as a mightie whyrle wynde: and shal fall vpo the heades of the
vngodly.
24 The terrible displeasure of the LORDE shall not leaue of, vntill he haue
done, & perfourmed the intent of his herte, which in the latter dayes ye shal
vnderstonde.

Chapter 31

1 At the same tyme (saieth the LORDE) shal I be the God of all the generacions
of Israel, & they shalbe my people.
2 Thus saieth the LORDE: The people of Israel which escaped in ye wildernes from
the swearde, founde grace to come in to their rest.
3 Euen so shal the LORDE now also apeare vnto me from farre, and saye: I loue
the with an euerlastinge loue, therfore do I sprede my mercy before the.
4 I will repayre the agayne (o thou doughter of Israel) that thou mayest be fast
and sure. Thou shalt take thy tabrettes agayne, & go forth with them, that lede
the daunce.
5 Thou shalt plante vynes agayne vpon ye hilles of Samaria, and the grape
gatherers shall plante, and synge.
6 And when it is tyme, the watch men vpon the mount of Ephraim shall crie:
Arise, let vs go vp vnto Sion to oure LORDE God,
7 for thus saieth the LORDE: Reioyce with gladnes because of Iacob, crie vnto
the heade of the Gentiles: speake out, synge, and saye: The LORDE shall delyuer
his people, the remnaunt of Israel &, make them whole
8 Beholde, I will bringe them agayne from out of the north lode, and gather them
from the endes of the worlde, with the blynde and lame that are amonge them,
with the women that be greate with childe, and soch as be also delyuered: and
the company of them that come agayne, shal be greate.
9 They departed from hence in heuynes, but with ioye will I bringe them hither
agayne. I will lede them by the ryuers of water in a straight waye, where they
shall not stomble: For I will be Israels father, and Epraim shalbe my
firstborne.
10 Heare the worde of the LORDE (o ye Gentiles) preach in the Iles, that lie
farre of, and saye: he that hath scatred Israel, shall gather him together
agayne, and shall kepe him as a shepherde doth his flocke.
11 For the LORDE shall redeme Iacob, and ryd him from the honde of the violent.
12 And they shal come, & reioyce vpon the hill of Sion, & shall haue
plenteousnes of goodes, which the LORDE shall geue them: Namely, wheate, wyne,
oyle, yonge shepe and calues. And their conscience shalbe as a well watred
garden, for they shall nomore be hongrie.
13 Then shal the mayde reioyce in the daunce, yee both yonge and olde folkes.
For I will turne their sorow in to gladnesse, and will comforte them, and make
them ioyfull, euen from their hertes.
14 I will poure plenteousnes vpon the hertes of the prestes, and my people
shalbe satisfied with good thinges, saieth the LORDE.
15 Thus saieth the LORDE: The voyce of heuynes, wepynge and lamentacion came vp
in to heauen: euen of Rachel mournynge for hir children, and wolde not be
comforted, because they were awaye.
16 But now saieth the LORDE: leaue of from wepynge and crienge, witholde thyne
eyes from teares, for thy laboure shalbe rewarded, saieth the LORDE. And they
shall come agayne out of the londe of their enemies:
17 Yee euen thy posterite shall haue consolacion in this (saieth the LORDE) that
thy children shall come agayne in to their owne londe.
18 Morouer I herde Ephraim, (that was led awaye captyue) complayne on this
maner: O LORDE, thou hast correcte me, and thy chastenynge haue I receaued, as
an vntamed calfe. Conuerte thou me, and I shalbe conuerted, for thou art my
LORDE God.
19 Yee as soone as thou turnest me, I shall refourme my self: and when I
vnderstonde, I shall smyte vpon my thee. For verely I haue comitted shamefull
thinges: O let my youth beare this reprofe and confucion.
20 Vpon this complaynte, I thought thus by myself: is not Ephraim my deare
sonne? Is he not the childe, with whom I haue had all myrth and pastyme? For
sence the tyme that I first comoned with him, I haue him euer in remembraunce:
therfore my very herte dryueth me vnto him: gladly and louyngly will I haue
mercy vpon him, saieth the LORDE.
21 Get the watchmen, prouyde teachers for the: set thine herte vpon the right
waie, that thou shuldest walke, and turne agayne: (o thou doughter of Israel,)
turne agayne to these cities of thyne.
22 How longe wilt thou go astraie, o thou shrekinge doughter? For the LORDE will
worke a new thynge vpon earth: A woman shall compasse a man.
23 For thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel: It will come therto,
that when I haue brought Iuda out of captiuyte, these wordes shalbe herde in ye
londe and in his cities: The LORDE, which is the fayre brydegrome of
rightuousnesse, make the frutefull, o thou holy hill:
24 And there shall dwell Iuda and all hir cities, the shepherdes and hu?bonde
men:
25 For I shall fede the hongrie soule, and refresh all faynte hertes.
26 When I herde this, I came agayne to myself, and mused, like as I had bene
waked out of a swete slepe.
27 Beholde (saieth the LORDE) the dayes come, that I will sowe the house of
Israel and the house of Iuda, with men and with catell.
28 Yee it shall come therto, that like as I haue gone aboute in tymes past to
rote them out, to scatre them, to breake them downe, to destroye them and chaste
them: Euen so will I also go diligently aboute, to buylde them vp agayne, and to
plante them, saieth the LORDE.
29 Then shall it no more be sayde: ye fathers haue eaten a sower grape, and the
childrens teth are set on edge:
30 for euery one shal dye for his owne my?dede, so that who so eateth a sower
grape, his teth shalbe set on edge.
31 Beholde, the dayes come (saieth the LORDE) yt I will make a new couenaunt
with ye house of Israel & with ye house of Iuda:
32 not after the couenaunt that I made with their fathers, when I toke them by
the honde, & led them out of the londe of Egipte: which couenaunt they brake,
wherfore I punyshed them sore, saieth the LORDE:
33 But this shalbe the couenaunt that I will make with the house of Israel after
those dayes, saieth the LORDE: I will plante my lawe in the inwarde partes of
them, and write it in their hertes, and wilbe their God, and they shalbe my
people.
34 And from thece forth shall no man teach his neghboure or his brother, and
saye: knowe the LORDE: But they shall all knowe me, from the lowest vnto the
hyest, saieth the LORDE. For I will forgeue their my?dedes, and wil neuer
remembre their synnes eny more.
35 Thus saieth the LORDE which gaue the sonne to be a light for the daye, and
the Moone and starres to shyne in the night: which moueth the see, so that the
floudes therof waxe fearce: his name is the LORDE of hoostes.
36 Like as this ordinaunce shal neuer be taken out of my sight, saieth the
LORDE: So shal the sede of Israel neuer ceasse, but all waye be a people before
me.
37 Morouer, thus saieth the LORDE: like as the heauen aboue can not be measured,
and as the foundacions of the earth beneth maye not be sought out: So will I
also not cast out the whole sede of Israel, for that they haue commytted, saieth
the LORDE.
38 Beholde, the daies come saieth the LORDE, yt the cite of ye LORDE shalbe
enlarged from the towre of Hananeel, vnto ye gate of the corner wall.
39 From thence shal the right measure be taken before her vnto the hill toppe of
Gareb, and shal come aboute Gaatha,
40 and the whole valley of the deed carcases, and of the ashes, & all Seremoth,
vnto the broke of Cedron: and from thence vnto the corner of the horsgate
towarde ye east, where as the Sanctuary of the LORDE also shalbe set. And when
it is now buylded, & set vp of this fashion it shall neuer be broken, ner cast
downe eny more.

Chapter 32

1 These wordes spake the LORDE vnto Ieremy, in the tenth yeare of Sedechias
kinge of Iuda, which was ye xviij yeare of Nabuchodonosor,
2 what tyme as the kinge of Babilons hooste layed sege vnto Ierusalem. But
Ieremy the prophet laye bounde in ye courte of the preson, which was in the
kinge of Iudaes house:
3 where Sedechias the kinge of Iuda caused him to be layed, because he had
prophecied of this maner: Thus saieth the LORDE: Beholde, I will delyuer this
cite in to the hondes of the kinge of Babilon, which shal take it.
4 As for Sedechias the kinge of Iuda, he shal not be able to escape the Caldees,
but surely he shall come in to the hondes of the kinge of Babilon: which shall
speake with him mouth to mouth, and one of them shall loke another in the face.
5 And Sedechias shalbe caried vnto Babilon, and there shall he be, vntill the
tyme that I vyset him, saieth the LORDE. But yf thou takest in hode to fight
agaynst the Caldees, thou shalt not prospere.
6 And Ieremy sayde: Thus hath the LORDE spoken vnto me:
7 Beholde, Hananeel the sonne of Sellum thine Vncles sonne shall come vnto the,
and requyre the to redeme ye londe, that lieth in Anathot vnto thy self: for by
reason of kynred it is thy parte to redeme it, and to bye it out.
8 And so Hananeel myne Vncles sonne came to me in the courte of the preson,
(acordinge to the worde of the LORDE,) and sayde vnto me: Bye my londe (I praye
the) that lieth in Anothot in the countre of Ben Iamyn: for by heretage thou
hast right to lowse it out for thy self, therfore redeme it. Then I preceaued,
that this was the commaundement of the LORDE,
9 and so I lowsed the londe from Hananeel of Anathot, myne Vncles sonne, and
weyed him there the moneye: euen seuen sycles, and ten syluer pens.
10 I caused him also to make me a writinge, and to seale it, and called recorde
there by, and weyed him there the money vpon the waightes.
11 So I toke the euydence with the copie (when it was orderly sealed and red
ouer)
12 and I gaue the euydence vnto Baruch the sonne of Nerias the sonne of Maasia
in the sight of Hananeel my cosen, and in the presence of the witnesses, that be
named in the euydence, and before all the Iewes that were therby in the courte
of the preson.
13 I charged Baruch also before them, saienge:
14 The LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel commaundeth the, to take this sealed
euydence with the copie, and to laye it in an erthen vessell, that it maye longe
continue.
15 For the LORDE of hoostes of the God of Israel hath determed, that houses,
feldes and vynyardes shalbe possessed agayne in this londe.
16 Now when I had delyuered the euydence vnto Baruch ye sonne of Nerias, I
besought the LORDE, sayenge:
17 O LORDE God, It is thou that hast made heauen and earth with thy greate power
and hie arme, and there is nothinge to harde for ye.
18 Thou shewest mercy vpon thousandes, thou recompecest the wickednes of the
fathers, in to the besome of the children that come after them.
19 Thou art the greate and mightie God, whose name is the LORDE of hoostes:
greate in councell, and infinite in thought: Thine eyes loke vpon all the wayes
of mens children, to rewarde euery one after his waye, and acordinge to the
frutes of his inuencions:
20 Thou hast done greate tokens and wonders in the londe of Egipte (as we se
this daye) vpon the people of Israel and vpon those men: to make thy name
greate, as it is come to passe this daye:
21 Thou hast brought thy people of Israel out of the londe of Egipte, with
tokens, with wondres, with a mightie honde, with a stretched out arme and with
greate terriblenes:
22 and hast geuen them this londe, like as thou haddest promysed vnto their
fathers: Namely, that thou woldest geue them a lode, that floweth with mylke and
honye.
23 Now when they came therin, and possessed it, they folowed not thy voyce, and
walked not in thy lawe: but all that thou commaundedest them to do, that haue
they not done, and therfore come all these plages vpon them.
24 Beholde, there are bulworckes made now agaynst the cite, to take it: and it
shalbe wonne of the Caldees that besege it, with swearde, with honger and death,
and loke what thou hast spoken, that same shal come vpon them. For lo, all
thinges are present vnto the:
25 Yet sayest thou vnto me (o LORDE God) and commaundest me, that I shall loose
a pece of londe vnto my self, and take witnesses therto: and yet in the meane
season the cite is delyuered in to the power of the Caldees.
26 Then came the worde of the LORDE vnto me, sayenge:
27 Beholde, I am the LORDE God of all flesh, Is there eny thinge then to harde
for me?
28 Therfore thus sayde the LORDE: beholde, I shal delyuer this cite in to the
power of the Caldees, and in to the power of Nabuchodonosor the kinge of
Babilon, they shall take it in:
29 For the Caldees shall come, and wynne this cite, and set fyre vpon it, and
burne it: with the gorgeous houses, in whose parlers they haue made sacrifice
vnto Baal, and poured drynkeofferinges vnto straunge goddes, to prouoke me vnto
wrath.
30 For seinge the children of Israel and the children of Iuda haue wrought
wickednes before me euer from their youth vp, what haue they els done, but
prouoked me with the workes of their owne hondes? saieth the LORDE.
31 Or, what hath this cite bene els, but a prouokinge of my wrath, euer sence
the daye that I buylded it, vnto this houre? Wherin I cast it out of my sight,
32 be cause of the greate blasphemies of the childre of Israel and Iuda, which
they haue done to prouoke me: yee they, their kinges, their prynces, their
prestes, their prophetes, whole Iuda, and all the citesyns of Ierusalem.
33 When I stode vp early, and taught them and instructe them, they turned their
backes to me, and not their faces.
34 They wolde not heare, to be refourmed and correcte. They hane set their
goddes in ye house, that is halowed vnto my name, to defyle it.
35 They haue buylded hie places for Baal in the valley of the children of Ennon,
to vowe their sonnes and doughters vnto Moloch: which I neuer commauded them,
nether came it euer in my thought, to make Iuda synne with soch abhominacion.
36 Morouer thus hath the LORDE God of Israel spoken, concernynge this cite,
which (as ye youre selues confesse) shalbe delyuered in to the honde of the
kinge of Babilon, when it is wonne with the swerde, with honger and with
pestilence.
37 Beholde, I will gather them together from all londes, wherin I haue scatred
them in my wrath, in my fearfull and greate displeasure: and will bringe them
agayne vnto this place, where they shal dwell safely.
38 And they shalbe my people, and I wilbe their God.
39 And I will geue them one herte and one waye, that they maye feare me all the
daies of their life, that they and their children after them maye prospere.
40 And I will set vp an euerlastinge couenaunt with them, Namely: that I will
neuer ceasse to do them good, and that I will put my feare in their hertes, so
that they shall not runne awaye fro me.
41 Yee I will haue a lust and pleasure to do them good, and faithfully to plante
them in this londe, with my whole herte, and with all my soule.
42 For thus saieth the LORDE: like as I haue brought all this greate plage vpon
this people: so will I also bringe vpon them all the good, that I haue promysed
them
43 And men shall haue their possessions in this londe, wherof ye saye now, that
it shal nether be inhabited of people ner of catell, but be deliuered in to the
hodes of the Caldees:
44 Yee londe shalbe bought for money, & euydeces made ther vpon & sealed before
witnesses in the countre of Ben Iamin, & rounde aboute Ierusalem: in the cities
of Iuda, in the cities that are vpo the mountaynes, & in them that lie beneth,
yee & in the cities that are in the deserte. For I wil bringe their presoners
hither agayne, saieth the LORDE.

Chapter 33

1 Morouer the worde of the LORDE came vnto Ieremy on this maner, whe he was yet
bounde in the courte of the preson:
2 Thus saieth the LORDE, which fulfilleth the thinge that he speaketh the LORDE
which perfourmeth the thinge that he taketh in honde: euen he, whose name is the
LORDE:
3 Thou hast cried vnto me, and I haue herde the: I haue shewed greate and hie
thinges, which were vnknowne vnto you.
4 Thus (I saye) spake the LORDE God of Israel, concernynge the houses of this
cite, and the houses of the kinges of Iuda: that they shalbe broken thorow the
ordinaunce and weapens,
5 when the Caldees come to besege them: and they shalbe fylled with the deed
carcases of men, whom I will slaye in my wrath and displeasure: whe I turne my
face from this cite, because of all hir wickednes.
6 Beholde, (saieth the LORDE) I will heale their woundes, and make them whole: I
will open them the treasure of peace and treuth.
7 And I will returne the captiuyte of Iuda and Israel: and will set them vp
agayne, as they were afore.
8 From all my?dedes (wherin they haue offended agaynst me) I will clese them:
And all their blasphemies which they haue done agaynst me, when they regarded me
not, I will forgeue them.
9 And this shal get me a name, a prayse and honoure, amonge all people of the
earth, which shall heare all the good, that I will shewe vnto them: Yee they
shall be afrayed and astonnied at all the good dedes and benefites, that I will
do for them.
10 Morouer, thus saieth the LORDE: In this place, wherof ye saye that it shalbe
a wildernesse, wherin nether people ner catell shal dwell: In like maner in the
cities of Iuda and without Ierusalem (which also shalbe so voyde, that nether
people ner catell shall dwell there)
11 Shal the voyce of gladnesse be herde agayne, the voyce of the brydegrome and
of the bryde, the voyce of them that shall synge: (Prayse the LORDE of hoostes,
for he is louynge, and his mercy endureth for euer) and the voyce of them that
shall offre vp giftes in the house of the LORDE. For I will restore the
captiuyte of this londe, as it was afore, saieth the LORDE.
12 Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes. It shall come yet therto, that in this
londe, which is voyde from men and catell, and in all the cities of the londe,
there shal be set vp shepherdes cotages:
13 in the cities vpon the mountaynes, and in the cities that lie vpon the
playne, and in the deserte. In the londe of BenIamin, in the feldes of
Ierusalem, and in the cities of Iuda shal the shepe be nombred agayne, vnder the
honde of him, that telleth them, saieth the LORDE.
14 Beholde, the tyme commeth (saieth the LORDE) that I wil perfourme that good
thinge, which I haue promised vnto the house of Israel and to the house of Iuda.
15 In those daies and at the same tyme, I will bringe forth vnto Dauid, the
braunch of rightuousnes, and he shall do equite and rightuousnesse in the londe.
16 In those daies shall Iuda be helped, and Ierusalem shall dwell safe, and he
that shall call her is euen God oure rightuous maker.
17 For thus the LORDE promyseth: Dauid shal neuer want one, to syt vpon the
stole of the house of Israel:
18 nether shall the prestes and Leuites want one to offre all waye before me,
burntofferinges, to kyndle the meatofferinges, & to prepare the sacrifices.
19 And the worde of the LORDE came vnto Ieremy after this maner:
20 Thus saieth the LORDE: Maye the couenaunt which I haue made with daye and
night, be broken, that there shulde not be daye and night in due season?
21 Then maye my couenaunt also be broken, which I made with Dauid my seruaunt,
and so he not to haue a sonne to reigne in his Trone. So shall also the prestes
and Leuites neuer fayle, but serue me.
22 For like as the starres of heauen maye not be nombred, nether the sonde of
the see measured: so will I multiplie the sede of Dauid my seruaunt, and of the
Leuites my ministers.
23 Morouer, the worde of the LORDE came to Ieremy, saienge:
24 Cosidrest thou not what this people speaketh? Two kynreddes (saye they) had
the LORDE chosen, & those same two hath he cast awaye. For so farre is my people
come, yt they haue no hope to come together eny more, and to be one people
agayne.
25 Therfore thus saieth the LORDE: Yf I haue made no couenaunt with daye &
night, and geue no statute vnto heauen and earth:
26 then will I also cast awaye the sede of Dauid my seruaunt: so that I wil take
no prynce out of his sede, to rule the posterite of Abraha, Isaac and Iacob. But
yet I will turne agayne their captiuyte, and be mercifull vnto them.

Chapter 34

1 These are the wordes which the LORDE spake vnto Ieremy, what tyme as
Nabuchodonosor the kinge of Babilon, & all his hoostes (out of all the kingdomes
yt were vnder his power) and all his people, fought agaynst Ierusalem and all
the cities therof.
2 Thus saieth the LORDE God of Israel: Go, & speake to Sedechias the kinge of
Iuda, & tell him: The LORDE sendeth the this worde: Beholde, I will delyuer this
cite in to the hode of the kinge of Babilon, he shal burne it,
3 and thou shalt not escape his hondes, but shalt be led awaye presoner, and
delyuered into his power. Thou shalt loke the kinge of Babilon in the face, and
he shal speake with the mouth to mouth, and then shalt thou go to Babilon.
4 Yet heare the worde of the LORDE, o Sedechias thou kinge of Iuda: Thus saieth
the LORDE vnto the: Thou shalt not be slayne with the swearde,
5 but shalt die in peace. Like as yi fore fathers, the kinges, thy progenitours
were brente: so shalt thou be brente also, & in the mournynge they shal saye: oh
lorde. For thus haue I determed, saieth the LORDE.
6 Then spake Ieremy the prophet all these wordes vnto Sedechias kinge of Iuda in
Ierusalem:
7 what tyme as the kinge of Babilons hooste beseged Ierusalem, and the remnaunt
of the cities: Namely, Lachis & Azecha, which yet remayned of the stronge
defensed cities of Iuda.
8 These are the wordes that the LORDE spake vnto Ieremy the prophet, when
Sedechias was agreed with all the people at Ierusalem, that there shulde be
proclamed a liberte:
9 so that euery man shulde let fre go his seruaunt and handemayde, Hebrue &
Hebruesse & no Iewe to holde his brother as a bonde man.
10 Now as they had consented, euen so they were obedient, & let them go fre.
11 But afterwarde they repented, & toke agayne the seruauntes and handemaydens,
whom they had letten go fre, and so made them bonde agayne.
12 For the which cause the worde of the LORDE came vnto Ieremy from the LORDE
him self, sayenge:
13 Thus saieth the LORDE God of Israel: I made a couenaunt with youre fathers,
when I brought them out of Egipte, (that they shulde no more be bondmen,)
sayenge:
14 When seuen yeares are out, euery man shal let go fre his bought seruaunte an
Hebrue, yf he haue serued him sixe yeares. But yor fathers obeied me not &
herkened not vnto me
15 As for you, ye were now turned, & dyd right before me, in yt ye proclamed,
euery ma to let his neghboure go fre, & in yt ye made a couenaunt before me, in
the temple that beareth my name:
16 But yet ye haue turned youre selues agayne, and blasphemed my name: In this,
yt euery man hath requyred his seruaunt and handemayden agayne, whom ye had
letten go quyte and fre, and compelled them to serue you agayne, and to be youre
bonde men.
17 And therfore thus saieth the LORDE: Ye haue not obeyed me, euery man to
proclame fredome vnto his brother and neghbor: wherfore, I will call you vnto a
fredome, saieth the LORDE: euen vnto the swearde, to the pestilence, and to
honger, and will make you to be plaged in all the kyngdomes of the earth.
18 Yee those men that haue broke my couenaunt, and not kepte the wordes of the
apoyntmet, which they made before me: when they hewed the calfe in two, & when
there wente thorow the two halfes therof:
19 The prynces of Iuda, the prynces of Ierusalem, the gelded men, the prestes
and all the people of the londe (which wete thorow the two sydes of the calfe.)
20 Those men wil I geue in to the power of their enemies, and in to the hondes
of them that folowe vpon their lyues. And their deed bodies shall be meate for
the foules of the ayre, and beestes of the felde.
21 As for Sedechias the kinge of Iuda & his prynces, I will delyuer them in to
the power of their enemies, and of them that desyre to slaye them, and in to the
honde of the kynge of Babilons hooste, which now is departed from you:
22 But thorow my commaundement (saieth the LORDE) they shal come agayne before
this cite, they shall fight agaynst it, wynne it, and burne it. Morouer I will
laye the cities of Iuda so waist, that no man shall dwell therin.

Chapter 35

1 The wordes which the LORDE spake vnto Ieremy, (in the reigne of Ioachim the
sonne of Iosias kinge of Iuda) are these:
2 Go vnto ye house of the Rechabites, & call them out, & bringe the to ye house
of the LORDE in to some commodious place, and geue them wyne to drynke.
3 Then toke I Iasanias the sonne of Ieremy, the sonne of Habazania, and his
brethre and all his sonnes, and the whole housholde off the Rechabites:
4 and brought them to the house off the LORDE, in to the closet of the children
off Hanan the sonne off Igdalia the man off God: which was by the closet off the
prynces, that is aboue the closet of Maasia the sonne of Sellum, which is the
chefe off the tresury.
5 And before the sonnes of the kynred of the Rechabites, I set pottes full of
wyne, and cuppes, and sayde vnto them: drynke wyne.
6 But they sayde: we drynke no wyne, For Ionadab the sonne of Rechab oure father
commaunded vs, sayenge: Ye and youre sonnes shall neuer drynke wyne, buylde no
houses, sowe no sede, plante no vynes,
7 yee ye shall haue no vynyardes: but for all youre tyme ye shall dwell in
tetes, yt ye maye lyue loge in the lode, wherin ye be straugers.
8 Thus haue we obeyed the comaundemet of Ionadab ye sonne of Rechab oure father,
in all yt he hath charged vs, and so we drynke no wyne all oure lyue longe: we,
oure wyues, or sonnes & oure doughters.
9 Nether buylde we eny house to dwell therin, we haue also amonge vs nether
vynyardes, ner corne lode to sowe:
10 but we dwell in tentes, we obeye, & do acordinge vnto all, that Ionadab oure
father commaunded vs.
11 But now yt Nabuchodonosor the kinge of Babilo came vp in to the lode, we
sayde: come, let vs go to Ierusale, yt we maye escape the hooste of the Caldees
ad the Assirias: & so we dwell now at Ierusale.
12 Then came ye worde of the LORDE vnto Ieremy, sayenge:
13 Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel: Go & tell whole Iuda &
all the inhabitours of Ierusale: Wyll ye not be refourmed, to obeye my wordes?
saieth the LORDE.
14 The wordes which Ionadab the sonne off Rechab comaunded his sonnes, yt they
shulde drynke no wyne, are fast & surely kepte: for vnto this daye they drynke
no wyne: but obeye their fathers comaundement. But as for me, I haue stode vp
early, I haue spoke vnto you, & geuen you earnest warnynge: & yet haue ye not
bene obediet vnto me.
15 Yee I haue sent my seruautes, all the prophetes vnto you, I rose vp early, &
sent you worde, sayenge: O turne you, euery man from his wicked waye: amede yor
lyues, & go not after strauge goddes, to worshippe the: yt ye maye cotinue in
the lode, which I haue geuen vnto you and youre fathers, but ye wolde nether
heare me, ner folowe me.
16 The childre of Ionadab Rachabs sonne haue stedfastly kepte their fathers
comaudement, yt he gaue them, but this people is not obedient vnto me
17 And therfore thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes ye God of Israel: Beholde, I
wil bringe vpo Iuda & vpo euery one yt dwelleth in Ierusale, all the trouble yt
I haue deuysed agaynst the. For I haue spoke vnto the, but they wolde not
folowe: I haue called vnto them, neuertheles they wolde geue me no answere.
18 Ieremy also spake vnto the housholde off the Rechabites: Thus saieth the
LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel: For so moch as ye haue obeyed ye comaundemet
of Ionadab yor father, & kepte all his preceptes, & done acordinge vnto all yt
he hath bydden you:
19 Therfore thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel: Ionadab the
sonne of Rechab shal not fayle, but haue one out of his stocke, to stode allwaye
before me.

Chapter 36

1 In the fourth yeare of Ioachim the sonne of Iosias kynge of Iuda, came ye
worde of the LORDE vnto Ieremy, sayege:
2 Take a boke, & write therin all ye wordes, yt I haue spoke to the, to Israel,
to Iuda & to all the people, fro the tyme yt I begane for to speake vnto the (in
ye reigne of Iosias) vnto this daye.
3 That when the house of Iuda heareth of the plage, which I haue deuysed for
the, they maye peradueture turne, eueryman fro his wicked waye, that I maye
forgeue their offences and synnes.
4 Then dyd Ieremy call Baruch the sonne of Nerias, & Baruch wrote in the boke at
ye mouth of Ieremy, all the wordes of the LORDE, which he had spoken vnto him.
5 And Ieremy commaunded Baruch sayenge: I am in preson, so that I maye not come
in to the house of ye LORDE:
6 therfore go thou thither, & rede the boke, that thou hast writte at my mouth:
Namely, the wordes off the LORDE, & rede the in the LORDES house vpon the
fastinge daye: that the people, whole Iuda, & all they that come out of the
cities, maye heare.
7 Peraduenture they will praye mekely before the face of the LORDE, and turne,
euery one from his wicked waye. For greate is the wrath and displeasure, that
the LORDE hath taken agaynst this people.
8 So Baruch the sonne of Nerias dyd, acordinge vnto all that Ieremy the prophet
comauded him, readinge the wordes off the LORDE out off the boke in the LORDES
house.
9 And this was done in the fyfth yeare off Ioachim ye sonne of Iosias kinge of
Iuda, in the ix. moneth when it was commaunded, that all the people of Ierusalem
shulde fast before the LORDE, and they also that were come from the cities of
Iuda vnto Ierusalem.
10 Then red Baruch the wordes of Ieremy out of the boke within the house of the
LORDE, out of ye treasury of Gamarias the sonne off Saphan the scrybe, which is
besyde the hyer loffte off the new dore of the LORDES house: that all ye people
might heare.
11 Now whe Micheas the sonne off Gamarias the sonne of Saphan had herde all the
wordes of the LORDE out of ye boke,
12 he wete downe to the kinges palace in to ye scrybes chabre for there all ye
prynces were set: Elisama the scrybe, Dalias the sonne of Semei, Elnatha the
sonne off Achbor, Gamaria the sonne of Saphan, Sedechias the sonne of Hananias,
with all the princes.
13 And Micheas tolde them all the wordes, yt he herde Baruch rede out of the
boke before the people.
14 Then all the prynces sent Iehudi ye sonne of Nathanias the sonne of Salamia
the sonne of Chusi, vnto Baruch, sayenge: Take in thine honde the boke, wherout
thou hast red before all the people, and come. So Baruch the sonne of Nerias
toke ye boke in his honde, and came vnto them.
15 And they sayde vnto him: Syt downe, and rede the boke, yt we maye heare also.
So Baruch red, yt they might heare.
16 Now when they had herde all the wordes, they were abashed one vpon another,
and sayde vnto Baruch: We wil certifie the kinge of all these wordes
17 And they examined Baruch, sayenge: Tell vs, how didest thou wryte all these
wordes out off his mouth?
18 Then Baruch answered them: He spake all these wordes vnto me with his mouth,
and I alone was with him, and wrote them in the boke.
19 Then sayde the prynces vnto Baruch: Go thy waye, and hyde the with Ieremy, so
that no man knowe where ye be.
20 And they went in to the kinge to the courte. But they kepte the boke in the
chambre off Elisama the scrybe, ad tolde the kynge all the wordes, that he might
heare.
21 So the kynge sent Iehudi to fetch him ye boke, which he brought out of
Elisama ye scrybes chambre. And Iehudi red it, that the kynge and all the
prynces, which were aboute him, might heare.
22 Now the kynge sat in the wynter house, for it was in the ix. Moneth, and
there was a good fyre before him.
23 And whe Iehudi had red thre or foure leaues therof, he cut the boke in peces
with a penne knyfe, and cast it in to the fyre vpo the herth, vntil the boke was
all brente in the fyre vpon the herth.
24 Yet no man was abashed therof, or rente his clothes: nether the kynge
himselffe, ner his seruauntes, though they herde all these wordes.
25 Neuertheles Elnathan, Dalias ad Gamarias, besoughte the kinge, that he wolde
not burne the boke: notwithstondinge ye kynge wolde not heare them,
26 but commaunded Ieramyhel the sonne off Amalech, Sarias the sonne of Esriel
and Selamia ye sonne of Abdiel, to laye hondes vpon Baruch the scrybe, and vpon
Ieremy the prophet: but the LORDE kepte them out of sight.
27 After now that the kynge had brente the boke, ad ye sermos which Baruch wrote
at ye mouth off Ieremy: The worde of the LORDE came vnto Ieremy sayenge:
28 Take another boke, and write in it all the forsayde sermons, that were
written in the first boke, which Ioachim the kynge off Iuda hath brente.
29 And tell Ioachim the kynge off Iuda, Thus saieth the LORDE: thou hast brente
ye boke, and thoughtest within thy selff: Why hast thou written therin, that the
kynge off Babilon shal come, & make this lode waist? so that he shall make both
people and catel to be out of it?
30 Therfore thus the LORDE saieth, of Ioachim the kynge of Iuda: There shal none
of his generacion syt vpon the trone of Dauid. His deed corse shalbe cast out,
that the heat off the daye, and the frost of the night maye come vpon him:
31 And I will vyset the wickednes of him, of his sede, and of his seruauntes.
Morouer all the euell that I haue promised the (though they herde me not) will I
bringe vpon them, vpon ye inhabitours of Ierusalem, and vpon all Iuda.
32 Then toke Ieremy another boke, and gaue it Baruch the scrybe the sonne of
Nerias, which wrote therin out of the mouth off Ieremy: all the sermons that
were in the first boke, which Ioachim the kynge off Iuda dyd burne. And there
were added vnto them many mo sermons, then before.

Chapter 37

1 Sedechias ye sonne of Iosias (which was made kynge thorow Nabuchodonosor kynge
of Babilon) reigned in the londe of Iuda, in the steade off Iechonias the sonne
of Ioachim.
2 But nether he, ner his seruauntes, ner the people in the lode wolde obeye the
wordes of ye LORDE, which he spake by the prophet Ieremy.
3 Neuertheles Sedechias the kynge sent Iuchal the sonne of Selamia and Sophonias
the sonne of Maasia the prest to the prophet Ieremy, sayenge: O praye thou vnto
the LORDE oure God for vs.
4 Now Ieremy walked fre amonge the people at that tyme, and was not put in
preson as yet.
5 Pharaos hooste also was come out of Egipte: which when the Caldees that
beseged Ierusalem, perceaued, they departed from thence.
6 Then came the worde of the LORDE vnto Ieremy the prophet, sayege:
7 Thus saieth ye LORDE God of Israel, This answere shal ye geue to the kynge of
Iuda, that sent you vnto me for councell: Beholde, Pharaos hooste which is come
forth to helpe you, shall returne to Egipte in to his owne londe:
8 But the Caldees shall come agayne, & fight agaynst this cite, wynne it, and
set fyre vpon it.
9 For thus saieth the LORDE: disceaue not yor owne myndes, thinkynge on this
maner: Tush, the Caldees go now their waye from vs: No, they shall not go their
waye.
10 For though ye had slayne the whole hooste off the Caldees. that besege you,
and euery one of the slayne laye in his tent, yet shulde they stonde vp, and set
fyre vpon this cite.
11 Now whe the hooste of the Caldees was broke vp from Ierusale for feare of the
Egipcians armye,
12 Ieremy went out of Ierusale towarde the lode of Ben Iamin, to do certayne
busynesse there amoge ye people.
13 And whe he came vnder Ben Iamyns Porte, there was a porter called Ierias the
sonne of Selamia ye zone of Hananias, which fell vpo him & toke him, sayege: yi
mynde is to runne to the Caldees.
14 Then sayde Ieremy: It is not so, I go not to the Caldees. Neuertheles Ierias
wolde not beleue him, but brought Ieremy boude before the princes.
15 Wherfore the princes were angrie with Ieremy, causinge him to be beaten, & to
be layed in preson in the house of Ionathas the scrybe. For he was the ruler of
the preson.
16 Thus was Ieremy put in to the dongeon & preson, and so laye there a longe
tyme.
17 Then Sedechias the kynge sent for him, & called him, & axed him quietly in
his owne house, sayenge: thinkest thou this busynes (that now is in honde)
cometh of the LORDE? Ieremy answerde: yee yt it doth: & thou (sayde he) shalt be
delyuered in to the kynge of Babilons power.
18 Morouer, Ieremy sayde vnto kynge Sedechias: What haue I offended agaynst ye,
agaynst thy seruautes, or agaynst this people, that ye haue caused me be put in
preson?
19 Where are youre prophetes, which haue prophecied vnto you and sayde, that ye
kynge of Babilo shulde not come agaynst you & this lode?
20 And therfore heare now, o my lorde the kynge: let my prayer be accepte before
the, & sende me nomore in to ye house of Ionathas the scrybe, that I dye not
there.
21 Then Sedechias the kynge commaunded to put Ieremy in the fore entrie off the
preson, and dayly to the geuen him a cake of bred, and els no dighte meate,
vntill all the bred in the cite was eaten vp. Thus Ieremy remayned in ye fore
entre off the preson.

Chapter 38

1 Saphatias the sonne off Matha, Gedolias the sonne of Pashur, Iuchal the sonne
of Selamia, & Pashur the sonne of Malchias perceaued the wordes, yt Ieremy had
spoke vnto all the people, namely on this maner:
2 Thus saieth the LORDE: Who so remayneth in this cite, shall perish, ether with
the swearde, with honger or with pestilence: But who so falleth vnto the
Caldees, shal escape, wynnynge his soule for a pray, & shal lyue.
3 For thus saieth the LORDE This cite (no doute) must be delyuered into ye power
of the kige of Babilo, & he also shal wynne it.
4 The sayde the prynces vnto ye kynge: Syr, we besech you let this man be put to
death, For thus he discorageth the hodes of the soudyers yt be in this cite, &
the hodes of all the people, whe he speaketh soch wordes vnto the. This ma
verely laboureth not for peace of ye people, but mischefe.
5 Sedechias the kinge answered and sayde: lo, he is in yor hodes, for ye kige
maye denye you nothinge.
6 Then toke they Ieremy, and cast him in to the dongeon off Malchias the sonne
off Amalech, that dwelt in the fore entre off the preson. And they let downe
Ieremy wt coardes in to a dongeon, where there was no water, but myre.
7 So Ieremy stack fast in the myre. Now when Abdemelech the Morian beynge a
chamberlayne in the kynges courte, vnderstode, that they had cast Ieremy in to
the dongeon:
8 he went out off the kynges house, and spake to the kynge (which the sat vnder
the porte off Ben Iamin) these wordes:
9 My lorde the kynge, where as these men medle with Ieremy the prophet, they do
him wronge: Namely, in that they haue put him in preson, there to dye of honger,
for there is no more bred in the cite.
10 The the kynge commauded Abdemelech the Morian, and sayde: Take from hece xxx.
men whom thou wilt, & drawe vp Ieremy the prophet out of the dongeon, before he
dye.
11 So Abdemelech toke the men wt him, & went to ye house of Amalech, & there
vnder an almery he gat olde ragges & worne cloutes, & let the downe by a coarde,
in to the dongeon to Ieremy.
12 And Abdemelech the Morian sayde vnto the prophet Ieremy: O put these ragges
and cloutes vnder thine arme holes, betwixte the and the coardes: ad Ieremy dyd
so.
13 So they drewe vp Ieremy with coardes and toke him out of the dongeon, and he
remayned in the fore entrie of the preson.
14 The Sedechias the kynge sent and caused Ieremy the prophet be called vnto
him, in to the thirde entrie, that was by the house off the LORDE. And the kynge
sayde vnto Ieremy: I wil axe the somwhat, but hyde nothinge fro me.
15 The Ieremy answerde Sedechias: Yf I be playne vnto the, thou wilt cause me
suffre death: yf I geue the coucell, thou wilt not folowe me.
16 So the kynge swore an ooth secretly vnto Ieremy, sayenge: As truly as the
LORDE lyueth, that made vs these soules, I will not slaye the, ner geue the in
to the hodes of them, that seke after thy life.
17 Then sayde Ieremy vnto Sedechias: Thus saieth ye LORDE off hoostes the God of
Israel: Yf case be, that thou wilt go forth vnto the kynge off Babilons prynces,
thou shalt saue thy life, and this cite shall not be bret, yee both thou and thy
housholde shall escape with youre lyues.
18 But yff thou wilt not go forth to the kynge off Babilons prynces, then shal
this cite be delyuered in to the hondes of the Caldees which shal set fyre vpon
it, and thou shalt be able to escape them.
19 And Sedechias sayde vnto Ieremy: I am afrayde for the Iewes, that are fled
vnto the Caldees, lest I come in their hodes, and so they to haue me in
derision.
20 But Ieremy answerde: No, they shal not betraye the: O herken vnto the voyce
off the LORDE (I beseke ye) which I speake vnto the, so shalt thou be well, and
saue thy life.
21 But yf thou wilt not go forth, the LORDE hath tolde me this planely:
22 Beholde, all the women that are left in the kynge of Iudaes house, shal go
out to the kynge of Babilons prynces. For they thynke, yt thou art disceaued:
and that ye men in whom thou didest put thy trust, haue gotten the vnder, and
set thy fete fast in the myre, and gone their waye from the.
23 Therfore all thy wyues with their children shall fle vnto the Caldees, and
thou shalt not escape their hondes, but shalt be ye kynge of Babilons presoner,
& this cite shall be brent.
24 Then sayde Sedechias vnto Ieremy: loke yt no body knowe off these wordes, and
thou shalt not dye.
25 But yf the prynces perceaue, that I haue talked with the, and come vnto the,
sayenge: O speake, what sayde the kynge to the? hyde it not from vs, and we wil
not put the to death. Tell vs (we praye the) what sayde ye kynge to the?
26 Se thou geue them this answere: I haue humbly besought the kynge, that he
will let me lye nomore in Ionathas house, that I dye not there?
27 Then came all the princes vnto Ieremy, and axed him, And he tolde them, after
the maner as the kynge bad him. Then they helde their peace, for they perceaued
nothinge.
28 So Ieremy abode still in the fore entrie off the preson, vntill the daye that
Ierusalem was wonne.

Chapter 39

1 Now when the cite off Ierusale was taken (for in the ix. yeare of Sedechias
kynge of Iuda in the tenth Moneth, came Nabuchodonosor the kynge off Babilon and
all his hooste, and beseged Ierusalem.
2 And in the xi. yeare of Sedechias in the fourth Moneth ye ix. daye of ye
Moneth, he brake in to the cite).
3 Then all the kynge of Babilons prynces came in, & sat the downe vnder the
porte: Nergall, Sarezer, Samgarnebo, Sarsechim, Rabsaris, Nergal, Sarezer,
Rabmag, with all the other prynces of the kynge of Babilon.
4 And when Sedechias the kynge of Iuda with his soudyers sawe them, they fled,
and departed out of ye cite by night thorow the kynges garde, and thorow the
porte that is betwene the two walles, and so they wente towarde the wildernesse.
5 But the Caldees hooste folowed fast after them, and toke Sedechias in the
felde of Iericho, and brought him presoner to Nabuchodonosor the kynge off
Babilo vnto Reblatha, that lieth in the londe off Hemath where he gaue iugdment
vpon him.
6 So the kynge of Babilon caused the children of Sedechias and all the nobles
off Iuda be slayne, before his face at Reblatha
7 And made Sedechias eyes be put out, and boude him with chaynes, and sent him
to Babilon.
8 Morouer, the Caldees bret vp the kynges palace, with ye other houses of the
people, and brake downe the walles off Ierusalem.
9 As for the remnaunt of the people that were in the cite, and soch as were come
to helpe them (what so euer was left of the come sorte) Nabuzaradan the chefe
captayne caried them to Babilon.
10 But Nabuzarada the chefe captayne let the rascall people (and those that had
nothinge) dwell still in the lode off Iuda, and gaue them vynyardes and corne
feldes at the same tyme.
11 Nabuchodonosor also the kynge of Babilon gaue Nabuzarada the chefe captayne a
charge, cocernynge Ieremy, sayenge:
12 take and cherish him, and make moch off him: se thou do him no harme, but
intreate him after his owne desyre.
13 So Nabuzarada ye chefe captayne, Nabusa?ba the chefe chamberlayne,
Nergalsarezer the treasurer and all the kynge of Babilons lordes, sent for
Ieremy,
14 & caused him be fet out off the fore entrie off the preson, and committed him
vnto Godolias the sonne off Ahicam the sonne of Saphan: that he shulde carie him
home, and so he dwelt amonge the people.
15 Now whyle Ieremy laye yet bounde in the fore entrie of the preson, ye worde
off the LORDE came vnto him sayenge:
16 Go, and tell Abdemelech the Morian: Thus saieth the LORDE off hoostes ye God
off Israel: Beholde, the cruell and sharpe plage that I haue deuysed for this
cite, will I brynge vpon them, that thou shalt se it:
17 but I wil delyuer the (sayeth the LORDE) and thou shalt not come in the
hondes off those men, whom thou fearest.
18 For doutles I will saue the, so that thou shalt not perish with the swearde:
but thy life shalbe saued, and that because thou hast put thy trust in me,
saieth the LORDE.

Chapter 40

1 This is the maner, how the LORDE intreated Ieremy, when Nebuzaradan the chefe
captayne had let him go fre from Rama, whither as he had led him bounde, amonge
all the presoners, that were caried from Ierusalem and Iuda vnto Babilon.
2 The chefe captayne called for Ieremy, and sayde vnto him: The LORDE thy God
spake mightely before off the mysery vpon this place:
3 Now the LORDE hath sent it, and perfourmed it, as he had promised: For ye haue
synned agaynst the LORDE, and haue not bene obedient vnto his voyce, therfore
commeth this plage vpon you.
4 Beholde, I lowse the bondes from thy hodes this daye: yf thou wilt now go with
me vnto Babilon, vp the: For I will se to the, and prouyde for the: But yf thou
wilt not go with me to Babilon, then remayne here. Beholde, all the londe is at
thy will: loke where thou thinkest conveniet & good for the to Abyde, there
dwell.
5 Yf thou canst not be content to dwell alone, then remayne wt Godolias the
sonne off Ahica the sonne of Sapha, whom the kynge of Babilo hath made
gouernoure ouer ye cities of Iuda, & dwell wt him amonge the people, or remayne,
where so euer it pleaseth ye. So the chefe captayne gaue him his expeses wt a
rewarde, & let him go.
6 Then wete Ieremy vnto Godolias ye sonne of Ahica to Masphat, & dwelt there wt
him amonge the people that were left in the londe.
7 Now when ye captaynes of the hooste of Iuda (which wt their felowes were
scatred abrode on euery syde in ye lode) vnderstode, yt the kynge of Babilo had
made Godolias ye sonne of Ahica gouernoure in the lode, & yt man, wife & childe,
yee & the poore men in the londe (yt were not led captyue to Babilon) shulde be
vnder his Iurisdictio:
8 They came to Godolias vnto Masphat: Namely, Ismael the sonne of Nathanias,
Iohana & Ionathas the sonnes of Carea, Sareas the sonne of Tanhometh, the sonnes
of Opheus ye Netophetite, Iesanias ye sonne of Machati, wt their copanyons.
9 And Godolias the sonne of Ahicam the sonne off Sapha, swore vnto the & their
felowes on this maner: Be not afrayed to serue the Caldees, dwell in the lode, &
do the kynge of Babilon seruyce, so shal ye prospere.
10 Beholde, I dwell at Masphat to be an officer in the Caldees behalfe, & to
satisfie soch as come to vs. Therfore gather you wyne, corne and oyle, and kepe
them in youre ware houses, and dwell in youre cities, that ye haue in kepinge.
11 Yee all the Iewes also yt dwelt in Moab vnder ye Ammonites, in Idumea & in
all ye coutrees, whe they herde, yt the kinge of Babilo had made Godolias the
sonne of Ahica the sonne of Sapha, gouernoure vpo the yt were left in Iuda:
12 All the Iewes (I saye) returned out off all places where they were fled vnto:
& came in to the lode of Iuda to Godolias vnto Masphat, & gathered wyne and
other frutes, and that very moch.
13 Morouer Iohanna the sonne of Carea & all ye captaynes of ye hooste, yt were
scatred on euery syde in the londe, came to Godolias in Masphat, & sayde vnto
him:
14 knowest thou not yt Baalis kinge of ye Ammonites hath sent Ismael ye sonne of
Nathanias, to slaye the? But Godolias ye sonne of Ahica beleued the not.
15 The sayde Iohana the sonne of Carea vnto Godolias in Masphat these wordes
secretly: Let me go (I praye the) & I will slaye Ismael the sonne of Nathanias,
so yt no body shal knowe it. Wherfore will he kyll the, yt all the Iewes which
resorte vnto the, might be scatred, & the remnaunt in Iuda perishe?
16 The sayde Godolias the sonne of Ahicam to Iohanna the sonne of Carea: Thou
shalt not do it, for they are but lies, that men saye of Ismael.

Chapter 41

1 Bvt in the seuenth Moneth it happened, yt Ismael the sonne of Nathanias ye
sonne of Elisama (one of ye kynges bloude) came wt the that were greatest aboute
the kynge, & ten men that were sworne with him: vnto Godolias the sonne off
Ahicam to Masphat, and eate there together.
2 And Ismael ye sonne of Nathanias wt those ten men that were sworne to him,
starre vp, and smote Godolias the sonne of Ahicam the sonne of Saphan wt the
swearde, & slewe hym, whom the kynge off Babilo had made gouernoure off the
londe.
3 Ismael also slewe all the Iewes that were with Godolias at Masphat, and all
the Caldees that he founde there waitynge vpon him.
4 The nexte daye after that he had slayne Godolias (the matter was yet vnknowne)
5 there came certayne men from Sichem, fro Silo and Samaria, to the nombre off
lxxx. which had shauen their beerdes, rent their clothes, & were all heuye,
bringinge meatoffringes and incense in their hondes, to offre it in the house
off the LORDE.
6 And Ismael the sonne of Nathamas went forth of Masphat wepinge, to mete them.
Now whe he met them, he sayde: Go youre waye to Godolias the sonne of Ahicam.
7 And when they came in the myddest off the cite, Ismael the sonne off Nathamas
(with them that were sworne vnto him) slewe them, eue at the myddest off the
pyt.
8 Amonge these lxxx. me there were ten, yt sayde vnto Ismael: Oh slaye vs not,
for we haue yet a greate treasure in the felde, off wheate, barley, oyle and
hony. So he spared the, and slewe them not with their brethren.
9 Now the pyt wherin Ismael dyd cast the deed bodies off the me (whom he slewe
because off Godolias) had kynge Asa caused to be made, for feare off Baasa the
kynge off Israel, and the same pit dyd Ismael fyll with slayne men.
10 As for the renaunt off th peeople, the kynges doughters and all the people
that were yet left at Masphat; vpon whom Nabusaradan the chefe Captayne had made
Godolias the sonne of Ahicam gouernoure: Ismael the sonne off Nathanias caried
them awaye presoners towarde the Ammonites.
11 But when Iohana the sonne off Carea and all they which had bene captaynes
ouer the kynges hooste with him, herde of all the wickednes that Ismael the
sonne off Nathanias had done:
12 they toke their companyons, and wente out for to fight with Ismael the sone
of Nathanias, and founde him by the waters of Rabim in Gabaon.
13 Now when all the people, whom Ismael led captyue, sawe Iohana ye sonne off
Carea and all the other captaynes off the hooste, they were glad.
14 So all the people that Ismael had caried awaye fro Masphat, were brought
agayne. And whe they returned, they came to Iohanna the sonne off Carea.
15 But Ismael the sonne off Nathanias fled from Iohana wt eight of his sworne
companyons, & wente to the Ammonites.
16 Then Iohanna the sonne of Carea and all the captaynes of the hooste that were
wt him, toke the remnaut of the people, whom Ismael the sonne of Nathanias had
led awaye (When he had slayne Godolias the sonne of Ahica) whom they also had
rescued from him: fightinge men, women & children, and gelded men, whom they
brought agayne from Gabaon:
17 and wente from thence, and sat them downe at Geruth Chimham, which lieth
besyde Bethlee, that they might go into Egipte for feare of the Caldees:
18 of whom they were afrayed, because that Ismael the sonne off Nathanias had
slayne Godolias Ahicams sonne, whom the kynge off Babilon had made gouernoure in
the londe.

Chapter 42

1 So all the rulers, and Iohana the sonne off Carea, Iesanias the sonne off
Osias came with all the people fro the leest vnto the most,
2 & sayde vnto Ieremy the prophet: O heare oure peticio, that thou mayest praye
for vs vnto the LORDE yi God, and for the remnaunt, wherof there be very few
left off many, as thou seist vs:
3 that the LORDE thy God maye shewe vs a waye to go in, & tell vs, what we
shulde do.
4 Then Ieremy the prophete sayde vnto them: I haue herde you. Beholde, I will
praye vnto God youre LORDE, as ye haue requyred me: and loke what answere the
LORDE geueth you, I shall certifie you theroff, and kepe nothinge back fro you.
5 And they sayde vnto Ieremy: The LORDE off treuth & faithfulnes be oure
recorde, that we wil do all, that the LORDE thy God commaundeth vs,
6 whether it be good or euell. We will herken vnto the voyce off oure LORDE God,
to whom we sende the: that we maye prospere, when we haue folowed the voyce off
the LORDE oure God.
7 And after ten dayes came the worde off the LORDE vnto Ieremy.
8 Then called he Iohanna the sonne of Carea, and all the captaynes of the people
that were with him: Yee & all the people from the leest to the most,
9 & sayde vnto them: Thus saieth the LORDE God of Israel vnto whom ye sent me,
to laye forth youre prayers before him:
10 Yf ye wil dwell in this londe, I shall buylde you vp, & not breake you downe:
I shall plante you, & not rote you out: for I am pacified, as cocernynge the
trouble that I haue done to you.
11 Feare not the kynge off Babilon, off whom ye stonde in awe: O be not afrayed
off him, saieth the LORDE: for I will be with you, to helpe you, and delyuer you
from his honde.
12 I will pardon you, I wil haue mercy vpon you, and brynge you agayne in to
youre owne londe.
13 Neuertheles, yf ye purpose not to dwell in this londe, ner to folowe the
voyce off the LORDE youre God:
14 but will saye thus: we will not dwell here, but go in to Egipte: where we
shall nether se warre, heare the noyse off batell, ner suffre honger, there will
we dwell.
15 Wherfore heare now the worde of the LORDE, o ye remnaunt of Iuda. Thus saieth
the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel: Yf ye be whole purposed to go in to
Egipte, ad to be there as straugers:
16 the swearde that ye feare, shall ouertake you in Egipte: and the honger
wheroff ye be here afrayed, shall hange vpon you into Egipte, and there ye shall
dye.
17 For all they, that off set purpose vndertake to go in to Egipte, there to
ease them selues off their mysery, shall perish with the swearde, with honger
and pestilence: not one off them shall remayne, there shal none escape the
plage, that I wil bringe vpon them.
18 For thus saieth the LORDE off hoostes the God off Israel: like as my wrath
and indignacion is come vpon the inhabitours of Ierusale, so shall my
displeasure go forth vpon you also, yf ye go in to Egipte: For there ye shalbe
reuyled, abhorred, brought to shame and confucion: and as for this place, ye
shall neuer se it more.
19 The LORDE forbyddeth you (o ye remnaut of Iuda) that ye shall not go in to
Egipte. And forget not that I haue warned you earnestly this daye
20 ls shal ye begyle youre selues. For ye sent me vnto the LORDE youre God, and
sayde: O praye thou the LORDE oure God for vs: and loke what answere the LORDE
oure God geueth the, that bringe vs agayne, ad we shall do thereafter.
21 Now haue I shewed, and declared vnto you the voyce off the LORDE youre God,
for the which cause he hath sent me to you.
22 Yf ye will not folowe it, be sure, yt ye shall perishe with the swearde, with
honger & pestilence: euen in the same place, where youre lust was to go, and
dwell.

Chapter 43

1 Now when Ieremy had ended all ye wordes of ye LORDE God vnto ye people, (for
their sakes to whom God had sent him)
2 Asarias the sonne of Osias, & Iohana ye sonne of Carea, with all the proude
personnes, sayde vnto Ieremy: Thou lyest, the LORDE oure God hath not sent ye to
speake vnto vs, that we shulde not go in to Egipte, and dwell there:
3 But Baruch the sonne of Nerias prouoketh the agaynst vs, that he might bringe
vs in to the captyuyte off the Caldees: that they might slaye vs, and carie vs
awaye presoners vnto Babilon.
4 So Iohanna the sonne of Carea, and all the captaynes of the hooste, and all
the people folowed not the commaundement of the LORDE: Namely, to dwell in the
londe off Iuda:
5 But Iohanna the sonne of Carea & all the captaynes of the hooste, caried awaye
all the remnaunt in Iuda, that were come together agayne from the Heithen (amoge
whom they had bene scatred) to dwell in the londe of Iuda:
6 Men, women, childre, the kynges doughters: all those that Nabusaradan the
chefe captayne had left with Godolias the sonne of Ahicam. They caried awaye
also the prophet Ieremy, Baruch the sonne of Nerias,
7 and so came in to Egipte: for they were not obedient vnto the commaundement of
God. Thus came they to Taphnis.
8 And in Taphnis the worde off the LORDE happened vnto Ieremy, sayenge:
9 Take greate stones in thine hode, and hyde them in the brick wall, vnder the
dore off Pharaos house in Taphnis, that all the men of Iuda maye se,
10 and saye vnto them: Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel:
Beholde, I will sende and call for Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babilon my
seruaunt, and will set his seate vpon these stones that I haue hyd, and he shall
sprede his tente ouer them.
11 And when he commeth, he shal smyte the lode of Egipte with slaughter, with
presonment and with the swearde.
12 He shall set fyre vpon the temples of the Egipcias goddes, and burne them vp,
& take them selues presoners. Morouer he shall araye himselff wt the lode of
Egipte, like as a shepherde putteth on his cote, and shall departe his awaye
from thence in peace.
13 The pilers also of the temple of the Sonne that is in Egipte, shal he breake
in peces, and burne the tempels of the Egipcians goddes.

Chapter 44

1 This is the worde yt was shewed to Ieremy cocerninge all ye Iewes, which dwelt
in Egipte: at Magdal, at Taphnis, at Memphis, & in the londe of Patures.
2 Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel: Ye haue sene all ye
mysery, yt I haue brought vpon Ierusalem, and vpon all the cities of Iuda: so
that this daye they are desolate, and no man dwellinge therin:
3 & yt because of the greate blasphemies, which they committed, to prouoke me
vnto anger: In that they wente backe to do sacrifice ad worshipe vnto straunge
goddes: whom nether they, ner ye, ner yor fathers haue knowne.
4 How be it, I sent vnto them my seruautes all the prophetes: I rose vp early, I
sent vnto them, and gaue them warninge: O do no soch abhominable thinges, &
thinges that I hate
5 But they wolde not folowe ner herke, to turne from their wickednes, and to do
nomore sacrifice vnto straunge goddes.
6 Wherfore my indignacion & wrath was kyndled, and it brente vp the cities of
Iuda, the feldes with the stretes off Ierusalem: so that they were made waist
and desolate, as it is come to passe this daye.
7 Now therfore thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel: How happeneth
it, that ye do so greate euell vnto youre owne soules, thus to destroye the men
and women, childre and babes of Iuda? so that none of you is left,
8 because ye prouoke me vnto wrath with the workes of youre owne hondes: whe ye
offre vnto straunge goddes in the londe off Egipte, where as ye be gone to
dwell: That ye might vtterly perishe, and that ye might be reuyled and shamfully
intreated of all nacions.
9 Or, haue ye now forgotten the wickednes off yor forefathers, the wickednes off
ye kynges of Iuda and their wyues, ye wickednes that ye youre selues ad youre
wyues haue done in the londe of Iuda, in the cite and in the londe off
Ierusalem?
10 Yet are ye not sory this daye, ye feare not, nether walke ye in my lawe and
in my commaundementes, that I haue geue vnto you and youre forefathers.
11 Therfore thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God off Israel: I am stedfastly
advysed and determed, to punysh you, and to rote out all Iuda.
12 As for the remnaunt off Iuda that purposly wente in to Egipte, there to ease
them off their mysery: I will take them, and they shall all be destroyed. In ye
londe of Egipte shall they perishe, beynge consumed with the swearde and with
honger. For from ye leest vnto ye most, they shal perishe with the swearde and
with honger. Morouer they shalbe reuyled, abhorred, shamed, and confounded.
13 For I will viset them that dwell in Egipte, as I haue visited Ierusalem: with
the swearde, with honger and with pestilence:
14 So that none off the remnaunt off Iuda, which are gone to dwell in Egipte,
shall be left to come agayne in to ye londe off Iuda: all though they thynke to
come thither agayne, and to dwell there. For none shal come agayne, but soch as
are fled awaye.
15 Then all the men which knewe that their wyues had offred vnto straunge
goddes, & a greate sorte off wyues that stode there, yee and all the people that
dwelt there in Egipte in the cite of Patures, answerde Ieremy, & sayde:
16 As for the wordes that thou hast spoken vnto vs in the name of the LORDE, we
will in no wyse heare them:
17 but what so euer goeth out of oure owne mouth, that wil we do: We will do
sacrifice, and offre oblacions vnto the Quene off heauen: like as we and or
forefathers, oure kynges and oure heades haue done in the cities off Iuda, and
in the stretes and feldes of Ierusalem. For then had we plenteousnesse off
vytales, then were we in prosperite, and no my?fortune came vpon vs.
18 But sens we left of, to offre, and to do sacrifice vnto the Quene of heauen,
we haue had scarcenes of all thinges, and perish wt the swearde and honger.
19 Last of all, when we wome did sacrifice and offred vnto the Quene of heaue,
did we make her cakes ad poure vnto her drinkofferinges, to do her seruyce,
without oure hu?bondes wylles?
20 Then sayde Ieremy vnto all the people, to the men, to the women and to all
the folke, which had geuen him that answere:
21 Dyd not the LORDE remembre the sacrifices that ye, yor forefathers, youre
kiges & rulers (wt all the people) haue offred in the cities of Iuda, in the
stretes and londe off Ierusalem? and hath he not considered this in his mynde?
22 In so moch, that the LORDE might no longer suffre the wickednes off youre
inuencions, and the abhominable thynges which ye dyd? Is not youre londe
desolate & voyde, yee and abhorred, so that no ma dwelleth therin enymore, as it
is come to passe this daye?
23 Dyd not all this happen vnto you, because ye made soch sacrifice, and synned
agaynst the LORDE? Ye haue not folowed his voyce, to walke in his lawe, in his
ordinaunces and statutes. Yee this is the cause, that all mysfortune happened
vnto you, as it is come to passe this daye.
24 Morouer, Ieremy spake vnto all the people and to all the women: Heare the
worde off the LORDE all Iuda, ye that be in the londe off Egipte:
25 Thus saieth the LORDE off hoostes the God of Israel: Ye and youre wyues haue
spoken with youre owne mouth, the thinge that ye haue fulfilled in dede. Yee
thus haue ye sayde: We will not fayle, but do the thynge that pleaseth vs: we
wil do sacrifice and poure out drynkoffringes to the Quene of heauen. Purposly
haue ye set vp youre owne good meanynges, & hastely haue ye fulfilled youre owne
intente.
26 And therfore, heare the worde of the LORDE all Iuda, ye that dwell in the
londe off Egipte. Beholde, I haue sworne by my greate name (saieth the LORDE)
that my name shal not be rehearsed thorow eny mans mouth of Iuda, in all the
londe of Egipte: to saye: The LORDE God lyueth,
27 for I wil watch, to plage them, and not for their wealth. And all the men of
Iuda that be in the lode of Egipte, shal perish with the swearde and with hoger,
vntill they be vtterly destroyed.
28 Neuertheles, those that fled awaye for ye swearde, shal come agayne in to the
lode of Iuda (but there shal be very fewe of them) And all the remnaunt off
Iuda, that are gone in to Egipte, there to dwell, shall knowe, whose wordes
shalbe founde true: theirs or myne.
29 Take this for a token, that I wil viset you in this place (saieth the LORDE)
and that ye maye knowe, how that I (without doute) wil perfourne my purpose vpon
you,) to punysh you.
30 Beholde (saieth the LORDE I wil delyuer Pharao Ophram kynge of Egipte in to
the hondes of his enemies, yt seke after his life: euen as I gaue Sedechias the
kynge of Iuda in to the hondes of Nabuchodonosor kige of Babilo, which sought
after his life.

Chapter 45

1 These are the wordes yt Ieremy the prophet spake vnto Baruch the sonne of
Nerias, after that he had written these Sermos into a boke at the mouth of
Ieremy, In the fourth yeare of Ioachim the sonne of Iosias kynge of Iuda.
2 Thus saieth the LORDE God of Israel vnto the, O Baruch:
3 In so moch as thou thoughtest thus (when thou wast writinge) Wo is me, the
LORDE hath geuen me payne for my trauayle: I haue weeried my self wt sighinge,
and shall I fynde no rest?
4 Therfore tell him (O Ieremy) yt the LORDE saieth thus: Beholde, The thige that
I haue buylded, wil I breake downe agayne, and rote out the thinge, that I haue
planted, yee this whole londe.
5 And sekest thou yet promocio? Loke not for it, and desyre it not. For I will
bringe a miserable plage vpo all flesh, saieth the LORDE. But thy life will I
geue the for a pray, where so euer thou goest.

Chapter 46

1 Here folowe the wordes off the LORDE to the prophet Ieremy, which he spake
vnto the Gentiles.
2 These wordes folowinge preached he to the Egipcias concernynge the hoost off
Pharao Necho kynge off Egipte, when he was in Charcamis besyde the water off
Euphrates: what tyme as Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babilon slewe him, In the
fourth yeare off Ioachim the sonne off Iosias kynge off Iuda.
3 Ye make redy buckler and shylde, ye go forth to fight:
4 Yee harnesse youre horses, & set youre selues vpon them: Ye set youre salettes
fast on, ye bringe forth speares, ye scoure youre sweardes, & put on youre brest
plates.
5 But alas, how happeneth it, that I se you so afrayed? why shrecke ye backe?
where fore are youre worthies slayne? Yee they runne so fast awaye, that none
off them loketh behynde him. Fearfulnesse is fallen vpon euerychone off them,
saieth the LORDE.
6 The lightest off fote shall not fle awaye, and the worthies shall not escape.
Towarde the north by the water of Euphrates they shall stomble and fall.
7 But what is he this, that swelleth vp, as it were a floude, roaringe & raginge
like the streames off water?
8 It is Egipte that ryseth vp like the floude, and casteth out the waters with
so greate noyse. For they saye: We will go vp, and will couer the earth: we wil
destroye ye cities, with them that dwell therin.
9 Get you to horse backe, roll forth ye Charettes, come forth ye worthies: ye
Morians, ye Libeans with youre buclers, ye Lideans with youre bowes:
10 So shall this daye be vnto the LORDE God of hoostes, a daye of vegeaunce,
that he maye avege him of his enemies. The swearde shal deuoure, it shalbe
satisfied and bated in their bloude: For the LORDE God off hoostes shall haue a
slayneoffringe towarde the North, by the water of Euphrates.
11 Go vp (o Galaad) & bringe triacle vnto the doughter off Egipte: But in vayne
shalt thou go to surgery, for thy wounde shall not be stopped.
12 The Heithen shall heare off thy shame, and the londe shalbe full of thy
confucion: for one stronge man shall stomble vpon another, how then shulde they
not fall both together?
13 These are the wordes that the LORDE spake to the prophet Ieremy, concernyge
ye hoost of Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babilon, which was to destroye the londe
off Egipte:
14 Preach out thorow the londe of Egipte, and cause it be proclamed at Migdal,
Memphis and Taphnis, and saye: Stonde still, make the redie, for the swearde
shal consume the rounde aboute.
15 How happeneth it that thy mightie worthies are fallen? why stode they not
fast? Euen because the LORDE thrust them downe.
16 The slaughter was greate, for one fell euer still vpon another. One cried
vpon another: Vp, let vs go agayne to oure owne people, and to oure owne
naturall countre, from the swearde of oure enemie.
17 Crie euen there: O Pharao kynge of Egipte, the tyme will bringe sedicion.
18 As truly as I lyue (saieth the kynge, whose name is the LORDE of hoostes) it
shall come as ye mount of Thabor, and as Libanus yf it stode in the see.
19 O thou doughter of Egipte, make redy thy geer to flyt. For Memphis shalbe
voyde and desolate, so that no ma shal dwell therin.
20 The londe of Egipte is like a goodly fayre calfe, but one shall come out of
the north to dryue her forwarde.
21 Hir wagied souldyers that be with her, are like fat calues. They also shall
fle awaye together, and not abyde: for the daye off their slaughter and the tyme
of their visitacion shall come vpon them.
22 The crie off their enemies shall make a noyse, as the blast of a trompet. For
they shall entre in with their hooste, and come wt axes, as it were hewers downe
of wod.
23 And they shall cut downe hir wod (saieth the LORDE) with out eny discrecion.
For they shal be mo in nobre then the greshoppers, so that no man shalbe able to
tell the.
24 The doughter of Egipte shalbe confouded. whe she shalbe delyuered in to the
hondes off the people off the north.
25 Morouer thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel: Beholde I will
vyset that restlesse people off Alexandria, Pharao and Egipte, yee both their
goddes and their kynges: euen Pharao, and all them yt litten vnto him.
26 Yee I will delyuer them in to the hondes off those, that seke after their
lyues: Namely, in to the power off Nabuchodonosor the kynge off Babilon, and in
to the power off his seruautes. And after all these thinges, it shalbe inhabited
as afore tyme, saieth the LORDE
27 But be not thou afrayed (o my seruaunt Iacob) feare not thou, o Israel. For
lo, I wil helpe the from farre, and thy sede from the londe of thy captiuyte.
Iacob also shall come agayne, and be in rest: he shall be rich, and no man shall
do him harme.
28 Feare thou not (o Iacob my seruaunt) saieth the LORDE, for I am with the: and
will destroye all nacions, amonge whom I haue scatred the. Neuertheles I will
not consume the, but chasten the and correcke the: yee and that with discrecion:
nether wil I spare the, as one that were fautlesse.

Chapter 47

1 These are the wordes, that the LORDE spake vnto Ieremy the prophet agaynst the
Phylistines, before that Pharao smote the cite off Gaza.
2 Thus saieth the LORDE: Beholde, there shall waters arise out off the north:
and shall growe to a greate floude, runnynge ouer and couerynge the londe, the
cities and them that dwell therin. And the men shall crie, and all they that
dwell in the londe, shall mourne
3 at the noyse and stampynge off their stronge barded horses, at the shakynge
off their charettes, and at the romblinge off the wheles. The fathers shall not
loke to their children, so feable and weery shall their hondes be:
4 at the same tyme, when he shal be there, to destroye the whole londe off the
Phylistynes. He shall make waist both Tirus, Sidon ad all other that are sworne
vnto them. For the LORDE will destroye all Palestina, and the other Iles, that
be deuyded fro the countre.
5 Baldnesse is come vpon Gaza, Ascalon with hir other valleys shall kepe hir
peace. How longe wilt thou slaye,
6 O thou swearde off the LORDE? Turne agayne in to ye sheeth, reste, and leaue
off.
7 But how can it ceasse, when the LORDE himselff hath geuen it a charge agaynst
Ascalon, and raysed it vp agaynst the cities off the see coast?

Chapter 48

1 Thus saieth ye LORDE off hoostes ye God of Israel against Moab: Wo be to ye
cite of Nebo, for it shal be layed waist, brought to confucion and taken. Yee ye
stroge cite of Cariatharim shalbe brought to shame, and afrayed:
2 Moab shall nomore be had in honoure: Wicked councell shalbe taken vpon
Hesebon. Come (shall they saye) let vs rote them out, that they maye be nomore
amonge the nombre of the Gentiles, yee that they maye nomore be thought vpon:
Thus the swearde shall persecute ye.
3 A voyce shall crie from Horonaim: With greate waistinge and destruction,
4 is Moab made desolate. And this crie shalbe herde in all hir cities.
5 At the goinge vp vnto Luhtih there shall arise a lametacion: and downe towarde
Horonaim, there shall be herde a cruell and a deedly crie:
6 Get you awaye, saue youre lyues & be like vnto the heeth in ye wildernes
7 For, because thou hast trusted in thy stronge holdes and treasure, thou shalt
be taken. Chamos with his prestes and prynces shall go awaye in to captiuyte.
8 The destroyer shal come vpon all cities, none shall escape. The valleys shalbe
destroyed, and the feldes shall be layed waist: like as the LORDE hath determed.
9 Make a token vnto Moab, that she get hir awaye spedely: for hir cities shalbe
made so desolate, that no man shall dwell therin.
10 Cursed be he that doth the worke of the LORDE necligently, and cursed be he
that kepeth backe his swearde from sheddynge off bloude.
11 Moab hath euer bene rich and carlesse from hir youth vp, she hath sytten and
take hir ease with hir treasure. She was neuer yet put out off one vessell in to
another (yt is) she neuer wente awaye in to captyuyte, therfore hir taist
remayneth, and hir sauoure is not yet chaunged.
12 But lo, the tyme commeth (saieth the LORDE) that I shall sende hir trussers
to trusse her vp, to prepare and season hir vessels: yee hir tankerdes rattell,
and shake to & fro.
13 And Moab shalbe ashamed off Chamos, like as Israel was ashamed off Bethel,
wherin she put hir trust.
14 Wherfore do ye thinke thus: we are mightie, and stronge men off warre?
15 Moab shalbe destroyed, and hir cities brente vp: hir chosen yonge men shall
be slayne, saieth the kinge, whose name is the LORDE off hoostes.
16 The destruction off Moab commeth on a pace, and hir fall is at honde.
17 All hir neghbours shall mourne for her, and all they that knowe hir name,
shal saye: O how happeneth it, that the stronge staff and the goodly rod is thus
broken?
18 And thou doughter Dibo, come downe from thy glory, and syt in pouerte. For he
that destroyeth Moab, shall come vp to the also, and breake downe thy stronge
holdes.
19 And thou that dwellest in Aroer, get the to ye strete, & loke aboute the: axe
them that are fled and escaped, and saye: what thynge is happened?
20 O, Moab is confounded and ouercome. Mourne and crie, tell it out at Arnon,
that Moab is destroyed.
21 And mysery shall come vpon the playne londe: Namely, vpo holon, and Iaza:
vpon Mephat
22 and Dibo, vpon Nebo and the house of Diplathaim,
23 vpon Cariatharim and Bethgamul, vpon Bethmaon
24 and Carioth, vpon Bosra and all the cities in the lode off Moab, whether they
lye farre or neare.
25 The horne of Moab shal be smytte downe, & hir arme broken, saieth the LORDE.
26 Make hir dronken (for she magnified hirself aboue the LORDE:) that men maye
clappe their hondes at hir vomyte, and that she also maye be laughed to scorne.
27 O Israell, shalt thou not laugh him to scorne, when he is taken amoge theues?
Yee because off thy wordes that thou hast spoken agaynst him, thou shalt be
dryuen awaye.
28 Ye Moabites shal leaue the cities, and dwell in rockes off stone, and become
like doues, that make their nestes in holes.
29 As for Moabs pryde, we haue herde off it, she is very hie mynded. I knowe hir
stoutnesse, hir boostinge, hir arogacy and the pryde off hir stomack, saieth the
LORDE.
30 For hir furiousnes maye nether vpholde her wt strength, ner dede.
31 Therfore shal there mournynge be made for Moab, and euery ma shal crie for
Moabs sake: a lamentacion shalbe made, to the men that stonde vpon the wall.
32 So will I mourne for the also (o Iazer) and for the, O thou vynyarde off
Sybma. Thy wyne brauches shal come ouer ye see, and the braunches off Iazer but
vnto the see: the destroyer shall breake in to thy haruest and grape gatheringe.
33 Myrth and cheare shalbe taken awaye from the tymbre felde, and from the whole
londe off Moab. There shall be no swete wyne in the presse, the treader shall
haue no stomacke to crie, yee there shall be none to crie vnto him:
34 which afore tyme were herde from hesebon to Eleale and Ioaz, which lifted vp
their voyce from Zoar vnto Horonaim, that bullock off thre yeare olde. The
waters also off Nemrim shalbe dried vp.
35 Morouer I will make Moab ceasse (saieth the LORDE) from the offringes and
censinge that she hath made vnto hir goddes in hie places.
36 Wherfore my herte mourneth for Moab, like a crowde playenge an heuy songe:
and for the mens sake off the bricke wall my herte mourneth also, euen as a
pype, that pipeth a dolefull songe: for they shalbe very fewe, and destroyed.
37 All heades shall be shauen, and all beerdes clipped off: all hondes bounde,
and all loynes gyrded aboute with sack cloth.
38 Vpo all the house toppes and stretes off Moab, there shalbe mournynge: For I
will breake Moab like an vnprofitable vessell saieh the LORDE
39 O how fearfull is she? O how mourneth she? O how doth Moab hange downe hir
heade, and is ashamed? Thus shall Moab be a laughinge stocke, and had in
derision off all them, that be rounde aboute her.
40 For thus saieth the LORDE: Beholde, the enemie shal come flyenge as an Aegle,
and sprede his wynges vpon Moab.
41 They shall clymme ouer the walles, and wynne the stronge holdes. Then the
mighty mens hertes in Moab, shalbe like the herte off a woman trauelinge with
childe.
42 And Moab shalbe made so desolate, that she shal nomore be a people, because
she hath set vp her selfe agaynst the LORDE.
43 Feare, pyt, and snare shall come vpo the (o Moab) saieth the LORDE.
44 Who so escapeth the feare, shal fall in the pyt: and who so getteth out off
the pyt, shall be taken in the snare. For I will bringe a yeare off visitacion
vpon Moab, saieth the LORDE.
45 They that are able to fle, shall stonde vnder the shadowe off Hesebon. For
there shall go a fyre out off Hesebon, and a flame from Sion, & shall burne vp
that proude people off Moab, both before and behynde.
46 Wo be vnto the (o Moab) for thou people off Chamos shalt perish: Yee thy
sonnes and doughters shall be led awaye captyue.
47 Yet at the last will I bringe Moab out off captiuyte agayne, saieth the
LORDE. Thus farre off the plage off Moab.

Chapter 49

1 As concerninge the Ammonites, thus the LORDE saieth: Hath Israel no children,
or is he without an heyre? Why hath youre kynge then taken Gad in? wherfore doth
his people dwell in his cities?
2 Beholde therfore, the tyme commeth (saieth ye LORDE) that I will brynge a
noyse off warre into Rabath off the Ammonites. Lahel shalbe desolate, and hir
cities brent vp: and the Israelites shall be lordes ouer those, that had the in
possession a fore, saieth the LORDE.
3 Hesebon shall mourne, for it shalbe roted out off the grounde, saieth the
LORDE. The cities off Rabath shall crie out, and gyrde them selues with sack
cloth: they shall mourne, and runne aboute the walles: for their kynge shall be
led awaye presoner: yee his preestes and prynces with him.
4 Wherfore trustest thou in the water streames, that flowe to and fro, o thou
fearce doughter: and thynkest thou art so safe (by reason off thy treasure) that
no man shal come to the?
5 Beholde, I will brynge a feare vpon the, saieth the LORDE God off hoostes,
from all those that be aboute the: so that ye shall be scatred euery man from
another, and no ma shall gather them together agayne, that be fled.
6 But after that, I will bringe the Ammonites also out off captyuyte agayne.
7 Vpon the Edomites hath the LORDE off hoostes spoken on this maner: Is there
nomore wy?dome in Theman? Is there nomore good councell amonge his people? Is
their wy?dome then turned clene to naught?
8 Get you hence, turne youre backes, crepe downe into the depe, O ye citesyns
off Dedan. For I will bringe destructio vpon Esau, yee and the daye off his
visitacion.
9 Yff the grape gatherers came vpon the, shulde they not leaue some grapes? Yff
the night robbers came vpon the, shulde they not take so moch, as they thought
were ynough?
10 But I will make Esau bare, and discouer his secretes, so that he shall not be
able to hyde them. His sede shalbe waisted awaye, yee his brethren and his
neghbours, ad he himselff shall not be left behinde.
11 Thou shalt leaue thy fatherlesse children behinde the, and I will kepe them
and thy wydowes shall take their comforth in me.
12 For thus hath the LORDE spoken: Beholde, they that men thought were vnmete to
drinke of the cuppe, haue dronken with the first: and thynkest thou then to be
fre? No, no: thou shalt nether be quyte no fre, but thou must drynke also:
13 For why, I haue sworne by my selff (saieth the LORDE) that Bosra shall become
a wyldernesse, an open shame, a laughinge stocke and cursynge: and hir cities
shalbe a continuall deserte.
14 For I am perfectly infourmed of the LORDE, that he hath sent a message all
ready vnto the Hiethen. Gather you together, and go forth agaynst them: make you
ready to the battayle,
15 for lo: I will make the but small amonge the Heithen, and litle regarded
amonge men.
16 Thy hie stomack & the pryde of thy herte haue disceaued ye, because thou wilt
dwell in the holes of stony rockes, and haue the hie mountaynes in possession.
Neuertheles though thy nest were as hie as the Aegles, yet wil I cast the downe,
saieth the LORDE.
17 Morouer Idumea shall be a wildernesse: who so goeth by it, shalbe abashed,
and wondre at all hir miserable plages.
18 Like as Sodom, Gomor and the cities that laye there aboute, were turned
vpsyde downe (saieth ye LORDE) so shal no body dwell in Idumea, and no man shal
haue his habitacion there.
19 Beholde, like as the Lyon cometh vp from the pleasaunt medowes of Iordane
vnto ye grene pastures of Etha, so wil I dryue him, & make him runne agaynst
her. But who is the yonge man that I will ordene therto? Who is like, vnto me?
What is he that will stryue with me? What shepherde maye stonde in my hondes?
20 Therfore heare the councell of the LORDE, that he hath taken vpon Idumea: &
his purpose, that he hath deuysed vpon the citesyns of Theman: The leest of the
flocke shal teare them in peces, & loke what fayre thynge they haue, they shal
make it waist, & them selues also.
21 At the noyse of their fall ye earth shal quake, the crie of their voyce
shalbe herde vnto the reed see.
22 Beholde, ye enemie shall come and fle vp hither, like as it were an Aegle, &
sprede his wynges vpon Bosra. Then shal the hertes of the worthies in Edom be as
the herte of a woman trauelinge of childe.
23 Vpon Damascus, Hemath and Arphad shall come confucion, for they shall heare
euell tydinges: they shal be tossed to and fro like the see that can not stonde
still.
24 Damascus shalbe sore afrayde, & shal fle, tremblinge shal come vpon her.
Sorowe and payne shal ouer take her as a woman trauelinge of childe.
25 But how shulde so worshipfull and glorious a cite be forsaken?
26 Heare therfore: hir yonge men shal fall in the stretes, and all hir men of
warre shal be take awaye in that tyme, saieth the LORDE of hoostes.
27 I will kyndle a fyre in the walles of Damascus, which shal cosume the palace
of Benadad.
28 As for Cedar and the kyngdome of Hasor, whom Nabuchodonosor the kynge of
Babilon smote downe, the LORDE hath spoken thus vpon them: Arise, and get you vp
vnto Cedar, and destroye the people towarde the easte.
29 Their tentes and their flockes shal they take awaye, yee their hanginges and
their vessell. Their Camels also shall they carie awaye with them. They shall
come aboute them on euery syde with a fearfull crie.
30 Fle, get you soone awaye, crepe in to caues, that ye maye dwell there: O ye
inhabitours of Hasor, saieth the LORDE: for Nabuchodonosor ye kinge of Babilon
hath holden a councel concernynge you, & concluded his deuyce agaynst you.
31 Arise, & get you vp agaynst yonder rich & carelesse people (saieth the LORDE)
which haue nether gates ner dore barres, & that dwell not together.
32 Their Camels shalbe stollen, & the droues of their catell dryuen awaye.
Morouer, these that be shauen wil I scatre towarde all the wyndes, & bringe them
to destruction: Yee & that thorow their owne familiers, saieth the LORDE.
33 Hasor also shall be a dwellinge for Dragons, and an euerlastinge wildernesse:
so that no body shal dwell there, and no man shal haue there his habitacion.
34 These are the wordes, that the LORDE spake to the prophet Ieremy concernynge
Elam, in the begynnynge of the reigne of Sedechias kinge of Iuda.
35 Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: Beholde, I wil breake the bowe of Elam, and
take awaye their strength:
36 aud vpon Elam I wil bringe the foure wyndes from ye foure quarters of heauen,
& wil scatre them agaynst the same foure wyndes. And there shal be no people,
but some of Elam shal fle vnto them.
37 For I wil cause Elam be afrayed of their enemies, & of them that seke their
lyues: & wil bringe vpo them the indignacion of my wrath, saieth the LORDE. And
I wil persecute them with the swearde so longe til I haue brought them to
naught.
38 I wil set my stole in Elam, I wil destroye both the kinge & ye prynces from
thence, saieth the LORDE.
39 But in processe of tyme, I wil bringe Elam out of captiuyte agayne, saieth
the LORDE.

Chapter 50

1 The wordes yt the LORDE spake vnto the prophet Ieremy, concernynge Babilon, &
the londe of the Caldees:
2 Preach amonge the Gentiles, let youre voyce be herde, make a toke: crie out,
kepe no sylence, but saye: Babilon shal be wonne, Bel shalhe cofounded, and
Merodach shalbe ouer come. Yee their goddes shal be brought to shame, and their
ymages shall stonde in feare.
3 For out of the north there shal come a people agaynst her, which shal make hir
londe so waist, that no body shal dwell therin: nether man ner beast, for they
shall fle and departe from thence.
4 In those dayes & at that tyme (saieth the LORDE) the childre of Israel shall
come, they & the children of Iuda, wepinge & makinge haist, & shal seke the
LORDE their God.
5 They shall axe the waye to Sion, thyther shall they turne their faces, & come,
and hange vpon the, in a couenaunt that neuer shal be broken.
6 My people hath bene a lost flocke, my shepherdes haue disceaued them, & haue
made them go astraye vpon the hilles. They haue gone from the mountayne to the
litle hill, & forgotten their folde.
7 All they yt came vpon them, haue deuoured the: & their enemies sayde: We haue
made no faute agaynst them, for they haue displeased the LORDE, yee euen the
LORDE which is the bewtie of their rightuousnes, & yt defended their fathers.
8 Yet shal ye fle from Babilon, & departe out of ye londe of the Caldees, and ye
shall be as the rammes that go before the flocke.
9 For lo, I will wake vp an hoost of people from ye northren londe, & bringe
them vpon Babilon: these shal laye sege to it, & wynne it: Their arowes shal not
mysse, like as a connynge archer shuteth not wronge.
10 And the Caldees shalbe spoyled, & all they that spoyle them, shalbe
satisfied, saieth the LORDE:
11 because ye were so chearfull & glad, to treade downe myne heretage, &
fulfilled youre pleasures, as the calues in the grasse: and triumphed ouer them
like the bulles, when ye had gotten the victory.
12 Youre mothers shalbe sore confounded, and they that bare you, shal come to
shame. She shall be the leest set by amonge the nacions, vyode, waist, & dried
vp.
13 No man shal be able to dwell there, for the feare of ye LORDE, but she shal
be whole desolate. All they that go by Babilon, shall stonde still, & be
abashed, & shal wondre at all hir plages.
14 Go forth in yor araye agaynst Babilon rounde aboute, all ye that can hadle
bowes: shute as her, spare no arowes, for she hath synned agaynst the LORDE.
15 Crie out: vpon her, vpon her, agaynst her roude aboute: she shal yelde
herselfe, her foundacios shal fall, & hir walles shall come downe, for it shalbe
the vengeaunce of the LORDE. Yee vegeaunce shalbe taken of her, & as she hath
done, so shal she be dealt withall.
16 They shal rote out the sower from Babilon, & him yt handleth the sickle in
haruest. For feare of the swearde of the enemie, euery man shall get him to his
owne people, & euery man shal fle to his owne londe.
17 Israel is a scatred flocke, the Lyons haue dispersed them. First the kinge of
the Assirians deuoured them, last of all this Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babilon
hath brussed all their bones.
18 Therfore thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel: Beholde, I will
viset the kinge of Babilon & his kingdome, as I haue visited the kinge of the
Assirians:
19 and will bringe Israel agayne to his pleasaunt pasture, that he maye fede
vpon Charmel & Basan, and be satisfied vpon the mount of Ephraim & Galaad.
20 In those dayes and at the same tyme (saieth the LORDE) yf the offence of
Israel be sought for, there shal none be founde: Yf men enquere for the synne of
Iuda, there shal be none: for I wil be mercifull vnto them, whom I suffre to
remayne ouer.
21 Go downe (o thou avenger) in to the enemies londe, & viset them that dwell
therin: downe with them, and smyte them vpon the backes, saieth the LORDE: do
acordinge to all, that I haue commaunded the.
22 There is gone aboute the londe a crie of a slaughter & greate murthur, namely
on this maner:
23 How happeneth it, that the hammer of the whole worlde is thus broken &
brussed in sonder? How chaunceth it, that Babilon is become a wildernes amonge
the Heithen on this maner?
24 I myself haue layed wayte for the, & thou art taken: vnawarres art thou
trapped & snared: for why, thou hast prouoked ye LORDE vnto anger:
25 The LORDE hath opened his house of ordinaunce, & brought forth the weapens of
his wrath. For the thinge that is done in the londe of the Caldees, it is the
LORDE of hoostes worke.
26 These thinges shal come vpon her at the last, they shal breake in to hir
preuy chabres, they shall leaue her as bare as stones, that be layed together
vpon heapes. They shall so destroye her, yt nothinge shal be left.
27 They shal slaye all hir mightie souldyers, and put them to death. Wo be vnto
the, for the daye & tyme of their visitacion is at honde.
28 Me thinke I heare already a crie, of them that be fled & escaped out of the
londe of Babilon, which shewe in Sion the vengeaunce of the LORDE oure God, the
vengeaunce of his temple: Yee a voyce of them, that crie agaynst Babilon:
29 Call vp all the archers agaynst Babilon, pytch youre tentes rounde aboute
her, that none escape. Recompence her, as she hath deserued: and acordinge as
she hath done, so deale with her agayne: for she hath set vp her self agaynst
the LORDE, agaynst ye holy one of Israel.
30 Therfore shal hir yonge men fall downe in the stretes, & all hir men of warre
shal be roted out in yt daye, saieth the LORDE.
31 Beholde, I speake vnto the (o thou proude) saieth the LORDE God of hoostes:
for thy daye shal come, eue the tyme of yi visitacio.
32 And the proude shal stomble & fall, & no man shal helpe him vp. I wil burne
vp his cities with fyre, & it shal consume all that is rounde aboute him.
33 Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: The children of Israel & Iuda suffre
violence together. All they that haue them in captiuyte, kepe them fast, & wil
not let them go:
34 but their aveger & redemer is mightie, whose name is the LORDE of hoostes: he
shal manteyne their cause, he shal make the londe shake, & iudge them that dwell
therin, one with another.
35 The swearde shall come vpon the Caldees (saieth the LORDE) vpon them that
dwell in Babilon, vpon their prynces, & vpo their wyse me:
36 The swearde vpon their soythsayers, (as for those, they shall become fooles.)
The swearde vpo their worthies, so that they shal stonde in feare:
37 The swearde vpon their horsmen and charettes, & vpon all the comon people
that dwell vnder the: so that they all shal become like women: The swearde vpon
their treasure, so that it shal be stolen awaye:
38 The swearde vpon their waters, so that they shalbe dried vp: For the londe
worshippeth ymages, & delyteth in straunge wondrefull thinges.
39 Therfore shal wilde beestes, Apes & Estriches dwell therin: for there shal
neuer man dwell there, nether shal eny man haue his habitacion there fore
euermore.
40 Like as God destroyed Sodom & Gomorre, with the cities that laye there
aboute, saieth the LORDE: So shal noman dwell there also, nether shal eny ma
haue there his habitacion.
41 Beholde, there shal come a people from the north, with a greate bonde of men,
& many kinges shal stonde vp from the endes of the earth:
42 They beare bowes & buclers, cruell are they & vnmercifull. Their voyce
roareth like the raginge see, they ryde vpon horses, & come weapened to fight
agaynst the: O Babilon.
43 As soone as the kinge of Babilon heareth tell of them, his hondes shal waxe
feable: Sorowe and heuynes shall come vpon him, as a woman trauelinge with
childe.
44 Beholde, like as the Lyon commeth vp from the pleasaunt medowes of Iordane
vnto the grene pastures of Ethan, so wil I dryue the forth, and make them runne
agaynst her. But whom shal I chose out, & ordene to soch thinge? For who is like
me, or who wil stryue with me? or what shepherde maye stonde agaynst me?
45 Therfore heare the councel that the LORDE hath geuen vpon Babilon, and the
deuyce that he hath taken vpon the londe of the Caldees. The leest amoge the
people shal teare them in peces, & loke what pleasaunt thinge they haue: they
shal laye it waist.
46 The noyse at ye wynnynge of Babilon shal moue the earth, & the crie shalbe
herde amonge the Getiles.

Chapter 51

1 Thus hath the LORDE sayde: Beholde, I will rayse vp a perlous wynde agaynst
Babilon & hir citesens, yt beare euell will agaynst me.
2 I wil sende also in to Babilo fanners, to fanne her out, & to destroye hir
londe: for in the daye of hir trouble they shalbe aboute her on euery syde.
3 Morouer, the LORDE hath sayde vnto the bowe men, & to them yt clymme ouer the
walles in brest plates: Ye shal not spare hir yongeme, kyll downe all hir hoost.
4 Thus the slayne shal fall downe in the londe of the Caldees, and the wounded
in the stretes.
5 As for Israel & Iuda, they shall not be forsake of their God, of the LORDE of
hoostes, of the holyone of Israel: no, though they haue fylled all their londe
full of synne.
6 Fle awaye from Babilon, euery man saue his life. Let no man holde his tunge to
hir wickednes, for the tyme of the LORDES vengeaunce is come, yee he shal
rewarde her agayne.
7 Babilon hath bene in the LORDES honde a golden cuppe, yt maketh all londes
droncken. Of hir wyne haue all people droncken, therfore are they out of their
wittes.
8 But sodenly is Babilon fallen, and destroyed. Mourne for her, brynge plasters
for hir woundes, yf she maye peraduenture be healed agayne.
9 We wolde haue made Babilon whole (saye they) but she is not recouered.
Therfore wil we let her alone, & go euery ma in to his owne countre. For hir
iudgmet is come in to heauen, & is gone vp to the cloudes.
10 And therfore come on, we will shewe Sion the worke of the LORDE oure God.
11 Make sharpe the arowes, and fyll the quyuers: for the LORDE shall rayse vp
the sprete of the kynge of the Meedes, which hath allready a desyre to destroye
Babilon. This shalbe the vengeaunce of the LORDES, and the vengeaunce of his
temple.
12 Set vp tokens vpon the walles of Babilon, make youre watch stronge, set yor
watch men in araye, yee holde preuye watches: & yet for all that shall the LORDE
go forth with the deuyce, which he hath taken vpon them that dwell in Babilon.
13 O thou that dwellest by the greate waters, o thou that hast so greate
treasure and riches, thyne ende is come: & the rekenynge of thy wynnynges.
14 The LORDE of hoostes hath sworne by himself, that he wil ouer whelme the with
men like greshoppers in nombre, which with a corage shall crie Alarum Alarum
agaynst the.
15 Yee euen the LORDE of hoostes, that with his power made the earth, with his
wi?dome prepayred ye rounde worlde, & with his discrecion spred out the heauens.
16 As soone as he letteth his voyce be herde, the waters in the ayre waxe
fearce: He draweth vp the cloudes from the endes of the earth. He turneth ye
lightenynges to rayne, he bringeth the wyndes out of their secrete places
17 By the reason of wy?dome, all men are become fooles. Confounded be all the
casters of ymages: for ye thinge that they make, is but disceate, & hath no
breath.
18 Vayne is it, & worthy to be laughed at: & in the tyme of visitacion it shal
perish.
19 Neuertheles, the porcion of Iacob is none soch: but he that made all thinges,
whose name is the LORDE of hoostes, he is the rodde of his enheritaunce.
20 Thou breakest my weapens of warre, & yet thorow the I haue scatred the
nacions & kyngdomes:
21 Thorow the haue I scatred horse & horseman, yee the charettes, & soch as sat
vpon them:
22 Thorow the I haue scatred man & woman, olde and yonge, bacheler & mayden.
23 Thorow the I haue scatred the shepherde & his flocke, the husbond man & his
catell, the prynces & the rulers.
24 Therfore wil I rewarde the cite of Babilon & all his citesyns the Caldees,
with all the euell which they haue done vnto Sion: Yee that ye youre selues
shall se it, saieth the LORDE.
25 Beholde, I come vpon the (thou noysome hill) saieth the LORDE, thou that
destroyest all londes. I wil stretch out my honde ouer the, & cast the downe
from the stony rockes: & wil make the a brente hill,
26 so that nether corner stones, ner pinnacles, ner foundacion stones shalbe
taken enymore out of the but waist & desolate shalt thou lie for euermore,
saieth the LORDE.
27 Set vp a toke in the londe: blowe the trompettes amonge the Heithen, prouoke
the nacions agaynst her, call the kyngdomes, of Ararat, Menni & Ascanes agaynst
her: nombre out Taphsar agaynst her, bringe as greate a sorte of horses agaynst
her, as yf they were greshoppers.
28 Prepare agaynst them ye people of the Meedes wt their kynges, prynces & all
their chefe rulers, yee and the whole londe that is vnder them.
29 The londe also shal shake & be afrayed, when the deuyce of the LORDE shall
come forth agaynst Babilon: to make the londe of Babilon so waist, that no ma
shal dwell eny more therin.
30 The Worthies of Babilon shal leaue the batell, & kepe themselues in stronge
holdes, their strength hath fayled them, they shalbe like women. Their dwellinge
places shal be brent vp, their barres shalbe broken.
31 One purseuaunt shal mete another, yee one poste shal come by another, to
bringe the kinge of Babilon tydinges: that his cite is taken in on euery syde,
32 the foordes occupyde, the fennes brent vp, and the souldyers sore afrayed.
33 For thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel: The doughter of
Babilon hath bene in hir tyme like as a thre?shinge floore, but shortly shal hir
haruest come.
34 Nabuchodonosor the kinge of Babilon hath deuoured and distroyed me, he hath
made me an emptie vessell. He swalowed me vp like a Dragon, and fylled his bely
with my delicates: he hath cast me out,
35 he hath take my substaunce awaye, & the thinge that was left me hath he
caried vnto Babilon, saieth the doughter, that dwelleth in Sion: Yee & my bloude
also, vnto the Caldees, saieth Ierusalem.
36 Therfore thus saieth the LORDE: Beholde, I wil defende thy cause, & avenge
the: I will drynke vp hir see, & drye vp hir water sprynges.
37 Babilon shal become an heape of stones, a dwellinge place for dragons, a
fearfulnes & wondringe, because no man dwelleth there.
38 They shall roare together like lyons, & as the yonge lyons when they be
angrie, so shal they bede them selues.
39 In their heate I shal set drynke before the, & they shalbe droncken for ioye:
Then shal they slepe an euerlastinge slepe, & neuer wake, saieth the LORDE.
40 I shal carie them downe to be slayne like shepe, like wethers & gootes.
41 O, how was Sesah wonne? O, how was the glory of ye whole londe taken? how
happeneth it, that Babilon is so wondred at amonge the Heithe?
42 The see is rysen ouer Babilon, & hath couered her with his greate wawes.
43 Hir cities are layed waist, the londe lieth vnbuylded and voyde: it is a
londe, where no man dwelleth, & where no ma traueleth thorow.
44 Morouer, I wil vyset Bel at Babilo: & the thinge that he hath swalowed vp,
that same shal I plucke out of his mouth. The Gentiles also shall runne nomore
vnto him, yee and the walles of Babilon shal fall.
45 O my people, come out of Babilon, that euery man maye saue his life, from the
fearfull wrath of the LORDE.
46 Be not faynte herted, & feare not at euery rumoure that shalbe herde in the
londe: for euery yeare bringeth new tydinges, yee straunge wickednes and
lordshipe.
47 And lo, the tyme commeth that I wil vyset the ymages of Babilo, and the whole
londe shalbe confounded, yee and hir slayne shal lie in the myddest of her.
48 Heauen and earth with all that is therin, shall reioyce ouer Babilon, when
the destroyers shal come vpon her from the north, saieth ye LORDE.
49 Like as Babilo hath beaten downe and slayne many out of Israel, so shal there
fall many, and be slayne in all hir kyngdome.
50 Ye that haue escaped the swearde, haist you, stode not still, remembre the
LORDE afarre of: and thinke vpon Ierusalem,
51 for we were ashamed to heare the blasphemies: oure faces were couered with
shame, because the straunge aleauntes came in to the Sanctuary of the LORDE.
52 Wherfore beholde (saieth the LORDE) the tyme commeth, that I wil vyset the
ymages of Babilon, and thorow the whole lode they shal mourne and fall.
53 Though Babilon clymmed vp in to heaue, and kepte her power an hie: yet shal I
sende her destroyers saieth the LORDE.
54 A piteous crie shall be herde from Babilon, and a greate mysery from the
londe of the Caldees:
55 when the LORDE destroyeth them, and when he dryueth out the hie stomack &
proude boostinge, where with they haue bene as furious, as the wawes of greate
water floudes, and made greate crakes with their wordes
56 For the destroyers shall come vpon her (euen vpon Babilon) which shal take
hir worthies, and brake their bowes: for God is disposed to avenge him self vpon
them, & sufficiently to recompence the.
57 Yee (saieth the LORDE) I will make their prynces, their wyse men, their chefe
rulers & all their worthies, droncke: so that they shal slepe an euerlastinge
slepe, and neuer wake: Thus saieth the kinge, whose name is ye LORDE of hoostes.
58 Morouer, thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: The thicke wall of Babilon shalbe
broken, and hir proude gates shalbe brente vp. And the thinge that the Getiles
and the people haue wrought with greate trauayle and laboure, shal come to
naught, and be consumed in the fyre.
59 This is the charge that Ieremy gaue vnto Sarias the sonne of Nerias, the
sonne of Maasia, when he wente towarde Babilon with Sedechias the kinge of Iuda,
in the fourth yeare of his reigne. Now this Sarias was a peaceable prynce.
60 Ieremy wrote in a boke, all the misery that shulde come vpon Babilon, yee and
all these sermons that be written agaynst Babilon,
61 and gaue Sarias this charge: When thou commest vnto Babilon, se that thou
rede all these wordes,
62 and saye: O LORDE, thou art determed to rote out this place, so that nether
people ner catell shal dwell there eny more, but to lie waist for euer:
63 and when thou hast redde out the boke, bynde a stone to it, and cast it in
the myddest of Euphrates,
64 and saye: Euethus shal Babilon syncke, & be thrust downe with the burthen of
trouble, that I will bringe vpon her: so that she shal neuer come vp agayne.
Thus farre are ye preachinges of Ieremy.

Chapter 52

1 Sedechias was xxj. yeare olde, when he was made kynge, & he raigned xj. yeare
in Ierusalem. His mothers name was Hamithal, Ieremies doughter of Lobna.
2 He lyued wickedly before the LORDE euen as Ioachim dyd.
3 Wherfore the LORDE was angrie at Ierusalem & Iuda, so longe till he had cast
the out of his presence. And Sedechias fel from the kynge of Babilon.
4 But in ye ix. yeare of his raigne, In the teth Moneth, the tenth daye of the
Moneth it happened, that Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babilon with all his hooste
came before Ierusalem, & beseged it, & made them bulworkes rounde aboute it.
5 And this beseginge of the cite endured vnto the xj yeare of kynge Sedechias.
6 And in the fourth Moneth, the ix daye of the Moneth, there was so greate
honger in the cite: that there were no more vitayles for the people of the
londe.
7 So all the souldyers brake awaye, and fled out of the cite by night, thorow
the waye of the porte betwene the two walles by the kynges garden. Now ye
Caldees had copassed the cite rounde aboute, yet wente these men their waye
towarde the wildernesse.
8 And so the Caldees folowed vpon them, and toke Sedechias the kinge in the
felde of Iericho, when his hoost was runne from him.
9 So they caried the kynge awaye presoner to Reblatha, vnto the kinge of Babilon
in the londe of Hemath, where he gaue iudgment vpon him.
10 The kinge of Babilo also caused Sedechias sonnes be slayne before his face,
yee & put all the prynces of Iuda to death at Reblatha.
11 Morouer he put out the eyes of Sedechias, caused him be bounde with cheynes,
to be caried vnto Babilon: & let him lie in preson, till he dyed.
12 Now ye tenth daye of the fyfth Moneth in the xix yeare of Nabuchodonosor
kynge of Babilon, Nabusaradan the chefe captayne and the kinge of Babilons
seruauntes came vnto Ierusalem,
13 & brent vp the house of the LORDE. He brent vp also the kinges palace, all
the houses & all the gorgeous buyldinges in Ierusale.
14 And the whole hoost of the Caldees yt were with the chefe captayne, brake
downe all the walles of Ierusalem rounde aboute.
15 As for the poore people & soch folke as yet was left in the cite, which also
were fallen to the kinge of Babilon, yee & what people as yet remayned:
Nabusaradan the chefe captayne caried them awaye presoners
16 But ye poore people of the countre, dyd Nabusaradan the chefe captayne leaue
in the londe, to occupie the vynyardes & feldes.
17 The Caldees also brake the brasen pilers, that were in the house of the
LORDE, yee the seate and the brasen lauer that was in the house of ye LORDE: &
caried all the metall of them vnto Babilon.
18 They toke awaye also the Cauldrons, shouels, flesh hokes, sprinklers, spones
& all the brasen vessell that was occupide in the seruyce:
19 with the basens, colepannes, sprinklers, pottes, candilstickes, spones, and
cuppes: wherof some were of golde, and some of syluer.
20 The chefe captayne toke also the two pilers, the lauer, the xij brasen
bullockes yt stode vnder ye seate, which kinge Salomon made in the house of the
LORDE: & all the vessell conteyned so moch metall, that it might not be weyed
21 For euery piler was xviij cubites hie, & the rope that went aboute it, was
xij cubites, & foure fingers thick and rounde:
22 Now vpon the rope were brasen knoppes, & euery knoppe was fyue cubites hie: &
vpon the knoppes were whopes, & pomgranates rounde aboute of clene brasse.
23 After this maner were both the pilers fashioned with the pomgranates, wherof
there were an hundreth and xcvj, which hanged vpon the whoopes rounde aboute.
24 The chefe captayne also toke Sarias ye hie prest, & Sophonias that was chefe
next him, and the thre kepers of the treasury.
25 He toke out of the cite a chamberlayne which was a captayne of the souldyers,
& seuen men that were the kinges seruauntes, which were founde in the cite: &
Sepher a captayne that vsed to muster the men of warre: with lx men of the
countre that were taken in the cite.
26 These Nabusaradan the chefe captayne toke, & caried them to the kinge of
Babilon vnto Reblatha:
27 and the kinge of Babilon caused them to be put to death at Reblatha in the
londe of Hemath. And thus Iuda was ledde awaye captyue, out of his owne londe.
28 This is the summe of the people, whom Nabuchodonosor ledde awaye captyue. In
the seuenth yeare of his reigne, he caried awaye of ye Iewes, thre thousande
thre and twenty.
29 In the xviij yeare Nabuchodonosor caried awaye from Ierusalem eight hunderth
& xxxij personnes.
30 In the xxiij yeare of Nabuchodonosor Nabusaradan the chefe captayne, toke
awaye seuen hundreth xlv Iewes presoners. The whole summe of all the presoners,
is foure thousande and sex hundreth.
31 In the xxxvij yeare after that Ioachim the kinge of Iuda was caried awaye in
the xxv daye of the xij Moneth, Euilmerodach kinge of Babilon (the same yeare yt
he reigned) gaue Ioachim the kinge of Iuda his pardon, and let him out of
preson,
32 and spake louyngly to him: And set his trone aboue ye trones of the other
kinges that were with him in Babilon.
33 He chaunged also the clothes of his preson, yee and he ate with him all his
life longe.
34 And he had a cotinuall lyuynge geuen him of the kinge of Babilon, euery daye
a certayne thinge alowed him, all the dayes of his life, vntill he dyed.


Lamentations

Chapter 1

1 Alas, how sitteth the cite so desolate, yt some tyme was full of people? how
is she become like a wedowe, which was the lady of all nacions? How is she
brought vnder tribute, that ruled all londes?
2 She wepeth sore in the night, so that ye teares runne downe hir chekes: for
amonge all hir louers, there is none, that geueth her eny comforte: yee hir
nexte frendes abhorre her, & are become hir enemies.
3 Iuda is taken presoner, because she was defyled: & for seruynge so many
straunge goddes, she dwelleth now amonge the Heithen. She fyndeth no rest, all
they that persecuted her, toke her, and so she dwelleth amonge hir enemies.
4 The stretes of Sion mourne, because no man commeth more to the solempne
feastes: All hir gates are desolate, hir prestes make lamentacion, hir maydens
are carefull, and she herself is in greate heuynesse.
5 Hir enemies are fallen vpon hir heade, & haue put her to shame: because the
LORDE hath chastened her for hir greate wickednes: hir children are ledde awaye
captiue before their enemie.
6 All the bewtie of the doughter of Sion is awaye, hir prynces are become like
wethers, that fynde no pasture. They are dryue awaye before their enemie, so
that they haue no more power.
7 Now doth Ierusalem remembre the tyme of hir misery & disobedience, yee the
ioye & pleasure yt she hath had in tymes past: seynge hir people is brought
downe thorow the power of their enemie, & there is no man for to helpe her: hir
enemies stode lokinge at her and laugh hir Sabbath dayes to scorne.
8 Ierusalem synned euer more & more, therfore is she come in decaye. All they
that had her in honoure, despise her: for they haue sene hir fylthinesse. Yee
she sigheth, and is a shamed of herselfe.
9 Hir skyrtes are defyled, she remebred not what wolde folowe: therfore is hir
fall so greate, and there is no ma to comforte her. O LORDE, cosidre my trouble,
for myne enemie hath the vpper honde.
10 The enemie hath put his honde to all the precious thinges that she had, yee
euen before hir eyes came the Heithen in and out of the Sanctuary: whom thou
(neuertheles) hast forbydden to come within thy congregacion.
11 All hir people seke their bred with heuynes, & loke what precious thinge
euery man hath, that geueth he for meate, to saue his life. Considre (O LORDE)
and se, how vyle I am become.
12 O ye all that go fore by, beholde and se, yf there be eny sorowe like vnto
myne, wherwith the LORDE hath troubled me, in the daye of his fearefull wrath.
13 From aboue hath he sent downe a fyre, in to my bones and chastened me: he
hath layed a net for my fete, and throwne me wyde open: he hath made me
desolate, so that I must euer be mournynge.
14 The yocke of my transgression is come at the last, with his honde hath he
taken it vp, and put it aboute my neck. My strength is gone: the LORDE hath
delyuered me in to those hondes, wherout I can not quyte myself.
15 The LORDE hath destroyed all the mightie men, that were in me. He hath
proclamed a feast, to slaughter all my best me. The LORDE hath troden downe the
doughter of Iuda, like as it were in a wyne presse.
16 Therfore do I wepe, and myne eyes gusshe out of water: for the coforter that
shulde quycken me, is farre fro me. My children are dryuen awaye, for why? the
enemie hath gotten the ouer honde.
17 Sion casteth out hir hodes, and there is no man to comforte her. The LORDE
hath layed the enemies rounde aboute Iacob, and Ierusalem is as it were a
menstruous woma, in the myddest of them.
18 The LORDE is rightuous, for I haue prouoked his countenaunce vnto anger. O
take hede all ye people, and considre my heuynes: My maydens and my yonge men
are led awaye in to captiuyte.
19 I called for my louers (but they begyled me:) for my prestes and councelers,
but they perished: euen while they sought for meate, to saue their lyues.
20 Considre (O LORDE) how I am troubled, my wombe is disquieted, my herte
turneth aboute in me, and I am full of heuynes. The swearde hurteth me without,
and within I am like vnto death.
21 They heare my mournynge, but there is none that wil comforte me. All myne
enemies haue herde of my trouble, and are glad therof, because thou hast done
it. But thou shalt brynge forth the tyme, when they also shal be like vnto me.
22 From the shall come all their aduersite: thou shalt plucke them awaye, eue as
thou hast plucked me, because of all my wickednesse. For my sorow is very
greate, and my herte is heuy.

Chapter 2

1 Alas, how hath ye LORDE darckened the doughter of Sion so sore in his wrath?
As for the honoure of Israel, he hath casten it downe from heauen: How happeneth
it, that he remembred not his owne fote stole, when he was angrie?
2 The LORDE hath cast downe all the glory of Iacob without eny fauoure: All the
stronge places of the doughter Iuda hath he broken in his wrath, & throwne them
downe to the grounde: hir kyngdome & hir prynces hath he suspended.
3 In the wrath of his indignacion he hath broken all the horne of Israel: he
hath withdrawe his right honde from the enemie: yee a flame of fyre is kyndled
in Iacob, & hath consumed vp all rounde aboute.
4 He hath bent his bowe like an enemie, he hath fastened his right honde as an
aduersary; and euery thinge that was pleasaut to se, he hath smyten it downe. He
hath poured out his wrath like a fyre, in to the tabernacle of the doughter
Sion.
5 The LORDE is become, like as it were an enemie, he hath cast downe Israel &
all his places: yee all his stronge holdes hath he destroyed, and fylled the
doughter of Iuda wt moch sorow and heuynesse.
6 Hir tabernacle (which was like a garden of pleasure) hath he destroyed: hir
hie solepne feastes hath he put downe. The LORDE hath brought it so to passe,
that the hie solempne feastes and Sabbathes in Sion, are clene forgotte. In his
heuy displeasure hath he made the kynge & prestes to be despised.
7 The LORDE hath forsaken his owne aulter, & is wroth with his owne Sanctuary, &
hath geuen the walles of their towres in to the hondes of the enemie. Their
enemies made a noyse in the house of the LORDE, as it had bene in a solempne
feast daye.
8 The LORDE thought to breake downe the walles of the doughter Sion, he spred
out his lyne, & drewe not in his honde, till he had destroyed them. Therfore
mourne the turrettes and the broken walles together.
9 Hir portes are casten downe to the grounde, hir barres are broken & smytten in
sonder: hir kynge & prynces are caried awaye to the Getiles. They haue nether
lawe ner prophetes, ner yet eny vision from the LORDE.
10 The Senatours of the doughter Sion sit vpon the grounde in sylence, they haue
strowed a?shes vpon their heades, and gyrded them selues with sack cloth. The
maydens of Ierusalem hange downe their heades to the grounde.
11 Myne eyes begynne to fayle me thorow wepinge, my body is disquieted, my leuer
is poured vpon the earth, for the greate hurte of my people, seynge the children
and babes dyd swowne in the stretes of the cite.
12 Euen when they spake to their mothers: where is meate and drynke? for whyle
they so sayde, they fell downe in the stretes of the cite, like as they had bene
wounded, and some dyed in their mothers bosome.
13 What shal I saye of the (O thou doughter Ierusalem) to whom shall I licke
the? To whom shal I copare the (o thou doughter Sion) to comforte the withall?
Thy hurte is like a mayne see, who maye heale the?
14 Thy prophetes haue loked out vayne & folish thinges for the, they haue not
shewed the of thy wickednesse, to kepe the from captiuyte: but haue ouerladen
the, and thorow falsede scatred the abrode.
15 All they that go by the, clappe their hondes at the: hissinge and wagginge
their heades vpon the doughter Ierusalem, and saye: is this the cite that men
call so fayre, wherin the whole londe reioyseth?
16 All thine enemies gape vpon the, whisperinge and bytinge their teth, sayenge:
let vs deuoure, for the tyme that we loked for, is come: we haue founde and sene
it.
17 The LORDE hath fulfilled the thinge, that he was purposed to do: and
perfourmed that he had deuysed longe agoo: he hath destroyed, and not spared. He
hath caused thine aduersary to tryumphe ouer the, and set vp the horne of thine
enemie.
18 Let thine hert crie vnto the LORDE, O thou cite of the doughter Sion: let thy
teares rune downe like a ryuer daye & night: rest not, & let not the aple of
thine eye leaue of.
19 Stonde vp, and make thy prayer in the first watch of the night, poure out
thine hert like water before the LORDE: lift vp thine hondes, for the lyues of
thy yonge children, that dye of honger in the stretes.
20 Beholde (O LORDE) & considre, why hast thou gathered me vp so clene? Shal the
women then eate their owne frute, euen children of a spanne longe? Shal the
prestes and prophetes be slayne thus in the Sanctuary of the LORDE?
21 Yonge & olde lye behinde the stretes vpon the grounde, my maydens & yonge men
are slayne with the swearde: whom thou in the daye of thy wrothfull indignacion
hast put to death: Yee euen thou hast put them to death, & not spared them.
22 My neghbours that are rounde aboute me, hast thou called, as it were to a
feast daye: so that in the daye of the LORDES wrath none escaped, nether was eny
left behinde. Those that I had brought vp & norisshed, hath myne enemy
destroyed.

Chapter 3

1 I am the ma, that (thorow the rodd of his wrath) haue experiece of misery.
2 He droue me forth, and led me: yee into darcknesse, but not in to light.
3 Agaynst me only he turneth his honde, & layeth it euer vpon me.
4 My flesh & my skynne hath he made olde, and my bones hath he brussed.
5 He hath buylded rounde aboute me, & closed me in with gall and trauayle.
6 He hath set me in darcknesse, as they that be deed for euer.
7 He hath so hedged me in, that I can not get out, & hath layed heuy lynckes
vpon me.
8 Though I crie & call piteously, yet heareth he not my prayer.
9 He hath stopped vp my wayes with foure squared stones, & made my pathes
croked.
10 He layeth waite for me like a Bere, and as a lyon in a hole.
11 He hath marred my wayes, and broke me in peces, he hath layed me waist
altogether.
12 He hath bent his bowe, and made me as it were a marck to shute at.
13 The arowes of his quyuer hath he shot, euen in to my reynes.
14 I am laughed to scorne of all my people, they make songes vpon me all ye daye
loge.
15 He hath fylled me with bytternesse, & geuen me wormwod to drynke.
16 He hath smytten my teth in peces, & rolled me in the dust.
17 He hath put my soule out of rest, I forget all good thinges.
18 I thought in my self: I am vndone, there is no hope for me in the LORDE.
19 O remembre yet my mysery and my trouble, the wormwod and the gall.
20 Yee thou shalt remebre them, for my soule melteth awaye in me.
21 Whyle I cosidre these thinges in my hert, I get a hope agayne.
22 Namely, that the mercies of the LORDE are not clene gone, & that his louynge
kyndnesse ceasseth not.
23 His faithfulnes is greate, and renueth it self as the mornynge.
24 The LORDE is my porcion (saieth my soule) therfore wil I hope in him.
25 O how good is the LORDE vnto the, that put their trust in him, and to the
soule that seketh after him?
26 O how good is it with stilnesse to wate and tarie, for the health of the
LORDE?
27 O how good is it for a man, to take the yock vpon him from his youth vp?
28 He sitteth alone, he holdeth him still. and dwelleth quietly by him self.
29 He layeth his face vpon the earth, yf (percase) there happen to be eny hope.
30 He offreth his cheke to the smyter, he will be content with reproues.
31 For the LORDE wil not forsake for euer.
32 But though he do cast of, yet (acordinge to ye multitude of his mercies) he
receaueth to grace agayne.
33 For he doth not plage, & cast out the children of men from his herte.
34 To treade all the presoners of the earth vnder his fete.
35 To moue the iudgment of man before the most highest.
36 To condemne a man in his cause: The LORDE hath no pleasure in soch thinges.
37 What is he then that saieth: there shulde somthinge be done without the
LORDES comaundement?
38 Out of the mouth of the most highest goeth not euell and good.
39 Wherfore them murmureth the lyuinge man? let him murmoure at his owne synne,
40 Let vs loke well vpon oure owne waies, & remembre oure selues, and turne
agayne to ye LORDE.
41 Let vs lift vp oure hertes with oure hondes vnto the LORDE, that is in
heauen.
42 We haue bene dyssemblers & haue offended, wilt thou therfore not be
intreated?
43 Thou hast couered vs in thy wrath, & persecuted vs, thou hast slayne vs
without eny fauoure.
44 Thou hast hyd thy self in a cloude, that oure prayer shulde not go thorow.
45 Thou hast made vs outcastes, and to be despysed amonge the Heithen.
46 All oure enemies gape vpon vs.
47 Feare and snare is come vpon vs, yee despite and destruccion.
48 Whole ryuers of water gu?she out of myne eyes, for the greate hurte of my
people.
49 Myne eyes runne, and can not ceasse, for there is no rest.
50 O LORDE, when wilt thou loke downe fro heauen, and considre?
51 Myne eye breaketh my herte, because of all the doughters of my cite.
52 Myne enemies hunted me out sharpely like a byrde, yee and that with out a
cause.
53 They haue put downe my life in to a pitte, and layed a stone vpon me.
54 They poured water vpon my heade, then thought I: now am I vndone.
55 I called vpon thy name (O LORDE) out of the depe pitte.
56 Thou hast herde my voyce, & hast not turned awaye thine eares fro my sighinge
and crienge.
57 Thou hast enclyned yi self vnto me, whe I called vpon the, & haist sayde:
feare not.
58 Thou (O LORDE) hast mayntened the cause of my soule, and hast redemed my
life.
59 O LORDE, thou hast sene my blasphemers, take thou my cause vpon the.
60 Thou hast well considred how they go aboute to do me harme, & that all their
councels are agaynst me.
61 Thou hast herde their despytefull wordes (O LORDE) yee and all their
ymaginacions agaynst me.
62 The lippes of myne enemies, & their deuyces that they take agaynst me, all
the daye longe.
63 Thou seist also their sittinge downe and their rysinge vp, they make their
songes of nothinge but of me.
64 Rewarde them (O LORDE) acordinge to the workes of their hondes.
65 Geue them ye thinge, that their owne herte is afrayed of: euen thy curse.
66 Persecute them, (O LORDE) with thy indignacion, & rote them out from vnder
the heauen.

Chapter 4

1 O how is the golde become so dymme? How is the goodly coloure of it so sore
chaunged? and the stones of ye Sanctuary thus scatred in the corner of euery
strete?
2 The children of Sion that were allwaye in honoure, & clothed with ye most
precious golde: how are they now becomme like the erthen vessels which be made
with the potters honde?
3 The Lamyes geue their yonge ones suck wt bare brestes: but the doughter of my
people is cruel, and dwelleth in the wyldernesse: like the Estriches.
4 The tonges of the suckinge children, cleue to ye rofe of their mouthes for
very thurst. The yonge children axe bred, but there is noman, that geueth it
them.
5 They that were wonte to fayre delicatly, perishe in the stretes: they that
afore were brought vp in purple, make now moch of donge.
6 The synne of the doughter of my people is become greater, then ye wickednesse
of Sodome, that sodely was destroyed, and not taken with hondes.
7 Hir absteyners (or Nazarees) were whyter then ye snowe or mylke: their coloure
was fresh read as the Corall, their beutie like the Saphyre.
8 But now their faces are very black: In so moch, that thou shuldest not knowe
them in the stretes. Their skynne cleueth to their bones, It is wythered, and
become like a drye stock.
9 They that be slayne with the swearde, are happier, then soch as dye of honger,
and perishe awaye famishinge for the frutes of the felde.
10 The wome (which of nature are pitefull) haue sodden their owne children with
their hondes: that they might be their meate, in ye miserable destruccion of the
doughter of my people.
11 The LORDE hath perfourmed his heuy wrath: he hath poured out the furiousnes
of his displeasure. He hath kindled a fyre in Sion, which hath consumed the
foundacions therof.
12 Nether the kinges of the earth, ner all ye inhabitours of the worlde, wolde
haue beleued, that the enemie & aduersary shulde haue come in at the gates of
the cite of Ierusale.
13 Which neuertheles is come to passe for ye synnes of hir prophetes, and for
the wickednes of hir prestes, that haue shed innocentes bloude within her.
14 So that these blynde men wete stomblinge in the stretes, and stayned
themselues wt bloude, which els wolde touche no bloudy cloth.
15 But they cried vnto euery ma: fle the staynynge, awaye, get you hece, touch
it not. Yee (sayde they) ye must be brent, ye must dwell amonge the Gentiles, &
byde no longer here.
16 The countenaunce of the LORDE hath banyshed them, & shal neuer loke more vpon
them: For they them selues nether regarded the prestes, nor pitied their elders.
17 Wherfore yet oure eyes fayle vs, whyle we loke for vayne helpe: seynge we be
euer waitynge vpon a people, that can do vs no good,
18 They laye so sharpe waite for vs, that we can not go safe vpon the stretes:
for oure ende is come, oure dayes are fulfilled, oure ende is here.
19 Oure persecuters are swifter then the Aegles of the ayre: they folowed vpon
vs ouer the mountaynes, and layed wait for vs in ye wildernesse.
20 The very breth of oure mouth; euen the anoynted LORDE himself shalbe take in
oure synnes, of whom we saye: Vnder his shadowe we shal be preserued amonge the
Heithen.
21 And thou (O doughter Edom) that dwellest in the londe of Hus, be glad and
reioyce: for the cuppe shal come vnto the also, which whe thou suppest of, thou
shalt be droncke.
22 Thy synne is wel punished (O thou doughter Sion) he shall not suffre the to
be caried awaye eny more. But thy wickednesse (O doughter Edom) shall he vyset,
and for thy synnes sake, he shal lede the into captiuyte.

Chapter 5

1 Call to remebraunce (O LORDE) what we haue suffred, cosidre and se oure
cofucion.
2 Oure enheritaunce is turned to the straungers, & oure houses to the aleauntes.
3 We are become carefull and fatherlesse, and oure mothers are as the wydowes.
4 We are fayne to drynke oure owne water for moneye, and oure owne wod must we
bye with moneye.
5 Oure neckes are vnder persecucion, we are weery, and haue no rest.
6 Afore tyme we yelded oure selues to the Egipcians, and now to the Assirians,
only that we might haue bred ynough.
7 Oure fathers (which now are gone) haue synned, & we must beare their
wickednesse.
8 Seruauntes haue the rule of vs, and no man delyuereth vs out of their hodes.
9 We must get or lyuynge with the parell of oure lyues, because of the drouth of
the wildernesse.
10 Oure skynne is as it had bene brent in an ouen, for very sore honger.
11 The wyues are raueshed in Sion, & the maydens in the cities of Iuda.
12 The prynces are hanged vp with the honde of the enemies, they haue not spared
the olde sage men,
13 they haue taken yonge mens lyues from them, and the boyes are hanged vp vpon
trees.
14 The elders syt no more vnder the gates, and the yonge men vse nomore playenge
of Musick.
15 The ioye of oure herte is gone, oure mery quere is turned in to mourninge.
16 The garlande of oure heade is fallen: alas, that euer we synned so sore.
17 Therfore oure hert is full of heuynesse, & oure eyes dymme:
18 because of ye hill of Sion that is destroyed, In so moch, that the foxes
runne vpon it.
19 But thou (O LORDE) that remaynest for euermore, and thy seate worlde with out
ende:
20 Wherfore wilt thou still forget vs, and forsake vs so longe?
21 O LORDE: Turne thou vs vnto the, & so shal we be turned. Renue or daies as in
olde tyme,
22 for thou hast now banished vs longe ynough, and bene sore displeased at vs.


Ezekiel

Chapter 1

1 It chaused, in the xxx. yeare the fifth daye off the fourth Moneth, that I was
amonge the presoners by the ryuer off Cobar: where the heauens opened, & I sawe
a vision of God.
2 Now the fifth daye off the Moneth made out the fyfth yeare off kynge Ioachims
captiuyte.
3 At the same tyme came ye worde off the LORDE vnto Ezechiel the sonne off Buzi
prest, in the londe off the Caldees by the water of Cobar, where the honde off
the LORDE came vpo him.
4 And I loked: & beholde, a stormy wynde came out off the north with a greate
cloude full of fyre, which wt his glistre lightened all rounde aboute. And in ye
myddest off the fyre it was all cleare,
5 and as it were the licknesse of foure beastes, which were fashioned like a
man: sauynge,
6 that euery one had foure faces and foure wynges.
7 Their legges were straight, but their fete were like bullockes fete, and they
glistred, as it had bene fayre scoured metall.
8 Vnder their wynges vpon all the foure corners, they had mens hondes. Their
faces and their wynges were towarde the foure corners:
9 yet were the wynges so, that one euer touched another. When they wente, they
turned them not aboute: but ech one wente straight forwarde.
10 Vpon the rightside off these foure, their faces were like the face off a man
and the fa off a Lyon: But vpon the leftside, they had the face off an oxe and
the face off an Aegle.
11 Their faces also and their wynges were spred out aboue: so that two wynges
off one touched euer two wynges off another, and with the other two they couered
their bodie.
12 Euery one when it wente, it wente straight forwarde. Where as the sprete led
them, thither they wente, and turned not aboute in their goynge.
13 The fashion and countenauce of the beestes was like hote coales off fyre,
euen as though burnynge cresshettes had bene amonge the beestes: and the fyre
gaue a glistre, and out off the fyre there wente lighteninge.
14 Whe ye beestes wete forwarde & backwarde, one wolde haue thought it had
lightened.
15 Now whe I had well considered the beestes, I sawe a worke off wheles vpon the
earth with foure faces also like the beestes.
16 The fashion & worke of the wheles was like the see. The foure wheles were
ioyned and made (to loke vpon) as it had bene one whele in another.
17 When one wente forwarde, they wente all foure, and turned the not aboute i
their goinge.
18 They were large, greate and horrible to loke vpon. Their bodies were full off
eyes rounde aboute them all foure. Whe the beestes wete, the wheles wente also
with them:
19 And when the beestes lift them selues vp from ye earth, the wheles were lift
vp also.
20 Whyther so euer the sprete wente, thither wente they also, & ye wheles were
lift vp & folowed the. for ye sprete of life was in the wheles.
21 When ye beestes wete forth, stode still, or lift themselues vp from the
earth: then the wheles also wente, stode still, & were lift vp, for ye breth off
life was in the wheles.
22 Aboue ouer ye heades of the beestes there was a firmament, which was
fashioned as it had bene off the most pure Christall, & that was spred out aboue
vpon their heades:
23 vnder the same firmament were their wynges layed abrode, one towarde another,
and two wynges couered the body of euery beest.
24 And when thy wente forth, I herde the noyse off their wynges, like the noyse
of greate waters, as it had bene the voyce off the greate God, and a russhinge
together as it were off an hoost off men. And when they stode still, they let
downe their
25 Now when they stode still, and had letten downe their wynges, it thondred in
the firmament, that was aboue their heades.
26 Aboue the firmament that was ouer their heades, there was the fashion off a
seate, as it had bene made off Saphir. Apon the seate there sat one like a ma.
27 I behelde him, and he was like a cleare light, as it had bene all of fyre
with in from his loynes vpwarde. And beneth when I loked vpon him vnder ye
loynes, me thought he was like a shyninge fyre, that geueth light on euery syde.
Yee the shyne and glistre yt lightened rounde aboute,
28 was like a raynbowe, which in a raynie daye apeareth in the cloudes. Eue so
was the similitude, wherin the glory off the LORDE apeared. Whe I sawe it, I
fell vpon my face, and herkened vnto the voyce off him, that spake.

Chapter 2

1 Then sayde he vnto me: Stonde vp vpon thy fete (O thou sonne of ma) and I will
talke with the.
2 And as he was commonynge with me, the sprete came in to me, and set me vp vpon
my fete: so that I marcked the thinge, that he sayde vnto me.
3 And he sayde: Beholde, thou sonne off man: I will sende the to the children
off Israel, to those runnagates and obstinate people: for they haue take parte
agaynst me, and are runne awaye fro me: both they, and their forefathers, vnto
this daye.
4 Yee I will sende ye vnto a people yt haue rough vysages and stiff stomackes:
vnto whom thou shalt saye on this maner: This the LORDE God himselff hath
spoken,
5 yt whether they be obedient or no (for it is a frauwarde housholde) they maye
knowe yet that there hath bene a prophet amonge them.
6 Therfore (thou sonne off man) feare the not, nether be afrayed off their
wordes: for they shall rebell agaynst the, and despise ye. Yee thou shalt dwell
amonge scorpions: but feare not their wordes, be not abashed at their lokes, for
it is a frauwerde housholde.
7 Se that thou speake my wordes vnto them, whether they be obediet or not, for
they are obstinate.
8 Therfore (thou sonne of man) obeye thou all thinges, that I saye vnto ye, and
be not thou stiffnecked, like as they are a stiffnecked housholde. Open thy
mouth, and eate that I geue the.
9 So as I was lokynge vp, beholde, there was sent vnto me an hande, wherin was a
closed boke:
10 and the hande opened it before me, and it was written within and without,
full off carefull mourninges: alas, and wo.

Chapter 3

1 Then sayde he vnto me: thou sonne of ma, eate that, what so euer it be: Yee
eate that closed boke, and go thy waye, and speake vnto the children off Israel.
2 So I opened my mouth, and he gaue me the boke for to eate,
3 and sayde vnto me: Thou sonne of man, thy bely shal eate, and thy bowels
shalbe fylled with ye boke, that I geue the. Then dyd I eate the boke, and it
was in my mouth sweter then hony.
4 And he sayde vnto me: thou sonne of ma, get the soone vnto the house off
Israel, ad shewe the ye wordes, that I comaunde the:
5 for I sende the not to a people that hath a strauge, vnknowne or harde
speache, but vnto the house off Israel:
6 Not to many nacions, which haue diuerse speaches and harde languages, whose
wordes thou vnderstodest not: Neuertheles, yf I sent the to those people, they
wolde folowe the:
7 But the house off Israel wil not folowe ye, for they wil not folowe me: Yee
all the house off Israel haue stiff foreheades and harde hertes.
8 Beholde therfore, I will make thy face preuayle agaynst their faces, and
harden thy foreheade agaynst their foreheades:
9 so that thy foreheade shall be harder then an Adamat or flynt stone: that thou
mayest feare them ye lesse, and be lesse afrayed off them, for they are a
frauwerde housholde.
10 He sayde morouer vnto me: thou sonne off man, take diligent hede with thine
eares, to ye wordes that I speake vnto the, fasten them in thine herte:
11 and go to the presoners off thy people, speake vnto them, ad saye on this
maner: Thus the LORDE God hath spoke: Whether ye heare, or heare not.
12 With that, the sprete toke me vp. And I herde the noyse of a greate russhinge
and remouynge off the most blissed glory off the LORDE out off his place.
13 I herde also the noyse off the wynges off the beestes, that russhed one
agaynst another, yee and the ratlynge off the wheles, that were by them, which
russhinge & noyse was very greate.
14 Now when the sprete toke me vp, and caried me awaye, I wente with an heuy and
a soroufull mynde, but the honde off ye LORDE comforted me right soone.
15 And so in the begynnynge off the Moneth Abib, I came to the presoners, that
dwelt by the water off Cobar, and remayned in that place, where they were: and
so continued I amonge them seuen dayes, beinge very sory.
16 And when the seuen dayes were expyred, the LORDE sayde vnto me:
17 Thou sonne off man, I haue made the a watch man vnto the house of Israel:
therfore take good hede to the wordes, and geue them warnynge at my
commaundement.
18 Yff I saye vnto the, concernynge the vngodly ma, that (without doute) he must
dye, and thou geuest him not warnynge, ner speakest vnto him, that he maye turne
from his euell waye, and so to lyue: Then shall the same vngodly man dye in his
owne vnrightuosnes: but his bloude will I requyre off thyne honde.
19 Neuertheles, yff thou geue warnynge vnto the wicked, and he yet forsake not
his vngodlynesse: then shall he dye in his owne wickednesse, but thou hast
discharged thy soule.
20 Now yf a rightuous ma go fro his rightuousnesse, and do the thinge that is
euell: I will laye a stomblinge blocke before him, and he shall dye, because
thou hast not geuen him warninge: Yee dye shall he in his owne synne, so that
the vertue, which he did before, shall not be thought vpon: but his bloude will
I requyre of thine honde.
21 Neuertheles, yf thou exhortest the rightuous, that he synne not, and so ye
rightuous do not synne: Then shall he lyue, because he hath receaued thy
warnynge, and thou hast discharged thy soule.
22 And there came the hode off the LORDE vpon me, and he sayde vnto me: Stonde
vp, and go in to the felde, yt I maye there talke with the.
23 So when I had rysen vp, and gone forth into the felde: Beholde, the glory off
the LORDE stode there, like as I sawe it afore, by the water off Cobar. Then
fell I downe vpon my face,
24 and ye sprete came in to me, which set me vp vpon my fete, and sayde thus
vnto me: Go thy waye, and sparre thy selff in thyne house.
25 Beholde (O thou sonne off man) there shall chaynes be brought for the, to
bynde the wt all, so that thou shalt not escape out off the.
26 And I will make thy tunge cleue so the rofe off thy mouth, that thou shalt be
domme, and not be as a chider with them: for it is an obstinate housholde.
27 But when I speake vnto the, then open thy mouth, and saye: Thus saieth the
LORDE God: who so heareth, let him heare: who so will not, let him leaue: for it
is a frauwarde housholde.

Chapter 4

1 Thou sonne off man: take a tyle stone, and laye it before the, and descrybe
vpon it the cite off Ierusalem:
2 how it is beseged, how bulworkes and stroge diches are grauen on euery syde
off it: descrybe also tentes, and an hoost off men rounde aboute it.
3 Morouer, take an yron panne, and set it betwixte the & ye cite in steade off
an yron wall, Then set thy face towarde it, besege it, and laye ordinaunce
agaynst it, to wynne it. This shal be a token vnto the house off Israel.
4 But thou shalt slepe vpon thy left syde, and laye the synne of the house off
Israel vpon the. Certayne dayes apoynted, thou shalt slepe vpon that syde, and
beare their synnes.
5 Neuertheles I will apoynte the a tyme (to put off their synnes) and the nombre
off the daies: Thre hundreth & xc. dayes must thou beare the wickednesse off the
house of Israel.
6 When thou hast fulfilled these dayes, lye downe agayne, and slepe vpon thy
right syde xl. dayes, and beare the synnes off the house of Iuda. A daye for a
yeare, a daye (I saye) for a yeare, will I euer laye vpon the.
7 Therfore set now thy face agaynst that beseged Ierusalem, and discouer thine
arme, that thou mayest prophecie agaynst it.
8 Beholde, I will laye chaynes vpon the, that thou shalt not turne the from one
syde to another, till thou hast ended the dayes of thy sege.
9 Wherfore, take vnto the wheate, barly beanes, growell sede, milium and
fitches: and put these together in a vessell, and make the loaues of bred
therof, acordinge to the nombre of the dayes that thou must lye vpon yi syde:
that thou mayest haue bred to eate, for thre hundreth and XC. dayes.
10 And the meate that thou eatest, shall haue a certayne waight apoynted:
Namely, twentie sycles euery daye. This apoynted meate shalt thou eate daylie,
from the beginnynge to the ende.
11 Thon shalt dryncke also a certayne measure off water: Namely, the sixte parte
of an Hin shalt thou drynke daylie from the begynnynge to the ende.
12 Barly cakes shalt thou eate, yet shalt thou first strake the ouer with mas
donge, yt they maye se it.
13 And with that, sayde the LORDE: Euen thus shal the children of Israel eate
their defyled bred in the myddest off the Gentiles, amonge whom I will scatre
them.
14 Then sayde I: Oh LORDE God, Beholde, my soule was yet neuer stayned: for fro
my youth vp vnto this houre, I dyd neuer eate of a deed carcase, or of that
which was slayne of wilde beestes, nether came there euer eny vnclene flesh in
my mouth.
15 Where vnto he answered me, and sayde: Well than, I will graunte the to take
cowes donge, for the donge off a man, and to strake the bred ouer with all,
before the.
16 And he sayde vnto me: Beholde thou sonne off man, I will mynishe all the
prouysion of bred in Ierusalem, so that they shall weye their bred, and eate it
with scarcenesse. But as for water, they shall haue a very litle measure
theroff, to drynke.
17 And when they haue nomore bred ner water, one shal be destroyed with another,
and famish awaye for their wickednesse.

Chapter 5

1 Take the then a sharpe knyfe (O thou sonne of man) namely, a rasoure. Take
that, and shaue the hayre off thy heade and beerd: Then take the scoales and the
waight, and deuyde the hayre a sunder.
2 And burne the thirde parte therof in the fyre in the myddest off the cite, and
cut the other thirde parte in peces with a knyfe. As for the thirde parte that
remayneth, cast it in the wynde, and then shewe the bare knyfe.
3 Yet afterwarde take a litle off the same, & bynde it in they cote lappe.
4 Then take a curtesy of it, and cast it in the myddest of ye fyre, and burne it
in the fyre. Out of the same fyre shall there go a flame, vpon the whole house
of Israel.
5 Morouer, thus sayde the LORDE God: This same is Ierusalem. I set her in the
middest of the Heithen and nacions, that are rounde aboute her,
6 but she hath despised my iudgmetes more then ye Gentiles the selues, and
broken my comaundementes more then the nacions, that lye rounde aboute her: For
they haue cast out myne ordinaunces, and not walked in my lawes.
7 Therfore, thus saieth the LORDE God: For so moch as ye wt youre wickednesse
farre exceade the Heithe, that dwell rounde aboute you: (For ye haue not walked
in my lawes, nether haue ye kepte myne ordinauces)
8 Therfore thus saieth ye LORDE God: I will also come vpon the, for in the
myddest of the will I syt in iugdmet, in the sight of the Heithen,
9 and will handle the of soch a fashion, as I neuer dyd before, and as I neuer
wil do from that tyme forth, and that because of all thy abhominacions.
10 For in the the fathers shal be fayne to eate their owne sonnes, and the
sonnes their owne fathers. Soch a courte will I kepe in the, and the whole
remnaunt will I scatre in to all the wyndes.
11 Wherfore, as truly as I lyue (saieth the LORDE God) seynge thou hast defyled
my Sanctuary, with all maner off abhominacions and with all thy shamefull
offences: For this cause will I also destroye the. Myne eye shall not ouersee
the, nether will I spare the.
12 One thirde parte within the, shall die of the pestilence and of honger:
Another thirde parte shall be slayne downe rounde aboute the, with the swearde:
The other thirde parte that remayneth, will I scatre abrode towarde all the
wyndes, and drawe out the swearde after them.
13 Thus wil I perfourme my indignacion and set my wrath agaynst them, and ease
my self. So that when I haue fulfilled myne anger agaynst them, they shall
knowe, that I am the LORDE, which wt a feruent gelousy haue spoken it.
14 Morouer I will make the waist and abhorred, before all the Heithen that dwell
aboute the, and in the sight off all them, that go by the:
15 so that when I punysh the in my wrath, in myne anger, and with the plage off
my whote displeasure: thou shalt be a very abhominacion, shame, a gasinge and
wondringe stocke, amonge the Heithen that lye aboute the. Euen I the LORDE haue
spoken it, and it shall come to passe,
16 when I shute amonge them the perlous dartes of hoger, which shalbe but death:
Yee therfore shall I shute them, because I will destroye you. I will encrease
hunger, and mynish all the prouysion off bred amonge you.
17 Plages and mysery will I sende you, yee and wilde beestes also to destroye
yon. Pestilence and bloudsheddinge shall come vpon you, and the swearde wil I
bringe ouer you. Euen I the LORDE, haue sayde it.

Chapter 6

1 The worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
2 Thou sonne off man, turne thy face to the mountaynes of Israel, that thou
mayest prophecie vnto them,
3 and saye: Heare the worde of the LORDE God, o ye mountaynes off Israel: Thus
hath the LORDE God spoken to the moutaynes, hilles, valleys and dales: Beholde,
I will brynge a swearde ouer you, and destroye youre hie places:
4 I wil cast downe youre aulters, and breake downe youre temples. Youre slayne
men will I laye before youre goddes,
5 and the deed carcases off the children off Israel will I cast before their
ymages, youre bones wil I strowe rounde aboute youre aulters,
6 and dwellinge places. The cities shalbe desolate, ye hillchapels layed waist:
youre aulters destroyed, & broken: youre goddes cast downe, and taken awaye, yor
tepels layde eaue with the groude, youre owne workes clene roted out.
7 Youre slayne men shall lie amonge you, that ye maye lerne to knowe, how yt I
am the LORDE.
8 Those yt amoge you haue escaped the swearde, will I leaue amonge the Gentiles,
for I will scatre you amonge the nacions.
9 And they that escape from you, shall thinke vpon me amonge the heithen, where
they shalbe in captiuyte. As for that whorish and vnfaithfull herte of theirs,
wherwith they runne awaye fro me, I will breake it: yee & put out those eyes off
theirs, that committe fornicacion with their Idols. Then shall they be ashamed,
and displeased with their selues, for the wickednesses ad abhominacions, which
they haue done:
10 and shal lerne to knowe, how that it is not in vayne, that I the LORDE spake,
to bringe soch mysery vpon them.
11 The LORDE sayde morouer vnto me: Smyte thine hondes together, and stampe with
thy fete, and saye: Wo worth all the abhominacions and wickednesses of the house
of Israel, for because of the, they shal perish with the swearde, with hoger and
with pestilence.
12 Who so is farre of, shall dye off the pestilence: he that is nye at hande,
shall perish with the swearde: and ye other that are beseged, shall dye of
honger. Thus wil I satisfie my wrothfull displeasure vpon them.
13 And so shall ye lerne to knowe, that I am the LORDE, whe youre slayne men lye
amoge youre goddes, and aboute youre aulters: vpon all hie hilles and toppes off
mountaynes, amoge all grene trees, amonge all thicke okes: euen in the places,
where they dyd sacrifice to all their Idols.
14 I will stretch myne honde out vpon them, & will make the londe waist: So that
it shall lye desolate and voyde, from the wildernesse off Deblat forth, thorow
all their habitacions: to lerne them for to knowe, that I am the LORDE.

Chapter 7

1 The worde off the LORDE came vnto me, on this maner:
2 The I call, O thou sonne off man. Thus saieth the LORDE God vnto the londe off
Israel: The ende commeth, yee verely the ende commeth vpon all the foure corners
off the earth.
3 But now shall the ende come vpon the: for I will sende my wrath vpo the, and
wil punysh the: acordinge to thy wayes, and rewarde the after all thy
abhominacios.
4 Myne eye shall not ouersee the, nether will I spare the: but rewarde the,
acordinge to thy waies, and declare thy abhominacions. Then shall ye knowe, that
I am the LORDE.
5 Thus saieth the LORDE God: Beholde, one mysery and plage shall come after
another:
6 the ende is here. The ende (I saye) that waiteth for the, is come already,
7 ye houre is come agaynst the, that dwellest in the londe. The tyme is at
honde, the daye of sedicio is hard by, & no glad tidinges vpo the moutaynes.
8 Therfore, I will shortly poure out my sore displeasure ouer the, and fulfill
my wrath vpon the. I will iudge the after thy waies, and recompence the all thy
abhominacions.
9 Myne eye shal not ouersee the, nether wil I spare the: but rewarde the after
thy waies, and shewe thy abhominacions: to lerne you for to knowe, how yt I am
the LORDE, yt smyteth.
10 Beholde, the daye is here, the daye is come, the houre is runne out, the
rodde florisheth, wylfulnesse waxeth grene,
11 malicious violece is growne vp, and the vngodly waxen to a staff. Yet shall
there no complaynte be made for them, ner for the trouble that shall come of
these thinges.
12 The tyme cometh, the daye draweth nye: Who so byeth, let him not reioyce: he
that selleth, let him not be sory: for why, Trouble shall come in the myddest
off all rest:
13 so that the seller shall not come agayne to the byer, for nether off them
both shall lyue. For the vision shal come so greatly ouer all, yt it shal not be
hyndered: No ma also wt his wickednesse shall be able to saue his owne life.
14 The trompettes shall ye blowe, and make you all ready, but no man shall go to
the batell, for I am wroth with all the whole multitude.
15 The swearde shalbe without, pestilence and honger within: so that who so is
in the felde, shalbe slayne with the swearde: and he that is in the cite, shall
perish with honger and pestilence.
16 And soch as escape and fle from amonge them, shal be vpon the hilles, like as
the doues in the felde: euery one shalbe afrayed, because off his owne
wickednesse.
17 All hondes shalbe letten downe, and all knees shalbe weake as the water:
18 they shall gyrde them selues with sack cloth, feare shal fall vpon them.
Their faces shall be confouded, and their heades balde:
19 their syluer shall lye in the stretes, and their golde shalbe despised: Yee
their syluer and golde maye not delyuer them, in the daye of the fearfull wrath
of the LORDE. They shall not satisfie their hongrie soules, nether fyll their
emptie belies therwith: For it is become their owne decaye thorow their
wickednesse:
20 because they made therof, not only costly Ieweles for their pompe and pryde,
but also abhominable ymages and Idols. For this cause will I make them to be
abhorred.
21 Morouer, I will geue it in to ye hondes off the straungers to be spoyled: and
to ye wicked, for to be robbed, and they shall destroye it.
22 My face wil I turne from the, my Treasury shall be defyled: for the theues
shall go into it, and suspende it.
23 I wil make clene ryddaunse, for the londe is whole defyled with vnrightuous
iudgment of innocent bloude, & the cite is full off abhominacions.
24 Wherfore, I will bringe the most cruell tyrauntes from amonge the Heithen, to
take their houses in possession. I will make the pompe off the proude to ceasse,
ad they shal take in their Sanctuary.
25 When this trouble cometh, they shal seke peace, but they shal haue none.
26 One myschefe and sorowe shal folowe another, and one rumoure shal come after
another: Then shall they seke visions in vayne at their prophetes. The lawe shal
be gone from the prestes, and wy?dome from the elders.
27 The kynge shall mourne, the princes shalbe clothed with heuynesse, and ye
hodes off the people in the londe shall tremble for feare. I will do vnto them
after their owne waies, & acordinge to their owne iudgmentes will I iudge them:
to lerne them for to knowe, that I am the LORDE.

Chapter 8

1 It happened, that in the sixte yeare, the fifth daye of the sixte Moneth I sat
in my house, and the LORDES off the councell off Iuda with me: and the honde off
the LORDE God fell euen there vpo me.
2 And as I loked vp, I sawe as it were a licknesse off fyre from his loynes
downwarde, and from his loynes vpwarde it shyned maruelous cleare.
3 This symilitude stretched out an honde, and toke me by the hayrie lockes off
my heade, and the sprete lift me vp betwixte heauen and earth: and God brought
me in a vision to Ierusalem, in to the courte off the inwarde porte that lieth
towarde the north: there stode an ymage, with whom he that hath all thinges in
his power, was very wroth.
4 And beholde, the glory off the God off Israel was in the same place: eue as I
had sene it afore in the felde.
5 And he sayde vnto me: Thou sonne off man, O lift vp thine eyes, and loke
towarde the north. Then lift I vp myne eyes towarde the north, and beholde:
Besyde the porte northwarde, there was an aulter made vnto the ymage off
prouocacion in the very entrynge in.
6 And he sayde furthermore vnto me: Thou sonne off man, Seist thou what these
do? Seist thou the greate abhominacions that the house off Israel commytte in
this place? which ought not to be done in my sanctuary? But turne the aboute,
and thou shalt se yet greater abhominacions.
7 And with that brought he me to the courte gate: and whe I loked, beholde,
there was an hole in the wall.
8 Then sayde he vnto me: Thou sonne off man, dygge thorow the wall. And when I
dygged thorow the wall, beholde, there was a dore.
9 And he sayde vnto me: go thy waye in, & loke what wicked abhominacions they do
there.
10 So I wente in, and sawe: and beholde, there were all maner ymages off wormes
& beastes, all Idols and abhominacions of ye house off Israel paynted euerychone
rounde aboute the wall.
11 There stode also before the ymages lxx. lordes of the councell off the house
off Israel: and in the myddest off them stode Iaasanias the sonne off Saphan:
And euery one off them had a censoure in his honde, & out off the incense, there
wente a smoke, as it had bene a cloude.
12 Then sayde he vnto me: Thou sonne off man, hast thou sene what the Senatours
off the house off Israel do secretly, euery one in his chambre? For they saye:
Tush, the LORDE seth vs not, the LORDE regardeth not the worlde.
13 And he sayde vnto me: Turne the yet agayne, and thou shat se the greate
abhominacions that they do.
14 And with that, he brought me to the dore off the porte off the LORDES house,
towarde the north. And beholde, there sat women mournynge for Thamus.
15 Then sayde he vnto me: hast thou sene this, thou sonne of ma? Turne ye
aboute, & thou shalt se yet greater abhominacions.
16 And so he brought me in to the inwarde courte of the LORDES house: & beholde,
at the porte of the LORDES house, betwixte the fore entrie and the aulter, there
were fyue and twenty men, that turned their backes vpon the Temple of the LORDE,
& their faces towarde the easte, and these worshipped the Sonne.
17 And he sayde vnto me: hast thou sene this, thou sonne of man? Thinketh the
house of Israel, that it is but a trifle, to do these abhominacions here? Shulde
they fyll the londe full of wickednesse, and vndertake to prouoke me vnto anger?
Yee & purposly to cast vp their noses vpon me?
18 Therfore wil I also do some thinge in my wrothfull displeasure, so that myne
eye shall not ouersee them, nether wil I spare them. Yee and though they crie in
myne eares with loude voyce, yet wil I not heare them.

Chapter 9

1 He cried also with a loude voyce in myne eares, sayenge: Come here ye rulers
of the cite, euery man with his weapened honde to the slaughter.
2 Then came there sixe men out of the strete of the vpper porte towarde the
north, and euery man a weapen in his honde to the slaughter. There was one
amongst them, that had on him a lynninge rayment, and a wryters ynckhorne by his
syde. These wente in, and stode beside the brasen aulter:
3 for the glory of the LORDE was gone awaye from the Cherub, and was come downe
to the thresholde of the house, & he called the ma, that had the lynnynge
rayment vpon him, and the writers ynckhorne by his syde,
4 and the LORDE sayde vnto him: Go thy waye thorow the cite of Ierusalem, and
set this marck  Thau vpo the foreheades of them, that mourne, and are sory for
all the abhominacions, that be done therin.
5 And to the other, he sayde that I might heare: Go ye after him thorow the
cite, slaye, ouersee none, spare none:
6 Kyll, & destroye both olde men and yonge, maydens, children, and wyues. But as
for those, that haue this marck  Thau vpo them: se that ye touch them not, and
begynne at my Sanctuary. Then they begane at the elders, which were in the
Temple,
7 for he had sayde vnto them: When ye haue defyled the Temple, and fylled the
courte with the slayne, then go youre waye forth. So they wete out and slewe
downe thorow ye cite.
8 Now when they had done ye slaughter, & I yet escaped: I fell downe vpon my
face, & cried, sayenge: O LORDE, wilt thou then destroye all the resydue of
Israel, in thy sore displeasure, that thou hast poured vpo Ierusalem?
9 Then sayde he vnto me: The wickednesse of the house of Israel and Iuda is very
greate: so that the lode is full of bloude, and ye cite full of vnfaithfulnesse:
For they saye: Tush, ye LORDE regardeth not the earth, he seyth vs not.
10 Therfore will I vpon them, myne eye shall not ouersee them, nether will I
spare them, but will recompence their wickednesse vpon their heades.
11 And beholde, the ma that had the lynnynge rayment vpon him, and the writers,
ynckhorne by his syde: tolde all the matter how it happened, and sayde: LORDE,
as thou hast commaunded me, so haue I done.

Chapter 10

1 And as I loked, beholde, In the firmament that was aboue the Cherubins there
apeared the similitude of a stole of Saphir vpo them:
2 Then sayde he that sat therin, to him that had the lynnynge rayment vpon him:
Crepe in betwene the wheles that are vnder the Cherubins, and take thine honde
full of hote coales out from betwene the Cherubins, and cast them ouer the cite.
And he crepte in, that I might se.
3 Now the Cherubins stode vpo the right syde of the house, when the man wete in,
and the cloude fylled the ynnermer courte.
4 But the glory of the LORDE remoued from the Cherubins, and came vpon the
thresholde of the house: so that the Temple was full of cloudes, and the courte
was full of the shyne of the LORDES glory.
5 Yee and the sounde of the Cherubins wynges was herde in to the forecourte,
like as it had bene the voyce of the almightie God, when he speaketh.
6 Now when he had bydden the man yt was clothed in lynnynge, to go and take the
hote coales from the myddest of ye wheles, which were vnder the Cherubins: he
wente and stode besyde the wheles.
7 Then the one Cherub reached forth this honde from vnder the Cherubins, vnto ye
fyre that was betwene the Cherubins, and toke therof, and gaue it vnto him (that
had on the lynnynge rayment) in his honde: which toke it, and wente out.
8 And vnder the wynges of ye Cherubins, there apeared the licknes of a mas hode:
9 I sawe also foure wheles besyde the Cherubins, so that by euery Cherub there
stode a whele. And the wheles were (to loke vpon) after ye fashion of ye
precious stone of Tharsis:
10 Yet (vnto the sight) were they fashioned & like, as yf one whele had bene in
another.
11 When they wente forth, they wete all iiij together, not turnynge aboute in
their goinge: But where the first wente, thither wente they after also, so that
they turned not aboute in their goinge.
12 Their whole bodies, their backes, their hodes & wynges, yee & the wheles
also, were all full of eyes rounde aboute them all foure.
13 And I herde him call ye wheles, Galgal (that is) a rounde boull.
14 Euery one of them had foure faces: so that the one face was the face of a
Cherub, the seconde of a man, the thirde of a lyon, the fourth of an Aegle,
15 & they were lifted vp aboue. This is the beest, that I sawe at the water of
Cobar.
16 Now when the Cherubins wente, the wheles wente with them: & when the
Cherubins shoke their wynges to lift them selues vpwarde, the wheles remayned
not behynde, but were with them also.
17 Shortly, when they stode, these stode also: And when they were lift vp, ye
wheles were lift vp also with the, for the sprete of life was in the wheles.
18 Then the glory of the LORDE was lift vp from the thresholde of the temple,
and remayned vpon the Cherubins:
19 And the Cherubins flackred with their wynges, and lift the selues vp from the
earth: so that I sawe when they went, and the wheles with them. And they stode
at the east syde of the porte that is in the house of the LORDE. So the glory of
the LORDE was vpon them.
20 This is the beest that I sawe vnder the God of Israel, by the water of Cobar.
And I perceaued, that it was the Cherubins.
21 Euery one had foure faces, & euery one foure wynges, & vnder their winges, as
it were mes hondes.
22 Now the figure of their faces was, euen as I had sene them, by the water of
Cobar, & so was the countenaunce of the: Euery one in his goinge wente straight
forwarde.

Chapter 11

1 Morouer, the sprete of the LORDE lift me vp, & brought me vnto ye east porte
of the LORDES house. And beholde, there were xxv men vnder the dore: amoge whom
I sawe Iaasanias the sonne of Asur, & Pheltias the sonne of Banias, the rulers
of the people.
2 Then sayde the LORDE vnto me: Thou sonne of man: These men ymagin myschefe,
and a wicked councel take they in this cite,
3 sayenge: Tush, there is no destruccion at honde, let vs buylde houses: This
Ierusalem is the cauldron, & we be the flesh.
4 Therfore shalt thou prophecie vnto them, yee prophecie shalt thou vnto them, O
sonne of man.
5 And with that, fell the sprete of the LORDE vpon me, and sayde vnto me:
Speake, thus saieth the LORDE: On this maner haue yee spoke (O ye house of
Israel) and I knowe the ymaginacios of youre hertes.
6 Many one haue ye murthured in this cite, & filled the stretes full of the
slayne.
7 Therfore, thus saieth the LORDE God: The slayne men that ye haue layed on the
grounde in this cite, are the flesh, & this cite is the cauldron: But I wil
bringe you out of it:
8 ye haue drawe out ye swearde, eue so wil I also bringe a swearde ouer you,
saieth ye LORDE God.
9 I will dryue you out of this cite and delyuer you in to youre enemies honde, &
wil condemne you.
10 Ye shal be slayne in all the coastes of Israel, I wil be avenged of you: to
lerne you for to knowe, that I am the LORDE.
11 This cite shal not be youre cauldron, nether shal ye be the flesh therin: but
in the coastes of Israel wil I punysh you,
12 that ye maye knowe, that I am the LORDE: in whose commaundementes ye haue not
walked, ner kepte his lawes: but haue done after the customes of the Heithen,
that lie rounde aboute you.
13 Now when I preached, Pheltias the sonne of Banias dyed. Then fell I downe vpo
my face, & cried with a loude voyce: O LORDE God, wilt thou then vterly destroye
all the remnaunt in Israel?
14 And so the worde of the LORDE came to me on this maner:
15 Thou sonne of man: Thy brethren, thy kynsfolke, & ye whole house of Iuda,
which dwell at Ierusalem, saye: They be gone farre from the LORDE, but the londe
is geuen vs in possession.
16 Therfore tell them, thus saieth the LORDE God: I wil sende you farre of amoge
the Gentiles, & scatre you amonge the nacions, & I wil halowe you but a litle,
in the londes where ye shall come.
17 Tell them also, thus saieth the LORDE God: I wil gather you agayne out of the
nacions, & bringe you from the countrees where ye be scatred, & will geue you
the londe of Israel agayne:
18 & thither shal ye come. And as for all impedimentes, & all youre
abhominacions: I will take them awaye.
19 And I wil geue you one herte, & wil plante a new sprete within yor bowels.
That stony herte wil I take out of youre body, & geue you a fleshy herte:
20 that ye maye walke in my commaundementes, and kepe myne ordinaunces, & do
them: that ye maye be my people, and I youre God.
21 But loke whose hertes are disposed to folowe their abhominacions and wicked
lyuynges: Those mens dedes will I bringe vpon their owne heades, saieth the
LORDE God.
22 After this dyd the Cherubins lift vp their winges, and the wheles wente with
them, and the glory of the LORDE was vpon them.
23 So the glory of the LORDE wente vp from the myddest of the cite, & stode vpon
the mount of the cite towarde the east.
24 sprete of God) it brought me agayne in to Caldea amonge the presoners. Then
the vision that I had sene, vanyshed awaye fro me.
25 So I spake vnto the presoners, all the wordes of the LORDE, which he had
shewed me.

Chapter 12

1 The worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
2 Thou sonne of ma, thou dwellest in the myddest of a frauwerde housholde: which
haue eyes to se, & yet se not: eares haue they to heare, and yet heare they not,
for they are an obstinate housholde.
3 Therfore (O thou sonne of man) make thy gere redy to flit, and go forth by
fayre daye light, yt they maye se. Yee eue in their sight shalt thou go from thy
place to another place: yf peraduenture they wil considre, yt they be an
vnobedient housholde.
4 Thy gere that thou hast made redy to flit withall, shalt thou beare out by
fayre daye light, that they maie se: & thou yi self shalt go forth also at eue
in their sight, as a ma doth whe he flitteth.
5 Dygge thorow the wall, that they maye se, and beare thorow it the same thinge,
that thou tokest vp
6 in their sight. As for thy self, thou shalt go forth in the darcke. Hyde thy
face that thou se not ye earth, for I haue made the a shewtoke vnto the house of
Israel.
7 Now as ye LORDE comaunded me, so I dyd: ye gere that I had made redy, brought
I out by daye. At euen I brake downe an hole thorow the wall with my honde: &
when it was darcke, I toke the gere vpo my shulders, and bare them out in their
sight.
8 And in the mornynge, came the worde of the LORDE vnto me, sayenge:
9 Thou sonne of man, yf Israel, yt frauwerde housholde axe the, and saye: what
dost thou there?
10 Then tell them: Thus saieth the LORDE God: This punyshment toucheth the chefe
rulers at Ierusalem, and all the house of Israel, that dwell amonge them:
11 Tell them: I am youre shewtoken: like as I haue done, so shal it happen vnto
you: Flyt shal ye also, and go in to captiuyte.
12 The chefest that is amonge you, shall lade his shulders in the darcke, and
get him awaye. He shal breake downe the wall, to carie stuff there thorow: He
shal couer his face, that he se not the grounde, with his eyes.
13 My lyne will I sprede out vpon him, and catch him in my net, and carie him to
Babilon, in the lode of the Caldees: which he shal not se, & yet shal he dye
there.
14 As for all his helpers, and all his hoostes that be aboute him: I will scatre
them towarde all the wyndes, and drawe out a swearde after them.
15 So when I haue scatred them amonge the Heithen, and strowed them in the
londes: they shal knowe, that I am ye LORDE.
16 But, I will leaue a litle nombre of them, from the swearde, hunger &
pestilence: to tell all their abhominacions amonge the Heithen, where they come:
that they maye knowe, how that I am the LORDE.
17 Morouer, the worde of the LORDE came vnto me sayenge:
18 Thou sonne of man: with a fearfull treblinge shalt thou eate thy bred, with
carefulnesse & sorowe shalt thou drynke thy water.
19 And vnto the people of the londe, speake thou on this maner: Thus saieth the
LORDE God, to them that dwell in Ierusalem, and to the londe of Israel: Ye shall
eate youre bred with sorowe, and drynke youre water with heuynesse: Yee the
londe with the fulnesse therof shalbe layde waist, for ye wickednesse of them
that dwell therin.
20 And the cities that now be well occupied, shal be voyde, and the londe
desolate: that ye maye knowe, how that I am the LORDE.
21 Yet came the worde of the LORDE vnto me agayne, sayenge:
22 Thou sonne of man, what maner of byworde is that, which ye vse in the londe
of Israel, sayenge: Tush, seynge that the daies are so slacke in commynge, all
the visios are of none effecte:
23 Tell them therfore, thus saieth the LORDE God: I wil make that byworde to
ceasse, so that it shall nomore be comonly vsed in Israel. But saye this vnto
them: The daies are at honde, that euery thinge which hath bene prophecied,
shalbe fulfilled.
24 There shall no vision be in vayne, nether eny prophecie fayle amonge the
children of Israel:
25 For it is I the LORDE, that speake it: and what so euer I ye LORDE speake, it
shal be perfourmed, and not be slacke in commynge. Yee euen in youre dayes (O ye
frauwarde housholde) will I deuyse somethinge, & bringe it to passe, saieth the
LORDE God.
26 And the worde of the LORDE came vnto me sayenge:
27 Beholde, thou sonne of man: The house of Israel saye in this maner: Tush, as
for the vision that he hath sene, it will be many a daye or it come to passe: Is
it farre of yet, the thinge that he prophecieth.
28 Therfore saye vnto them: Thus saieth the LORDE God: All my wordes shal nomore
be slacke: Loke what I speake, that same shal come to passe, saieth the LORDE.

Chapter 13

1 The worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayege:
2 Thou sonne of man, Speake prophecie agaynst those prophetes, that preach in
Israel: & saye thou vnto them that prophecie out of their owne hertes: Heare the
worde of the LORDE,
3 thus saieth the LORDE God: Wo be vnto those folish prophetes, that folowe
their owne sprete, and speake, where they se nothinge.
4 O Israel, thy prophetes are like the foxes vpon the drie felde:
5 For they stonde not in the gappes, nether make they an hedge for the house of
Israel, that me might abyde the parell in the daye of the LORDE.
6 Vayne thinges they se, & tell lies, to mayntene their preachinges withall. The
LORDE (saye they) hath spoke it, when in very dede the LORDE hath not sent them.
7 Vayne visios haue ye sene, & spoke false prophecies. when ye saye: the LORDE
hath spoken it, where as I neuer sayde it.
8 Therfore, thus saieth the LORDE God: Because youre wordes be vayne, & ye seke
out lies: Beholde, I wil vpon you, saieth ye LORDE.
9 Myne hondes shal come vpon the prophetes, that loke out vayne thinges, and
preach lies: they shal not be in the councell of my people, ner written in the
boke of the house of Israel, nether shal they come in the londe of Israel: that
ye maye knowe, how that I am the LORDE God.
10 And that for this cause: they haue disceaued my people, & tolde them of
peace, where no peace was. One setteth vp a wall, & they dawbe it with lowse
claye.
11 Therfore tell them which dawbe it with vntempered morter, that it shall fall.
For there shal come a greate shuwer of rayne, greate stones shall fall vpon it,
& a sore storme of wynde shal breake it,
12 so shal ye wall come downe. Shal it not then be sayde vnto you: where is now
the morter, that ye dawbed it withall?
13 Therfore thus saieth the LORDE God: I will breake out in my wrothfull
displeasure with a stormy wynde, so that in myne anger there shal come a mightie
shuwer of rayne, & hale stones in my wrath, to destroye withall.
14 As for ye wall, that ye haue dawbed with vntempered morter, I wil breake it
downe, & make it eauen with the grounde: so that the foundacion therof shal
remoue, & it shal fall, yee & ye youre selues shall perish in the myddest
therof: to lerne you for to knowe, that I am the LORDE.
15 Thus wil I perfourme my wrath vpon this wall, & vpon them that haue dawbed it
with vntempered morter, and then will I saye vnto you: The wall is gone, & the
dawbers are awaye.
16 These are the prophetes of Israel, which prophecie vnto the cite of
Ierusalem, & loke out visions of peace for them, where as no peace is, saieth
the LORDE God.
17 Wherfore (o thou sonne of ma,) set thy face agaynst the doughters of yi
people, which prophecie out of their owne hertes: & speake thou prophecie
agaynst them,
18 & saye: Thus saieth the LORDE God: Wo be vnto you, that sowe pilowes vnder
all arme holes, and bolsters vnder the heades both of yonge and olde, to catch
soules withall. For when ye haue gotten the soules of my people in youre
captiuyte, ye promyse them life,
19 and dishonoure me to my people, for an handfull of barly, & for a pece of
bred: when ye kyll the soules of them that dye not, & promyse life to them, that
lyue not: Thus ye dyssemble with my people, yt beleueth yor lies.
20 Wherfore thus saieth the LORDE God: Beholde, I wil also vpo the pillowes,
wherwith ye catch the soules in flyenge: the will I take from youre armes, & let
the soules go, that ye catch in flyenge.
21 Youre bolsters also wil I teare in peces, & delyuer my people out of youre
honde: so that they shal come no more in youre hodes to be spoyled, & ye shal
knowe, that I am the LORDE.
22 Seinge yt with youre lyes ye discomforte the herte of the rightuous, whom I
haue not discomforted: Agayne: For so moch as ye corage the honde of the wicked,
so that he maye not turne from his wicked waye, & lyue:
23 therfore shall ye spie out nomore vanyte, ner prophecie youre owne gessinges:
for I wil delyuer my people out of youre honde, that ye maye knowe, how that I
am the LORDE.

Chapter 14

1 There resorted vnto me certayne of ye elders of Israel, & sat downe by me.
2 Then came the worde of the LORDE vnto me, sayenge:
3 Thou sonne of man, these men beare their Idols in their hertes, & go purposly
vpon the stomblinge block of their owne wickednesse: how darre they then axe
councell at me?
4 Therfore speake vnto them, & saye: thus saieth the LORDE God: Euery man of the
house of Israel that beareth his Idols in his herte, purposynge to stomble in
his owne wickednesse, and commeth to a prophet, to enquere eny thinge at me by
him: vnto that man wil I the LORDE myself geue answere, acordinge to the
multitude of his Idols:
5 that the house of Israel maye be snared in their owne hertes, because they be
clene gone fro me, for their Idols sakes.
6 Wherfore, tell the house of Israel: thus saieth the LORDE God: Be conuerted,
forsake youre Idols, and turne youre faces from all yor abhominacions.
7 For euery man (whether he be of the house of Israel, or a straunger, that
sogeourneth in Israel) which departeth fro me, and carieth Idols in his herte,
purposinge to go still stomblinge in his owne wickednesse, and commeth to a
prophet, for to axe councell at me thorow him: vnto yt man wil I the LORDE geue
answere, by myne owne self.
8 I wil set my face agaynst that man, and wil make him to be an example for
other, yee and a comon byworde: and wil rote him out of my people, that he maye
knowe, how yt I am the LORDE.
9 And yf that prophet be disceaued, when he telleth him a worde: then I the
LORDE myself haue disceaued that prophet, and wil stretch forth myne honde vpon
him, to rote him out of my people of Israel:
10 and they both shall be punyshed for their wickednesse. Acordinge to ye synne
of him that axeth, shal the synne of the prophet be:
11 that ye house of Israel be led nomore fro me thorow erroure, and be nomore
defyled in their wickednesse: but that they maye be my people, and I their God,
saieth the LORDE God.
12 And the worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
13 Thou sonne of man, when the londe synneth agaynst me, and goeth forth in
wickednesse: I will stretch out myne hode vpon it, and destroye all the
prouysion of their bred, and sende derth vpon them, to destroye man & beest in
the londe.
14 And though Noe, Daniel and Iob these thre men were amonge them, yet shal they
in their rightuousnesse delyuer but their owne soules, saieth the LORDE God.
15 Yf I bringe noysome beestes in to the londe, to waist it vp, and it be so
desolate, that no man maye go therin for beestes:
16 yf these thre men also were in the londe, as truly as I lyue (saieth the
LORDE God) they shal saue nether sonnes ner doughters, but be only delyuered
them selues: and as for the londe, it shal be waist.
17 Or, yf I bringe a swearde in to the londe, and charge it to go thorow the
londe: so that I slaye downe man and beest in it,
18 and yf these thre men were therin: As truly as I lyue (saieth the LORDE God)
they shal delyuer nether sonnes ner doughters, but only be saued them selues.
19 Yf I sende a pestilence in to the londe, and poure out my sore indignacion
vpon it in bloude, so that I rote out of it both man and beest,
20 and yf Noe, Daniel and Iob were therin: As truly as I lyue (saieth the LORDE
God) they shal delyuer nether sonnes ner doughters, but saue their owne soules
in their rightuousnesse.
21 Morouer, thus saieth the LORDE God: Though I sende my foure trublous plages
vpon Ierusalem: the swearde, honger, perlous beestes and pestilence, to destroye
man and beest out of it:
22 yet shal there a remnaunt be saued therin, which shal bringe forth their
sonnes and doughters. Beholde, they shal come forth vnto you, and ye shall se
their waye, and what they take in honde, & ye shalbe coforted, as touchinge all
the plages that I haue brought vpon Ierusalem.
23 They shall comforte you, when ye se their waye and workes: and ye shal knowe,
how yt it is not without a cause, that I haue done so agaynst Ierusalem, as I
dyd, saieth the LORDE God.

Chapter 15

1 The worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
2 Thou sonne of man: What commeth of the vyne amonge all other trees? and of the
wyne stocke, amoge all other tymbre of the groaue?
3 Do me take wodd of it, to make eny worke withall? Or maye there a nale be made
of it, to hange eny thinge vpon?
4 Beholde, it is cast in the fyre to be brent, the fyre consumeth both the endes
of it, the myddest is brent to a?shes. Is it mete then for eny worke? No.
5 Seinge then, that it was mete for no worke, beinge whole: moch lesse maye
there eny thinge be made of it, when the fyre hath consumed and brent it.
6 And therfore thus saieth the LORDE God: Like as I cast the vyne in to the fyre
for to be brent, as other trees of the wod: Euen so wil I do with them that
dwell in Ierusalem,
7 and set my face agaynst them: they shall go out from the fyre, and yet the
fyre shall consume them. Then shal ye knowe, that I am the LORDE, when I set my
face agaynst them,
8 and make the londe waist: because they haue so sore offended, saieth the LORDE
God.

Chapter 16

1 Agayne, the worde of LORDE spake vnto me, sayenge:
2 Thou sonne of man, shewe the cite of Ierusalem their abhominacions,
3 and saye: thus saieth the LORDE God vnto Ierusalem: Thy progeny and kynred
came out of the londe of Canaan, thy father was an Amorite, thy mother a
Cethite.
4 In ye daye of thy byrth when thou wast borne, ye stringe of thy nauel was not
cut of: thou wast not bathed in water to make the clene: Thou wast nether rubbed
wt salt, ner swedled in cloutes:
5 No man regarded the so moch, as to do eny of these thinges for ye, or to shewe
the soch fauoure, but thou wast vtterly cast out vpon ye felde, yee despised
wast thou in the daye of thy byrth.
6 Then came I by the, and sawe the troden downe in thine owne bloude, & sayde
vnto the: thou shalt be pourged from thine owne bloude, fro thine owne bloude (I
saye) shalt thou be clensed.
7 So I planted the, as the blossome of thy felde: thou art growen vp, & waxe
greate: thou hast gotten a maruelous pleasaunt beutie, thy brestes are come vp,
thy hayre is goodly growen, where as thou wast naked and bare afore.
8 Now when I wente by ye, & loked vpon the: beholde, thy tyme was come, yee eue
the tyme to wowe the. Then spred I my clothes ouer the, to couer thy
dishonestie: Yee I made an ooth vnto the, & maried my self with the (saieth the
LORDE God) & so thou becamest myne owne.
9 Then wa?shed I the with water, & pourged thy bloude from the. I anoynted the
with oyle,
10 I gaue the chaunge of raymentes, I made the shues of Taxus lether: I gyrthed
ye aboute wt white sylcke, I clothed the with kerchues,
11 I decked the wt costly apparell, I put rynges vpon thy fyngers: a chayne
aboute thy necke,
12 spages vpo thy foreheade, eare rynges vpon thyne eares, & set a beutifull
crowne vpon thine heade.
13 Thus wast thou deckte with syluer & golde, & thy rayment was of fyne white
sylke, of nedle worke & of dyuerse colours. Thou didest eate nothinge but
symnels, honny & oyle: maruelous goodly wast thou & beutifull, yee euen a very
Quene wast thou:
14 In so moch, that thy beuty was spoken of amonge the Heithen, for thou wast
excellet in my beuty, which I put vpo the, saieth the LORDE God.
15 But thou hast put confidece in thine owne beuty, & played the harlot, when
thou haddest gotten the a name. Thou hast committed whordome, with all that
wente by the, & hast fulfilled their desyres:
16 Yee thou hast taken thy garmetes of dyuerse colours, & deckte thine aulters
therwith, where vpon thou mightest fulfill thine whordome, of soch a fashion, as
neuer was done, ner shalbe.
17 The goodly ornametes & Iewels which I gaue the of myne owne golde and syluer,
hast thou take, & made the mes ymages therof, and committed whordome withall.
18 Thy garmentes of dyuerse colours hast thou taken, and deckte them therwith:
myne oyle & incense hast thou set before them.
19 My meate which I gaue the, as symnels, oyle & hony: (to fede the withall)
that hast thou set before them, for a swete sauoure. And this came also to
passe, saieth the LORDE God:
20 Thou hast take thine owne sonnes & doughters, whom thou haddest begotten vnto
me: and these hast thou offred vp vnto them, to be their meate. Is this but a
small whordome of thine (thinkest thou)
21 that thou slayest my children, and geuest them ouer, to be bret vnto them?
22 And yet in all thy abhominacions and whordome, thou hast not remembred the
dayes of thy youth, how naked and bare thou wast at that tyme, & troden downe in
thine owne bloude.
23 After all these thy wickednesses (wo wo vnto the, saieth ye LORDE)
24 thou hast buylded thy stewes and brodel houses in euery place: yee at the
heade of euery strete
25 hast thou buylded the an aulter. Thou hast made thy beuty to be abhorred:
thou hast layed out thy legges to euery one that came by, and multiplied thine
whordome.
26 Thou hast committed fornicacion with the Egipcians thy neghbours, which had
moch flesh: & thus hast thou vsed thine whordome, to anger me.
27 Beholde, I will stretch out myne honde ouer the, and wil mynish thy stoare of
fode, and delyuer the ouer in to the willes of the Philistynes thine enemies,
which are ashamed of thy abhominable waye.
28 Thou hast played the whore also with the Assirians, which might not satisfie
the: Yee thou hast played the harlot, & not had ynough.
29 Thus hast thou still comitted thy fornicacion from the londe of Canaan vnto
the Caldees, and yet thy lust not satisfied.
30 How shulde I circumcide thine herte (saieth the LORDE God) seinge thou doest
all these thinges, thou precious whore:
31 buyldinge thy stewes at the heade of euery strete, and thy brodel houses in
all places? Thou hast not bene as an other whore, yt maketh booste of hir
wynnynge:
32 but as a wife yt breaketh wedlocke, & taketh other in steade of hir hu?bode.
33 Giftes are geuen to all other whores, but thou geuest rewardes vnto all thy
louers: & offrest them giftes, to come vnto the out of all places, & to committe
fornicacio with the.
34 It is come to passe with the in thy whordomes, contrary to the vse of other
women: yee there hath no soch fornicacion bene committed after the, seinge that
thou profrest giftes vnto other, & no rewarde is geuen the: this is a contrary
thinge.
35 Therfore heare the worde of the LORDE, o thou harlot:
36 Thus saieth the LORDE God: For so moch as thou hast spet thy moneye, &
discouered thy shame, thorow thy whordome with all thy louers, and with all the
Idols of thy abhominacions in the bloude of thy children, whom thou hast geuen
them:
37 Beholde therfore, I wil gather together all thy louers, vnto whom thou hast
made thy self comon: yee & all them whom thou fauourest, and euery one that thou
hatest: and will discouer thy shame before the, that they all maye se thy
fylthines
38 Morouer, I wil iudge the as a breaker of wedlocke and a murthurer, and
recompence the thine owne bloude in wrath and gelousy.
39 I wil geue the ouer in to their power, that shal breake downe thy stewes, and
destroye thy brodel houses: they shal stripe the out of thy clothes, all thy
fayre & beutifull Iewels shal they take from the, and so let the syt naked &
bare:
40 Yee they shal bringe the comon people vpon the, which shal stone the, & slaye
the downe with their sweardes.
41 They shall burne vp thy houses, and punysh the in the sight of many wome.
Thus wil I make thy whordome to ceasse, so that thou shalt geue out no mo
rewardes.
42 Shulde I make my wrath to be still, take my gelousy from the, be content, and
nomore to be displeased?
43 seinge thou remembrest not the dayes of thy youth, but hast prouoked me to
wrath in all these thinges? Beholde therfore, I wil bringe thine owne wayes vpon
thine heade, saieth the LORDE God: how be it, I neuer dyd vnto the, acordinge to
thy wickednesse and all thy abhominacions.
44 Beholde, all they yt vse comon prouerbes, shall vse this prouerbe also
agaynst the: Soch a mother, soch a doughter.
45 Thou art euen thy mothers owne doughter, that hath cast of hir hou?bonde and
hir children: Yee thou art the sister of thy sisters, which forsoke their
hu?bodes and their children. Youre mother is a Cethite, and youre father an
Amorite.
46 Thine eldest sister is Samaria, she and hir doughters that dwel vpo thy left
honde. But thy yongest sister that dwelleth on ye right hode, is Sodoma and hir
doughters.
47 Yet hast thou not walked after their wayes, ner done after their
abhominacions: But in all thy wayes thou hast bene more corrupte then they.
48 As truly as I lyue, saieth the LORDE God: Sodoma thy sister with hir
doughters, hath not done so euel, as thou and thy doughters.
49 Beholde, the synnes of thy sister Sodoma were these: Pryde, fulnesse of
meate, abundaunce and Idilnesse: these thinges had she and hir doughters.
Besydes that, they reached not their honde to the poore and nedy,
50 but were proude, and dyd abhominable thinges before me: therfore I toke them
awaye, when I had sene it.
51 Nether hath Samaria done half of thy synnes, yee thou hast exceaded them in
wickednesse: In so moch that in comparison of all the abhominacions which thou
hast done, thou hast made thy sisters good women.
52 Therfore beare thine owne shame, thou that in synne hast ouercome thy
sisters: seinge thou hast done so abhominably, that they were better then thou.
Be ashamed therfore (I saye) and beare thine owne confucion, thou that makest
thy sisters good women.
53 As for their captiuyte, namely the captiuyte of Sodoma and hir dougters: the
captiuyte of Samaria and hir doughters: I wil bringe them agayne, so will I also
bringe agayne thy captiuyte amoge them:
54 that thou mayest take thine owne confucion vpon the, and be ashamed of all
that thou hast done, and to comforte them.
55 Thus thy sisters (namely) Sodoma and hir doughters: Samaria and hir doughters
with yi self & thy doughters, shalbe brought agayne to youre olde estate.
56 Whe thou wast in thy pryde,
57 and before thy wickednesse came to light: thou woldest not heare speake of
thy sister Sodoma, vntill the tyme that the Sirians with all their townes, and
the Philistynes with all that lye rounde aboute them, brought the to shame and
confucion:
58 that thou mightest beare thine owne fylthynes and abhominacion, saieth the
LORDE.
59 For thus saieth the LORDE God: I shulde (by right) deale with the, as thou
hast done. Thou hast despysed the ooth, and broken the couenaunte.
60 Neuertheles, I wil remembre the couenaunt, that I made with the in thy youth,
in so moch that it shall be an euerlastinge couenaunt:
61 So that thou also remembre thy wayes, and be ashamed of the: then shalt thon
receaue of me thy elder and yonger sisters, whom I wil make thy doughters, and
that besyde thy couenaunt.
62 And so I wil renue my couenaunt with the, yt thou mayest knowe, that I am the
LORDE:
63 that thou mayest thincke vpo it, be ashamed, and excuse thine owne confucion
nomore: when I haue forgeuen the, all that thou hast done, saieth the LORDE God.

Chapter 17

1 The worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
2 Thou sonne of man: put forth a darcke speakynge and a parable, vnto the house
of Israel,
3 and saye: Thus saieth the LORDE God: There came a greate Aegle with greate
wynges, yee wt mightie longe wynges, and full of fethers of dyuerse colours,
vpon the mount of Libanus, and toke a braunch from a Cedre tre,
4 and brake of the toppe of his twygge, and caried it in to the londe of Canaan,
and set it in a cite of marchauntes.
5 He toke also a braunch of the londe, and planted it in a frutefull grounde, he
brought it vnto greate waters, & set it as a willye tre therby.
6 Then dyd it growe, and was a greate wyne stocke, but lowe by the grounde: thus
there came of it a vyne, and it brought forth blossomes, & spred out braunches.
7 But there was another Aegle, a greate one, which had greate wynges and many
fethers: and beholde, ye rotes of this vyne had an huger after him, and spred
out his braunches towarde him, to water his frutes:
8 Neuertheles it was plated vpon a good grounde besyde greate waters: so that
(by reason) it shulde haue brought out braunches and frute, and haue bene a
goodly vyne.
9 Speake thou therfore, thus saieth the LORDE God: Shal this vyne prospere? shal
not his rotes be pluckte out, his frute broken of, his grene braunches wythereed
and fade awaye? yee without ether stronge arme or many people, shal it be
plucked vp by the rotes.
10 Beholde, it was planted: shall it prospere therfore? Shall it not be dryed vp
and withered, yee euen in the shutinge out of his blossomes, as soone as ye east
wynde bloweth?
11 Morouer, the worde of the LORDE came vnto me sayenge:
12 Speake to that frauwarde housholde: knowe ye not, what these thinges do
signifie? Tell them: Beholde, the kinge of Babilon came to Ierusalem, and toke
the kinge & his prynces, and ledde them to Babilon.
13 He toke of the kinges sede, and made a couenaunt with him, and toke an ooth
of him: The prynces of the londe toke he with him also,
14 that the londe might be holden in subieccion, and not to rebelle, but kepe
the couenaunt, and fulfill it.
15 But he fell from him, & sent his Embassitours in to Egipte, that he might
haue horses & moch people. Shulde that prospere? Shulde he be kepte safe, that
doth soch thinges? Or shulde he escape, that breaketh his couenaunt?
16 As truly as I lyue, saieth the LORDE God: He shal dye at Babilon, in ye place
where the kinge dwelleth, that made him kinge: whose ooth he hath despised, and
whose couenaunt he hat broken.
17 Nether shall Pharao with his greate hoost and multitude of people, maynteyne
him in the warre: when they cast vp diches, and set vp bulworkes to destroye
moch people.
18 For seinge he hath despysed the ooth, and broken the couenaunt (where as he
yet gaue his honde thervpon) and done all these thinges, he shall not escape.
19 Therfore thus saieth the LORDE God: As truly as I lyue, I will bringe myne
ooth that he hath despysed, and my couenaunt that he hath broken, vpon his owne
heade.
20 I wil cast my net aboute him, and catch him in my yarne. To Babilon will I
cary him, there will I punysh him, because of the greate offence that he made
me.
21 As for those yt fle from him out of ye hoost, they shalbe slayne with the
swearde. The residue shalbe scatred towarde all the wyndes: and ye shal knowe,
that I the LORDE haue spoken it.
22 Thus saieth the LORDE God: I will also take a braunch from an hie Cedre tre,
and will set it, and take the vppermost twygge, that yet is but tendre, and
plante it vpon an hie hill:
23 Namely, vpon the hie hill of Sion will I plante it: that it maye bringe forth
twygges, and geue frute, and be a greate Cedre tre: so that all maner of foules
maye byde in it, and make their nestes vnder the shadowe of his braunches.
24 And all the trees of the felde shall knowe, that I the LORDE haue brought
downe the hie tre, and set the lowe tre vp: that I haue dryed vp the grene tre,
and made the drye tre to florish: Euen I the LORDE yt spake it, haue also
brought it to passe.

Chapter 18

1 The worde of the LORDE came vnto me, on this maner:
2 what meane ye by this comon prouerbe, that ye vse in the londe of Israel,
sayenge: The fathers haue eaten soure grapes, and the childres teth are set on
edge?
3 As truly as I lyue, saieth ye LORDE God, ye shal vse this byworde nomore in
Israel.
4 Beholde, all soules are myne. Like as the father is myne, so is ye sonne myne
also. The soule that synneth, shal dye.
5 Yf a man be godly, and do the thinge that is equall & right,
6 (he eateth not vpon the hilles: he lifteth not his eyes vp to the Idols of
Israel: he defyleth not his neghbours wife: he medleth wt no menstruous woman:
7 he greueth no body: he geueth his detter his pledge agayne: he taketh none
other mans good by violece: he parteth his mete with the hongrie: he clotheth
the naked:
8 he lendeth nothinge vpon vsury: he taketh nothinge ouer: he withdraweth his
honde from doinge wronge: he hadleth faithfully betwixte man & man:
9 he walbeth in my commaundementes, & kepeth my lawes, & perfourmeth the
faithfully:) This is a rightuous ma, he shal surely lyue, saieth the LORDE God.
10 Yf he now get a sonne, that is a murthurer, a shedder of bloude: yf he do one
of these thinges
11 (though he do not all) he eateth vpon the hilles: he defyleth his neghbours
wife:
12 he greueth the poore and nedy: he robbeth and spoyleth: he geueth not the
detter his pledge agayne: he lifteth vp his eyes vnto Idols, & medleth with
abhominable thinges:
13 he lendeth vpon vsury, and taketh more ouer. Shal this man lyue? He shal not
lyne. Seinge he hath done all these abhominacions, he shall dye: his bloude
shalbe vpon him.
14 Now yf this man get a sonne also, that seith all this fathers synnes, which
he hath done: and feareth, nether doth soch like:
15 Namely, he eateth not vpon the mountaynes: he lifteth not his eyes vp to the
Idols of Israel: he defyleth not his neghbours wife:
16 he vexeth no man: he kepeth no mans pledge: he nether spoyleth, ner robbeth
eny man: he dealeth his meate with the hungrie: he clotheth the naked:
17 he oppresseth not the poore: he receaueth no vsury, ner eny thinge ouer: he
kepeth my lawes, and walketh in my commaundementes: This man shal not dye in his
fathers synne, but shall lyue without fayle.
18 As for his father: because he oppressed and spoyled his brother, and dyd
wyckedly amonge his people: lo, he is deed in his owne synne.
19 And yet saye ye: Wherfore the shulde not this sonne beare his fathers synne?
Therfore: because the sonne hath done equyte and right, hath kepte all my
commaundementes, and done them: therfore, shall he lyue in dede.
20 The same soule yt synneth, shall dye. The sonne shal not beare the fathers
offence, nenether shal the father beare the sonnes offence. The rightuousnes of
the rightuous shall be vpon himself, and the wickednes of the wicked shal be
vpon him self also.
21 But yf ye vngodly will turne awaye, from all his synnes that he hath done,
and kepe all my commaundemetes, and do the thinge ye is equall & right: doutles
he shal lyue, and not dye.
22 As for all his synnes that he dyd before, they shall not be thought vpon: but
in his rightuousnes that he hath done, he shall lyue.
23 For haue I eny pleasure in the death of a synner, saieth the LORDE God? but
rather that he conuerte, and lyue?
24 Agayne: yf the rightuous turne awaye from his rightuousnes, and do iniquyte,
acordinge to all the abhominacions, that ye wicked ma doth: shal he lyue? All
the rightuousnes that he hath done, shall not be thought vpo: but in the fawte
that he hath offended withall, and in the synne that he hath done, he shal dye.
25 And yet ye saye: Tush, the waye of ye LORDE is not indifferet. Heare therfore
ye house of Israel: Is not my waye right? Or, are not youre wayes rather wicked?
26 When a rightuous ma turneth awaye from his rightuousnesse, and medleth with
vngodlynes: he must dye therin: Yee for the vnrightuousnes that he hath done,
must he dye.
27 Agayne: when the wicked man turneth awaye from his wickednesse, that he hath
done, and doth the thinge which is equall and right: he shal saue his soule
alyue.
28 For in so moch as he remembreth himself, and turneth him from all the
vngodlynes, that he hath vsed, he shall lyue, and not dye.
29 And yet saieth the house of Israel: Tush, the waye of the LORDE is not
equall. Are my wayes vnright, o ye house of Israel? Are not youre wayes rather
vnequall?
30 As for me, I wil iudge euery man, acordinge to his wayes, O ye house of
Israel, saieth the LORDE God. Wherfore, be conuerted, and turne you clene from
all youre wickednesse, so shal there no synne do you harme.
31 Cast awaye fro you all youre vngodlynesse, that ye haue done: make you new
hertes and a new sprete. Wherfore wil ye dye, O ye house of Israel?
32 seynge I haue no pleasure in ye death of him that dyeth, saieth the LORDE
God. Turne you then, and ye shal lyue.

Chapter 19

1 Bvt mourne thou for the prynces off Israel,
2 & saye: Wherfore laye thy mother that lyonesse, amoge the lyons? & norished
hir yonge ones amoge the lyons whelpes?
3 to spoyle, and to deuoure folke.
4 The Heithen herde of him, & toke him in their nettes, & brought him in chaynes
vnto the londe of Egipte.
5 Now when the damme sawe, that all hir hope & comforth was awaye, she toke
another of hir whelpes, and made a lyon of him:
6 which wente amonge the lyons, & became a fearce lyon: lerned to spoyle and to
deuoure folcke:
7 he destroyed their palaces, and made their cities waist: In so moch that the
whole londe and euery thinge therin, were vtterly desolate, thorow the very
voyce of his roaringe.
8 Then came the Heithen together on euery syde out of all countrees agaynst him,
layed their nettes for him, and toke him in their pytte.
9 So they bounde him with chaynes, and brought him to the kinge of Babilon:
which put him in preson, that his voyce shulde nomore be herde vpon the
mountaynes of Israel.
10 As for thy mother, she is like a vyne in thy bloude, planted by the
watersyde: hir frutes and braunches are growen out of many waters:
11 hir stalkes were so stronge, that men might haue made staues therof for
officers: she grew so hie in hir stalkes. So when men sawe that she exceaded ye
heith and multitude of hir braunches,
12 she was roted out in displeasure, and cast downe to the grounde. The East
wynde dryed vp hir frute, hir stronge stalkes were broken of, wythered and brent
in the fyre.
13 But now she is planted in the wildernesse, in a drye and thurstie grounde.
14 And there is a fyre gone out of hir stalkes, which hath bret vp hir braunches
and hir frute: so that she hath no mo stronge stalkes, to be staues for
officers. This is a piteous and miserable thinge.

Chapter 20

1 In in the xvij yeare the x daye of the v Moneth, it happened, that certayne of
the elders of Israel came vnto me for to axe councell at the LORDE, and sat them
downe by me.
2 Then came the worde of the LORDE vnto me on this maner:
3 Thou sonne of man: Speake to the elders of Israel, and saye vnto them: Thus
saieth the LORDE God: Are ye come hither to axe eny thinge at me? As truly as I
lyue (saieth the LORDE,)
4 I will geue you no answere. Wilt thou not reproue them (thou sonne of man)
wilt thou not reproue them? Shewe them the abhominacions of their forefathers,
5 & tell the: Thus saieth the LORDE God: In the daye when I chose Israel, and
lift vp myne honde vpon the sede of the house of Iacob, & shewed my self vnto
them in the londe of Egipte: Yee when I lifte vp myne honde ouer the, and sayde:
I am the LORDE youre God,
6 euen in the daye that I lift vp myne honde ouer them, to bringe them out of
the londe of Egipte: in to a londe that I had prouyded for them, which floweth
with mylcke and hony, and is a pleasaunt lode amonge all other:
7 Then sayde I vnto them: Cast awaye euery man the abhominacions that he hath
before him, and defyle not youre selues with the Idols of Egipte, for I am the
LORDE youre God.
8 But they rebelled agaynst me, and wolde not folowe me: to cast awaye euery man
the abhominacions of his eyes, and to forsake the Idols of Egipte. Then I made
me to poure my indignacion ouer them, and to satisfie my wrath vpon them: yee
euen in the myddest of the londe of Egipte.
9 But I wolde not do it, for my names sake: that it shulde not be vnhalowed
before the Heithen, amonge whom they dwelt, and amonge whom I shewed my self
vnto them, that I wolde bringe them out of the londe of Egipte.
10 Now when I had caried them out of the londe of Egipte, and brought them into
the wildernesse:
11 I gaue them my commaundementes, & shewed the my lawes: which who so kepeth
shal lyue in them.
12 I gaue them also my holy dayes, to be a token betwixte me and them, and
therby to knowe, that I am the LORDE, which haloweth them.
13 And yet the house of Israel rebelled agaynst me in the wildernesse, they
wolde not walke in my commaundementes, they haue cast awaye my lawes: (which
whoso kepeth shulde lyue in them,) and my Sabbath daies haue thy greatly
vnhalowed. The I made me to poure out my indignacion vpon them, & to cosume them
in the wildernesse.
14 Yet I wolde not do it, for my names sake: lest it shulde be dishonoured
before the Heithe, from the which I had caried them awaye.
15 But I swore vnto them in the wildernesse, that I wolde not bringe them into
the londe, which I gaue them: a londe that floweth with mylcke & hony, & is a
pleasure of all londes:
16 & yt because they refused my lawes, & walked not in my comaundemetes, but had
vnhalowed my Sabbathes, for their herte was gone after their Idols.
17 Neuertheles myne eye spared the, so yt I wolde not vtterly slaye the, &
cosume the in the wildernes.
18 Morouer, I sayde vnto their sonnes in ye wildernesse: walke not in the
statutes of yor forefathers, kepe not their ordinaunces, and defyle not youre
selues with their Idols,
19 for I am the LORDE youre God. But walke in my statutes, kepe my lawes & do
them,
20 halowe my Sabbathes: for they are a token betwixte me & you, that ye maye
knowe, how yt I am the LORDE.
21 Notwithstodinge, their sonnes rebelled against me also: they walked not in my
statutes, they kepte not my lawes to fulfill them (which he that doth shal lyue
in them) nether halowed they my Sabbath dayes. The I made me agayne to poure out
my indignacion ouer them, and to satisfie my wrath vpon them in the wildernesse.
22 Neuertheles I with drewe my honde for my names sake, lest it shulde be
vnhalowed amonge the Heithe, before whom I had brought them forth.
23 I lift vp myne honde ouer them also in the wildernesse, that I wolde scatre
them amonge the Heithen, and strowe them amonge the nacions:
24 because they had not kepte my lawes, but cast asyde my commaundementes,
vnhalowed my Sabbathes, and lift vp their eyes to their fathers Idols.
25 Wherfore I gaue them also commaundementes not good, & lawes thorow the which
they shulde not lyue,
26 & I vnhalowed them in their owne giftes: (when I appoynted for my self all
their first borne) to make them desolate: that they might knowe, how that I am
the LORDE.
27 Therfore (O thou sonne of man) tell the house of Israel, thus saieth the
LORDE God: Besyde all this, youre forefathers haue yet blasphemed me more, and
greatly offended agaynst me:
28 For after I had brought them in to the londe, yt I promysed to geue them,
when they sawe euery hie hill & all the thicke trees: they made there their
offringes, and prouoked me with their oblacions, makinge swete sauoures there, &
poured out their drinkeofferinges.
29 Then I axed them: what haue ye to do with all, that ye go thither? And
therfore is it called the hie place vnto this daye.
30 Wherfore, speake vnto the house of Israel: Thus saieth the LORDE God: Ye are
euen as vnclene as youre forefathers, & committe whordome also with their
abhominacios.
31 In all youre Idols, where vnto ye bringe youre oblacios, & to whose honoure
ye burne youre children: ye defyle youre selues, euen vnto this daye: how darre
ye the come, and axe eny question at me? O ye housholde of Israel? As truly as I
lyue (saieth the LORDE God) ye get no answere of me:
32 & as for the thinge that ye go aboute, it shal not come to passe, where as ye
saye: we wil be as the Heithen, & do as other people in the londe, wod & stone
wil we worshipe.
33 As truly as I lyue (saieth the LORDE God) I myself, wil rule you with a
mightie honde, with a stretchedout arme, and with indignacion poured out ouer
you:
34 & wil bringe you out of the nacions and londes, wherin ye are scatred: and
gather you together with a mightie hode, with a stretchedout arme & wt
indignacion poured out vpon you:
35 & wil bringe you in to the wildernesse of the people, & there I will reason
with you face to face.
36 Like as I punished yor forefathers in the wildernesse, so wil I punish you
also, saieth the LORDE God.
37 I wil bringe you vnder my iuri?diction, and vnder the bonde of the couenaunt.
38 The forsakers also and the transgressours wil I take from amonge you, &
bringe them out of the londe of youre habitacion: as for the londe of Israel,
they shall not come in it: that they maye knowe, how that I am the LORDE.
39 Go now then (saieth the LORDE God) ye house of Israel, cast awaye, and
destroye euery man his Idols: then shal ye heare me, and nomore blaspheme my
holy name with youre offrynges and Idols.
40 But vpon my holy hill, eue vpon the hie hill of Israel shal all the house of
Israel and all that is in the londe, worshipe me: and in the same place will I
fauoure them, and there will I requyre youre heaueoffringes, and the firstlinges
of youre oblacions, with all youre holy thinges.
41 I wil accepte youre swete sauoure, when I bringe you from the nacions, and
gather you together out of the londes, wherin ye be scatred: that I maye be
halowed in you before the Heithen,
42 and that ye maye knowe, that I am the LORDE, which haue brought you in to the
londe of Israel: yee in to the same lode, that I swore to geue vnto youre
forefathers.
43 There shal ye call to remembraunce youre owne wayes and all youre
ymaginacions, wherin ye baue bene defyled: and ye shal be displeased with youre
owne selues, for all youre wickednes, that ye haue done.
44 And ye shal knowe, that I am the LORDE: when I entreate you after my name,
not after yor wicked wayes, ner acordinge to youre corrupte workes: o ye house
of Israel, saieth the LORDE.
45 Morouer, the worde of ye LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
46 Thou sonne of ma, set thy face towarde the south, & speake to the south
wynde,
47 and saye to the wodde towarde the souht: Heare the worde of the LORDE, thus
saieth the LORDE God: Beholde, I wil kyndle a fyre in the, yt shal cosume the
grene trees wt the drye. No man shal be able to quench his flame, but all that
loketh from the south to the north, shal be brent therin:
48 & all flesh shal se, that I the LORDE haue kyndled it, so that no man maye
quench it.
49 Then sayde I: O LORDE, they wil saye of me: Tush, they are but fables, that
he telleth.

Chapter 21

1 The worde of the LORDE came to me, sayenge:
2 Thou sonne of man, set thy face towarde Ierusalem, speake agaynst the
Sanctuary, & prophecie agaynst the londe of Israel, saye to the lode of Israel:
3 Thus saieth the LORDE God: Beholde, I wil vpon the, & wil drawe my swearde out
of ye sheth, & rote out of ye both the rightuous & the wicked.
4 Seinge then that I will rote out of the both the rightuous & wicked, therfore
shal my swearde go out of his sheth, agaynst all flesh from the north to the
south:
5 that all flesh maye knowe, how that I the LORDE haue drawen my swearde out of
the sheth, & it shal not be put in agayne.
6 Mourne therfore (o thou sonne of man) yt thy loynes crack withall, yee mourne
bytterly for them:
7 And yf they saye, wherfore mournest thou? Then tell them: for the tydinges
that commeth, at the which all hertes shall melt, all hondes shal be letten
downe, all stomackes shal faynte, and all knees shall waxe feble. Beholde, it
commeth & shal be fulfilled, saieth the LORDE God.
8 Agayne, the worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
9 Thou sonne of man, prophecie, and speake: Thus saieth the LORDE God: speake,
the swearde is sharpened & wel scoured.
10 Sharpened is it for the slaughter, & scoured yt it maye be bright. O, the
destroyenge staff of my sonne, shal bringe downe all wodde.
11 He hath put his swearde to ye dightinge, yt good holde maye be take of it.
This swearde is sharpened & dight, yt it maye be geuen in to the honde of the
manslayer.
12 Crie (o thou sonne of man) and howle, for this swearde shal smyte my people,
& all the rulers in Israel, which with my people shall be slayne downe to the
grounde thorow this swearde.
13 Smyte thou vpo thy thee, for, wherfore shulde not the plage & staff of
iudgmet come?
14 Prophecy thou sonne of man, & smyte thine hodes together: make the swearde
two edged, yee make it thre edged, yt manslayers swearde, that swearde of the
greate slaughter, which shal smyte them, euen in their preuy chambres:
15 to make them aba?shed & faynte at the hertes, & in all gates to make some of
them fall. O how bright and sharpe is it, how wel dight & mete for ye slaughter?
16 Get the to some place alone, ether vpon the right honde or on the lefte,
whither so euer thy face turneth.
17 I wil smyte my hondes together also, and satisfie my wrothfull indignacion:
Euen I the LORDE haue sayde it.
18 The worde of the LORDE came yet vnto me agayne, sayenge:
19 Thou sonne of man, make the two stretes, that the swearde of ye kinge of
Babilo maye come. Both these stretes shall go out of one londe. He shal set him
vp a place, at the heade of the strete shal he chose him out a corner.
20 Make ye a strete, that the swearde maye come towarde Rabath of the Ammonites,
and to the stronge cite of Ierusalem.
21 For the kinge of Babilon shall stonde in the turnynge of the waye, at the
heade of the two stretes: to axe councell at the soythsayers, castinge the
lottes with his arowes, to axe councell at the Idols, and to loke in the lyuer.
22 But the soythsayenge shall poynte to the right syde vpon Ierusalem, that he
maye set men of warre, to smyte it with a greate noyse, to crie out Alarum, to
set batellrammes agaynst the gates, to graue vp dyches, & to make bulworkes.
23 Neuertheles, as for ye soythsayenge, they shall holde it but for vanite, euen
as though a iest were tolde them: Yee and they them selues remembre their
wickednesse, so that by right they must be take and wonne.
24 Therfore saieth the LORDE God: For so moch as ye youre selues shewe your
offence, and haue opened youre wickednesse, so that in all youre workes men maye
se youre synnes: Yee in so moch (I saye) that ye youre selues haue made mencion
therof, ye shalbe taken by violence.
25 O thou shameful wicked gyde of Israel, whose daye is come: euen the tyme that
wickednesse shall haue an ende:
26 Thus saieth the LORDE God: take awaye the mytre, and put of the crowne, and
so is it awaye: the humble is exalted, and the proude brought lowe.
27 Punysh, punysh, yee punysh them will I, and destroye them: and that shall not
be fulfilled, vntill he come, to whom the iudgment belongeth, and to whom I haue
geue it.
28 And thou (o sonne of man) prophecy, & speake: Thus saieth the LORDE God to
the children of Ammon, & to their blasphemy, speake thou: The swearde, the
swearde, is drawen forth alredy to the slaughter, & scoured that it glistreth
29 (because thou hast loked the out vanities, & prophecied lyes) yt it maye come
vpon thy necke, like as vpo the other vngodly, which be slayne: whose daye came,
when their wickednesse was full.
30 Though it were put vp agayne into the sheath, yet will I punysh the, in the
londe where thou wast norished & borne,
31 and poure my indignacion vpon the, and will blowe vpon the in the fyre of my
wrath, and delyuer the vnto cruell people, which are lerned to destroye.
32 Thou shalt fede the fyre, and yi bloude shall be shed in the londe, that thou
mayest be put out of remembraunce. Euen I the LORDE haue spoken it.

Chapter 22

1 Morouer, the worde of ye LORDE came vnto me, & sayde:
2 Thou sonne of man, wilt thou not reproue this bloudthurstie cite? Shewe the
their abhominacios,
3 & tell them: Thus saieth the LORDE God: O thou cite, yt sheddest bloude in ye
myddest of the, yt thy tyme maye come also: and makest the Idols to defyle the
withall.
4 Thou hast made thy self gilty, in ye bloude yt thou hast shed: & defyled ye i
ye ydols, which thou hast made. Thou hast caused thy daies to drawe nye, & made
the tyme of thy yeares to come. Therfore will I make ye to be confounded amoge
the Heithe, & to be despised in all the lodes,
5 whether they be nye or farre fro the: they shal laugh ye to scorne, thou yt
hast gotte the so foule a name, & art full off myschefe.
6 Beholde, the rulers of Israel haue brought euery man his power, to shed bloude
in the.
7 In the haue they despised father & mother, in the haue they oppressed the
strauger, in the haue they vexed the wyddowe & the fatherlesse.
8 Thou hast despysed my Sactuary, and vnhalowed my Sabbath.
9 Murtherers are there in the, that shed bloude, & eate vpon the hilles, and in
the they vse vnhappynesse.
10 In ye haue they discouered their fathers shame, in the haue they vexed women
in their sicknesse.
11 Euery ma hath dealte shamefully with his neghbours wife, & abhominably
defyled his doughter in lawe. In the hath euery man forced his owne sister, euen
his fathers doughter:
12 Yee giftes haue bene receaued in the, to shed bloude. Thou hast taken vsury &
encreace, thou hast oppressed thy neghbours by extorcion, and forgotten me,
saieth the LORDE God.
13 Beholde, I haue smytten my hondes vpo thy couetousnesse, that thou hast vsed,
and vpon the bloude which hath bene shed in the.
14 Is thy herte able to endure it, or maye thy hondes defende them selues, in
the tyme that I shall bringe vpon the? Euen I the LORDE that speake it, will
bringe it also to passe.
15 I will scatre the amonge the Heithen, & strowe the aboute in the lodes, and
wil cause thy fylthynesse to ceasse out off the:
16 yee and I will haue the in possession in the sight of the Heithen, that thou
mayest knowe, that I am the LORDE,
17 And the worde off the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
18 Thou sonne of man, the house of Israel is turned to drosse. C All they that
shulde be brasse, tynne, yro & leade, are in the fyre become drosse.
19 Therfore, thus saieth the LORDE God: For so moch as ye all are turned in to
drosse, beholde: I will brynge you together vnto Ierusalem,
20 like as syluer, brasse, yron, tynne and leade are put together in the
fornace, and the fyre blowen there vnder to melt them: Euen so will I gather
you, put you in together, and melt you in my wrath and indignacion.
21 I will brynge you together, and kyndle the fyre of my cruell displeasure
vnder you, that ye maye be melted therin.
22 Like as the syluer is melted in the fyre, so shall ye also be melted therin:
that ye maye knowe, how that I the LORDE haue poured my wrath vpon you.
23 And the worde off the LORDE came vnto me, sayege:
24 Thou sonne of ma, tell her: Thou art an vn clene londe, which is not rayned
vpon in the daye off the cruell wrath:
25 thy prophetes that are in the, are sworne together to deuoure soules, like as
a roaringe Lyon, that lyueth by his pray. They receaue riches and good, and make
many wyddowes in ye.
26 Thy prestes breake my lawe, and defyle my Sanctuary. They put no dyfference
betwene the holy and vnholy, nether discerne betwene the clene and vnclene: they
turne their eyes fro my Sabbathes, and I am vnhalowed amonge them.
27 Thy rulers in the are like rauyshinge wolues, to shed bloude, and to destroye
soules, for their owne covetous lucre.
28 As for thy prophetes, they dawbe with vntempered claye, they se vanities, and
prophecie lies vnto them, sayenge: the LORDE God sayeth so, where as the LORDE
hath not spoken
29 The people in the londe vseth wicked extorcio and robbery. They vexe the
poore and nedy: and oppresse the straunger agaynst right.
30 And I sought in the londe for a man, that wolde make vp the hedge, and set
him self in the gappe before me in the lodes behalfe, yt I shulde not vtterly
destroye it: but I coude fynde none.
31 Therfore wil I poure out my cruell displeasure vpon them, and burne them in
the fyre of my wrath: their owne wayes will I recompence vpo their heades,
saieth the LORDE God.

Chapter 23

1 The worde off the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
2 Thou sonne of man, there were two wome, that had one mother:
3 These (when they were yonge) beganne to playe the harlottes in Egipte. There
were their brestes brussed, and the pappes off their maydenheade destroyed.
4 The eldest of them was called Oola, and hir yongest sister Ooliba. These two
were myne, and bare sonnes and doughters. Their names were, Samaria, and that
was Oola: and Ierusalem, that was Ooliba.
5 As for Oola, she beganne to go a whorynge, when I had take her to me. She was
set on fyre vpon hir louers the Assirians,
6 which had to do with her: euen the prynces and lordes, that were deckte in
costly araye: fayre yonge men, lusty ryders of horses.
7 Thus thorow hir whordome, she cleued vnto all the yonge men off Assiria: Yee
she was madde vpon them, and defyled herselff with all their Idols.
8 Nether ceassed she fro the fornicacio, that she vsed with the Egipcians: for
in hir youth they laye wt her, they brussed the brestes of hir maydenheade, and
poured their wordome vpon her.
9 Wherfore, I delyuered her in to ye hodes of hir louers, euen the Assirians,
whom she so loued.
10 These discouered hir shame, toke hir sonnes and doughters, and slewe her with
the swearde: An euell name gat she of all people, ad they punyshed her.
11 Hir sister Ooliba sawe this, ad destroyed herself wt inordinate loue, more
then she, & exceaded hir sister in whordome:
12 she loued ye Assirians (which also laye wt her) namely, the prynces & greate
lordes, that were clothed wt all maner of gorgious apparell, all lusty horsmen
and fayre yonge personnes.
13 Then I sawe, that they both were defyled a like.
14 But she increased still in whordome: for when she sawe men paynted vpon the
wall, the ymages off the Caldees set forth with fresh colours,
15 with fayre gyrdles aboute them, and goodly bonettes vpon their heades,
lokynge all like prynces (after ye maner of the Babilonias and Caldees in their
owne londe, where they be borne).
16 Inmediatly, as soone as she sawe them, she brent in loue vpon them, and sent
messaugers for them in to the londe of the Caldees.
17 Now when the Babilonias came to her, they laye with her, and defyled her with
their whordome, and so was she poluted with with them. And when hir lust was
abated from them,
18 hir whordome and shame was discouered & sene: then my herte forsoke her, like
as my herte was gone from hir sister also.
19 Neuertheles she vsed hir whordome euer the longer the more, and remembred the
dayes off hir youth, wherin she had played the harlot in the londe off Egipte:
20 she brent in lust vpon them, whose flesh was like ye flesh of Asses, and
their sede like the sede off horses.
21 Thus thou hast renued the fylthynesse of thy youth, when thy louers bressed
yi pappes, and marred thy brestes in Egipte.
22 Therfore (o Ooliba) thus saieth ye LORDE God. I will rayse vp thy louers
(with whom thou hast satisfied thy lust) agaynst the, and gather them together
rounde aboute the:
23 Namely, the Babilonians, and all the Caldees: Pecod, Schoa and Coa, with all
the Assirians: all yonge and fayre louers: prynces and lordes, knyghtes and
gentlemen, which be all good horsmen:
24 These shall come vpon the with horses, charettes, & a greate multitude of
people: which shal be harnessed aboute the on euery syde, wt brestplates,
sheldes and helmettes. I will punysh ye before them, yee they the selues shal
punysh the, acordinge to their owne iudgmet.
25 I will put my gelousy vpon the, so that they shall deale cruelly with the.
They shal cut of thy nose and thine eares, and the remnaunt shall fall thorow
the swearde. They shall cary awaye thy sonnes and doughters, & the resydue
shalbe brent in the fyre.
26 Thy shal strype the out of thy clothes, & cary thy costly Iewels awaye with
them.
27 Thus will I make an ende off thy fylthynesse & whordome, which thou hast
brought out of the lode of Egipte: so that thou shalt turne thine eyes nomore
after them, & cast thy mynde nomore vpon Egipte.
28 For thus saieth the LORDE: Beholde, I will delyuer ye in to the hodes of
them, whom thou hatest: yee euen in to the hondes of them, with who thou hast
fulfylled thy lust,
29 which shall deale cruelly with ye: All thy laboure shal they take with them,
and leaue the naked and bare, and thus the shame of thy filthy whordome shal
come to light.
30 All these thinges shal happen vnto the, because of thy whordome, which thou
hast vsed amonge the Gentiles, with whose Idols thou hast defyled yi self.
31 Thou hast walked in the waye of thy sister, therfore will I geue the hir
cuppe in thy honde.
32 Thus saieth the LORDE God: Thou shalt drynke off thy sisters cuppe, how depe
& farre so euer it be to the botome. Thou shalt be laughed to scorne, and had as
greatly in derision, as is possible.
33 Thou shalt be full off dronckennes and sorowe, for the cuppe of yi sister
Samaria is a cuppe of destruccion & waistinge:
34 the same shalt thou drynke, and suppe it out eue to ye dregges, yee thou
shalt eate vp the broken peces off it, and so teare thine owne brestes: For euen
I haue spoken it, saieth the LORDE God.
35 Therfore thus saieth ye LORDE God: For so moch as thou hast forgotte me, &
cast me asyde, so beare now thine owne fylthinesse & whordome.
36 The LORDE sayde morouer vnto me: Thou sonne of ma, wilt thou not reproue Oola
& Ooliba? Shewe the their abhominacios:
37 namely, yt they haue broke their wedlocke, & stayned their hodes wt bloude:
yee euen wt their Idols haue they committed aduoutry, & offred them their owne
children (to be deuoured) who they had borne vnto me.
38 Yee & this haue they done vnto me also: they haue defyled my Sactuary in that
same daye, & haue vnhalowed my Sabbath.
39 For when they had slayne their childre for their Idols, they came the same
daye in to my Sanctuary, to defyle it. Lo, this haue they done in my house.
40 Besyde all this, thou hast sent yi messaungers for men out of farre coutrees:
and whe they came, thou hast bathed, trymmed and set forth thy selff off the
best fashion:
41 thou sattest vpo a goodly bed, & a table spred before the: whervpon thou hast
set myne incense and myne oyle.
42 Then was there greate cheare wt her, & the men yt were sent fro farre
coutrees ouer the deserte: vnto these they gaue bracelettes vpon their hondes, &
set glorious crownes vpon their heades.
43 Then thought I: no doute, these wil vse their harlotry also wt yoder olde
whore.
44 And they wente in to her, as vnto a comon harlot: Euen so wente they also to
Oola & Ooliba, those filthy women.
45 O ye all that loue vertue and rightuousnes, iudge the, punysh them: as
aduoutrers and murtherers ought to be iudged and punyshed. For they are breakers
off wedlocke, and the bloude is in their hondes.
46 Wherfore thus saieth the LORDE God: bringe a greate multitude off people vpon
them, and make them be scatred and spoyled:
47 these shal stone them, and gorre them with their sweardes. They shal slaye
their sonnes and doughters and burne vp their houses with fyre.
48 Thus will I destroye all soch fylthynes out off the londe: that all women may
lerne, not to do after youre vnclenesse.
49 And so they shall laye youre fylthinesse vpon youre owne selues, and ye
shalbe punyshed for the synnes, that ye haue committed with youre Idols: & ye
shall knowe, that I am the LORDE.

Chapter 24

1 In the ix. yeare, in the x. Moneth. the x. daye off the Moneth, came the worde
off the LORDE vnto me, sayenge:
2 O thou sonne off man, wryte vp the name off this daye, yee eue ye houre of
this present daye: when the kynge of Babilon set himself agaynst Ierusale.
3 Shewe yt obstinate housholde a parable, & speake vnto the: Thus sayet the
LORDE God: Get the a pot, set it on, & poure water in to it:
4 put all the peces together in it, all the good peces: the loyne and the
shulder, & fyll it with the best bones.
5 Take one off the best shepe, & an heape off bones withall: let it boyle well,
& let the bones seyth well therin.
6 With that, sayde the LORDE God on this maner: Wo be vnto the bloudy cite of ye
pot, whervpon the rustynesse hageth, and is not yet scoured awaye. Take out the
peces that are in it, one after another: there nede no lottes be cast therfore,
7 for the bloude is yet in it Vpon a playne drye stone hath she poured it, and
not vpon the grounde, that it might be couered with dust.
8 And therfore haue I letten her poure hir bloude vpon a playne drye stony
rocke, because it shulde not be hid, and that I might bringe my wrothfull
indignacion and vengeaunce vpon her.
9 Wherfore, thus saieth ye LORDE God: O, wo be vnto that bloudthurstie cite, for
who I wil prepare a heape off wodde:
10 beare thou ye bones together, kyndle thou the fyre, seeth the flesh, let all
be well sodde, that the bones maye be suckte out.
11 Morouer, set the pot emptye vpon the coales, that it maye be warme and the
metall hote: that the fylth and rustynesse maye be consumed.
12 But it will not go off, there is so moch off it: the rustinesse must be brent
out.
13 Thy filthinesse is abhominable, for I wolde haue clensed the, but thou
woldest not be clensed. Thou canst not be pourged from thine vnclennesse, till I
haue poured my wrothfull indignacion vpon the.
14 Euen I the LORDE haue so deuysed: Yee it is come therto allredy, that I will
do it. I will not go backe, I will not spare, I wil not be intreated: but
acordinge to thy wayes ad ymaginacions, thou shalt be punyshed, saieth the LORDE
God.
15 And the worde off the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
16 Thou sonne off man, beholde, I will take awaye the pleasure off thine eyes wt
a plage: yet shalt thou nether mourne ner wepe, ner water thy chekes therfore:
17 thou mayest mourne by thy selff alone, but vse no deadly lamentacion. Holde
on thy bonet, and put on thy shues vpon thy fete, couer not thy face, and eate
no mourners bred.
18 So I spake vnto the people bytymes in the mornynge, and at euen my wyfe dyed:
then vpon the nexte morow, I dyd as I was comaunded.
19 And ye people sayde vnto me: wilt thou not tell vs, what that signifieth,
which thou doest?
20 I answered them, the worde off the LORDE came vnto me, sayege:
21 Tell the house of Israel, thus saieth ye LODDE God: beholde, I wil suspende
my Sanctuary: eue the glory of youre power, the pleasure of yor eyes, and the
thinge that ye loue: youre sonnes and doughters whom ye haue left, shal fall
thorow the swerde.
22 Like as I haue done, so shall ye do also: Ye shal not hyde youre faces, ye
shal eate no mourners bred:
23 youre bonettes shal ye haue vpon youre heades, & shues vpon youre fete Ye
shal nether mourne ner wepe, but in youre synnes ye shal be soroufull, and one
repete with another.
24 Thus Ezechiel is youre shewtoke. For loke as he hath done, so (when this
commeth) ye shall do also: that ye maye lerne to knowe, that I am ye LORDE God.
25 But beholde, O thou sonne of man: In the daye when I take from them their
power, their ioye and honoure, the lust off their eyes, the burthe of their
bodies: namely, their sonnes and doughters:
26 The shall there one escape, and come vnto the, for to shewe the.
27 In that daye shal yi mouth be opened to him, which is escaped, that thou
mayest speake, and be nomore domme: Yee and thou shalt be their shewtoke, that
they maye knowe, how that I am the LORDE.

Chapter 25

1 The worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
2 Thou sonne of man, set thy face agaynst ye Ammonites, prophecy vpon them,
3 and saye vnto the Ammonites: Heare the worde off the LORDE God, Thus saieth
the LORDE God: For so moch as thou speakest ouer my Sanctuary: A ha, I trow it
be now suspended: and ouer the londe of Israel, I trow it be now desolate: yee
ad ouer the house of Iuda, I trow they be now led awaye presoners:
4 Beholde, I will delyuer ye to the people of the east, yt they maye haue the in
possession: these shal set their castels and houses in the. They shall eate thy
frute, and drynke vp thy mylcke.
5 As for Rabath, I wil make of it a stall for camels, and of Ammon a shepefolde:
and ye shal knowe, that I am the LORDE.
6 For thus saieth the LORDE God: In so moch as thou hast clapped with thine
hondes, and stamped with thy fete, yee reioysed in thine herte ouer the londe of
Israel with despyte:
7 beholde, I wil stretch out myne hode ouer the also, and delyuer the, to be
spoyled off the Heithen, and rote the out from amonge the people, and cause the
be destroyed out off all londes: yee I will make the be layed waist, that thou
mayest knowe, that I am the LORDE.
8 Thus saieth ye LORDE God: For so moch as Moab and Seir do saye: As for the
house off Iuda, it is but like as all other Getiles be:
9 Therfore beholde, I will make the cities off Moab weapenlesse, and take awaye
their strength: their cities and chefe coastes off their londe, which are the
pleasures off the countre: As namely. Betiesimoth, Baalmeo and Cariathaim:
10 these will I open vnto the off the east, yt they maye fall vpon the
Ammonites: and will geue it them in possession: so that the Ammonites shal no
more be had in remebraunce amonge the Heithen.
11 Euen thus will I punysh Moab also, that they maye knowe, how that I am the
LORDE.
12 Morouer, thus sayeth the LORDE God: Because that Edom hath avenged & eased
himself vpon the house off Iuda,
13 therfore thus saieth the LORDE: I will reach out myne honde vpon Edom, and
take awaye man and beest out off it. From Thema vnto Dedan wil I make it
desolate, they shalbe slayne with the swearde.
14 Thorow my people of Israel, wil I avenge me agayne vpo Edo: they shal hadle
him, acordinge to my wrath and indignacio, so that they shal knowe my
vengeaunce, saieth the LORDE God.
15 Thus saieth ye LORDE God: For so moch as the Philistynes haue done this:
namely, taken vengeaunce with despitefull stomackes, and off an olde euell will
set them selues to destroye:
16 Therfore thus saieth the LORDE God: Beholde, I wil stretch out myne hode ouer
the Philistynes, and destroye the destroyer, and cause all the remnaunt off the
see coast to perish.
17 A greate vengeaunce will I take vpon them, and punysh them cruelly: that they
maye knowe, how that I am the LORDE, which haue avenged me off them.

Chapter 26

1 It happened, that in the xi. yeare, the first daye off the Moneth, the worde
of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
2 Thou sonne of man, Because that Tyre hath spoken vpon Ierusalem: A ha, now I
trow the portes of the people be broken, and she turned vnto me, for I haue
destroyed my bely full.
3 Yee therfore saieth ye LORDE God: Beholde O Tyre, I will vpo the, I wil bringe
a greate multitude off people agaynst ye, like as whe the see aryseth with his
wawes:
4 These shal breake the walles off Tyre, and cast downe hir towres: I wil scrape
the grounde from her, and make her a bare stone:
5 yee as the dryenge place, where the fyshers hange vp their nettes by the see
syde. Euen I haue spoken it, sayeth the LORDE God. The Getiles shal spoyle her:
6 hir doughters vpon the felde shall perish with the swearde, yt they maye
knowe, how that I am the LORDE.
7 For thus saieth the LORDE God: Beholde, I will brynge hither Nabuchodonosor
(which is the kynge off Babilon & a kynge of kynges) from the North, vpo Tyre,
with horses, charettes, horsmen and with a greate multitude of people.
8 Thy doughters that are in the londe, shal he slaye with ye swearde: But
agaynst ye, he shall make bullworkes & graue vp dyches aboute the, & lift vp his
shylde agaynst ye.
9 His slynges & batelrames shal he prepare for thy walles, & wt his weapes
breake downe thy towres.
10 The dust of his horses shal couer ye, they shalbe so many: ye walles shal
shake at the noyse of ye horse men, charettes & wheles: when he cometh to thy
portes, as men do into an open cite.
11 With the hoffes off his horse fete, shal he treade downe all thy stretes. He
shal slaye thy people wt the swearde, & breake downe the pilers of thy strength.
12 They shal waist awaye thy riches, & spoyle yi marchaudise. Thy walles shal
they breake downe, & destroye thy houses of pleasure. Thy stones, thy tymbre &
foundacions, shall they cast in the water.
13 Thus wil I brynge the melody of thy songes, & the voyce of thy mynstrelsy to
an ende, so that they shal nomore be herde.
14 I wil make a bare stone off the, yee a dryenge place for nettes, and shalt
neuer be buylded agayne: For eue I ye LORDE haue spoken it, sayeth the LORDE
God:
15 thus hath the LORDE God spoken concernynge Tyre: The Iles shall be moued at
the noyse off thy fall, & at the crie of the slayne, yt shalbe murthured in the.
16 All kynges off the see shall come downe from their seates regall: they shal
laye awaye their roabes, and put off their costly clothinge: Yee with tremblinge
shal they be clothed, they shall syt vpo the grounde: they shal be afrayed at
thy sodane fall, and be abasshed at the.
17 They shal mourne for the, and saye vnto the: O thou noble cite, yt hast bene
so greatly occupyed off olde, thou that hast bene the strongest vpon the see wt
thine inhabitours off whom all men stode in feare: How art thou now so vtterly
destroyed?
18 Now at the tyme off thy fall the inhabitours off the Iles, yee and the Iles
them selues shall stonde in feare at thine ende.
19 For thus sayeth the LORDE God: when I make the a desolate cite (as other
cities be, that no man dwell in) and when I brynge the depe vpon the, yt greate
waters maye couer the:
20 Then will I cast the downe vnto them, that descende into ye pytte: vnto a
people that hath bene loge deed, and set the in a londe yt is beneth, like the
olde wyldernes, with them which go downe to their graues, so yt no ma shal dwell
more in the. And I wil make the to be no more in honor, in the lode of the
lyuynge.
21 I wil make an ende off the, ad thou shalt be gone. Though thou be sought for,
yet shalt thou not be founde for euermore, saieth ye LORDE God.

Chapter 27

1 The worde off the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
2 O thou sonne off ma, make a lamentable coplaynte vpon Tyre,
3 & saye vnto Tyre, which is a porte off the see, yt occupieth with moch people:
and many Iles: thus speaketh ye LORDE God: O Tyre thou hast sayde: what, I am a
noble cite.
4 thy borders are in the myddest of the see, and thy buylders haue made the
maruelous goodly.
5 All yi tables haue they made of Cipre trees of the mount Senir. Fro Libanus
haue they take Cedre trees, to make the mastes:
6 & the Okes of Basan to make the rowers. Thy boordes haue they made of yuery, &
of costly wod out of the Ile of Cethim.
7 Thy sale was of whyte small nedle worke out off the londe of Egipte, to hage
vpo thy mast: & thy hanginges of yalow sylcke & purple, out of ye Iles of Elisa.
8 They of Sido & Arnad were thy maryners, & the wysest in Tyre were thy
shypmasters.
9 The eldest and wysest at Gebal were they, that mended & stopped thy shippes.
All shippes off the see with their shipme occupied their marchaundies in the.
10 The Perses, Lydians and Lybians were in thyne hoost, and helped the to fight:
these hanged vp their shildes & helmettes with the, these set forth thy beuty.
11 They off Arnad were with thine hoost roude aboute thy walles, & were thy
watchmen vpon thy towres: these hanged vp their shildes roude aboute thy walles,
and made the maruelous goodly.
12 Tharsis occupide with the in all maner of wares, in syluer, yron, tynne and
lead, and made thy market greate.
13 Iauan, Tubal and Mesech were thy marchauntes, which brought the men, &
ornamentes off metall for thy occupyenge.
14 They off the house of Thogarma brought vnto the at the tyme off thy Marte,
horse, horsmen and mules.
15 They off Dedan were thy marchautes: and many other Iles that occupyed with
the, brought the wethers, elephat bones and Paycockes for a present
16 The Sirians occupied with the, because of thy dyuerse workes, and increased
thy marchaundies, with Smaragdes, with scarlet, with nedle worke, wt whyte
lynninge cloth, with sylcke and with Christall.
17 Iuda and the londe off Israel occupide with the, and brought vnto thy
markettes, wheate, balme, hony, oyle, & triacle.
18 Damascus also vsed marchaudies with the, in the best wyne and whyte woll:
because thy occupienge was so greate, and thy wares so many.
19 Dan, Iauan, and Meusal haue brought vnto thy markettes, yron redy made, with
Casia and Calamus, acordinge to thyne occupienge.
20 Dedan occupied with the, in fayre tapestry worke and quy?hyns.
21 Arabia & all the princes off Cedar haue occupied wt the, in shepe, wethers
and goates.
22 The marchauntes off Seba and Rema haue occupied also with the, in all costly
spices, in all precious stones and golde, which they brought vnto thy
marckettes.
23 Haran, Chene and Eden, the marchauntes off Saba, Assiria and Chelmad, were
all doers with ye
24 and occupied with the: In costly rayment, off yalow sylke and nedle worke,
(very precious, & therfore packte & boude together wt roapes) Yee and in Cedre
wodde, at the tyme off yi marckettes.
25 The shippes of Tharsis were the chefe off thy occupienge. Thus thou art full,
and in greate worshipe, euen in the myddest off the see.
26 Thy maryners were euer brynginge vnto the out of many waters. But ye easte
wynde shal ouerbeare the in to the myddest off the see:
27 so yt thy wares, thy marchaudies, thy ryches, thy maryners, thy shipmasters,
thy helpers, thy occupiers (that brought the thinges necessary) the men off
warre that are in the: yee and all thy comons shall perish in the myddest off
the see, in the daye off thy fall.
28 The suburbes shall shake at the loude crie off thy shippmen.
29 All whirry men, and all maryners vpo the see, shall leape out of their
boates, and set them selues vpon the lode.
30 They shal lift vp their voyce because off the, and make a lamentable crye.
They shall cast dust vpon their heades, ad lye downe in the asshes.
31 They shal shaue them selues, & put sacke cloth vpon them for thy sake. They
shall mourne for the with hertfull sorow,
32 and heuy lamentacion, yee their children also shall wepe for the: Alas, what
cite hath so bene destroyed in the see, as Tyre is?
33 When thy wares & marchaundies came fro the sees thou gauest all people
ynough. The kynges off the earth hast thou made rich, thorow the multitude off
thy wares and occupienge:
34 But now art thou cast downe in to the depe of the see, all thy resorte of
people is perished with the.
35 All they that dwell in the Iles are abasshed at the, and all their kynges are
afrayed, yee their faces haue chaunged coloure.
36 The marchauntes of the nacions wondre at the, In that thou art so clene
brought to naught, & comest nomore vp.

Chapter 28

1 The worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
2 Thou sonne of man, tell the prynce of Tyre: Thus saieth the LORDE God: because
thou hast a proude hert and hast sayde: I am a God, I haue my seate in the
myddest off the see like a god: where as thou art but a man & not God, & yet
stondest in thine owne coceate, that thou art God:
3 Beholde, thou thynkest thy selfe wyser then Daniel, that there is no secretes
hyd from ye.
4 With thy wi?dome & thy vnderstodinge, thou hast gotte the greate welthynesse,
and gathered treasure of syluer & golde.
5 With thy greate wi?dome and occupienge, hast thou increased thy power, and
because of thy greate riches thy hert is proude.
6 Therfore thus saieth ye LORDE God: For so moch as thou hast lift vp thine
herte, as though thou werst God:
7 beholde, I wil bringe enemies vpon the, euen the tyrauntes of the Heithe:
these shal drawe out their sweardes vpon thy beuty and wi?dome, and shall defyle
thy glory.
8 They shal cast the downe to the pytte, so that thou shalt dye in the middest
of the see,
9 as they that be slayne. Let se, yff thou wilt saye then (before the that slaye
ye) I am God: where as thou art but a man, and not God, in the hondes of them
that slaye the.
10 Dye shalt thou, euen as the vncircumcised in the hodes of ye enemies: for I
myself haue spoken it, saieth the LORDE God.
11 Morouer, the worde off the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
12 Thou sonne off man, make a lamentable complaynte ouer the kynge of Tyre, &
tell him: Thus saieth the LORDE God: Thou art a seale of a licknesse, full off
wy?dome & excellent beuty.
13 Thou hast bene in ye pleasaut garde off God: thou art decte with all maner of
precious stones: with Ruby, Topas, Christall, Iacyncte, Onyx, Iaspis, Saphir,
Smaragde, Carbucle, & golde. Thy beuty & ye holes yt be in ye were set forth in
the daye of yi creacion.
14 Thou art a fayre Cherub, stretched wyde out for to couer. I haue set the vpon
the holy mount off God, there hast thou bene, and walked amoge the fayre
glisteringe stones.
15 From the tyme of thy creacion thou hast bene right excellent, tyll
wickednesse was founde in the.
16 Because off thy greate marchaundise, thy hert is full of wickednesse, & thou
hast offended. Therfore wil I cast the from the mount of God, (O thou coueringe
Cherub) and destroye the amoge the glisteringe stones.
17 Thy hert was proude in yi fayre beuty, & thorow thy beuty thou hast destroyed
thy wi?dome. I will cast ye downe to the grounde, & yt in ye sight of kynges.
18 Thou hast defyled thy Sactuary, wt the greate wickednesse off thy onrightuous
occupyenge. I wil bringe a fyre from the myddest of the, to consume the: ad wil
make the to asshes, in the sight of all the yt loke vpon the.
19 All they that haue bene acquaunted with the amonge the Heithe, shalbe
abasshed at the: seinge thou art so clene brought to naught, and comest no more
vp.
20 And the worde off the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
21 Thou sonne of man, set thy face agaynst Sido, Prophecie vpo it,
22 and speake. Thus saieth the LORDE God: Beholde o Sidon, I wil vpo the, & get
me honoure in the: that it maye be knowne, how that I am ye LORDE, when I punysh
her, & get me honoure in her.
23 For I will sende pestilence & bloudsheddinge in to hir stretes, so yt those
which be slayne with the swerde, shal lye rounde aboute in the myddest of her: &
they shal knowe, that I am the LORDE.
24 She shal no more be a prickinge thorne, & an hurtinge brere vnto the house of
Israel, ner vnto the that lye rounde aboute her and hate her: and they shal
knowe, that I am the LORDE.
25 Thus saieth the LORDE God: when I gather the housholde of Israel together
agayne, from the nacions amonge whom they be scatred: then shal I be sanctified
in the, in ye sight of the Getiles: & they shal dwell in the lode, yt I gaue to
my seruaunt Iacob.
26 They shal dwell safely therin, buylde houses, and plante vynyardes: Yee
safely shal they dwell therin, when I haue punyshed all those, that despyse them
rounde aboute: and then shall they knowe, yt I am the LORDE their God.

Chapter 29

1 In the x. yeare, vpon the xij. daye off the x. Moneth, the worde of the LORDE
came vnto me, sayege:
2 O thou sonne off ma, set now thy face agaynst Pharao the kynge off Egipte,
Prophecye agaynst him and agaynst the whole lode of Egipte:
3 Speake, and tell him, thus saieth the LORDE God: beholde, o Pharao thou kinge
of Egipte, I wil vpo the, thou greate whall fysh, yt lyest in yi waters: Thou yt
sayest: the water is myne, I haue made it myself.
4 I wil put an hoke in thy chawes, & hage all the fish in thy waters vpo thy
skales: after yt I wil drawe the out of thy waters, yee & all the fish, of ye
waters that hange vpon thy skales.
5 I wil cast the out vpon the dry lode with the fish of thy waters, so that thou
shalt lye vpon the felde. Thou shalt not be gathered ner taken vp, but shalt be
meate for the beestes of the felde, & for the foules off the ayre:
6 that all they which dwell in Egipte, maye knowe, that I am the LORDE: because
thou hast bene a staff of rede to the house of Israel.
7 When they toke holde of ye wt their hode thou brakest and prycdest them on
euery syde: and yff they leaned vpo the, thou brakest, ad hurtdest the reynes of
their backes.
8 Therfore, thus sayeth the LORDE: God: beholde, I will brynge a swearde vpon
the, and rote out of the both man and beest.
9 Yee the londe of Egipte shalbe desolate and waist, & they shal knowe, that I
am the LORDE: Because he sayde: the water is mine, I my self haue made it.
10 Beholde therfore, I wil vpon the, & vpon thy waters: I will make the londe
off Egipte waist and desolate, from the towre of Syenes vnto the borders of the
Morias londe:
11 so that in xl. yeares there shall no fote off man walke there, nether fote of
catell go there, nether shal it be inhabited.
12 I wil make the londe of Egipte to be desolate amonge other waist countrees,
and her cities to lye voyde xl. yeares, amonge other voyde cities: And I wil
scatre the Egipcians amonge the Heithen and nacions.
13 Agayne, thus sayeth the LORDE God: Whe the xl. yeares are expyred, I wil
gather the Egipcians together agayne, out off the nacios, amonge who they were
scatred,
14 and wil bringe the presoners off Egipte agayne in to the londe off Pathures
their owne natyue countre, that they maye be there a lowly small kyngdome:
15 yee they shal be the smallest amonge other kyngdomes, lest they exalte them
selues aboue the Heithen: for I will so mynish them,
16 that they shall nomore rule the Heithen. They shall nomore be an hope vnto
the house off Israel, nether prouoke the enymore to wickednesse, to cause them
turne backe, and to folowe them: ad they shal knowe, that I am the LORDE God.
17 In the xxvij. yeare, the first daye of the first Moneth, came ye worde off
the LORDE vnto me, sayenge:
18 Thou sonne off man, Nabuchodonosor the kynge off Babilon hath made his hoost,
with greate trauayle and laboure to come before Tyre: that euery heade maye be
balde, and euery shulder bare. Yet hath Tyre geuen nether him ner his hoost eny
rewarde, for ye greate trauayle yt he hath taken there.
19 Therfore thus saieth ye LORDE God: beholde I will geue the lode of Egipte
vnto Nabuchodonosor the kynge off Babilo, yt he maye take awaye all hir
substauce, robbe hir robberies, ad spoyle hir spoyles, to paye his hoost their
wagies withall.
20 I wil geue him the londe of Egipte for his laboure, that he toke for me
before Tyre.
21 At the same tyme wil I cause the horne off the house of Israel to growe
forth, & open thy mouth agayne amonge them: that they maye knowe, how that I am
the LORDE.

Chapter 30

1 Morouer, the worde off the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
2 Thou sonne of man, prophecy & speake: thus saieth the LORDE God: Mourne, wo
worth this daye,
3 for the daye is here, the daye of ye LORDE is come: the darcke daye of ye
Heithe the houre is at honde,
4 the swearde commeth vpon Egipte. When the wounded men fall downe in Egipte,
when hir people are taken awaye, and when hir foundacios are destroyed:
5 the Morians londe shal be afrayed, yee the Morians londe, Lybia & Lydia, all
their comon people, & Chub, & all yt be confederate vnto the, shal fall wt the
thorow ye swearde.
6 Thus saieth ye LORDE: The maynteyners of the lode of Egipte shall fall, the
pryde of hir power shal come downe: eue vnto the tower off Syenes shall they be
slayne downe wt the swearde, saieth ye LORDE God:
7 amonge other desolate countrees they shal be made desolate, & amoge other
waist cities they shalbe waisted.
8 And they shal knowe, yt I am ye LORDE, when I kyndle a fyre in Egipte, & when
all hir helpers are destroyed.
9 At that tyme, shal there messaungers go forth fro me in shippes, to make ye
carelesse Morians afrayed: and sorowe shal come vpon them in the daye of Egipte,
for doutles it shal come.
10 Thus saieth the LORDE God: I wil make an ende of the people of Egipte thorow
the honde of Nabuchodosor kynge of Babilon.
11 He and his people with him, yee and the cruell tyrauntes of the Heithen
shalbe brought to destroye the londe. They shal drawe out their sweardes vpon
Egipte and fyll the londe full of slayne men.
12 I will drye vp their floudes of water, ad sell the lode in to the hondes of
wicked people. The lode and all yt is therin, wil I destroye thorow the enemies.
Eue I the LORDE haue sayde it.
13 And thus saieth the LORDE God: I will destroye the Idols, and brynge the
ymages of Noph to an ende. There shal no more be a prynce of Egypte, and a
fearfulnesse will I sende in to the Egipcians londe.
14 As for Pathures, I wil make it desolate, ad kyndle a fyre in Zoan. Alexandria
will I punysh,
15 & poure my wrothfull indignacio vpo Sin, which is the strength of Egipte. All
the sustaunce of Alexandria will I destroye,
16 and kyndle a fyre in Egipte. Sin shalbe in greate heuynesse, Alexandria
shalbe roted out and Noph shall haue daylie sorowe.
17 The best men off Heliopolis & Bubasto shalbe slayne with the swearde ad
caried awaye captyue.
18 At Taphnis the daye shalbe darcke, when I breake there the scepter of the
londe of Egipte, and when ye pompe of hir powr shal haue an ende. A cloude shal
couer her, and hir doughters shalbe led awaye in to captyuyte.
19 Thus will I punysh Egipte, that they maye knowe, how that I am the LORDE.
20 It happened in the xi. yeare, vpon the seueth daye of ye first Moneth, yt the
LORDES worde came vnto me, sayege:
21 Beholde, thou sonne of ma, I wil breake ye arme of Pharao kynge of Egipte:
and lo, it shal not be boude vp to be healed, nether shal eny playstre be layed
vpon it, for to ease it, or to make it so stroge, as to holde a swearde.
22 Therfore, thus saieth the LORDE God: beholde, I will vpon Pharao ye kinge of
Egipte, & brusse his stroge arme (yet is it but a broken one) & will smyte the
swearde out of his honde.
23 As for the Egipcians, I wil scatre them amonge the Heithen, & strowe the in
the londes aboute.
24 Agayne I will strength ye arme of the kinge of Babilo, & geue him my swearde
in his hode: but I wil breake Pharaos arme, so yt he shal holde it before him
piteously, like a wounded man.
25 Yee I will stablish the kynge of Babilos arme, & the armes of Pharao shal
fall downe: that it maye be knowne, that I am the LORDE, which geue the kynge
off Babilon my swearde in his hode, that he maye drawe it out vpon the londe of
Egipte:
26 and that when I scatre the Egipcians amonge the Gentiles, and strowe them in
ye lodes aboute, they maye knowe, yt I am the LORDE.

Chapter 31

1 Morouer, it happened in the xi. yeare ye first daye of the thirde Moneth, that
the worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
2 Thou sonne of man, speake vnto Pharao the kynge of Egipte, ad to all his
people: Whom art thou like in yi greatnesse?
3 Beholde, Assur was like a Cedre tre vpo the mount of Libanus, with fayre
brauches: so thicke, that he gaue shadowes, and shot out very hye. His toppe
reached vnto the cloudes.
4 The waters made him greate, and the depe set him vp an hye. Roude aboute the
rotes of him rane there floudes of water, he sent out his litle ryuers vnto all
the trees of the felde.
5 Therfore was he hyer the all the trees of the felde, and thorow ye multitude
of waters that he sent fro him, he optayned many and longe braunches.
6 All foules of the ayre made their nestes in his brauches, vnder his bowes
gedred all the beastes of ye felde, & vnder his shadow dwelt all people.
7 Fayre and beutifull was he in his greatnesse, and in the length of his
braunches, for his rote stode besyde greate waters:
8 no Cedre tre might hyde him. In the pleasaut garden of God, there was no Fyrre
tre like his brauches, the playne trees were not like ye bowes of him. All the
trees in the garden off God might not be copared vnto him in his beuty:
9 so fayre and goodly had I made him with the multitude of his braunches: In so
moch, yt all the trees in the pleasaut garde of God, had envye at hi.
10 Therfore, thus saieth the LORDE God: For so moch as he hath lift vp himself
so hie, & stretched his toppe in to the cloudes, & seinge his hert is proude in
his highnesse:
11 I wil delyuer him in to ye hondes of ye mightiest amoge ye Heithe, which
shall rote him out. Acordige to his wickednes will I cast him awaye,
12 the enemies shal destroye him, & the mighty men of the Heithen shall so
scatre him, that his braunches shal lye vpon all mountaynes & in all valleys:
his bowes shall be broken downe to the grounde thorow out the londe. Then all
the people of the londe shal go from his shadowe, and forsake him.
13 When he is falle, all ye foules of ye ayre shal syt vpon him, and all wilde
beestes of the felde shal go aboute amonge his brauches:
14 so that from hence forth, no tre in the water shall attayne to his hyenesse,
nor reach his toppe vnto the cloudes, nether shall eny tre off the water stonde
so hye, as he hath done. For vnto death shall they all be delyuered vnder the
earth, and go downe to ye graue, like other men.
15 Morouer, thus saieth the LORDE God: In the daye when he goeth downe to the
graue, I will cause a lamentacion to be made. I will couer the depe vpon him, I
will staunch his floudes, and the greate waters shalbe restrayned. I shall cause
Libanus to be soroufull for his sake, and all the trees off the felde shall be
smytte.
16 I wil make the Heithen shake at the sounde of his fall, when I cast him downe
to hell, with them yt descende in to the pytte. All the trees of Eden, wt all
the chosen and best trees of Libanus, yee and all they that are planted vpon the
waters, shal mourne with him also in the lower habitacios:
17 for they shal go downe to hell wt him, vnto the that be slayne with the
swearde, which dwelt afore vnder the shadow off his arme amoge the Heithe.
18 To whom shalt thou be lickened, that art so glorious & greate, amonge the
trees off Eden? Yet art thou cast downe vnder ye earth (amonge the trees off
Eden) where thou must lye amonge the vncircumcised, with them that be slayne wt
the swearde. Euen thus is it with Pharao & all his people, saieth the LORDE God.

Chapter 32

1 In the xij. yeare, the first daye of the xij. Moneth, the worde of the LORDE
came vnto me, sayenge:
2 Thou sonne of man, take vp a lamentacion vpo Pharao the kynge of Egipte, &
saye vnto him: Thou art reputed as a Lyon of the Heithen, & as a whalfish in the
see. Thou castest yi waters aboute the, thou troublest the waters wt thy fete,
and stampest in their floudes.
3 Thus sayeth the LORDE God: I wil sprede my net ouer ye, namely, a greate
multitude of people: these shal dryue the into my yarne,
4 for I will cast the vpo the lode, and let the lye vpo the felde, that all the
foules of the ayre maye syt vpo the: I wil geue all the beastes of the felde
ynough off the.
5 Thy flesh will I cast vpo the hilles, and fyll the valleys with thy hyenesse.
6 I will water the londe with the abundaunce off thy bloude euen to the
moutaynes, & ye valleys shal be full off the.
7 When thou art put out, I will couer the heauen, and make his starres dymme. I
will sprede a cloude ouer the Sonne, ad the Moone shall not geue hir light.
8 All the lightes off heauen will I put out ouer the, and bringe darcknesse vpon
thy londe, saieth ye LORDE God.
9 I wil trouble the hertes off many people, when I bringe thy destruccion amoge
the Heithen and countrees, whom thou knowest not.
10 Yee I will make many people with their kynges so afrayed thorow ye, that
their hayre shal stonde vp, whe I shake my swearde at their faces. Sodenly shal
they be astonnyed, euery man in him self, at ye daye of thy fall.
11 For thus saieth the LORDE God: the kynge of Babilons swearde shal come vpon
ye,
12 with ye sweardes of the worthies will I smyte downe thy people. All they that
be mightie amonge the Getiles, shal waist the proude pompe of Egipte, and brynge
downe all hir people.
13 All the catell also of Egipte wil I destroye, that they shal come nomore vpo
the waters: so that nether mas fote ner beastes clawe, shal stere them enymore.
14 Then wil I make their waters cleare, and cause their floudes to runne like
oyle, sayeth the LORDE God:
15 when I make the londe of Egipte desolate, and when ye countre with all that
is therin, shalbe layde waist: and whe I smyte all the which dwell in it, that
they maye knowe, that I am the LORDE.
16 This is the mournynge, that the doughters off the Heithen shall make: Yee a
sorow and lamentacio shal they take vp, vpon Egipte and all hir people, saieth
the LORDE God.
17 In the xij. yeare, the xv. daye of the Moneth, came the worde off the LORDE
vnto me sayenge:
18 Thou sonne of man. Take vp a lamentacion vpon the people of Egipte, and cast
them downe, yee ad the mightie people of the Heithe also, euen with the that
dwell beneth: and with them that go downe in to the graue.
19 Downe (how fayre so euer thou be) and laye the with the vncircircumcised.
20 Amoge those that be slayne with the swearde, shal they lye. The swearde is
geuen alredy. he shal be drawen forth and all his people.
21 The mightie worthies and his helpers, yt be gone downe and lye with the
vncircumcised and with them that be slayne with ye swearde: shal speake to him
out of the hell.
22 Assur is there also with his company, ad their graues rounde aboute, which
were slayne ad fell all with the swearde,
23 whose graues lye besyde him in the lowe pytte. His comos are buried rounde
aboute his graue: alltogether wounded and slayne with the swearde, which men
afore tyme brought feare in to ye londe off the lyuynge.
24 There is Elam also with all his people, and their graues rounde aboute: which
all beynge wounded and slayne with the swearde, are gone downe vncircumcised
vnder the earth, which neuertheles somtyme brought feare in to the londe off the
lyuynge: for the which they beare their shame, with the other that be gone downe
to ye graue.
25 Their buryall is geuen them and all their people, amonge them that be slayne.
Their graues are rounde aboute all them, which be vncircumcised; and with them
that be slay thorow the swearde: for seynge that in tymes past they made the
londe off the lyuynge afrayed, they must now beare their owne shame, with them
that go downe to the pytte, and lye amonge them, that be slayne.
26 There is Mesech also and Tubal, and their people, and their graues rounde
aboute. These all are amonge the vncircucised, and them that be slayne with the
swearde, because afore tyme they made the londe off the lyuynge afrayed.
27 Shulde not they then lye also amonge ye worthies, and vncircumcised Giauntes?
which wt their weapens are gone downe to hel: whose sweardes are layed vnder
their heades, whose wickednesse is vpon their bones: because that as worthies,
they haue brought feare into ye lode of ye lyuinge;?
28 Yee amoge the vncircucised shalt thou be destroyed, and slepe with them, that
perished thorow the swearde.
29 There is the lode off Edom with hir kynges and prynces also, which wt their
stregth are layed by them that were slayne with the swearde, yee amonge the
vncircumcised, and them which are gone downe in to the pytte.
30 Morouer, there be all the prynces of the north, with all the Sidonias, which
are gone downe to the slayne. With their feare and strength they are come to
confucion, and lye there vncircumcised, amonge those that be slayne with the
swearde: and beare their owne shame, with them that be gone downe to ye pytte.
31 Now when Pharao seyth this, he shal be comforted ouer all his people, that is
slayne with the swearde: both Pharao & all his hoost, saieth ye LORDE God.
32 For I haue geue my feare in the lode of the lyunge. But Pharao & all his
people shal lye amoge the vncircumcised, and amonge them that be slayne with the
swearde, saieth the LORDE God.

Chapter 33

1 Agayne, the worde off the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
2 Thou sonne off man, Speake to the childre of thy people, and tell them: When I
sende a swearde vpon a londe, yf the people off the londe take a man off their
countre, and set him to be their watchman:
3 ye same man (wha he seyth the swearde come vpon the londe) shall blowe the
trompet, and warne the people.
4 Yff a man now heare the noyse off the trompet & will not be warned, and the
swearde come ad take him awaye: his bloude shall be vpo his owne heade:
5 For he herde the soude of the trompet, and wolde not take hede, therfore his
bloude be vpon him. But yff he will receaue warnynge, he shal saue his life.
6 Agayne, yf the watch man se the swerde come, and shewe it not with the
trompet, so yt the people is not warned: yff the swearde come then, and take eny
man from amoge the: the same shall be taken awaye in his owne synne, but his
bloude will I requyre off the watchmans honde.
7 And now (O thou sonne of man) I haue made the a watchman vnto the house of
Israel: that where as thou hearest eny thinge out of my mouth, thou mayest warne
them on my behalfe.
8 Yff I saye vnto the wicked: thou wicked, thou shalt surely dye: and thou
geuest him not warnynge, that he maye bewarre off his vngodly waye: then shall
the wicked dye in his owne synne, but his bloude will I requyre of thy honde.
9 Neuertheles yf thou warne the wicked off his waye, to turne from it, where as
he yet wil not be turned from it: then shal he dye because off his synne, but
thou hast delyuered thy soule.
10 Therfore (O thou sonne off man) speake vnto the house off Israel, Ye saye
thus: Oure offences and synnes lye vpon vs, and we be corrupte in them: how
shulde we then be restored vnto life?
11 Tell them: As truly as I lyue (saieth the LORDE God) I haue no pleasure in
the death off the wicked, but moch rather that the wicked turne from his waye
and lyue. Turne you, turne you from yor vngodly wayes, o ye off the house off
Israel. Oh, wherfore will ye dye?
12 Thou sonne off man, tell the children off thy people: The rightuousnes of the
rightuous shall not saue him, whan so euer he turneth awaye vnfaithfully:
Agayne, the wickednesse of the wicked shal not hurte him, whan so euer he
conuerteth from his vngodlynesse: And ye rightuousnesse of the rightuous shal
not saue his life, when so euer he synneth.
13 Yff I saye vnto the rightuous, that he shall surely lyue, and so he trust to
his owne rightuousnesse, and do synne: then shall his rightuousnesse be nomore
thought vpon, but in the wickednesse that he hath done, he shall dye.
14 Agayne, yff I saye to the wicked: thou shalt surely dye: and so he turne fro
his synnes, and do the thinge that is laufull and right:
15 In so moch that the same wicked ma geueth the pledge agayne, restoreth that
he had taken awaye by robbery, walketh in the comaundementes off life, and doth
no wroge: Then shall he surely lyue, and not dye.
16 Yee the synnes that he had done, shal neuer be thought vpon: For in so moch
as he doth now the thynge that is laufull and right, he shall lyue.
17 And yet the children off thy people saye: Tush, the waye of the LORDE is not
right, where as their owne waye is rather vnright.
18 When the rightuous turneth from his rightuousnesse, and doeth the thynge that
is wicked, he shall dye therfore.
19 But yf the wicked turne from his wickednesse, doinge the thinge that is
laufull and right, he shall lyue therfore.
20 Yet ye saye: the waye of ye LORDE is not equall. O ye house of Israel, I wil
iudge euery one of you after his wayes.
21 In the xij. yeare, the v. daye of the x. Moneth of oure captyuyte, it
happened, that one which was fled out of Ierusalem, came vnto me, and sayde: ye
cite is destroyed.
22 Now the honde of the LORDE had bene vpon me the euenynge, afore this man
(which was escaped) came vnto me, and had opened my mouth, vntyll the mornynge
that he came to me: Yee he opened my mouth, so yt I was nomore domme.
23 Then came the worde of ye LORDE vnto me, and sayde:
24 Thou sonne off man, these that dwell in the waisted londe of Israel, saye:
Abraham was but one man, ad he had the londe in possessio: now are we many, and
the londe is geuen vs to possesse also
25 And therfore tell them: Thus saieth the LORDE: In the bloude haue ye eaten,
youre eyes haue ye lift vp to Idols, and haue shed bloude: shal ye then haue the
londe in possession?
26 Ye leane vpon youre sweardes, ye worke abhominacions, euery one defyleth his
neghbours wife: and shal ye then possesse the londe?
27 Saye thou these wordes vnto the: Thus saieth the LORDE God: As truly as I
lyue, all ye that dwell in this wildernesse, shall be slayne wt the swearde:
what so is vpon the felde, will I geue vnto the beestes to be deuoured: those
that be in stronge holdes and dennes, shall dye off the pestilece.
28 For I wil make the londe desolate and waist, and ye pope off hir strength
shall come to an ende. The mountaynes in Israel shalbe so waiste that no man
shall trauayle therby.
29 Then shall they lerne to knowe, that I am the LORDE, whe I make the lode
waist and desolate, because off all their abhominacions, that they haue wrought.
30 And thou sonne off man, the children off thy people yt talke of the, by the
walles ad in the dores of their houses, sayenge one to another: come, let vs
heare, what worde is gone forth from the LORDE:
31 These come vnto the, after ye maner of a greate people: yee my people syt
downe before the, and heare thy wordes, but they do not therafter: For in their
mouthes they shewe themselues, as though they were feruent, but their herte
goeth after their owne couetous lucre.
32 And as a balet yt hath a swete tune, ad is pleasaut to synge, so shalt thou
be vnto them: thy wordes shal they heare, but they will not do therafter.
33 Whe this commeth to passe (for lo, it cometh in dede) then shal they knowe,
that there hath bene a prophet amonge them.

Chapter 34

1 And the worde off the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
2 Thou sonne off ma, prophecye agaynst the shepherdes of Israel, prophecy, and
speake vnto them: Thus saieth the LORDE God: Wo be vnto the shepherdes off
Israel, that fede them selues. Shulde not the shepherdes fede ye flockes?
3 Ye haue eaten vp the fatte, ye haue clothed you with the woll: the best fedde
haue ye slayne, but ye flocke haue ye not norished:
4 The weake haue ye not holden vp, the sicke haue ye not healed: the broken haue
ye not bounde together, the outcastes haue ye not brought agayne: ye lost haue
ye not sought, but churlishly and cruelly haue ye ruled the.
5 Thus are they scatred here and there without a shepherde: yee all the beastes
off the felde deuoure them, and they go astraye.
6 My shepe go wandringe vpon all moutaynes and vpon euery hye hill, yee they be
scatred abrode in all feldes, and there is no man, that careth for them, or
seketh after them.
7 Therfore o ye shepherdes heare the worde off the LORDE,
8 Thus sayeth the LORDE God: As truly as I lyue, for so moch as my shepe are
robbed, and deuoured off all the wylde beestes off the felde, hauynge no
shepherde: and seynge that my shepherdes take no regarde off my shepe, but fede
them selues only, and not my shepe:
9 Therfore heare ye worde off the LORDE, o ye shepherdes:
10 Thus sayeth the LORDE God: Beholde, I myselff will vpon the shepherdes, and
requyre my shepe from their hondes, and make the ceasse from fedynge of my
shepe: yee the shepherdes shall fede them selues nomore: For I will delyuer my
shepe out off their mouthes so that they shall not deuoure them after this.
11 For thus saieth the LORDE God: Beholde, I will loke to my shepe myselff, and
seke them.
12 Like as a shepherde amoge the flocke seketh after the shepe that are scatred
abrode, euen so will I seke after my shepe, and gather them together out off all
places, where they haue bene scatred in the cloudy and darcke daye.
13 I will bringe them out from all people, and gather them together out of all
londes. I will bringe the in to their owne londe, and fede them vpon the
mountaynes off Israel, by the ryuers, and in all the places of the countre.
14 I will fede them in right good pastures, and vpon the hie mountaynes off
Israel shall there foldes be. There shal they lye in a good folde, ad in a fat
pasture shall they fede: euen vpon the mountaynes of Israel.
15 I will fede my shepe myselff, and bringe them to their rest, sayeth the LORDE
God.
16 Soch as be lost, will I seke: soch as go astraye, wil I brynge agayne: soch
as be wouded, will I bynde vp: soch as be weake, will I make stronge: soch as be
fat and well lykinge, those will I preserue, and fede them with ye thinge that
is laufull.
17 And as for you (o my shepe) sayeth the LORDE God: I will put a difference
amonge the shepe, amonge the wethers ad the goates.
18 Was it not ynough for you, to eat vp the good pasture, but ye must treade
downe the residue of youre pasture wt youre fete also? Was it not ynough for you
to drynke cleare water, but ye must trouble the residue also with youre fete?
19 Thus my shepe must be fayne to eate ye thinge, that ye haue troden downe with
yor fete, and to drynke it, that ye with youre fete haue defyled.
20 Therfore, thus sayeth the LORDE God vnto them: Beholde, I will seuer the fat
shepe from the leane:
21 for so moch as ye haue shot the weake shepe a po ye sydes & shulders, and
runne vpon them with youre hornes, so longe till ye haue vtterly scatred them
abrode.
22 I wil helpe my shepe, so yt they shal nomore be spoyled: yee I wil discerne
one shepe from another.
23 I wil rayse vp vnto them one only shepherde: euen my seruaunt Dauid, he shal
fede the, and he shal be their shepherde.
24 I the LORDE wil be their God, and my seruaunt Dauid shal be their prince:
Euen I the LORDE haue spoken it.
25 Morouer, I wil make a couenaunt of peace with them, and dryue all euell
beastes out of the londe: so that they maye dwell safely in the wildernesse, and
slepe in the woddes.
26 Good fortune & prosperite wil I geue them, and vnto all that be rounde aboute
my hill. A prosperous shower and rayne wil I sende them in due season,
27 that the trees in the wodde maye bringe forth their frutes, & ye grounde hir
increase. They shalbe safe in their londe, and shal knowe, that I am the LORDE,
which haue broke their yocke, and delyuered them out of the hondes of those,
that helde them in subieccion.
28 They shal nomore be spoyled of the Heithen, ner deuoured with the beastes of
the lode: but safely shal they dwell, & no man shall fraye them.
29 I wil set vp an excellet plate for them, so yt they shal suffre no more
hunger in the londe, nether beare the reprofe of ye Heithen eny more.
30 Thus shal they vnderstonde, that I the LORDE their God am wt them, & yt they
(euen the house of Israel) are my people, saieth the LORDE God.
31 Ye men are my flocke, ye are the shepe of my pasture: and I am youre God,
saieth the LORDE God.

Chapter 35

1 Morouer, the worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
2 Thou sonne of man, turne thy face towarde the mount Seir, prophecy vpon it,
3 & saye vnto it: Thus saieth the LORDE God: Beholde, (o thou mount Seir) I will
vpon the, I will reach out myne hode ouer the, yee waist & desolate wil I make
the.
4 Thy cities wil I breake downe, & thou shalt lye voyde: that thou mayest knowe,
how that I am the LORDE.
5 For so moch as thou bearest an olde enemyte agaynst the children of Israel, &
with a cruel honde hast made them afrayed, what tyme as they were troubled &
punyshed for their synne:
6 Therfore, as truly as I lyue (saieth ye LORDE God) I wil prepare the vnto
bloude, yee bloude shal folowe vpon the: seinge thou layest waite for bloude,
therfore shall bloude persecute the.
7 Thus wil I make the mount Seir desolate & waist, and bringe to passe, that
there shall no man go thither, ner come from thence.
8 His mountaynes wil I fyll wt his slayne men: thy hilles, dales and valleys
shal lye full of them, that are slayne with ye swearde.
9 I wil make the a perpetuall wildernesse, so that noman shal dwell in thy
cities: yt ye maye knowe, how yt I am the LORDE.
10 And because thou hast sayde: what, both these nacions and both these londes
must be myne, & I wil haue them in possession, where as the LORDE was there.
Therfore, thus saieth the LORDE God:
11 As truly as I lyue, I will hadle the acordinge to thy wrath and gelousy, like
as thou hast dealt cruelly with them: that I maye be knowne amoge them, how I
haue punyshed the
12 Yee and that thou also mayest be sure, that I the LORDE haue herde all thy
despyteful wordes, which thou hast spoke agaynst the mountaynes of Israel,
sayenge: Lo, they are made waist, and geuen vs to deuoure.
13 Thus with youre mouthes ye haue made youre boost agaynst me, yee & multiplied
youre proude wordes agaynst me, which I haue herde altogether.
14 Where vnto, thus saieth ye LORDE God: when the whole worlde is in wealth,
then wil I make the waist.
15 And like as thou (o mount Seir) wast glad, because the heretage of the house
of Israel was destroyed: euen so wil I do vnto the also, that thou and whole
Edom shall be destroyed, & knowe, that I am the LORDE.

Chapter 36

1 Thou sonne of man, prophecie vpon the mountaynes of Israel, & speake: Heare
the worde of the LORDE, o ye mountaynes of Israel:
2 Thus saieth the LORDE God: Because yor enemie hath sayde vpon you: A ha, ye
hie euerlastynge places are now become ours:
3 prophecy therfore, & speake: thus saieth ye LORDE God: Seinge ye be waisted &
trode downe on euery syde, & become a possession vnto ye resydue of ye Getiles,
which haue brought you in to mes mouthes & vnto an euel name amonge ye people:
4 Therfore, heare the worde of the LORDE God, o ye mountaynes of Israel: Thus
saieth the LORDE God vnto the mountaynes and hilles, valleys & dales, to the
voyde wildernesses & desolate cities, which are spoyled, and had in derision on
euery syde, amonge the resydue of the Heithe:
5 Yee eue thus saieth the LORDE God: In the fyre of my gelousy haue I taken a
deuyce, agaynst the resydue of the Getiles, and agaynst all Edom: which haue
take in my lode vnto theselues for a possession: which also reioysed fro their
whole herte wt a despiteful stomacke, to waist it, and to spoyle it.
6 Prophecy therfore vpon the londe of Israel, speake vnto ye mountaynes and
hilles, to valleys and dales, thus saieth the LORDE God: Beholde, this haue I
deuysed in my gelousy and terrible wrath: For so moch as ye haue suffred reprofe
of the Heithen,
7 therfore thus saieth the LORDE God: I haue sworne, that the Gentiles which lye
aboute you, shal beare youre confucion them selues.
8 And as for you (o mountaynes of Israel) ye shall shute out youre braunches,
and bringe forth youre frute to my people of Israel, for it is harde by, that it
wil come.
9 Beholde, I come vnto you, and vnto you will I turne me, that ye maye be tylled
and sowen.
10 I wil sende you moch people, which shalbe all of the house of Israel: the
cities shalbe inhabited, and ye decayed places shalbe repayred againe.
11 I wil prouyde you with moch people and catell, which shal increase & bringe
frute. I wil restore you also to youre olde estate, and shewe you more kindnes
the euer ye had before: wherby ye shal knowe, yt I am the LORDE.
12 Yee people wil I sende vnto you (o my folke of Israel (which shal haue the in
possession, and thou shalt be their inheritaunce, so that thou shalt nomore be
without them.
13 Agayne, thus saieth the LORDE God: For so moch as they saye vnto you: thou
art an eater vp of men, and a waister of thy people:
14 therfore thou shalt eate no mo men, nether destroye thy people eny more,
saieth the LORDE God.
15 And I wil not suffre the, for to heare thine owne confucion amonge the
Gentiles from hensforth. Thou shalt not beare the reprofe of the nacions, ner
cast out thine owne people enymore, saieth the LORDE God.
16 Morouer, the worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
17 O thou sonne of ma, when the house of Israel dwelt vpon their owne grounde,
they defyled them selues with their owne wayes & ymaginacions: so that in my
sight their waye was like the vnclennesse of a menstruous woman.
18 Wherfore I poured my wrothfull displeasure vpon them, because of the bloude
that they had shed in the londe, & because of their Idols, wherwith they had
defyled them selues.
19 I scatred them also amonge the Heithen, so that they were strowed aboute in
the lodes. Acordinge to their wayes & after their owne inuencions, so dyd I
punysh them.
20 Now when they were gone vnto the Heithen, and come in amonge them, they
dishonoured my holy name: so that it was sayde of them: Are these the people of
God, & must go out of their owne londe?
21 Then spared I my holy name, which ye house of Israel had dishonoured amonge
the Gentiles, to whom they came.
22 Therfore tell ye house of Israel: Thus saieth the LORDE God: I do not this
for yor sakes (O house of Israel) but for my holy names sake, which ye
dishonoured amoge the Heithen, when ye came to them.
23 Therfore, I wil halowe my greate name agayne, which amonge the Getiles is
euel spoken of: for ye youre selues haue dishououred it amoge them. And the
Gentiles shal knowe, that I am the LORDE, when I am honoured in you before their
eyes, saieth ye LORDE God.
24 As for you, I wil take you from amonge the Heithen, and gather you together
out of all countrees, and bringe you agayne in to youre owne londe.
25 Then will I poure cleare water vpon you, & ye shalbe clene: Yee from all
youre vnclennesse and from all yor Idols shal I clense you.
26 A new herte also wil I geue you, and a new sprete wil I put in to you: As for
that stony hert, I will take it out of youre body, and geue you a fle?shy herte.
27 I wil geue you my sprete amonge you, and cause you to walke in my
commaundemetes, to kepe my lawes, and to fulfill them.
28 And so ye shall dwell in the londe, that I gaue to yor forefathers, & ye shal
be my people, and I wil be youre God.
29 I wil helpe you out of all youre vnclenesse, I wil call for the corne, and
wil increase it, and wil let you haue no honger.
30 I will multiplie the frutes of the trees and ye increase of the felde for
you, so that ye shal beare no more reprofe of honger amoge the Heithe.
31 Then shal ye remebre yor owne wicked wayes, and youre ymaginacios, which were
not good: so that ye shal take displeasure at youre owne selues, by reason of
youre synnes and abhominacions.
32 But I wil not do this for youre sakes (saieth the LORDE God) be ye sure of
it. Therfore (o ye house of Israel) be ashamed of youre synnes.
33 Morouer, thus saieth the LORDE God: what tyme as I shal clese you from all
youre offences, then wil I make the cities to be occupied agayne, and wil
repayre the places that be decayed.
34 The desolate londe shalbe buylded agayne, which afore tyme laye waist, in the
sight of all them, that wete by.
35 Then shal it be sayde: This waist lode is become like a garden of pleasure,
and the voyde, desolate and broke downe cities, are now stronge, and fensed
agayne.
36 Then the residue of the Heithen that lye rounde aboute you, shal knowe, that
I am the LORDE, which repayre that was broken downe, and plante agayne, that was
made waist. Euen I the LORDE haue spoken it, & wil do it in dede.
37 Thus saieth the LORDE God: I wil yet once be founde agayne of ye house of
Israel, & do this for them: I shal increase them as a flocke of men.
38 Like as the holy flocke and the flocke of Ierusalem are in the hie solempne
feastes: so shal also the wilde waisted cities be fylled with flockes of men:
and they shal knowe, that I am the LORDE.

Chapter 37

1 The honde of the LORDE came vpon me, & caried me out in the sprete of the
LORDE, & let me downe in a playne felde, that laye full of bones,
2 & he led me rounde aboute by them: & beholde, the bones that laye vpon the
felde, were very many, & maruelous drye also.
3 Then sayde he vnto me: Thou sonne of man: thinkest thou these bones maye lyue
agayne? I answered: O LORDE God, thou knowest.
4 And he sayde vnto me: Prophecy thou vpon these bones, & speake vnto them: Ye
drye bones, heare the worde of the LORDE.
5 Thus saieth the LORDE God vnto these bones: Beholde, I will put breth in to
you, that ye maye lyue:
6 I wil geue you synowes, & make flesh growe vpon you, & couer you ouer with
skynne: & so geue you breth, that ye maye lyue, and knowe, that I am the LORDE.
7 So I prophecied, as he had comaunded me. And as I was prophecienge, there came
a noyse and a greate mocion, so that the bones ranne euery one to another.
8 Now whe I had loked, beholde, they had synowes, and flesh grewe vpon them: and
aboue they were couered with skynne, but there was no breth in them.
9 Then sayde he vnto me: Thou sonne of man, prophecie thou towarde the wynde:
prophecy, and speake to the wynde: Thus saieth the LORDE God: Come (o thou ayre)
from the foure wyndes, & blowe vpon these slayne, that they maye be restored to
life.
10 So I prophecied, as he had commaunded me: Then came the breth tnto them, and
they receaued life, and stode vp vpon their fete, a maruelous greate sorte.
11 Morouer, he sayde vnto me: Thou sonne of man, these bones are the whole house
of Israel. Beholde, they saye: oure bones are dryed vp, oure hope is gone, we
are clene cut of.
12 Therfore prophecie thou, & speake vnto them. Thus saieth the LORDE God:
Beholde, I wil open youre graues (o my people) & take you out of youre
sepulcres, & bringe you in to the londe of Israel agayne.
13 So shall ye knowe yt I am the LORDE, when I open youre graues, & bringe you
out of them.
14 My sprete also wil I put in you, & ye shal lyue: I wil set you agayne in
youre owne londe, and ye shal knowe, that I am the LORDE, which haue sayde it,
and fulfilled it in dede.
15 The worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
16 Thou sonne of man, take a sticke and wryte vpon it: Vnto Iuda & to the
children of Israel his companyons. Then take another sticke, and wryte vpon it:
Vnto Ioseph the stocke of Ephraim, and to all the housholde of Israel his
companyons.
17 And than take both these together in thine honde, so shal there be one stycke
therof.
18 Now yf the childre of thy people saye vnto the: wilt thou not shewe vs, what
thou meanest by these?
19 Then geue them this answere: Thus saieth the LORDE God: Beholde, I wil take
the stocke of Ioseph, which is in the honde of Ephraim and of the trybes of
Israel his felowes, and wil put them to the stocke of Iuda, & make them one
stocke, and they shalbe one in my honde.
20 And the two stickes where vpon thou wrytest, shalt thou haue in thine honde,
that they maye se,
21 and shalt saye vnto them: Thus saieth the LORDE God: beholde I wil take awaye
the childre of Israel from amonge the Heithen, vnto whom they be gone, and wil
gather them together on euery syde, and bringe them agayne in to their owne
londe:
22 yee I wil make one people of the in ye londe, vpon the mountaynes of Israel,
and they all shal haue but one kinge. They shall nomore be two peoples from
hensforth, nether be deuyded in to two kingdomes:
23 they shal also defyle the selues nomore with their abhominacions, Idols and
all their wickeddoinges. I wil helpe the out of all their dwellinge places,
wherin they haue synned: & will so clense them, that they shalbe my people, and
I their God.
24 Dauid my seruaunt shalbe their kinge, & they all shal haue one shepherde
only. They shal walke in my lawes, and my commaundementes shalt they both kepe &
fulfill.
25 They shal dwell in the londe, that I gaue vnto Iacob my seruaunt, where as
youre fathers also haue dwelt. Yee eue in the same londe shal they, their
children, & their childers children dwell for euermore: and my seruaunt Dauid
shal be their euerlastynge prynce.
26 Morouer, I will make a bonde of peace with them, which shal be vnto them an
euerlastinge couenaunt. I wil sattle the also, and multiplie them, my Sanctuary
wil I set amonge the for euermore.
27 My dwellinge shalbe wt them, yee I wil be their God, & they shalbe my people.
28 Thus the Heithen also shal knowe, that I the LORDE am ye holy maker of
Israel: whe my Sanctuary shal be amonge them for euer more.

Chapter 38

1 And the worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
2 Thou sonne of man, turne thy face towarde Gog in the londe of Magog, which is
the chefe prynce at Mesech and Tubal: prophecy agaynst him,
3 and saye: Thus saieth the LORDE God: O Gog thou chefe prynce of Mesech and
Tubal: beholde, I wil vpon the,
4 and wil turne the aboute, and put a bytt in thy chawes: I wil bringe the forth
and all thine hoost, both horse & horsmen, which be all weapened of the best
fashion: a greate people, that handle altogether speares, shyldes, and swerdes:
5 the Perses, Moryans and with them the Lybians, which all beare shyldes and
helmettes:
6 Gomer, and all his hoostes: the house of Thogorma out of the north quarters,
and all his hoostes, yee and moch people with the.
7 Therfore prepare the, set thy self in araye with all thy people, that are come
vnto the by heapes, and be thou their defence.
8 After many dayes thou shalt be visited, and in the latter yeares thou shalt
come in to the lode, that hath bene destroyed with the swearde, & now is
replenished agayne wt dyuerse people vpon the mountaynes of Israel, which haue
loge lyen waist. Yee they be brought out of the nacions, & dwell all safe.
9 Thou shalt come vp like a stormy wether, to couer the lode, and as it were a
darcke cloude: thou with all thine hoostes, and a greate multitude of people
with the.
10 Morouer, thus saieth the LORDE God: At the same tyme shal many thinges come
in to thy mynde, so that thou shalt ymagyn myschefe,
11 and saye: I wil vp to yonder playne londe, seinge they syt at ease, and dwell
so safely (for they dwell all without eny walles, they haue nether barres nor
dores)
12 to spoyle them, to robbe the, to laye honde vpon their so wel inhabited
wildernesses: agaynst that people, yt is gathered together from amonge the
Heithe, which haue gotten catell and good, and dwell in the myddest of the
londe.
13 Then shal Saba and Dedan and the marchauntes of Tharsis wt all their
Worthies, saye vnto the: Art thou come to robbe? Hast thou gathered thy people
together, because thou wilt spoyle? to take syluer and golde: to cary awaye
catell and good: and to haue a greate pray?
14 Therfore, o thou sonne of man, thou shalt prophecie, and saye vnto Gog: Thus
saieth the LORDE God: In that daye thou shalt knowe, that my people of Israel
dwelleth safe:
15 and shalt come from thy place, out of the north partes: thou and moch people
wt the, which ryde vpon horses, wherof there is a greate multitude and an
innumerable sorte.
16 Yee thou shalt come vpon my people of Israel, as a cloude to couer the lode.
This shal come to passe in the latter dayes: I wil bringe the vp in to my londe,
that the Heithen maye knowe me, when I get me honoure vpon the (o Gog) before
their eyes.
17 Thus saieth the LORDE God: Thou art he, of whom I haue spoken aforetyme, by
my seruauntes ye prophetes of Israel, which prophecied in those dayes & yeares,
that I shulde bringe the vpon them.
18 At the same tyme, when Gog commeth vp in to the londe of Israel (saieth the
LORDE God) shal my indignacio go forth in my wrath.
19 For in my gelousy and hote displeasure I haue deuysed, that there shalbe a
greate trouble in the londe of Israel at that tyme.
20 The very fy?shes in the see, the foules of the ayre, the beestes of the
felde, and all the men yt are vpon the earth, shal tremble for feare of me. The
hilles also shalbe turned vpsidedowne, the stayres of stone shal fall, and all
walles shal syncke to the grounde.
21 I wil call for a swearde vpon them in all my mountaynes, saieth the LORDE
God: so that euery mans swearde shal be vpon another.
22 With pestilece and bloude wil I punysh him: stormy rayne and hale stones,
fyre and brymstone, wil I cause to rayne vpon him and all his heape, yee and
vpon all that greate people that is with him.
23 Thus wil I be magnified, honoured, and knowne amonge the Heithen: that they
maye be sure, how yt I am ye LORDE.

Chapter 39

1 Therfore o thou sonne of man, prophecie agaynst Gog, and speake: Thus saieth
the LORDE God: Beholde, o Gog: thou chefe prynce at Mesech and Tubal, I wil vpon
the,
2 and turne the aboute, & carie the forth, & lede ye from the north partes, and
bringe the vp to the mountaynes of Israel
3 As for thy bowe, I wil smyte it out of thy left honde, and cast thine arowes
out of thy right honde.
4 Thou with all thine heape, and all the people that is with the, must fall vpon
the mountaynes of Israel. Then wil I geue the vnto ye foules and wilde beastes
of the felde, to be deuoured:
5 there must thou lye vpon the felde: for eue I the LORDE haue spoken it, saieth
the LORDE God.
6 In to Magog, and amonge those that sit so carelesse in the Iles: wil I sende a
fyre, and they shal knowe, yt I am the LORDE.
7 I wil make also the name of my holynesse to be knowne amonge my people of
Israel: and I will not let my holy name be euel spoken of enymore: but the very
Heithen also shal knowe, that I am the LORDE, the holy one of Israel.
8 Beholde, it commeth, and shalbe fulfilled in dede, saieth the LORDE God. This
is the daye, wherof I haue spoken:
9 They that dwell in ye cities of Israel, shal go forth and set fyre vpon the
weapens, and burne them: shyldes and speres, bowes and arowes, bylles and
clubbes: seuen yeares
10 shall they be burnynge therof, so that they shall els bringe no stickes from
ye felde, nether haue nede to hew downe eny out of the wodde: For they shall
haue weapens ynew to burne. They shal robbe those that robbed them, and spoyle
those that spoyled them, saieth ye LORDE God.
11 At the same tyme will I geue vnto Gog, a place to be buried in, in Israel:
eue the valley, where thorow men go from the east to the see warde. Those that
trauayle therby, shal abhorre it. There shal Gog and all his people be buried:
and it shalbe called the valley of the people of Gog.
12 Seuen monethes longe shall the house of Israel be burienge of them, that they
maye clense the lode:
13 Yee all the people of the londe shal burie them. O it shal be a glorious
daye, when I get me that honoure, saieth the LORDE God.
14 They shal ordene men also to be deedburiers, euer goinge thorow the lode, and
appoynte them certayne places to bury those in, which remayne vpon the felde,
that the londe maye be clensed. From ende to ende shal they seke, and that vij
monethes loge.
15 Now those that go thorow the londe, where they se a mans bone, they shall set
vp a token by it, till the deedburiers haue buried it also, in the valley of the
people of Gog.
16 And the name of the cite shalbe called Hamona: Thus shall they make the londe
clene.
17 And thou sonne of man: thus saieth the LORDE God: Speake vnto all the foules
and euery byrde, yee and to all the wilde beastes of the felde: heape you
together and come, gather you roude aboute vpo my slaughter, that I haue slayne
for you: euen a greate slaughter vpon the mountaynes of Israel: eate flesh, and
drynke bloude.
18 Ye shal eate ye flesh of the worthies, and drynke the bloude of the prynces
of the londe: of the wethers, of the lambes, of the goates, and of the oxen that
be all slayne at Basan.
19 Eate ye fat youre bely full, and drynke bloude, till ye be droncken of the
slaughter, which I haue slayne vnto you.
20 Fyl you at my table, with horses & stronge horsmen: with captaynes and all me
of warre, saieth the LORDE God.
21 I will bringe my glory also amonge the Gentiles, that all the Heithen maye se
my iudgment, that I haue kepte, and my honde which I haue layed vpon them:
22 that ye house of Israel maye knowe, how that I am ye LORDE their God, from
that daye forth.
23 And the Heithen shal knowe, that where as the house of Israel were led into
captiuyte: it was for their wickednes sake, because they offended me. For the
which cause I hyd my face from them, and delyuered them in to the hondes of
their enemies, that they might all be slayne with the swearde.
24 Acordinge to their vnclennesse and vnfaithfull dealinges, so haue I entreated
them, and hyd my face from them.
25 Therfore thus saieth ye LORDE God: Now will I bringe agayne the captyues of
Iacob, and haue mercy vpon the whole house of Israel, and be gelous for my holy
names sake.
26 All their confucion and offence that they haue done agaynst me, shal be taken
awaye: and so safely shal they dwell in their londe, that no man shal make them
afrayed.
27 And when I haue brought the agayne from amonge the people, when I haue
gathered them together out of their enemies londes, and am praysed in them
before many Heithen:
28 then shall they knowe, that I am the LORDE their God, which suffred them to
be led in to captiuyte amonge the Heithen, but now haue brought them agayne in
to their owne londe, and not left one of them yonder.
29 After that, will I hyde my face nomore from them, but will poure out my
sprete vpon the house of Israel, saieth the LORDE God.

Chapter 40

1 In the xxv yeare of oure captiuyte, in the begynnynge of the yeare, the x daye
of the moneth: that is the xiiij yeare, after that ye cite was smytten downe:
the same daye came the honde of the LORDE vpon me, and caried me forth:
2 euen into the londe of Israel brought he me in the visions of God: and set me
downe vpo a maruelous hie mountayne, whervpon there was a buyldinge (as it had
bene of a cite) towarde the north.
3 Thither he caried me, and beholde, there was a man, whose similitude was like
brasse, which had a threde of flax in his honde, and a meterodde also. He stode
in the dore,
4 & sayde vnto me: marcke well with thine eyes, herken to with thine eares, and
fasten it in thine hert, what so euer I shal shewe the, for to the intent that
they might be shewed the, therfore art thou brought hither. And what soeuer thou
seyst, thou shalt certifie the house of Israel therof.
5 Beholde, there was a wall on the outsyde rounde aboute the house: the
meterodde that he had in his honde, was six cubites longe & a spanne. So he
measured the bredth of the buyldinge, which was a meterodde, and the heyth also
a meterodde.
6 Then came he vnto the eastdore, and wente vp the stares, & measured the postes
of the dore: wherof euery one was a meterodde thicke. Euery chambre was a
meterodde longe and brode:
7 betwene the chambers were fyue cubites. The poste of the dore within the
porche, was one meterodde.
8 He measured also the porche of the ynnermer dore, which conteyned a meterodde.
9 The measured he the entrie of the dore, that conteyned eght cubites, and his
pilers two cubites: and this entrie stode inwarde.
10 The chambers of the dore eastwarde, were thre on euery syde: alike brode and
longe. The pilers also that stode of both the sydes, were of one measure.
11 After this, he measured the wydenesse of the dore: which was x cubites, & the
heyth of the dore xiij cubites.
12 The edge before the chabres was one cubite brode vpo both the sydes, & the
chambres six cubites wyde of either syde.
13 He measured ye dore from the rygge of one chabre to another, whose wydenesse
was xxv cubites, & one dore stode agaynst another.
14 He made pilers also lx cubites hie, rounde aboute the courte dore.
15 Before the inwarde parte vnto the fore entre of the ynnermer dore, were
fiftie cubites.
16 The chambers and their pilers within, rounde aboute vnto ye dore, had syde
wyndowes: So had the fore entries also, whose wyndowes wente rounde aboute
within. And vpon the pilers there stode date trees.
17 Then brought he me in to the fore courte, where as were chabres & paued
workes, made in ye fore courte roude aboute: xxx chabres vpon one paued worcke.
18 Now the paued worke was a loge besyde the dores, and that was the lower paued
worke.
19 After this, he measured ye bredth from the lower dore, vnto the ynnermer
courte of the outsyde, which had an hundreth cubites vpon the east & the north
parte.
20 And the dore in the vttemost courte towarde the north, measured he after the
legth and bredth:
21 his thre chambres also on either syde, with his pilers & fore entries: which
had euen the measure of the first dore. His heyth was fiftie cubites, the bredth
xxv cubites:
22 his wyndowes & porches with his datetrees, had euen like measure as the dore
towarde the east: there where vij steppes to go vp vpo, & their porche before
them.
23 Now ye dore of the ynnermer courte stode straight ouer agaynst the dore, that
was towarde ye north east. From one dore to another, he measured an C cubites.
24 After that, he brought me to the south syde, where there stode a dore towarde
ye south: whose pilers and porches he measured, these had the fyrst measure,
25 & with their porches they had wyndowes rounde aboute, like the first
wyndowes. The heyth was l cubites, ye bredth xxv,
26 with steppes to go vp vpon: his porche stode before him, with his pilers and
datetrees on either syde.
27 And the dore of the ynnermer courte stode towarde the south, & he measured
from one dore to another an C cubites.
28 So he brought me in to ye ynnermer courte, thorow the dore of the south syde:
which he measured, & it had the measure afore sayde.
29 In like maner, his chambres, pilers and fore entries, had euen the fore sayde
measure also. And he had with his porches rounde aboute, wyndowes of l cubites
hye, & xxv cubites brode.
30 The porches rounde aboute were xxv cubites longe, and v cubites brode:
31 and his porch reached vnto ye vttemost courte: vpon his pilers there were
date trees, and viij steppes to go vp vpon.
32 He brought me also in to the ynmost courte vpon the east syde, and measured
the dore, acordinge to ye measure afore sayde.
33 His chabers, pilers and porches had euen the same measure, as the first had:
& with his porches he had wyndowes roude aboute. The heith was l cubites, ye
bredth xxv cubites:
34 His porches reached vnto the vttemost courte: his pilers also had date trees
on either syde, and viij steppes to go vp vpon.
35 And he brought me to the north dore, and measured it, which also had the
foresayde measure.
36 His chabres, pilers and porches had wyndowes rounde aboute: whose heyth was l
cubites, and the bredth xxv.
37 His pilers stode towarde the vttemost courte, and vpon them both were date
trees, and viij steppes to go vp vpon.
38 There stode a chambre also, whose intrauce was at the dore pilers, and there
the burntoffringes were wa?shed.
39 In the dore porche, there stode on ether syde two tables for the slaughtinge:
to slaye the brentoffringes, synneoffringes and trespaceoffringes thervpon.
40 And on the out syde as men go forth to the north dore, there stode two
tables.
41 Foure stables stode on ether syde of the dore, that is viij tables, whervpon
they slaughted.
42 Foure tables were of hewen stone for the burntoffringes, of a cubite and a
half longe and brode, and one cubite hie: whervpon were layed ye vessels and
ornamentes, which were vsed to, the burnt & slayne offeringes, when they were
slaughted.
43 And within there were hokes foure fyngers brode, fastened rounde aboute, to
hange flesh vpon, & vpon the tables was layed the offringe flesh.
44 On the outsyde of the ynnermer dore were the syngers chambers in the inwarde
courte besyde ye north dore ouer agaynst the south. There stode one also, besyde
the east dore north warde.
45 And he sayde vnto me: This chambre on the south syde belongeth to the
prestes, that kepe the habitacion:
46 and this towarde the north, is the prestes that wayte vpon the aulter: which
be the sonnes of Sadoch, that do seruyce before the LORDE in steade of the
children of Leui.
47 So he measured the fore courte, which had in length an C cubites, and as moch
in bredth by the foure corners. Now the aulter stode before the house:
48 And he brought me to the fore entre of the house, and measured the walles by
the entre dore: which were fyue cubites longe on ether syde. The thicknesse also
of the dore on ether syde, was thre cubites.
49 The legth of the porche was xx cubites. the bredth xj. cubites, and vpon
steppes went men vp to it: by the walles also were pilers, on either syde one.

Chapter 41

1 After this he brought me to the temple, and measured the postes: which were of
both the sydes vj. cubites thicke, acordinge to the wydenesse of the tabernacle.
2 The bredth of ye dore was x. cubites, & the walles of the dore on either syde
fyue cubites. He measured the length therof, which conteyned xl. cubites, and
the bredth xx.
3 The wente he in, and measured the dore postes, which were two cubites thicke:
but the dore itself was sixe cubites, and the bredth of the dore was vij.
cubites.
4 He measured the legth and bredth therof, which were euery one xx. cubites,
before the temple. And he sayde vnto me: this is the holyest of all.
5 He measured also the wall of the house, which was sixe cubites. The chambres
yt stode rounde aboute ye house, were euery one foure cubites wyde,
6 and one stode harde vpo another, wherof there were xxxiij. And there stode
postes beneth by the walles rounde aboute the house, to beare the vp: but in ye
wall of ye house they were not fastened:
7 The syde chambres were the hyer the wyder, and had steppes thorow them rounde
aboute ye house. Thus was it wyder aboue, that from the lowest men might go to
the hyest & mydde chabers.
8 I sawe also that the house was very hye rounde aboute. The foundacion of the
syde chambres was a meterodde (that is sixe cubites) brode.
9 The thicknesse of the syde wall without, conteyned fyue cubites, & so dyd ye
outwall of the chabers in ye house.
10 Betwene the chambers, was the wydenes xx. cubites rounde aboute ye house.
11 The chambre dores stode ouer agaynst the outwall, the one dore was towarde
the north, ye other towarde the south: and the thicknesse of the outwall was v
cubites rounde aboute.
12 Now the buyldinge that was separated towarde the west, was lxx. cubites wyde:
the wall of the buyldinge was v cubites thicke roude aboute, and the length
foure score cubites and ten.
13 So he measured the house which was an C. cubites longe, and the separated
buyldinge with the wall were an C. cubites loge also.
14 The wydnesse before the house and of it yt was separated towarde the east,
was an C. cubites.
15 And he measured the length of the buyldinge before and behinde with the
chabers vpon both the sydes: and it conteyned an C. cubites. The ynnermer
temple, the porch of the forecourte,
16 ye syde postes, these thre had syde wyndowes, and pilers rounde aboute ouer
agaynst the postes, from the grounde vp to the wyndowes: The wyndowes them
selues were syled ouer with bordes:
17 & thus was it aboue the dore, vnto the ynmost house, and without also: Yee
the whole wall on euery syde both within and without was syled ouer wt greate
bordes.
18 There were Cherubins and date trees made also, so that one date tre stode
euer betwixte two Cherubins: One Cherub had two faces,
19 ye face of a man lokinge asyde towarde the date tre, and a lyons face on the
other syde. Thus was it made roude aboute in all the house:
20 Yee the Cherubins and date trees were made from the grounde vp aboue the
dore, and so stode they also vpon the wall of the temple.
21 The bypostes of the temple were foure squared, and the fashion of the
Sanctuary was, euen as it appeared vnto me afore in ye vision.
22 The table was of wodde, thre cubites hie and two cubites longe: his corners,
the length and the walles were of wodde. And he sayde vnto me: This is the
table, that shal stonde before the LORDE.
23 The temple and the holiest of all had ether of them two dores,
24 and euery dore had two litle wickettes which were folden in one vpon another,
on euery syde two.
25 And vpon the dores of the temple there were made Cherubins and date trees,
like as vpon the walles: and a greate thicke balke of wodde was before on the
outsyde of the porche.
26 Vpo both the sydes of the walles of the porche, there were made depe wyndowes
and date trees, hauynge beames and balkes, like as the house had.

Chapter 42

1 Then caried he me out in to the fore courte towarde the north, & brought me in
to the chambre that stode ouer agaynst the backebuyldinge northwarde, which had
the length of an C. cubites, whose dore turned towarde the north.
2 The wydenesse conteyned L. cubites,
3 ouer agaynst the xx. cubites of the ynnermer courte, & agaynst the paued worke
that was in the fore courte. Besyde all these thre there stode pilers, one ouer
against another:
4 And before this chabre there was a walkinge place of x. cubites wyde, and
within was a waye of one cubite wyde, and their dores towarde the north.
5 Thus the hyest chambres were allwaye narower then the lowest and myddelmost of
ye buildinge:
6 for they bare chambre vpon chambre, and stode thre together one vpon another,
not hauynge pilers like the fore courte: therfore were they smaller then those
beneth and in the myddest, to reken from the grounde vpwarde.
7 The wall without that stode by ye chambres towarde the vttemost courte vpon
the fore syde of the chambres, was L. cubites loge:
8 for the legth of ye vttemost chambers in the fore courte was L. cubites also:
but the length therof before the temple was an C. cubites.
9 These chambres had vnder them an intraunce of the east syde, wherby a man
might go into them out of the fore courte,
10 thorow the thicke wall of the fore courte towarde the east, right ouer
agaynst the separated buyldinge.
11 Before the same buyldinge vpo this syde there were chabers also which, had a
waye vnto them, like as the chambers on the north syde of the same length and
wydenesse. Their intraunce, fashion and dores were all of the same maner.
12 Yee euen like as the other chamber dores were, so were those also of the
south syde. And before the waye towarde the syngers steppes on the east syde,
there stode a dore to go in at.
13 Then sayde he vnto me: The chambers towarde the north & the south, which
stode before the backe buyldinge: those be holy habitacions, wherin the prestes
that do seruyce before the LORDE, must eate the most holy offringes: and there
must they laye the most holy offringes: meatoffringes, synneoffringes & trespace
offringes, for it is an holy place.
14 When the prestes come therin, they shal not go out in to the fore courte: but
(seynge they be holy) they shall leaue the clothes of their ministracion, and
put on other garmentes, when they haue eny thinge to do with the people.
15 Now when he had measured all the ynnermer house, he brought me forth thorow
the east porte, and measured the same rounde aboute.
16 He measured the east syde with ye meterodde, which rounde aboute conteyned
v.C.meteroddes.
17 And the north syde measured he, which conteyned rounde aboute euen so moch.
18 The other two sydes also towarde the south
19 and the west (which he measured) conteyned ether of them v.C. meteroddes.
20 So he measured all ye foure sydes where there wente a wall rounde aboute v.C.
meteroddes longe, and as brode also, which separated the holy from the vnholy.

Chapter 43

1 So he brought me to ye dore, that turneth towarde the east.
2 Beholde, the came the glory of the God of Israel from out of the east, whose
voyce was like a greate noyse of waters, and the earth was lightened with his
glory.
3 His sight to loke vpon was like the first, that I sawe, when I wente in, what
tyme as the cite shulde haue bene destroyed: and like the vision that I sawe by
the water of Cobar. Then fell I vpon my face,
4 but the glory of the LORDE came in to the house thorow the eastdore.
5 So a wynde toke me vp, and brought me into ye ynnermer courte: & beholde, the
house was full of the glory of the LORDE.
6 I herde one speakinge vnto me out of the house, and there stode one by me,
7 that sayde vnto me: O thou sonne of man, this rowme is my seate, and the place
of my fotesteppes: where as I wil dwell amonge the children of Israel for
euermore: so that the house of Israel shal nomore defyle my holy name: nether
thei, ner their kinges, thorow their whordome, thorow their hie places, & thorow
the deed bodies of their kinges:
8 which haue buylded their thresholdes in maner harde vpon my thresholdes, and
their postes almost at my postes: so that there is but a bare wall betwixte me
and them. Thus haue they defyled my holy name with their abhominacions, that
they haue comitted. Wherfore I haue destroyed them in my wrath:
9 But now they shal put awaye their whordome and the deed bodies of their kinges
out of my sight, that I maye dwell amoge them for euermore.
10 Therfore (o thou sonne of man) shewe thou the housholde of Israel a temple,
that they maye be ashamed of their wickednesse, and measure them selues an
example therat.
11 And when they be ashamed of all their workes, then shewe them the fourme and
fashion of the temple: the comynge in, the goinge out, all the maner and
descripcion therof, yee all the vses and ordinaunces of it, yt they maye kepe &
fulfill all the fashions and customes therof.
12 This is the descripcion of the house: Aboue vpo the mount rounde aboute all
the corners, it shalbe ye holiest of all. Beholde, that is the descripcion and
fashion of the house.
13 This is the measure of the aulter (after the true cubite,: which is a spanne
longer then another cubite) his botome in the myddest was a cubite longe and
wyde, and the ledge that wente rounde aboute it, was a spanne brode. This is the
heyth of the aulter:
14 From the grounde to the lower steppes the length is two cubites, and the
bredth one cubite: and from the lower steppes to the higher are foure cubites, &
the bredth but one cubite.
15 The aulter was foure cubites hie, & from the aulter vpwarde stode foure
hornes,
16 and it was xij cubites longe and xij cubites brode, vpon the foure corners:
17 the coueringe of the aulter was xiiij cubites longe and brode vpon the foure
corners, and the ledge that wente rounde aboute, had half a cubite: and the
botome therof rounde aboute one cubite: his steppes stode towarde the easte.
18 And he sayde vnto me: Thou sonne of man, thus saieth the LORDE God: these are
the ordinaunces and lawes of the aulter, in the daye whe it is made, to offre
burntoffringes, and to sprenkle bloude ther vpon.
19 To the prestes, to ye Leuites that be of the sede of Sadoch, and treade
before me to do me seruyce, saieth the LORDE God: Vnto these geue thou a yonge
bullocke, for a synoffringe:
20 & take the bloude of him & sprenkle his foure hornes withal, & the foure
corners of the aulter coueringe, with the ledge that goeth rounde aboute: here
with shalt thou clense it, and reconcile it.
21 Thou shalt take the bullock also of the synoffringe, & burne him in a
seuerall place without the Sanctuary.
22 The nexte daye, take a gootbuck without blemish for a synoffringe, to
reconcile the aulter withall: like as it was reconciled with ye bullocke.
23 Now when thou hast made it clene, then offre a yonge bullocke without
blemish, and a ramme out of the flocke without blemish also:
24 Offre them before the LORDE, and let the prest cast salt thervpon, and geue
them so vnto the LORDE for a burntoffringe.
25 Seuen dayes shalt thou bringe, euery daye a gootbucke. A yonge bullocke & a
ramme of the flocke (both without blemish) shal they offre.
26 Seuen dayes shal they reconcile and clense the aulter, & offre vpon it.
27 When these dayes are expired, then vpon the viij daye and so forth, the
prestes shal offre their burntoffringes and healthoffringes vpo ye aulter: so
wil I be mercifull vnto you, saieth the LORDE God.

Chapter 44

1 After this, he brought me agayne to ye outwarde dore of the Sanctuary on the
east syde, and that was shut.
2 Then sayde the LORDE vnto me: This dore shalbe stil shut, and not opened for
eny ma to go thorow it, but only for the LORDE God of Israel: yee he shal go
thorow it, els shal it be shut still.
3 The prynce himself shal come thorow it, that he maye eate bred before the
LORDE. At the porche shal he come in, and there shal he go out agayne.
4 Then brought he me to the dore, vpon the north syde of the house. And as I
loked aboute me, beholde, the glory of the LORDE fylled the house: and I fell
downe vpon my face.
5 So the LORDE spake vnto me: O thou sonne of man, fasten this to thine herte,
beholde, and take diliget hede to all that I wil saye vnto the, concernynge all
the ordinaunces of the LORDE and all his lawes: pondre well with thine herte the
commynge in of the house and the goinge forth of the Sanctuary:
6 and tell that obstinate housholde of Israel: Thus saieth the LORDE God: O
house of Israel, ye haue now done ynough with all youre abhominacios,
7 seynge that ye haue brought in to my Sanctuary straungers, hauynge
vncircumcised hertes & flesh, where thorow my Sactuary is defiled, whe ye offre
my bred, fat, & bloude. Thus with all youre abhominacions ye haue broken my
couenaunt,
8 and not kepte the holy ordinaunces of my Sanctuary: but set kepers of my
Sanctuary, euen after youre owne mynde.
9 Therfore thus saieth ye LORDE God: Of all the straungers that dwell amoge the
childre of Israel, no straunger (whose herte & flesh is not circumcised) shal
come within my Sanctuary:
10 No ner the Leuites that be gone backe fro me, and haue disceaued the people
of Israel with erroures, goinge after their Idols: therfore shal thei beare
their owne wickednes.
11 Shulde they be set and ordened to ministre, vnder the dores of the house of
my Sanctuary? and to do seruyce in the house: to slaye burntoffringes and
sacrifices for ye people: to stode before them, and to serue them:
12 seynge the seruyce that they do them, is before their Idols, and cause the
house of Israel to stomble thorow wickednesse? For the which cause I haue
pluckte out myne honde ouer them (saieth the LORDE) so that now they must beare
their owne iniquyte,
13 and not to come nye me, to serue me with their preasheade, in my Sanctuary,
and most holyest of all: that they maye beare their owne shame and
abhominacions, which they haue done.
14 Shulde I vse them to be porters of the house, and to all the seruyce yt is
done therin?
15 But the prestes ye Leuites the sonnes of Sadoch, that kepte the holy
ordinaunces of my Sanctuary, when the children of Israel were gone fro me: shal
come to me, to do me seruyce, to stonde before me, and to offre me the fat and
the bloude, saieth the LORDE God.
16 They shall go in to my Sanctuary, and treade before my table, to do me
seruyce, and to waite vpo myne ordinaunces.
17 Now whe they go in at the dores of the ynnermer courte, they shal put on
lynnynge clothes, so that no wollyne come vpon them: whyle they do seruyce vnder
the dores of ye ynnermer courte, and within.
18 They shal haue fayre lynnynge bonettes vpon their heades, and lynnynge
breches vpon their loynes, which in their laboure they shal not put aboute them:
19 And when they go forth to the people in to the outwarde courte, they shal put
of the clothes, wherin they haue ministred, and laye them in the habitacion of
the Sanctuary, & put on other apparell, lest they onhalowe ye people with their
clothes.
20 They shal not shaue their heades, ner norish the bushe of their hayre, but
roude their heades only.
21 All the prestes that go in to the ynmost courte, shall drynke no wyne.
22 They shall mary no wydowe, nether one that is put from hir hu?bonde: but a
mayde of the sede of the house of Israel, or a wydowe, that hath had a prest
before.
23 They shal shewe my people the difference betwene the holy and vnholy,
betwixte the clene and vnclene.
24 Yf eny discorde aryse, they shal discerne it, and geue sentence after my
iudgmentes. My solempne feastes, my lawes and ordinaunces shal they kepe, and
halowe my Sabbathes.
25 They shal come at no deed persone, to defyle them selues: (excepte it be
father or mother, sonne or doughter, brother or sister that hath had yet no
husbonde) in soch they maye be defyled.
26 And when he is clensed, there shal be rekened vnto him vij dayes:
27 and yf he go in to the Sanctuary agayne to do seruyce, he shal bringe a
synoffringe saieth the LORDE God.
28 They shall haue an heretage, yee I my self wilbe their heretage: els shall ye
geue the no possession in Israel, for I am their possession.
29 The meatoffringe, synoffringe & trespace offringe shal they eate, and euery
dedicate thinge in Israel, shalbe theirs.
30 The firstlinges of all the first frutes, and all fre will offringes shal be
the prestes. Ye shall geue vnto the prest also the firstlinges of youre dowe,
that God maye prospere the resydue.
31 But no deed carion shall the prest eate, ner soch as is deuoured of wilde
beestes, foules or catell.

Chapter 45

1 When ye deuyde the lode by the lott, ye shal put asyde one parte for the
LORDE, to be holy from other londes: namely, xxv M meteroddes longe, and x M
brode. This shalbe holy, as wyde as it is rounde aboute.
2 Of this parte there shal be longe vnto the Sanctuary v C meteroddes in all the
foure corners, and l cubites wyde rounde aboute to the suburbes.
3 And from this meausre, namely of xxv M metteroddes longe, and x M brode, thou
shalt measure, wherin the Sanctuary and the holiest of all maye stonde.
4 The resydue of that holy grounde shall be the prestes, which do seruyce in the
Sanctuary of the LORDE, and go in before the LORDE to serue him, that they maye
haue rowme to dwell in.
5 As for the Sanctuary, it shal stonde for it self: and to the Leuites the serue
in that house, there shalbe geuen xx habitacions, of the xxv M legth & x M
bredth:
6 ye shal geue also vnto the cite a possessio of v M meteroddes brode, & xxv M
longe, besyde the parte of ye Sanctuary: that shal be for the whole house of
Israel.
7 Vpon both the sydes of the Sanctuarys parte, & by the cite, there shalbe geuen
vnto the prynce, what so euer lyeth ouer agaynst the cite, as farre as reacheth
westwarde and eastwarde: which shalbe as longe as one parte, fro ye west vnto ye
east.
8 This shalbe his owne lode in Israel, that my princes be no more chargeable
vnto my people. And soch as remayneth yet ouer in the londe, shalbe geuen to the
house of Israel acordinge to their trybes.
9 Thus saieth the LORDE God: O ye princes, ye haue now oppressed and destroyed
ynough: now leaue of, handle now acordinge to the thinge, that is equall and
laufull: and thrust out my people nomore, sayeth ye LORDE God.
10 Ye shal haue a true weight, a true Epha, & a true Bat.
11 The Epha & the Bat shalbe a like. One Bat shal coteyne ye teth parte of an
Homer, and so shal one Epha do: their measure shalbe after ye Homer.
12 One Sycle maketh xx. Geras. So xx. Sycles, and xxv. & xv. Sycles make a
pounde.
13 This is the Heaue offrynge, that ye shal geue to be heaued: namely, the xvj.
parte of an Epha, out of an Homer of wheat: and the xvj. parte of an Epha, out
of an Homer of barlie.
14 The oyle shalbe measured with the Bat: euen the x. parte of one Bat out of a
Cor. Ten Battes make one Homer: for one Homer maketh ten Battes.
15 And one labe from two hundreth shepe out of the pasture of Israel, for a
meatoffrynge, burntoffrynge and healthoffrynge, to recocile them, sayeth the
LORDE God.
16 All the people of the londe shal geue this heaue offrynge with a frewil.
17 Agayne, it shal be the prynces parte to offre burntoffrynges, meatoffrynges
and drynkoffrynges vnto the LORDE, in the holy dayes, new Moones, Sabbathes, and
in all the hye feastes of the house of Israel. The synoffrynge, meatofferynge,
brentofferynge & healthoffringe shal he geue, to recocile the house of Israel.
18 Thus sayeth ye LORDE God: The first daye of the first moneth thou shalt take
a yoge bullocke without blemysh, and clense the Sanctuary.
19 So the prest shal take of the bloude of ye synoffrynge, and sprenkle it vpon
the postes of the house, and vpon the foure corners of the aulter, with the
dorepostes of the ynnermer courte.
20 And thus shalt thou do also the seuenth daye of ye moneth (for soch as haue
synned of ignoraunce, or beynge disceaued) to reconcile the house withall.
21 Vpon ye xiiij. daye of the first moneth ye shal kepe Easter. Seue dayes shal
the feast contynue, wherin there shal no sower ner leueded bred be eate.
22 Vpon the same daye shal ye prynce geue for himself and all the people of the
londe, a bullocke for a synoffringe.
23 And in the feast of the seuen dayes he shal offre euery daye a bullocke & a
ram, that are with out blemysh, for a burntoffrynge vnto the LORDE: & an he
gaote daylie for a synoffrynge.
24 For the meatoffrynges he shall geue euer an Epha to a bullocke, an Epha to a
ram, & an Hin of oyle to an Epha.
25 Vpon ye xv. daye of the seuenth moneth, he shal kepe the seuen dayes holy one
after another, eue as the other vij. dayes: with the synoffrynge, burntoffringe,
meatoffrynge, and with the oyle.

Chapter 46

1 Thus sayeth the LORDE God: ye dore of the ynnermer courte towarde the east,
shall be shut the vj. worke dayes: but in the Sabbath and in the daye of the new
Moone, it shalbe opened.
2 Then shal the prynce come vnder the dore porche, & stonde still without by the
dore cheke. So ye prestes shall offre vp his burnt & healthoffrynges. And he
shal worshipe at the dore poste, and go his waye forth agayne: but ye dore shal
nomore be shut till the euenynge.
3 On the same maner shal the people of the londe also do their worshipe before
the LORDE, without this dore vpon the Sabbathes and new Moones.
4 This is now the burntoffrynge, that the prynce shall bringe vnto the LORDE
vpon the Sabbath: sixe lambes without blemysh, & a ram without blemysh,
5 and an Epha for a meatoffringe, with ye ram. As for the lambes, he maye geue
as many meatoffrynges to them, as he wil, & an Hin of oyle to an Epha.
6 In the daye of the new moneth, it shalbe a yonge bullocke without blemysh,
sixe lambes & a ram also without blemysh.
7 With the bullocke he shal geue an Epha, and with the ram an Epha also for a
meatofferinge: but to ye lambes, what he maye come by: And euer an Hin of oyle
to an Epha.
8 When the prynce cometh, he shall go vnder the dore porche, and euen there
departe forth agayne.
9 But when the people of the londe come before the LORDE in the hye solempne
feast, as many as come in by the north dore to do worshipe, shal go out agayne
at the south dore. And they that come in at the south dore, shal go forth agayne
at ye north dore. There shal none go out at the dore where he came in, but shal
go forth right ouer on the other syde,
10 and the prynce shall go in and out amonge them.
11 Vpon the solempne and hie feaste dayes, this shalbe the meatofferynge: An
Epha to a bullock, and an Epha to a ram: and to the lambes, as many as he wil,
but euer an Hin of oyle to an Epha.
12 Now when the prynce bryngeth a burntofferynge or an healthofferynge with a
fre wil vnto the LORDE, the east dore shalbe opened vnto him, yt he maye do with
his burnt & healthofferynges, as he doth vpo the Sabbath: and when he goeth
forth, the dore shal be shut after him agayne.
13 He shal daylie brynge vnto the LORDE a lambe of a yeare olde without blemish
for a burntofferynge: this shall he do euery mornynge.
14 And for a meatofferynge he shal geue the sixte parte of an Epha, & the thirde
parte of an Hin of oyle (to myngle with the cakes) euery mornynge. Yee this
shalbe a daylie meatofferinge vnto the LORDE, for an euerlastinge ordinaunce:
15 & thus shal the lambe, the meatofferynge and oyle be geuen euery mornynge,
for a dailie burntofferinge.
16 Morouer, thus sayeth the LORDE God: Yf the prynce geue a gifte vnto eny of
his sonnes, then shall it be his sonnes heretage perpetuall, yt he maye possesse
it.
17 But yf he wil geue one of his seruauntes some of his heretage, it shall be
his to the fre yeare, and the to returne agayne vnto ye prynce: for his heretage
shalbe his sonnes only.
18 The prynce also shal take none of the peoples enheritaunce, ner put the from
their possession: but to his owne sonnes shal he geue his possession, that my
people be not scatred abrode, but that euery man maye haue his owne.
19 And he brought me thorow the intraunce at the syde of the dore to ye
habitacion of the Sanctuary, that belongeth to ye prestes and stode towarde the
north, & beholde, there was a place vpon the west syde,
20 then sayde he vnto me: This is the place, where the prestes shall dight the
trespace and synofferynges, & bake ye meatofferynges: that they nede not beare
the in to the outwarde courte, and so to vnhalowe the people.
21 So he brought me in to the vttemost courte, rounde aboute all the foure
corners. Beholde, in euery corner of ye fore courte, there was yet a litle
courte.
22 Yee in all the foure corners of the courte, there was made a litle courte of
xl. cubites longe, and xxx. cubites brode: these foure litle courtes were of one
like measure,
23 & there went a rygge wall rounde aboute them all foure, vnder the which there
were harthes made rounde aboute.
24 Then sayde he vnto me: This is the kechin, where the ministers of the house
shal dight the slayne offerynges of the people.

Chapter 47

1 After this he brought me agayne before the dore of the house: & beholde, there
gu?shed out waters from vnder ye postes of the house eastwarde (for the house
stode towarde the east) that ranne downe vpo the right syde of the house, which
lyeth to the aulter south warde.
2 The caried he me out to the north dore, and brought me forth there rounde
aboute by the vttemost dore, yt turneth eastwarde. Beholde, there came forth the
water vpon the right syde.
3 Now whan the man yt had the meterodde in his honde wente out vnto the east
dore, he measured a M. cubites, & the he brought me thorow ye water, eue to the
ancles:
4 so he measured yet a thousande, & brought me thorow ye water agayne vnto the
knees: yet measured he a thousande, and brought me thorow the water vnto the
loynes.
5 After this he measured a thousande agayne, then was it soch a ryuer, yt I
might not wade thorow it: The water was so depe, that it was nedefull to haue
swymmed, for it might not be waded ouer.
6 And he sayde vnto me: hast thou sene this, o thou sonne of man? and with that,
he brought me to the ryuer banck agayne.
7 Now when I came there, there stode many trees vpon ether syde of the ryuer
backe.
8 Then sayde he vnto me: This water that floweth out towarde the east, and
runneth downe in to the playne felde, commeth in to the see: and from the see it
runneth out, & maketh the waters whole.
9 Yee all that liue and moue, where vnto this ryuer commeth, shal recouer. And
where this water cometh, there shalbe many fysh. For all that commeth to this
water, shall be lusty and whole.
10 By this riuer shal the fy?shers stonde from Engaddi vnto En Eglaim, & there
sprede out their nettes: for there shalbe greate heapes of fysh, like as in the
mayne see.
11 As for his claye and pyttes, they shal not be whole, for why, it shalbe
occupide for salt.
12 By this ryuer vpon both the sydes of the shore, there shall growe all maner
of frutefull trees, whose leaues shall not fall of, nether shal their frute
perish: but euer be rype at their monethes, for their water runneth out of the
Sanctuary. His frute is good to eate, and his leaf profitable for medycine.
13 Thus sayeth the LORDE God: Let this be the border, wherin ye shall deuyde the
londe vnto the xij. trybes of Israel, with the lyne.
14 Parte it indifferently vnto one as vnto another: of the which lode I swore
vnto youre fathers, that it shulde fall to youre enheritaunce.
15 This is the border of the londe vpon the northsyde, from the mayne see, as
men go to Zadada:
16 namely, Hemath, Berotha, Sabarim: from the borders of Damascus and Hemath
vnto Hazar Tichon, that lieth vpon the coastes of Hauera.
17 Thus the borders fro the see forth, shalbe Hazar Euan, the border of Damascus
the north, and the borders of Hemath: that is the north parte.
18 The east syde shal ye measure from Haueran and Damascus, from Galead and the
londe of Israel by Iordane and so forth, from the see coast, that lieth
eastwarde: and this is the east parte.
19 The south syde is, from Thamar forth to the waters of strife vnto Cades, the
ryuer, to the mayne see: and that is the south parte.
20 The west parte: namely the greate see from the borders therof, till a man
come vnto Hemath: this is the west parte.
21 This londe shal ye parte amonge you, acordinge to the trybes of Israel,
22 and deuyde it to be an heretage for you, and for the straugers that dwel
amoge you, and begette children. For ye shal take them amonge the childre of
Israell, like as though they were of youre owne housholde and countre, and they
shal haue heretage with you amonge the childre of Israel.
23 Loke in what trybe the straunger dwelleth, in the same trybe shal ye geue him
his heretage, saieth the LORDE God.

Chapter 48

1 These are ye names of the trybes that lye vpon the northsyde by the waye of
Hetlon, tyll thou commest vnto Hemath and Hazar Enam, the borders of Damascus
towarde the north besyde Hemath: Dan shal haue his porcio from the east quarter
vnto the west.
2 Vpon the borders of Dan from the east syde vnto the west, shal Asser haue his
porcion.
3 Vpon the borders of Asser fro the east parte vnto the west, shal Nephtali haue
his porcion.
4 Vpon the borders of Nephtali from the east quarter vnto the west, shal
Manasses haue his porcion.
5 Vpon the borders of Manasses from the east syde vnto the west, shal Ephraim
haue his porcion.
6 Vpon the borders of Ephraim from the east parte vnto the west, shal Ruben haue
his porcion.
7 Vpo the borders of Ruben from the east quarter vnto the west, shal Iuda haue
his porcion.
8 Vpon the borders of Iuda from the east parte vnto the west, ye shal set a syde
one porcio of xxv.M. meteroddes longe and brode (like as another porcion from
the east syde vnto the west,) wherin the Sanctuary shal stode.
9 As for the porcion, that ye shal separate out for the LORDE, it shalbe xxv.M.
longe, and x.M. brode.
10 Which separated holy porcion shal belonge vnto these: namely to the prestes,
towarde the north xxv.M. & towarde the west x.M. brode, towarde the east x. M.
brode also, & towarde the south xxv.M. longe, wherin the Sanctuary of the LORDE
shal stonde.
11 Yee this same place shal be the prestes, yt are of the childre of Sadoch, &
haue kepte my holy ordinaunce: which wente not astraye in the erroure of the
children of Israel, like as the Leuites are gone astraye:
12 and this separated pece that they haue of the londe, shalbe the most holy,
harde vpon the borders of the Leuites.
13 And nexte vnto the prestes, shal the Leuites haue xxv.M. loge and x.M. brode.
This shalbe on euery syde xxv. M. longe, and x. M. brode.
14 Of this porcio they shal sell nothinge, ner make eny permutacion therof, lest
the chefe of the londe fall vnto other, for it is halowed vnto the LORDE.
15 The other v.M. after the bredth, yt lyeth by the xxv.M, shalbe comon: it shal
belonge to the cite and to the suburbes for habitacions, and ye cite shal stonde
in the myddest therof.
16 Let this be the measure: towarde ye north parte, v.C. & iiij.M: towarde the
south parte, v.C. & iiij.M: towarde the east parte, v.C. and iiij.M: towarde ye
west parte, v.C. and iiij.M.
17 The suburbes harde vpon the cite, shall haue towarde the north, L. and ij.C:
towarde the south, L. and two C: towarde the east, L. and two C: towarde the
west also, L. and two C.
18 As for the residue of the length, that lyeth hard vpon the separated holy
grounde: namely, x.M. towarde the east and x.M. towarde the west, next vnto the
holy porcio: it and the increase therof shal serue for their meate, that laboure
in the cite.
19 They that laboure for the welth of the cite, shall manteine this also, out of
what tribe so euer they be in Israel.
20 All that is separated of the xxv.M. longe and xxv.M. brode on the foure
partes, yt shall ye put a syde for the separated porcion of the Sanctuary, & for
the possession of ye cite.
21 The resydue vpon both the sydes of the Sanctuary and possession of the cite,
shall belonge to the prynce, before the place of ye xxv.M. vnto the east ende, &
before the place of ye xxv.M. westwarde, vnto the borders of ye cite: this
shalbe ye prynces porcio. This shalbe the holy place, and the house of the
Sanctuary shal stonde in the myddest.
22 Morouer, from the Leuites and the cities possession, yt lye in the myddest of
the prynces parte: loke what remayneth betwixte the border of Iuda & the border
of Ben Iamin, it shalbe the prynces.
23 Now of the other trybes. Fro the east parte vnto the west, shal Ben Iamin
haue his porcion.
24 Vpon the borders of Ben Iamin fro the east syde vnto ye west, shal Symeon
haue his porcion.
25 Vpon the borders of Symeo from the east parte vnto the west, shal Isachar
haue his porcion.
26 Vpo the borders of Isachar from the east syde vnto the west, shal Sabulon
haue his porcion.
27 Vpon the borders of Sabulon from the east parte vnto the west, shal Gad haue
his porcion.
28 Vpon the borders of Gad southwarde, the coastes shal reach fro Thamar forth
vnto the waters of strife to Cades, and to the floude, euen vnto the mayne see.
29 This is ye lode wt his porcios, which ye shal distribute vnto the trybes of
Israel, saieth ye LORDE God.
30 Thus wyde shal the cite reach: vpon the north parte v C and iiij M measures.
31 The portes of the cite, shal haue the names of the trybes of Israel. Thre
portes of ye northsyde: One Ruben, another Iuda, the thirde Leui.
32 Vpo ye east syde, v C & iiij M measures, wt ye thre portes: The one Ioseph,
another Be Iamin, the thirde Dan.
33 Vpon the south syde v C and iiij M measures, with the thre portes: the one
Symeon, another Isachar, the thirde Sabulon.
34 And vpon the west syde v C and iiij M measures, with thre portes also: the
one Gad, another Asser, the thirde Nephtali.
35 Thus shal it haue xviij M measures roude aboute. And from that tyme forth, ye
name of the cite shalbe: the LORDE is there.


Daniel

Chapter 1

1 In ye thirde yeare of ye raigne of Ioachim kynge off Iuda, came Nabuchodonosor
kynge of Babilon vnto Ierusalem, & beseged it:
2 and the LORDE delyuered Ioachim the kynge off Iuda in to his honde, with
certayne ornamentes of the house off God, which he caried awaye vnto the londe
of Sennar, to the house of his god and there brought them in to his gods
treasury.
3 And the kynge spake vnto Asphenes ye chefe chamberlayne, that he shulde brynge
him certayne of the children of Israel, that were come of the kynges sede and of
prynces,
4 yoge spryngaldes with out eny blemish but fayre ad welfauored, instructe in
all wisdome, connynge and vnderstodinge: which were able to stonde in the kynges
palace, to reade, and to lerne for to speake Caldeish.
5 Vnto these the kinge appoynted a certayne porcion of his owne meate and of the
wine, which he drancke himselff, so to norish the thre yeare: that afterwarde
they might stonde before the kynge.
6 Amonge these now were certayne of the children off Iuda: namely Daniel,
Ananias, Misael and Azarias.
7 Vnto these the chefe chamberlayne gaue other names, and called Daniel,
Balthasar: Ananias, Sydrac: Misael, Misac: and Asarias, Abdenago.
8 But Daniel was at a poynt wt himself, that he wolde not be defyled thorow the
kynges meate, ner ye wyne which he droke. And this he desyred off the chefe
chaberlayne, lest he shulde defyle himselff.
9 So God gaue Daniel fauoure and grace before ye chefe chamberlayne,
10 that he sayde vnto him: I am afrayed off my lorde the kynge, which hath
appoynted you youre meate and drynke: lest he spye youre faces to be worse
lykynge then the other spryngaldes of youre age, ad so ye shal make me loose my
heade vnto ye kynge.
11 Then Daniel answered Melassar, whom the chefe chamberlayne had set ouer
Daniel, Ananias, Misael and Asarias, and sayde:
12 O proue but ten dayes with thy seruauntes, and let vs haue potage to eate,
and water to drynke:
13 then loke vpon oure faces, and theirs that eate off the kinges meate. And as
thou seyst, so deale with thy seruauntes.
14 So he consented to them in this matter, ad proued the x. dayes.
15 And after ye ten dayes, their faces were better lykinge & fatter, then all
the yonge spryngaldes, which ate of the kinges meate.
16 Thus Melassar toke awaye their meate and wyne, and gaue them potage therfore.
17 God gaue now these foure spryngaldes connynge and lernynge in all scripture
and wisdome: but vnto Daniel specially, he gaue vnderstondinge off all visions
and dreames.
18 Now when the tyme was expyred, that the kynge had appoynted to brynge in
these yonge springaldes vnto him: the chefe chamberlayne brought them before
Nabuchodonosor,
19 and the kynge commoned with them. But amonge them all were founde none soch
as Daniel, Ananias, Misael, and Asarias. Therfore stode they before the kynge,
20 which in all wisdome and matters off vnderstodinge, that he enquered off
them, founde them ten tymes better, the all the soythsayers and charmers, that
were in all his realme.
21 And Daniel abode still, vnto the first yeare of kynge Cyrus.

Chapter 2

1 In the secode yeare off the raigne of Nabuchodonosor, had Nabuchodonosor a
dreame, where thorow his sprete was vexed, and his slepe brake from him.
2 Then the kynge comaunded to call together all ye soythsayers, charmers,
witches and Caldees, for to shewe the kynge his dreame. So they came, and stode
before the kynge.
3 And the kynge sayde vnto them: I haue dreamed a dreame, & my sprete was so
troubled therwith, yt I haue clene forgotten, what I dreamed.
4 Vpon this, the Caldees answered the kynge in the Syrians speach: O kynge, God
saue thy life for euer. Shewe thy seruauntes the dreame, and we shal shewe the,
what it meaneth.
5 The kynge gaue the Caldees their answere, ad sayde: It is gone fro me: Yf ye
wil not make me vnderstonde the dreame with the interpretacion theroff, ye shal
dye, and youre houses shal be prysed.
6 But yff ye tell me the dreame and the meanynge therof, ye shall haue off me
giftes, rewardes and greate honoure: only, shewe me the dreame and the
significacion of it.
7 They answered agayne, and sayde: the kynge must shewe his seruauntes the
dreame, and so shal we declare, what it meaneth.
8 Then the kynge answerde, sayenge: I perceaue off a treuth, that ye do but
prologe ye tyme: for so moch as ye se, that the thinge is gone fro me.
9 Therfore, yff ye wil not tell me the dreame, ye shal all haue one iudgment.
But ye fayne and dyssemble with vayne wordes, which ye speake before me, to put
off the tyme. Therfore tell me the dreame, ad so shall I knowe, yff ye can shewe
me, what it meaneth.
10 Vpon this, the Caldees gaue answere before the kynge, and sayde: there is no
man vpon earth, that can tell the thinge, which ye kynge speaketh of: Yee there
is nether kynge prynce ner LORDE, that euer axed soch thinges at a soythsayer,
charmer or Caldeer:
11 for it is a very harde matter, that the kynge requyreth. Nether is there eny,
that can certifie the kynge theroff, excepte the goddes: whose dwellinge is not
amonge the creatures.
12 For ye which cause the kynge was wroth with greate indignacio, and comaunded
to destroye all the wyse men at Babilon:
13 and ye proclamacion wete forth, that the wyse me shulde be slayne. They
sought also to slaye Daniel with his copanyons.
14 Then Daniel enquered Arioch the kynges stewarde, off the iudgment and
sentence, that was gone forth alredy to kyll soch as were wyse at Babilon.
15 He answered, and sayde vnto Arioch beinge then the kinges debyte: Why hath
the kynge proclamed so cruell a sentence? So Arioch tolde Daniel the matter.
16 Vpon this, wente Daniel vp, and desyred the kinge, yt he might haue leysoure,
to shewe the kynge the interpretacion:
17 and then came he home agayne & shewed the thinge vnto Ananias, Misael &
Asarias his companios:
18 yt they shulde beseke the God of heauen for grace in this secrete, that
Daniel and his felowes with other soch as were wyse in Babilon, perished not.
19 Then was the mystery shewed vnto Daniel in a visio by nyght. And Daniel
praysed ye God of heaue,
20 Daniel also cryed loude, and sayde: O that the name of God might be praysed
for euer and euer, for wi?dome and strength are his owne:
21 he chaungeth the tymes and ages: he putteth downe kynges, he setteth vp
kynges: he geueth wy?dome vnto the wyse, and vnderstodinge to those that
vnderstode
22 he openeth the depe secretes: he knoweth ye the thynge that lyeth in
darknesse, for the light dwelleth with him.
23 I thanke the, and prayse the (O thou God off my fathers) that thou hast lent
me wy?dome and strength, & hast shewed me the thinge, that we desyred off the,
for thou hast opened the kynges matter vnto me.
24 Vpon this wente Daniel in vnto Arioch, whom the kinge had ordened to destroye
the wyse at Babilon: he wente vnto him, and sayde: destroye not soch as are wyse
in Babilon, but bringe me in vnto the kynge, and I shal shewe the kynge the
interpretacion.
25 Then Arioch brought Daniel into the kynge in all the haist, and sayde vnto
him: I haue founde a man amonge the presoners off Iuda, yt shal shewe the kinge
the interpretacion.
26 The answered the kynge, and sayde vnto Daniel, whose name was Balthasar: Art
thou he, yt cast shewe me ye dreame, which I haue sene, & the interpretacion
therof?
27 Daniel answered the kynge to his face, and sayde: As for this secrete, for
the which the kinge maketh inquisicion: it is nether the wyse, the sorcerer, the
charmer ner the deuell coniurer, that can certifie the kynge off it:
28 Only God in heaue ca open secretes, and he it is, that sheweth the kinge
Nabuchodonosor, what is for to come in the latter dayes. Thy dreame, and that
which thou hast sene in thyne heade vpon thy bed, is this:
29 O kynge, thou didest cast in thy mynde, what shulde come herafter: So he that
is the opener off mysteries, telleth the, what is for to come.
30 As for me, this secrete is not shewed me, for eny wi?dome that I haue, more
then eny other lyuynge: but only that I might shewe the kynge the
interpretacion, & that he might knowe the thoughtes off his owne herte.
31 Thou kynge sawest, and beholde: there stode before the a greate ymage, whose
fygure was maruelous greate, and his vysage grymme.
32 The ymage heade was of fyne golde, his brest and armes off syluer, his body
ad loynes were off copper,
33 his legges were off yron, his fete were parte off yron, and parte of earth.
34 This thou sawest, till the tyme that (with out eny hondes) there was hewen
off a stone which smote the ymage vpon the fete, that were both off yron and
earth, and brake the to poulder:
35 then was the yron, the earth, the copper, the syluer and golde broken
altogether in peces: and became like the chaffe off corne, that the wynde
bloweth awaye from ye somer floores, that they ca nomore be foude. But the stone
that smote the ymage, became a greate mountayne, which fulfylleth the whole
earth:
36 This is the dreame. And now will we shewe before the kynge, what it meaneth.
37 O kynge, thou art a kynge off kynges: For the God off heaue hath geue the a
kingdome, ryches, strength and maiesty:
38 & hath delyuered the all thinges, that are amoge ye children off men: the
beastes off the felde, ad the foules vnder the heaue, and geuen the dominion
ouer them all. Thou art that golde heade.
39 After ye there shal aryse another kingdome, which shal be lesse then thyne.
The thyrde kingdome shal be lyke copper, and haue dominacion in all lodes.
40 The fourth kingdome shal be as stronge as yron. For like as yron brusseth and
breaketh all thinges: Yee euen as yron beateth euery thinge downe, so shal it
beate downe and destroye.
41 Where as thou sawest the fete and toes, parte of earth and parte off yron:
that is a deuyded kyngdome, which neuertheles shal haue some off the yron
grounde mixte with it, for so moch as thou hast sene the yron mixte with the
claye.
42 The toes of the fete that were parte off yron and parte off claye,
signifieeh: that it shalbe a kyngdome partely stronge and partely weake.
43 And where as thou sawest yron myxte with claye: they shall myngle them selues
wt ye sede off symple people, & yet not contynue one with another, like as yron
wil not be souldered with a potsherde.
44 In the dayes off these kynges, shall the God of heauen set vp an euerlastinge
kyngdome which shall not perish, and his kyngdome shall not be geuen ouer to
another people: Yee the same shall breake and destroye all these kyngdomes, but
it shall endure for euer.
45 And where as thou sawest, that without eny hondes there was cut out of the
mount a stone, which brake the yron, the copper ye earth, the syluer and golde
in peces: by that hath ye greate God shewed the kynge, what wyl come after this.
This is a true dreame, and the interpretacion of it is sure.
46 Then the kynge Nabuchodonosor fell downe vpon his face, and bowed him self
vnto Daniel, and commaunded that they shulde offre meatoffrynges and swete
odoures vnto him.
47 The kynge answerde Daniel, and sayde: Yee off a treuth, youre God is a God
aboue all goddes, a LORDE aboue all kynges, and an opener of secretes: seynge
thou canst discouer this mysterie.
48 So the kynge made Daniel a greate man, and gaue him many and greate giftes.
He made him ruler off all the countrees of Babilon, and lorde of all the nobles,
that were at Babilon.
49 Now Daniel intreated the kynge for Sydrac, Misac and Abdenago, so that he
made them rulers ouer all the offyces in the londe off Babilon: but Daniel
himself remayned still in the courte by the kynge.

Chapter 3

1 Nabuchodonosor the kynge caused a golde ymage to be made, which was lx.
cubites hye, and sixe cubites thicke. This he made to be set vp in the valley of
Duran in the londe of Babilon
2 & sent out to gather together the dukes, lordes & nobles, the iudges and
officers, the debites ad shreues, with all the rulers of the londe: yt they
might come to the dedicacion of the ymage which Nabuchodonosor the kynge had set
vp.
3 So the dukes, lordes and nobles, the iudges and officers, debytes and shreues
with all the rulers of the londe gathered them together, and came vnto the
dedicatynge of ye ymage, that Nabuchodonosor the kinge had set vp. Now when they
stode before the ymage, which Nabuchodonosor set vp,
4 the bedell cried out wt all his might: O ye people, kynreddes and tunges, to
you be it sayde:
5 that whe ye heare the noyse off the trompettes, which shalbe blowne, wt ye
harpes, shawmes, Psalteries, Symphonies and all maner off Musick: ye fall downe
and worshipe the golden ymage, yt Nabuchodonosor the kynge hath set vp.
6 Who so then falleth not downe and boweth himself, shal euen the same houre be
cast in to an hote burnynge ouen.
7 Therfore, when all the folke herde the noyse off the trompettes that were
blowne, with the harpes, shawmes, Psalteries, Symphonies and all kynde of
Melody: the all the people, kynreddes and nacions fell downe, and bowed them
selues vnto the golden ymage, that Nabuchodonosor the kynge had set vp.
8 Now were there certayne men off the Caldees, that went euen then and accused
ye Iewes,
9 and sayde vnto kynge Nabuchodonosor: O kynge, God saue thy lyfe for euer.
10 Thou beynge kynge hast geuen a commaudemet, that all men when they heare the
noyse off the trompettes, harpes, shawmes, psalteries, symphonies and all the
other melodies: shall fall downe and bowe them selues towarde the golden ymage:
11 who so the fell not downe and worshipped not, that he shulde be cast in to an
hote burnynge ouen.
12 Now are there certaine Iewes, whom thou hast set ouer the offices of the
londe off Babilon: namely, Sydrac, Misac and Abdenago. These men (o kynge)
regarde not thy comaundemet, yee they will not serue thy goddes, ner bowe them
selues to the golden ymage, that thou hast set vp.
13 Then Nabuchodonosor in a cruell wrath and displeasure, commaunded, yt Sidrac,
Misac & Abdenago shulde be brought vnto him. So these men were brought before
the kynge.
14 Then Nabuchodonosor spake vnto them, and sayde: what? o Sidrac Misac and
Abdenago, will not ye serue my goddes? nor bowe youre selues to the golden
ymage, that I haue set vp?
15 wel, be redy herafter, when ye heare the noyse of the tropettes, blowne with
the harpes, shawmes, psalteries, symphonies and all ye other melodies: that ye
fall downe, and worshipe the ymage which I haue made. But yff ye worshipe it
not, ye shal be cast immediatly in to an hote burnynge ouen. Let se, what god is
there, yt maye delyuer you out of my hondes?
16 Sydrac, Misac and Abdenago answered the kynge, and sayde: O Nabuchodonosor,
we ought not to cosente vnto ye in this matter, for why:
17 oure God whom we serue, is able to kepe vs from the hote burnynge ouen (O
kynge) and can right wel delyuer vs out off thy hondes.
18 And though he wil not, yet shalt thou knowe (o kynge) that we will not serue
thy goddes, ner do reuerece to the ymage, which thou hast set vp.
19 Then was Nabuchodonosor full off indignacion, so that ye countenaunce of his
face chaunged vpo Sidrac, Misac & Abdenago. Therfore he charched and commaunded,
that the ouen shulde be made seuen tymes hoter, then it was wote to be:
20 and spake vnto the strongest worthies that were in his hooste, for to bynde
Sidrac, Misac and Abdenago, and to cast them in to the hote burnynge ouen.
21 So these men were bounde in their cotes, hosen, shues with their other
garmentes, ad cast in to the hote burnynge ouen:
22 for the kinges commaundement was so strate, and the ouen was exceadynge hote.
As for the men that put in Sydrac, Misac and Abdenago, the flame off the fyre
destroyed them.
23 And these thre men Sydrac, Misac and Abdenago fell downe in ye hote burnynge
ouen, beinge fast bounde.
24 Then Nabuchodonosor the kynge marueled, and stode vp in all haist: he spake
vnto his councel and sayde: dyd not ye cast these thre men bounde in to the
fyre? They answered, and sayde vnto the kynge: Yee o kynge.
25 He answered and sayde: lo, for all that, yet do I se foure men goinge lowse
in the myddest off the fyre, and nothinge corrupte: and the fourth is like an
angel to loke vpon.
26 Vpon this wete Nabuchodonosor vnto the mouth of the hote burnynge ouen: he
speake also, & sayde: O Sydrac, Misac and Abdenago, ye seruauntes of the hye
God: go forth, and come hither. And so Sydrac, Misac, and Abdenago wente out of
the fyre.
27 Then the dukes, lordes and nobles, and the kynges councell came together to
se these men, vpon whom the fyre had no maner of power in their bodies: In so
moch that the very hayre of their heade was not burnt, and their clothes
vnchaunged: Yee there was no smell of fyre felt vpon them.
28 Then spake Nabuchodonosor, and sayde: Blessed be the God of Sidrac, Misac &
Abdenago: which hath sent his angel, ad defended his seruautes, that put their
trust in him: yt haue altered the kynges commaundement, and ioperde their bodies
thervpon: rather then they wolde serue or worshipe eny other god, excepte their
owne God only.
29 Therfore I wil and commaude, that all people, kynreddes & tunges, which
speake eny blasphemy agaynst the God of Sydrac, Misac and Abdenago, shal dye,
and their houses shalbe prysed: Because, there is no God yt maye sane, as this.
30 So the kynge promoted Sidrac, Misac and Abdenago, in the londe of Babylon.

Chapter 4

1 Nabuchodonosor kynge, vnto all people, kynreddes and tunges that dwell vpon
the whole earth: peace be multiplied amoge you
2 I thought it good to shewe the tokes & maruelous workes, yt ye hye God hath
wrought vpon me.
3 O how greate are his tokes, & how mightie are his wonders? His kyngdome is an
euerlastinge kyngdome, and his power lasteth for euer and euer.
4 I Nabuchodonosor beynge at rest in myne house, ad florishinge in my palace,
5 sawe a dreame, which made me afrayed: ad thoughtes that I had vpo my bed, with
the visions of myne heade, troubled me.
6 Then sent I out a commission, that all they which were of wi?dome at Babilo
shulde be brought before me, to tell me the interpretacion of the dreame.
7 So there came the soythsayers, charmers, Caldees and coniurers of deuels: to
whom I tolde the dreame, but what it betokened, they coude not shewe me:
8 till at the last, there came one Daniel (otherwyse called Balthasar, acordinge
to the name of my God) which hath the sprete of the holy goddes in him: to whom
I tolde the dreame, sayenge:
9 O Balthasar, thou prynce of saythsayers: For so moch as I knowe, that thou
hast the sprete of the holy goddes, and no secrete is hyd from the: tel me
therfore, what ye visio of my dreame (yt I haue sene) maye signifie.
10 I sawe a vision in my heade vpon my bed: and beholde, there stode a tre vpon
the grounde,
11 which was very hye, greate and mightie: ye heyth reached vnto the heaue, and
the bredth extended to all the endes of the earth:
12 his leaues were fayre, he had very moch frute, so yt euery ma had ynough to
eate therin. The beastes of the felde had shadowes vnder it, and the foules off
the ayre dwelt in the bowes therof. Shortly, all creatures fed of it.
13 I sawe in my heade a vision vpon my bed: & beholde, a watcher (eue an holy
angel) came downe from heauen,
14 and cryed mightely, sayenge: Hew downe the tre, breake off his braunches,
shake of his leaues, and scatre his frute abrode: that all the beestes maye get
them awaye from vnder him, and the foules from his braunches.
15 Neuertheles leaue the grounde of his rote still in the earth, and bynde him
vpon the playne felde, with cheynes of yron and stele. With the dew of heauen
shall he be wet, and he shall haue his parte in the herbes of the grounde with
other wylde beastes.
16 That mans herte off his shall be taken from him, and a beastes herte shall be
geuen him, till seuen yeares be come and gone vpon him.
17 This erande of the watcher, is a comaundemet grounded and sought out in the
councel off him, that is most holy: to lerne men for to vnderstonde, that the
hyest hath power ouer the kyngdomes off men, ad geueth them, to whom it liketh
him, and bryngeth the very outcastes off men ouer them.
18 This is the dreame, yt I kynge Nabuchodonosor haue sene. Therfore o
Balthasar, tell thou me what it signifieth: for so moch as all the wyse men off
my kyngdome are not able to shewe me, what it meaneth. But thou canst do it, for
ye sprete of the holy Goddes is in the.
19 Then Daniel (whose name was Balthasar) helde his peace by the space of an
houre ad his thoughtes troubled him. So the kynge spake, and sayde: O Balthasar,
let nether the dreame ner the interpretacion theroff feare the. Balthasar
answered, sayenge: O my LORDE, this dreame happen to thyne enemies, and the
interpretacion to thyne aduersaries.
20 As for the tre that thou sawest which was so greate & mightie, whose heyth
reached vnto the heauen, and his bredth in to all the worlde:
21 whose leaues were fayre, ad the frute moch: vnder the which the beastes of
the felde had their habitacion, and vpon whose braunches the foules of the ayre
dyd syt:
22 Euen thou (o kynge) art the tre, greate & stroge. Thy greatnesse increaseth,
& reacheth vnto the heauen, so doth thy power to the endes of the earth.
23 But where as the kynge sawe a watcher euen an holy angel, that came downe
from heauen, and sayde: hew downe the tre, and destroye it: yet leaue the groun
of the rote in the earth, and bynde him vpon the playne felde with cheynes off
yron and stele: He shall be wet with the dew off heauen, and his parte shalbe
with the beestes of the felde, till seuen yeares be come and gone vpon him:
24 This (o kynge) is ye interpretacio, yee it is the very deuyce of him, yt is
hyest of all, & it toucheth my LORDE the kynge.
25 Thou shalt be cast out fro men, and thy dwellinge shalbe with the beestes of
the felde: with grasse shalt thou be fed like an oxe. Thou must be wet with the
dew of the heauen: yee seuen yeares shall come and go vpon the, till thou knowe,
that the hyest hath power vpon the kyngdomes of men, & geueth them, to whom he
lyst.
26 Morouer, where as it was sayde, that the rote of the tre shulde be be left
still in the grounde: it betokeneth, yt thy kyngdome shall remayne whole vnto
ye, after thou hast lerned to knowe, that the power commeth from heauen.
27 Wherfore (o kinge) be contet with my councel, that thou mayest lowse thy
synnes with rightuousnesse, ad thyne offences with mercy to poore people: for
soch thinges shall prolonge thy peace.
28 All these thynges touch the kynge Nabuchodonosor.
29 So after xij. monethes, the kynge walked vp and downe in the paalace off the
kyngdome off Babilon,
30 and sayde: This is the greate cite off Babilo, which I myself (with my power
& strength) haue made a kynges courte, for the honoure off my magesty.
31 Whyle these wordes were yet in the kynges mouth, there fell a voyce from
heaue, sayengt: O kinge Nabuchodonosor, to the be it spoke: Thy kyngdome shall
departe from the,
32 thou shalt be cast out of mens company: thy dwellinge shalbe with the beestes
off the felde, so that thou shalt eate grasse like as an oxe, till seuen yeares
be come and gone ouer the: euen vntill thou knowest, that the hyest hath power
vpon the kyngdomes off men, and that he maye geue them, vnto whom it pleaseth
him.
33 The very same houre was this matter fulfylled vpo Nabuchodonosor: so that he
was cast out off mes copany, & ate grasse like an oxe. His body was wet with the
dew of heauen, till his hayres were as greate as Aegles fethers, and his nales
like byrdes clawes.
34 When this tyme was past, I Nabuchodonosor lift vp myne eyes vnto heauen, and
myne vnderstondinge was restored vnto me agayne. Then gaue I thankes vnto the
hyest. I magnified and praysed him that lyueth for euermore, whose power
endureth allwaye, and his kyngdome from one generacion to another:
35 in comparyson off whom, all they that dwell vpon the earth, are to be reputed
as nothinge. He handleth acordinge to his will, amoge ye powers of heauen &
amonge the inhabitours of the earth: and there is none that maye resiste his
honde, or saye: what doest thou?
36 At the same tyme was myne vnderstondynge geuen me agayne, and I was restored
to the honoure of my kingdome, to my dignite, and to myne owne shappe agayne. My
great estates and prynces sought vnto me, and I was set in my kyngdome agayne,
so that I had yet greater worshipe.
37 The dyd I Nabuchodonosor, loaue, magnifie and prayse the kynge of heauen: for
all his workes are true, and his wayes right. As for those that go on proudly,
he is able to bri bringe them downe.

Chapter 5

1 Balthasar the kynge made a greate bancket to his thousande lordes: withall
these thousande he made greate cheare,
2 and when he was dronken wt wyne, he commaunded to brynge him ye golden and
syluer vessel, which his father Nabuchodonosor had taken out of the temple at
Ierusalem: that the kynge and his lordes (with his quene and concubynes) might
drike therout.
3 So they brought the golden vessel, that was take out of the temple of the
LORDES house at Ierusalem. Then the kynge and his lordes with his quene and
concubines dronke out of them.
4 They dronke wyne, and praysed their Idols of golde, syluer, copper, yron,
wodde and stone.
5 In the very same houre there appeared fyngers, as it had bene of a mans honde
writynge, right ouer agaynst the candelsticke vpon the playne wall in the kynges
palace: and the kynge sawe the palme of ye honde yt wrote.
6 Then chaunged the kynge his countenaunce, and his thoughtes troubled him: so
that the ioyntes off his body shoke, and his knees smote one agaynst the other.
7 Wherfore the kynge cryed mightely, that they shulde brynge him the charmers,
Caldees and coniurers of deuels. The kynge spake also to the wyse men of
Babilon, and sayde: Who so can rede this wrytynge, and shewe me the playne
meanynge theroff: shall be clothed with purple, haue a cheyne off golde aboute
his necke, and rule the thirdeparte off my kyngdome.
8 Vpon this, came all the kynges wyse men: but they coude nether rede the
wrytinge, ner shewe the kynge what it signified.
9 The was the kynge sore afrayed, in so moch, that his coloure chaunged, and his
lordes were sore vexed.
10 So by reason off this matter, yt had happened to the kynge & his lordes, the
quene went vp herself in to the bancket house, and spake vnto the kynge,
sayenge: O kynge God saue thy life for euer: Let not yi thoughtes trouble the,
and let not thy countenaunce be chaunged.
11 For why: there is a man in ye kyngdome, that hath the sprete off the holy
goddes within him, as it was sene in thy fathers dayes. He hath vnderstondinge
ad wysdome like the goddes. Yee the kynge Nabuchodonosor thy father made this
man chefe of the soythsayers, charmers, Caldees and deuel coniurers:
12 because that soch an abundaunt sprete, knowlege & wisdome (to expoude
dreames, to open secretes, and to declare harde dowtes) was founde in him: yee
euen in Daniel, whom the kynge named Balthasar. Let this same Daniel be sente
for, and he shall tell, what it meaneth.
13 Then was Daniel brought before the kinge. So the kynge spake vnto Daniel, and
sayde: Art thou that Daniel, one off the presoners of Iuda, whom my father the
kynge brought out of Iewry?
14 I haue herde speake of the, that thou hast the sprete of the holy goddes,
experience and vnderstodinge, and that there hath bene greate wisdome founde in
the.
15 Now haue there bene brought me, wise and connynge charmers, to rede this
wrytynge, and to shewe me the meanynge theroff: But they coude not tell me, what
this matter signified.
16 Then herde I saye, yt thou canst expounde darcke thinges, and declare harde
doutes. Well than, yf thou canst rede this writinge, and shewe me the meaninge
therof: thou shalt be clothed wt purple, haue a cheyne of golde aboute thy
necke, & rule the thirde parte of my kyngdome.
17 Daniel answered, and sayde before ye kynge: As for thy rewardes, kepe them to
thy self, or geue yi rych giftes to another: yet not thelesse, I wil rede the
wrytynge vnto ye kinge, and shewe him the interpretacion
18 therof O kinge, God the hyest gaue vnto Nabuchodonosor thy father, ye dignite
of a kynge, wt worshipe & honor:
19 so yt all people, kynreddes & tunges stode in awe & feare of him, by reason
off the hye estate, that he had lent him. For why: he slewe, whom he wolde: he
smote, whom it pleased him. Agayne: whom he wolde, he set vp: and whom he list,
he put downe.
20 But because his herte was so proude, and his stomack set fast vnto
wylfulnesse: he was deposed from his kyngly trone, and his magesty was taken
from him.
21 He was shot out from amonge men, his herte was like a beestes herte, and his
dwellynge was with the wylde Asses: he was fayne to eate grasse like an oxe, and
his body was wet with the dew off the heauen: till he knewe, that the hyest had
power vpon the kyngdomes of men, and setteth ouer them, whom he list.
22 And thou his sonne (o Balthasar) for all this, hast not submitted thine hert,
though thou knewest all these thinges:
23 but hast magnified thy selff aboue the LORDE off heauen, so that the vessels
off his house were brought before the: that thou, and thy lordes, with thy quene
and concubynes, might drynke wyne therout: And hast praysed the Idols of syluer
and golde, copper and yron, off wodde & stone: As for the God, in whose honde
consisteth thy breth ad all thy wayes: thou hast not loaued him.
24 Therfore is the palme off this honde sent hither from him, to token vp this
wrytinge.
25 And this is the scripture, that is written vp: Mane, Thetel, Phares.
26 Now the interpretacion off the thynge is this: Mane, God hath nombred thy
kyngdome, and brought it to an ende:
27 Thetel, Thou art weyed in the balaunce, and art founde to light:
28 Phares, Thy kyngdome is delt in partes, and geuen to the Medes and Perses.
29 Then commaunded Balthasar, to cloth Daniel with purple, to hange a cheyne off
golde aboute his necke, and to make a proclamacion concernynge him: that he
shulde be the ruler off the thirde parte off his kyngdome.
30 The very same night was Balthasar the kynge off the Caldees slayne,
31 and Darius out of Media toke in the kyngdome, beynge lxij. yeare off age.

Chapter 6

1 It pleased Darius to set ouer his kigdome an C and xx.lordes, which shulde be
in all his kingdome aboute.
2 Aboue these he set thre prynces (off whom Daniel was one) that the lordes
might geue accomptes vnto them, and the kynge to be vndiseased.
3 But Daniel exceaded all these princes ad lordes, for the sprete off God was
plenteous in him: so that the kynge was mynded to set him ouer the whole realme.
4 Wherfore the prynces and lordes sought, to pyke out in Daniel some quarel
agaynst the kyngdome: yet coude they fynde none occasion ner fawte vpon him. For
why: he was so faythful, yt there was no blame ner dishonesty founde in him.
5 Then sayde these men: we will get no quarell agaynst this Daniel, excepte it
be in the lawe off his God.
6 Vpon this, wente the princes and lordes together vnto the kynge, and sayde
thus vnto him: kynge Darius, God saue thy life for euer.
7 All the great estates off the realme: as ye prynces, dukes, senatours and
iudges, are determed to put out a commaundement off ye kynge, and to make a sure
statute: namely, that who so desyreth eny peticion, ether of eny god or man
(with in this xxx. dayes) excepte it be only off the, O kynge: the same person
maye be cast in to the Lyons denne.
8 Wherfore, o kynge, confirme thou this statute, and make a writynge: that the
thynge which the Medes and Perses haue ordened be not altered ner broken.
9 So Darius made the wrytynge, and confirmed it.
10 Now when Daniel vnderstode that the wrytynge was made, he wente in to his
house: and the wyndowes of his hall towarde Ierusalem stode open. There kneled
he downe vpon his knees, thre tymes a daye: there he made his peticion, and
praysed his God, like as his maner was to do afore tyme.
11 Then these men made searche, and founde Daniel makynge his peticion, and
prayenge vnto his God.
12 So they came to the kynge, and spake before him concernynge his
commaundement, sayenge: O kynge, hast thou not subscribed the statute, that
within xxx. dayes who so requyreth his peticion off eny god or man, but only of
thy self, o kynge: he shalbe cast in to the denne of the Lyons? The kynge
answered, ad sayde: yee, it is true. It must be as a lawe of ye Medes and
Perses, that maye not be broken.
13 Then answered they, and sayde vnto the kynge: Daniel one of the presoners of
Iuda (O kynge) regardeth nether the ner thy statute, that thou hast made, but
maketh his peticion thre tymes a daye.
14 When the kynge herde these wordes, he was sore greued, and wolde haue excused
Daniel, to delyuer him, and put off the matter, vnto the Sonne wete downe, to
the intent that he might saue him.
15 These men perceauynge the kynges mynde, sayde vnto him: knowe this (o kynge)
that the lawe off the Medes and Perses is, that the commaundement and statute
which the kynge maketh, maye not be altered.
16 Then the kynge bad them brynge Daniel, and they cast him in to the Lyons
denne. The kynge also spake vnto Daniel, ad sayde: Thy God, whom thou allwaye
seruest, euen he shall defende the.
17 And there was brought a stone, and layed vpon the hole of the denne: this the
kynge sealed with his owne rynge, and with ye signet of his prynces: that the
kynges commaundement concernynge Daniel, shulde not be broken.
18 So the kynge wente in to his palace, and kepte him sober all night, so that
there was no table spred before him, nether coude he take eny slepe.
19 But be tymes in the mornynge at the breake off the daye, the kynge arose, and
wente in all haist vnto the denne off the Lyons.
20 Now as he came nye vnto ye dene, he cried wt a piteous voyce vnto Daniel: Yee
ye kige spake, and sayde vnto Daniel: O Daniel, thou seruaunt off the lyuynge
God, Is not thy God (whom thou allwaye seruest) able to delyuer the from the
lyons?
21 Daniel sayde vnto the kynge: O kynge, God saue thy life for euer:
22 My God hath sent his angel, which hath shut the lyons mouthes, so that they
might not hurte me. For why: myne vngiltynesse is founde out before him. And as
for the (o kynge) I neuer offended the.
23 Then was the kynge exceadinge glad, ad commaunded to take Daniel out off the
denne. So Daniel was brought out of the dene, and no maner of hurte was founde
vpo him For he put his trust in his God.
24 And as for those men which had accused Daniel, the kige commaunded to bringe
them, and to cast them in the lyons denne: them, their children and their wyues.
So the lyons had the mastry of them, and brake all their bones a sonder, or euer
they came at the grounde.
25 After this, wrote kynge Darius vnto all people, kynreddes and tunges, that
dwelt in all londes: peace be multiplied with you:
26 My commaundement is, in all my dominio and kyngdome, that men feare and
stonde in awe off Daniels God: For he is the lyuinge God, which abydeth euer:
his kyngdome shall not fayle, and his power is euerlastynge.
27 It is he that delyuereth, and saueth: he doth wonders and maruelous workes,
in heauen and in earth: he hath preserued. Daniel from the power of the lyons.
28 This Daniel prospered in the raigne off Darius and Cirus of Persia.

Chapter 7

1 In the first yeare off Balthasar kynge off Babilon, sawe Daniel a dreame, and
a vision was in his heade vpon his bedde. Which dreame he wrote, and the summe
of the matter is this:
2 Daniel spake, and sayde: I sawe in my vision by nyght, and beholde: the foure
wyndes of ye heauen stroue vpon the see,
3 and foure greate beestes came vp from the see, one vnlike another.
4 The first was as a lyon, and yet had he Aegles wynges. I sawe, that his wynges
were plucte from him, and he taken awaye from the earth: that he stode vpon his
fete as a man, and that there was geuen him a mans herte.
5 Beholde, the seconde beest was like a Beer, and stode vpon the one syde.
Amonge his teth in his mouth he had iij greate loge teth and it was sayde vnto
him: Arise, eate vp moch flesh.
6 Then I loked, & beholde, there was another like vnto a Leoparde: this had
wynges as a foule, euen foure vpon the backe. This beest had foure heades, ad
there was power geuen him.
7 After this I sawe in a vision by night, & beholde: the fourth beest was grymme
and horrible, and maruelous stronge. It had greate yron teth, it deuoured, and
destroyed, and stamped the residue vnder fete. It was farre vnlike the other
beestes that were before it: for it had ten hornes, wheroff I toke good hede.
8 And beholde, there came vp amonge the, another like horne, before whom there
were thre of the first hornes pluckte awaye. Beholde, this horne had eyes like a
ma, & a mouth speakynge presumptuous thinges.
9 I loked till the seates were prepared, ad till the olde aged sat him downe.
His clothinge was as white as snowe, and the hayres of his heade like the pure
woll. His trone was like the firie flame, and his wheles as the burnynge fyre.
10 There drew forth a firie streame, & wente out from him. A thousand tymes a
thousande serued him, x.M. tymes ten thousande stode before him. The iudgmet was
set, and the bokes opened.
11 Then toke I hede there vnto, because of the voyce of the proude wordes, which
that horne spake. I behelde, till the beest was slayne, and his body destroyed,
& geuen ouer to be brent in the fyre.
12 As for the power of the other beestes also, it was taken awaye, but their
lyues were prolonged for a tyme and season.
13 I sawe in a vision by night, and beholde: there came one in the cloudes of
heauen like the sonne of a man, which wente vnto the olde aged, before whom they
brought him:
14 Then gaue he him power ad dignite regall, that all people, trybes and tunges
shulde serue him. His power is an euerlastinge power, which shal neuer be put
downe: & his kyngdome endureth vncorrupte.
15 My herte was vexed, & I Daniel had a troubled sprete within me, ad the
visions off my heade made me afrayed:
16 till I gat me vnto one off them that stode by, to knowe the treuth,
concerninge all these thinges. So he tolde me, and made me vnderstode the
interpretacio of these thinges.
17 These foure greate beastes, are foure kinges which shal aryse out of the
earth.
18 These shal take in the kyngdome off the sayntes of the most hyest, and
possesse it still more & more for a longe season.
19 After this I requyred diligently to knowe the treuth, concerninge the fourth
beest, which was so farre vnlike the other beestes, and so horrible: whose teth
were of yron, and his nales off brasse: which deuoured and destroied, and
stamped the resydue vnder his fete.
20 I desyred also to knowe the treuth, as touchinge the ten hornes that he had
vpon his heade, and this other which came vp afterwarde, before whose face there
fell downe thre: which horne had eyes and a mouth that spake presumptuous
thinges, and loked with a grimmer visage then his felowes.
21 I behelde, and the same horne made battail agaynst the sayntes, yee ad gat
the victory off them:
22 vntill the tyme, that the olde aged came, that the iudgment was geue to the
chefest sayntes: and till the tyme, that ye sayntes had the kyngdome in
possession.
23 He gaue me this answere: That fourth beest shalbe the fourth kingdome vpo
earth: it shalbe more then all other kyngdomes, it shall deuoure, treade downe
ad destroye all other londes.
24 The ten hornes, are ten kynges that shal aryse out of that kyngdome, after
who there shall stonde vp another, which shall be greater then the first.
25 He shall subdue thre kynges, and shall speake wordes agaynst the hyest off
all: he shall destroye the sayntes of the most hyest and thynke, that he maye
chaunge tymes and lawes. They shall be geuen vnder his power, vntill a tyme, two
tymes, and halff a tyme.
26 But the iudgment shalbe kepte, so that his power shalbe taken from him, for
he shalbe destroyed, and perish at the last.
27 As for the kyngdome, power and all might that is vnder the heauen: it shal be
geuen to the holy people off the most hyest, whose kyngdome is euerlastinge, yee
all powers shall serue and obeye him.
28 Thus farre extede ye wordes. Neuerthelesse, I Daniel was so vexed in my
thoughtes, that my countenaunce chaunged, but the wordes I kepte still in my
herte.

Chapter 8

1 In the thirde yeare off the raigne of kinge Balthasar, there apeared a visio
vnto me Daniel, after that I had sene the first.
2 I sawe in a vision, (and when I sawe it, I was at Susis in the chefe cite,
which lyeth in the londe off Elam) and in ye vision, me thought I was by the
ryuer off Vlai.
3 Then I loked vp, and sawe: and beholde there stode before the ryuer, a ramme,
which had hornes: and these hornes were hye, but one was hyer then another, and
the hyest came vp last.
4 I sawe that this ramme pu?hed with his hornes, agaynst the west, agaynst the
north, and agaynst the south: so that no beestes might stonde before him, ner
defende them from his power: but he dyd as him listed, and waxed greatly.
5 I toke hede vnto this, and then came there an hegoate from the west, ouer the
whole earth, and touched not the grounde. This goate had a maruelous goodly
horne betwixte his eyes,
6 and came vnto the ramme, that had the two hornes (whom I had sene afore by the
ryuer syde) and ranne fearcely vpon him with his might.
7 I sawe him drawe nye vnto the ramme, beynge very fearce vpon him: yee he gaue
him soch a stroke, that he brake his two hornes: Nether had the ramme so moch
strength as to stonde before him: but he kest him downe, trodde him vnder his
fete: and no man was able to delyuer the ramme out of his power.
8 The goate waxed exceadinge greate, and when he was at the strongest, his
greate horne was broken also. Then grewe there other foure soch like in the
steade, towarde the foure wyndes off the heauen.
9 Yee out of one of the leest off these hornes, there came vp yet another horne,
which waxed maruelous greate: towarde the south, towarde the east, and towarde
the fayre pleasaunt londe.
10 It grewe vp to the hoost off heauen, wherof it dyd cast some downe to the
grounde, and off the starres also, and trode them vnder fete.
11 Yee it grewe vp vnto the prynce off the hoost, from whom the daylie offeringe
was taken, and the place off his Sanctuary casten downe.
12 And a certayne season was geuen vnto it, agaynst the daylie offeringe
(because of wickednesse) that it might cast downe the verite to the grounde, and
so to prospere in all thinges, that it went aboute.
13 Vpon this I herde one off the sayntes speakynge, which saynte sayde vnto one
that axed this question: How longe shall this vision off the daylie sacrifice
and of the waistinge abhominacion endure: that the Sanctuary and the power shall
so be troden vnder fote?
14 And he answered him: Vnto the euenyinge & the morninge, euen two thousande
and thre hudreth dayes: then shall the Sanctuary be clensed agayne.
15 Now when I Daniel had sene this vision, and sought for the vnderstondinge of
it: beholde, there stode before me a thinge like vnto a man.
16 And I herde a mans voyce in the ryuer off Vlai, which cryed, and sayde: O
Gabriel, make this man vnderstonde the vision.
17 So he came, and stode by me. But I was afrayed at his cominge, and fell downe
vpon my face. Then sayde he vnto me: O thou sonne of man, marcke well, for in
the last tyme shall this vision be fulfylled.
18 Now as he was speakynge vnto me, I waxed faynte, so that I suncke downe to
the grounde. But he toke holde vpon me, and set me vp agayne,
19 sayenge: Beholde, I will shewe the, what shall happen in the last wrath: for
in the tyme appoynted it shal be fulfilled.
20 The ramme which thou sawest with the two hornes, is the kynge off the Medes
ad Perses:
21 but the goate is the kynge of Grekelonde: the greate horne that stode
betwixte his eyes, that is the pryncipall kynge.
22 But where as it brake, and foure other rose vp in the steade: it signifieth,
that out of this people shall stonde vp foure kyngdomes, but not so mightie as
it.
23 After these kyngdomes (whyle vngodnesse is a growinge) there shall aryse a
kynge off an vnshamefast face, which shall be wyse in darcke speakinges.
24 He shalbe mightie and stronge, but not in his owne strength. He shall
destroye aboue measure, and all that he goeth aboute, shall prospere: he shall
slaye the stronge and holy people.
25 And thorow his craftynes, falsede shall prospere in his honde, his herte
shall be proude, and many one shall he put to death in his welthynesse. He shal
stonde vp agaynst the prynce off prynces, but he shalbe destroyed without honde.
26 And this vision that is shewed vnto the, is as sure as the evenynge and the
mornynge. Therfore wryte thou vp this sight, for it wylbe longe or it come to
passe.
27 Vpon this was I Daniel very faynte, so that I laye sicke certayne dayes: but
whan I rose vp, I wente aboute the kynges busynesse, and marueled at the vision,
neuerthelesse no man knewe of it.

Chapter 9

1 In the first yeare off Darius the sonne off Ahasuerus, which was of the sede
off the Medes, & was made kynge ouer the realme of the Caldees:
2 Yee euen in the first yeare off his raigne, I Daniel desyred to knowe the
yearly nombre out of the bokes, wherof the LORDE spake vnto Ieremy the prophet:
that Ierusalem shulde lie waist lxx. yeares:
3 ad I turned me vnto God the LORDE, for to praye and make myne intercessio,
with fastinge, sackcloth ad ashes
4 I prayed before the LORDE my God, and knowleged, sayenge: O LORDE, thou greate
& fearfull God, thou that kepest couenaunt and mercy with them, which loue the,
and do thy commaundementes:
5 We haue synned, we haue offended, we haue bene disobedient and gone backe: yee
we haue departed from all thy preceptes and iudgmentes.
6 We wolde neuer folowe thy seruauntes the prophetes, that spake in thy name to
oure kynges and prynces to oure forefathers, and to all the people off the
londe.
7 O LORDE, rightuousnesse belongeth vnto the, vnto vs pertayneth nothynge but
open shame: as it is come to passe this daye vnto euery man of Iuda, and to them
that dwell at Ierusalem: Yee vnto all Israel, whether they be farre or nye:
thorow out all londes, wherin thou hast strowed them, because of the offences
that they had done agaynst the.
8 Yee o LORDE, vnto vs, to oure kinges & prynces, to oure forefathers: euen to
vs all, that haue offended the, belongeth open shame.
9 But vnto the o LORDE oure God, pertayneth mercy and forgeuenesse. As for vs,
we are gone backe from him,
10 and haue not obeyed the voyce of the LORDE oure God, to walke in his lawes,
which he layed before vs by his seruauntes the prophetes:
11 yee all Israel haue transgressed, and gone backe from thy lawe, so that they
haue not herkened vnto thy voyce. Wherfore the curse and ooth, that is written
in the law of Moses the seruaut of God (against whom we haue offended) is poured
vpon vs.
12 And he hath perfourmed his wordes, which he spake agaynst vs, & agaynst oure
iudges that iudged vs: to bringe vpon vs soch a greate plage, as neuer was vnder
heauen, like as it is now come to passe in Ierusalem.
13 Yee all this plage, as it is written in the lawe of Moses, is come vpon vs.
Yet made we not oure prayer before the LORDE oure God, that we might turne
agayne from oure wickednesse, and to be lerned in thy verite.
14 Therfore hath ye LORDE made haist, to bringe this plage vpon vs: for the
LORDE oure God is rightuous, in all his workes which he doth: for why, we wolde
not harken vnto his voyce.
15 And now, o LORDE oure God, thou that with a mightie honde hast brought thy
people out of Egipte, to get thy self a name, which remayneth this daye: we haue
synned
16 (o LORDE) & done wickedly agaynst all thy rightuousnes: yet let thy wrothfull
displeasure be turned awaye (I beseke the) from thy cite Ierusalem thy holy
hill. And why? for oure synnes sake and for the wickednesse of oure forefathers:
is Ierusalem and thy people abhorred, of all them that are aboute vs.
17 Now therfore (O oure God) heare the prayer of thy seruaunt, and his
intercession: O let thy face shyne ouer thy sanctuary, that lieth waist.
18 O my God, enclyne thine eare, and herken (at the leest for thine owne sake)
open thine eyes: beholde how we be desolated, yee and the cite also, which is
called after thy name: For we do not cast oure prayers before the in oure owne
rightuousnesse, no: but only in thy greate mercies.
19 O LORDE, heare: O forgeue LORDE: O LORDE considre, tary not ouer longe: but
for thine owne sake do it, O my God: for thy cite and thy people is called after
thy name.
20 As I was yet speakinge at my prayers, knowleginge myne owne synnes and ye
synnes of my people, makinge so myne intercession before the LORDE my God, for
the holy hils sake of my God:
21 yee whyle I was yet speakinge in my prayer, beholde, the ma Gabriel (whom I
had sene afore in the vision) came flyenge to me, and touched me aboute ye
offeringe tyme in the euenynge.
22 He infourmed me, and spake vnto me: O Daniel (sayde he) I am now come, to
make the vnderstonde it:
23 For as soone as thou begannest to make thy prayer, it was so diuysed, and
therfore am I come to shewe the. And why? for thou art a man greatly beloued.
Wherfore, pondre the matter wel, that thou mayest lerne, to vnderstonde the
vision.
24 Lxx. wekes are determed ouer thy people, & ouer thy holy cite: that the
wickednesse maye be consumed, that the synne maye haue an ende, that the offence
maye be reconciled, and to bringe in euerlastinge rightuousnesse, to fulfill ye
visions and the prophetes, and to anoynte the most holy one.
25 Vnderstode this then, and marcke it well: that from the tyme it shalbe
concluded, to go and repayre Ierusalem agayne, vnto Christ (or the anoynted)
prynce: there shalbe seuen wekes. Then shall the stretes & walles be buylded
agayne lxij. wekes, but with harde troublous tyme.
26 After these lxij. wekes, shal Christ be slayne, & they shal haue no pleasure
in him. Then shal there come a people with the prynce, and destroye the cite and
the sanctuary: and his ende shal come as the water floude. But the desolacion
shall continue till the ende of the batell.
27 He shall make a stronge bonde with many, for the space of a weke: and when
the weke is half gone, he shal put downe the slayne and meatoffringe. And in the
temple there shalbe an abhominable desolacio, till it haue destroyed all. And it
is concluded, yt this waistinge shal continue vnto the ende.

Chapter 10

1 In the thirde yeare of kinge Cirus of Persia, there was shewed vnto Daniel
(otherwise called Balthasar) a matter, yee a true matter, but it is yet a longe
tyme vnto it. He vnderstode the matter well, and perceaued what the vision was.
2 At the same tyme, I Daniel mourned for the space of thre wekes,
3 so that I had no lust to eate bred: as for flesh and wyne, there came none
within my mouth: No, I dyd not ones anoynte my self, till the whole thre wekes
were out.
4 Vpon the xxiiij. daye of the first moneth, I was by the greate floude, called
Tigris:
5 I lift vp myne eyes, and loked: and beholde, a man clothed in lynnynge, whose
loynes were gyrded vp with fyne golde of Araby:
6 his body was like the Chrisolite stone, his face (to loke vpon) was like
lightenynge, his eyes as the flame of fyre, his armes and fete were like fayre
glisteringe metall, but the voyce of his wordes was like ye voyce of a
multitude.
7 I Daniel alone sawe this vision, the men that were with me, sawe it not: but a
greate fearfulnesse fell vpon them, so that they fled awaye, and hyd them
selues.
8 I was left there my self alone, and sawe this greate vision, so longe til
there remayned nomore strength within me: Yee I lost my coloure clene, I waisted
awaye, and my strength was gone.
9 Yet herde I the voyce of his wordes: & as soone as I herde it, fayntnesse came
vpon me, and I fell downe flat to the grounde vpon my face.
10 And beholde, an hande touched me, which set me vp vpon my knees & vpon the
palmes of my hondes,
11 sayenge vnto me: O Daniel, thou well beloued man: take good hede of the
wordes, that I shal saye vnto ye, & stode right vp, for vnto ye am I now sent.
And when he had sayde these wordes, I stode vp tremblinge.
12 Then saide he vnto me: feare not Daniel: for why, sence the first daye that
thou set thine herte to vnderstonde, and didest chasten thy self before thy God:
thy wordes haue bene herde. And I had come vnto the whe thou begannest to
speake,
13 had not the prynce ouer the kingdome of the, Perses wt stonde me xxj. dayes.
But lo, Michael one of the chefe prynces, came to helpe me, him haue I left by
the kinge of Persia,
14 & am come to shewe the, what shal happen vnto thy people in the latter dayes:
for it wilbe loge yet or the vision be fulfilled.
15 Now when he had spoken these wordes vnto me, I kest downe my heade to ye
grounde, and helde my tunge.
16 Beholde, there touched my lippes one, very like vnto a man. Then opened I my
mouth, and sayde vnto him, that stode before me: O my lorde, my ioyntes are
lowsed in the vision, and there is no more stregth within me:
17 How maye my lordes seruaunt then talke with my lorde? seinge there is no
strength in me, so that I can not take my breth?
18 Vpon this there touched me agayne, one moch like a man, & conforted me,
19 sayenge: O thou man so wel beloued, feare not: be content, take a good herte
vnto the, and be stronge. So when he had spoken vnto me, I recouered, & sayde:
Speake on my lorde, for thou hast refre?shed me.
20 The sayde he: knowest thou wherfore I am come vnto ye? now wil I go agayne to
fight with the prynce of the Perses. As soone as I go forth, lo, the prynce of
Grekelonde shal come.
21 Neuertheles, I wil shewe the the thinge, yt is fast noted in the scripture of
treuth. And as for all yonder matters, there is none that helpeth me in them,
but Michael youre prynce.

Chapter 11

1 And in the first yeare of Darius of Media, I stode by him, to conforte him, &
to strength him,
2 and now wil I shewe the the treuth. Beholde, there shal stonde vp yet thre
kinges in Persia, but ye fourth shal be farre richer then they all. And when he
is in the chefest power of his riches, he shal prouoke euery man agaynst the
realme of Grekelonde.
3 Then shal there arise yet a mightie kinge, that shal rule with greate
dominion, and do what him list.
4 And as soone as his kingdome commeth vp, it shalbe destroyed, & deuyded
towarde ye foure wyndes of the heauen. They yt come after him, shall not haue
soch power & dominion as he: but his kingdome shalbe scatred, yee euen amonge
other the those.
5 And the kynge of ye south shalbe migthier, then his other prynces. Agaynst him
there shal one make himself stroge, & shal rule his dominio wt greate power.
6 But after certayne yeares they shalbe ioyned together, & the kynges doughter
of the south shall come to the kynge of the north, for to make fredshipe, but
she shal not optayne the power of that arme, nether shall she be able to endure
thorow his might: but she, & soch as brought her (yee & he yt begat her, &
conforted her for his tyme) shalbe delyuered vp.
7 Out of ye braunches of hir rote, there shal one stonde vp in his steade: which
with power of armes shal go thorow the kynges londe of the north, & handle him
acordinge to his strength. As for their Idols & prynces, with their costly
Iewels of golde & syluer,
8 he shal cary them awaye captyues in to Egipte, and he shal preuayle agaynst
the kynge of the north certayne yeares.
9 And when he is come into ye kynges realme of ye south, he shal be fayne to
turne agayne in to his owne londe.
10 Wherfore his sonnes shalbe displeased, and shal gather together a mightie
greate hoost of people: and one of them shal come, and go thorow like a
waterfloude: then shal he returne, and go forth with defyenge and boostinge vnto
his owne londe.
11 The the kinge of ye south shalbe angrie, and shal come forth to fight agaynst
the kinge of the north: Yee he shall bringe a greate multitude of people
together, and a greate heape shalbe geue into his honde:
12 these shal he cary awaye wt greate pryde, for so moch as he hath cast downe
so many thousandes, neuertheles he shall not preuayle.
13 For ye kinge of ye north shal gather (of the new) a greater heape of people
then afore, & come forth (after a certayne tyme and yeares) with a mightie hoost
& exceadinge greate good.
14 At the same tyme there shall many stonde vp agaynst the kinge of the south,
so that ye wicked children of thy people also shal exalte them selues (to
fulfill the vision) and then fall.
15 So the kinge of the north shall come to laye sege, and to take the stroge
fensed cities: And the power of the of ye south shal not be able to abyde him, &
the best men of the people shall not be so stronge, as to resist him.
16 Shortly, when he commeth, he shall handle him as he list, & no man shalbe so
hardy as to stonde agaynst him. He shal stode in the pleasaunt countre, which
thorow him shalbe destroyed.
17 He shal set his face wt all his power to optayne his kingdome, & to be like
it. Yee that shal he do, & geue him vnto the doughters amoge women, to destroye
him. But he shal fayle, nether shal he optayne his purpose.
18 After this, shall he set his face vnto the Iles, & take many of the. A prynce
shal stoppe him, to do him a shame, besyde the confucion that els shal come vnto
him.
19 Thus shal he turne agayne to his owne londe, stomble, & fall, and be nomore
founde:
20 so he that came vpon him & dyd him violence, shal stonde in his place, & haue
a pleasaunt kingdome: and after few dayes he shal be destroyed, & that nether in
wrath ner in batell.
21 In his steade there shal aryse a vyle person not holde worthy of a kinges
dignite: this shall come in craftely, & optayne the kingdome with fayre wordes:
22 he shal fight agaynst the armes of the mightie (& destroye them,) yee &
agaynst the prynce of the couenaunt.
23 So after yt he hath taken truce with him, he shal hadle disceatfully: that he
maye get vp, & ouer come him with a small flocke:
24 & so with craftynesse to get him to ye fattest place of the londe, and to
deale otherwise, then ether his fathers or graudfathers dyd. For he shal
destroye the thinge, ye they had robbed & spoyled, yee & all their substaunce:
ymagenynge thoughtes agaynst the stroge holdes, & that for a tyme.
25 His power and herte shalbe sterred vp wt a greate armye agaynst the kinge of
the south: where thorow the kinge of the south shalbe moued then vnto batell,
with a greate & mightie hoost also. Neuerthelesse, he shal not be able to
stonde, for they shall conspyre agaynst him.
26 Yee they yt eate of his meate, shal hurte him: so that his hoost shal fall, &
many be slayne downe.
27 These two kinges shalbe mynded to do myschefe, & talke of disceate at one
table: but they shal not prospere: for why, the ende shal not come yet, vnto the
tyme apoynted.
28 The shall he go home agayne in to his owne londe with greate good, & set his
herte agaynst the holy couenaunt, he shalbe busy agaynst it, & then returne
home.
29 At the tyme appoynted he shal come agayne, & go towarde the south: So shall
it happen otherwise then at the first, yet ones agayne.
30 And why, the shippes of Cythim shal come vpon him, that he maye be smytten &
turne agayne: yt he maye take indignacion agaynst the couenaunt of holynes, to
medle agaynst it. Yee he shal turne him, & drawe soch vnto him, as leaue the
holy couenaunt.
31 He shal set mightie men to vnhalowe the sanctuary of stregth, to put downe
the daylie offeringe, & to set vp the abhominable desolacion.
32 And soch as breake the couenaunt, shal he flatre with fayre wordes. But ye
people that wil knowe their God, shal haue the ouerhade and prospere.
33 Those also that haue vnderstondinge amonge the people, shal enfourme the
multitude: & for a longe season, they shalbe persecuted with swearde, with fyre,
with captyuyte & with the takynge awaye of their goodes.
34 Now whe they fall, they shalbe set vp with a litle helpe: but many shal cleue
vnto them faynedly.
35 Yee some of those which haue vnderstondynge shal be persecuted also: yt they
maye be tryed, purified & clesed, till the tyme be out: for there is yet another
tyme appoynted.
36 The kinge shal do what him list, he shal exalte and magnifie himself agaynst
all, that is God. Yee he shall speake maruelous thinges agaynst the God of all
goddes, wherin he shal prospere, so longe till the wrath be fulfilled, for the
conclusion is deuysed alredy.
37 He shal not regarde the God of his fathers, but his lust shall be vpon wome:
Yee he shal not care for eny God, for he shal magnifie himself aboue all.
38 In his place shal he worshipe the mightie Idols: & the god whom his fathers
knewe not, shal he honoure with golde and syluer, with precious stones and
pleasaunt Iewels.
39 This shal he do, sekinge helpe and sucoure at the mightie Idols and straunge
goddes. Soch as wil receaue him, and take him for God, he shal geue them greate
worshipe and power: yee and make them lordes of the multitude, and geue them the
londe with rewardes.
40 In the latter tyme, shal the kinge of the south stryue with him: and the
kinge of the north in like maner shall come agaynst him with charettes, horsmen
& with a greate nauy of shippes. He shal come in to the londes, destroye and go
thorow:
41 he shal entre also in to the fayre pleasaunt londe. Many cities & countrees
shal decaye, excepte Edom, Moab & the best of the children of Ammon, which shal
escape from his honde.
42 He shall stretch forth his hodes vpon the countrees, & the londe of Egipte
shal not escape him.
43 For thorow his goinge in, he shal haue dominion ouer the treasures of syluer
& golde, & ouer all the precious Iewels of Egipte, Lybia and Ethiopia.
44 Neuerthelesse the tydinges out of the east and the north shall trouble him,
for the which cause he shal go forth to destroye & curse a greate multitude.
45 The tentes of his palace shall he pytch betwixte the two sees, vpon the hill
of the noble sanctuary, for he shal come to the ende of it, and then shal no man
helpe him.

Chapter 12

1 The tyme wil come also, that the greate prynce Michael, which stondeth on thy
peoples syde, shal aryse vp, for there shal come a tyme of trouble, soch as
neuer was, sens there begane to be eny people, vnto that same tyme. Then shal
thy people be delyuered, yee all those that be foude written in the boke.
2 Many of them that slepe in the dust of the earth, shal awake: some to
euerlastinge life, some to perpetuall shame & reprofe.
3 The wyse (soch as haue taught other) shal glister, as the shyninge of heauen:
and those that haue instructe the multitude vnto godlynesse, shalbe as the
starres, worlde without ende.
4 And thou o Daniel, shut vp these wordes, & seale the boke, till the last tyme.
Many shal go aboute here and there, and the shal knowlege increase.
5 So I Daniel loked, and beholde, there stode other two: one vpon this shore of
the water, the other vpon yonder syde.
6 And one of the sayde vnto him, which was clothed in lynnynge, and stode aboue
vpon the waters of the floude: How longe shall it be to the ende of these
wonderous workes?
7 Then herde I the man with the lynnynge clothes, which stode aboue vpon the
waters of the floude: when he helde vp his right and left honde vnto heauen, &
sware by him which lyueth for euer: that it shal tary for a tyme, two tymes &
half a tyme: & when the power of the holy people is clene scatred abrode, the
shal all these thinges be fulfilled.
8 I herde it well, but I vnderstode it not. Then sayde I: O my lorde, what shal
happen after that?
9 He answered: Go thy waye Daniel, for these wordes shal be closed vp & sealed,
till the last tyme:
10 & many shalbe purified, clensed & tried. But the vngodly shall lyue wickedly,
and those wicked (as many of the as they be) shal haue no vnderstondinge. As for
soch as haue vnderstondinge, they shal regarde it.
11 And from ye tyme forth that the daylie offerynge shalbe put downe & the
abhominable desolacion set vp, there shalbe a thousande two hudreth & xc.dayes.
12 O well is him, that waiteth, & commeth to the thousande iij.C. & xxxv.dayes.
13 Go thou thy waye now, till it be ended: take thy rest, and byde in thy lot,
till the dayes haue an ende.


Hosea

Chapter 1

1 This is the worde of the LORDE, that came vnto Oseas the sonne of Beeri, in
the dayes of Osias, Ioathan, Achas & Ezechias kinges of Iuda: and in the tyme of
Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas kynge of Israel.
2 First, when the LORDE spake vnto Oseas, he saide vnto him: Go thy waye, take
an harlot to thy wife, and get childre by her: for the lode hath comitted greate
whordome agaynst the LORDE.
3 So he wente, and toke Gomer ye doughter of Deblaim: which conceaued, and
brought forth a sonne.
4 And the LORDE sayde vnto him: call his name Iesrael, for I wil shortly auenge
the bloude of Iesrael vpon the house of Iehu, and will bringe the kingdome of
the house of Israel to an ende.
5 Then will I breake the bowe of Israel, in the valley of Iesrael.
6 She conceaued yet agayne, and bare a doughter. And he sayde vnto him: Call hir
name Loruhama (that is, not opteyninge mercy) ofr I wil haue no pyte vpon the
house of Israel, but forget them, and put them clene out of remembraunce.
7 Neuerthelesse I wil haue mercy vpon the house of Iuda, & wil saue them, euen
thorow the LORDE their God. But I wil not delyuer them thorow eny bow, swearde,
batel, horses or horsmen.
8 Now when she had weened Loruhama, she conceaued agayne, & bare a sonne.
9 Then sayde he: call his name Lo Ami (that is to saye, not my people.) For why?
ye are not my people, therfore will not I be yours.
10 And though the nombre of the children of Israel be as the sonde of the see,
which can nether be measured ner tolde: Yet in the place where it is sayde vnto
them, ye be not my people: euen there shall it be thus reported of them: they be
ye childre of the lyuynge God.
11 Then shal the children of Iuda and the childre of Israel be gathered together
agayne, & chose them selues one heade, and then departe out of the londe: for
greate shalbe the daye of Iesrael.

Chapter 2

1 Tell youre brethren, that they are my people: and youre sisteren, that they
haue optayned mercy.
2 As for youre mother, ye shal chyde with her, and reproue her: for she is not
my wife, nether am I hir hu?bode: vnlesse she put awaye hir whordome out of my
sight, and hir aduoutry from hir brestes.
3 Yf no, I shal strype her naked, & set her, euen as she came in to ye worlde:
Yee I shal laye hir waist, and make her like a wildernesse, and slaye her for
thyrste.
4 I shal haue no pite also vpon hir children, for they be the children of
fornicacion.
5 Their mother hath broken hir wedlocke, and she that bare them, is come to
cofucion. For she sayde: I wil go after my louers, that geue me my water and my
bred, my woll & my flax, my oyle and my drynke.
6 But I will hedge hir waye with thornes, and stoppe it, that she shal not fynde
hir fotestoppes:
7 and though she runne after hir louers, yet shall she not get them: she shal
seke them, but not fynde them. Then shal she saye: well, I will go turne agayne
to my first hu?bonde, for at yt tyme was I better at ease, then now:
8 But this wolde she not knowe, where as I yet gaue her corne, wyne, oyle,
syluer and golde, which she hath hanged vpon Baal.
9 Wherfore now will I go take my corne & wyne agayne in their season, and fet
agayne my woll and my flax, which I gaue her, to couer hir shame.
10 And now will I dyscouer hir foolishnesse, euen in the sight of hir louers,
and no man shal delyuer her out of my hondes.
11 Morouer, I wil take awaye all hir myrth, hir holy dayes, hir newmoones, hir
Sabbathes and all hir solempne feastes:
12 I will destroye hir vynyardes and fyge trees, though she saieth: lo, here are
my rewardes, that my louers haue geuen me. I wil make it a wodde, and the wylde
beestes shall eate it vp:
13 I will punysh her also for the dayes of Baal, wherin she censed him, deckynge
him with hir earynges and cheynes: when she folowed hir louers, and forgat me,
saieth the LORDE.
14 Wherfore beholde, I wil call her againe, bringe her in to a wildernes, and
speake frendly vnto her:
15 there wil I geue her hir vynyardes agayne, yee and the valley of Achor also,
to shewe hir hope & comforte. Then shal she synge there as in the tyme of hir
youth, & like as in the daye when she came out of the londe of Egipte.
16 Then (saieth the LORDE) she shal saye vnto me: O my hou?bande, & shal call me
nomore Baal:
17 for I wil take awaye those names of Baal from hir mouth, yee she shal neuer
remembre their names eny more.
18 Then will I make a couenaunt with them, with the wylde beastes, with the
foules of the ayre, & with euerythinge that crepeth vpon the earth. As for bowe,
swerde and batel, I will destroye soch out of the londe, & wil make them to
slepe safely.
19 Thus wil I mary the vnto myne owne self for euermore: yee euen to my self wil
I mary the, in rightuousnesse, in equyte, in louynge kyndnesse and mercy.
20 In faith also will I mary the vnto my self, & thou shalt knowe the LORDE.
21 At the same tyme wil I shewe my self frendly and gracious vnto ye heauens,
saieth the LORDE: & the heauens shal helpe the earth,
22 and the earth shal helpe the corne, wyne and oyle, and they shal helpe
Iesrael.
23 I wil sowe them vpo earth, for a sede to myne owne self, & wil haue mercy
vpon her, yt was without mercy. And to the which were not my people, I wil saye:
thou art my people. And he shal saye: thou art my God.

Chapter 3

1 Then sayde ye LORDE to me: Go yet yi waye & wowe an aduouterous woma, who thy
neghboure loueth, as ye LORDE doth the childre of Israel: how be it they haue
respecte to straunge goddes, and loue the wyne kannes.
2 So I gat her for xv. syluerlinges, and for an Homer and an half of barlye,
3 & sayde vnto her: Thou shalt byde with me a longe season, but se that thou
playest not the harlot, and loke thou medle with none other man, & then wil I
kepe my self for the.
4 Thus the childre of Israel shal syt a greate whyle without kinge and prynce,
without offerynge and aulter, without prest and reuelacion.
5 But afterwarde shal the children of Israel conuerte, and seke the LORDE their
God, and Dauid their kinge: and in ye latter dayes they shal worshipe the LORDE,
and his louynge kyndnesse.

Chapter 4

1 Heare ye worde of the LORDE, o ye children of Israel: For the LORDE must
punysh the, yt dwel in the londe. And why? There is no faithfulnesse, there is
no mercy, there is no knowlege of God in the lode:
2 but swearinge, lyege, maslaughter, theft and aduoutry haue gotten the
ouerhande, & one bloudgiltynesse foloweth another.
3 Therfore shal the londe be in a miserable case, and all they that dwell
therin, shal mourne. The beastes in the felde, the foules in ye ayre, and the
fishes in the see shall dye.
4 Yet is there none, that wil chaste nor reproue another. The prestes which
shulde refourme other me, are become like the people.
5 Therfore stomblest thou in ye daye tyme &, the prophet with the in the night.
I wil bringe thy mother to sylence, & why?
6 my people perish, because they haue no knowlege. Seinge then that thou hast
refused vnderstondinge, therfore wil I refuse ye also: so that thou shalt nomore
be my prest. And for so moch as thou hast forgotten the lawe of thy God, I wil
also forget thy childre.
7 The more they increased in multitude, the more they synned agaynst me,
therfore wil I chaurge their honoure in to shame.
8 They eate vp the synnes of my people, & corage them in their wickednesse.
9 Thus the prest is become like the people. Wherfore I will punysh them for
their wicked wayes, & rewarde them acordinge to their owne ymaginacions.
10 They shal eate, & not haue ynough: They haue vsed whordome, therfore shall
they not prospere: & why? they haue forsaken the LORDE, & not regarded him.
11 Whordome, wyne and dronckennesse take the herte awaye.
12 My people axe councel at their stockes, their staffe must tell them. For an
whorish mynde hath disceaued them, so yt they comitte fornicacion agaynst their
God.
13 They make sacrifice vpon the hie mountaynes, & burne their incense vpon the
hilles, yee amonge the okes, groues & bu?shes, for there are good shadowes.
Therfore yor doughters are become harlottes, and youre spouses haue broke their
wedlocke
14 I wil not punish yor doughters for beinge defyled, & yor brydes that became
whores: seinge the fathers themselues haue medled with harlottes, and offered
with vnthriftes: but the people that wil not vnderstonde, must be punyshed.
15 Though thou Israel art disposed to playe ye harlot, yet shuldest not thou
haue offended, o Iuda: thou shuldest not haue runne to Galgala, ner haue gone vp
to Bethaue, ner haue sworne: the LORDE lyueth.
16 For Israel is gone backe, like a waton cowe. The LORDE therfore shal make hir
fede, as ye labe yt goeth astraye.
17 And where as Ephraim is become partaker of Idols, wel, let him go.
18 Their dronckenesse hath put the backe, & brought them to whordome. Their
rulers loue rewardes, brynge (saye they,) to their owne shame.
19 A wynde shall take holde of their fethers, & they shall be cofounded in their
offeringes.

Chapter 5

1 Heare this, o ye prestes: take hede, o thou housholde of Israel: geue eare, o
thou kingly house: for this punyshment wil come vpon you, that are become a
snare vnto Myspa, and a spred net vnto the mount of Thabor.
2 They kyll sacrifices by heapes, to begyle the people therwith: therfore wil I
punysh them all.
3 I knowe Ephraim well ynough, & Israel is not hyd fro me: for Ephraim is become
an harlot, and Israel is defyled.
4 They are not mynded to turne vnto their God, for they haue an whorish herte,
so yt they can not knowe the LORDE.
5 But the pryde of Israel wil be rewarded him in his face, yee both Israel and
Ephraim shal fall for their wickednesse, and Iuda with them also.
6 They shall come with their shepe & bullockes to seke ye LORDE, but they shal
not fynde him, for he is gone from them.
7 As for the LORDE, they haue refused him, and brought vp bastarde children: a
moneth therfore shall deuoure them with their porcions.
8 Blowe with the shawmes at Gabea, and with the trumpet in Rama, crie out at
Bethauen vpon the yonside of Ben Iamin.
9 In the tyme of ye plage shal Ephraim be layed waist, therfore dyd I faithfully
warne the trybes of Israel.
10 Yet are the prynces of Iuda become like them, that remoue the londemarckes,
therfore wil I poure out my wrath vpon them like water.
11 Ephraim is oppressed, and can haue no right of the lawe: for why? they folowe
ye doctrynes of men.
12 Therfore will I be vnto Ephraim as a moth, & to the house of Iuda as a
caterpiller.
13 When Ephraim sawe his sicknesse, and Iuda his disease: Ephraim wente vnto
Assur, and sent vnto kinge Iareb: yet coude not he helpe you, ner ease you of
youre payne.
14 I am vnto Ephraim as a lyon, and as a lyons whelpe to the house of Iuda. Euen
I, I wil spoyle them, & go my waye. I wil take them with me, and no man shal
rescue them.
15 I wil go, and returne to my place, till they waxe faynt, and seke me.

Chapter 6

1 In their aduersite they shall seke me, and saye: come, let vs turne agayne to
the LORDE: for he hath smytten vs, and he shal heale vs:
2 He hath wounded vs, & he shal bynde vs vp agayne: after two dayes shal he
quycken vs, in the thirde daye he shal rase vs vp, so that we shal lyue in his
sight.
3 Then shal we haue vnderstondinge, & endeuoure oure selues to knowe the LORDE.
He shal go forth as the sprynge of the daye, and come vnto vs as the euenynge
and mornynge rayne vpon the earth.
4 O Ephraim, what shal I do vnto the? O Iuda, how shal I intreate the? seynge
youre loue is like a mornynge cloude, & like a dew yt goeth early awaye.
5 Therfore haue I cut downe the prophetes, & letten them be slayne for my wordes
sake: so that thy punyshment shal come to light.
6 For I haue pleasure in louynge kyndnesse, and not in offerynge: Yee in the
knowlege of God, more then in burntsacrifice.
7 But euen like as Adam dyd, so haue they broken my couenaunt, and set me at
naught.
8 Galaad is a cite of wicked doers, of malicious people and bloudshedders.
9 The multitude of the prestes is like an heape of theues, murtherers &
bloudthurstie: for they haue wrought abhominacion.
10 Horrible thinges haue I sene in the house of Israel, there playeth Ephraim
the harlot, and Israel is defyled:
11 but Iuda shall haue an haruest for himself, when I returne the captiuyte of
my people.

Chapter 7

1 When I vndertake to make Israel whole, then the vngraciousnesse of Ephraim and
the wickednes of Samaria commeth to light: then go they aboute with lyes. At
home, they be theues: and without, they fall to robbynge.
2 They cosidre not in their hertes, that I remebre all their wickednes. They go
aboute wt their owne ynuencios, but I se them wel ynough.
3 They make the kinge and the princes, to haue pleasure in their wickednes &
lyes.
4 All these burne in aduoutry, as it were an ouen yt the baker heateth, whe he
hath lefte kneadinge, till the dowe be leuended.
5 Euen so goeth it this daye with oure kinges and prynces, for they begynne to
be woode droncken thorow wyne: they vse familiarite with soch as disceaue the.
6 They with the ymaginacion of their herte are like an oue, their slepe is all
ye night like the slepe of a baker, in the mornynge is he as hote as the flame
of fyre:
7 they are altogether as hote as an ouen. They haue deuoured their owne iudges,
all their kinges are falle: yet is there none of the yt calleth vpon me.
8 Therfore must Ephraim be mixte amonge ye Heithen. Ephraim is become like a
cake, yt no man turneth:
9 straungers haue deuoured his strength, yet he regardeth it not: he waxeth ful
of gray haires, yet wil he not knowe it:
10 & ye pride of Israel is cast downe before their face, yet wil they not turne
to the LORDE their God, ner seke him, for all this.
11 Ephraim is like a doue, that is begyled, and hath no herte. Now call they
vpon the Egipcians, now go they to the Assirians:
12 but whyle they be goinge here and there, I shal sprede my net ouer them, &
drawe them downe as ye foules of the ayre: and acordinge as they haue bene
warned, so will I punysh them.
13 Wo be vnto them, for they haue forsake me. They must be destroyed, for they
haue set me at naught. I am he that haue redemed them, and yet they dyssemble wt
me.
14 They call not vpon me with their hartes, but lye youlinge vpon their beddes.
Where as they come together, it is but for meate & drincke, and me will they not
obeye.
15 I haue taught them, and defended their arme, yet do they ymagin myschefe
agaynst me.
16 They turne them selues, but not a right, & are become as a broken bowe. Their
prynces shalbe slayne wt the swearde, for the malice of their tunges, soch
blasphemies haue they lerned in the londe of Egipte.

Chapter 8

1 Set the horne to thy mouth, and blowe: get the swiftly (as an Aegle) vnto the
house of the LORDE: for they haue broken my couenannt, and transgressed my lawe.
2 Israel can saye vnto me: thou art my God, we knowe the:
3 but he hath refused the thinge that is good, therfore shall the enemye folowe
vpon him.
4 They haue ordened kinges, but not thorow me: they haue made prynces, and I
must not knowe of it. Of their syluer and golde haue they made them ymages, to
bringe them selues to destruccion.
5 Thy calfe (O Samaria) shalbe taken awaye. for my wrothfull indignacion is gone
forth agaynst the. How longe wil it be, or they can be clensed?
6 For the calfe came from Israel, the worke man made it, therfore can it be no
God, but euen to a spyders webbe shal ye calfe of Samaria be turned.
7 They haue sowne wynde, therfore shal they reepe a storme. Their sede shal
beare no corne, there shal no meel be made of their increase: though yere be,
yet shall straungers deuoure it vp.
8 Israel shall perish, the Gentiles shall entreate him as a foule vessel.
9 Sens they went vp to the Assirians, they are become like a wylde asse in the
deserte. Ephraim geueth rewardes to get louers,
10 therfore are they scatred amoge the Heithe, there wil I gather them vp. They
shal soone be weery of the burthen of kinges & prynces.
11 Ephraim hath made many aulters to do wickednes, therfore shal the aulters
turne to his synne.
12 Though I shewe the my lawe neuer so moch, they counte it but straunge
doctrine.
13 Where as they do sacrifice, offeringe the flesh and eatinge it: the LORDE
will haue no pleasure therin: but will remembre their wickednes, and punysh
their synnes. Israel turneth agayne in to Egipte,
14 they haue forgotten him that made them, they buylde churches, and Iuda maketh
many stronge cities: therfore wil I sende a fyre in to their cities, and it shal
consume their places.

Chapter 9

1 Do not thou triumphe (O Israel) make no boostinge more then the Heithen, for
thou hast comitted aduoutry agaynst yi God: straunge rewardes hast thou loued,
more the all corne floores.
2 Therfore shall they nomore enioye the cornefloores and wyne presses, and their
swete wyne shal fayle the.
3 They wil not dwel in the LORDES londe, but Ephraim turneth agayne in to
Egipte, & eateth vncleane thinges amonge the Assirians.
4 They poure out no wyne for a drinkofferinge vnto the LORDE, nether geue they
him their slayne offeringes: but they be vnto them as mourners meates, wherin
all they that eate them, are defyled. For the bred that they haue soch lust
vnto, shal not come in the house of the LORDE.
5 What wil ye do then in the solempne dayes, and in the feast of the LORDE?
6 lo, they shall get them awaye for the destruccion, Egypte shal receaue them, &
Noph shal bury them. The nettles shall ouergrowe their pleasaunt goodes, and
burres shalbe in their tabernacles.
7 Be ye sure (O Israel) the tyme of visitacion is come, the dayes of
recompencinge are at honde. As for the prophet, ye holde him for a foole: and
him that is rich in the sprete, for a mad man: so greate is youre wickednes and
malice.
8 Ephraim hath made himself a watchman of my God, a prophet yt is become a snare
to do hurte in euery strete, and abhominacion in the house of his God.
9 They be gone to farre, & haue destroied the selues, like as they dyd afore
tyme at Gabaa. Therfore their wickednes shal be remebred, and their synnes
punyshed.
10 I fande Israel like grapes in the wildernes, & sawe their fathers as the
first fyges in ye toppe of ye fyge tre. But they are gone to Baal Peor, & runne
awaie fro me to yt shamefull Idoll, & are become as abhominable as their louers
11 Ephraim flieth like a byrde, so shal their glory also: In so moch, yt they
shal nether begette, coceaue ner beare children.
12 And though they bringe vp eny, yet will I make them childlesse amonge men.
Yee wo shall come to them, when I departe from them.
13 Ephraim (as me thinke) is planted in welthinesse, like as Tyrus, but now must
she bringe hir owne children forth to the manslayer.
14 O LORDE thou shalt geue them: what shalt thou geue them? geue them an
vnfrutefull wombe and drye brestes.
15 All their wickednesse is done at Galgal, there do I abhorre them. For the
vngraciousnes of their owne inuencions, I wil dryue them out of my house. I will
loue them nomore, for all their prynces are vnfaithfull.
16 Ephraim is hewen downe, their rote is dryed vp, so yt they shal bringe nomore
frute: yee and though they bringe forth eny, yet wil I slaye euen the best
beloued frute of their body.
17 My God shall cast them awaye, for they haue not bene obediet vnto him,
therfore shal they go astraye amonge the Heithen.

Chapter 10

1 Israel was a goodly vyne, but he hath brought forth vnprofitable frute: yee
the more frute he had, the mo aulters he made: ye more good I dyd to their
londe, the more frendshipe shewed they to their ymages.
2 Their herte is deuyded, therfore wil they be destroyed. The LORDE shall breake
downe their ymages, he shal destroye their aulters.
3 Then shal they saye: we haue no kinge, for why? we haue not feared the LORDE.
And what shal then the kinge do to vs?
4 They comon together, and sweare vayne oothes: they be cofederate together,
therfore groweth their punyshment, as the wedes in the forowes of the londe.
5 They that dwell in Samaria haue worshipped the calfe of Bethaue: therfore
shall the people mourne ouer them, yee and the prestes also, that in their
welthynesse reioysed with them: and why? it shal passe awaye from them.
6 It shalbe brought to the Assirian, for a present vnto kinge Iareb. Ephraim
shal receaue full punishment: Israel shalbe confounded for his owne
ymaginacions,
7 Samaria wt his kinge shall vanish awaye, as the scomme vpon the water.
8 The hye places of Auen where Israel do synne, shal be cast downe: thistles and
thornes shal growe vpon their aulters. Then shal they saye to ye mountaynes:
couer vs, and to the hilles: fall vpon vs.
9 O Israel, thou hast synned as Gabaa dyd afore tyme, where they remayned:
shulde not the batel then come vpon the wicked children, as wel as vpon the
Gabaonites?
10 I wil chasten them, euen after myne owne desyre, the people shal be gathered
together ouer them, whe I punysh them for their greate wickednesse.
11 Ephraim was vnto me, as a cow that is vsed to go to plowe, therfore I loued
him, and fell vpon his fayre neck. I droue Ephraim, Iuda plowed, & Iacob played
the hu?bode man:
12 that they might sowe vnto rightuousnes, and reape the frutes of weldoynge: yt
they might plowe vp their fresh londe, and seke the LORDE, till he came, and
lerned them rightuousnes.
13 But now they haue plowed them wickednesse, therfore shal they reepe synne,
and eate the frute of lyes. Seinge thou puttest thy cofidence in thine owne
wayes, and leanest to ye multitude of thy worthies:
14 there shal growe a sedicion amonge thy people. All yi stroge cities shalbe
layed waist, euen as Salmana was destroyed with his familiers, thorow him that
was auenged of Baal, in the daye of batel, where ye mother perished with hir
childre.
15 Euen so shal it go with you (o Bethel) because of youre malicious wickednes.
Like as the mornynge goeth awaye, so shal the kinge of Israel passe.

Chapter 11

1 When Israel was yoge, I loued him: and called my sonne out of the londe of
Egipte.
2 But ye more they were called, the more they wente backe: offerynge vnto Idols,
and censynge ymages.
3 I lerned Ephraim to go, and bare them in myne armes, but they regarded not me,
that wolde haue helped them.
4 I led them with coardes of frendshipe, & with bondes of loue. I was euen he,
that layed the yocke vpon their neckes. I gaue them their fodder my self,
5 yt they shulde not go agayne in to Egipte: And now is Assur their kinge: For
they wolde not turne vnto me.
6 Therfore shal ye swearde begynne in their cities, the stoare that they haue
lickened vnto, shall be destroyed and eaten vp: and that because of their owne
ymaginacions.
7 My people hath no lust to turne vnto me, their prophetes laye the yocke vpon
the, but they ease them not of their burthen.
8 What greate thinges haue I geuen the, o Ephraim? how faithfully haue I
defended the, o Israel? haue I dealt with the as with Adama? or haue I intreated
the like Seboim? No, my hert is otherwise mynded. Yee my mercy is to feruent:
9 therfore haue I not turned me to destroye Ephraim in my wrothful displeasure.
For I am God and no man, I am euen that holy one in the myddest of the, though I
came not within the cite.
10 The LORDE roareth like a lyon, that they maye folowe him: Yee as a lyon
roareth he, that they maye be afrayed, like the children of the see:
11 that they maye be scarred awaye from Egipte, as men scarre byrdes: & frayed
awaye (as doues vse to be) from the Assirias londe: and that because I wolde
haue them tary at home, saieth the LORDE.
12 But Ephraim goeth aboute me with lies, and the house of Israel dyssembleth.
Only Iuda holdeth him with God, and with the true holy thinges.

Chapter 12

1 Ephraim kepeth the ayre, and foloweth after the east wynde: he is euer
increasinge lyes & destruction. They be confederate with the Assirians, their
oyle is caried in to Egipte.
2 The LORDE hath a courte to holde with Iuda, and wil punysh Iacob: After their
owne waies and acordinge to their owne inuencions, shal he recompence them.
3 He toke his brother by the hele, when he was yet in his mothers wombe: and in
his strength he wrestled with God.
4 He stroue with the Angel, and gat the victory: so that he prayde and desyred
him. He fande him at Bethel, & there he talked wt vs.
5 Yee the LORDE God of hoostes, euen ye LORDE him self remembred him:
6 Then turne to thy God, kepe mercy and equyte, and hope still in thy God.
7 But the marchaunt hath a false weight in his honde, he hath a pleasure to
occupie extorcion.
8 Ephraim thinketh thus: Tush, I am rich, I haue good ynough: In all my workes
shal not one fawte be founde, that I haue offended.
9 Yet am I the LORDE thy God, eue as when I brought the out of the londe of
Egipte, and set the in thy tentes, and as in the hye feast dayes.
10 I haue spoke thorow the prophetes, and shewed dyuerse visions, and declared
my self by the ministracion of ye prophetes.
11 But at Galaad is the abhominacion, they are fallen to vanyte. At Galgal they
haue slayne oxen: and as many heapes of stones as they had in their lode
forowes, so many aulters haue they made.
12 Iacob fled into the londe of Siria, and Israel serued for a wife, and for a
wife he kepte shepe.
13 By a prophet the LORDE brought them out of Egipte, and by a prophet he
preserued the.
14 But Ephraim hath prouoked him to displeasure thorow his abhominacions:
therfore shal his bloude be poured vpon him self, and the LORDE his God shal
rewarde him his blasphemies.

Chapter 13

1 The abhominacion of Ephraim is come also in to Israel. He is gone backe to
Baal, therfore must he dye.
2 And now they synne more and more: of their syluer, they make them molten
ymages, like the Idols of the Heithen, and yet all is nothinge but the worke of
the craftesman. Notwithstodinge they preach of the same: who so wil kysse the
calues, offreth to men.
3 Therfore they shalbe as the mornynge cloude, and as the dew that early passeth
awaye: and like as dust that ye wynde taketh awaye from the floore, and as smoke
that goeth out of ye chymney.
4 I am the LORDE thy God, which brought the out of the londe of Egipte: that
thou shuldest knowe no God but me only, & that thou shuldest haue no Sauioure
but only me.
5 I toke diligent hede of the in the wildernesse that drye londe.
6 But when they were wel fedde and had ynough, they waxed proude, and forgat me.
7 Therfore will I be vnto them as a lyon, and as a leoparde in ye waye to the
Assirians.
8 I wil come vpon them as a she beer, that is robbed of hir welpes, and I wil
breake that stubburne herte of theirs. There wil I deuoure them as a lyon: yee
the wylde beastes shal teare them.
9 O Israel, thou doest but destroyeth thyself, In me only is thy helpe.
10 Where are thy kinges now, that shulde helpe the in all thy cities? Yee and
thy iudges, of whom thou saydest: geue me a kinge and prynces?
11 well, I gaue the a kinge in my wrath, and in my displeasure will I take him
from the agayne.
12 The wickednesse of Ephraim is bounde together, & his synne lieth hyd.
13 Therfore shall sorowes come vpon him, as vpon a woman that traualeth. An
vndiscrete sonne is he: for he considreth not, that he shulde not haue bene able
to haue endured in the tyme of his byrth,
14 had not I defended him from the graue, and delyuered him from death. O death,
I wil be thy death: o hell, I wil be thy stynge.
15 Yet can I se no comforth, for when he is now the goodliest amonge the
brethren, the east wynde (euen the wynde of the LORDE) shal come downe from the
wildernesse, and drye vp his condytes, and drynke vp his welles: he shal spoyle
the treasure of all pleasaunt vessels.
16 As for Samaria, they shalbe made waist, & why? they are disobedient vnto
their God. They shal perish with the swearde, their children shalbe slayne, and
their women bygg with childe shalbe rypte vp.

Chapter 14

1 Tvrne the now (o Israel) vnto ye LORDE thy God, for thou hast taken a greate
fall thorow thy wickednesse.
2 Take these wordes with you, when ye turne to the LORDE, & saye vnto him: O
forgeue vs all oure synnes, receaue vs graciously, & then wil we offre ye
bullockes of oure lyppes vnto the.
3 Assur shalbe no more oure helper, nether will we ryde vpon horses eny more. As
for the workes of oure hondes, we wil nomore call vpon them: For it is thou that
art oure God, thou shewest euer mercy vnto the fatherlesse.
4 O (yf they wolde do this) I shulde heale their sores: yee with all my herte
wolde I loue them: so yt my wrath shulde clene be turned awaye from them.
5 Yee I wolde be vnto Israel as the dewe, and he shulde growe as ye lylie, & his
rote shulde breake out as Libanus.
6 His braunches shulde sprede out abrode, & be as fayre as the olyue tre, & smel
as Libanus.
7 They that dwel vnder his shadowe, shulde come agayne, & growe vp as the corne,
& florish as the vyne: he shulde haue as good a name, as the wyne of Libanus.
8 O Ephraim, what haue I to do with Idols eny more? I wil graciously heare him,
& lede him forth. I wil be vnto the as a grene Fyrre tre, vpon me shalt thou
fynde thy frute.
9 Who so is wyse, shal vnderstonde this: & he yt is right enstructe, wil regarde
it. For ye wayes of the LORDE are rightuous, soch as be godly wil walke in them:
As for the wicked, they wil stomble therin.


Joel

Chapter 1

1 This is the worde of the LORDE, that came vnto Ioel the sonne of Phatuel:
2 Heare o ye elders: podre this wel, all ye that dwell in the lode: yf euer
there happened soch a thinge in youre dayes, or in ye dayes of youre fathers.
3 Tell youre children of it, & let them shewe it vnto their children, & so they
to certifie their posterite therof.
4 Loke what the caterpiller hath lefte, yt hath the greshopper eaten vp: what
the greshopper lefte, that hath the locuste eaten vp: & what the locuste hath
lefte, that hath the blastinge consumed.
5 Wake vp ye dronckardes, & wepe: mourne all ye wyne suppers, because of youre
swete wyne, for it shal be taken awaye from youre mouth.
6 Yee a mightie & an innumerable people shall come vp in to my londe: these haue
teth like the teth of lyons, & chaftbones like the lyonesses.
7 They shal make my vinyarde waist, they shal pyll of the barckes of my
fygetrees, strype them bare, cast them awaye, and make the braunches whyte.
8 Make yi mone as a virgin doth, yt gyrdeth her selfe with sacke, because of hir
bryde grome.
9 For the meate & drynkofferynge shalbe taken awaye from the house of the LORDE:
& the prestes ye LORDES ministers shal mourne.
10 The felde shalbe waisted, the londe shalbe in a miserable case: for the corne
shalbe destroyed, the swete wyne shal come to confucion, & the oyle vtterly
desolate.
11 The hu?bodemen & the wyne gardeners shal loke piteously & make lamentacion,
for the wheate wyne & barley, & because the haruest vpon the felde is so clene
destroyed.
12 The grape gatherers shal make greate mone, when the vynyarde & fygetrees be
so vtterly waisted. Yee all the pomgarnettes, palmtrees, apletrees, & the other
trees of the felde shall wyther awaye. Thus the mery cheare of the children of
men, shal come to confucion.
13 Gyrde you, & make yor mone, o ye prestes: mourne ye ministres of the aulter:
go youre waye in, & slepe in sack cloth, o ye officers of my God: for the meat &
drynkofferynge shalbe taken awaye from the house of yor God.
14 Proclame a fastynge, call the cogregacion, gather the elders & all the
inhabiters of the londe together into the house of the LORDE yor God, & crie
vnto the LORDE:
15 alas, alas for this daye. And why? the daye of the LORDE is at honde, and
commeth as a destroyer from the Allmightie.
16 Shal not ye meates be taken awaye before oure eyes, the myrth also & ioye
from the house of oure God?
17 The sede shal perish in the grounde, the garners shall lye waist, the floores
shalbe broken downe, for the corne shalbe destroied.
18 O what a sighinge make the catell? the bullockes are very euel likynge,
because they haue no pasture: and the shepe are fame?shed awaye.
19 O LORDE, to the will I crie: for the fyre hath consumed the goodly pastures
of the wyldernesse, and the flame hath brent vp all the trees of the felde.
20 Yee the wylde beestes crie also vnto the: for the water ryuers are dryed vp,
and the fyre hath consumed the pastures of the wyldernesse.

Chapter 2

1 Blowe out ye trompet in Sion, & crie vpo my holy hill, yt all soch as dwel in
the londe, maye treble at it: for ye daie of the LORDE commeth, & is harde at
honde:
2 a darcke daye, a gloomynge daye, a cloudy daye, yee & a stormy daye, like as
the mornynge spredeth out vpo the hilles: Namely, a great & mightie people: soch
as haue not bene sens ye begynnynge, nether shal be after them for euermore.
3 Before him shal be a consumynge fyre, & behynde him a burnynge flame. The
londe shal be as a garden of pleasure before him, but behinde him shal it be a
very waist wildernesse, & there is no man, that shal escape him.
4 They are to loke vpon like bayrded horses, & runne like horse men.
5 They skyppe vp vpon ye hilles, as it were the sounde of charettes: as the
flame of fyre that consumeth the strawe, and as a mightie people redy to the
batell.
6 The folke shalbe afrayed of him, all faces shal be as blacke as a pot.
7 These shal rune like giauntes, & leape ouer the walles like men of warre.
Euery ma in his goinge shal kepe his araie, & not go out of his Path.
8 There shal not one dryue another, but ech shal kepe his owne waye. They shal
breake in at the wyndowes, & not be hurte:
9 They shal come into the cite, & runne vpon the walles: They shal clymme vp
vpon the houses, & slyppe in at the wyndowes like a thefe.
10 The earth shal quake before him, yee the heauens shalbe moued: the Sonne &
Moone shal be darckened, and the starres shal withdrawe their shyne.
11 The LORDE shal shewe his voyce before his hoost, for his hoost is greate,
stronge & mightie to fulfill his commaundement. This is yt greate and maruelous
fearfull daye of the LORDE: And who is able to abyde it?
12 Now therfore saieth the LORDE: Turne you vnto me with all youre hertes, with
fastinge, wepynge and mournynge:
13 rente youre hertes, & not youre clothes. Turne you vnto the LORDE youre God,
for he is gracious & mercifull, longe sufferynge & of greate compassion: & redy
to pardone wickednes.
14 Then (no doute) he also shal turne, & forgeue: & after his chastenynge, he
shal let youre increase remayne, for meat & drynck offerynges vnto the LORDE
youre God?
15 Blowe out with the tropet in Sion, proclame a fastynge, call the
congregacion,
16 & gather the people together: warne the congregacion, gather the elders,
bringe the children & suclynges together. Let ye brydegrome go forth of his
chabre, & the bryde out of her closet.
17 Let the prestes serue the LORDE betwixte the porch & ye aulter, wepinge &
sayenge: be fauourable (o LORDE) be fauourable vnto thy people: let not thine
heretage be brought to soch confucion, lest the Heithen be lordes therof.
Wherfore shulde they saye amonge the Heithen: where is now their God?
18 Then shal the LORDE be gelous ouer his londe, & spare his people:
19 yee ye LORDE shal answere, & saye vnto his people: Beholde, I wil sende you
corne, wyne & oyle, so that ye shal haue plenty of them: & I wil nomore geue you
ouer to be a reprofe amonge the Heithen.
20 Agayne, as for him of the north, I shal dryue him farre from you: & shute him
out in to a drye and waist londe, his face towarde the east see, and his hynder
partes towarde the vttemost see. The stynke of him shall go vp, and his fylthy
corrupcion shal fall vpon himself, because he hath dealte so proudly.
21 Feare not (o londe) but be glad and reioyse, for the LORDE wil do greate
thinges.
22 Be not ye afrayed nether (o ye beastes of the felde) for the pastures shal be
grene, and the trees shal beare their frute: the fygetrees & vinyardes shal geue
their increase.
23 Be glad then (o ye children of Sion) and reioyse in the LORDE youre God, for
he hath geuen you the teacher of rightuousnes: & he it is yt shal sende you
downe shuwers of rayne, early and late in the first moneth:
24 so that ye garners shal be full of corne, and the presses plenteous in wyne
and oyle.
25 And as for the yeares that ye gre?shopper, locuste, blasstinge & caterpiller
(my greate hoost, which I sent amonge you) haue eaten vp, I shal restore them to
you agayne:
26 so that ye shal haue ynough to eate, and be satisfied: and prayse the name of
the LORDE youre God, that so maruelously hath dealte with you. And my people
shall neuer be confounded eny more:
27 Ye shall well knowe, that I am in the myddest of Israel, and that I am youre
God: yee and that there is none other, and my people shall nomore be brought to
confucion.
28 After this, will I poure out my sprete vpon all flesh: & yor sonnes & yor
doughters shal prophecy: yor olde me shal dreame dreames & youre yonge men shal
se visions:
29 Yee in those dayes I will poure out my sprete vpon seruauntes and maydens.
30 I will shewe wonders in heauen aboue, and tokes in the earth beneth: bloude
and fyre, and the vapoure off smoke.
31 The Sonne shalbe turned in to darcknesse, & ye Moone in to bloude: before yt
greate & notable daye off the LORDE come.
32 And the tyme shal come: yt who so euer calleth on the name of the LORDE,
shalbe saued. For vpon the mount Sion & at Ierusalem, there shalbe a saluacion,
like as the LORDE hath promised: yee & amonge the other remnaunt, whom the LORDE
shall call.

Chapter 3

1 For take hede: In those dayes & at ye same tyme, when I turne agayne the
captyuite of Iuda & Ierusale:
2 I shal gather all people together, & brynge the in to the valley of Iosaphat:
and there wil I reason with the, because of my people & heretage of Israel: who
they haue scatred aboute in the nacions, & parted my lode:
3 yee they haue cast lottes for my people, the yonge me haue they set in the
brodel house, & solde the Damsels for wyne, yt they might haue to drike.
4 Thou Tirus and Sido and all ye borders of the Philistynes: what haue ye to do
with me? Will ye defye me? well: yf ye will nedes defye me, I shall recopence
you, euen vpon youre heade, & yt right shortly:
5 for ye haue take awaye my syluer & golde, my fayre & goodly Iewels, & brought
them in to youre gods houses.
6 The children also of Iuda and Ierusalem haue ye solde vnto the Grekes, that ye
might brynge the farre fro ye borders of their owne countrees.
7 Beholde therfore: I will rayse them out of the place, where ye haue solde
them, & will rewarde you euen vpon youre heade.
8 Youre sonnes & youre doughters will I sell thorow the hondes of the childre of
Iuda, & so they shal geue them forth to sell, vnto the of Saba, a people of a
farre coutre: for the LORDE himself hath sayde it.
9 Crie out these thinges amonge the Gentiles, proclame warre, wake vp the
giauntes, let them drawe nye, let the come vp all the lusty warryours of the.
10 Make you sweardes of youre ploweshares, and speares of youre syckles &
sythes. Let ye weake man saye: I am stronge.
11 Mustre you, and come, all ye Heithe roude aboute: gather you together, there
shall the LORDE laye all thy giauntes to the grounde.
12 Let the people aryse, and get them to the valley of Iosaphat: for there wil I
syt, and iudge all Heithe roude aboute.
13 Laye to youre sythes, for the haruest is rype: come, get you downe: the
wynepresse is full, yee the wynepresses runne ouer, for their wickednesse is
waxen greate.
14 In the valley appoynted, there shalbe many, many people: for the daye of the
LORDE is nye in ye valley appoynted.
15 The Sonne and Moone shall be darckened, & the starres shal withdrawe their
light.
16 The LORDE shal roare out of Sion, & crie out of Ierusale, that the heauens &
the earth shal quake withall. But the LORDE shal be a defence vnto his owne
people, ad a refuge for the childre of Israel.
17 Thus shal ye knowe, yt I the LORDE youre God dwell vpo my holy mount of Sion.
Then shal Ierusale be holy, & there shal no straungers go thorow her eny more.
18 Then shal the moutaynes droppe swete wyne, & the hylles shall flowe with
mylcke, All the ryuers of Iuda shal haue water ynough, & out of the LORDES
house, there shal flowe a sprynge, to water ye broke of Sitim:
19 but Egipte shalbe layed waist, & Edo shal be desolate: because they haue
dealte so cruelly with the childre of Iuda, and shed innocent bloude in their
londe.
20 Agayne, Iuda shalbe inhabited for euermore, & Ierusale from generacion to
generacio:
21 for I wil not leaue their bloude vnauenged. And the LORDE shal dwell in Sion.


Amos

Chapter 1

1 These are the sermons, that were shewed vnto Amos (which was one of the
shepherdes at Thecua) vpon Israel, in the tyme of Osias kynge of Iuda, & in the
tyme of Ieroboa ye sonne of Ioas kynge of Israel, two yeare before ye earthquake
2 And he sayde: The LORDE shal roare out off Sion, & shewe his voyce fro
Ierusale: so that ye pastures of the shepherdes shal be in a miserable case, &
ye toppe of Charmel dryed vp.
3 Thus sayeth the LORDE: for thre & foure wickednesses of Damascus, I will not
spare her: because they haue thro?hed Galaad wt yro flales:
4 But I wil sende a fyre in to ye house of Hazael, the same shal consume the
palaces of Benadab.
5 Thus wil I breake the barres off Damascus, & rote out the inhabiter fro the
felde of Auen, and him yt holdeth the scepter, out of ye pleasunt house: so yt
the people shalbe dryuen out of fayre Siria, sayeth the LORDE.
6 Thus saieth the LORDE: For thre & foure wickednesses of Gaza, I wil not spare
her: because they make the presoners yet more captyue, & haue dryuen the in to
the lode of Edom.
7 Therfore wil I sende a fyre in to ye walles of Gaza, which shal deuoure hir
houses.
8 I wil rote out the yt dwell at Asdod & him yt holdeth the scepter of Ascalon,
and stretch out myne honde ouer Accaron, that the remnaunt of the Philistines
shal perish saieth the LORDE.
9 Thus sayeth the LORDE: For thre and foure wickednesses off the cite off Tyre,
I will not spare her: because they haue increased ye captiuyte of the Edomites,
and haue not remembred the brotherly couenaunt.
10 Therfore will I sende a fyre into the walles off Tyre, that shal consume hir
pallaces.
11 Thus sayeth the LORDE: For thre and foure wickednesses of Edom I wil not
spare him, because he persecuted his brother with the swerde, destroyed his
mothers wombe, bare hatred very longe, and so kepte indignacion allwaye by him.
12 Therfore will I sende a fyre in to Thema, which shal deuoure the pallaces of
Bosra.
13 Thus sayeth the LORDE: For thre ad foure wickednesses of the children off
Ammon, I will not spare them: because they rypte vp the wome greate with childe
in Galaad, to make the borders of their londes the wyder.
14 Therfore I wil kyndle a fyre in the walles of Rabbath, that shall consume hir
palaces: with a greate crie, in the daye of batel, in tempest and in the daye
off storme:
15 so that their kynge shal go in to captiuyte, he and his prices together,
sayeth the LORDE.

Chapter 2

1 Thus sayeth the LORDE: For thre and foure wickednesses off Moab, I will not
spare him: because he brent the bones off the kynge of Edom to asshes.
2 Therfore wil I sende a fyre in to Moab, which shal cosume ye pallaces of
Carioth: so yt Moab shal perish with a noyse, and the sounde of a shawme.
3 I will rote out the iudge from amoge them, and slaye all his prynces with him,
sayeth the LORDE.
4 Thus sayeth the LORDE: for thre ad foure wickednesses of Iuda, I wil not spare
him: because he hath cast asyde the lawe of the LORDE, and not kepte his
commaundementes: for why, they wolde nedes be disceaued with the lyes, that
their forefathers folowed.
5 Therfore will I sende a fyre in to Iuda, which shal consume the palaces of
Ierusalem.
6 Thus sayeth the LORDE: For thre & foure wickednesses of Israel, I wil not
spare him: because he hath solde the rightuous for money, and the poore for
shues.
7 They treade vpon poore mens heades in the dust of the earth, & croke the wayes
off the meke. The sonne and the father go to the harlot, to dishonoure my holy
name:
8 they lye besyde euery aulter vpon clothes taken to pledge, and in the house of
their goddes they drynke the wyne of the oppressed.
9 Yet destroyed I the Amorite before them, that was as hie as the Cedre trees,
and as stronge as the okes: notwithstodinge I destroyed his frute fro aboue, and
his rote from vnder.
10 Agayne: I brought you out of the londe of Egipte, and led you xl. yeares
thorow the wyldernesse, that ye might haue the Amoriters londe in possession.
11 I raysed vp prophetes amonge youre children, and absteyners amonge youre yoge
men. Is it not so, o ye children of Israel, sayeth the LORDE?
12 But ye gaue the absteyners wyne to drynke, yee ye comaunded the prophetes,
sayenge: Prophecy not.
13 Beholde, I wil crasshe you in sonder, like as a wayne crassheth, yt is full
of sheaues:
14 so that ye swifte shall not escape, nether the stronge be able to do eny
thynge: no, the giaunte shal not saue his owne life.
15 The archer shall not abyde, and the swifte off fote shall not escape. The
horsma shal not saue his life,
16 & he that is as maly of stomack as a giaunte, shall in that daye be fayne to
runne his waye naked, sayeth the LORDE.

Chapter 3

1 Heare, what the LORDE speaketh vnto you (o ye children of Israel) namely, vnto
all ye trybes, who I brought out of Egipte, and sayde:
2 You only haue I accepted from all the generacions off the earth: therfore will
I vyset you in all youre wickednesses.
3 Maye twaine walke together excepte they be agreed amonge them selues?
4 Doth a lyon roare in the wodde, excepte he haue a pray? Or crieth a lyons
whelpe out of his denne, excepte he haue gotten somthige?
5 Doth a byrde fall in a snare vpo ye earth where no fouler is? Taketh a man his
snare vp from the grounde, afore he catche somwhat?
6 Crie they out Alarum with the trompet in the cite, and the people not afrayed?
Commeth there eny plage in a cite, without it be the LORDES doinge?
7 Now doth the LORDE God no maner of thinge, but he telleth his secrete before
vnto his seruauntes ye prophetes.
8 When a lyon roareth, who will not be afrayed? Seynge then that the LORDE God
himself speaketh, who will not prophecy?
9 Preach in the palaces at Asdod, and in the palaces off the londe off Egipte,
and saye: gather you together vpon the moutaynes off Samaria, so shall ye se
greate murthur and violent oppression amonge them: for why, they regarde not the
thinge that is right,
10 sayeth the LORDE: they gather together euell gotten goodes, and laye vp
robbery in their houses.
11 Therfore, thus sayeth the LORDE God: This londe shalbe troubled and beseged
roude aboute, thy strength shalbe plucte from the, and thy palaces robbed.
12 Thus saieth the LORDE: like as an hyrdeman taketh two legges or a pece off an
eare out off the Lyons mouth: Euen so the children of Israel (that dwell in
Samaria, hauynge their couches in the corner, and their beddes at Damascus)
shalbe plucte awaye.
13 Heare, and beare recorde in the house of Iacob (sayeth the LORDE God of
hoostes)
14 that when I begynne to vyset the wickednesse of Israel, I will vyset ye
aulters at Bethel also: so that the hornes of the aulter shalbe broken of, &
fall to the groude.
15 As for the wynter house and sommer house, I will smyte them downe: and the
houses of yuery, yee and many other houses shal perish, and be destroyed, sayeth
the LORDE.

Chapter 4

1 Heare this worde, o ye fat kyne, that be vpon the hill of Samaria: ye that do
poore me wronge, and oppresse the nedy: ye that saye to youre lordes: brynge
hyther, let vs drynke.
2 Therfore the LORDE hath sworne by his holynesse: The dayes shall come vpon
you, that ye shalbe lift vp vpo speares, and youre posterite caried awaye in
fyssher pannes.
3 Ye shall get you out at the gappes one after another, and in Armon shal ye be
cast awaye, sayeth the LORDE.
4 Ye came to Bethel for to worke vngraciousnes, and haue increased youre synnes
at Galgal. Ye brought youre sacrifices in the mornynge, and youre tythes vnto
the thirde daye.
5 Ye made a thakofferinge off leuen, ye promised frewillofferinges, and
proclamed them. Soch lust had ye, o ye children of Israel, sayeth the LORDE God.
6 Therfore haue I geuen you ydle teth in all youre cities, & scarcenesse off
bred in all youre places: yet will ye not turne vnto me, sayeth the LORDE.
7 Whe there were but thre monethes vnto ye haruest, I withelde the rayne from
you: yee I rayned vpo one cite, and not vpo another one pece off grounde was
moystured with rayne, and the grounde that I rayned not vpon, was drye.
8 Wherfore two (yee thre) cities came vnto one, to drynke water: but they were
not satisfied, yet will ye not turne vnto me, sayeth ye LORDE.
9 I haue smyten you with drouth and blastinge: and loke how many orchardes,
vinyardes, fygetrees and olyue trees ye had: ye catirpiller hath eaten them vp.
But yet will ye not turne vnto me, sayeth the LORDE.
10 Pestilence haue I sent amoge you, as I dyd in Egipte: youre yonge men haue I
slayen wt ye swerde, and caused youre horses be taken captyue: I made the
stynckinge sauoure of youre tentes to come vp in to youre nostrels: Yet wil ye
not turne vnto me, sayeth the LORDE.
11 Some off you haue I ouerthrowen? as I ouerthrewe Sodome & Gomorre: so that ye
were as a brande plucte out of the fyre. Yet will ye not turne vnto me, sayeth
the LORDE.
12 Therfore, thus will I handle the agayne (O Israel) ye euen thus will I handle
the. Make the ready then to mete thy God, o Israel.
13 For lo, he maketh the mountaynes, he ordeneth the wynde, he sheweth man what
he is aboute to do: he maketh the mornynge and the darcknesse, he treadeth vpo
the hye places off the earth: ye LORDE God of hoostes is his name.

Chapter 5

1 Heare this worde (o ye house of Israel) and why? I must make this mone for
you:
2 The vyrgin Israel shall fall, & neuer ryse vp agayne: she shall be cast downe
vpon hir owne grounde, and no man shal helpe hir vp.
3 For thus sayeth ye LORDE God: Where as there dwelt a M. in one cite, there
shalbe left scarce an C. therin: and where yere dwelt an C. there shal scarce
ten be left for the house off Israel.
4 Neuertheles, thus sayeth the LORDE vnto ye house of Israel: Seke after me, ad
ye shal lyue,
5 but seke not after Bethel. Come not at Galgal, and go not to Bersaba: for
Galgal shall be caried awaye captyue, and Bethel shal come to naught.
6 Seke the LORDE, yt ye maye lyue: lest the house of Ioseph be brent with fyre
and cosumed, and lest there be none to quench Bethel.
7 Ye turne the lawe to wormwod, and cast downe rightuousnes vnto the grounde.
8 The LORDE maketh the vij. starres and the Oryons, he turneth the night in to
daye, and off the daye he maketh darcknesse. He calleth ye waters of the see,
and poureth them out vpon the playne grounde: the LORDE is his name.
9 He rayseth destruccion vpon the mightie people, & bryngeth downe the stronge
holde:
10 but they owe him euel will, yt reproueth them openly: and who so telleth the
the playne treuth, they abhorre him.
11 For so moch the as ye oppresse ye poore, and robbe him of his best
sustenaunce: therfore, where as ye haue buylded houses off square stone, ye
shall not dwell in them. Maruelos pleasaunt vynyardes shall ye plante, but the
wyne of the shal ye not drynke: and why?
12 as for the multitude of youre wickednesses and youre stoute synnes, I knowe
them right well. Enemies are ye off the rightuous, ye take rewardes, ye oppresse
the poore in iudgment.
13 Therfore the wyse must now be fayne to holde his tuge, so wicked a tyme is
it.
14 Seke after the thinge that is good, & not euell, so shall ye lyue: yee the
LORDE God off hoostes shal be with you, acordinge to youre owne desyre.
15 Hate the euell, and loue the good: set vp right agayne in the porte: & (no
doute) the LORDE God of hoostes shall be mercifull vnto the remnaunt of Ioseph.
16 Yff no (sayeth the LORDE God, the God of hoostes) there shal be mourninge in
all stretes, yee they shal saye i euery strete: alas, alas. They shall call the
housbonde man to lamentacio, and soch as can mourne, to mournynge.
17 In all vynyardes there shal be heuynesse, for I will come amonge you, sayeth
the LORDE.
18 Wo be vnto them that desyre the daye off ye LORDE: Wherfore wolde ye haue it?
As for that daye of the LORDE, it shalbe darcke ad not cleare:
19 Yee like as when a ma runeth fro a lyon, and a Beer meteth with him: or, whe
he commeth into the house, and leeneth his honde vpon the wall, a serpent byteth
him.
20 Shall not the daye of the LORDE be darcke, and not cleare? shal it not be
cloudy, and no shyne in it?
21 I hate and abhorre youre holy dayes, ad where as ye cense me when ye come
together I will not accepte it.
22 And though ye offre me brentofferinges and meatofferinges, yet haue I no
pleasure therin: As for youre fat thankofferynges, I wil not loke vpon them.
23 Awaye with that noyse of thy songes, I wil not heare thy playes of musick:
24 but se that equyte flowe as the water, and rightuousnesse as a mightie
streame.
25 O ye house of Israel, gaue ye me offeringes and sacrifices those xl. yeares
longe in the wyldernesse?
26 Yet haue ye set vp tabernacles to youre Moloch, and ymages of youre Idols,
Yee ad the starre of youre god Rempha, figures which ye made to worshipe them.
27 Therfore wil I cause you be caried awaye beyonde Damascus, sayeth the LORDE,
whose name is the God off hoostes.

Chapter 6

1 Wo be to the proude welthy in Sio, to soch as thinke the so sure vpon ye mount
of Samaria? which holde them selues for the best of the worlde, and rule the
house of Israel, eue as they list.
2 Go vnto Calne, and se: and from thence get you to Hemath the greate cite, and
so go downe to Gath of the Philistines: be they better at ease then these
kyngdomes, or the border of their londe wyder then yours?
3 Ye are taken out for the euel daye, euen ye that syt in the stole of
wylfulnesse:
4 Ye that lye vpon beddes off yuery, and vse youre wantonnesse vpon youre
couches: ye that eate the best lambes of ye flocke, and the fattest calues off
the droaue:
5 ye that synge to the lute, and in playenge off instrumentes compare youre
selues vnto Dauid:
6 ye that drynke wyne out of goblettes, & anoynte youre selues with the best
oyle, but no man is sory for Ioseps hurte.
7 Therfore now shall ye be the first of them, that shal be led awaye captyue,
and the lusty chere of the wylfull shall come to an ende.
8 The LORDE God hath sworne euen by himself (sayeth the LORDE God of hoostes:) I
hate the pryde of Iacob, and I abhorre his palaces: and I wil geue ouer the
cite, wt all that is therin:
9 so that though there remayne ten men in one house, they shal dye.
10 So their nexte kyn?folckes and the deed buriers shall take them, and cary
awaye their bones, and saye vnto him, that is in the ynnermer house: is there
yet eny mo by ye? And he shal answere: they are all gone, holde thy tunge (shall
he saye) for they wolde not remembre the name of the LORDE.
11 Beholde, the LORDE is mynded to smyte the greate houses, so that they shall
decaye: ad the litle houses, that they shall cleue a sunder.
12 Who can runne with horses, or plowe wt oxen vpon the harde rockes off stone?
For why, ye haue turned true iudgment in to bytternesse, and the frute of
rightuousnesse in to wormwod:
13 Yee euen ye, that reioyse in vayne thynges: ye that saye: haue not we
optayned hornes in oure owne strength?
14 Well, take hede, o ye house off Israel, sayeth the LORDE God of hoostes: I
wil brynge a people vpo you, which shall trouble you, from the waye that goeth
towarde Hemath, vnto the broke in the medowe.

Chapter 7

1 The LORDE God shewed me soch a vision: beholde, there stode one that made
gre?shoppers, euen when the corne was shutynge forth, after the kynge had clipte
his shepe.
2 Now when they vndertoke to eate vp all the grene thinges in ye lode, I sayde:
O LORDE God, be mercifull, I beseke the: who shulde els helpe vp Iacob, that is
brought so lowe?
3 So the LORDE was gracious therin, and the LORDE sayde: well, it shall not be.
4 Agayne, ye LORDE shewed me this vision: beholde, the LORDE God called the fyre
to punysh withall, and it deuoured the greate depe: yee it consumed a parte
allredy.
5 Then sayde I: O LORDE God, holde thyne honde: for who shulde els helpe vp
Iacob that is brought so lowe?
6 So the LORDE was merciful therin, and the LORDE God sayde: well, it shal not
be.
7 Morouer, he shewed me this vision: beholde, the LORDE stode vpon a plastered
wall, & a masons trowell in his hode.
8 And the LORDE sayde vnto me: Amos, what seist thou? I answered: a masons
trowell. Then sayde the LORDE: beholde, I will laye the trowell amoge my people
of Israel, and will nomore ouersee them:
9 but the hye hilchapels off Isaac must be layed waist, and the churches off
Israel made desolate: and as for the house of Ieroboam, I will stonde vp agaynst
it with the swerde.
10 Vpon this sent Amasias the prest to Bethel vnto Ieroboam the kinge of Israel,
sayenge: Amos maketh the house off Israel to rebell agaynst the, the londe ca
not awaye with his wordes.
11 For Amos sayeth: Ieroboam shall dye with the swerde, and Israel shall be led
awaye captyue out of their owne londe.
12 And Amasias sayde vnto Amos: Get the hence (thou that cast se so well) and
fle in to the londe of Iuda: get the there thy lyuynge, and prophecy there:
13 and prophecy nomore at Bethel, for it is the kynges chapel, and the kynges
courte.
14 Amos answered, and sayde to Amasias: As for me, I am nether prophet, ner
prophetes sonne: but a keper of catell. Now as I was breakynge downe molberies,
and goynge after the catell,
15 the LORDE toke me, & sayde vnto me: Go thy waye, and prophecy vnto my people
of Israel.
16 And therfore, heare thou now the worde off the LORDE: Thou saiest: prophecy
not agaynst Israel, and speake nothinge agaynst the house off Isaac.
17 Wherfore thus sayeth the LORDE: Thy wife shalbe defyled in ye cite, yi sonnes
and doughters shalbe slayne with the swerde, and thy londe shalbe measured out
with the lyne: Thou thy self shalt dye in an vnclene londe, and Israel shalbe
dryuen out off his owne countre.

Chapter 8

1 The LORDE God shewed me me this vision: and beholde, there was a maude with
sommer frute.
2 And he sayde: Amos, what seist thou? I answered: a maude with sommer frute.
Then sayde the LORDE vnto me: the ende commeth vpon my people of Israel, I wil
nomore ouersee them.
3 In that daye shall the songes off the temple be turned in to sorow, sayeth the
LORDE God. Many deed bodyes shal lye in euery place, & be cast forth secretly.
4 Heare this, O ye yt oppresse the poore, and destroye the nedy in ye londe,
sayenge:
5 Whan will the new moneth be gone, that we maye sell vytale, and ye Sabbath,
that we maye haue scarcenesse of corne: to make the bu?shel lesse, and the Sycle
greater?
6 We shall set vp false waightes, yt we maye get the poore vnder vs with their
money, and the nedy also for shues: yee let vs sell the chaffe for corne.
7 The LORDE hath sworne agaynst the pryde of Iacob: these workes of theirs will
I neuer forget.
8 Shal not the londe tremble, and all they that dwell therin, mourne for this?
Shal not their destruccion come vpon them like a water streame, & flowe ouer
the, as the floude of Egipte?
9 At the same tyme (sayeth the LORDE God) I shall cause ye Sone to go downe at
noone, and the londe to be darcke in the cleare daye.
10 Youre hye feastes will I turne to sorow, and youre songes to mournynge: I wil
brynge sack cloth vpo all backes, & baldnes vpo euery heade: yee soch a
mournynge wil I sende them, as is made vpon an only begotten sonne, and they
shall haue a miserable ende.
11 Beholde, the tyme commeth (sayeth the LORDE God) yt I shal sende an huger in
to ye earth: not the hunger of bred, ner the thyrst of water: but an hunger to
heare the worde off the LORDE:
12 so that they shal go from the one see to the other, yee from ye north vnto ye
east, runnynge aboute to seke the worde of ye LORDE, and shal not fynde it.
13 In that tyme, shal the fayre virgins and the yonge men perish for thyrst,
14 yee euen they that sweare in the offence off Samaria, and saye: as truly as
thy God lyueth at Dan, and as truly as ye God lyueth at Bersaba. These shal
fall, and neuer ryse vp agayne.

Chapter 9

1 I sawe the LORDE stondinge vpon the aulter, and he sayde: smyte the dore
cheke, that the postes maye shake withall. For their couetousnesse shal fall
vpon all their heades, and their posterite shalbe slayne with the swerde. They
shall not fle awaye, there shall not one off them escape, ner be delyuered.
2 Though they were buryed in the hell, my honde shal fetch them from thence:
though they clymme vp to heauen, yet shal I cast them downe:
3 though they hyde them selues vpo the toppe of Carmel, yet shal I seke them
out, and brynge them from thence: Though they crepe downe fro my sight in to the
depe of the see, I shal comaude the serpente, euen there to byte them.
4 Yff they go awaye before their enemies i to captyuyte, then shall I commaunde
the swerde, there to slaye them. Thus wil I set myne eyes vpon them, for their
harme and not for their wealth.
5 For when the LORDE God of hoostes toucheth a londe, it cosumeth awaye, and all
they that dwell therin, must nedes mourne: And why? their destruccion shal aryse
as euery streame and runne ouer them, as the floude in Egipte.
6 He that hath his dwellinge in heauen, ad groundeth his tabernacle in the
earth: He that calleth the waters of the see, and poureth them out vpon the
playne grounde: his name is the LORDE.
7 O ye children off Israel, are ye not vnto me, euen as the Morians, sayeth the
LORDE? haue not I brought Israel out off the londe off Egipte, the Philistynes
from Capthor, and the Sirians fro Cyr?
8 Beholde, the eyes of the LORDE are vpon the realme that synneth, to rote it
clene out of the earth: Neuertheles, I will not vterly destroye the house of
Iacob, saieth the LORDE.
9 For lo, this I promyse: though I siffte ye house of Israel amonge all nacions
(like as they vse to sifte in a syue) yet shall not ye smallest grauel stone
fall vpo the earth:
10 But all the wicked doers of my people, that saye: Tush, the plage is not so
nye, to come so hastely vpon vs: those shal perish with the swerde.
11 At that tyme wil I buylde agayne the tabernacle off Dauid, that is fallen
downe, and hedge vp his gappes: and loke what is broke, I shal repayre it: Yee I
shal buylde it agayne, as it was a fore tyme,
12 yt they maye possesse the remnaunt of Edom, yee and all soch people as call
vpon my name wt the, saieth the LORDE, which doth these thinges.
13 Beholde, the tyme commeth (saieth the LORDE) that the plowman shal ouertake
ye mower, and ye treader off grapes, him that soweth sede. The mountaynes shall
droppe swete wyne, and the hilles shall be frutefull,
14 and I wil turne the captyuyte of my people of Israel: they shal repayre the
waist cities, & haue the in possessio: they shal plante vinyardes, ad drynke the
wyne therof: they shal make gardens, and enioye the frutes off the.
15 And I wil plate them vpo their owne groude, so that I will neuer rote them
out agayne from their londe, which I haue geuen the sayeth the LORDE thy God.


Obadiah

Chapter 1

1 This is the vision that was shewed vnto Abdy: Thus hath ye LORDE God spoke vpo
Edo: We haue herde of the LORDE yt there is an embassage sent amonge the
Heithen: Vp, let vs aryse, and fight agaynst them.
2 Beholde, I will make ye small amoge the Heithen, so that thou shalt be vtterly
despised.
3 The pryde of thine herte hath lift the vp, thou that dwellest in ye stroge
holdes off stone, and hast made the an hye seate: Thou sayest in thyne herte:
who shal cast me downe to the grounde?
4 But though thou wentest vp as hye as the Aegle, and maydest thy nest aboue
amonge the starres: yet wolde I plucke the downe from thece.
5 Yf ye theues & robbers came to ye bynight, thou takinge thy rest: shulde they
not steale, till they had ynough? yf the grape gatherers came vpon the, wolde
they not leaue the some grapes?
6 But how shall they rype Esau, and seke out his treasures?
7 Yee the men that were sworne vnto the, shal dryue the out off the borders off
thyne owne londe. They that be now at one with the, shal disceaue the, and
ouercome ye: Eue they that eate thy bred, shall betraye the, or euer thou
perceaue it.
8 Shal not I at the same tyme destroye the wyse men of Edom, ad those that haue
vnderstondinge, from the mount of Esau?
9 Thy giauntes (o Theman) shalbe afrayed, for thorow the slaughter they shalbe
all ouer throwne vpon the mout of Esau.
10 Shame shal come vpon the, for ye malice that thou shewedest to thy brother
Iacob: yee for euermore shalt thou perish,
11 & that because of the tyme, when thou didest set thyself agaynst him, euen
when the enemies caried awaye his hoost, and when the aleauntes came in at his
portes, and cast lottes vpon Ierusalem, and thou thyself wast as one of them.
12 Thou shalt nomore se the daye of thy brother, thou shalt nomore beholde the
tyme of his captiuyte: thou shalt nomore reioyse ouer the children of Iuda, in
the daye of their destruccion, thou shalt tryumphe nomore in the tyme of their
trouble.
13 Thou shalt nomore come in at the gates off my people, in the tyme of their
decaye: thou shalt not se their mysery in the daye of their fall. Thou shalt
sende out no man agaynst their hoost, in the daye of their aduersite:
14 nether shalt thou stode waytinge enymore at ye corners of the stretes, to
murthur soch as are fled, or to take them presoners, that remayne in the daye of
their trouble.
15 For the daye off the LORDE is harde by vpon all Heithen. Like as thou hast
done, so shalt thou be dealte withall, yee thou shalt be rewarded euen vpon
thine heade.
16 For like wyse as ye haue droncken vpon myne holy hill, so shal all heithen
dryncke continually: yee dryncke shall they, and swalowe vp, so that ye shall
be, as though ye had neuer bene.
17 But vpon the mount Sion, there shall a remnaunt escape: these shalbe holy,
and the house of Iacob shal possesse euen those, that had them selues afore in
possessio.
18 Morouer, the house of Iacob shalbe a fyre, the house of Ioseph a flame, & the
house of Esau shalbe the strawe: which they shal kyndle and cosume, so that
nothinge shalbe left of the house of Esau, for the LORDE himfelf hath sayde it.
19 They of the south shal haue the mount of Esau in possession: and loke what
lieth vpon the grounde, that shal the Philistynes haue: the playne feldes shal
Ephraim and Samaria possesse: and the mountaynes of Galaad shal Ben Iamin haue.
20 And this hoost shalbe the childre of Israels presoners: Now what so lieth
from Canaan vnto Sarphad, and in Sepharad, that shal be vnder the subieccion of
Ierusalem: and the cities of the south shall enheret it.
21 Thus they that escape vpon the hill off Sion, shall go vp to punysh the mount
off Esau, and the kyngdome shalbe the LORDES.


Jonah

Chapter 1

1 The worde of the LORDE came vnto Ionas the sonne of Amithai, sayenge:
2 Aryse, and get the to Niniue that greate cite: and preach vnto them, how yt
their wickednesse is come vp before me.
3 And Ionas made him ready to fle vnto Tharsis from the presence of the LORDE,
and gat him downe to Ioppa: where he founde a shippe ready for to go vnto
Tharsis. So he payde his fare, and wente aborde, that he might go with them vnto
Tharsis from the presence of the LORDE.
4 But the LORDE hurled a greate wynde in to the see, and there was a mightie
tempest in the see: so that the shippe was in ioperdy of goinge in peces.
5 Then the maryners were afrayde, and cried euery man vnto his god: and the
goodes that were in the shippe, they cast in to the see, to lighten it off them.
But Ionas gat him vnder ye hatches, where he layed him downe and slombred.
6 So the master of the shippe came to him and sayde vnto him: why slomberest
thou? Vp, call vpon thy God: yf God (happly) wil thynke vpon vs, that we peryshe
not.
7 And they sayde one to another: come, let vs cast lottes: that we maye knowe,
for whose cause we are thus troubled. And so they cast lottes, and the lot fell
vpon Ionas.
8 The sayde they vnto him: tell vs, for whose cause are we thus troubled? what
is thine occupacion? whence commest thou? what countre man art thou, and of what
nacion?
9 He answered them: I am an Ebrue, and I feare the LORDE God of heauen, which
made both the see and drie londe.
10 Then were ye men exceadingly afrayed, & sayde vnto him: why didest thou so?
(for they knewe, that he was fled from the presence of the LORDE, because he had
tolde them)
11 and sayde morouer vnto him: What shall we do vnto the, that the see maye
ceasse from troublinge vs? (for the see wrought and was troublous)
12 he answered them: Take me, and cast me in to the see, so shal it let you be
in rest: for I wote, it is for my sake, that this greate tempest is come vpon
you.
13 Neuerthelesse, the men assayed with rowinge, to brynge the shippe to lode:
but it wolde not be, because the see wrought so, & was so troublous agaynst
them.
14 Wherfore they cried vnto the LORDE, and sayde: O LORDE, let vs not perish for
this mans death, nether laye thou innocent bloude vnto oure charge: for thou (o
LORDE) hast done, euen as thy pleasure was.
15 So they toke Ionas, and cast him in to the see, and the see lefte ragynge.
16 And the men feared the LORDE exceadingly, doynge sacrifices ad makynge vowes
vnto the LORDE.
17 Bvt the LORDE prepared a greate fyshe, to swalow vp Ionas. So was Ionas in
the bely of the fysh, thre dayes and thre nightes.

Chapter 2

1 And Ionas prayed vnto the LORDE his God, out of the fysshes bely,
2 and sayed: In my trouble I called vnto ye LORDE, and he herde me: out off the
bely off hell I cried, and thou herdest my voyce.
3 Thou haddest cast me downe depe in ye middest off the see, and the floude
compased me aboute: yee all thy wawes and rowles of water went ouer me,
4 I thought that I had bene cast awaye out of thy sight: but I wil yet agayne
loke towarde thy holy temple.
5 The waters compased me, euen to the very soule: the depe laye aboute me, and
the wedes were wrapte aboute myne heade.
6 I wente downe to the botome of the hilles, & was barred in with earth for
euer. But thou (o LORDE my God) hast brought vp my lyfe agayne out of
corrupcion.
7 When my soule faynted within me, I thought vpon the LORDE: and my prayer came
in vnto the, euen in to thy holy temple.
8 They that holde of vayne vanyties, wil forsake his mercy.
9 But I wil do the sacrifice with the voyce of thankesgeuynge, and wil paye that
I haue vowed: for why? saluacion commeth of the LORDE.
10 And ye LORDE spake vnto ye fysh, and it cast out Ionas agayne vpon the drye
londe.

Chapter 3

1 Then came the worde of the LORDE vnto Ionas agayne, sayenge:
2 vp, and get the to Niniue that greate cite, & preach vnto them the preachinge,
which I bade the.
3 So Ionas arose, and wente to Niniue at the LORDES commaundement. Niniue was a
greate cite vnto God, namely, off thre dayes iourney.
4 And Ionas wente to, and entred in to ye cite: euen a dayes iourney, and cried,
sayenge: There are yet xl. dayes, and then shal Niniue be ouerthrowen.
5 And the people of Niniue beleued God, and proclamed fastinge, and arayed them
selues in sack cloth, as well the greate as the small of them.
6 And the tydinges came vnto ye kinge of Niniue, which arose out off his seate,
and dyd his apparell off, and put on sack cloth, and sate him downe in asshes.
7 And it was cried and commaunded in Niniue, by the auctorite of the kige and
his lordes, sayenge: se that nether man or beest, oxe or shepe taist ought at
all: and that they nether fede ner drincke water:
8 but put on sack cloth both man and beest, and crye mightely vnto God: yee se
that euery man turne fro his euell waye, and from the wickednesse, yt he hath in
honde.
9 Who can tell? God maye turne, and repete, and cease from his fearce wrath,
that we perish not.
10 And when God sawe their workes, how they turned from their wicked wayes: he
repented on the euell, which he sayde he wolde do vnto them, and dyd it not.

Chapter 4

1 Wherfore Ionas was sore discontet, and angrie.
2 And he prayed vnto the LORDE, and sayde: O LORDE, was not this my sayenge (I
praye the) when I was yet in my countre? therfore I haisted rather to fle vnto
Tharsis, for I knowe well ynough that thou art a mercifull God, full of
compassion, loge sufferinge, and of greate kyndnesse, and repentest when thou
shuldest take punyshment.
3 And now o LORDE, take my life fro me (I beseke the) for I had rather dye then
lyue.
4 Then sayde the LORDE: art thou so angrie?
5 And Ionas gat him out of the cite, and sat downe on ye east syde therof: and
there made him a bothe, and sat vnder it in the shadow, till he might se, what
shulde chaunce vnto the cite.
6 And the LORDE God prepared a wylde vyne, which sprange vp ouer Ionas, that he
might haue shadowe aboue his heade, to delyuer him out of his payne. And Ionas
was exceadinge glad of the wylde vyne.
7 But vpo the nexte morow agaynst the springe of the daye, the LORDE ordened a
worme, which smote the wylde vyne, so that it wethered awaye.
8 And when the Sone was vp God prepared a feruent east wynde: and the Sonne bete
ouer the heade of Ionas, that he faynted agayne, and wy?shed vnto his soule,
that he might dye, and sayde: It is better for me to dye, the to lyue.
9 And God sayd vnto Ionas: Art thou so angrie for the wylde vyne? And he sayde:
yee very angrie am I euen vnto the deeth.
10 And the LORDE sayde: thou hast compassion vpon a wylde vyne, whero thou
bestowdest no laboure, ner maydest it growe: which sprange vp in one night and
perished in another:
11 And shulde not I then haue compassion vpon Niniue that greate cite, wherin
there are aboue an C. and xx. thousande personnes, yt knowe not their right hode
fro the lefte, besydes moch catell?


Micah

Chapter 1

1 This is the worde of the LORDE, that came vnto Micheas the Morastite, in the
dayes of Ioathan, Achas and Ezechias kiges of Iuda: which was shewed him vpon
Samaria and Ierusalem.
2 Heare all ye people, marcke this well o earth, and all that therin is: Yee the
LORDE God himself be witnesse amonge you, euen ye LORDE from his holy temple.
3 For why? beholde, the LORDE shal go out of his place, & come downe, and treade
vpon the hie thinges of the earth.
4 The moutaynes shall consume vnder him, & the valleys shal cleue asunder: like
as wax cosumeth at the fyre, & as ye waters runne downwarde.
5 And all this shalbe for the wickednesse of Iacob, and the synnes of the house
of Israel. But what is the wickednesse of Iacob? Is not Samaria? Which are the
hye places of Iuda? Is not Ierusale?
6 Therfore I shall make Samaria an heape of stones in the felde, to laye aboute
the vynyarde: hir stones shal I cast in to the valley, & discouer hir foudacios.
7 All hir ymages shalbe broke downe & all hir wynnynges shal be brent in the
fyre: yee all hir Idols will I destroye: for why, they are gathered out of the
hyre of an whore, & in to an whores hyre shal they be turned agayne.
8 Wherfore I wil mourne & make lamentacion, bare & naked will I go: I must
mourne like ye dragos, & take sorow as ye Estriches:
9 for their woude is past remedy: And why? it is come in to Iuda, & hath touched
ye porte of my people at Ierusale allredy.
10 Wepe not, lest they at Geth perceaue it. Thou at Betaphra, welter thy self in
the dust and asshes.
11 Thou that dwellest at Sephir, get the hence with shame. The proude shall
boost nomore for very sorowe: & why? hir neghboure shall take from her what she
hath.
12 The rebellious cite hopeth, that it shal not be so euell: but for all that,
the plage shal come from the LORDE, euen in to the porte of Ierusalem.
13 The greate noyse off the charettes shall feare them, that dwell at Lachis,
which is an occasion of ye synne of ye doughter of Sion, for in the came vp the
wickednesses of Israel.
14 Yee she sent hir coursers in to the londe of Geth. The houses of lies will
disceaue the kynges of Israel.
15 And as for the (o thou that dwellest at Morassa) I shal brynge a possessioner
vpon the, ad the plage of Israel shal reach vnto Odolla.
16 Make the balde, and shaue the, because of thy tender children: Make the
cleane balde as an Aegle, for they shalbe caried awaye captyue from the.

Chapter 2

1 Wo vnto them, that ymagyn to do harme, and deuyse vngraciousnesse vpon their
beddes, to perfourme it in ye cleare daye: for their power is agaynst God.
2 When they covet to haue londe, they take it by violence, they robbe men off
their houses. Thus they oppresse a ma for his house, & euery man for his
heretage.
3 Therfore thus sayeth the LORDE: Beholde, agaynst this housholde haue I deuysed
a plage, wherout ye shal not plucke youre neckes: Ye shal nomore go so proudly,
for it will be a perlous tyme.
4 In that daye shall this terme be vsed, and a mournynge shal be made ouer you
on this maner: We be vtterly desolate, the porcion off my people is translated.
Whan wil he parte vnto vs the londe, that he hath taken from vs?
5 Neuerthelesse there shalbe noman to deuyde the thy porcion, in the
congregacion off the LORDE.
6 Tush, holde youre tunge (saye they) It shall not fall vpon this people, we
shall not come so to confucion,
7 sayeth the house off Iacob. Is the sprete off the LORDE so clene awaye? or is
he so mynded? Treuth it is, my wordes are frendly vnto them that lyue right:
8 but my people doth the contrary, therfore must I take parte agaynst them: for
they take awaye both cote and cloke from the symple. Ye haue turned youre selues
to fight,
9 the women off my people haue ye shot out fro their good houses, and taken
awaye my excellent giftes from their children.
10 Vp, get you hence, for here shall ye haue no rest. Because off their Idolatry
they are corrupte, and shall myserably perish.
11 Yff I were a fleshly felowe, and a preacher of lyes and tolde them that they
might syt bebbinge and bollynge, and be droncken: O that were a prophet for this
people.
12 But I will gather the indede (o Iacob) and dryue the remnaunt off Israel all
together. I shall cary them one with another, as a flocke in the folde, and as
the catell in their stalles, that they maye be disquieted of other men.
13 Who so breaketh the gappe, he shall go before. They shall breake vp the
porte, and go in and out at it. Their kynge shall go before them, and the LORDE
shalbe vpon the heade of them.

Chapter 3

1 Heare, o ye heades of the house of Iacob, and ye leders of the house of
Israel: Shulde not ye knowe, what were laufull and right?
2 But ye hate the good, and loue the euell: ye plucke of mens skynnes, and the
flesh from their bones:
3 Ye eate the flesh of my people, ad flay of their skynne: ye breake their
bones, ye choppe them in peces as it were in to a cauldron, ad as flesh into a
pot.
4 Now the tyme shall come, that when they call vnto the LORDE, he shall not
heare them, but hyde his face from them: because that thorow their owne
ymaginacios, they haue dealte so wickedly.
5 And as concernynge the prophetes that disceaue my people, thus the LORDE
sayeth agaynst them: When they haue eny thinge to byte vpon, then they preach
that all shalbe well: but yf a man put not some thinge in to their mouthes, they
preach of warre agaynst him.
6 Therfore youre vision shalbe turned to night, & youre prophecyenge to
darcknesse. The Sonne shall go downe ouer those prophetes, & the daye shalbe
darcke vnto them.
7 Then shall the vision seers be ashamed, & ye saythsayers confounded: yee they
shalbe fayne (all the packe of the) to stoppe their mouthes, for they haue not
Gods worde.
8 As for me, I am full of strength, & of ye sprete of ye LORDE, full of iudgment
& boldnesse: to shewe the house of Iacob their wickednesse, & the house of
Israel their synne.
9 O heare this ye rulers of the house of Iacob, and ye iudges of the house off
Israel: ye that abhorre the thinge that is laufull, and wraist asyde the thinge
that is straight:
10 Ye that buylde vp Sion with bloude, and Ierusalem with doynge wronge.
11 O ye iudges, ye geue sentence for giftes: O ye preastes, ye teach for lucre:
O ye prophetes, ye prophecy for money. Yet wil they be take as those that holde
vpon God, and saye: Is not the LORDE amonge vs? Tush, there can no misfortune
happen vs.
12 Therfore shal Sion (for youre sakes) be plowed like a felde: Ierusale shall
become an heape of stones, and the hill of ye temple shal be turned to an hye
wodde.

Chapter 4

1 But in the latter dayes it wil come to passe, that the hill off the LORDES
house shalbe set vp hyer the eny moutaynes or hilles: Yee the people shall
preese vnto it,
2 and the multitude off the Gentiles shal haist them thither, sayege: Come, let
vs go vp to the hill of the LORDE, & to the house of the God of Iacob: that he
maye teach vs his waye, and that we maye walke in his pathes. For the lawe shall
come out off Sion, ad the worde of God from Ierusalem,
3 and shall geue sentence amonge the multitude off the Heithen, and refourme the
people off farre coutrees: so that of their swerdes they shal make plowshares,
and sythes off their speares. One people shall not lift vp a swerde agaynst
another, yee they shall nomore lerne to fight:
4 but euery man shal syt vnder his vinyarde and vnder his fyge tre, and no man
to fraye him awaye: for the mouth off ye LORDE of hoostes hath spoken it.
5 Therfore, where as all people haue walked euery man in ye name of his owne
god, we will walke in the name of oure God for euer and euer.
6 At the same tyme (sayeth the LORDE) will I gather vp the lame and the
outcastes, and soch as I haue chastened:
7 and will geue yssue vnto the lame, and make of ye outcastes a greate people:
and the LORDE himself shal be their kynge vpon the mount Sion, fro this tyme
forth for euermore.
8 And vnto the (O thou tower of Eder, thou stronge holde off the doughter Sion)
vnto the shal it come: eue the first lordshipe and kyngdome of the doughter
Ierusale.
9 Why the art thou now so heuy? is there no kynge in the? are thy councelers
awaye that thou art so payned, as a woman in hir trauayle?
10 And now (o thou doughter Sion) be sory, let it greue the as a wife laboringe
with childe: for now must thou get the out off the cite, and dwell vpon the
playne felde: Yee vnto Babilo shalt thou go, there shalt thou be delyuered, and
there the LORDE shal lowse the from the honde off thine enemies.
11 Now also are there many people gathered together agaynst the, sayenge: what,
Sion is cursed, we shall se oure lust vpon her.
12 But they knowe not the thoughtes off the LORDE, they vnderstonde not his
councell, that shall gather them together as the sheeues in the barne.
13 Therfore get the vp (o thou doughter Sion) and throsshe out the corne: For I
wil make thy horne yron, and thy clawes brasse, that thou mayest grynde many
people: their goodes shalt thou appropriate vnto the LORDE, and their substaunce
vnto the ruler off the whole worlde.

Chapter 5

1 After that shalt thou be robbed thy selff, o thou robbers doughter: they shal
laye sege agaynst vs, and smyte the iudge off Israel with a rodde vpon the
cheke.
2 And thou Bethleem Ephrata, art litle amonge the thousandes off Iuda, Out off
the shal come one vnto me, which shall be ye gouernoure i Israel: whose
outgoinge hath bene from the begynnynge, and from euerlastinge.
3 In the meane whyle he plageth them for a season, vntill the tyme that she
(which shall beare) haue borne: then shall the remnaunt of his brethren be
conuerted vnto ye children of Israel.
4 He shal stonde fast, and geue fode in the strength of the LORDE, and in the
victory of the name of ye LORDE his God: and when they be conuerted, he shall be
magnified vnto the farthest partes of the worlde.
5 Then shal there be peace, so that the Assirian maye come in to oure londe, and
treade in oure houses. We shall brynge vp seuen shepherdes and viij. prynces vpo
them:
6 these shal subdue the londe of Assur wt the swerde, and the londe of Nymrod
with their naked weapens. Thus shal he delyuer vs from the Assiria, when he
commeth within oure lande, and setteth his fote within oure borders.
7 And the remnaunt of Iacob shal be amonge the multitude of people, as the dew
of the LORDE, and as the droppes vpon the grasse, that tarieth for no man, and
waiteth of no body.
8 Yee the residue of Iacob shalbe amonge the Gentiles and the multitude off
people, as the lyon amonge the beestes of ye wodde, and as the lyons whelpe
amonge a flocke of shepe: which (when he goeth thorow) treadeth downe, teareth
in peces, and there is no man that can helpe.
9 Thyne honde shalbe lift vp vpon thine enemies, and all thine aduersaries shal
perish.
10 The tyme shal come also (sayeth the LORDE) that I wil take thine horses from
the, & destroye thy charettes.
11 I will breake downe the cities off thy londe, and ouerthrewe all thy stronge
holdes.
12 All witchcraftes will I rote out of thyne hande, there shall no mo
soythsayenges be within the.
13 Thine Idols and thyne ymages will I destroye out of ye so that thou shalt
nomore bowe thy self vnto the workes of thyne owne hondes.
14 Thy groues wil I plucke vp by the rotes, & breake downe thy cities.
15 Thus will I be aueged also, vpon all Heithen that will not heare.

Chapter 6

1 Herken now what the LORDE sayeth: Vp, reproue the mountaynes, and let the
hilles heare thy voyce.
2 O Heare the punyshment of the LORDE, ye mountaynes, and ye mightie foundacios
of ye earth: for the LORDE wil reproue his people, ad reason with Israel:
3 O my people, what haue I done vnto the? or wherin haue I hurte the? geue me
answere.
4 Because I brought the fro the londe of Egipte, and delyuered the out of the
house of bondage? Because I made Moses, Aaron and Miriam to lede the?
5 Remembre (o my people) what Balach the kynge of Moab had ymagined agaynst the,
ad what answere that Balaam the sonne of Beor gaue him, from Sethim vnto Galgal:
yt ye maye knowe the louynge kyndnesses of ye LORDE.
6 What acceptable thynge shal I offre vnto the LORDE? shall I bowe mykne to the
hye God? Shal I come before him wt brentofferinges, and with calues of a yeare
olde?
7 Hath the LORDE a pleasure in many thousand rammes, or innumerable streames of
oyle? Or shal I geue my firstborne for myne offences, and the frute of my body
for the synne of my soule?
8 I wil shewe the (O ma) what is good, and what the LORDE requyreth off the:
Namely, to do right, to haue pleasure in louynge kyndnesse, to be lowly, and to
walke with thy God:
9 that thou mayest be called a cite of the LORDE, & that thy name maye be
rightuousnesse. Heare (o ye trybes) who wolde els geue you soch warnynge?
10 Shulde I not be displeased, for the vnrightuous good in the houses of the
wicked, and because the measure is minished?
11 Or shulde I iustfie the false balaunces and the bagge of disceatfull
weightes,
12 amonge those that be full off riches vnrightuously gotten: where the citesyns
deale with falsede, speake lyes, and haue disceatfull tunges in their mouthes?
13 Therfore I will take in honde to punysh the, and to make the desolate,
because of thy synnes.
14 Thou shalt eate, & not haue ynough: yee thou shalt bringe thy self downe.
Thou shalt fle, but not escape: ad those yt thou woldest saue, wil I delyuer to
the swerde.
15 Thou shalt sowe, but not reape: thou shalt presse out olyues, but oyle shalt
thou not haue, to anoynte thy self withall: thou shalt treade out swete must,
but shalt drynke no wyne.
16 Ye kepe the ordinaunces of Amri, & all the customes of the house of Achab: ye
folowe their pleasures, therfore wil I make the waist, & cause yi inhabiters to
be abhorred, O my people: & thus shalt thou beare thine owne shame.

Chapter 7

1 Wo is me: I am become as one, that goeth a gleenynge in the haruest. There are
no mo grapes to eate, yet wolde I fayne (with all my herte) haue of the best
frute.
2 There is not a godly man vpo earth, there is not one rightuous amoge me. They
laboure all to shed bloude, & euery ma hunteth his brother to death:
3 yet they saye they do well, when they do euell. As the prince wil, so sayeth
the iudge: yt he maye do him a pleasure agayne. The greate ma speaketh what his
herte desyreth, & ye hearers alowe him.
4 The best off the is but as a thistle, and the most rightuous of them is but as
a brere in the hedge But when the daye of thy preachers commeth, yt thou shalt
be vysited: the shal they be waisted a waye.
5 Let no man beleue his frende, ner put his confidece in a prince. Kepe the
porte of thy mouth, from her yt lieth in thy bosome:
6 for ye sonne shal put his father to dishonoure, the doughter shal ryse agaynst
her mother, ye doughter in lawe agaynst hir mother in lawe: and a mans foes
shalbe euen they of his owne housholde.
7 Neuerthelesse I wil loke vp vnto ye LORDE, I wil paciently abyde God my
sauioure: my God shal heare me.
8 O thou enemie of myne, reioyce not at my fall, for I shal get vp agayne: and
though I syt in darcknesse, yet ye LORDE is my light.
9 I will beare the punishment of the LORDE (for why, I haue offended him) till
he syt in iudgment vpon my cause, and se that I haue right. He wil bringe me
forth to the light, and I shal se his rightuosnesse.
10 She that is myne enemy shall loke vpon it, & be confounded, which now saieth:
Where is thy LORDE God? Myne eyes shal beholde her, when she shalbe troden
downe, as the claye in the stretes.
11 The tyme wil come, that thy gappes shal be made vp, and the lawe shal go
abrode:
12 and at that tyme shal they come vnto the, from Assur vnto the stroge cities,
and from the stronge cities vnto the ryuer: from the one see to the other, from
the one mountayne to the other.
13 Not wt stondinge the londe must be waisted, because of them that dwell
therin, and for the frutes of their owne ymaginacions.
14 Therfore fede thy people with thy rodde, the flocke of thine heretage which
dwell desolate in the wodde: that they maye be fedde vpon the mount of Charmel,
Basan & Galaad as afore tyme.
15 Maruelous thinges will I shewe them, like as when they came out of Egipte.
16 This shal the Heithen se, and be a?shamed for all their power: so that they
shal laye their honde vpon their mouth, and stoppe their eares.
17 They shal licke the dust like a serpent, & as the wormes of the earth, yt
tremble in their holes. They shalbe afrayed of the LORDE oure God, & they shal
feare ye.
18 Where is there soch a God as thou? that pardonest wickednes, and forgeuest
the offences of the remnaunt of thine heretage? He kepeth not his wrath for
euer. And why? his delyte is to haue compassion:
19 he shal turne agayne, & be mercyfull to vs: he shal put downe oure
wickednesses, & cast all oure synnes in to the botome of the see.
20 Thou shalt kepe thy trust with Iacob, and thy mercy for Abraham, like as thou
hast sworne vnto oure fathers longe agoo.


Nahum

Chapter 1

1 This is the heuy burthen of Niniue, which Naum of Elchos dyd wryte, as he sawe
it.
2 The LORDE is a gelous God, and a taker of vengeaunce: yee a taker of vegeaunce
is ye LORDE, and wrothfull. The LORDE taketh vengeaunce of his enemies, and
reserueth displeasure for his aduersaries.
3 The LORDE suffreth longe, he is of greate power, & so innocent, that he
leaueth no man fautlesse before him. The LORDE goeth forth in tempest and stormy
wether, the cloudes are the dust of his fete.
4 Whe he reproueth the see, he dryeth it vp, & turneth all the floudes to drye
londe. Basan is desolate, Charmel and the pleasure of Libanus waisteth awaye.
5 The mountaynes tremble for him, the hilles consume. At the sight of him, the
earth quaketh: yee the whole worlde, and all that dwell therin.
6 Who maye endure before his wrath? Or who is able to abyde his grymme
displeasure? His anger taketh on like fyre, and the harde rockes burst in sunder
before him.
7 Ful gracious is the LORDE, and a stronge holde in tyme of trouble, he knoweth
the that put their trust in him:
8 when the floude renneth ouer, and destroyeth the place, and when the
darcknesse foloweth still vpon his enemies.
9 What do ye ymagin then agaynst the LORDE on this maner? (Tush, when he hath
once made an ende, there shal come nomore trouble.)
10 For like as the thornes that sticke together, and as the drye strawe, so shal
the dronckardes be consumed together, euen when they be full.
11 There come out of ye soch as ymagin myschefe, and geue vngracious councell
agaynst the LORDE.
12 Therfore thus saieth the LORDE: Let the be as wel prepared, yee and as many
as they can, yet shal they be hewen downe, and passe awaye. And as for the, I
wil vexe the, but not vtterly destroie the.
13 And now wil I breake his rodde from thy backe, and burst thy bondes in
sonder.
14 But the LORDE hath geuen a commaundement cocernynge the, that there shall
come nomore sede of thy name. The carued and casten ymages will I rote out of
the house of thy god. Thy graue shal I prepare for the, and thou shalt be
confounded.
15 Beholde, vpon the mountaynes come the fete of him, that bryngeth good
tydinges, & preacheth peace. O Iuda, kepe thy holy dayes, perfourme thy
promyses: for Belial shal come no more in the, he is vtterly roted out.

Chapter 2

1 The scaterer shal come vp agaynst the, & laye sege to the castell. Loke thou
wel to the stretes, make thy loynes stronge, arme thy self with all thy myght:
2 for the LORDE shal restore agayne the glory of Iacob, like as ye glory of
Israel. The destroyers haue broken them downe, & marred the wyne braunches.
3 The shylde of his giauntes glistereth, his men of warre are clothed in purple.
His charettes are as fyre, when he maketh him forwarde, his archers are wel
deckte & trimmed.
4 The charettes rolle vpon the stretes, & welter in the hye wayes. They are to
loke vpon like cressettes of fyre, and go swyftly, as the lightenynge.
5 When he doth but warne his giauntes, they fall in their araye, & haistely they
clymme vp the walles: yee the engyns of the warre are prepared all ready.
6 The water portes shal be opened, and the kinges palace shall fall.
7 The quene hir self shal be led awaye captyue, and hir gentilwomen shal mourne
as the doues, & grone within their hertes.
8 Niniue is like a pole full of water, but then shal they be fayne to fle.
Stonde, stode, (shal they crie) & there shal not one turne backe.
9 Awaye with the syluer, awaye with the golde: for here is no ende of treasure.
There shalbe a multitude of all maner costly ornamentes.
10 Thus must she be spoyled, emptied & clene striped out: that their hertes maye
be melted awaye, their knees treble, all their loynes be weake, and their faces
blacke as a pot.
11 Where is now the dwellinge of the lyos, and the pasture of the lyons whelpes?
where the lyon and the lyonesse wente with the whelpes, and no man frayed them
awaye?
12 But the lyon spoyled ynough for his yonge ones, and deuoured for his
lyonesse: he fylled his dennes with his pray, & his dwellinge place with that he
had rauy?shed.
13 Beholde, I wil vpon the (saieth the LORDE of hoostes) and wil set fyre vpon
thy charettes, that they shal smoke withall, and the swerde shal deuoure thy
yonge lyons. I wil make an ende of thy spoylinge from out of the earth, & the
voyce of thy messaungers shall nomore be herde.

Chapter 3

1 Wo to that bloudthursty cite, which is all full of lyes and robbery, & wil not
leaue of from rauy?shinge.
2 There a man maye heare scourginge, ru?shinge, the noyse of the wheles, the
crienge of the horses, & the rollinge of the charettes.
3 There the horse men get vp with naked swerdes, and glisterynge speares: There
lyeth a multitude slayne, and a greate heape of deed bodies: There is no ende of
deed coarses, yee men fall vpon their bodies:
4 And that for the greate and manyfolde whordome, of the fayre and beutifull
harlot: which is a mastresse of wychcraft, yee and selleth the people thorow hir
whordome, and the nacions thorow hir wichcraft.
5 Beholde, I wil vpon the (saieth the LORDE of hoostes) and wil pull thy clothes
ouer thy heade: that I maye shewe thy nakednes amonge the Heithen, and thy shame
amonge the kingdomes.
6 I wil cast dyrte vpon ye, to make the be abhorred, and a gasynge stocke:
7 Yee all they that loke vpon the, shal starte backe, & saye: Niniue is
destroyed. Who wil haue pyte vpo the? where shal I seke one to conforte the?
8 Art thou better then the greate cite of Alexadria? that laye in the waters,
and had the waters rounde aboute it: which was strongly fenced & walled with the
see?
9 Ethiopia and Egipte were hir stregth, & that exceadinge greate aboue measure.
Aphrica and Lybia were hir helpers,
10 yet was she dryuen awaye, & brought in to captiuyte: hir yonge children were
smytten downe at the heade of euery strete, the lottes were cast for the most
awncient men in her, and all hir mightie men were bounde in chaynes.
11 Euen so shalt thou also be droncken, and hyde thy self, and seke some helpe
agaynst thine enemy.
12 All thy stronge cities shal be like fyge trees wt rype fyges: which whe a ma
shaketh, they fall in to the mouth of the eater.
13 Beholde, thy people with in the are but women: the portes of thy londe shal
be opened vnto thine enemies, and the fyre shal deuoure yi barres.
14 Drawe water now agaynst thou be beseged, make vp thy stroge holdes, go into
the claye, tempre the morter, make stronge bricke:
15 yet the fyre shal consume the, the swerde shal destroye the, yee as ye
locuste doth, so shal it eate the vp. It shal fall heuely vpon the as the
locustes, yee right heuely shal it fall vpon the, euen as the greshoppers.
16 Thy marchauntes haue bene mo then the starres of heaue: but now shal they
sprede abrode as the locustes, and fle their waye:
17 Thy lordes are as the greshoppers, & thy captaynes as the multitude of
greshoppers: which whe they be colde, remayne in ye hedges: but when the Sonne
is vp, they fle awaye, and no ma can tell where they are become.
18 Thy shepherdes are aslepe (o kinge of Assur) thy worthies are layed downe: yi
people is scatred abrode vpon the mountaynes, and no man gathereth them together
agayne.
19 Thy wounde can not be hyd, thy plage is so sore. All they that heare this of
the, shall clappe their handes ouer the. For what is he, to who thou hast not
allwaye bene doynge hurte?


Habakkuk

Chapter 1

1 This is the heuy burthe, which the prophet Abacuc dyd se.
2 O LORDE, how longe shal I crie, & thou wilt not heare? How longe shall I
complayne vnto the, suffrynge wronge, and thou wilt not helpe?
3 Why lettest thou me se weerynesse and laboure? Tyrany and violence are before
me, power ouergoeth right:
4 for the lawe is torne in peces, and there can no right iudgment go forth. And
why? the vngodly is more set by then the rightuous: this is the cause, yt wronge
iudgment procedeth.
5 Beholde amonge the Heithen, and loke wel: wondre at it, and be aba?shed: for I
wil do a thinge in youre tyme, which though it be tolde you, ye shal not beleue.
6 For lo, I wil rase vp ye Caldees, that bytter and swifte people: which shal go
as wyde as the londe is, to take possession of dwellinge places, that be not
their owne.
7 A grymme & boysteous people is it, these shal syt in iudgment & punyshe.
8 Their horses are swifter then the cattes of the mountayne, & byte sorer then
ye wolues in ye euenynge. Their horsmen come by greate heapes from farre, they
fle hastely to deuor as the Aegle.
9 They come all to spoyle: out of them commeth an east wynde, which bloweth and
gathereth their captyues, like as the sonde.
10 They shall mocke the kinges, and laugh the prynces to scorne. They shal not
set by eny stronge holde, for they shal laye ordinaunce agaynst it, and take it.
11 Then shal they take a fresh corage vnto them, to go forth & to do more euell,
& so ascrybe that power vnto their God.
12 But thou o LORDE my God, my holy one, thou art from the begynnynge, therfore
shal we not dye. O LORDE, thou hast ordened them for a punyshmet, and set them
to reproue the mightie.
13 Thine eyes are clene, thou mayest not se euell, thou canst not beholde ye
thinge that is wicked. Wherfore then dost thou loke vpon the vngodly, and
holdest thy tunge, when the wicked deuoureth the man that is better the himself?
14 Thou makest men as the fish in the see, and like as the crepinge beestes,
that haue no gyde.
15 They take vp all with their angle, they catch it in their net, & gather it in
their yarne: wherof they reioyce and are glad.
16 Therfore offre they vnto their net, and do sacrifice vnto their yarne:
because that thorow it their porcion is become so fat, and their meate so
pleteous.
17 Wherfore they cast out their net agayne, & neuer ceasse to slaye the people.

Chapter 2

1 I stode vpon my watch, and set me vpon my bulworke, to loke & se what he wolde
saye vnto me, and what answere I shulde geue him yt reproueth me.
2 But the LORDE answered me, and sayde: Wryte the vision planely vpon thy
tables, that who so commeth by, maye rede it:
3 for ye visio is yet farre of for a tyme, but at ye last it shal come to passe,
& not fayle. And though he tary, yet wait thou for him, for in very dede he wil
come, and not be slacke.
4 Beholde, who so wil not beleue, his soule shal not prospere: but the iust shal
lyue by his faith.
5 Like as the wyne disceaueth the dronckarde, euen so the proude shal fayle &
not endure. He openeth his desyre wyde vp as the hell, & is as vnsaciable as
death. All Heithen gathereth he to him, & heapeth vnto him all people.
6 But shall not all these take vp a prouerbe agaynst him, and mocke him with a
byworde, and saye: Wo vnto him that heapeth vp other mens goodes? How longe wil
he lade himself with thicke claye?
7 O how sodenly wil they stonde vp, yt shal byte the, & awake, that shal teare
ye in peces? yee thou shalt be their pray.
8 Seinge thou hast spoyled many Heithen, therfore shall the remnaunt of the
people spoyle the: because of mens bloude, & for the wronge done in the londe,
in the cite & vnto all them that dwel therin.
9 Wo vnto him, that couetously gathereth euell gotten goodes in to his house:
that he maye set his nest an hye, to escape from the power of mysfortune.
10 Thou hast deuysed ye shame of thine owne house, for thou hast slayne to moch
people, and hast wilfully offended:
11 so that the very stones of the wall shal crie out of it, and the tymbre that
lieth betwixte the ioyntes of the buyldinge shall answere.
12 Wo vnto him, yt buyldeth the towne with bloude, and maynteneth ye cite with
vnrightuousnes.
13 Shal not the LORDE of hoostes bringe this to passe, that the laboures of the
people shal be brent with a greate fyre, and that the thinge wher vpon the
people haue weeried them selues, shall be lost?
14 For the earth shalbe full of knowlege of the LORDES honoure, like as the
waters that couer the see.
15 Wo vnto him that geueth his neghboure dryncke, to get him wrothfull
displeasure for his dronckennesse: that he maye se his preuytees.
16 Therfore with shame shalt thou be fylled, in steade of honoure. Dryncke thou
also, till thou slombre withall: for the cuppe of the LORDES right hode shall
compasse the aboute, and shamefull spewinge in steade of thy worshipe.
17 For the wroge that thou hast done in Libanus, shal ouerwhelme the, and the
wilde beastes shal make the afrayed: because of mens bloude, and for the wronge
done in the londe, in the cite, and vnto all soch as dwel therin.
18 What helpe than wil ye ymage do, whom the workman hath fashioned? Or the
vayne cast ymage, wherin because the craftesman putteth his trust, therfore
maketh he domme Idols?
19 Wo vnto him, that saieth to a pece of wod: arise, and to a domme stone:
stonde vp. For what instruccio maye soch one geue? Beholde, it is layed ouer
with golde and syluer, & there is no breth in it.
20 But the LORDE in his holy teple is he, whom all the worlde shulde feare.

Chapter 3

1 A prayer of the prophet Abacuc for the ignoraunt.
2 O Lorde, when I herde speake of ye, I was afrayed. The worke yt thou hast
taken in honde, shalt thou perfourme in his tyme, O LORDE: and when thy tyme
commeth, thou shalt declare it. In thy very wrath thou thinkest vpon mercy.
3 God commeth from Theman, and the holy one from the mount of Pharan. Sela.
4 His glory couereth the heauens, and the earth is full of his prayse. His shyne
is as ye sonne, & beames of light go out of his hondes, there is his power hid.
5 Destruccio goeth before him, and burnynge cressettes go from his fete.
6 He stondeth, & measureth the earth: He loketh, & the people consume awaye, the
moutaynes of ye worlde fall downe to powlder, and the hilles are fayne to bowe
them selues, for his goinges are euerlastinge and sure.
7 I sawe, that the pauilions of the Morians and the tentes of the londe of
Madian were vexed for weerynesse.
8 Wast thou not angrie (o LORDE) in the waters? was not thy wrath in the
floudes, and thy displeasure in the see? yes, whe thou sattest vpon thine horse,
and when thy charettes had the victory.
9 Thou shewdest thy bowe opely, like as thou haddest promised with an ooth vnto
the trybes. Sela. Thou didest deuyde the waters of the earth.
10 When the mountaynes saw the, they were afrayed, ye water streame wete awaye:
the depe made a noyse at the liftinge vp of thine honde.
11 The Sonne and Mone remayned still in their habitacion. Thine arowes wente out
glisteringe, and thy speares as the shyne of the lightenynge.
12 Thou trodest downe the londe in thine anger, and didest throsshe the Heithen
in thy displeasure.
13 Thou camest forth to helpe thy people, to helpe thine anoynted. Thou smotest
downe the heade in the house of the vngodly, & discoueredest his foundacions,
eue vnto ye necke of him. Sela.
14 Thou cursest his septers, the captayne of his men of warre: which come as a
stormy wynde to scatre me abrode, & are glad when they maye eat vp ye poore
secretly.
15 Thou makest a waye for thine horses in the see, euen in the mudde of greate
waters.
16 Whe I heare this, my body is vexed, my lippes tremble at ye voyce therof, my
bones corruppe, I am afrayed where I stonde. O that I might rest in the daye of
trouble, that I might go vp vnto oure people, which are alredy prepared.
17 For the fyge trees shal not be grene, & the vynes shal beare no frute. The
laboure of ye olyue shalbe but lost, and the londe shall bringe no corne: the
shepe shalbe taken out of ye folde, and there shalbe no catell in ye stalles.
18 But as for me, I wil be glad in the LORDE, and will reioyce in God my
Sauioure.
19 The LORDE God is my strength, he shall make my fete as the fete of hertes: &
he which geueth ye victory, shal bringe me to my hye places, synginge vpon my
psalmes.


Zephaniah

Chapter 1

1 This is the worde of the LORDE, which came vnto Sophony the sonne of Chusi,
the sonne of Gedolias, the sonne of Amarias ye sonne of Hezechias: in the tyme
of Iosias the sonne of Amon kinge of Iuda.
2 I will gather vp all thinges in the londe (saieth the LORDE)
3 I wil gather vp man and beest: I wil gather vp the foules in the ayre, and the
fysh in the see (to the greate decaye of the wicked) & wil vtterly destroye the
men out of the londe, saieth the LORDE.
4 I wil stretch out myne honde vpon Iuda, and vpon all soch as dwel at
Ierusalem. Thus wil I rote out the remnaunt of Baal from this place, and the
names of the Kemuryns and prestes:
5 yee & soch as vpon their house toppes worshipe & bowe them selues vnto the
hoost of heauen: which sweare by the LORDE, and by their Malchom also:
6 which starte a backe from ye LORDE, and nether seke after the LORDE, ner
regarde him.
7 Be still at ye presence of the LORDE God, for the daye of the LORDE is at
honde: yee the LORDE hath prepared a slayne offeringe, and called his gestes
therto.
8 And thus shall it happen in the daye of the LORDES a slaynofferynge: I will
vyset the prynces, the kinges children, & all soch as weere strauge clothinge.
9 In the same daye also wil I vyset all those, that treade ouer the thresholde
so proudly, which fyll their lordes house wt robbery and falsede.
10 At ye same tyme (saieth the LORDE) there shall be herde a greate crie from
the fyshporte, and an howlinge from ye other porte, and a greate murthur from
the hilles.
11 Howle ye that dwel in the myll, for all the marchaunt people are gone, and
all they that were laden with syluer, are roted out.
12 At the same tyme wil I seke thorow Ierusalem with lanternes, and vyset them
that contynue in their dregges, and saye in their hertes: Tush, the LORDE wil do
nether good ner euell.
13 Their goodes shalbe spoyled, and their houses layed waist. They shall buylde
houses, and not dwel in them: they shal plante vynyardes, but not drynke the
wyne therof.
14 For the greate daye of the LORDE is at honde, it is harde by, & commeth on a
pace. Horrible is ye tydinges of the LORDES daye, then shall the giaunte crie
out:
15 for that daye is a daye of wrath, a daye of trouble & heuynesse, a daye of
vtter destruccion & mysery, a darcke & glomynge daye, a cloudy & stormy daye,
16 a daye of the noyse of trompettes and shawmes, agaynst the stronge cities and
hie towres.
17 I wil bringe ye people into soch vexacion, that they shal go aboute like
blinde me, because they haue synned agaynst the LORDE. Their bloude shalbe shed
as the dust, & their bodies as the myre.
18 Nether their syluer ner their golde shalbe able to delyuer the in that
wrothfull daye of the LORDE, but the whole londe shalbe cosumed thorow the fyre
of his gelousy: for he shall soone make clene ryddaunce of all them that dwell
in the londe.

Chapter 2

1 Come together and gather you, O ye frauwerde people:
2 or ye thinge go forth that is concluded, & or the tyme be passed awaye as the
dust: or the fearfull wrath of the LORDE come vpon you,
3 yee or the daye of the LORDES sore displeasure come vpon you. Seke the LORDE
all yee meke harted vpon earth, ye that worke after his iudgmet: seke
rightuousnesse, seke lowlynesse: that ye maye be defended in the wrothfull daye
of ye LORDE.
4 For Gaza shal be destroyed, & Ascalon shall be layed waist: They shal cast out
A?dod at the noone daye, and Accaron shalbe pluckte vp by the rotes.
5 Wo vnto you yt dwel vpon the see coost, ye murthurous people: the worde of ye
LORDE shal come vpon you. O Canaan thou londe of the Philistynes, I wil destroye
the, so that there shal no man dwel in the eny more:
6 & as for the see coost, it shal be hyrdmens cotages & shepe foldes:
7 yee it shalbe a porcion for soch as remayne of the house of Iuda, to fede ther
vpon. In ye houses of Ascalon shal they rest towarde night: for the LORDE their
God shal vyset the, & turne awaye their captyuite.
8 I haue herde the despite of Moab, & the blasphemies of the children of Ammon:
how they haue shamefully intreated my people, and magnified them selues within
the borders of their londe.
9 Therfore as truly as I lyue (saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel)
Moab shalbe as Sodome, & Ammon as Gomorra: euen drie thorne hedges, salt pittes
and a perpetuall wyldernes. The residue of my folke shall spoyle them the
remnaunt of my people shall haue them in possession.
10 This shal happen vnto them for their pryde, because they haue dealte so
shamefully with the LORDE of hoostes people, and magnified them selues aboue
them.
11 The LORDE shall be grymme vpon them, and destroye all the goddes in the
londe. And all the Iles of the Heithen shal worshipe him, euery man in his
place.
12 Ye Morias also shal perish with my swerde:
13 Yee he shall stretch out his honde ouer the north, and destroye Assur. As for
Niniue, he shal make it desolate, drye and waist.
14 The flockes and all the beastes of the people shall lye in the myddest of it,
pellicanes and storckes shall abyde in the vpper postes of it, foules shal synge
in the wyndowes, and rauens shal syt vpon the balckes, for the bordes of Cedre
shalbe ryue downe.
15 This is the proude and carelesse cite, that sayde in hir herte: I am, and
there is els none. O how is she made so waist, yt the beestes lye therin? Who so
goeth by, mocketh her, and poynteth at her with his fynger.

Chapter 3

1 Wo to the abhominable, fylthie and cruel cite:
2 which wil not heare, ner be refourmed. Hir trust is not in the LORDE, nether
wil she holde her to hir God.
3 Hir rulers within her are as roaringe lyons: hir iudges are as wolues in the
euenynge, which leaue nothinge behynde them till the morow.
4 Hir prophetes are light personnes and vn faithfull men: hir prestes vnhalowe
the Sanctuary, and do wronge vnder the pretence of the lawe.
5 But the iust LORDE that doth no vnright, was amonge them, euery mornynge
shewinge them his lawe clearly, and ceassed not. But the vngodly will not lerne
to be a?shamed.
6 Therfore wil I rote out this people, and destroye their towres: yee and make
their stretes so voyde, that no man shall go therin. Their cities shall be broke
downe, so that no body shal be left, ner dwel there eny more.
7 I sayde vnto them: O feare me, and be cotent to be refourmed. That their
dwellinge shulde not be destroyed, and that there shulde happen vnto them none
of these thinges, wherwith I shal vyset the. But neuertheles they stonde vp
early, to folowe the filthynes of their owne ymaginacions.
8 Therfore ye shal waite vpon me (saieth the LORDE) vntil the tyme that I stonde
vp: for I am determed, to gather the people and to bringe the kingdomes
together, that I maye poure out myne anger, yee all my wrothfull displeasure
vpon them. For all the worlde shalbe consumed with the fyre of my gelousy.
9 And then wil I clense the lippes of the people, that they maye euerychone call
vpon the name of the LORDE, and serue him with one shulder.
10 Soch as I haue subdued, and my children also whom I haue scatred abrode, shal
brynge me presentes beyonde the waters of Ethiopia.
11 In that tyme shalt thou nomore be confounded, because of all thy
ymaginacions, wher thorow thou haddest offended me: for I wil take awaye the
proude boosters of thine honoure from the, so that thou shalt nomore tryumphe
because of my holy hill.
12 In the also wil I leaue a smal poore symple people, which shal trust in the
name of the LORDE.
13 The remnaunt of Israel shal do no wickednes, ner speake lyes: nether shal
there eny disceatful tunge be founde in their mouthes. For they shal be fed, and
take their rest, and no man shal make them afrayed.
14 Geue thankes o doughter Sio, be ioyful o Israel: reioyce & be glad from thy
whole herte, o doughter Ierusalem,
15 for the LORDE hath taken awaye thy punyshment, and turned backe thine
enemies. The kinge of Israel, euen the LORDE himself is with the: so that thou
nedest nomore to feare eny my?fortune.
16 In that tyme it shall be sayed to Ierusalem: feare not, and to Sion: let not
thine hondes be slacke,
17 for the LORDE thy God is with the, it is he that hath power to saue: he hath
a special pleasure in the, and a maruelous loue towarde the: yee he reioyseth
ouer the wt gladnesse.
18 Soch as haue bene in heuynesse, wil I gather together, and take out of thy
congregacion: as for the shame and reprofe that hath bene layed vpon the, it
shal be farre from the.
19 And lo, in yt tyme wil I destroye all those that vexe the: I wil helpe the
lame, and gather vp the cast awaye: yee I wil get them honoure and prayse in all
lodes, where they haue bene put to shame.
20 At ye same tyme wil I bringe you in, and at the same tyme wil I gather you. I
wil get you a name and a good reporte, amonge all people of the earth, when I
turne backe youre captiuyte before youre eyes, saieth the LORDE.


Haggai

Chapter 1

1 In the seconde yeare of kynge Darius, in the vj. moneth the first daye of the
moneth, came the worde of the LORDE (by the prophet Aggeus) vnto Zorobabel the
sonne of Salathiel ye prynce of Iuda, and to Iesua the sonne of Iosedec the hye
prest, sayenge:
2 Thus speaketh the LORDE of hoostes, and saieth: This people doth saye: The
tyme is not yet come to buylde vp the LORDES house.
3 Then spake the LORDE by the prophet Aggeus & sayed:
4 Ye yor selues can fynde tyme to dwell in syled houses, and shal this house lye
waist?
5 Considre now youre owne wayes in youre hertes (saieth ye LORDE of hoostes)
6 ye sowe moch, but ye bringe litle in: Ye eate, but ye haue not ynough: ye
drinke, but ye are not fylled: ye decke youre selues, but ye are not warme: & he
yt earneth eny wage, putteth it in a broken purse.
7 Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: Cosidre youre owne wayes in youre hertes,
8 get you vp to the mountayne, fetch wod, & buylde vp the house: that it maye be
acceptable vnto me, and that I maye shewe myne honoure, saieth the LORDE.
9 Ye loked for moch, and lo it is come to litle: & though ye brynge it home, yet
do I blowe it awaye. And why so, saieth the LORDE of hoostes? Eue because that
my house lyeth so waist, and ye renne euery man vnto his owne house.
10 Wherfore the heauen is forbydde to geue you eny dew, and the earth is
forbydden to geue you encrease.
11 I haue called for a drouth, both vpo the londe & vpon the mountaynes, vpon
corne, vpon wyne & vpon oyle, vpon euery thinge that the grounde bryngeth forth,
vpon men and vpon catell, yee and vpon all handy laboure.
12 Now when Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel, & Iesua the sonne of Iosedec the
hye prest with the remnaunt of the people, herde the voyce of the LORDE their
God, & the wordes of the prophet Aggeus (like as the LORDE their God had sent
him) the people dyd feare the LORDE.
13 Then Aggeus the LORDES angel sayed in the LORDES message vnto the people: I
am wt you, saieth the LORDE.
14 So the LORDE waked vp the sprete of Zorobabel the prynce of Iuda, and the
sprete of Iesua the sonne of Iosedec the hye prest, and the sprete of the
remnaunt of all the people: yt they came & laboured, in the house of the LORDE
of hoostes their God.
15 Vpon the xxiiij. daye of the sixte moneth, in the secode yeare of kinge
Darius,

Chapter 2

1 The xxi. daye of the seuenth moneth, came the worde of the LORDE by the
prophet Aggeus, sayenge:
2 speake to Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel prynce of Iuda, and to Iesua the
sonne of Iosedec the hye prest, and to the residue of ye people, & saye:
3 Who is left amoge you, that sawe this house in hir first beuty? But what
thinke ye now by it? Is it not in youre eyes, eue as though it were nothinge?
4 Neuerthelesse be of good chere, o Zorobabel (saieth the LORDE) be of good
conforte, o Iesua thou sonne of Iosedec, hye prest: take good hartes vnto you
also, all ye people of the londe, saieth the LORDE of hoostes,
5 and do acordinge to the worde (for I am with you, saieth the LORDE of hoostes)
like as I agreed with you, when ye came out of the londe of Egypte: & my sprete
shalbe amonge you, feare ye not.
6 For thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: Yet once more will I shake heaue and
earth, the see and the drye lode:
7 Yee I will moue all Heithen, & the comforte of all Heithen shall come, & so
wil I fyll this house with honoure, saieth the LORDE of hoostes.
8 The syluer is myne, & the golde is myne, saieth the LORDE of hoostes.
9 Thus ye glory of the last house shalbe greater the the first, saieth the LORDE
of hoostes: & in this place wil I geue peace, saieth the LORDE of hoostes.
10 The xxiiij. daye of the ix moneth in the seconde yeare of kinge Darius, came
the worde of the LORDE vnto the prophet Aggeus sayenge:
11 Thus saieth ye LORDE God of hoostes: Axe the prestes concernynge the lawe, &
saye:
12 Yf one beare holy flesh in his cote lappe, & with his lappe do touch the
bred, potage, wyne, oyle or eny other meate: shall he be holy also? The prestes
answered, & saide: No.
13 Then sayde Aggeus: Now yf one beynge defyled with a deed carcase, touch eny
of the se: shall it also be vnclene?
14 The prestes gaue answere & sayed: yee, it shall be vnclene. The Aggeus
answered, and sayde: Euen so is this people & this nacion before me, saieth ye
LORDE: and so are all the workes of their hodes, yee and all that they offre, is
vnclene.
15 And now (I praye you) cosidre from this daye forth, and how it hath gone with
you afore: or euer there was layed one stone vpo another in the temple of the
LORDE:
16 that when ye came to a corne heape of xx. busshels, there were scarce ten:
and that when ye came to the wyne presse for to poure out L. pottes of wyne,
there were scarce xx.
17 For I smote you with heate, blastinge & hale stones in all the labours of
youre hondes: yet was there none of you, that wolde turne vnto me, saieth the
LORDE.
18 Considre then from this daye forth and afore, namely, from the xxiiij. daye
of the ix. moneth, vnto the daye that the foundacion of the LORDES temple was
layed: Marck it well,
19 Is not the sede yet in the barne? haue not the vynes, the fygetrees, the
pomgranates and olyue trees bene yet vnfrutefull? but fro this daye forth, I
shal make them to prospere.
20 Morouer the xxiiij. daye of the moneth came the worde of the LORDE vnto
Aggeus agayne, sayenge:
21 Speake to Zorobabel the prynce of Iuda, and saye: I will shake both heauen
and earth,
22 and ouerthrowe the seate of the kingdomes, yee & destroye the mightie
kingdome of the Heithe. I wil ouerthrowe the charettes, and those that syt vpon
them, so that both horse and man shal fall downe, euery man thorow his neghbours
swerde.
23 And as for the, o Zorobabel (saieth the LORDE of hoostes) thou sonne of
Salathiel, my seruaunt: I wil take the (saieth the LORDE) at the same tyme, and
make the as a seale: for I haue chosen the, saieth the LORDE of hoostes.


Zechariah

Chapter 1

1 In the eight moneth of the secode yeare of kinge Darius, came the worde of the
LORDE vnto Zachary the sonne of Barachias, the sonne of Addo, the prophet,
sayenge:
2 The LORDE hath bene sore displeased at youre forefathers.
3 And saye thou vnto them: thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes. Turne you vnto me
(saieth the LORDE of hoostes) and I wil turne me vnto you, saieth the LORDE of
hoostes.
4 Be not ye like youre forefathers, vnto whom the prophetes cried a fore tyme,
sayege: Thus saieth the LORDE God of hoostes: Turne you from youre euell wayes,
& from youre wicked ymaginacions. But they wolde not heare, ner regarde me,
saieth the LORDE.
5 What is now become of youre forefathers and the prophetes? are they yet still
alyue?
6 But dyd not my wordes & statutes (which I comaunded by my seruauntes ye
prophetes) touch yor forefathers? Vpo this, they gaue answere & sayde: like as
ye LORDE of hoostes deuysed to do vnto vs, acordinge to or owne wayes &
ymaginacions, euen so hath he dealte with vs.
7 Vpon the xxiiij. daye of the xj. moneth (which is the moneth Sebat) in the
seconde yeare of Darius, came the worde of the LORDE vnto Zachary the sonne of
Barachias, the sonne of Addo the prophete, sayenge:
8 I sawe by night, and lo, there sat one vpon a reade horse, and stode still
amonge the Myrte trees, that were beneth vpon the grounde: and behynde him were
there reade, spreckled and whyte horses.
9 Then sayde I: O my LORDE, what are these? And the angel that talked with me,
sayed vnto me: I will shewe the what these be.
10 And the man that stode amoge the Myrte trees, answered & sayde: These are
they, whom the LORDE hath sent to go thorow the worlde.
11 And they answered the angel of the LORDE, that stode amonge the Myrte trees,
and sayde: We haue gone thorow the worlde: and beholde, all the worlde dwell at
ease, and are carelesse.
12 Then the LORDES angel gaue answere and sayde: O LORDE of hoostes, how longe
wilt thou be vnmercifull to Ierusale and to the cities of Iuda, with whom thou
hast bene displeased now these lxx. yeares?
13 So the LORDE gaue a louynge and a confortable answere, vnto the angel that
talked with me.
14 And the angel that commoned with me, sayde vnto me: Crie thou, and speake,
thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: I am exceadynge gelous ouer Ierusalem and
Sion,
15 and sore displeased at the carelesse Heithen: for where as I was but a litle
angrie, they dyd their best that I might destroye them
16 Therfore thus saieth the LORDE: I wil turne me agayne in mercy towarde
Ierusalem, so that my house shalbe buylded in it, saieth the LORDE of hoostes:
yee and the plommet shal be layed abrode in Ierusalem, saieth the LORDE of
hoostes.
17 Crie also, and speake: thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: My cities shall be
in good prosperite agayne, the LORDE shall yet conforte Sion, and chose
Ierusalem.
18 Then lift I vp myne eyes and sawe, and beholde, foure hornes.
19 And I sayde vnto the angel, that talked with me: what be these? he answered
me: These are ye hornes, which haue scatred Iuda, Israel and Ierusalem abrode.
20 And ye LORDE shewed me iiij. carpenters.
21 Then sayde I: what wil these do? He answered, & sayde: Those are the hornes,
which haue so strowed Iuda abrode, that no man durst lift vp his heade: But
these are come to fraye them awaye, and to cast out ye hornes of the Gentiles,
which lift vp their horne ouer the londe of Iuda, to scatre it abrode.

Chapter 2

1 I lift vp myne eyes agayne, & loked: and beholde, a man with a measure lyne in
his honde.
2 Then saide I: whether goest thou? And he sayde vnto me: To measure Ierusalem,
that I maye se how longe and how brode it is.
3 And beholde, the angel that talked wt me, wente his waye forth. Then wete
there out another angel to mete him,
4 & sayde vnto him: Runne, speake to this yonge man, & saye: Ierusalem shal be
inhabited without eny wal, for ye very multitude of people & catell, yt shal be
therin.
5 Yee I myself (saieth the LORDE) wil be vnto her a wall of fyre rounde aboute,
& wilbe honoured in her.
6 O get you forth, O fle from the londe of ye north (saieth the LORDE) ye, whom
I haue scatred in to the foure wyndes vnder heaue, saieth the LORDE.
7 Saue thy self, o Sion: thou that dwellest with ye doughter of Babilon,
8 for thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: With a glorious power hath he sent me
out to the Heithe, which spoyled you: for who so toucheth you, shal touche the
aple of his owne eye.
9 Beholde, I will lift vp myne honde ouer them: so that they shal be spoyled of
those, which afore serued them: & ye shal knowe, that the LORDE of hoostes hath
sent me.
10 Be glad, & reioyce, o doughter of Sion: for lo, I am come to dwell in the
myddest of the, saieth the LORDE.
11 At the same tyme there shal many Heithen cleue to the LORDE, & shal be my
people. Thus wil I dwel in the myddest of the, & thou shalt knowe, that the
LORDE of hoostes hath sent me vnto the.
12 The LORDE shall haue Iuda in possession for his parte in the holy grounde, &
shal chose Ierusalem yet agayne.
13 Let all flesh be still before the LORDE, for he is rysen out of his holy
place.

Chapter 3

1 And he shewed me Iesua ye hye prest, stondinge before the angel of the LORDE,
and Satan stode at his right honde to resiste him.
2 And the LORDE sayde vnto Satan: The LORDE reproue the (thou Satan) yee the
LORDE that hath chosen Ierusalem, reproue the. Is not this a brande take out of
the fyre?
3 Now Iesua was clothed in vnclene rayment, and stode before the angel:
4 which answered & sayde vnto those, yt stode before him: take awaye ye foule
clothes from him. And vnto him he sayde: Beholde, I haue take awaye thy synne
from the, & wil decke the with chaunge of raymet.
5 He sayde morouer: set a fayre myter vpon his heade. So they set a fayre myter
vpon his heade, & put on clothes vpon him, and the angel of ye LORDE stode
there.
6 Then the angel of the LORDE testified vnto Iesua, & spake,
7 thus sayeth the LORDE of hoostes: Yf thou wilt walke in my wayes, & kepe my
watch: thou shalt rule my house, & kepe my courtes, & I wil geue the place amoge
these that stonde here.
8 Heare o Iesua thou hye prest, thou & thy frendes that dwell before the, for
they are woderous people. Beholde, I will bringe forth the braunch of my
seruaunt:
9 for lo, the stone that I haue layed before Iesua: vpon one stone shalbe vij.
eyes. Beholde, I will hewe him out (saieth the LORDE of hoostes) and take awaye
the synne of that londe in one daye.
10 Then shall euery man call for his neghboure, vnder the vyne & vnder ye fyge
tre, saieth the LORDE of hoostes.

Chapter 4

1 And ye angel that talked with me, came agayne, & waked me vp (as a man that is
raysed out of his slepe)
2 & sayde vnto me: What seist thou? And I sayde: I haue loked, and beholde: a
candelsticke all of golde, with a boll vpon it & his vij. lampes therin, & vpon
euery lampe vij. stalkes:
3 And ij. olyue trees therby, one vpon the right syde of the boll, & the other
vpon the left syde.
4 So I answered, & spake to the angel yt talked with me, sayenge: O my lorde
what are these?
5 The angel that talked with me, answered & sayde vnto me: knowest thou not what
these be? And I sayde: No, my lorde.
6 He answered, & sayde vnto me: This is the worde of the LORDE vnto Zorobabel,
sayenge: Nether thorow an hoost of men, ner thorow stregth, but thorow my
sprete, saieth ye LORDE of hoostes.
7 What art thou (thou greate mountayne) before Zorobabel? thou must be made
eauen. And he shal bringe vp the first stone, so that men shall crie vnto him:
good lucke, good lucke.
8 Morouer, the worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
9 The hondes of Zorobabel haue layed ye foundacion of this house, his hondes
also shal fynishe it: that ye maye knowe, how that the LORDE of hoostes hath
sent me vnto you.
10 For he that hath bene despysed a litle season, shal reioyce, whe he seyth the
tynne weight in Zorobabels honde. The vij. eyes are the LORDES, which go thorow
the hole worlde.
11 Then answered I, & sayde vnto him: What are these two olyue trees vpon the
right and left syde of the candilsticke?
12 I spake morouer, & sayde vnto him: what be these ij. olyue braunches which
(thorow ye two golden pipes) emptie them selues into the golde?
13 He answered me, & sayde: knowest thou not, what these be? And I sayde: No, my
lorde.
14 Then sayde he: These are the two olyue braunches, that stonde before the
ruler of the whole earth.

Chapter 5

1 So I turned me liftynge vp myne eyes, & loked, & beholde, a flyenge boke.
2 And he sayde vnto me: what seist thou? I answered: I se a flyenge boke of xx.
cubites longe & x. cubites brode.
3 Then sayde he vnto me: This is the curse, yt goeth forth ouer the whole earth:
For all theues shalbe iudged after this boke, & all swearers shalbe iudged
acordinge to the same.
4 I wil bringe it forth (saieth the LORDE of hoostes) so yt it shal come to the
house of the thefe, & to the house of him, that falsely sweareth by my name: &
shal remayne in his house, & cosume it, with the tymbre & stones therof.
5 The the angel that talked with me, wente forth, & sayde vnto me: lift vp thine
eyes & se, what this is yt goeth forth.
6 And I sayde: what is it? He answered: this is a measure goinge out. He sayde
morouer: Euen thus are they (yt dwell vpon the whole earth) to loke vpon.
7 And beholde, there was lift vp a talent of leade: & lo, a woman sat in the
myddest of the measure.
8 And he sayde: This is vngodlynesse. So he cast her in to the myddest of the
measure, & threwe ye lompe of leade vp in to an hole.
9 Then lift I vp myne eyes, & loked: & beholde, there came out ij. women, & the
wynde was in their wynges (for they had wynges like the wynges of a Storke) &
they lift vp the measure betwixte the earth & the heauen.
10 Then spake I to the angel, yt talked wt me: whyther wil these beare the
measure?
11 And he sayde vnto me: in to the londe of Synear, to buylde them an house:
which when it is prepared, the measure shall be set there in his place.

Chapter 6

1 Morouer I turned me, liftynge vp myne eyes, & loked: & beholde, there came
iiij. charettes out fro betwixte two hilles, which hilles were of brasse:
2 In the first charet were reade horse, In the secode charet were blacke horse,
3 In ye thirde charet were whyte horse, In ye fourth charet were horses of
dyuerse colours, & stronge.
4 Then spake I, and sayde vnto the angel that talked with me: O lorde, what are
these?
5 The angel answered, & sayde vnto me: These are the iiij. wyndes of the heauen,
which be come forth to stode before the ruler of all ye earth.
6 That with the blacke horse wente in to the londe of the north, & the whyte
folowed the, and the sprekled horses wente forth towarde the south.
7 These horses were very stronge, & wente out: and sought to go and take their
iourney ouer the whole earth. And he sayde: get you hence, and go thorow the
worlde. So they wete thorow out the worlde.
8 Then cried he vpon me, and spake vnto me, sayenge: Beholde, these that go
towarde ye north, shal still my wrath in the north countre.
9 And the worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
10 Take of the presoners that are come from Babilon: namely, Heldai, Tobias and
Idaia: & come thou the same daye, and go into the house of Iosias the sonne of
Sophony.
11 Then take golde and syluer, and make crownes therof, and set them vpon the
heade of Iesua the sonne of Iosedec, the hie prest,
12 and speake vnto him: Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: Beholde, the man whose
name is the braunch: & he that shall springe vp after him, shal buylde vp the
temple of the LORDE:
13 yee euen he shall buylde vp the temple of the LORDE. He shal beare the
prayse, he shall syt vpon the LORDES trone, and haue the dominaciou. A prest
shall he be also vpon his trone, & a peaceable councell shalbe betwixte them
both.
14 And the crownes shal be in the temple of the LORDE, for a remembraunce vnto
Helem, Tobias, Idaia and Hen the sonne of Sophony. And soch as be farre of, shal
come and buylde the temple of the LORDE:
15 that ye maye knowe, how that the LORDE of hoostes hath sent me vnto you. And
this shal come to passe, yf ye wil herken diligently vnto the voyce of the LORDE
youre God.

Chapter 7

1 It happened also in the fourth yeare of kynge Darius, that the worde of the
LORDE came vnto Zachary in the fourth daye of the ix. moneth, which is calleth
Casleu:
2 what tyme as Sarasar and Rogomelech and the men that were with them, sent vnto
Bethel for to praye before ye LORDE:
3 and that they shulde saye vnto the prestes, which were in the house of the
LORDE of hoostes, and to the prophetes: Shulde I wepe in the fyfte moneth, and
absteyne, as I haue done now certayne yeares?
4 Then came the worde of the LORDE of hoostes vnto me, sayenge:
5 Speake vnto all the people of the londe, and to the prestes, and saye: when ye
fasted and mourned in the v & vij. moneth (now this lxx. yeares) dyd ye fast
vnto me?
6 When ye ate also and dronke, dyd ye not eate and drinke for youre owne selues?
7 Are not these the wordes, which the LORDE spake by his prophetes afore tyme,
when Ierusalem was yet inhabited and welthy, she and the cities rounde aboute
her: when there dwelt me, both towarde the south and in the playne countrees?
8 And the worde of the LORDE came vnto Zachary, sayenge:
9 Thus saieth ye LORDE of hoostes: Execute true iudgment: shewe mercy and
louynge kyndnesse, euery man to his brother:
10 Do the wyddowe, the fatherlesse, the straunger, and poore no wronge: and let
no man ymagen euell agaynst his brother in his hert.
11 Neuertheles they wolde not take hede, but turned their backes, and stopped
their eares, that they shulde not heare.
12 yee they made their hertes as an Adamant stone, lest they shulde heare the
lawe & wordes, which the LORDE of hoostes sent in his holy sprete by the
prophetes afore tyme. Wherfore the LORDE of hoostes was very wroth at them.
13 And thus is it come to passe, that like as he spake and they wolde not heare:
euen so they cried, and I wolde not heare (saieth the LORDE of hoostes)
14 but scatered them amonge all Gentiles, whom they knewe not. Thus the londe
was made so desolate, yt there traualed no man in it nether to ner fro, for that
pleasaunt londe was vtterly layed waist.

Chapter 8

1 So the worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge:
2 Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: I was in a greate gelousy ouer Sion, yee I
haue bene very gelous ouer her in a greate displeasure.
3 thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: I wil turne me agayne vnto Sion, and wil
dwel in the myddest of Ierusalem: so that Ierusalem shalbe called a faithfull
and true cite, the hill of the LORDE of hoostes, yee an holy hill.
4 Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: There shall yet olde men and women dwel
agayne in the stretes of Ierusalem: yee and soch as go with staues in their
hondes for very age.
5 The stretes of the cite also shalbe full of yonge boyes and damselles, playnge
vpon the stretes.
6 Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: yf the residue of this people thynke it to
be vnpossible in these dayes, shulde it therfore be vnpossible in my sight,
sayeth the LORDE of hoostes
7 Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: Beholde, I wil delyuer my people from the
londe of the east and west,
8 and wil brynge them agayne: that they maye dwel at Ierusalem. They shalbe my
people, and I will be their God, in treuth and rightuousnesse.
9 Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: let youre hondes be stronge, ye that now
heare these wordes by the mouth of the prophetes, which be in these dayes that
the foundacion is layed vpon the LORDE of hoostes house, that the temple maye be
buylded.
10 For why? before these dayes nether men ner catel coude wynne eny thinge,
nether might eny man come in and out in rest, for trouble: but I let euery man
go agaynst his neghboure.
11 Neuerthelesse I wil now intreate the residue of this people nomore, as afore
tyme (saieth the LORDE of hoostes)
12 but they shalbe a sede of peace. The vynyarde shal geue hir frute, the
grounde shal geue hir increase, and the heauens shal geue their dew: and I shal
cause the remnaunt of this people, to haue all these in possession.
13 And it shall come to passe, that like as ye were a curse amonge the Heithen
(O ye house of Iuda and ye house of Israel) Euen so wil I delyuer you, that ye
shalbe a blessynge: feare not, but let youre hodes be stronge.
14 For thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: like as I deuysed to punysh you, what
tyme as youre fathers prouoked me vnto wrath (sayeth the LORDE of hoostes) and
spared not:
15 Euen so am I determed now in these dayes, for to do wel vnto the house of
Iuda and Ierusalem, therfore feare ye not.
16 Now the thinges that ye shal do, are these: Speake euery man the treuth vnto
his neghboure, execute iudgment truly and peaceably within youre portes,
17 none of you ymagyn euell in his hert agaynst his neghboure, and loue no false
oothes: for all these are the thinges that I hate, sayeth the LORDE.
18 And the worde of the LORDE of hoostes came vnto me, sayenge:
19 thus sayeth the LORDE of hoostes: The fast of the fourth moneth, the fast of
the fifth, the fast of the seuenth, and the fast of the tenth, shal be ioye and
gladnesse, & prosperous hye feastes vnto the house of Iuda: Only, loue the
treuth and peace.
20 Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: There shall yet come people, and the
inhabiters of many cities:
21 and they that dwell in one cite, shal go to another, sayenge: Vp, let vs go,
and praye before the LORDE, let vs seke the LORDE of hoostes, I wil go with you.
22 Yee moch people and mightie Heithen shal come and seke the LORDE of hoostes
at Ierusalem, and to praye before the LORDE.
23 Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: In that tyme shal ten men (out of all maner
of languages of the Gentiles) take one Iewe by the hemme of his garment, and
saye: we wil go with you, for we haue herde, that God is amonge you.

Chapter 9

1 The worde of the LORDE shalbe receaued at Adrach, & Damascus shalbe his
offerynge: for the eyes of all me and of the trybes of Israel shall loke vp vnto
the LORDE.
2 The borders of Hemath shal be harde therby, Tyrus also & Sidon, for they are
very wise.
3 Tyrus shal make hirself stronge, heape vp syluer as the sonde, and golde as
the claye of the stretes.
4 Beholde, the LORDE shal take her in, and haue her in possession: he shal smyte
downe hir power in to the see, and she shalbe consumed with fyre.
5 This shal Ascalon se, and be afrayed. Gaza shalbe very sory, so shal Accaron
also, because hir hope is come to confucion. For the kinge of Gaza shall perish,
and at Ascalon shal no man dwel.
6 Straugers shall dwel at A?dod, & as for ye pryde of ye Philistynes, I shal
rote it out.
7 Their bloude will I take awaye from their mouth, and their abhominacios from
amonge their teth. Thus they shal be left for oure God, yee they shalbe as a
prynce in Iuda, & Accaron like as Iebusi.
8 And so will I compase my house rounde aboute with my men of warre, goinge to
and fro: that no oppressoure come vpon them eny more. For that haue I sene now
with myne eyes.
9 Reioyce thou greatly, o doughter Sion: be glad, o doughter Ierusalem. For lo,
thy kinge commeth vnto the, euen the rightuous and Sauioure: Lowly and symple is
he, he rydeth vpon an asse, and vpo the foale of an asse.
10 I wil rote out the charettes fro Ephraim, & the horse from Ierusalem, the
batel bowes shal be destroyed. He shall geue the doctryne of peace vnto the
Heithen, and his dominion shalbe from the one see to the other, & from the
floudes to the endes of the worlde.
11 Thou also thorow the bloude of thy couenaunt: shalt let thy presoners out of
the pytte, wherin is no water.
12 Turne you now to the stronge holde, ye that be in preson, & longe sore to be
delyuered: And this daye I bringe the worde, that I wil rewarde the dubble
agayne.
13 For Iuda haue I bent out as a bowe for me, and Ephraim haue I fylled. Thy
sonnes (o Sio) wil I rayse vp agaynst the Grekes, and make the as a giauntes
swearde:
14 the LORDE God shalbe sene aboue the, and his dartes shall go forth as the
lightenynge. The LORDE God shall blowe the trompet, and shal come forth as a
storme out of the south.
15 The LORDE of hoostes shall defende the, they shall consume and deuoure, and
subdue them with slynge stones. They shal drynke & rage, as it were thorow wyne.
They shalbe fylled like ye basens, & as ye hornes of ye aulter.
16 The LORDE their God shal delyuer the in ye daye, as the flock off his people:
for the stones off his Sanctuary shalbe set vp in his lade.
17 O how prosperous and goodly a thynge shall that be? The corne shall make the
yongemen chearefull, and the new wyne the maydens.

Chapter 10

1 Praye the LORDE then by tymes to geue you the latter rayne, so shall the LORDE
make cloudes, and geue you rayne ynough for all the increase off the felde:
2 For vayne is the answere of Idols. The soythsayers se lyes, and tell but vayne
dreames: the comforth that they geue, is nothynge worth. Therfore go they
astraye like a flocke of shepe, ad are troubled, because they haue no shepherde.
3 My wrothfull displeasure is moued at the shepherdes, and I will vyset the
goates. For the LORDE of hoostes wil graciously vyset his flocke (the house of
Iuda) and holde them as a goodly fayre horse in the batell.
4 Out of Iuda shal come the helmet, the nale, the batelbowe, and all the princes
together.
5 They shalbe as the giauntes, which in the batell treade downe the myre vpon ye
stretes. They shal fight, for ye LORDE shalbe with them, so that the horsmen
shalbe confounded.
6 I wil coforte the house of Iuda, and preserue the house of Ioseph. I wil turne
them also, for I pytie them: and they shal be like as they were, when I had not
cast them of. For I the LORDE am their God, and wil heare them.
7 Ephraim shalbe as a giaunt, and their herte shalbe cherefull as thorow wyne:
Yee their children shal se it, and be glad; and their herte shal reioyce in the
LORDE.
8 I wil blowe for them & gather them together, for I wil redeme them. They shall
increace, as they increased afore.
9 I wil sowe the amonge the people, yt they maye thinke vpo me in farre
countrees: they shal lyue wt their childre, and turne agayne.
10 I wil bringe them agayne also from the londe of Egipte, and gather them out
of Assiria. I wil carye them in to ye londe of Galaad and to Libanus, and they
shal wante nothynge.
11 He shall go vpon the see of trouble, and smyte the see wawes: so yt all the
depe floudes shalbe dryed vp. The proude boostinge of Assur shalbe cast downe,
and the scepter off Egipte shall be taken awaye.
12 I will comforte them in the LORDE, that they maye walke in his name, saieth
the LORDE.

Chapter 11

1 Open thy dores (o Libanus) that the fyre maye consume thy Cedre trees.
2 Howle ye Fyrre trees, for the Cedre is falle, yee all ye proude are waisted
awaye Howle (o ye oke trees of Baasan) for ye mightie stronge wod is cut downe.
3 Men maye heare the shepherdes mourne, for their glory is destroyed. Me maye
heare the lyons whelpes roare, for the pryde off Iordane is waisted awaye.
4 Thus sayeth the LORDE my God: Fede the shepe of ye slaughter,
5 which shalbe slayne of those that possesse them: yet they take it for no
synne, but they yt sell the, saye: The LORDE be thanked, I am rich: Yee their
owne shepherdes spare them not.
6 Therfore wil I nomore spare those that dwell in the londe (sayeth the LORDE)
but lo, I will delyuer the people, euery man in to his neghbours honde, and in
to the hode of his kynge: that they maye smyte the londe, and out off their
hondes wil not I delyuer them.
7 I myself fedde ye slaughter shepe (a poore flocke verely) ad toke vnto me two
staues: the one I called louynge mekenesse, the other I called wo, and so I
kepte the shepe.
8 Thre shepherdes destroyed I in one moneth, for I might not awaye wt them,
nether had they eny delyte in me.
9 Then sayde I: I will fede you nomore, the thinge that dyeth, let it dye: and
that wil perishe, let it perish, & let the renaunt eate, euery one the flesh of
his neghboure.
10 I toke also my louynge meke staff, ad brake it, that I might disanull the
conuenaunt, which I made with all people,
11 And so it was broken in that daye. Then the poore symple shepe that had a
respecte vnto me, knewe therby, that it was the worde of the LORDE.
12 And I sayde vnto them: yff ye thynke it good, brynge hither my pryce: yf no,
then leaue. So they wayed downe xxx. syluer pens, ye value that I was prysed at.
13 And the LORDE sayde vnto me: cast it vnto the potter (a goodly pryce for me
to be valued at of them) and I toke the xxx. syluers pens, and cast them to the
potter in the house of the LORDE.
14 Then brake I my other staff also (namely wo) that I might lowse the
brotherheade betwixte Iuda and Israel.
15 And the LORDE sayde vnto me: Take to the also the staff off a foolish
shepherde:
16 for lo, I will rayse vp a shepherde in the londe, which shall not seke after
the thinges that be lost, ner care for soch as go astraye: he shall not heale
the wounded, he shal not norish the thinge that is whole: but he shall eate the
flesh off soch as be fat, and teare their clawes in peces.
17 O Idols shepherde, that leaueth the flocke. The swerde shal come vpon his
arme and vpon his right eye. His arme shalbe clene dried vp, and his right eye
shalbe sore blynded.

Chapter 12

1 The heuy burthen which ye LORDE hath deuysed for Israel. Thus saieth the
LORDE, which spred the heaues abrode, layde the foundacion of the earth, and
geueth man ye breath of life:
2 Beholde, I will make Ierusalem a cuppe of surfet, vnto all the people yt are
rounde aboute her: Yee Iuda himself also shalbe in the sege agaynst Ierusalem.
3 At the same tyme will I make Ierusalem an heuy stone for all people, so that
all soch as lift it vp, shalbe toarne and rete, and all the people of the earth
shalbe gathered together agaynst it.
4 In that daye (sayeth ye LORDE) I wil make all horses abasshed, and those that
ryde vpon them, to be out of their wyttes. I will open myne eyes vpon the house
of Iuda, ad smyte all the horses of the people with blyndnesse.
5 And the prynces of Iuda shall saye in their hertes: The inhabiters off
Ierusalem shall geue me consolacion in the LORDE off hoostes their God.
6 In that tyme will I make the prynces of Iuda like an hote burnynge ouen with
wodd, and like a cresshet off fyre amonge the strawe: so that they shal cosume
all the people roude aboute them, both vpon the right honde and the left.
Ierusale also shalbe inhabited agayne: namely, in the same place where Ierusalem
stondeth.
7 The LORDE shall preserue the tentes off Iuda like as afore tyme: so that the
glory of the house of Dauid and the glory of the cytesyns of Ierusalem, shalbe
but litle regarded, in comparison off the glory off Iuda.
8 In that daye shall the LORDE defende the citesyns of Ierusalem: so that the
weakest then amonge them shalbe as Dauid: and the house of Dauid shalbe like as
Gods house, and as the angell off the LORDE before them.
9 At the same tyme will I go aboute to destroye all soch people as come agaynst
Ierusalem.
10 Morouer, vpon the house off Dauid and vpon the citesyns off Ierusalem, will I
poure out the sprete of grace and prayer: so that they shal loke vpon me, whom
they haue pearsed: and they shall bewepe him, as men mourne for their only
begotten sonne: Yee and be sory for him, as men are sory for their first childe.
11 Then shall there be a greate mournynge at Ierusalem, like as the lamentacion
at Adremnon in the felde off Maggadon.
12 And the londe shall bewayle, euery kynred by the selues: The kynred off the
house of Dauid them selues alone, and their wyues by them selues:
13 The kynred off the house of Nathan them selues alone, and their wyues by them
selues: The kynred off the house of Leui the selues alone, and their wiues by
them selues: The kynred of the house of Semei them selues alone, and their wyues
by them selues:
14 In like maner, all the other generacios, euerychone by them selues alone, and
their wyues by them selues.

Chapter 13

1 In that tyme shall the house off Dauid and the citesyns off Ierusalem haue an
open well, to wash of synne and vnclennesse.
2 And then (sayeth the LORDE off hoostes) I will destroye the names of Idols out
off the londe: so that they shal nomore be put in remembraunce. As for the false
prophetes also and the vnclene sprete, I shall take them out of the londe:
3 So that yf eny off them prophecy eny more, his owne father and mother that
begat him, shall saye vnto him: Thou shalt dye, for thou speakest lyes vnder the
name off the LORDE: Yee his owne father and mother that begat him, shall wounde
him, when he prophecyeth.
4 And then shall those prophetes be confounded, euery one off his vision when he
prophecieth: nether shall they weere sack clothes eny more, to disceaue me
withall.
5 But he shall be fayne to saye: I am no prophet: I am an husbonde man, for so
am I taught by Adam fro my youth vp.
6 And yff it be sayde vnto him: How came these woundes then in thine hondes? He
shall answere: Thus am I wounded in the house off myne owne frendes.
7 Arise (o thou swearde) vpon my shepherde, and vpon the prynce of my people,
sayeth the LORDE of hoostes: Smyte the shepherde and the shepe shalbe scatred
abrode, and so will I turne myne honde to the litle ones.
8 And it shal come to passe (sayeth the LORDE) that in all the londe two partes
shalbe roted out, but the thirde parte shal remayne therin.
9 And the same thirde parte wil I brynge thorow the fyre, and will clense them,
as the syluer is clensed: Yee and trye them, like as golde is tryed. Then shall
they call vpon my name, and I wil heare them: I wil saye: it is my people. And
they shal saye: LORDE, my God.

Chapter 14

1 Beholde, the daye of the LORDE cometh, that thou shalt be spoyled and robbed:
2 for I wil gather together all the Heithen, to fight agaynst Ierusalem: so that
the cite shalbe wonne, the houses spoyled, and the women defyled. The half of
the cite shal go awaye in to captiuyte, and the residue of the people shal not
be caried out of the cite.
3 After that shall the LORDE go forth to fight agaynst those Heithen, as men vse
to fight in the daye of batell.
4 The shall his fete stode vpo the mount oliuete, that lieth vpon the east syde
of Ierusale. And ye mount olyuete shal cleue in two, eastwarde, & westwarde so
yt there shal be a greate valley: & the halff mount shal remoue towarde the
north, and the other half towarde the south.
5 And ye shall fle vnto the valley of my hilles, for the valley off the hylles
shal reach vnto Asal. Yee fle shall ye. like as ye fled for the earthquake in
the dayes off Osias kynge of Iuda. And the LORDE my God shal come, and all
sanctes with him.
6 In that daye shal it not be light, but colde and frost.
7 This shalbe that specyall daye, which is knowne vnto the LORDE: nether daye
ner night, but aboute the euenynge tyme it shalbe light.
8 In that tyme shall there waters of life runne out from Ierusalem: the half
parte of them towarde the east see, ad the other half towarde the vttemost see,
and shall continue both somer and wynter.
9 And the LORDE himself shalbe kynge ouer all the earth. At that tyme shal there
be one LORDE only, and his name shalbe but one.
10 Men shal go aboute the whole earth, as vpon a felde: from Gibea to Remmon,
and from ye south to Ierusalem. She shalbe set vp, and inhabited in hir place:
From BenIamins porte, vnto the place of the first porte, and vnto ye corner
porte: and from the tower of Hanael, vnto the kynges wyne presses.
11 There shall men dwell, and there shal be nomore cursinge, but Ierusalem
shalbe safely inhabited.
12 This shalbe the plage, wherwith ye LORDE wil smyte all people, that haue
fought agaynst Ierusalem: Namely, their flesh shall consume awaye, though they
stonde vpon their fete: their eyes shall corruppe in their holes, and their
tunge shal consume in their mouth.
13 In that daye shall the LORDE make a greate sedicion amoge them, so that one
ma shal take another by the honde, and laye his hondes vpon the hondes of his
neghboure.
14 Iuda shal fight also agaynst Ierusalem, ad the goodes of all the Heithen
shalbe gathered together rounde aboute: golde and syluer and a very greate
multitude off clothes.
15 And so shal this plage go ouer horses, mules camels, asses and all the
beastes that shall be in the hooste, like as yonder plage was.
16 Euery one that remayueth then of all ye people, which came agaynst Ierusalem,
shal go vp yearly, to worshipe the kynge (euen ye LORDE of hoostes) and to kepe
the feast off tabernacles.
17 And loke what generacion vpon earth goeth not vp to Ierusalem, for to
worshipe the kynge (euen the LORDE of hoostes) vpon the same shal come no rayne.
18 Yff the kynred of Egipte go not vp & come not, it shall not rayne vpon them
nether. This shalbe the plage wherwith ye LORDE wil smyte all Heithen, that come
not vp to kepe the feast of tabernacles:
19 Yee this shalbe the synneplage of Egipte and the synneplage of all people,
that go not vp to kepe the feast of tabernacles.
20 At that tyme shal the rydinge geer of ye horses be holy vnto the LORDE, and
the kettels in the LORDES house shal be like the basens before the aulter:
21 yee all the kettels in Ierusalem and Iuda, shalbe holy vnto the LORDE of
hoostes: and all they that slaye offeringes, shall come and take of them, and
dight them therin. And at that tyme there shal be no mo Cananites in the house
of the LORDE.


Malachi

Chapter 1

1 The heuy burthen which the LORDE sheweth agaynst Israel by Malachy.
2 I haue loued you, sayeth ye LORDE: ad yet ye saye: wherin hast thou loued vs?
Was not Esau Iacobs brother, sayeth the LORDE? yet haue I loued Iacob,
3 and hated Esau: Yee I haue made his hilles waist, and his heretage a
wyldernesse for dragos.
4 And though Edom sayde: well, we are destroyed, we wil go buylde vp agayne the
places that be waisted: yet (sayeth ye LORDE of hoostes) what they buylded, that
brake I downe: so that it was called a cursed londe, and a people, whom the
LORDE hath euer bene angrie withall.
5 Youre eyes haue sene it, ad ye youre selues must confesse, that ye LORDE hath
brought the londe of Israel to greate honoure.
6 Shulde not a sonne honoure his father, and a seruaut his master? Yf I be now a
father, where is myne honoure? Yf I be the LORDE, where am I feared? sayeth the
LORDE of hoostes. Now to you prestes, that despise my name. And yf ye saye:
wherin haue we despised thy name?
7 In this, that ye offre vnclene bred vpo myne aulter. And yf ye wil saye:
wherin haue we offred eny vnclene thynge vnto the? In this that ye saye: the
aulter of the LORDE is not to be regarded.
8 Yf ye offre ye blynde, is not yt euell? And yf ye offre the lame and sick, is
not that euell? Yee offre it vnto thy prynce, shal he be cotent with the, or
accepte thy personne, sayeth the LORDE of hoostes?
9 And now make youre prayer before God, that he maye haue mercy vpon vs: for
soch thinges haue ye done. Shal he regarde youre personnes (thynke ye) sayeth
the LORDE of hoostes?
10 Yee what is he amonge you, that wil do so moch as to shut ye dores, or to
kyndle ye fyre vpo myne aulter for naught? I haue no pleasure in you, sayeth the
LORDE off hoostes: and as for the meatofferinge, I wil not accepte it at youre
honde.
11 For from the rysinge vp of ye sonne vnto ye goinge downe of the same, my name
is greate amonge the Gentiles: Yee in euery place shal there sacrifice be done,
and a clene meatofferinge offred vp vnto my name: for my name is greate amonge
the Heithe, sayeth the LORDE of hoostes.
12 But ye haue vnhalowed it, in that ye saye, the aulter of ye LORDE is not to
be regarded, and the thinge that is set thervpon, not worthy to be eaten.
13 Now saye ye: It is but laboure and trauayle, and thus haue ye thought scorne
at it, (sayeth the LORDE off hoostes) offerynge robbery, yee the lame and the
sicke. Ye haue brought me in a meatofferynge, shulde I accepte it of youre
honde, sayeth the LORDE?
14 Cursed be the dyssembler, which hath in his flocke one that is male, and when
he maketh a vowe, offereth a spotted one vnto the LORDE. For I am a greate kynge
(sayeth the LORDE of hoostes) and my name is fearfull amonge the Heithen.

Chapter 2

1 And now (o ye prestes) this commaundement toucheth you:
2 yf ye will not heare it, ner regarde it, to geue the glory vnto my name
(sayeth the LORDE off hoostes) I wil sende a curse vpon you, & will curse youre
blessinges: yee curse them will I yf ye do not take hede.
3 Beholde, I shal corruppe youre sede, and cast donge in youre faces: euen the
donge of youre solempne feastes and it shal cleue fast vpon you.
4 And ye shall knowe, that I haue sent this commaundement vnto you: that my
couenaunt which I made with Leui, might stonde, sayeth ye LORDE of hoostes.
5 I made a couenaunt of life and peace wt him: this I gaue him, that he might
stonde in awe of me: and so he dyd feare me, ad had my name in reuerence.
6 The lawe of treuth was in his mouth, and there was no wickednesse founde in
his lippes. He walked with me in peace ad equyte, and dyd turne many one awaye
from their synnes.
7 For the prestes lippes shulde be sure knowlege, that men maye seke the lawe at
his mouth, for he is a messaunger of the LORDE of hoostes.
8 But as for you, ye are gone clene out off the waye, and haue caused the
multitude to be offended at the lawe: ye haue broken the couenaunt of Leui,
sayeth the LORDE of hoostes.
9 Therfore wil I also make you to be despised, and to be of no reputacion amonge
all ye people: because ye haue not kepte my wayes, but bene parciall in the
lawe.
10 Haue we not all one father? Hath not one God made vs? why doth euery one off
vs then despyse his owne brother, and so breake the couenaunt of oure fathers?
11 Now hath Iuda offended: yee the abhominacion is done in Israel and in
Ierusale, for Iuda hath defyled the Sactuary of the LORDE, which he loued, and
hath kepte the doughter of a straunge God.
12 But the LORDE shal destroye the ma that doth this (yee both the master & the
scolar) out off the tabernacle of Iacob, with him that offreth vp meatofferynge
vnto the LORDE off hoostes.
13 Now haue ye brought it to this poynte agayne, that the aulter of the LORDE is
couered with teares wepynge and mournynge: so that I will nomore regarde the
meatofferynge, nether wil I receaue or accepte enythinge at youre hodes.
14 And yet ye saye: wherfore? Euen because that where as the LORDE made a
couenaut betwixte ye and the wife off thy youth, thou hast despysed her: Yet is
she thyne owne copanyon and maried wife.
15 So dyd not the one, & yet had he an excellent sprete. What dyd then the one?
He sought the sede promised of God. Therfore loke well to youre sprete, & let no
man despyse ye wife of his youth.
16 Yf thou hatest her, put her awaye, sayeth the LORDE God of Israel and geue
her a clothinge for the scorne, sayeth the LORDE of hoostes. Loke well then to
youre sprete, and despyse her not.
17 Ye greue the LORDE with youre wordes, and yet ye saye: wherwithall haue we
greued him? In this, that ye saye: All that do euell are good in the sight of
God, and soch please him. Or els where is the God that punysheth?

Chapter 3

1 Beholde, I wil sende my messaunger, which shal prepare the waye before me: and
the LORDE whom ye wolde haue, shal soone come to his temple, yee euen the
messaunger of the couenaunt whom ye longe for. Beholde, he commeth, sayeth the
LORDE of hoostes.
2 But who maye abyde the daye of his commynge? Who shalbe able to endure, when
he appeareth? For he is like a goldsmythes fyre, ad like wasshers sope.
3 He shall syt him downe to trye and to clense ye syluer, he shal pourge the
children of Leui, and purifie them like as golde and syluer: that they maye
brynge meatofferinges vnto the LORDE in rightuousnes.
4 Then shall the offeringe of Iuda and Ierusalem be acceptable vnto the LORDE,
like as from the begynninge & in the yeares afore tyme.
5 I will come & punysh you, & I myself wil be a swift wytnes agaynst the
witches, agaynst the aduouterers, agaynst false swearers: yee ad agaynst those,
that wrogeously kepe backe the hyrelynges dewty: which vexe the wyddowes & the
fatherlesse, & oppresse the straunger, and feare not me, sayeth the LORDE of
hoostes.
6 For I am the LORDE yt chaunge not, & ye (o children of Iacob) wil not leaue
of:
7 ye are gone awaye fro myne ordinauces, & sens ye tyme of youre forefathers
haue ye not kepte them. Turne you now vnto me, and I wil turne me vnto you,
sayeth the LORDE of hoostes. Ye saye: Wherin shal we turne?
8 Shulde a man vse falsede and disceate with God, as ye vse falsede and disceate
with me? Yet ye saye: wherin vse we disceate with the? In Tythes and heaue
offerynges.
9 Therfore are ye cursed with penury, because ye dyssemble with me, all the
sorte of you.
10 Brynge euery Tythe in to my barne, yt there maye be meat in myne house: and
proue me withall (sayeth the LORDE of hoostes) yf I wil not open the wyndowes of
heauen vnto you, and poure you out a blessinge with plenteousnesse.
11 Yee I shal reproue the consumer for youre sakes, so that he shall not eate vp
the frute of youre grounde, nether shal ye vynyarde be baren in the felde,
sayeth ye LORDE of hoostes:
12 In so moch that all people shal saye, that ye be blessed, for ye shall be a
pleasaunt lode, sayeth the LORDE off hoostes.
13 Ye speake hard wordes agaynst me, sayeth the LORDE. And yet ye saye: What
haue we spoken agaynst the?
14 Ye haue sayed: It is but lost laboure, to serue God: What profit haue we for
kepynge his commaundementes, and for walkinge humbly before the LORDE off
hoostes?
15 Therfore maye we saye, that the proude are happie, and that they which deale
with vngodlynesse, are set vp: for they tempte God, and yet escape.
16 But they that feare God, saye thus one to another: The LORDE cosidreth and
heareth it. Yee it is before him a memoriall boke written for soch as feare the
LORDE, and remembre his name.
17 And in the daye that I wil make (saieth ye LORDE of hoostes) they shalbe myne
owne possession: and I will fauoure them, like as a man fauoureth his owne
sonne, that doth him seruyce.
18 Turne you therfore, and considre what difference is betwixte the rightuous
and vngodly: betwixte him that serueth God, ad him that serueth him not.

Chapter 4

1 For marck, the daye commeth that shall burne as an oue: and all the proude,
yee and all soch as do wickednesse, shalbe straw: and the daye that is for to
come, shall burne the vp (sayeth the LORDE of hoostes) so that it shal leaue
them nether rote ner braunch.
2 But vnto you that feare my name, shall the Sone of rightuousnesse aryse, &
health shalbe vnder his winges. Ye shal go forth, & multiplie as ye fat calues.
3 Ye shal treade downe ye vngodly: for they shalbe like the asshes vnder the
soles of youre fete, in the daye yt I shal make, sayeth the LORDE of hoostes.
4 Remembre the lawe of Moses my seruaunt, which I committed vnto him in Oreb for
all Israel, with the statutes and ordinaunces.
5 Beholde, I will sende you Elias ye prophet: before the comynge off the daye of
the great and fearfull LORDE.
6 He shall turne the hertes of the fathers to their children and the hertes of
the children to their fathers, that I come not, and smyte the earth with
cursynge.


Matthew

Chapter 1

1 This is the boke of the generacion of Iesus Christ ye sonne of Dauid, the
sonne of Abraham.
2 Abraha begat Isaac: Isaac begat Iacob: Iacob begat Iudas & his brethre:
3 Iudas begat Phares & Zara of Thamar: Phares begat Hesrom: Hesrom begat Aram:
4 Aram begat Aminadab: Aminadab begat Naasson: Naasson begat Salmon:
5 Salmon begat Boos of Rahab: Boos begat Obed of Ruth: Obed begat Iesse:
6 Iesse begat Dauid the kynge: Dauid the kynge begat Salomon, of her that was
the wyfe of Vry:
7 Salomon begat Roboam: Roboam begat Abia: Abia begat Asa:
8 Asa begat Iosaphat: Iosaphat begat Ioram: Ioram begat Osias:
9 Osias begat Ioatham: Ioatham begat Achas: Achas begat Ezechias:
10 Ezechias begat Manasses: Manasses begat Amon: Amon begat Iosias:
11 Iosias begat Iechonias and his brethren aboute the tyme of the captiuyte of
Babylon.
12 And after the captiuyte of Babylon, Iechonias begat Salathiel: Salathiel
begat Zorobabel:
13 Zorobabel begat Abiud: Abiud begat Eliachim: Eliachim begat Azor:
14 Azor begat Sadoc: Sadoc begat Achin: Achin begat Eliud:
15 Eliud begat Eleasar: Eleasar begat Matthan: Matthan begat Iacob:
16 Iacob begat Ioseph the hussbande of Mary, of who was borne that Iesus, which
is called Christ.
17 All the generacions from Abraha to Dauid are fourtene generacions: From Dauid
vnto the captiuite of Babylon, are fourtene generacions. From the captiuite of
Babylon vnto Christ, are also fourtene generacions.
18 The byrth of Christ was on thys wyse: When his mother Mary was maried to
Ioseph before they came together, she was foude with chylde by ye holy goost,
19 But Ioseph her hussbande was a perfect man, and wolde not bringe her to
shame, but was mynded to put her awaie secretely.
20 Neuertheles whyle he thus thought, beholde, the angell of the LORDE appered
vnto him in a dreame, saynge: Ioseph thou sonne of Dauid, feare not to take vnto
the Mary thy wyfe. For that which is coceaued in her, is of ye holy goost.
21 She shall brynge forth a sonne, and thou shalt call his name Iesus. For he
shall saue his people from their synnes.
22 All this was done, yt the thinge might, be fulfilled, which was spoken of the
LORDE by the Prophet, saynge:
23 Beholde, a mayde shall be with chylde, and shall brynge forth a sonne, and
they shall call his name Emanuel, which is by interpretacion, God wt vs.
24 Now whan Ioseph awoke out of slepe he did as the angell of ye LORDE bade hym,
and toke his wyfe vnto hym,
25 and knewe her not, tyll she had brought forth hir fyrst borne sonne, and
called his name Iesus.

Chapter 2

1 When Iesus was borne at Bethlee in Iury, in the tyme of Herode the kynge,
Beholde, there came wyse men from the east to Ierusale,
2 saynge: Where is the new borne kynge of the Iues? We haue sene his starre in
the east, and are come to worship him.
3 When Herode ye kynge had herde thys, he was troubled, & all Ierusale with hym,
4 and he gathered all the hye Prestes and Scribes of ye people, & axed of them,
where Christ shulde be borne.
5 And they sayde vnto hym: at Bethleem in Iury. For thus it is written by the
Prophet:
6 And thou Bethleem in the londe of Iury, art not the leest amonge the Princes
of Iuda. For out of ye shall come vnto me the captayne, that shall gouerne my
people Israel.
7 Then Herod preuely called the wyse men, and dyligently enquyred of them, what
tyme the starre appered,
8 and sent them to Bethleem, sainge: Go, and searche dyligently for the chylde.
And when ye haue founde hym, bringe me worde agayne, that I maye come and
worshippe hym also.
9 When they had heard the kynge, they departed: and lo, the starre which they
sawe in the east, went before them, tyll it came, and stode ouer the place where
the chylde was.
10 When they sawe the starre, they were maruelously glad:
11 and went into the house, and found the chylde with Mary his mother, and
kneled downe and worshipped hym, & opened ther treasures, and offred vnto hym
gyftes: gold, franckynsence and myrre.
12 And after they were warned of God in a dreame, that they shuld not go ageine
to Herod, they returned into their awne countre another waye.
13 When they were departed: beholde, the angell of the LORDE appered to Ioseph
in a dreame, sayinge: aryse, and take the chylde and his mother, and flye into
Egypte, and abyde there tyll I brynge the worde. For Herod wyl seke the chylde
to destroye hym.
14 The he arose, and toke the chylde and his mother by night, and departed into
Egypte,
15 and was there vnto ye deeth of Herod, that the thinge might be fulfylled
which was spoke of the LORDE, by the Prophet, which sayeth: out of Egypte haue I
called my sonne.
16 Then Herod perceauynge yt he was disceaued of the wyse men, was excedynge
wroth, and sent forth, and slue all the chyldren that were in Bethleem, and in
all the coastes there of, as many as were two yere olde and vnder, accordynge to
the tyme which he had diligently searched out of the wyse men.
17 Then was yt fulfilled which was spoken by ye Prophet Ieremy sayinge:
18 On ye hilles was a voyce herde, greate mournynge, wepynge, & lamentacion:
Rachel wepynge for her chyldren, and wolde not be conforted, because they were
not.
19 When Herode was deed: beholde, an angell of the LORDE appered in a dreame to
Ioseph in Egypte,
20 sayinge: arise and take the chylde and his mother, & go into ye londe of
Israel. For they are deed, which sought the chyldes life.
21 And he arose vp, and toke ye chylde and his mother, & came into the londe of
Israel.
22 But whe he herde that Archelaus did raygne in Iury, in ye rowme of his father
Herode, he was afrayde to go thither. Notwithstondinge after he was warned of
God in a dreame, he turned asyde into the parties of Galile,
23 and went and dwelt in a cite called Nazareth, to fulfill yt which was spoken
by the Prophetes: he shalbe called a Nazarite.

Chapter 3

1 In those dayes Ihon the Baptyst came and preached in the wildernes of Iury,
2 saynge: Amede youre selues, the kyngdome of heuen is at honde.
3 This is he, of whom it is spoke by ye Prophet Esay, which sayeth: The voyce of
a cryer in ye wyldernes, prepare the LORDES waye, and make his pathes straight.
4 This Ihon had his garment of camels heer, and a lethre gerdell aboute his
loynes. Hys meate was locustes and wylde hony.
5 Then went out to hym Ierusalem, and all Iury, and all the region rounde aboute
Iordan,
6 and were baptised of him in Iordan, cofessynge their synnes.
7 Now when he sawe many of the Pharises and of ye Saduces come to hys baptim, he
sayde vnto them: ye generacio of vipers, who hath certified you, that ye shal
escape ye vengeaunce to come?
8 Bewarre, brynge forth due frutes of pennaunce.
9 Thinke not now, to saye in your selues, we haue Abraham to oure father. For I
saye vnto you, that God is able of these stones to rayse vp chyldren vnto
Abraham.
10 Euen now is the axe put vnto ye rote of the trees: therfore euery tre which
bringeth not forth good frute, shalbe hewe downe, and cast into the fyre.
11 I baptise you with water to repentaunce: but he that cometh after me, is
myghtier the I, whose shues I am not worthy to beare. He shall baptise you with
ye holy goost & wt fyre:
12 which hath also his fan in his hond, and will pourge his floore, and gadre
the wheet into his garner, & will burne ye chaffe with vnquencheable fyre.
13 Then came Iesus from Galile to Iordan, vnto Ihon, to be baptised of hym.
14 But Iho forbade hym, saynge: I haue nede to be baptysed of the: and commest
thou to me?
15 Iesus answered & sayd vnto hym: Let it be so now. For thus it be commeth vs
to fulfyll all righteousnes. Then he suffred hym.
16 And Iesus assone as he was baptised, came straight out of the water. And lo,
heue was ope ouer hym: and Ihon sawe the spirite of God descende lyke a doue,
and lyght vpon hym.
17 And lo, there came a voyce fro heue sayng: Thys ys that my beloued sonne, in
whom is my delyte.

Chapter 4

1 Then was Iesus ledd awaye of the spirite in to wildernes, to be tempted of the
deuyll.
2 And when he had fasted fourtye dayes and fourtye nightes, he was afterward an
hungred.
3 And the tepter came to him and sayde: yf thou be the sonne of God, commaunde,
that these stones be made breed.
4 He answered & sayde: yt is wrytte: Man shall not lyue by bred onlye, but by
euery worde that proceadeth out of the mouth of God.
5 Then the deuyll toke hym vp into the holy cite, and set hym on a pynacle of
the temple,
6 and sayde vnto hym: yf thou be ye sonne of God, cast thy sylfe downe. For it
is wrytten: he shall geue his angels charge ouer the and with their handes they
shal holde the vp, that thou dashe not thy fote agaynst a stone.
7 And Iesus sayde vnto hym: it ys wrytten also: Thou shalt not tempte thy LORDE
God.
8 Agayne, the deuyll toke hym vp and led hym into an excedynge hye mountayne,
and shewed hym all the kyngdomes of the worlde, and all the glorie of them,
9 and sayde vnto hym: all these wil I geue the, yf thou wilt fall downe and
worship me.
10 Then sayde Iesus vnto hym: Auoyde Sata. For it ys wrytte: thou shalt worshyp
the LORDE thy God and hym onely shalt thou serue.
11 Then the deuell left hym, and beholde, the angels came and ministred vnto
hym.
12 When Iesus had herde that Ihon was taken, he departed into Galile
13 and left Nazareth, and went and dwelt in Capernaum, which is a cite apon the
see, in the coostes of zabulon and Neptalim,
14 yt the thinge might be fulfilled whiche was spoken by Esay the Prophet,
sayinge:
15 The londe of zabulon and Neptalim, the waye of the see beyonde Iordan, and
Galile of the Gentyls,
16 the people which sat in darknes, sawe a greate lyght, & to them which sat in
the region & shadowe of deeth, lyght is begone to shyne.
17 From that tyme forth beganne Iesus to preach, and to saye: Amende youre
selues, ye kingdome of heauen is at honde.
18 As Iesus walked by the see of Galile, he sawe two brethren: Simon which was
called Peter, & Andrew his brother, castynge a net into ye see, for they were
fisshers,
19 and he sayde vnto them: folowe me, & I will make you fisshers of me.
20 And they strayght waye lefte their nettes, and folowed hym.
21 And whan he wet forth from thence, he sawe other two brethren, Iames the
sonne of zebede, and Ihon his brother, in the ship with zebede their father,
mendynge their nettes, and called them.
22 And they without tarynge lefte ye shyp and their father, and folowed hym.
23 And Iesus went aboute all Galile, teachyng in their synagoges, and preachynge
the gospel of the kyngdome, and healed all maner of siknes, & all maner dyseases
amonge the people.
24 And his fame spred abrode through out all Siria. And they brought vnto hym
all sick people, that were taken with diuers diseases and gripinges, and the yt
were possessed with deuils, & those which were lunatyke, and those that had the
palsie: & he healed the.
25 And ther folowed hym a greate nombre of people, from Galile, & from the ten
cities, and from Ierusalem, and from the regions that lye beyonde Iordan.

Chapter 5

1 When he sawe the people, he went vp into a mountayne: and when he was set, his
disciples came to hym,
2 and he opened his mouth, and taught them, sayinge:
3 Blessed are the poore in sprete: for theirs is the kyngdome of heue.
4 Blessed are they that mourne: for they shalbe coforted.
5 Blessed are the meke: for they shall inheret the erth.
6 Blessed are they which honger & thyrst for rightewesnes: for they shalbe
filled.
7 Blessed are the mercifull: for they shall obteyne mercy.
8 Blessed are the pure in herte: for they shall se God.
9 Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shalbe called the chyldren of God.
10 Blessed are they which suffre persecucion for rightwesnes sake: for theirs is
the kyngdome of heuen.
11 Blessed are ye when men reuyle you, and persecute you, and falsly say all
manner of yuell saynges against you for my sake.
12 Reioyce and be glad, for greate is youre rewarde in heue.For so persecuted
they the Prophetes which were before youre dayes.
13 Ye are ye salt of the earth, but and yf the salt haue lost his saltnes, what
can be salted therwith? It is thence forth good for nothynge, but to be cast
out, and to be trodden vnder fote of men.
14 Ye are the light of the worlde. A cite that is set on an hill, can not be
hid:
15 nether do men lyght a candell, and put it vnder a busshell, but on a
candelstick, and it lighteth all that are in the house.
16 Let youre light so shyne before men, that they maye se youre good workes, and
glorify youre father which is in heauen.
17 Thinke not, that I am come to destroye the lawe, or the Prophetes: no, I am
not come to destroye them, but to fulfyll them.
18 For truly I saye vnto you: till heauen and earth perisshe, one iott or one
tyttle of the lawe shall not escape, tyll all be fulfilled.
19 Whosoeuer breaketh one of these least comaundmentes, and teacheth me so, he
shalbe called the leest in the kyngdome of heauen, But whosoeuer obserueth and
teacheth the same shalbe called greate in the kyngdome of heauen.
20 For I saye vnto you: excepte youre rightewesnes exceade the righetewesnes of
the Scribes and Pharises, ye can not entre in to the kyngdome of heauen.
21 Ye haue herde, how it was sayde to the of the olde tyme: Thou shalt not kyll.
For whosoeuer kylleth, shall be in daunger of iudgement.
22 But I saye vnto you: whosoeuer is angrie with his brother, is in daunger of
the iudgement. Whosoeuer sayeth vnto his brother: Racha, is in daunger of ye
cousell. But whosoeuer sayeth: thou foole, is in daunger of hell fyre.
23 Therfore when thou offrest thy gift at the altare, and there remembrest that
thy brother hath ought agaynst the:
24 leaue there thyne offrynge before the altare, and go thy waye first, and
reconcyle thy selfe to thy brother, & then come and offre thy gyfte.
25 Agre with thine aduersary quicklye, whyle thou art in the waye with hym, lest
that aduersary deliuer the to the iudge, and the iudge deliuer the to the
minister, and then thou be cast in to preson.
26 I saye vnto the verely: thou shalt not come out thece, till thou haue payed
the vtmost farthinge.
27 Ye haue herde, how it was sayde to them of olde tyme: Thou shalt not committe
aduoutrie.
28 But I saye vnto you, that whosoeuer loketh on a wife lustinge after her, hath
committed aduoutrie with hir already in his hert.
29 Wherfore yf thy right eye offende the, plucke hym out, and cast him from the.
Better it is for the, that one of thy membres perisshe, then that thy whole body
shulde be cast in to hell.
30 Also yf thy right honde offende the, cut hym of, and cast him from the.
Better yt is that one of thy mebres perissh, the yt all yi body shulde be cast
in to hell.
31 It is sayde: whosoeuer putteth awaye his wyfe, let hym geue her a testimony
all of the deuorcemet.
32 But I saye vnto you: whosoeuer putteth awaye his wyfe (except it be for
fornicacio causeth her to breake matrymony. And whosoeuer maryeth her that is
deuorsed, breaketh wedlocke.
33 Agayne, ye haue herde, how it was sayde to the of olde tyme: Thou shalt not
forsweare thy selfe, but shalt performe thyne ooth to God.
34 But I saye vnto you: sweare not at all, nether by heaue, for it is Godis
seate:
35 nor yet by the earth, for it is his fote stole: nether by Ierusalem, for it
is the cyte of ye greate kinge:
36 nether shalt thou sweare by thy heed, because thou canst not make one heer
whyte or blacke:
37 But your communicacion shalbe, yee, yee: nay, nay. For what soeuer is more
then that, commeth of euel.
38 Ye haue herde howe it is sayde: An eye for an eye, a toth for a toth.
39 But I saye vnto you: that ye resist not euell. But whosoeuer geueth the a
blowe on thy right cheke, turne to him the other also.
40 And yf eny man will sue the at the lawe, & take awaye thy coate, let him haue
thy cloake also.
41 And who so compelleth the to go a myle, go wt hym twayne.
42 Geue to hym that axeth: and from hym that wolde borowe, turne not awaye.
43 Ye haue herde, how it is saide: thou shalt loue thyne neghboure, & hate thyne
enemy.
44 But I saye vnto you: loue youre enemies: Blesse the that cursse you: Do good
to the that hate you: Praye for the which do you wronge and persecute you,
45 that ye maye be the chyldern of youre father which is in heauen: for he
maketh his sonne to aryse on the euel and on the good, and sendeth his rayne on
the iust and vniuste.
46 For yf ye loue them which loue you, what rewarde shall ye haue? Do not the
Publicans eue so?
47 And yf ye be frendly to youre brethren onlye: what singuler thynge do ye? Do
not the Publicans also lyke wyse?
48 Ye shall therfore be perfecte, euen as youre father in heaue is perfecte.

Chapter 6

1 Take hede to youre almes, that ye geue it not in the syght of men, to the
intent that ye wolde be sene of them: or els, ye get no rewarde of youre father
which is in heauen.
2 When soeuer therfore thou geuest thine almes, thou shalt not make a trompet to
be blowen before the, as the ypocrites do in the synagoges and in the stretes,
for to be praysed of me. Verely I saye vnto you: they haue their rewarde.
3 But whe thou doest almes, let not thy lefte hande knowe, what thy righte hande
doth;
4 that thine almes maye be secrete: and thy father which seith in secrete, shall
rewarde the openly.
5 And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as ye ypocrytes are. For they loue to
stode and praye in the synagoges, and in the corners of the stretes, to be sene
of men. Verely I saie vnto you: they haue their rewarde.
6 But when thou prayest, entre in to thy chamber, and shut thy dore to the, &
praye to thy father which is in secrete: and thy father which seith in secrete,
shall rewarde the openly.
7 And when ye praye, bable not moch, as ye Hethen do: for they thinke that they
shalbe herde, for their moch bablynges sake.
8 Be not ye lyke them therfore. For youre father knoweth where of ye haue nede,
before ye axe of him.
9 After thys maner therfore shall ye praye:O oure father which art in heauen,
halowed be thy name.
10 Thy kyngdome come. Thy wyll be fulfilled vpon earth as it is in heauen.
11 Geue vs this daye oure dayly bred.
12 And forgeue vs oure dettes, as we also forgeue oure detters.
13 And lede vs not in to teptacion: but delyuer vs from euell. For thyne is the
kyngdome, and the power, and the glorye for euer. Amen.
14 For yf ye forgeue other men their treaspases, youre heauenly father shall
also forgeue you.
15 But and ye wyll not forgeue me their trespases, nomore shall youre father
forgeue you youre trespases.
16 Moreouer when ye fast, be not sad as ye ypocrytes are. For they disfigure
their faces, that they myght be sene of men to fast. Verely I saye vnto you:
they haue their rewarde.
17 But thou, whe thou fastest, annoynte thyne heed, and wash thy face,
18 that it appeare not vnto men, that thou fastest: but vnto thy father which is
in secrete: and thy father which seyth in secrete, shal rewarde the openly.
19 Se that ye gather you not treasure vpon the earth, where rust and mothes
corrupte, and where theues breake through and steale.
20 But gather you treasure together in heauen, where nether rust nor mothes
corrupte, and where theues nether breake vp nor yet steale.
21 For where youre treasure is, there is youre herte also.
22 The eye is the light of the body. Yf thyne eye then be syngle, all thy body
shalbe ful of light:
23 But and yf thyne eye be wycked, all thy body shalbe full of darckenes:
Wherfore yf the light that is in the, be darckenes, how greate then shall that
darckenes be?
24 No ma can serue two masters. For ether he shall hate the one and loue the
other: or els he shall leane to the one, and despise the other: Ye can not serue
God and mammon.
25 Therfore I saye vnto you: be not ye carefull for your lyfe, what ye shall
eate, or what ye shall drinke: nor yet for youre body, what ye shal put on. Ys
not the lyfe more worth the meate, and the body more of value then raymet?
26 Beholde the foules of ye ayer: for they sowe not, nether reepe, nor yet cary
in to the barnes: and yet youre heauely father fedeth the. Are ye not moch
better the they?
27 Which of you (though he toke thought therfore) coulde put one cubit vnto his
stature?
28 why care ye then for rayment? Considre the lylies of the felde, how they
growe. They laboure not, nether spynne.
29 And yet for all that I saye vnto you, that euen Salomon in all his royalte
was not arayed lyke vnto one of these.
30 Wherfore yf God so cloth the grasse, which is to daye in the felde, and to
morowe shalbe cast into the fornace: shal he not moch more do the same vnto you,
o ye of lytle fayth?
31 Therfore take no thought, sayinge: what shall we eate, or what shall we
drinke? or where with shall we be clothed?
32 After all soch thynges do the heithen seke. For youre heauenly father
knoweth, that ye haue nede of all these thynges.
33 Seke ye fyrst the kyngdome of heauen and the righteousnes therof, so shal all
these thynges be ministred vnto you.
34 Care not then for the morow, for the morow shall care for it self: Euery daye
hath ynough of his owne trauayll.

Chapter 7

1 Ivdge not, that ye be not iudged:
2 For as ye iudge, so shal ye be iudged. And with what measure ye meete, with
the same shall it be measured to you agayne.
3 Why seist thou a moate in thy brothers eye, and perceauest not the beame yt is
yn thine awne eye?
4 Or why saiest thou to yi brother: holde, I wil plucke the moate out of thyne
eye, and beholde, a beame is in thyne awne eye.
5 Ypocryte, fyrst cast out the beame out of thyne awne eye, and then shalt thou
se clearly, to plucke out the moate out of thy brothers eye.
6 Geue not that which is holy, to dogges: nether cast ye youre pearles before
swyne, lest they treade them vnder their fete, & the other turne agayne and all
to rente you.
7 Axe, and it shalbe geuen you: Seke, and ye shall fynde: knocke, and it shalbe
opened vnto you.
8 For whosoeuer axeth, receaueth: and he that seketh, fyndeth: and to hym yt
knocketh, it shal opened.
9 Ys there eny man amonge you, which yf his sonne axed hym bred, wolde offer him
a stone?
10 Or yf he axed fysshe, wolde he proffer hym a serpent?
11 yf ye then which are euell, can geue youre chyldren good gyftes: how moche
more shall youre father which is in heauen, geue good thynges to them that axe
hym?
12 Therfore what soeuer ye wolde that me shulde do to you, eue so do ye to them.
This ys the lawe and the Prophetes.
13 Enter in at the strayte gate: for wyde is the gate, and broade is the waye,
that leadeth to destruccion: & many there be, which go in therat.
14 But strayte is the gate, and narowe ys the waye, which leadeth vnto lyfe, and
fewe there be that fynde it.
15 Beware of false Prophetes, which come to you in shepes clothinge, but
inwardly they are rauenynge wolues,
16 Ye shall knowe them by their frutes. Do men gather grapes of thornes? or
figges of thistles?
17 Euen so euery good tree bryngeth forth good frute. But a corrupte tree,
bryngeth forth euyl frute,
18 A good tree can not bryng forth bad frute: nother can a rotten tre bringe
forth good frute.
19 Euery tre that bryngeth not forth good frute, shalbe hewen downe, and cast
into the fyre.
20 Wherfore by their frutes ye shall knowe them.
21 Not all they that saye vnto me, LORDE LORDE, shall enter in to the kyngdome
of heauen: but he that doth the will of my father which ys in heauen.
22 Many shall saye to me in that daye: LORDE, LORDE: haue we not prophecied in
thy name? Haue we not cast out deuyls in thy name? Haue we not done many greate
dedes in thy name?
23 And then will I knowlege vnto them: I neuer knewe you, Departe fro me, ye
workers of iniquite.
24 Whosoeuer therfore heareth of me these sayinges, and doeth the same, I wyll
lycke hym vnto a wyse man, which buylt hys house vpon a rocke:
25 Now whan abundaunce of rayne descended, and the wyndes blewe and bet vpon
that same house, it fel not, because it was grounded on the rocke.
26 And who soeuer heareth of me these sayinges, & doth the not, shalbe lyckened
vnto a folysh ma, which buylt his housse apon the sonde:
27 Now whan abudaunce of rayne desceded, & the wyndes blewe, & bet vpon yt
housse, it fell, and great was the fall of it.
28 And it came to passe, that when Iesus had ended these saynges, the people
were astonnyed at hys doctryne.
29 For he taught them as one hauynge power, and not as the Scribes.

Chapter 8

1 When he was come downe from the mountayne, moch people folowed him.
2 And lo, there came a leper, and worsheped him, sayinge: LORDE, yf thou wylt,
thou canst make me cleane.
3 And Iesus put forth hys honde, & touched him, sayinge: I wyl, be thou cleane:
& immediatly his leprosie was clensed?
4 And Iesus sayde vnto hym: Se thou tell no ma, but go and shew thy selfe to the
preste, and offer the gyfte that Moses comaunded, in witnes to them.
5 When Iesus was entred into Capernaum, there came vnto him a Captayne, &
besought hym,
6 sayinge: Syr, my seruaunt lyeth sicke at home of the palsye, and ys greuously
payned.
7 Iesus sayd vnto hym: I wil come & heale him.
8 The Captayne answered and sayde: Syr, I am nor worthy, that thou shuldest come
vnder my rofe, but speake the worde only, and my seruaunt shalbe healed.
9 For I myselfe also am a ma subiect to ye auctorite of another, & haue sowdiers
vnder me. Yet wha I saye to one: go, he goeth, and to another: come, he commeth:
& to my seruaunt: do this, he doeth it.
10 When Iesus hearde that, he marueled, and sayde to them that folowed hym:
Verely I say vnto you: I haue not founde so greate fayth: no not i Israel.
11 But I say vnto you: Many shall come from the east and west, and shall rest
with Abraham, Isaac and Iacob in the kyngdome of heauen:
12 and the chyldren of the kyngdome shalbe cast out in to vtter darcknes: there
shalbe wepinge & gnasshing of teth.
13 And Iesus sayd vnto ye Captayne: go thy waye, and as thou beleuest, so be it
vnto the. And his seruaunt was healed the same houre.
14 And Iesus went in to Peters housse, and sawe hys wyues mother lyinge sicke of
a feuer:
15 so he touched her hande, and the feuer left hir: and she arose, and ministred
vnto them.
16 When the euen was come, they brought vnto him many that were possessed with
deuylls. And he cast out ye spirites with a worde, & healed all that were sicke,
17 that ye thinge might be fulfilled, which was spoken by Esay the Prophet,
sayinge: He toke on him oure infirmities, and bare oure sickneses.
18 Whe Iesus sawe moch people about him, he commaunded to go ouer the water.
19 And there came a scribe and sayde vnto hym: master, I wyll folowe the,
whyther so euer thou goest.
20 And Iesus sayde vnto him: the foxes haue holes, and the byrddes of the ayer
hane nestes, but ye sonne of ma hath not wheron to rest his heede.
21 Another that was one of his disciples, sayde vnto hym: Syr, geue me leue
fyrst, to go & burye my father.
22 But Iesus sayde vnto him: folowe thou me, and let the deed burie their deed.
23 And he entred in to a shyppe, & his disciples folowed him.
24 And beholde, there arose a greate tempest in the see, in so moch that the
shippe was couered with wawes, & he was a slepe.
25 And his disciples came vnto him, and awoke hym, sayinge: LORDE, saue vs, we
perishe.
26 And he sayde vnto them: why are ye fearfull, o ye of lytell faithe? Then he
arose, and rebuked the wyndes and the see, & there folowed a greate calme.
27 And the men marueyled and sayde: what ma is this, that both wyndes and see
obey hym?
28 And when he was come to ye other syde, in to the countre of the Gergesites,
there met him two possessed of deuyls, which came out of the graues, and were
out of measure fearce, so that no man myght go by that waye.
29 And beholde, they cryed out sayinge: Oh Iesu thou sonne of God, what haue we
to do wt the? Art thou come hyther to tormet vs, before the tyme be come?
30 And there was a good waye of from them a greate heerd of swyne fedinge.
31 Then the deuyles besought him, sayinge: yf thou cast vs out, suffre vs to go
oure waye in to the heerd of swyne.
32 And he sayde vnto them: go youre wayes. Then went they out, and departed in
to the heerd of swyne. And beholde, ye whoale heerd of swyne was caryed with
violece headlinge in to the see, and perished in the water.
33 The the heerdmen fled and wente their ways in to the cyte, and tolde euery
thinge, & what had fortuned vnto the possessed of the deuyls.
34 And beholde, all the cyte came out and met Iesus. And when they sawe hym,
they besought hym, for to departe out of their coostes.

Chapter 9

1 Then entred he into a shipp, and passed ouer and came into his awne cite.
2 And lo, they brought vnto him a man sicke of ye palsie, lyinge in his bed. And
when Iesus sawe the faith of the, he sayde to the sicke of ye palsie: my sonne,
be of good cheare, thy sinnes are forgeue the.
3 And beholde, certeyne of the scribes sayde in them selues: this man
blasphemeth.
4 But when Iesus sawe their thoughtes, he sayde: wherfore thinke ye euill in
youre hertes?.
5 Whether ys it easier to saye: thy synnes be forgeue ye, or to saie: arise and
walke?
6 But that ye maye knowe, that the sonne of man hath power to forgeue sinnes in
earth, the sayde he vnto the sicke of ye palsye: arise, take vp thy bed, and go
home.
7 And he arose and wente home.
8 hen ye people sawe it, they marueyled, & glorified God, which had geue soch
power vnto men.
9 And as Iesus passed forth from thence, he sawe a man syt a receyuinge of
custome, named Mathew, & sayde vnto him: folowe me.
10 And he arose, and folowed him. And it came to passe as he sat at meate in the
house: beholde, many publicans and synners came and sat downe also with Iesus
and hys disciples.
11 When the Pharises sawe that, they sayde to hys disciples: why eateth youre
master with publicans and synners?
12 When Iesus herde that, he sayde vnto them: The whole nede not ye phisicio,
but they that are sicke.
13 Go and learne, what that meaneth: I haue pleasure in mercy, and not in
offerynge. For I am not come to call the righteous, but ye synners to
repentaunce,
14 Then came the disciples of Ihon to hym sayinge: why do we & ye Pharises fast
so oft: and thy disciples fast not?
15 And Iesus sayde vnto the: Can the weddynge chyldre mourne as loge as the
bridegrome is with them? The tyme will come, when the bridegrome shalbe taken
from them, and the shall they fast.
16 No man peceth an olde garment with a pece of newe clothe. For then taketh he
awaye the pece agayne from the garment, & the rent ys made greater.
17 Nether do men put new wyne in to olde vessels, for then the vessels breake,
and the wyne runneth out, & ye vessels peryshe, But they poure newe wyne in to
newe vessels, and so are both saued together,
18 Whyle he thus spake vnto them, beholde there came a certayne ruler, and
worshipped him, sayinge: My doughter is eue now deceased, but come and lay yi
honde on her, and she shall liue.
19 Iesus arose and folowed hym with hys disciples.
20 And beholde, a woman which was diseased wt an yssue of bloude xij. yeres,
came behynde hym, and touched the hem of hys vesture.
21 For she sayde in her silfe: yf I maye touche but euen his vesture only, I
shalbe safe.
22 Then Iesus tourned him aboute, and behelde her, sayinge: Doughter be of good
conforte, thy faith hath made ye safe. And she was made whole, euen that same
houre.
23 And when Iesus came into the rulers house, and sawe the minstrels and the
people raginge,
24 he sayde vnto them: Get you hece, for ye mayde is not deed, but slepeth. And
they laughed hym to scorne.
25 But whan the people were put forth, he went in, and toke her by the honde,
and the mayde arose.
26 And this was noysed through out all that londe.
27 And as Iesus departed thence, two blynde me folowed hym, cryinge and sayinge:
O thou sonne of Dauid, haue mercy vpon vs.
28 And when he was come home, the blynde came to hym, And Iesus sayde vnto them
Beleue ye, that I am able to do thys? And they sayde vnto hym: yee, LORDE.
29 Then touched he their eyes, sayinge: acordinge to youre fayth, be it vnto
you.
30 And their eyes were opened. And Iesus charged the, sayinge: Se that no ma
knowe of it.
31 But they departed, & spred abroade his name through out all the londe.
32 Whan these were gone out, beholde, they brought to hym a domme man possessed
of a deuyll.
33 And whan the deuyl was cast out, the domme spake: And the people merueled
sayinge: it was neuer so sene in Israel.
34 But ye Pharises sayde: he casteth out deuyls, thorow the chefe deuyll.
35 And Iesus wente aboute in all cities and townes, teachinge in their synagoges
& preachyng ye gospel of ye kyngdome, & healinge all maner sicknes & all maner
desease amoge the people.
36 And when he sawe the people, he had compassion on the, because they were
pyned awaye, and scattered abroade, euen as shepe hauinge no shepherd,
37 Then sayde he to hys disciples: ye heruest is greate, but ye laborers are
fewe.
38 Wherfore praye the LORDE of the haruest, to sende forth laborers into hys
haruest.

Chapter 10

1 And he called his xii. disciples vnto hym, & gaue them power ouer vncleane
spretes, to cast them out, & to heale all maner of sicknesses, and all maner of
deseases.
2 The names of the xii. Apostels are these: The fyrst, Simon called Peter: &
Andrew his brother.Iames the sonne of Zebede, and Ihon his brother.
3 Philip and Bartlemew. Thomas, and Mathew the Publican. Iames the sonne of
Alphe, and Lebbeus otherwyse called Taddeus.
4 Simon of Cane, and Iudas Iscarioth, which also betrayed hym.
5 These twolue sent Iesus, and commaunded them, sayinge: Go not in to the wayes
yt leade to the Heithen, and in to the cities of the Samaritas enter ye not.
6 But go rather to the lost shepe of the housse of Israel.
7 Go and preach, sayinge: The kyngdome of heue is at hande.
8 Heale the sicke, clense the lepers rayse the deed, cast out the deuils. Frely
ye haue receaued, frely geue againe.
9 Posses not golde, nor siluer, nor brasse yn youre gerdels,
10 nor yet scrip towardes your iorney: nether two cotes, nether shues, nor yet a
staffe. For the workman is worthy of his meate.
11 In to whatsoeuer cite or towne ye shall come, enquyre in it, who is mete for
you, and there abyde, tyll ye go thence.
12 And whe ye come in to an house, salute ye same.
13 And yf the housse be mete for you, yor peace shal come vpo it. But yf it be
not mete for you, yor peace shal turne to you againe.
14 And yf no man wil receaue you, ner heare youre preachinge, departe out of
that house or that cite, and shake the dust of youre fete.
15 Truly I saye vnto you: it shall be easyer for ye londe of Sodoma and Gomorra
in ye daye of iudgment, then for that cite.
16 Beholde, I sende you forth as shepe amoge wolues. Be ye therfore wyse as
serpentes, and innocent as doues.
17 Beware of men, for they shall deliuer you vp to the cousels, and shal scourge
you in their synagoges.
18 And ye shall be brought before prynces and kynges for my sake, in witnes to
them and to the gentyls.
19 But when they delyuer you vp, take no thought how or what ye shall speake,
for yt shalbe geuen you, euen in that same houre, what ye shall saye.
20 For it is not ye that speake, but the sprete of your father which speaketh in
you.
21 The brother shall delyuer the brother to deeth, and the father the sonne. And
the chyldren shall aryse agaynst their fathers & mothers, & shall helpe them to
deeth:
22 & ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake. But he yt endureth to the
ende, shalbe saued.
23 When they persecute you in one cite, flye in to another. I tell you for a
treuth, ye shall not fynysshe all the cities of Israel, tyll the sonne of man
come.
24 The disciple is not aboue the master, nether the seruaunt aboue the LORDE.
25 It is ynough for the disciple, to be as his master, and the seruaunt as his
LORDE. Yf they haue called the good ma of the house Beelzebub, how moch more
shal they call them of his housholde so?
26 Feare them not therfore.There is nothinge hyd, that shal not be openly
shewed: and nothinge secrete, that shall not be knowne.
27 What I tell you in darcknes, that speake ye in light: and what ye heare in
the eare, that preach ye vpon the house toppes.
28 And feare ye not them that kyll the body, and be not able to kyll the soule.
But rather feare hi, which is able to destroye both soule and body in to hell.
29 Are not two sparowes solde for a farthinge? Yet doth there none of the light
vpon the groude without youre father.
30 And now are all ye hayres of youre heade tolde.
31 Feare ye not therfore: ye are of more value then many sparowes.
32 Therfore whosoeuer knowlegeth me before me, him wil I knowlege also before my
father which is in heauen.
33 But who soeuer denyeth me before me, him wil I also denie before my father
which is in heauen.
34 Thynke not that I am come to sende peace vpon earth. I came not to sende
peace, but a swerde.
35 For I am come to set a ma at variaunce ageynst his father, and the doughter
ageynst hir mother, & the doughter in lawe ageynst her mother in lawe:
36 and a mans foes shalbe they of his owne housholde.
37 Who so loueth father and mother more then me, is not mete for me: and he that
loueth sonne or doughter more then me, is not mete for me.
38 And he yt taketh not his crosse and foloweth me, is not mete for me.
39 Who so fyndeth his life, shal lose it: and he that loseth his life for my
sake, shal fynde it.
40 He that receaueth you, receaueth me: & who so receaueth me, receaueth him yt
sent me.
41 He that receaueth a prophet in the name of a prophet, shal receaue a
prophetes rewarde. He yt receaueth a righteous man in the name of a righteous
man, shal receane a righteous mans rewarde:
42 And who soeuer geueth vnto one of the least of these a cupp of colde water
onely to drinke, in ye name of a disciple, verely I saie vnto you: he shal not
lose his rewarde.

Chapter 11

1 And it came to passe, wha Iesus had made an ende of comaundinge his twolue
disciples, he departed thence. to teach and to preach in their cities.
2 Whan Ihon beinge in preson herde of the workes of Christ, he sent two of his
disciples,
3 and sayde vnto him: Art thou he yt shal come, or shal we loke for another?
4 Iesus answered and sayde vnto the: Go youre waye and tell Ihon agayne, what ye
se and heare.
5 The blynde se, and the lame go: the lepers are clensed, and ye deaf heare: the
deed aryse ageyne, and the gospell is preached to the poore:
6 and blessed is he, that is not offended at me.
7 Whan they wente their waye, Iesus beganne to speake vnto the people,
concernynge Ihon: What are ye gone out for to se in the wyldernes? Wolde ye se a
rede shaken with the wynde?
8 Or what are ye gone out for to se? Wolde ye se a man clothed in soft rayment?
Beholde, they that weare soft clothinge, are in kinges houses,
9 But what are ye gone out for to se? A prophet? Yee I saye vnto you, and more
the a prophet.
10 For this is he, of who it is written: Beholde, I sende my messauger before
thy face, which shal prepare thy waye before the.
11 Verely I saye vnto you: Amonge ye children of wemen arose there not a greater
then Ihon the baptist. Not withstondinge he that is lesse in the kyngdome of
Heauen, is greater then he.
12 From the tyme of Ihon baptist hither to, ye kyngdome of heauen suffreth
violence, and the violent plucke it vnto them.
13 For all the prophetes and the lawe prophecied vnto Ihon.
14 Also yf ye wil receaue it, this is Helias, which shulde come.
15 Who so hath eares to heare, let hi heare.
16 But where vnto shal I licke this generacion? It is like vnto childre which
syt in the market, and call vnto their felowes,
17 & saye: we haue pyped vnto you, and ye wolde not daunse: We haue morned vnto
you, & ye wolde not wepe.
18 For Ihon came nether eatinge nor drynkinge, & they saye: he hath the deuyll.
19 The sonne of man came eatinge and drynkinge, & they saye: lo what a glutton
and wyne bebber this ma is, and a companyon of publicans & synners? And wissdome
is iustified of hir children.
20 Then beganne he to vpbrade the cities, in the which most of his miracles were
done, because they amended not.
21 Wo vnto the Chorasin, Wo vnto the Bethsaida: for yf the miracles which haue
bene shewed amoge you, had bene done in Tyre and Sidon, they had repented longe
agoo in sack cloth and asshes.
22 Neuertheles I saye vnto you: It shalbe easyer for Tyre and Sidon in the daye
of iudgment, then for you.
23 And thou Capernaum which art lift vp vnto heauen, shalt be brought downe vnto
hel. For yf the miracles which haue bene done in the, had bene shewed in Sodom,
they had remained vnto this daye.
24 Neuertheles I saye vnto you: It shalbe easyer for the londe of Sodome in the
daye of iudgment, the for the.
25 At ye same tyme Iesus answered, and sayde: I prayse the (O father and LORDE
of heauen and earth) that thou hast hid these thinges from the wyse and prudent,
and opened the vnto babes.
26 Euen so father, for so it pleased the.
27 All thinges are geuen ouer vnto me of my father: and no ma knoweth the sonne,
but the father: nether knoweth eny man the father, saue the sonne, and he to
whom the sonne wil open it.
28 Come vnto me all ye that laboure and are laden, and I wil ease you.
29 Take my yock vpon you, and lerne of me, for I am meke and lowlye of hert, &
ye shal fynde rest vnto youre soules:
30 for my yock is easy, and my burden is light.

Chapter 12

1 At the same tyme wete Iesus thorow the corne vpon the Sabbath, and his
disciples were hongrie, and beganne to plucke of the eares of the corne, and to
eate.
2 When ye Pharises sawe that, they sayde vnto him: Beholde, thy disciples do
that, which is not laufull to do vpon the Sabbath.
3 He sayde vnto them: haue ye not red what Dauid did, whan he was hongrie, &
they also yt were with him?
4 How he entred in to the house of God, & ate the shew breds which were not
laufull for him to eate, nether for the yt were with him, but onely for the
prestes?
5 Or haue ye not red in the lawe how that the prestes in the temple breake the
Sabbath, and yet are blamelesse?
6 But I saye vnto you: yt here is one greater then the temple.
7 But yf ye wyst what this were (I haue pleasure in mercy, and not in offeringe)
ye wolde not haue condemned innocentes:
8 For the sonne of man is LORDE euen ouer the Sabbath.
9 And he departed thence, and wente in to their synagoge:
10 and beholde, there was a ma which had his hade dryed vp. And they axed him,
sayenge: Is it laufull to heale, vpon the Sabbath? because they might accuse
him.
11 But he sayde vnto the: Which of you is it, yf he had a shepe falle in to a
pytte vpon the Sabbath, that wolde not take him, and lift him out?
12 And how moch is a man better then a shepe? Therfore it is lefull to do good
vpon the Sabbath.
13 Then sayde he to the ma: Stretch forth thine hande. And he stretched it
forth: and it was whole agayne like vnto the other.
14 Then wente the Pharises out, and helde a councell agaynst him, how they might
destroye him.
15 But wha Iesus knew therof, he departed thence, & moch people folowed him: and
he healed them all,
16 and charged them, yt they shulde not make him knowne:
17 that the thinge might be fulfylled, which was spoken by Esay the prophet,
which sayeth:
18 Beholde, this is my seruaunt, whom I haue chosen: and my beloued, in whom my
soule delyteth: I wil put my sprete vpon hi, and he shal shewe iudgment vnto the
Heithe.
19 He shal not stryue, ner crye, nether shal eny man heare his voyce in the
stretes.
20 A brosed rede shal he not breake, and flax that beginneth to burne shal he
not quench, tyll he sende forth iudgment vnto victory.
21 And in his name shal the Heithen trust.
22 Then was there brought vnto him one possessed (of a deuell) the which was
blynde and domne, and he healed him: in so moch yt ye blynde and domne both
spake and sawe.
23 And all the people were amased, and sayde: Is not this the sonne of Dauid?
24 But whan the Pharises herde that, they sayde: He dryueth the deuyls out none
other wyse, but thorow Beelzebub the chefe of the deuyls.
25 Neuertheles Iesus knew their thoughtes, and sayde vnto them: Euery kyngdome
deuyded within it self, shalbe desolate: and euery cite or house deuyded in it
self, maye not contynue.
26 So yf one Sathan cast out another, the is he at variaunce within him self:
how maye then his kyngdome endure?
27 But yf I cast out deuils thorow Beelzebub, thorow whom do youre childre cast
them out? Therfore shal they be youre iudges.
28 But yf I cast out the deuyls by the sprete of God then is the kyngdome of God
come vpon you.
29 Or how ca a man entre in to a stronge mans house, and violently take awaye
his goodes, excepte he first bynde the stronge ma, & the spoyle his house?
30 He that is not wt me, is agaynst me: & he yt gathereth not wt me, scatereth
abrode.
31 Therfore I saye vnto you: All synne and blasphemy shalbe forgeuen vnto men,
but the blasphemy agaynst the sprete shal not be forgeuen vnto men:
32 And whosoeuer speaketh a worde agaynst the sonne of man, it shalbe forgeue
him. But whosoeuer speaketh agaynst the holy goost it shal not be forgeuen him,
nether in this worlde, ner in the worlde to come.
33 Either make the tre good and his frute good also, or els make the tre euel &
his frute euel also. For the tre is knowne by the frute.
34 O ye generacio of vypers, how can ye speake good, whan ye youre selues are
euell? For of ye abundace of ye hert ye mouth speaketh.
35 A good man out of the good treasure of his hert, bringeth forth good thinges:
& an euel man out of his euell treasure, bringeth forth euell thinges.
36 But I saye vnto you, that of euery ydell worde that me haue spoken, they shal
geue accomptes at ye daye of iudgmet.
37 Out of thy wordes thou shalt be iustified, & out of thy wordes thou shalt be
codemned.
38 Then answered certayne of the scrybes and Pharises, and sayde: Master, we
wolde fayne se a toke of the.
39 And he answered and saide vnto the: This euell and aduouterous generacion
seketh a token: and there shal no token be geuen the, but the token of the
prophete Ionas.
40 For as Ionas was thre dayes and thre nightes in the Whalles bely, so shal the
sonne of ma be thre dayes and thre nightes in the hert of the earth.
41 The men of Ninyue shal ryse in the last iudgment with this generacion, and
shal condemne it: for they dyd penaunce acordinge to ye preachinge of Ionas. And
beholde, here is one greater the Ionas.
42 The quene of the south shal aryse in the last iudgmet with this generacion,
and shal condene it: for she came from the vttemost partes of the earth, to
heare ye wyssdome of Salomon: And lo, here is one greater then Salomon.
43 Whan the vncleane sprete is gone out of man, he walketh thorow dry places,
sekinge rest, & fyndeth none.
44 The saieth he: I wil turne agayne in to my house, fro whence I wete out. And
whan he cometh, he fyndeth it emptye, swepte and garnyshed.
45 Then goeth he his waye, & taketh vnto him seuen other spretes worse then him
self: and whan they are entred in, they dwell there: And the ende of that man is
worse then the begynnynge. Euen so shal it go wt this euell generacion.
46 Whyle he yet talked vnto the people, beholde, his mother & his brethre stode
without desyringe to speake wt him.
47 Then sayde one vnto him: Beholde, thy mother and thy brethren stonde without,
& wolde speake wt the.
48 Neuertheles he answered & sayde vnto him that tolde him: Who is my mother? &
who are my brethren?
49 And he stretched forth his hande ouer his disciples, & sayde: Beholde my
mother and my brethre.
50 For who soeuer doth ye wyll of my father which is in heaue, the same is my
brother, sister and mother.

Chapter 13

1 The same daye wente Iesus out of ye house, and sat by the see syde,
2 & moch people resorted vnto him: so yt he wete in to a shyppe and satt him
downe, and all the people stode vpo the shore.
3 And he spake many thinges vnto the in symilitudes, sayenge: Beholde, The sower
wente forth to sowe:
4 and as he sowed, some fell by the waye syde: Then came the foules, & ate it
vp.
5 Some fell vpon stony grounde, & anone it spronge vp, because it had no depth
of earth:
6 But whan the Sonne arose, it caught heate: and for so moch as it had no rote,
it withred awaye.
7 Some fell amoge the thornes, & the thornes grewe vp, and choked it.
8 Some fell vpo good groude, & gaue frute: some an hundreth folde, some sixtie
folde, some thirtie folde.
9 Who so hath eares to heare, let hi heare.
10 And the disciples came vnto him, and sayde: Why speakest thou to the by
parables?
11 He answered and sayde vnto the: Vnto you it is geuen to knowe the mystery of
the kingdome of heauen, but vnto them it is not geuen.
12 For whoso hath, vnto him shal be geue, and he shal haue abundaunce. But who
so hath not, from him shalbe taken awaye, eue that he hath.
13 Therfore speake I vnto the by parables, for with seynge eyes they se not, &
with hearinge eares they heare not, for they vnderstonde it not.
14 And in them is fulfilled ye prophecie of Esay, which sayeth: Ye shal heare in
dede, and shal not vnderstonde: and with seinge eyes shal ye se, and not
perceaue.
15 For ye hert of this people is waxed grosse, & their eares are thick of
hearige, & their eyes haue they closed, lest they shulde once se wt ye eyes, &
heare wt the eares, & vnderstode wt the hert, & turne, that I might heale them.
16 But blessed are youre eyes, for they se: & youre eares, for they heare.
17 Verely I saye vnto you: Many prophetes & righteous men haue desyred to se ye
thinges that ye se, and haue not sene the: and to heare the thinges that ye
heare, and haue not herde the.
18 Heare ye therfore the parable of the sower.
19 Whan one heareth ye worde of the kyngdome, and vnderstondeth it not, the
euell man cometh, and plucketh it awaye that is sowne in his hert: & this is he
yt is sowne by the waye syde.
20 But he yt is sowne in the stonye grounde, is this: wha one heareth the worde,
& anone with ioye receaueth it:
21 neuertheles he hath no rote i him, but endureth for a season: wha trouble &
persecucion aryseth because of the worde, immediatly he his offended.
22 As for him that is sowne amonge ye thornes, this is he: Wha one heareth the
worde, & the carefulnes of this worlde, & the disceatfulnes of riches choke the
worde, & so he becometh vnfrutefull.
23 But he yt is sowne in the good grounde, is this: whan one heareth the worde,
and vnderstondeth it, and bringeth forth frute: and some geueth an hudreth
folde, some sixtie folde, and some thirtie folde.
24 Another parable put he forth vnto the, & sayde: The kyngdome of heaue is like
vnto a man, yt sowed good sede in his felde.
25 But whyle me slepte, there came an enemye, and sowed tares amonge ye wheate,
& wente his waye.
26 Now wha the blade was sproge vp & brought forth frute, the ye tares appeared
also.
27 Then came the seruautes to ye housholder, & sayde vnto him: Syr, sowdest not
thou good sede in yi felde? Fro whece the hath it tares?
28 He sayde vnto the: that hath the enemye done. The sayde ye seruautes: wilt
thou then yt we go & wede the out?
29 He sayde: No, lest whyle ye wede out ye tares, ye plucke vp the wheate also
wt the.
30 Let the both growe together tyll the haruest, and in tyme of haruest I wil
saye vnto the reapers: Gather ye tares first, & bynde the in sheeues to be bret:
but gather the wheate in to my barne.
31 Another parable put he forth vnto the, and sayde: The kyngdome of heauen is
like vnto a grane of mustarde sede, which a man toke, and sowed it in his felde.
32 Which is the leest amonge all sedes. But whan it is growne, it is the
greatest amonge herbes, and is a tre: so that the byrdes vnder the heauen come
and dwell in the braunches of it.
33 Another parable spake he vnto the: The kyngdome of heaue is like vnto leue,
which a woman toke, and myxte it amonge thre peckes of meele, tyll all was
leuended.
34 All soch thinges spake Iesus vnto ye people by parables, & without parables
spake he nothinge vnto the:
35 yt the thinge might be fulfilled, which was spoke by ye prophet, sayenge: I
wil open my mouth in parables, and wil speake out the secretes from the
begynnynge of the worlde.
36 Then sent Iesus the people awaye, and came home. And his disciples came vnto
hi, and sayde: Declare vnto us ye parable of ye tares of ye felde.
37 Iesus answered, and sayde vnto them: He that soweth the good sede, is the
sonne of man:
38 the felde is the worlde: ye good sede are the childre of the kyngdome: The
tares are the children of wickednes:
39 ye enemye that soweth the, is the deuell: ye haruest is the ende of the
worlde: ye reapers are ye angels.
40 For like as ye tares are weded out, and brent in the fyre, eue so shal it go
in ye ende of this worlde.
41 The sonne of man shal sende forth his angels, & they shal gather out of his
kingdome all thinges yt offende, & the yt do iniquyte,
42 & shal cast the in to a fornace of fyre, there shalbe waylinge and gnasshinge
of teth.
43 The shal the righteous shyne as the Sonne, in the kyngdome of their father.
Who so hath eares to heare, let him heare.
44 Agayne, the kingdome of heauen is like vnto a treasure hyd in the felde,
which a ma founde and hid it, and for ioye therof he wete & solde all yt he had,
and bought yt felde.
45 Agayne, the kyngdome of heauen is like vnto a marchaut, yt sought good
pearles:
46 & wha he had founde a precious pearle, he wete and solde all that he had, &
bought it.
47 Agayne, ye kyngdome of heaue is like vnto a nett cast in to ye see, wherwith
are take all maner of fyshes:
48 & wha it is ful, me drawe it out vnto ye shore, & sytt & gather ye good i to
the vessels, but cast the bad awaye.
49 So shal it be also in ye ende of ye worlde. The angels shal go out, & seuer
the bad fro the righteous,
50 & shal cast the in to a fornace of fyre, there shalbe waylinge & gnasshinge
of teth.
51 And Iesus sayde vnto them: Haue ye vnderstode all these thinges? They sayde:
Yee LORDE.
52 Then sayde he vnto the: Therfore euery scribe taught vnto ye kingdome of
heauen, is like an houssholder, which bryngeth out of his treasure thinges new
and olde.
53 And it came to passe wha Iesus had ended these parables, he departed thence,
54 and came in to his owne coutre, and taught the in their synagoges: in so
moch, that they were astonnyed and sayde: Whece cometh soch wyssdome & power
vnto him?
55 Is not this the carpeters sonne? Is not his mother called Mary? and his
brethre Iames & Ioses, and Symon and Iude?
56 And are not all his sisters here with us? Whence hath he the all these
thinges?
57 And they were offended at him. But Iesus sayde vnto the: A prophet is nowhere
lesse sett by, the at home & amonge his owne.
58 And he dyd not many miracles there, because of their vnbeleue.

Chapter 14

1 At that tyme Herode ye Tetrarcha herde of ye fame of Iesu,
2 & sayde vnto his seruautes: This is Iho ye baptist. He is rysen agayne fro the
deed, therfore are his dedes so mightie.
3 For Herode had take Iho bounde hi, & put him in preson for Herodias sake his
brothers Philips wife.
4 For Ihon sayde vnto him: It is not laufull for ye to haue her.
5 And fayne wolde he haue put him to death, but he feared the people, because
they helde him for a Prophet.
6 But whan Herode helde his byrth daye, the doughter of Herodias daunsed before
the, and that pleased Herode well,
7 wherfore he promysed her with an ooth, yt he wolde geue her, what soeuer she
wolde axe.
8 And she (beynge instructe of hir mother afore) sayde: geue me Ihon baptistes
heade in a platter.
9 And the kynge was sory. Neuertheles for ye ooth sake, & the yt sat with him at
ye table, he comaunded it to be geuen her,
10 and sent, & beheeded Ihon in the preson.
11 And his heed was brought in a platter, and geuen to the damsell, & she
brought it vnto her mother.
12 Then came his disciples, and toke his body, and buried it, and wente and
tolde Iesus.
13 Whan Iesus hetde yt, he departed thence by shippe in to a desert place alone.
And wha the people herde therof, they folowed him on fote out of ye cities.
14 And Iesus wete forth, and sawe moch people, and had pytie vpon them, and
healed their sicke.
15 But at euen his disciples came vnto him, & saide: This is a deserte place,
and ye night falleth on: let ye people departe from the, that they maye go in to
the townes, and bye them vytayles.
16 But Iesus sayde vnto them: They nede not go awaye, geue ye the to eate.
17 The saide they vnto him: We haue here but fyue loaues and two fyshes.
18 And he sayde: bringe the hither.
19 And he comaunded ye people to syt downe vpon the grasse, and toke ye fyue
loaues and two fisshes, and loked vp towarde heauen, and gaue thankes, and brake
and gaue the loaues vnto the disciples, and the disciples gaue them to the
people.
20 And they all ate, and were suffised. And they gathered vp of the broken meate
that remayned ouer, twolue basskettes full.
21 And they yt ate, were aboute a fyue thousande men, besyde wemen and children.
22 And straight waye Iesus made his disciples to entre in to a shippe, & to go
ouer before hi, tyll he had sent ye people awaye.
23 And whan he had sent the people awaye, he wete vp in to a mountayne alone, to
make his prayer. And at euen he was there him self alone.
24 And ye shippe was allready in ye myddest of the see, & was tost wt wawes, for
the winde was cotrary.
25 But in ye fourth watch of ye night Iesus came vnto the, walkinge vpon the
see.
26 And whan his disciples sawe him goinge vpon the see, they were afrayed,
sayenge: It is some sprete, and cried out for feare.
27 But straight waye Iesus spake vnto them, and sayde: Be of good cheare, it is
I, be not afrayed.
28 Peter answered him, & saide: LORDE, yf it be thou, byd me come vnto the vpon
ye water.
29 And he sayde: come on yi waye. And Peter stepte out of the shippe, & wete
vpon the water, to come vnto Iesus.
30 But whan he sawe a mightie wynde, he was afrayed, & begane to synke, & cried,
sayenge: LORDE, helpe me.
31 And imediatly Iesus stretched forth his hande, & caught him, & sayde vnto
him: O thou of litle faith, wherfore doutest thou?
32 And they wente in to the shippe, & the wynde ceased.
33 Then they that were in ye shippe, came & fell downe before him, & sayde: Of a
trueth thou art ye sonne of God.
34 And they shipped ouer, & came in to the lode of Genazereth.
35 And wha ye me of yt place had knowlege of hi, they sent out in to all that
coutre rounde aboute, & brought vnto him all that were sicke,
36 & besought him, that they might but touch the hemme of his vesture onely: &
as many as touched it, were made whole.

Chapter 15

1 Then came vnto him the scribes and pharises from Ierusalem, sayenge:
2 Why do thy disciples transgresse ye tradicions of the elders? for they wash
not their hodes whan they eate bred.
3 He answered & sayde vnto the: Why do ye transgresse the comaundemet of God,
because of youre owne tradicios?
4 For God comaunded, sayege: Honoure father & mother: & he yt curseth father &
mother, shal dye the death.
5 But ye saye: Euery man shal saye to father or mother: The thige yt I shulde
helpe ye withal, is geue vnto God.
6 By this is it come to passe, that no man honoureth his father or his mother
eny more. And thus haue ye made the comaundement of God of none effecte, for
youre owne tradicios.
7 Ye ypocrites, full well hath Esaye prophecied of you, & sayde:
8 This people draweth nye vnto me wt their mouth, & honoureth me wt their
lippes, howbeit, their hert is farre fro me.
9 But in vayne do they serue me, whyle they teach soch doctrynes as are nothinge
but the commaundementes of men.
10 And he called ye people to hi, & saide vnto the: Heare & vnderstode:
11 That which goeth in to the mouth, defyleth not the ma: but yt which cometh
out of the mouth, defyleth ye ma.
12 Then came his disciples, & sayde vnto him: knowest thou yt the Pharises were
offended, whan they herde this sayenge?
13 He answered, and sayde: All plantes which my heauenly father hath not
planted, shal be pluckte vp by ye rotes.
14 Let the go, they are ye blynde leaders of ye blynde. Wha one blinde leadeth
another, they fall both i ye diche.
15 Then answered Peter & sayde vnto him: Declare vnto us this parable.
16 And Iesus sayde vnto the: Are ye yet the without vnderstondinge?
17 Perceaue ye not, yt what soeuer goeth in at ye mouth, descedeth downe in to
ye bely, & is cast out into the draught?
18 But the thinge that proceadeth out of the mouth, cometh fro ye hert, & that
defyleth ye ma.
19 For out of ye hert come euell thoughtes murthur, breakynge of wedlocke,
whordome theft, false witnesse, blasphemy.
20 These are ye thinges that defyle a man. But to eate wt vnwasshen hondes,
defyleth not a man.
21 And Iesus wente out from thence, & departed in to the coastes of Tyre of
Sidon.
22 And beholde, a woma of Canaan wete out of ye same coastes, & cried after him,
sayege: O LORDE, thou sonne of Dauid, haue mercy vpon me. My doughter is sore
vexed wt a deuell.
23 And he answered her neuer a worde. The came his disciples vnto him, &
besought him, sayege: Sede her awaye, for she crieth after us.
24 But he answered, & saide: I am not sent, but vnto the lost shepe of the house
of Israel.
25 Notwithstondinge she came & fell downe before him, & sayde: LORDE, helpe me.
26 He answered & sayde: It is not good, to take the childrens bred, & to cast it
vnto dogges.
27 It is trueth LORDE (sayde she) Neuertheles the whelpes eate of the crommes,
that fall fro their lordes table.
28 Then answered Iesus & sayde vnto her: O woma, greate is yi faith be it vnto
the, eue as thou desyrest. And hir doughter was made hole at ye same houre.
29 And Iesus departed thece, and came nye vnto the see of Galile, and wente vp
in to a mountayne, and sat downe there,
30 And there came vnto him moch people, hauinge with them, lame, blynde, dome,
crepell, and other many, and cast them downe at Iesus fete. And he healed the,
31 in so moch that the people wodred, to se the dome speake, the crepell whole,
the halt to go, & the blynde to se. And they praysed the God of Israel.
32 And Iesus called his disciples vnto him, & sayde: I haue copassion vpon the
people, for they haue cotynued wt me now thre dayes, & haue nothinge to eate, &
I wil not let the departe fastynge, lest they perishe in ye waye.
33 And his disciples sayde vnto him: Whence shulde we get so moch bred in the
wyldernes, that we might satissfie so moch people?
34 And Iesus sayde vnto the: How many loaues haue ye? They sayde: seue, & a few
litle fyshes.
35 And he comaunded ye people to syt downe vpo the grounde,
36 and toke ye seue loaues, & the fyshes, & gaue thankes & brake the, & gaue the
to his disciples, & ye disciples gaue the vnto the people.
37 And they all ate, & were suffised. And they toke vp of the broke meate yt was
left, seuen basskettes full.
38 And they yt ate, were foure thousande me, besyde wemen and children.
39 And whan he had sent awaye the people, he wente in to a shippe, & came in to
the parties of Magdala.

Chapter 16

1 Then came the Pharises & Saduces vnto him, & tepted him, requyringe him to
shewe the a toke from heaue.
2 But he answered, & sayde: At eue ye saye: It wil be fayre wedder. for ye sskye
is reed.
3 And in ye mornynge, ye saye: It wil be foule wedder to daye, for the sskye is
reed, & gloometh. O ye ypocrytes, ye can discerne the fashion of ye sskye: can
ye not the discerne the tokes of these tymes also?
4 This euell and aduouterous generacio seketh a toke, & there shal no toke be
geue the, but the toke of ye prophet Ionas. So he left the, and departed.
5 And wha his disciples were come to the other syde of the water, they had
forgotten to take bred wt them.
6 Iesus sayde vnto the: Take hede & bewarre of the leue of ye Pharises & of the
Saduces.
7 The thought they in the selues, sayege: We haue take no bred wt us.
8 Whe Iesus perceaued yt, he sayde to the: O ye of litle faith, why are ye
combred (in yor mindes (because ye haue take no bred wt you?
9 Do ye not yet perceaue? Remembre ye not those fyue loaues, whe there were fyue
thousande me, and how many basskettes toke ye vp?
10 Nether ye seue loaues whan there were foure thousande men, & how many
baskettes toke ye vp?
11 Why perceaue ye not then, yt I spake not to you of bred, whe I saide: bewarre
of ye leue of ye Pharises & of ye Saduces?
12 The vnderstode they, how yt he had not the bewarre of the leue of bred, but
of ye doctryne of the Pharises and of the Saduces.
13 Then came Iesus into the coastes of the cite Cesarea Philippi, & axed his
disciples & saide: Who do me saie, yt ye sonne of ma is?
14 They sayde: Some saye, yt thou art Iho the baptist, Some yt thou art Elias,
Some yt thou art Ieremy, or one of ye prophetes.
15 He saide to the: But who saye ye yt I am.
16 The answered Symo Peter and saide: Thou art Christ ye sonne of ye lyuinge
God.
17 And Iesus answered, & saide vnto hi: Blessed art thou Symo ye sonne of Ionas,
for flesh & bloude hath not opened yt vnto the, but my father yt is in heaue.
18 And I saie to ye: Thou art Peter, & vpo this rocke wil I builde my
cogregacion: and ye gates of hell shal not preuayle agaynst it.
19 And the keyes of heauen wil I geue vnto the: Whatsoeuer thou shalt bynde vpon
earth, shalbe bounde also in heauen: & whatsoeuer thou shalt lowse vpon earth,
shalbe lowsed also in heaue.
20 Then charged he his disciples, that they shulde tell no ma that he was Iesus
Christ.
21 From that tyme forth beganne Iesus to shew vnto his disciples, how that he
must go vnto Ierusale, and suffre many thinges of the elders, and of the hye
prestes, and of the scrybes, and be put to death, and ryse againe the thirde
daye.
22 But Peter toke him asyde, and beganne to rebuke him, sayenge: LORDE, fauoure
thy self, let not this happen vnto the.
23 Neuertheles he turned him aboute, & sayde vnto Peter: Auoyde fro me Satha,
thou hindrest me, for thou sauourest not ye thinges that be of God, but of men.
24 Then sayde Iesus vnto his disciples: Yf eny man wil folowe me, let him
forsake himself, & take vp his crosse, and folowe me.
25 For who so wil saue his life, shal lose it: but whoso loseth his life for my
sake, shal fynde it.
26 What helpeth it a man though he wanne the whole worlde, and yet suffred harme
in his soule? Or what can a man geue, to redeme his soule withall?
27 For it wil come to passe, that the sonne of ma shal come in the glory of his
father with his angels, and then shal he rewarde euery one acordinge to his
dedes.
28 Verely I saye vnto you: there stonde here some, which shal not taist of
death, tyll they se ye sonne of ma come in his kingdome.

Chapter 17

1 And after sixe dayes Iesus toke Peter Iames, and Ihon his brother, and brought
them vp in to an hye mountayne out of the waye,
2 and was transfigured before the: & his face shone as ye Sonne, and his clothes
were as white as the light.
3 And beholde, there appeared vnto the Moses and Elias talkinge with him.
4 Then answered Peter, and sayde vnto Iesus: LORDE, here is good beynge for us.
Yf thou wilt, let us make here thre tabernacles: one for the, one for Moses, and
one for Elias.
5 Whyle he yet spake, beholde, a bright cloude ouershadowed them: and lo, there
came a voyce out of the cloude, saienge: This is my deare sonne, in whom I
delyte, heare him.
6 Whan ye disciples herde that, they fell vpon their faces, and were sore
afrayed.
7 But Iesus came and touched them, and sayde: Aryse, and be not afrayed.
8 And whan they loked vp, they sawe no man, but Iesus onely.
9 And wha they came downe fro ye mountayne, Iesus charged them, and sayde: Tell
no man of this vision, tyll the sonne of man be rysen agayne from ye deed.
10 And his disciples axed him, and sayde: Why saye the scrybes then, that Elias
must first come?
11 Iesus answered and sayde vnto them: Elias shall come first in dede, and
bringe all thinges to right agayne.
12 But I saye vnto you: Elias is come all ready, & they knewe him not, but haue
done vnto him what they wolde. Eue so shal also the sonne of man suffre of them.
13 Then the disciples perceaued, that he spake vnto them of Ihon the baptist.
14 And whan they were come to the people, there came vnto him a certayne man,
and kneled vnto him, and sayde:
15 LORDE, haue mercy vpon my sonne, for he is lunatike, & sore vexed. He falleth
oft tymes in to ye fyre, and oft in to ye water:
16 and I brought him vnto thy disciples, and they coude not heale him.
17 Iesus answered, and sayde: O thou faithles and frowarde generacion, how longe
shal I be with you? How longe shal I suffre you? Bringe him hither to me.
18 And Iesus rebuked him, and ye deuyll wete out of him, and ye childe was
healed, euen that same houre.
19 Then came the disciples vnto Iesus secretly, & sayde: Why coude not we cast
him out?
20 Iesus sayde vnto them: Because of youre vnbeleue. For I saye verely vnto you?
Yf ye haue faith as a grane of mustarde sede, ye maye saye vnto this mountayne:
Remoue hence to yonder place, and he shal remoue, nether shal enythinge be
vnpossible vnto you.
21 How beit this kinde goeth not out, but by prayer and fastynge.
22 Whyle they occupied in Galile, Iesus sayde vnto them: it wil come to passe,
that the sonne of man shalbe delyuered in to the hondes of men,
23 and they shal kyll him, and the thirde daye shal he aryse agayne. And they
were very sory.
24 Now wha they were come to Capernaum, they that receaued ye tribute money,
came to Peter, and sayde: Doth youre master paye tribute?
25 He sayed: yee. And when he was come home, Iesus preuented him, and sayde:
What thinkest thou Symon? Of whom do the kynges of the earth take toll or
tribute? Of their children, or of straungers?
26 Then sayde Peter to him: Of straungers. Iesus sayde vnto him: Then are ye
children fre.
27 Neuertheles lest we offende them, go thy waye to the see, and cast thine
angle, and take the fysh that first cometh vp, and whan thou hast opened his
mouth, thou shalt fynde a pece of twenty pens, take that, and geue it them for
me and the.

Chapter 18

1 At the same tyme came the disciples vnto Iesus, and sayde: Who is the greatest
in the kyngdome of heauen?
2 And Iesus called a childe vnto him, and set him in the myddest amonge them,
3 and sayde: Verely I saye vnto you: Excepte ye turne and become as children, ye
shal not entre into the kyngdome of heauen.
4 Whosoeuer therfore humbleth him self as this childe, ye same is the greatest
in ye kyngdome of heauen.
5 And who so receaueth soch a childe in my name, receaueth me.
6 But who so offendeth one of these litle ones which beleue in me, it were
better for him, that a mylstone were hanged aboute his neck, and he drowned in
the depth of the see.
7 Wo vnto the worlde because of slauders. Yee there must slaunders come: but wo
vnto that man, by whom slaunder commeth.
8 But yf thy hande or thy fote offende the, cut him of, and cast him from the.
It is better for ye to entre in vnto life lame or crepell, the yt thou shuldest
haue two hodes or two fete, and be cast in to euerlastinge fyre.
9 And yf thyne eye offende the, plucke it out, & cast it from the. Better it is
for the to entre in vnto life with one eye, the to haue two eyes, and to be cast
in to hell fyre.
10 Take hede, yt ye despyse not one of these litle ones. For I saye vnto you:
their angels do alwaye beholde the face of my father which is in heauen:
11 for the sonne of man is come to saue that which is lost.
12 How thinke ye? Yf a man haue an hundreth shepe, and one of the be gone
astraye, doth not he leaue the nyentie and nyene in the mountaynes, and goeth,
and seketh that one which is gone astraye?
13 And yf it happen that he fynde it, verely I saye vnto you: he reioyseth more
ouer it, then ouer the nyentie & nyene which wete not astraye.
14 Euen so is it not the will before youre father in heauen, that one of these
litle ones shulde perishe.
15 Yf thy brother trespace agaynst the, go and tell him his faute betwene the
and him alone. Yf he heare the, thou hast wone thy brother.
16 But yf he heare the not, then take yet with the one or two, that in the mouth
of two or thre wytnesses, euery matter maye be stablyshed.
17 Yf he heare not them, tell it vnto the congregacion. Yf he heare not the
cogregacion, holde him as an Heithen and Publican.
18 Verely I saye vnto you: what soeuer ye shal bynde vpon earth, shalbe boude
also in heauen: & what soeuer ye lowse vpon earth, shalbe lowsed also in heaue.
19 Agayne, I saye vnto you: Yf two of you shal agree vpon earth (for what thinge
soeuer it be yt they wolde desyre) they shal haue it of my father which is in
heaue.
20 For where two or thre are gathered together i my name, there am I in the
myddest amonge them.
21 Then came Peter vnto him, & sayde, LORDE, how oft shal I forgeue my brother,
yt trespaceth agaynst me? Seue tymes?
22 Iesus saide vnto hi: I saye not vnto ye seue tymes, but seuetie tymes seuen
tymes.
23 Therfore is ye kingdome of heaue lickened vnto a kynge which wolde reken wt
his seruauntes.
24 And whan he beganne to reke, one was brought vnto him, which ought him ten
thousande poude.
25 Now wha he had nothinge to paye his lorde comaunded him to be solde, & his
wife & his childre, & all yt he had, & payment to be made.
26 Then the seruaunt fell downe, & besought him, sayenge: Syr, haue paciece wt
me, and I wil paye the all.
27 Then had the lorde pytie on that seruaunt, & discharged him, and forgaue him
the dett.
28 And the same seruaunt wete out, & foude one of his felowes, which ought him
an hudreth pens, and layed hande vpon him, and toke him by the throte, and
sayde: paye me that thou owest.
29 The his felowe fell downe, and besought him, sayenge: haue paciece wt me, and
I wil paye the all
30 Neuertheles, he wolde not, but wente and cast him in to preson, tyll he
shulde paye the dett.
31 Whan his felowes sawe what was done, they were very sory, and came and tolde
their lorde all that had happened.
32 Then his lorde called for him, and sayde vnto him: O thou wicked seruaut, I
forgaue the all this dett, because thou praydest me:
33 shuldest not thou then haue had compassion also vpon thy felowe, euen as I
had pytie vpon the?
34 And his lorde was wroth, and delyuered him vnto the iaylers, tyll he payed
all that he ought.
35 So shal my heauenly father do also vnto you, yf ye euery one of you fro youre
hertes, forgeue not his brother his trespaces.

Chapter 19

1 And it came to passe, wha Iesus had ended these sayenges, he gat him fro
Galile, & came i to ye coastes of Iewry beyonde Iordane,
2 & moch people folowed him, and he healed them there.
3 Then came vnto him the Pharises & tepted him, & sayde vnto him: Is it laufull
for a man to put awaye his wife for eny maner of cause?
4 He answered & sayde vnto the: Haue ye not red, how yt he which made (man) at
the begynnynge, made the ma & woma,
5 & sayde: For this cause shal a ma leaue father & mother, & cleue vnto his
wife, & they two shalbe one fleshe.
6 Now are they not twayne then, but one flesh. Let not man therfore put a
sunder, yt which God hath coupled together.
7 Then sayde they: Why dyd Moses then comaunde to geue a testimonyall of
deuorsement, & to put her awaye?
8 He sayde vnto the: Moses (because of ye hardnes of yor hertes) suffred you to
put awaye youre wyues: Neuertheles fro the begynnynge it hath not bene so.
9 But I saye vnto you: Whosoeuer putteth awaye his wife (excepte it be for
fornicacion) and marieth another, breaketh wedlocke. And who so marieth her yt
is deuorced, commytteth aduoutrye.
10 Then sayde his disciples vnto him: Yf ye matter be so betwene ma and wife,
the is it not good to mary.
11 But he sayde vnto them: All me can not coprehende yt sayenge, saue they to
who it is geue.
12 For there be some gelded, which are so borne from their mothers wombe: and
there be some gelded, which are gelded of men: & there be some gelded, which
haue gelded the selues for the kyngdome of heauens sake. He that can coprehende
it, let him comprehende it.
13 Then were brought vnto him yoge children, yt he shulde put his hondes vpon
the, & praye. And ye disciples rebuked them.
14 But Iesus sayde: Suffre ye childre, & forbyd the not to come vnto me, for
vnto soch belogeth the kyngdome of heauen.
15 And wha he had layed his hodes vpo the, he departed thece.
16 And beholde, one came vnto him, and sayde: Good master, what good shal I do,
yt I maye haue the euer lastinge life?
17 He sayde vnto him: Why callest thou me good? there is none good, but God
onely. Neuertheles yf thou wilt entre into life, kepe ye comaudemetes.
18 The sayde, he vnto him: Which? Iesus saide: Thou shalt not kyll: thou shalt
not breake wedlocke: thou shalt not steale: thou shalt beare no false wytnes:
19 Honoure father and mother: and thou shalt loue thy neghboure as thy self.
20 Then sayde the yonge ma vnto him: All these haue I kepte fro my youth vp:
what lack I yet?
21 Iesus sayde vnto him: Yf thou wilt be perfecte, go thy waye and sell that
thou hast, & geue it vnto the poore, and thou shalt haue a treasure in heauen,
and come and folowe me.
22 Whan ye yonge man herde yt worde, he wente awaye sory, for he had greate
possessions.
23 Iesus sayde vnto his disciples: Verely I saie vnto you: it shalbe harde for a
rich man to entre in to the kyngdome of heaue.
24 And morouer I saye vnto you: It is easier for a Camell to go thorow the eye
of a nedle, the for a rich man to entre in to the kyngdome of heauen.
25 Whan his disciples herde that, they were exceadingly amased, and sayde: Who
can the be saued?
26 Neuertheles Iesus behelde them, and sayde vnto them: With men it is
vnpossyble, but with God all thinges are possyble.
27 Then answered Peter & sayde vnto him: Beholde, we haue forsake all, and
folowed the: What shal we haue therfore?
28 Iesus sayde vnto the: Verely I saye vnto you: that when the sonne of man shal
sytt in the seate of his maiestye, ye which haue folowed me in the new byrth,
shal syt also vpon twolue seates, and iudge ye twolue trybes of Israel.
29 And who so euer forsaketh houses or brethre, or sisters, or father, or
mother, or wife, or children, or londes, for my names sake, the same shal
receaue an hundreth folde, and inheret euerlastinge life.
30 But many that be the first, shalbe the last: and the last shalbe the first.

Chapter 20

1 The kyngdome of heauen is like vnto an housholder, which wete out early in the
mornynge, to hyre labourers in to his vyniarde.
2 And wha he had agreed with the labourers for a peny a daye, he sent the in to
his vynyarde.
3 And aboute ye thirde houre he wente out, and sawe other stondinge ydle in the
market place,
4 and sayde vnto them: Go ye also in to my vynyarde, & what so euer is right, I
wil geue it you. And they wete their waye.
5 Agayne, he wete out aboute the sixte and nyenth houre, and dyd likewyse,
6 And aboute the eleuenth houre he wete out, and founde other stodynge ydle, and
sayde vnto them: Why stonde ye here all the daye ydle?
7 They sayde vnto him: because no man hath hyred us. He saide vnto the: Go ye
also in to my vinyarde, and loke what is right, ye shal haue it.
8 Now whan euen was come, the lorde of the vynyarde sayde vnto his stewarde:
Call the labourers, and geue them their hyre, begynnynge from the last vnto ye
first.
9 Then they that were hyred aboute the eleuenth houre, came and receaued euery
man a peny.
10 But whan the first came, they supposed that they shulde receaue more: and
they also receaued euery man a peny.
11 And whan they had receaued it, they murmured agaynst the housholder,
12 and sayde: These last haue wrought but one houre, and thou hast made the
equall vnto us, which haue borne the burthen and heate of the daye.
13 He answered and sayde vnto one of them: frende, I do ye no wronge: diddest
not thou agree with me for a peny?
14 Take that thine is, and go thy waye. I wil geue vnto this last also, like as
vnto the.
15 Or haue I not power, to do as me listeth with myne owne? Is thine eye euell,
because I am good?
16 So the last shalbe the first, & the first the last. For many are called, but
few are chosen.
17 And Iesus wente vp to Ierusalem, and toke the twolue disciples asyde in the
waye, and sayde vnto them:
18 Beholde, we go vp to Ierusalem, and the sonne of man shalbe delyuered vnto
the hye prestes and scribes: & they shal condemne him to death,
19 and shal delyuer him vnto ye Heithen, to be mocked to be scourged, and to be
crucified. And the thirde daye he shal ryse agayne.
20 Then came vnto him the mother of Zebedes childre with hir sonnes, fell downe
before him, and desyred a certayne thinge of hi.
21 And he saide vnto her: What wilt thou? She sayde vnto him: Let these two
sonnes of myne syt in thy kyngdome: the one vpon thy right honde, & the other
vpon thy left honde.
22 But Iesus answered, and sayde: Ye wote not what ye axe. Maye ye drynke the
cuppe, that I shal drynke? & to be baptised with the baptyme, that I shalbe
baptysed withall?
23 They sayde vnto him: Yee that we maye. And he sayde vnto them: My cuppe truly
shal ye drynke, & with the baptyme yt I shal be baptysed withall, shal ye be
baptysed: Neuertheles to syt vpon my right honde & on my left, is not myne to
geue, but vnto the for who it is prepared of my father.
24 Whan the ten herde that, they disdayned at the two brethren.
25 But Iesus called them vnto him, and sayde: Ye knowe that ye prynces of the
worlde haue domynacion of the people, and the greatest exercise power amonge
the.
26 It shal not be so amonge you. But whoso euer wyl be greate amonge you, let
him be youre mynister:
27 & who soeuer wyl be chefe, let him be youre seruaunt:
28 Euen as the sonne of man came, not to be serued, but to do seruyce, and to
geue his life to a redepcion for many.
29 And when they departed from Iericho, moch people folowed him:
30 and beholde, two blyndemen sat by the waye syde: And when they herde that
Iesus passed by, they cried & sayde. O LORDE, thou sonne Dauid,haue mercy vpon
vs.
31 But ye people rebuked the, that they shulde holde their peace. Neuertheles
they cried the more, & sayde: O LORDE, thou sonne of Dauid, haue mercy vpon vs.
32 And Iesus stode styll, and called them, and sayde: What wil ye, yt I shal do
vnto you?
33 They sayde vnto him: LORDE, that oure eyes maye be opened.
34 And Iesus had compassion vpon them, and touched their eyes: & immediatly
their eies receaued sight. And they folowed him.

Chapter 21

1 Now whan they drew nye vnto Ierusalem, and were come to Bethphage vnto mount
Oliuete, Iesus sent two of his disciples,
2 and sayde vnto them: Go in to the towne that lyeth before you, & anone ye shal
fynde an Asse bounde, and hir foale with her: lowse them, and brynge the vnto
me.
3 And yf eny man saye ought vnto you, saye ye: the LORDE hath nede of the, And
straight waye he wil let them go.
4 But all this was done, that the thinge might be fulfylled, which was spoken by
the prophet, sayenge:
5 Tell the doughter of Sion: beholde, thy kynge commeth vnto ye meke, syttinge
vpon an Asse and a foale of ye Asse vsed to the yocke.
6 The disciples wente, and dyd as Iesus commaunded them,
7 and brought the Asse and the foale, & layed their clothes vpon them, and set
him theron.
8 But many of the people spred their garmentes in the waye: other cut downe
braunches from the trees, and strawed them in the waye.
9 As for the people that wente before and that came after, they cryed and sayde:
Hosianna vnto the sonne of Dauid, Blessed be he that commeth in the name of the
LORDE, Hosianna in the height.
10 And whan he was come in to Ierusalem, all the cite was moued, and sayde: Who
is this?
11 And the people sayde: This is Iesus ye prophet of Nazareth out of Galile.
12 And Iesus wente in to the teple of God, and cast out all them that bought and
solde in the teple, and ouerthrew the tables of the money chaungers, and the
seates of them that solde doues,
13 and sayde vnto them: It is wrytte: My house shalbe called ye house of prayer,
but ye haue made it a denne of murthurers.
14 The blynde also and ye lame came vnto him in the temple, and he healed them.
15 But whan the hye prestes and the scrybes sawe the wonders that he dyd, and
the children crienge in the temple and sayenge: Hosianna vnto the sonne of
Dauid, they disdayned,
16 and sayde vnto him: Hearest thou what these saye? Iesus sayde vnto them: Yee.
Haue ye neuer red: Out of the mouth of very babes and sucklinges thou hast
ordeyned prayse?
17 And he left them there, and wente out of the cite vnto Bethania, and there
abode ouer night.
18 But in the mornynge as he returned in to the cite, he hugred.
19 And in the waye he sawe a fygge tre, and came vnto it, and founde nothinge
theron, but leaues onely, and sayde vnto it: Neuer frute growe on the from hence
forth. And immediatly the fygge tre wythred awaye.
20 And whan his disciples sawe that, they marueyled, and sayde. How is ye fygge
tre wythred awaye so soone?
21 Iesus answered and sayde vnto them: Verely I saye vnto you: Yf ye haue faith
& doute not, ye shal not onely do this with the fygge tre, but yf ye shal saye
vnto this mountayne: Avoyde, and cast thy self in to the see, it shal be done.
22 And what soeuer ye axe in prayer, yf ye beleue, ye shal receaue it.
23 And when he was come in to the teple, the chefe prestes and the elders of the
people came vnto him (as he was teachinge) & sayde: By what auctorite doest thou
these thinges? and who gaue the this auctorite?
24 Iesus answered and sayde vnto them: I wil axe a worde of you also: which yf
ye tell me, I in like wyse wyl tell you, by what auctorite I do these thinges.
25 The baptime of Iho, whece was it? from heaue, or of men? Then thought they
amoge them selues, and saide: Yf we saye it was from heaue, then shal he saye
vnto us: Why dyd ye not then beleue him?
26 But yf we saye it was of men, the feare we the people: For euery ma helde
Ihon for a prophet.
27 And they answered Iesus, & sayde: We can not tell. Then sayde he vnto them:
Nether tell I you, by what auctorite I do these thinges.
28 But what thinke ye? A certayne man had two sonnes, and came to the first, and
sayde: Go thy waye my sonne, & worke to daye in my vynyarde.
29 He answered and sayde: I wil not, but afterwarde he repented, and wente.
30 He came also vnto the secode, and sayde likewyse. And he answered and saide:
I wil syr. And wete not.
31 Whether of them twayne dyd the wil of the father? They sayde vnto him: the
first. Iesus sayde vnto the: Verely I saye vnto you: The publicans and harlottes
shal come in to the kyngdome of God before you.
32 For Ihon came vnto you, and taught you ye right waye and ye beleued him not:
but the publicans & harlottes beleued hi. As for you, though ye sawe it, yet
were ye not moued with repetaunce, that ye might afterwarde haue beleued him.
33 Heare another parable. There was a certayne houssholder which planted a
vynyarde, and hedged it roude aboute, and dygged a wyne presse in it, and built
a tower, and let it out vnto hussbandmen, and wente in to a straunge countre.
34 Now wha the tyme of the frute drew neare, he sent his seruautes to the
hussbandmen, to receaue the frutes of it.
35 Then the hussbandmen caught his seruauntes: one they bett, another they
kylled, the thirde they stoned.
36 Agayne, he sent other seruauntes, moo then the first, and they dyd vnto them
in like maner.
37 At the last he sent his owne sonne vnto them, and sayde: they wyl stode in
awe of my sonne.
38 But whe the hussbandme sawe the sonne, they sayde amonge the selues: This is
the Heyre, come, let us kyl hym, and take his inheritauce vnto oure selues.
39 And they caught him, and thrust him out of the vynyarde, & slew him.
40 Now whe the lorde of the vynyarde commeth, what wyl he do wt those
hussbandmen?
41 They sayde vnto him: He wyl cruelly destroye those euell personnes, & let out
his vyniarde vnto other hussbadmen, which shal delyuer him the frute at tymes
conuenyent.
42 Iesus sayde vnto the: Dyd ye neuer rede in the scriptures: The same stone
which the buylders refused, is become the heade stone in the corner? This was
the LORDES doynge, & it is maruelous i oure eyes
43 Therfore I saie vnto you: The kingdome of God shalbe take fro you, & shalbe
geue vnto the Heithe, which shal brynge forth ye frutes of it.
44 And who so falleth vpo this stone, shalbe broke in peces: & loke vpo whom it
falleth, it shal grynde him to poulder.
45 And when the hye prestes & Pharises herde his parables, they perceaued, that
he spake of them.
46 And they wente aboute to take him, but they feared ye people, because they
helde hi for a prophet.

Chapter 22

1 And Iesus answered, and spake vnto the agayne by parables, & sayde:
2 The kingdome of heauen is like vnto a kynge, which maried his sonne.
3 And sent forth his seruauntes, to call the gestes vnto the mariage, & they
wolde not come.
4 Agayne, he sent forth other seruauntes, and sayde: Tell the gestes: Beholde, I
haue prepared my dynner, myne oxen and my fed catell are kylled, and all thinges
are readye, come to the mariage.
5 But they made light of it, and wente their wayes: one to his hussbandrye,
another to his marchaundise.
6 As for the remnaut, they toke his seruauntes, and intreated the shamefully,
and slew the.
7 When the kynge herde that, he was wroth, and sent forth his warryers, and
destroyed those murtherers, and set fyre vpon their cite.
8 Then sayde he vnto his seruauntes: The mariage in dede is prepared, but the
gestes were not worthy.
9 Go youre waye out therfore in to ye hye wayes, and as many as ye fynde, byd
them to the mariage.
10 And the seruauntes wete out in to the hye wayes, and gathered together as
many as they coulde fynde, both good and bad, & the tables were all full.
11 Then the kynge wete in, to se the gestes, and spyed there a man that had not
on a weddynge garment,
12 and sayde vnto him: Frende, how camest thou in hither, & hast not on a
weddyinge garment? And he was euen spechlesse.
13 Then sayde the kynge vnto his seruauntes: Take and bynde him hande and fote,
& cast him into ye vtter darcknes: there shal be waylinge and gnasshinge of
teth.
14 For many be called, but few are chose.
15 Then wente the Pharises, and toke councell, how they might tangle him in his
wordes,
16 and sent vnto him their disciples with Herodes officers, and sayde: Master,
we knowe that thou art true, and teachest the waye of God truly, and carest for
no ma: for thou regardest not the outwarde appearaunce of me.
17 Tell us therfore, how thinkest thou? Is it laufulll to geue tribute vnto the
Emperoure, or not?
18 Now wha Iesus perceaued their wickednes, he sayde: O ye ypocrites, why tepte
ye me?
19 Shewe me ye tribute money. And they toke hi a peny.
20 And he saide vnto the: Whose is this ymage and superscription?
21 They sayde vnto him: The Emperours. Then sayde he vnto them: Geue therfore
vnto the Emperour, that which is the Emperours: and geue vnto God, that which is
Gods.
22 When they herde that, they marueyled, and left him, & wete their waye.
23 The same daye there came vnto him the Saduces (which holde that there is no
resurreccion) and axed him,
24 and sayde: Master, Moses sayde: Yf a man dye, hauynge no children, his
brother shal mary his wife, & rayse vp sede vnto his brother.
25 Now were there with us seue brethren. The first maried a wife, and dyed: &
for somoch as he had no sede, he left his wife vnto his brother.
26 Like wyse the secode, and thirde vnto the seueth.
27 Last of all the woman dyed also.
28 Now in the resurreccion, whose wife shal she be of the seuen? For they all
had her.
29 Iesus answered, and sayde vnto them: Ye erre, and vnderstode not the
scriptures, ner the power of God.
30 In the resurreccion they shal nether mary, ner be maried, but are as the
angels of God in heauen.
31 As touchinge the resurreccio of the deed, haue ye notred, what is spoken vnto
you of God, which sayeth:
32 I am the God of Abraham, and ye God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob? Yet is
not God a God of the deed, but of the lyuynge.
33 And whan the people herde that, they were astonnyed at his doctryne.
34 When the Pharises herde, that he had stopped the mouth of the Saduces, they
gathered them selues together.
35 And one of them (a Scrybe) tepted him, and sayde:
36 Master, which is the chefest commaundemet in the lawe?
37 Iesus saide vnto him: Thou shalt loue the LORDE thy God with all thy hert,
with all thy soule, and with all thy mynde:
38 this is the pryncipall and greatest comaundement.
39 As for the seconde, it is like vnto it: Thou shalt loue thy neghboure as thy
self.
40 In these two commaundementes hange all the lawe and the prophetes.
41 Now whyle the Pharises were gathered together, Iesus axed them,
42 and sayde: What thinke ye of Christ? Whose sonne is he? They sayde vnto him:
Dauids.
43 He sayde vnto them: How then doth Dauid in sprete, call him LORDE, sayenge:
44 The LORDE sayde vnto my LORDE: Syt thou on my right honde, tyll I make thine
enemies thy fote stole.
45 Yf Dauid now call him LORDE, how is he then his sonne?
46 And no man coude answere him one worde, nether durst eny man axe him eny mo
questios, fro that daye forth.

Chapter 23

1 Then spake Iesus vnto ye people and to his disciples,
2 and sayde: The scrybes & Pharises are set downe vpon Moses seate.
3 Therfore whatsoeuer they bid you obserue, that obserue and do, but after their
workes shal ye not do,
4 for they saye & do not. For they bynde heuy and intollerable burthens, and
laye them vpon mens shulders: But they them selues wil not heaue at them with
one of their fyngers.
5 All their workes do they to be sene of men. They set abrode their Philateries,
and make large borders vpon their garmentes,
6 and loue to syt vppermost at the table, and to haue the chefe seates in the
synagoges,
7 and loue to be saluted in the market, and to be called of me Rabbi.
8 But ye shal not suffre youre selues to be called Rabbi, for one is youre
master, euen Christ, and all ye are brethren.
9 And call no man father vpon earth, for one is youre father, which is in heaue.
10 And ye shal not suffre youre selues to be called masters, for one is youre
master, namely, Christ.
11 He that is greatest amoge you, shalbe youre seruaunt.
12 For who so exalteth himself, shal be brought lowe: and he that humbleth
himself, shalbe exalted.
13 Wo vnto you Scrybes and Pharises, ye ypocrytes, that shut vp the kyngdome of
heauen before men: Ye come not in youre selues, nether suffre ye them to enter,
that wolde be in.
14 Wo vnto you Scrybes and Pharises, ye ypocrytes, that deuoure wyddowes houses,
and that vnder the culoure of prayenge longe prayers, therfore shal ye receaue
ye greater damnacion.
15 Wo vnto you Scrybes and Pharises, ye ypocrytes, which compasse see and lode
to make one Proselyte: and whan he is become one, ye make of him a childe of
hell, two folde more then ye youre selues are.
16 Wo vnto you blyndegydes, which saye: Who so euer sweareth by the temple, that
is nothinge: but who so euer sweareth by the golde of the temple, he is giltie.
17 Ye fooles and blynde, whether is greater? the golde, or the teple that
sanctifieth the golde?
18 And who so euer sweareth by the altare, that is nothinge: but who so euer
sweareth by the offeringe that is vpo it, he is giltye.
19 Ye fooles and blynde, whether is greater? the offeringe, or the altare that
sanctifieth the offerynge?
20 Therfore who so sweareth by the altare, sweareth by the same, and by all that
is theron:
21 and who so sweareth by the temple, sweareth by the same, and by him that
dwelleth therin.
22 And who so sweareth by heauen, sweareth by the seate of God, and by him that
sytteth theron.
23 Wo vnto you scrybes and Pharises, ye ypocrytes, which tythe Mynt, Anyse and
Commyn, and leaue the waightier matters of the lawe behynde: namely, iudgment,
mercy, and fayth. These ought to haue bene done, and not to leaue the other
behynde.
24 O ye blynde gydes, which strayne out a gnat, but swalowe vp a Camell.
25 Wo vnto you scrybes and Pharises, ye Ypocrytes, which make cleane the
vttersyde of the cuppe and platter, but within are ye full of robbery and
excesse.
26 Thou blynde Pharise, clense first the in syde of the cuppe and platter, that
the out syde maye be cleane also.
27 Wo vnto you scrybes and Pharises, ye Ypocrites, which be like vnto paynted
Sepulcres, that appeare beutyfull outwarde, but within they are full of deed
mens bones and all fylthines.
28 Euen so are ye also: Outwarde ye appeare righteous vnto men, but within ye
are full of ypocrisye and iniquyte.
29 Wo vnto you scrybes and Pharises, ye ypocrites, which buylde the tombes of
the prophetes, and garnysh the sepulcres of the righteous,
30 and saye: Yf we had bene in oure fathers tyme, we wolde not haue bene
partakers with them in the bloude of the prophetes.
31 Therfore ye be wytnesses vnto youre selues, that ye are the children of them,
which slew the prophetes.
32 Go to, fulfyll ye also the measure of youre fathers.
33 O ye serpentes, O ye generacion of vypers, how wyl ye escape the damnacion of
Hell?
34 Therfore beholde, I sende vnto you prophetes and wysemen, and scrybes, and
some of them shal ye kyll and crucifye, and some of them shal ye scourge in
youre synagoges, and persecute them from cite to cite:
35 that vpon you maye come all the righteous bloude which hath bene shed vpon ye
earth, from the bloude of righteous Abel, vnto ye bloude of Zachary ye sonne of
Barachias, whom ye slew betwene the temple and the altare.
36 Verely I saye vnto you: All these thinges shal light vpo this generacion.
37 O Ierusalem Ierusalem, thou that slayest the prophetes, and stonest them that
are sent vnto the: How oft wolde I haue gathered thy children together, euen as
the henne gathereth hir chekens vnder hir wynges, and ye wolde not?
38 Beholde, youre habitacion shalbe left vnto you desolate.
39 For I saye vnto you: Ye shal not se me hence forth, tyll ye saye: Blessed be
he, that commeth in the name of the LORDE.

Chapter 24

1 And Iesus wente out and departed from the temple, and his disciples came vnto
him, to shew him the buyldinge of the temple.
2 But Iesus sayde vnto them: Se ye not all these thinges? Verely I saye vnto
you: there shal not be left here one stone vpon another, yt shal not be cast
downe.
3 And as he sat vpon the mount Oliuete, his disciples came vnto him secretly, &
saide: Tell us, whe shal these thinges come to passe? and which shal be the
token of thy comynge, and of the ende of the worlde?
4 Iesus answered and sayde vnto them: Take hede, that no man disceaue you.
5 For there shal many come in my name, and saye: I am Christ, and shal disceaue
many.
6 Ye shal heare of warres, and of ye noyse of warres: take hede, and be not ye
troubled. All these thinges must first come to passe, but the ende is not yet.
7 For one people shall ryse vp agaynst another, and one realme agaynst another:
and there shalbe pestilece, honger, and earthquakes here & there.
8 All these are the begynnynge of sorowes.
9 Then shal they put you to trouble, & shal kyll you, and ye shalbe hated of all
people for my names sake.
10 The shal many be offended, and shal betraye one another, and shal hate one
the other.
11 And many false prophetes shal aryse, and shal disceaue many:
12 and because iniquyte shal haue the vpper hande, the loue of many shal abate.
13 But whoso endureth vnto ye ende, ye same shal be saued.
14 And this gospell of the kyngdome shalbe preached in all the worlde for a
wytnes vnto all people, and then shal the ende come.
15 Whan ye therfore shal se the abhominacion of desolacion (wher of it is spoke
by Daniel the prophet) stonde in the holy place (who so readeth it, let him
marck it well)
16 the let the which be in Iewry, flye vnto ye moutaynes:
17 and let him which is on the house toppe, not come downe to fet eny thinge out
of his house:
18 and let him which is in ye felde, not turne back to fetch his clothes.
19 But wo vnto them that are with childe, and to them that geue suck in those
dayes.
20 But praye ye, that youre flight be not in ye wynter, ner on the Sabbath.
21 For then shal there be greate trouble, soch as was not from the begynnynge of
the worlde vnto this tyme, ner shalbe.
22 Yee and excepte those daies shulde be shortened, there shulde no flesh be
saued: but for ye chosens sake those dayes shalbe shortened.
23 Then yf eny man shal saye vnto you: lo, here is Christ, or there, beleue it
not.
24 For there shal aryse false Christes and false prophetes, and shal do greate
tokes and wonders: In so moch, that (yf it were possible) the very chosen shulde
be brought in to erroure.
25 Beholde, I haue tolde you before.
26 Wherfore yf they shal saye vnto you: Beholde, he is in the wildernes, go not
ye forth:Beholde, he is in the chamber, beleue it not.
27 For like as the lightenynge goeth out from the East, and shyneth vnto the
west, so shal the commynge of the sonne of man be.
28 For where so euer a deed carcase is, there wyl the Aegles be gathered
together.
29 Immediatly after the trouble of the same tyme, shal the Sonne and Moone lose
their light, and the starres shall fall from heauen, and the powers of heauen
shal moue:
30 and then shal appeare the token of the sonne of man in heaue: and then shal
all the kynreds of the earth mourne, and they shal se the sonne of man come in
the cloudes of heauen with greate power and glory.
31 And he shal sende his angels with ye greate voyce of a trompe, & they shal
gather together his chosen from the foure wyndes, from one ende of the heauen to
the other.
32 Lerne a symilitude of ye fygge tre. When his braunche is yet tender, and his
leaues spronge, ye knowe that Sommer is nye.
33 So likewyse ye, whan ye se all thynges, be ye sure, that it is nye euen at
the dores
34 Verely I saye vnto you: This generacion shal not passe, tyll all these be
fulfylled.
35 Heauen and earth shal perishe, but my wordes shal not perishe.
36 Neuertheles of that daye & houre knoweth no man, no not the angels of heauen,
but my father onely.
37 Euen as it was in the tyme of Noe, so shal the commynge of the sonne of man
be also.
38 For as they were in the dayes before ye floude (they ate, they dronke, they
maried, and were maried, euen vnto the daye yt Noe entred in to the shippe,
39 and they regarded it not, tyll the floude came and toke them all awaye) So
shal also the commynge of the sonne of man be.
40 The shal two be in the felde: the one shal be receaued,and the other shalbe
refused:
41 Two shalbe gryndinge at the Myll, the one shalbe receaued, and the other
shalbe refused:
42 Watch therfore, for ye knowe not what houre youre LORDE wil come.
43 But be sure of this, that yf the good man of the house knewe what houre the
thefe wolde come, he wolde surely watch, and not suffre his house to be broken
vp.
44 Therfore be ye ready also, for in the houre that ye thynke not, shal the
sonne of man come.
45 Who is now a faithfull and wyse seruaut, whom his lorde hath made ruler ouer
his houssholde, that he maye geue them meate in due season?
46 Blessed is yt seruaut, whom his lorde (whan he cometh) shal fynde so doynge.
47 Verely. I saye vnto you: he shal set him ouer all his goodes.
48 But and yf the euell seruaut shal saye in his hert: Tush, it wil be longe or
my lorde come,
49 and begynne to smyte his felowes, yee and to eate and drynke with the
dronken:
50 The same seruautes lorde shal come in a daye, wha he loketh not for him, and
in an houre that he is not ware of,
51 and shal hew him in peces and geue him his rewarde with ypocrytes: there shal
be waylinge and gnasshinge of teth.

Chapter 25

1 Then shal the kyngdome of heauen be like vnto ten virgins, which toke their
lapes, and wente forth to mete the brydegome.
2 But fyue of them were foolish, and fyue were wyse.
3 The foolish toke their lapes, neuertheles they toke none oyle with them.
4 But the wyse toke oyle in their vessels with their lampes.
5 Now whyle the brydegrome taried, they slombred all and slepte.
6 But at mydnight there was a crye made: Beholde, the brydegrome commeth, go
youre waye out for to mete him.
7 Then all those virgins arose, and prepared their lampes.
8 But the foolish sayde vnto the wyse: geue vs of youre oyle, for oure lapes are
gone out.
9 Then answered the wyse, and sayde: Not so, lest there be not ynough for vs and
you, but go rather vnto them that sell, and bye for youre selues.
10 And whyle they wente to bye, the brydegrome came: and they that were readye,
wente in with him vnto the mariage, and the gate was shut vp.
11 At ye last came ye other virgins also, and sayde: LORDE LORDE, opo vnto vs.
12 But he answered, and sayde: Verely I saye vnto you: I knowe you not.
13 Watch ye therfore, for ye knowe nether the daye ner yet the houre, whan ye
sonne of man shal come.
14 Like wyse as a certayne ma ready to take his iourney into a straunge countre,
called his seruautes, and delyuered his goodes vnto the.
15 And vnto one he gaue fyue talentes, to another two, and to another one: vnto
euery man after his abilyte, and straight waye departed.
16 Then he that had receaued the fyue talentes, wente and occupied with the
same, and wanne other fyue talentes.
17 Likewyse he yt receaued two talentes, wane other two also.
18 But he that receaued ye one wente and dygged a pyt in the earth, and hyd his
lordes money.
19 After a longe season the lorde of those seruauntes came, and rekened with
them.
20 Then came he that had receaued fyue talentes, and brought other fyue
talentes, and sayde: Syr, thou delyuerdst vnto me fyue talentes:Beholde, with
them haue I wonne fyue taletes mo.
21 Then sayde his lorde vnto hi: wel thou good & faithfull seruaunt, thou hast
bene faithfull ouer litle, I wil set the ouer moch: entre thou in to the ioye of
thy lorde.
22 The came he also that had receaued two talentes, and sayde: Syr, thou
delyuerdst vnto me two talentes: Beholde, I haue wonne two other taletes with
the.
23 His lorde sayde vnto him: Wel thou good and faithfull seruaut, thou hast bene
faithfull ouer litle, I wil set the ouer moch: entre thou in to the ioye of thy
lorde.
24 Then he that had receaued the one talet, came and sayde: Syr, I knew that
thou art an hard man: thou reapest where thou hast not sowen, and gatherest
where thou hast not strowed,
25 and so I was afrayed, and wete and hyd thy talent in the earth: lo, there
thou hast thine owne.
26 But his lorde answered, and sayde vnto him: Thou euell and slouthfull
seruaunt, knewest thou that I reape where I sowed not, and gather where I
strawed not?
27 Thou shuldest therfore haue had my money to the chaungers, and then at my
commynge shulde I haue receaued myne owne with vauntage.
28 Therfore take the talent fro him, and geue it vnto him that hath ten
talentes.
29 For who so hath, to him shalbe geuen, and he shal haue abundaunce. But who so
hath not, fro him shalbe take awaye euen that he hath.
30 And cast the vnprofitable seruaunt in to vtter darcknes: there shalbe
waylinge and gnasshinge of teth.
31 But whan the sonne of man shal come in his glory, and all holy angels with
him, then shal he syt vpon the seate of his glory.
32 And all people shalbe gathered before him: and he shal separate them one from
another as a shepherde deuydeth the shepe from ye goates.
33 And he shal set ye shepe on his right honde, and the goates on the lefte.
34 Then shal the kynge saye vnto them that shalbe on his right honde: Come
hither ye blessed of my father, inheret ye ye kingdome, which is prepared for
you from the begynnynge of the worlde.
35 For I was hongrie, and ye gaue me meate: I was thirstie, and ye gaue me
drynke: I was harbourlesse, and ye lodged me:
36 I was naked, & ye clothed me: I was sicke, and ye vysited me: I was in
preson, and ye came vnto me.
37 Then shal the righteous answere him, & saye: LORDE, whe sawe we the hogrie,
and fed the? Or thirstie, and gaue the drynke?
38 When sawe we the herbourlesse, and lodged the? Or naked, and clothed ye?
39 Or whe sawe we ye sicke or in preson, and came vnto the?
40 And the kynge shal answer and saye vnto them: Verely I saye vnto you: Loke
what ye haue done vnto one of the least of these my brethren, the same haue ye
done vnto me.
41 Then shal he saye also vnto them that shalbe on the left hande: Departe fro
me ye cursed in to the euerlastinge fyre, which is prepared for the deuell and
his angels.
42 For I was hogrie, and ye gaue me no meate: I was thirstye, and ye gaue me no
drynke:
43 I was herbourlesse, and ye lodged me not: I was naked, and ye clothed me not:
I was sicke and in preson, and ye vysited me not.
44 Then shal they also answere hi, and saye: LORDE, when sawe we the hogrie, or
thyrstie, or herbourlesse, or naked, or sicke, or in preson, and haue not
mynistred vnto the?
45 The shal he answere them, and saye: Verely I saye vnto you: Loke what ye haue
not done vnto one of the leest of these, the same haue ye not done vnto me.
46 And these shal go in to euerlastinge payne, but the righteous in to
euerlastinge life.

Chapter 26

1 And it came to passe wha Iesus had fynished all these wordes, he sayde vnto
his disciples:
2 Ye knowe, that after two dayes shalbe Easter, and the sonne of man shalbe
delyuered to be crucified.
3 Then assembled together the hye prestes and the scrybes, and the elders of the
people in to the palace of the hye prest which was called Caiphas,
4 and helde a councell, how they might take Iesus by disceate, and kyll him.
5 But they sayde: Not on the holy daye, lest there be an vproure in the people.
6 Now when Iesus was at Bethany in the house of Symon the leper,
7 there came vnto hi a woman, which had a boxe with precious oyntment, and
poured it vpon his heade, as he sat at the table.
8 Whan his disciples sawe that, they dissdayned, and sayde: Where to serueth
this waist?
9 This oyntmet might haue bene wel solde, and geue to the poore.
10 Whe Iesus perceaued that, he sayde vnto them: Why trouble ye the woman? She
hath wrought a good worke vpon me
11 for ye haue allwaye the poore with you, but me shal ye not haue allwayes.
12 Where as she hath poured this oyntmet vpon my body, she dyd it to bury me.
13 Verely I saye vnto you: where so euer this gospell shalbe preached thorow out
all the worlde, there shal this also that she hath done, be tolde for a
memoriall of her.
14 Then one of the twolue (called Iudas Iscarioth) wente vnto the hye prestes,
15 and sayde: What wil ye geue me, and I shal delyuer him vnto you? And they
offred hi thirtie syluer pens.
16 And from that tyme forth, he sought oportunyte to betraye him?
17 The first daye of swete bred came the disciples to Iesus, and sayde vnto him:
Where wilt thou that we prepare for the, to eate the Easter lambe?
18 He sayde: Go in to the cite to soch a man, and saye vnto him: The Master
sendeth the worde: My tyme is at honde, I wil kepe myne Easter by the with my
disciples.
19 And the disciples dyd as Iesus had appoynted them, and made ready the Easter
lambe.
20 And at euen he sat downe at the table with the twolue.
21 And as they ate, he sayde: Verely I saye vnto you: One of you shal betraye
me.
22 And they were exceadinge soroufull, and beganne euery one of them to saye
vnto him: Syr, is it I?
23 He answered and sayde: He that deppeth his honde with me in the dysshe, the
same shal betraye me.
24 The sonne of man goeth forth, as it is wrytten of him: but wo vnto that man
by who the sonne of man shalbe betrayed: It had bene better for that ma, yf he
had neuer bene borne.
25 The Iudas that betrayed him, answered and sayde: Master, is it I? He sayde
vnto: him Thou hast sayde.
26 And as they ate, Iesus toke the bred, gaue thankes, brake it, and gaue it to
the disciples, and sayde: Take, eate, this is my body.
27 And he toke the cuppe, and thanked, and gaue it the, and sayde: Drynke ye all
therof,
28 this is my bloude of the new testament, that shalbe shed for many for the
remission of synnes.
29 I saye vnto you: I wil not drynke hence forth of this frute of the vyne tre,
vntill that daye that I shal drynke it new with you in my fathers kyngdome.
30 And whan they had sayde grace, they wente forth vnto mount Oliuete.
31 Then sayde Iesus vnto them. This night shal ye all be offended in me. For it
is wrytten: I wil smyte the shepherde, and the shepe of the flocke shalbe
scatered abrode.
32 But after that I ryse agayne, I wil go before you in to Galile.
33 Peter answered and sayde vnto him: Though all men shulde be offended in ye,
yet wyl I neuer be offeded.
34 Iesus sayde vnto hi: Verely I saye vnto ye: This same night before ye cock
crowe, shalt thou denie me thryse.
35 Peter saide vnto him: And though I shulde dye with the, yet wil I not denye
the. Likewyse also sayde all the disciples.
36 Then came Iesus with them into a felde which is called Gethsemane, and sayde
vnto the disciples: Syt ye here, whyle I go yonder & praye.
37 And he toke with him Peter, and the two sonnes of Zebede, and beganne to wexe
soroufull and to be in an agonye.
38 Then sayde Iesus vnto them: My soule is heuy euen vnto the death. Tary ye
here, and watch with me.
39 And he wente forth a litle, and fell flat vpon his face, and prayed sayenge:
O my father, yf it be possible, let this cuppe passe fro me: neuertheles not as
I wil but as thou wilt.
40 And he came to his disciples, and founde the a slepe, & sayde vnto Peter:
What? coude ye not watch with me one houre?
41 Watch & praye, that ye fall not in to temptacion. The sprete is wyllinge, but
the flesh is weake.
42 Agayne, he wete forth the seconde tyme and prayed, sayenge: O my father, yf
this cuppe can not passe awaye fro me (excepte I drynke of it) thy will be
fulfilled.
43 And he came, and founde them a slepe agayne, and their eyes were heuy.
44 And he left them, and wente forth agayne, and prayed the thirde tyme, sayenge
the same wordes.
45 Then came he to his disciples, and sayde vnto them: Slepe on now, and take
youre rest. Beholde, the houre is come, yt the sonne of man shalbe delyuered in
to the hondes of synners:
46 Aryse, let us be goynge. Beholde, he is at hode, that betrayeth me.
47 Whyle he yet spake, lo, Iudas one of the twolue came, and with him a greate
multitude with swerdes and staues, sent fro the hye prestes and elders of the
people.
48 And he that betrayed him, had geuen them a toke, sayenge: Whom so euer I
kysse, that same is he, laye hodes vpo him.
49 And forth withal he came to Iesus, and sayde: Hayle master, and kyssed him.
50 And Iesus sayde vnto him: Frende, wherfore art thou come? Then came they, and
layed hondes vpon Iesus, and toke him.
51 And beholde, one of them that were with Iesus, stretched out his honde, and
drue his swerde, and stroke a seruaunt of the hye prestes, & smote of his eare:
52 Then sayde Iesus vnto him: Put vp yi swerde in to his place. For all that
take the swerde, shal perish with the swerde.
53 Or thinkest thou that I can not praye my father now, to sende me more then
twolue legions of angels?
54 But how the shulde the scriptures be fulfylled? For thus must it be.
55 In the same houre sayde Iesus vnto the multitude: Ye are come out as it were
to a murthurer with swerdes and staues for to take me. I sat daylie teachinge in
the temple amonge you, and ye toke me not.
56 But all this is done, that the scriptures of the prophetes might be
fulfylled.
57 The all the disciples left him, and fled. But they that toke Iesus, led him
to Caiphas the hye prest, where the scrybes and the elders were gathered
together.
58 As for Peter, he folowed him a farre of vnto the hye prestes palace, & wente
in, and sat with the seruauntes, that he might se the ende.
59 But the hye prestes and the elders, and the whole councell sought false
wytnesse ageynst Iesus, that they might put him to death,
60 and founde none. And though many false wytnesses stepte forth, yet founde
they none. At the last there stepte forth two false wytnesses,
61 & spake: He sayde: I can breake downe the temple of God, and buylde it agayne
in thre dayes.
62 And the hye prest stode vp, and sayde vnto him: Answerest thou nothinge, vnto
it, that these testifie agaynst the?
63 Neuertheles Iesus helde his tonge. And the hye prest answered, and sayde vnto
him: I charge the by ye lyuynge God, that thou tell us, yf thou be Christ the
sonne of God.
64 Iesus spake: Thou hast sayde it. Neuerthelesse I saye vnto you: From this
tyme forth it shal come to passe, that ye shal se the sonne of man syttinge vpon
the right hande of the power (of God) and commynge in the cloudes of the heauen.
65 Then the hye prest rente his clothes, and sayde: He hath blasphemed, what
nede we eny mo wytnesses? Lo, now haue ye herde his blasphemy:
66 What thinke ye? They answered, & sayde: He is gyltie of death.
67 Then spytted they in his face, & smote him with fistes. Some smote him
68 vpon the face, and sayde: Prophecie vnto us thou Christ, who is it, that
smote the?
69 As for Peter, he sat without in the palace. And there came vnto him a
damsell, and sayde: And thou wast with Iesus of Galile also.
70 Neuertheles he denyed before the all, and sayde: I can not tell what thou
sayest.
71 But whan he wete out at the dore, another damsell sawe him. and sayde vnto
them that were there: This was also with Iesus of Nazareth.
72 And he denyed agayne, and sware also: I knowe not the ma.
73 And after a litle whyle, they that stode there, stepte forth, and sayde vnto
Peter: Of a trueth thou art one of them also, for thy speach bewrayeth the.
74 Then begane he to curse and to sweare: I knowe not the man. And immediatly
the cock crew.
75 Then thought Peter vpon the wordes of Iesus, which sayde vnto him: before the
cock crow, thou shalt denye me thryse. And he wente out, and wepte bytterly.

Chapter 27

1 Vpon the morow, all the hye prestes and elders of the people helde a councell
agaynst Iesus, that they might put him to death,
2 and bounde him, and led him forth, and delyuered him vnto Pontius Pilate the
debyte.
3 When Iudas which betrayed him, sawe this that he was condemned vnto death, it
repented him, and brought agayne the thirtie syluer pens to the hye prestes and
the elders,
4 and sayde: I haue done euell, in that I haue betrayed innocet bloude. They
sayde: What haue we to do with yt? Se thou therto.
5 And he cast the syluer pens in the teple, and gat him awaye, and wente and
hanged him self.
6 So the hye prestes toke the syluer pens, and sayde: It is not laufull to put
them in to the Gods chest, for it is bloudmoney.
7 Neuertheles they helde a councell, and bought with the a potters felde, for to
burye straugers in.
8 Wherfore the same felde is called the bloudfelde vnto this daye.
9 Then was that fulfylled, which was spoken by Ieremy the prophet sayenge: And
they toke thirtie syluer pens, the pryce of him that was solde, whom they bought
of the children of Israell:
10 and these they gaue for a potters felde, as the LORDE commaunded me.
11 As for Iesus, he stode before the debyte, and the debyte axed him, and sayde:
Art thou the kynge of the Iewes? And Iesus sayde vnto him: Thou sayest it.
12 And wha he was accused of the hye prestes and elders, he answered nothinge.
13 Then sayde Pylate vnto him: Hearest thou not, how sore they accuse the?
14 And he answered him not one worde: in so moch that the debyte marueled
exceadingly.
15 At that feast, the debyte was wote to delyuer a presoner fre vnto the people,
whom they wolde.
16 And at the same tyme he had a notable presoner called Barrabas.
17 And whan they were gathered together, Pylate sayde vnto them: Whether wil ye,
that I geue lowse vnto you? Barrabas, or Iesus which is called Christ?
18 For he knewe well that they had delyuered him of enuye.
19 And wha he sat vpo the iudgmet seate, his wife sent vnto him, sayenge: Haue
thou nothinge to do with that righteous man, for I haue suffred many thinges
this daye in a dreame because of him.
20 But the hye prestes and the elders persuaded the people, that they shulde axe
Barrabas, and destroye Iesus.
21 Then answered the debyte, & sayde vnto the: Whether of these two wyl ye yt I
geue lowse vnto you? They sayde: Barrabas:
22 Pylate sayde vnto them: What shal I do then with Iesus, which is called
Christ? They sayde all: let him be crucified.
23 The debyte saide: What euell hath he done the? Neuertheles they cried yet
more and sayde, let him be crucified.
24 So whan Pilate sawe, that he coude not helpe, but that there was a greater
vproure, he toke water, and wasshed his handes before the people, and sayde: I
am vngiltie of ye bloude of this righteous man. Se ye therto.
25 Then answered all the people, and sayde: His bloude come vpon vs, and vpon
oure children.
26 Then gaue he Barrabas lowse vnto the, but caused Iesus be scourged, and
delyuered him to be crucified.
27 Then the debites soudyers toke Iesus, in to the comon hall, and gathered the
whole multitude ouer him,
28 and stryped him out of his clothes, and put a purple robe vpo him,
29 and plated a crowne of thorne, & set it vpon his heade, and a rede in his
hade, and kneled before him, and mocked him, and sayde: hayle kynge of the
Iewes.
30 And spytted vpon him, and toke ye rede, & smote him vpon the heade.
31 And wha they had mocked hi, they toke the robe of him ageyne, & put his owne
clothes vpon him, and led him forth, yt they might crucifie hi.
32 And as they were goinge out, they founde a man of Cyren called Symon: him
they compelled to beare his crosse.
33 And when they came vnto the place called Golgatha (that is to saye by
interpretacio a place of deed mens sculles)
34 they gaue him to drynke, veneger myxte wt gall. And whan he had tasted
therof, he wolde not drynke.
35 So whan they had crucified him, they parted his garmetes, and cast lottes
therfore: that the thinge might be fulfilled, which was spoken by the prophet:
They haue parted my garmetes amonge the, & cast lottes vpon my vesture.
36 And there they sat, and watched hi.
37 And aboue ouer his heade, they put vp the cause of his death in wrytinge:
namely: This is the kynge of the Iewes.
38 Then were there two murthurers crucified with him, the one of the right
hande, and the other on the left.
39 They that wente by, reuyled him, and wagged their heades
40 and sayde: Thou that breakest downe the teple of God, and buyldest it in thre
dayes, helpe thyself. Yf thou be the sonne of God, come downe from the crosse.
41 The hye prestes also in like maner with the scrybes & elders, laughed him to
scorne, and sayde:
42 he hath helped other, and can not helpe himself: Yf he be the kynge of
Israel, let him come downe now from the crosse, and we wil beleue him
43 He trusted in God, let him delyuer him now, yf he wil haue him. For he hath
sayde: I am the sonne of God.
44 The murtherers also that were crucified with him, cast the same in his tethe.
45 And from ye sixte houre there was darcknes ouer the whole earth vnto the
nyenth houre.
46 And aboute the nyenth houre, Iesus cried with a loude voyce, and sayde: Eli,
Eli, Lamma asabthani? that is, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?
47 But some of the that stode there, when they herde yt sayde: He calleth Elias.
48 And immediatly one of them ranne, and toke a spoge, and fylled it with
veneger, and put it vpon a rede, and gaue him to dryncke.
49 But ye other sayde: holde, let se whether Elias wyl come, and delyuer him.
50 Iesus cried agayne with a loude voyce, and gaue vp the goost.
51 And beholde, the vale of the temple was rente in two peces, from aboue tyll
beneth, and the earth quaked, and the stones rent,
52 and the graues opened, and many bodies of the sayntes that slepte, arose,
53 and wete out of the graues after his resurreccion, and came in to the holy
cite, and appeared vnto many.
54 But the captayne and they that were with him, and kepte Iesus, when they sawe
the earthquake and the thinges that were done, they were sore afrayed, and
sayde: Verely this was Gods sonne.
55 And there were many wemen there lokynge to afarre of, which had folowed Iesus
from Galile, and had mynistred vnto him:
56 amonge whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of Iames and Ioses, and
the mother of the children of Zebede.
57 At euen there came a rich man of Arimathia, called Ioseph, which was also a
disciple of Iesus.
58 He wete vnto Pylate, and axed the body of Iesus. Then commaunded Pylate that
the body shulde be geue him.
59 And Ioseph toke the body, and wrapped it in a cleane lynnen cloth,
60 and layed it in his owne new sepulcre, which he had hewen out in a rocke, and
rolled a greate stone to the dore of the sepulcre, and wente his waye.
61 And there was Mary Magdalene and ye other Mary, syttinge ouer agaynst the
sepulcre.
62 The next daye that foloweth the daye of preparynge, the hye prestes and
Pharises came together vnto Pylate,
63 and saide: Syr, we haue called to remembraunce, that this disceauer sayde
whyle he was yet alyue: After thre dayes I wyl ryse agayne.
64 Comaunde therfore that the sepulcre be kepte vnto the thirde daye, lest
peraduenture his disciples come, and steale him awaye, and saye vnto the people:
He is rysen from the deed, and so shal the last errour be worse the the first.
65 Pylate sayde vnto them: There haue ye watchme, go youre waye, and kepe it as
ye can.
66 They wete and kepte the sepulcre wt watchmen, and sealed the stone.

Chapter 28

1 Upon the euenynge of the Sabbath holy daye, which dawneth ye morow of the
first daye of ye Sabbathes, came Mary Magdalene and ye other Mary, to se ye
sepulcre.
2 And beholde, there was made a greate earthquake: for the angell of the LORDE
descended from heauen, and came and rolled backe ye stone from the dore, and sat
vpon it.
3 And his countenaunce was as ye lightenynge, and his clothinge whyte as snowe.
4 But ye watch me were troubled for feare of him, and became as though they were
deed.
5 The angell answered, and sayde vnto ye women: Be not ye afrayed. I knowe that
ye seke Iesus that was crucified.
6 He is not here. He is rysen, as he sayde. Come, and se ye place, where the
LORDE was layed,
7 and go youre waye soone, and tell his disciples, that he is rysen from the
deed. And beholde, he wyl go before you in to Galile, there shal ye se him. Lo,
I haue tolde you.
8 And they departed from the graue in all the haist with feare and greate ioye,
& ranne to brige his disciples worde.
9 And as they were goinge to tell his disciples, beholde, Iesus met them, and
sayde: God spede you. And they wente vnto him, and helde his fete, and fell
downe before him.
10 The sayde Iesus vnto them: Be not afrayed: go youre waye and tell my
brethren, that they go in to Galile, there shal they se me.
11 And whan they were gone, beholde, certayne of the watchmen came in to the
cite, & tolde the hye prestes euery thinge that had happened.
12 And they came together with the elders, and helde a councell, and gaue ye
souders money ynough,
13 and sayde: Saye ye: his disciples came by night, and stole him awaye, whyle
we were a slepe.
14 And yf this come to the debytes eares, we wyl styll him, and brynge it so to
passe, that ye shal be safe.
15 And they toke the money, and dyd as they were taught. And this sayenge is
noysed amonge the Iewes vnto this daye.
16 The eleuen disciples wente vnto Galile in to a mountayne, where Iesus had
appoynted them.
17 And whan they sawe him, they fell downe before him: but some of them douted.
18 And Iesus came vnto them, talked with them, and sayde: Vnto me is geue all
power in heauen and in earth.
19 Go ye youre waye therfore, and teach all nacions, and baptyse them in the
name of the father, and of the sonne, and of the holy goost:
20 and teach them to kepe all thinges, what soeuer I haue commaunded you. And
lo, I am with you euery daye vnto the ende of the worlde.


Mark

Chapter 1

1 This is the begynnynge of the gospell of Iesus Christ the sonne of God,
2 as it is wrytte in the prophetes. Beholde, I sende my messauger before thy
face, which shal prepare thy waye before the.
3 The voyce of a cryer is in the wyldernes: Prepare the waye of the LORDE, make
his pathes straight.
4 Ihon was in the wyldernes, and baptysed, and preached the baptyme of
amendment, for the remyssion of synnes.
5 And there wente out vnto him the whole londe of Iewry, and they of Ierusalem,
and were all baptysed of him in Iordan, and knowleged their synnes.
6 Ihon was clothed with Camels heer, and with a lethron gerdell aboute his
loynes, and ate locustes and wylde hony,
7 and preached, and sayde: There commeth one after me, which is stronger then I:
before whom I am not worthy to stoupe downe, and to lowse vp ye lachet of his
shue.
8 I baptyse you with water, but he shal baptyse you with the holy goost.
9 And it happened at the same tyme, that Iesus came out of Galile from Nazareth,
and was baptysed of Ihon in Iordan.
10 And as soone as he was come out of the water, he sawe that the heauens
opened, and the goost as a doue comynge downe vpon him.
11 And there came a voyce from heaue: Thou art my deare sonne, in whom I delyte.
12 And immediatly the sprete droue him in to the wyldernes:
13 and he was in the wyldernes fourtye dayes, and was tempted of Sathan, and was
with the wylde beestes. And the angels mynistred vnto him.
14 But after that Ihon was taken, Iesus came in to Galile, and preached the
gospell of the kyngdome of God,
15 and sayde: the tyme is fulfylled, and the kyngdome of God is at hande: Amende
youre selues, and beleue the gospell.
16 So as he walked by the see of Galile, he sawe Symon and Andrew his brother,
castinge their nettes in the see, for they were fysshers.
17 And Iesus sayde vnto the: Folowe me, and I wil make you fysshers of me.
18 And immediatly they left their nettes, and folowed him.
19 And when he was gone a lytle further from thence, he sawe Iames the sonne of
Zebede, and Ihon his brother, as they were in the shyppe mendynge their nettes.
20 And anone he called them. And they left their father Zebede in the shyppe
with the hyred seruauntes, and folowed him.
21 And they wente in to Capernaum, and immediatly vpon the Sabbathes, he entred
in to the synagoge, and taught.
22 And they were astonnyed at his doctryne: for he taught them as one hauynge
power, and not as the Scrybes.
23 And in their synagoge there was a man possessed with a foule sprete, which
cried
24 and sayde: Oh what haue we to do with the, thou Iesus of Nazareth. Art thou
come to destroye us? I knowe that thou art euen yt holy one of God.
25 And Iesus reproued him, and sayde: holde thy tonge, and departe out of him.
26 And the foule sprete tare him, and cried with a loude voyce, and departed out
of him.
27 And they were all astonnyed, in so moch that they axed one another amonge the
selues, & sayde: What is this? What new lernynge is this? For he comaundeth the
foule spretes with power, and they are obedient vnto him.
28 And immediatly the fame of him was noysed rounde aboute in the coastes and
borders of Galile.
29 And forth with they wente out of the synagoge, and came in to the house of
Symo and Andrew, wt Iames and Ihon.
30 And Symons mother in lawe laye, & had the feuers, and anone they tolde him of
her.
31 And he came to her, and set her vp, and toke her by ye hande, and the feuer
left her immediatly. And she mynistred vnto them.
32 At euen whan the Sonne was gone downe, they brought vnto him all that were
sick and possessed,
33 and the whole cite was gathered together at the dore,
34 and he healed many that were diseased with dyuerse sicknesses, and cast out
many deuels, and suffred not the deuels to speake, because they knew him.
35 And in the mornynge before daye, he arose, and wente out. And Iesus departed
in to a deserte place, and prayed there.
36 Peter also and they that were with him, folowed after him.
37 And whan they had founde him, they sayde vnto him: Euery man seketh the.
38 And he sayde vnto them: Let us go in to the next townes, that I maye preach
there also, for therto am I come.
39 And he preached i their synagoges, in all Galile, and droue out the deuyls.
40 And there came vnto him a leper, which besought him, and kneled before him, &
sayde vnto him: Yf thou wilt, thou canst make me cleane.
41 And it pitied Iesus, and he stretched forth his honde, and touched him, and
sayde: I wyll, be thou cleane.
42 And wha he had so spoken, immediatly the leprosy departed fro him, and he was
clensed.
43 And Iesus forbad him strately, and forth with sent him awaye,
44 and sayde vnto him: Take hede, that thou saye nothinge to eny man, but go thy
waye, and shew thy self vnto the prest, and offre for thy clensynge what Moses
commaunded, for a wytnesse vnto them.
45 But he whan he was departed, beganne to speake moch of it, and made the dede
knowne: in so moch that Iesus coude no more go into the cite openly, but was
without in deserte places, & they came vnto him fro all quarters.

Chapter 2

1 And after certayne dayes he wente agayne vnto Capernaum, and it was noysed
that he was in ye house.
2 And immediatly there was gathered a greate multitude, in so moch that they had
no rowme, no not without before the dore. And he spake the worde vnto the.
3 And there came vnto him certaine, which brought one sicke of the palsye borne
of foure.
4 And when they coude not come nye him for ye people, they vncouered ye rofe of
ye house where he was. And when they had made a hole, they let downe the bed (by
coardes) wherin the sicke of ye palsy laye.
5 But when Iesus sawe their faith, he sayde vnto the sicke of the palsye: My
sonne, thy synnes are forgeuen the.
6 Neuertheles there were certayne scrybes which sat there, & thought in their
hertes:
7 How speaketh this man soch blasphemy? Who can forgeue synnes, but onely God?
8 And immediatly Iesus knew in his sprete, that they thought so in the selues,
and saide vnto them: Why thynke ye soch thinges in youre hertes?
9 Whether is easier to saye to the sicke of the palsye: Thy synnes are forgeue
the, or to saye: aryse, take vp thy bed and walke.
10 But that ye maye knowe, that ye sonne of man hath power to forgeue synnes
vpon earth, he sayde vnto the sicke of ye palsye:
11 I saye vnto the, aryse, take vp thy bed, and go home.
12 And immediatly he arose, toke his bed, and wente forth before them all: in so
moch that they were all astonnied, and praysed God, and sayde: We neuer sawe
soch.
13 And he wente forth agayne vnto the see, and all the people came vnto him, and
he taught them.
14 And as Iesus passed by, he sawe Leui the sonne of Alpheus syttinge at the
receate of custome, and sayde vnto him: Folowe me. And he arose, and folowed
him.
15 And it came to passe as he sat at the table in his house, there sat many
publicans & synners at the table with Iesus and his disciples: For there were
many yt folowed him.
16 And whan the scrybes and Pharises sawe that he ate with publicans & synners,
they sayde vnto his disciples: Why doth he eate and dryncke with ye publicans
and synners?
17 Whan Iesus herde that, he sayde vnto the: The whole nede not ye Phisician,
but they that are sycke. I am not come to call the righteous, but the synners to
repetaunce.
18 And the disciples of Ihon and of ye Pharises fasted. And there came certaine,
which sayde vnto him: Why fast the disciples of Ihon, and of ye Pharises, and
thy disciples fast not?
19 And Iesus sayde vnto them: How can the weddinge children fast, whyle the
brydegrome is with them? So longe as ye brydegrome is with them, they can not
fast.
20 But the tyme wyl come, that the brydegrome shalbe taken from them, and then
shal they fast.
21 No man soweth a pece of new cloth vnto an olde garment, for els he taketh
awaye the new pece from the olde, and so is the ret worse.
22 And no man putteh new wyne into olde vessels, els the new wyne breaketh the
vessels, and the wyne is spylt, and ye vessels perishe: but new wyne must be put
in to new vessels.
23 And it chaunsed that vpon ye Sabbath he wente thorow the corne feldes, and
his disciples begane to make a waye thorow, and to plucke the eares of ye corne.
24 And the Pharises sayde vnto him: Beholde, what thy disciples do, which is not
laufull vpo the Sabbath.
25 And he sayde vnto the: Haue ye neuer red what Dauid dyd, wha he had nede, and
was anhongred, both he and they that were wt him:
26 how he wente in to the house of God in the tyme of Abiathar the hye prest,
and ate the shewbreds (which was laufull for no man to eate, but for the
prestes) and he gaue them vnto him, and to them that were with him?
27 nd he sayde vnto them: The Sabbath was made for mans sake, and not man for
the Sabbathes sake.
28 Therfore is the sonne of man LORDE euen ouer the Sabbath.

Chapter 3

1 He wente agayne also in to the synagoge, and there was there a ma that had a
wythred hande.
2 And they marked him, whether he wolde heale him on the Sabbath, that they
might accuse him.
3 And he sayde vnto ye ma with the wythred hade: Steppe forth here.
4 And he sayde vnto the: Is it laufull to do good on the Sabbath? Or is it
laufull to do euell? to saue life, or to kyll? But they helde their tonge.
5 And he loked rounde aboute vpon them with wrath, and was sory for the harde
hertes of the, and sayde vnto the man: Stretch out thine hande. And he stretched
it out. And his hande was made whole like as ye other.
6 And the Pharises wete out, and straight waye they helde a councell with
Herodes officers agaynst him, how they might destroye him.
7 But Iesus departed awaye with his disciples vnto the see. And there folowed
him moch people out of Galile, and fro Iewry,
8 and from Ierusale, and out of Idumea, and from beyonde Iordan, and they that
dwelt aboute Tyre and Sydon, a greate multitude which had herde of his noble
actes, and came vnto him.
9 And he spake vnto his disciples yt they shulde kepe a shyppe for him because
of the people, lest they shulde thrunge him:
10 for he healed many of them, in so moch, that all they which were
plaged,preased vpon him, that they might touch him.
11 And whan the foule spretes sawe him, they fell downe before him, and cried,
and sayde: Thou art the sonne of God.
12 And he charged them strately, that they shulde not make him knowne.
13 And he wente vp in to a mountayne, and called vnto him whom he wolde, and
they came vnto him.
14 And he ordeyned ye twolue, that they shulde be with him, and that he might
sende them out to preach,
15 and that they might haue power to heale sicknesses, and to cast out deuyls.
16 And vnto Symon he gaue the name Peter,
17 and Iames the sonne of Zebede, and Ihon the brother of Iames, and gaue the
the name Bonarges, that is to saye, the children of thonder:
18 and Andrew, and Philippe, and Bartylmew, and Mathew, and Thomas, and Iames ye
sonne of Alpheus, and Taddeus, and Symon of Cana,
19 and Iudas Iscarioth which betrayed him.And they came to house.
20 Then assembled the people together agayne, in so moch that they had no
leysure to eate.
21 And when they that were aboute him herde of it, they wente out to holde him.
For they sayde: he taketh to moch vpon him.
22 But the scrybes that were come downe from Ierusalem, sayde: He hath Belzebub,
and thorow the chefe deuell casteth he out deuyls.
23 And he called them together, and spake vnto them in symilitudes:How can one
Sathan dryue out another?
24 And yf a realme be deuyded in it self, how can it endure?
25 And yf a house be deuyded agaynst it self, it can not contynue.
26 Yf Sathan now ryse agaynst him self, and be at variaunce with him self, he
can not endure, but is at an ende.
27 No man can entre in to a stronge mans house, and take awaye his goodes,
excepte he first bynde the stronge man, and then spoyle his house.
28 Verely I saye vnto you: All synnes shalbe forgeuen the children of men, and
the blasphemy also wherwith they blaspheme.
29 But who so blasphemeth the holy goost, hath neuer forgeuenes, but is giltie
of the euerlastinge iudgment.
30 For they sayde: he hath an vncleane sprete.
31 And there came his mother and his brethre, and stode without, and sente vnto
him, and called him.
32 And the people sat aboute him, and sayde vnto him: Beholde, thy mother and
thy brethre axe after the without.
33 And he answered, and sayde: Who is my mother and my brethren?
34 And he loked rounde aboute him vpon his disciples, which sat rounde in
compasse aboute him, and sayde: Beholde, my mother and my brethren.
35 For who so euer doth the will of God the same is my brother, and my sister
and my mother.

Chapter 4

1 And he begane agayne to teach by ye seeside. And there gathered moch people
vnto him, so that he wente in to a shippe, and sat vpon the water. And all the
people stode vpon the londe by the see syde.
2 And he preached longe vnto the by parables, and sayde vnto the in his
doctryne:
3 Herken to, beholde, there wente out a sower to sowe:
4 & it happened whyle he was sowinge, that some fell by the waye syde. Then came
the foules vnder the heauen, and ate it vp.
5 Some fell vpon stonye grounde, where it had not moch earth: and anone it came
vp, because it had not depe earth.
6 Now wha the Sonne arose, it caught heate: and in so moch as it had no rote, it
wythred awaye.
7 And some fel amonge the thornes, & the thornes grew vp, and choked it, and it
gaue no frute.
8 And some fell vpon a good grounde, which gaue frute, that came vp and grew.
And some bare thirtie folde, and some sixtie folde, and some an hundreth folde,
9 And he sayde vnto them: Who so hath eares to heare, let him heare.
10 And whan he was alone, they that were aboute him wt the twolue, axed him
concernynge this parable.
11 And he sayde vnto the: Vnto you it is geuen, to knowe the mystery of the
kyngdome of God: but vnto them that are without, all thinges happen by parables,
12 that with seynge eyes they maye se, and not discerne: and that with hearinge
eares they maye heare, and not vnderstode, lest at eny tyme they turne, and
their synnes be forgeuen them.
13 And he sayde vnto them: Vnderstonde ye not this parable? How wyl ye then
vnderstonde all other parables?
14 The sower soweth the worde.
15 These be they that are by the waye syde: where the worde is sowne, and as
soone as they haue herde it, immediatly commeth Satha, and taketh awaye the
worde that was sowen in their hertes.
16 And likewyse are they that are sowen on the stonye grounde: which when they
haue herde the worde, receaue it with ioye,
17 and haue no rote in them: but endure for a tyme. When trouble and persecucion
aryseth for ye wordes sake, immediatly they are offended.
18 And these are they that are sowen amoge the thornes: which heare the worde,
19 and ye carefulues of this worlde, and the disceatfulnes of riches, and many
other lustes entre in, and choke the worde, and so is it made vnfrutefull.
20 And these are they yt are sowen vpo a good grounde: Which heare ye worde, and
receaue it, and brynge forth frute: some thirtie folde, and some sixtie folde,
and some an hundreth folde.
21 And he sayde vnto the: Is a candle lighted to be put vnder a busshell, or
vnder a table? Is it not lighted, to be set vpon a candelsticke?
22 For there is nothinge hyd, that shal not be openly shewed: and there is
nothinge secrete, yt shal not be knowne.
23 Who so hath eares to heare, let him heare.
24 And he sayde vnto them: Take hede what ye heare. With what measure ye mete,
with the same shal it be measured vnto you agayne. And vnto you that heare this,
shal more be geuen.
25 For who so hath, vnto him shal be geuen: and who so hath not, from him shalbe
taken awaye, euen that he hath.
26 And he sayde: The kyngdome of God is after this maner, as when a man casteth
sede vpon the londe,
27 and slepeth, and stondeth vp night and daye, and the sede spryngeth vp, &
groweth, he not knowinge of it.
28 (For the earth bryngeth forth frute of her selfe: first the grasse,
afterwarde the eare, then the full wheate in the eare)
29 But whan she hath brought forth the frute, he putteth to the syckell, because
the haruest is come.
30 And he sayde: Where vnto wyl we licken the kyngdome of God? Or by what
symilitude wyl we compare it?
31 It is like a grayne of mustarde sede, which wha it is sowe vpo the londe, is
the leest amonge all sedes of the earth.
32 And wha it is sowen, it groweth vp, and is greater then all herbes, and
getteth greate braunches, so yt the foules vnder the heaue maye dwell vnder ye
shadowe therof.
33 And by many soch parables he spake the worde vnto the, there after as they
might heare it,
34 & without parables spake he nothinge vnto them: but vnto his disciples he
expounded all thinges pryuately.
35 And the same daye at euen he sayde vnto them: let us passe ouer.
36 And they let the people go, and toke him as he was in the shippe, and there
were mo shippes with him.
37 And there arose a greate storme of wynde, and dasshed the wawes in to the
shippe, so that the shippe was full.
38 And he was behynde in the shippe and slepte vpon a pelowe. And they awoke him
& sayde vnto him: Master, Carest thou not, that we perishe?
39 And he arose, and rebuked ye wynde, and sayde vnto the see: Peace, and be
styll, And the wynde was layed, & there folowed a greate calme.
40 And he sayde vnto them: Why are ye so fearfull? How is it, that ye haue no
faith?
41 And they feared exceadingly, & sayde one to another: What is he this? For
wynde and see are obedient vnto him.

Chapter 5

1 And they came ouer vnto the other syde of the see in to the countre of the
Gaderenites.
2 And whan he wete out of the shippe, there met him a ma possessed of an
vncleane sprete,
3 which had his dwellinge in the graues. And no man coude bynde hym, no not with
cheynes:
4 for he was oft bounde with fetters & cheynes, and pluckte the cheynes in
sunder, and brake the fetters in peces, and no man coude tame him.
5 And he was allwaye both daye and night vpon the mountaynes and in the graues
crienge, and beatinge him self with stones.
6 But whan he sawe Iesus afarre of, he ranne, and fell downe before him,
7 and cried loude, and sayde: What haue I to do with the O Iesus thou sonne of
ye Hyest God? I charge the by God, that thou torment me not.
8 Neuertheles he sayde vnto him: Go out of the man thou foule sprete.
9 And he axed him: What is thy name? And he answered and sayde: My name is
Legion, for there be many of vs.
10 And he prayed him instantly, that he wolde not sende them awaye out of that
countre.
11 And euen there in the mountaynes there was a greate heerd of swyne fedynge,
12 and all the deuyls praied him, and sayde: Let vs departe in to the swyne.
13 And anone Iesus gaue them leue. Then the foule spretes wente out, and intred
in to the swyne. And the heerd of swyne, ranne heedlinges in to ye see with a
storme. They were aboute a two thousande swyne, and were drowned in the see.
14 And the swyneherdes fled, and tolde it in the cite, and in the countre. And
they wente out for to se what had happened,
15 and came to Iesus, and sawe hym which was possessed and had had ye legion,
that he sat, and was clothed, and in his right mynde, and they were afrayed.
16 And they that had sene it, tolde them what had happened to the possessed, and
of the swyne.
17 And they beganne to praye him, that he wolde departe out of their coastes.
18 And whan he came in to the shyppe, the possessed prayed him, that he might be
with him.
19 Neuertheles Iesus wolde not suffre hi, but saide vnto hi: Go i to yi house &
to thine awne, and tell the how greate benefites the LORDE hath done for ye, and
how he hath had mercy vpon the.
20 And he wente his waye, and beganne to publish in the ten cities how greate
benefites Iesus had done for him. And euery man marueyled.
21 And whan Iesus passed ouer agayne by shippe, there gathered moch people vnto
him, and was by the see syde.
22 And beholde, there came one of the rulers of the synagoge, whose name was
Iairus. And whan he sawe him, he fell downe at his fete,
23 and besought him greatly, & sayde: My doughter is at the poynte (of death)
let it be thy pleasure to come and laye thine honde vpon her, that she maye be
whole and lyue.
24 And he wente with him, and moch people folowed him, and thronged him.
25 And there was a woman, which had had the bloude yssue twolue yeares,
26 and had suffred moch of many phisicians, and spent all that she had, and was
not helped, but rather in worse case.
27 Whan she herde of Iesus, she came behynde amonge the people, and touched his
garment.
28 For she sayde: Yf I maye but touch his clothes, I shalbe whole.
29 And immediatly ye fountayne of hir bloude was dryed vp, and she felt in hir
body, yt she was healed of the plage.
30 And forth with Iesus felt in himself the power that was gone out of him, and
turned him aboute amoge the people, and sayde: Who hath touched my clothes?
31 And his disciples sayde vnto him: Thou seist that the people thrusteth the,
and sayest: Who hath touched me?
32 And he loked aboute to se her, that had done it.
33 As for the woman, she feared and trembled (for she knew, what was done in
her) and came and fell downe before him, and tolde him the whole trueth.
34 And he sayde vnto her: Doughter, thy faith hath made the whole: go thy waye
in peace, & be whole of thy plage.
35 Whyle he yet spake, there came certayne from the ruler of the synagoges
house, and sayde: Thy doughter is deed, why troublest thou the master eny more?
36 But Iesus herde right soone the worde that was spoken, and sayde vnto the
ruler of the synagoge: Be not thou afrayed, beleue onely.
37 And he suffred no ma to folowe him, but Peter and Iames and Ihon his brother.
38 And he came in to the ruler of the synagoges house, and sawe the busynes, and
them that wepte and wayled greatly:
39 and he wente in, and sayde vnto them: Why make ye this a doo, and wepe? The
mayde is not deed, but slepeth.
40 And they laughed him to scorne And he droue them all out, and toke the father
and mother of the mayde, and them that were with him, and wente in where the
mayden laye.
41 And he toke the mayde by the honde, and sayde vnto her: Thabitha Cumi (which
is by interpretaeion) Mayde, I saye vnto the: Aryse.
42 And immediatly the mayden arose, and walked. She was twolue yeare olde, and
they were astonnyed out of measure.
43 And he charged them strately, that no man shulde knowe of it, and sayde vnto
them, that they shulde geue her to eate.

Chapter 6

1 And he departed thence, and came in to his awne countre, and his disciples
folowed him.
2 And wha ye Sabbath came, he begane to teach in their synagoge. And many that
herde it, marueled at his lernynge, and sayde: From whece hath he these thinges?
And what wyssdome is this, yt is geue him: & soch actes as are done by his
handes?
3 Is not this the Carpenter the sonne of Mary, and the brother of Iames and
Ioses, and of Iude and Symon? Are not his sisters here with vs also? And they
were offended at him.
4 But Iesus saide vnto the: A prophet is nowhere lesse set by, the in his awne
countre, & at home amonge his awne.
5 And he coude not shew one miracle there, but layed his handes vpon a few
sicke, and healed them.
6 And he marueyled at their vnbeleue.And he wente aboute in the townes on euery
syde, and taught them.
7 And called the twolue, and begane to sende them two and two, and gaue them
power ouer the vncleane spretes.
8 And commaunded the, that they shulde take nothinge with them towarde their
iourney, saue onely a rodde: no scrippe, no bred, no money in the gerdell,
9 but shulde be shod with sandales, and that they shulde not put on two cotes.
10 And he sayde vnto them: Where so euer ye shal entre in to an house, there
abyde, tyll ye go thence.
11 And who so euer wyll not receaue you, ner heare you, departe out from thence,
and shake of the dust from youre fete, for a wytnesse vnto them. I saye vnto you
verely: It shal be easyer for Sodome and Gomorra in the daye of iudgment, then
for that cite.
12 And they wete forth, and preached, that men shulde amede them selues,
13 and they cast out many deuyls: and many that were sicke anoynted they with
oyle, and healed the.
14 And it came to kynge Herods eares (for his name was now knowne) and he sayde:
Ihon the baptist is rysen agayne from the deed, and therfore are his dedes so
mightie.
15 But some sayde: It is Elias. Some sayde: It is a prophet, or one of ye
prophetes.
16 But when Herode herde it, he sayde: It is Ihon whom I beheeded, he is rysen
againe from the deed.
17 This Herode had sent forth, and taken Ihon, and put him in preson, because of
Herodias his brother Philippes wife, for he had maried her.
18 Neuertheles Ihon sayde vnto Herode It is not laufull for the to haue yi
brothers wife.
19 But Herodias layed wayte for him, and wolde haue slayne him, and coude not.
20 Notwithstodinge Herode feared Iho, for he knew that he was a iust and holy
man: and he kepte him, and herkened vnto him in many thinges, and herde him
gladly.
21 And there came a conuenient daye, that Herode on his byrth daye made a supper
to the lordes, captaynes and chefe estates of Galile.
22 Then the daughter of Herodias came in, and daunsed, and pleased Herode, and
them that sat at the table. Then sayde the kynge vnto ye damsel: Axe of me what
thou wilt, I wil geue it the.
23 And he sware vnto her: What soeuer thou shalt axe of me, I wil geue it the,
euen vnto ye one half of my kyngdome.
24 She wente forth, and sayde vnto hir mother: what shal I axe? She sayde: Ihon
baptistes heade.
25 And immediatly she wete in to the kinge with haist, and sayde: I will that
thou geue me straight waye in a platter the heed of Ihon the baptist.
26 Then the kynge was sory: Yet for the oothes sake and the that sat at the
table, he wolde not saye her nay.
27 And immediatly he sent the hangman, and commaunded his heade to be brought
in. So he wete, and heeded him in the preson,
28 and brought his heade in a platter, and gaue it vnto the damsell, and the
damsell gaue it vnto hir mother.
29 And whan his disciples herde that, they came and toke his body, & layed it in
a graue.
30 And the Apostles came together vnto Iesus, and tolde hi all, and what they
had done and taught.
31 And he sayde vnto them: Let vs go out of the waye in to the wyldernes, and
rest a litle. For there were many comers and goers, and they had not tyme ynough
to eate.
32 And there he passed by shippe out of ye waye in to a deserte place.
33 And the people sawe the departynge awaye, and many knewe of it, & ranne
thither together of fote out of all cities, & came before the, & came vnto him.
34 And Iesus wente out, and sawe moch people, and had copassion vpon them: for
they were as the shepe, that haue no shepherde, and he begane a loge sermon.
35 Now whan the daye was farre past, his disciples came vnto him, and sayde:
This is a deserte place,
36 let them departe, that they maye go in to the vyllagies and townes rounde
aboute, and bye them selues bred, for they haue nothinge to eate.
37 But Iesus answered and sayde vnto them: geue ye them to eate.And they sayde
vnto him: Shal we go then, and bye two hundreth peny worth of bred, and geue
them to eate?
38 He sayde vnto them: How many loaues haue ye? Go and se. And when they had
searched, they sayde: Fyue, and two fisshes.
39 And he commaunded them all to syt downe by table fulles vpon the grene
grasse.
40 And they sat downe here a rowe and there a rowe by hundreds and by fifties.
41 And he toke the fyue loaues and two fisshes, and loked vp vnto heauen, and
gaue thankes, and brake the loaues, and gaue to the disciples, to set before
them. And the two fisshes parted he amonge them all.
42 And they all ate, and were satisfied.
43 And they toke vp twolue baskettes full of ye broken peces and of the fisshes.
44 And they that ate, were aboute fyue thousande men.
45 And anone he caused his disciples to go in to the shippe, and to passe ouer
before him vnto Bethsaida, whyle he sent awaye the people.
46 (Omitted Text)
47 And at euen was the shippe in the myddest of the see, and he alone vpon the
londe.
48 And he sawe that they were in parell with rowynge, for the wynde was agaynst
them.And aboute the fourth watch of ye night he came vnto them, and walked vpon
the see, and wolde haue gone ouer by the.
49 And whan they sawe him walkinge vpon the see, they thought it had bene a
sprete, and cried out,
50 for they sawe him all, and were afrayed. But immediatly he talked with them,
and sayde vnto them: Be of good comforte, it is I, be not afrayed.
51 And he wete vnto them in to the shippe, and the wynde ceassed. And they were
astonnyed, and marueled exceadingly:
52 for they had forgotten the loaues, and their hert was blynded.
53 And whan they were passed ouer, they came in to lande of Genezareth, and drue
vp in to the hauen.
54 And whan thy were come out of the shippe, immediatly they knewe him,
55 and ranne thorow out all the region aboute, and beganne on euery syde to
brynge vnto him in beddes soch as were sicke, where they herde that he was.
56 And whither so euer he entred in to townes, cities or vyllagies, there layed
they the sicke in the market place, and prayed him, that they might but touch
the hemme of his garment. And as many as touched him, were made whole.

Chapter 7

1 And there came vnto him the Pharises, and certayne of the scrybes, that were
come from Ierusale.
2 And wha they sawe certayne of his disciples eate bred with comon (that is,
with vnwashen) handes, they complayned.
3 For the Pharises & all the Iewes eate not, excepte they wash their handes oft
tymes: obseruynge so the tradicions of the elders.
4 And whan they come from the market, they eate not, excepte they wasshe. And
many other thynges there be, which they haue taken vpon them to obserue, as the
washinge of cuppes and cruses, and brasen vessels and tables.
5 Then the Pharises and scrybes axed him: Why walke not thy disciples after the
tradicions of the elders, but eate bred with vnwasshen handes?
6 But he answered & sayde vnto them: Full well hath Esay prophecied of you
Ypocrytes, as it is wrytte: This people honoureth me wt their lippes, but their
hert is farre fro me.
7 But in vayne do they serue me, whyle they teach soch doctrynes as are nothinge
but the commaundemetes of me.
8 Ye leaue the comaundement of God and kepe the tradicions of men, as the
wasshynge of cruses and cuppes, & many soch thinges do ye.
9 And he saide vnto the: How goodly haue ye cast asyde the comaundement of God,
to manteyne youre owne tradicions?
10 For Moses sayde: Honoure father & mother. Whoso curseth father and mother,
shal dye the death.
11 But ye saye: A ma shal saye to father or mother: Corban, that is, The thinge
yt I shulde helpe the withall, is geue vnto God.
12 And thus ye suffre him nomore to do ought for his father or his mother,
13 & make Gods worde of none effecte, thorow youre owne tradicions that ye haue
set vp. And many soch thinges do ye.
14 And he called vnto him all the people, and sayde vnto them: Herken vnto me ye
all, and vnderstonde me.
15 There is nothinge without a man, that can defyle him, whan it entreth in to
him. But that goeth out of him, that is it that maketh the man vncleane.
16 Yf eny man haue eares to heare, let him heare.
17 And whan he came from the people in to ye house, his disciples axed him of
this symilitude.
18 And he sayde vnto them: Are ye so then without vnderstondinge? Perceaue ye
not yet, yt euery thinge which is without, and goeth in to the ma, can not
defyle him?
19 For it entreth not in to his hert, but in to ye bely, and goeth out in to the
draught, that purgeth all meates.
20 And he sayde: The thinge that goeth out of the man,
21 that defyleth the man. For from within out of the hert of man proceade euell
thoughtes, aduoutrye, whordome, murthur,
22 theft, coueteousnes, wickednes, disceate, vnclennes, a wicked eye, blasphemy,
pryde, foolishnes.
23 All these euell thinges go from within, and defyle the man.
24 And he arose, and wente from thence in to the borders of Tyre and Sydon, &
entred in to an house, and wolde let no man knowe of it, and yet coude he not be
hyd:
25 For a certayne woman (whose doughter had a foule sprete) herde of him, and
came and fell downe at his fete
26 (and it was in Heithe woman of Syrophenices) and she besought him, that he
wolde dryue out the deuell from hir doughter.
27 But Iesus sayde vnto her: Let the children be fed first: It is not mete to
take the childres bred, and to cast it vnto dogges.
28 She answered and sayde vnto him: Yee LORDE, neuertheles the whelpes also eate
vnder ye table, of ye childres cromes.
29 And he sayde vnto her: Because of this sayenge go thy waye, the deuell is
departed out of thy doughter.
30 And she wente vnto her house, & founde that the deuell was departed, and hir
doughter lyenge on the bed.
31 And whan he wente out agayne from the coastes of Tyre and Sydon, he came vnto
the see of Galile, thorw the myddes of ye coastes of the te cities.
32 And they brought vnto him one that was deaf, and had impediment in his
speach. And they prayed him, that he wolde laye his hande vpon him.
33 And he toke him a syde from the people, and put his fyngers in his eares, and
dyd spyt, and touched his tonge,
34 and loked vp vnto heauen, sighed, and sayde vnto him: Ephatha, that is, be
opened.
35 And immediatly his eares were opened, and the bonde of his toge was lowsed,
and he spake right.
36 And he charged them, that they shulde tell noman.But the more he forbad them,
the more they published it,
37 & marueyled out of measure, and sayde: He hath done all thinges well. The
deaf hath he made to heare, and the domme to speake.

Chapter 8

1 At the same tyme whan there was moch people there, and had nothinge to eate,
Iesus called his disciples to him, and sayde vnto them:
2 I haue compassion vpon the people, for they haue taried wt me now thre dayes,
& haue nothinge to eate.
3 And yf I let them go home fro me fastynge, they shulde faynte by the waye. For
some of them were come from farre.
4 And his disciples answered him: Where shulde we get bred here in the
wyldernes, to satisfie them?
5 And he axed the: How many loaues haue ye? They sayde: Seuen.
6 And he commaunded the people to syt downe vpon the grounde. And he toke the
seuen loaues, and gaue thakes, and brake them, and gaue the vnto his disciples
to set them before the people. And they set the before the people.
7 And they had a few small fyshes, and whan he had geuen thankes, he bad set the
same before the people.
8 They ate, and were satisfied, & toke vp seue basskettes full of ye broke meate
that was left.
9 And they yt ate, were vpo a foure thousande. And he sent the awaye.
10 And forth with he wente in to a shippe with his disciples, and came in to the
coastes of Dalmanutha.
11 And the Pharises wente out, and begane to dispute with him, and tempted him,
and desyred a token of him from heaue.
12 And he sighed in his sprete, and sayde: Why doth this generacion seke a
token? Verely I saye vnto you: There shal no toke be geue vnto this generacion.
13 And he left them, and wete againe into the shippe, and passed ouer.
14 And they forgat to take bred with them, and had nomore with them in the
shippe but one loaf.
15 And he comaunded them, and sayde: Take hede, and bewarre of the leuen of the
Pharises, and of the leuen of Herode.
16 And their myndes wauered here and there, and sayde amonge them selues: This
is it, that we haue no bred.
17 And Iesus vnderstode that, and sayde vnto them: Why trouble ye youre selues,
that ye haue no bred? Are ye yet without vnderstondinge? Haue ye yet a blynded
hert in you?
18 Haue ye eyes, & se not? and haue ye eares, and heare not? and remebre ye not,
19 that I brake fyue loaues amonge fyue thousande, how many basskettes full of
broken meate toke ye then vp? They sayde: twolue.
20 And whan I brake the seuen amonge the foure thousande, how many baskettes
full of broken meate toke ye then vp? They sayde: Seuen.
21 And he sayde vnto the: Why are ye then without vnderstondinge?
22 And he came to Bethsaida, & they brought one blynde vnto him, and prayed him
to touch him.
23 And he toke the blynde by the hande, aud led him out of the towne, and spat
in his eyes, and layed his handes vpon him, and axed him whether he sawe ought.
24 And he loked vp, and sayde: I se men goynge as yf I sawe trees.
25 After this he layed his handes vpon his eyes ageyne, and made him to se. And
he was brought to right againe, and sawe all clearly.
26 And he sent him home, and sayde: Go not in to ye towne, and tell it also vnto
noman therin.
27 And Iesus wente out and his disciples into the townes of the cite Cesarea
Philippi, And in ye waye he axed his disciples and sayde vnto them: What do men
saye, that I am?
28 They answered: They saye, thou art Ihon the baptist: Some saye thou art
Elias, some that thou art one of the prophetes.
29 And he sayde vnto them: But whom saye ye that I am? Then answered Peter and
sayde vnto him: Thou art very Christ.
30 And he charged them strately, that they shulde tell no man of him.
31 And he begane to teach them: The sonne of man must suffre many thinges, and
be cast out of the elders & hye prestes and scrybes, and be put to death, and
after thre dayes ryse agayne.
32 And that worde spake he fre openly. And Peter toke him vnto him, and beganne
to rebuke him.
33 But he turned him aboute, and loked vpon his disciples, and reproued Peter,
and sayde: Go after me thou Sathan, for thou sauourest not the thinges that be
of God, but of men.
34 And he called vnto him the people with his disciples, and sayde vnto them:
Who so euer wyl folowe me, let him denye himself, and take vp his crosse, and
folowe me.
35 For who so euer wyl saue his life, shal lose it: and who so euer loseth his
life for my sake and ye gospels, ye same shal saue it.
36 What helpeth it a ma though he wane the whole worlde, and yet toke harme in
his soule?
37 Or, what can a man geue, to redeme his soule withall?
38 Who so euer is ashamed of me and of my wordes amonge this aduouterous and
synfull generacion, of him shal the sonne of man also be ashamed, whan he
commeth in the glory of his father with the holy angels.

Chapter 9

1 And he sayde vnto them: Verely I saye vnto you: There stode here some, which
shal not taist of death, tyll they se the kyngdome of God come with power.
2 And after sixe dayes Iesus toke vnto him Peter, Iames and Ihon, and brought
them vp in to an hye mountayne out of the waye alone, and was ttasfigured before
them,
3 and his clothes were bright and very whyte as ye snowe, so whyte as no fuller
can make vpon earth.
4 And there appeared vnto the Elias with Moses, and they talked with Iesus.
5 And Peter answered, and sayde vnto Iesus: Rabbi, here is good beynge for vs.
Let vs make thre tabernacles: one for the, one for Moses, and one for Elias.
6 For he knewe not what he sayde, and they were very fearfull.
7 And there was a cloude, which ouershadowed the. And out of the cloude there
came a voyce, and sayde: This is my deare sonne, heare him.
8 And immediatly they loked aboute them, and sawe noman more then Iesus onely
with them.
9 But whan they wente downe from the mountayne, Iesus charged them, that they
shulde tell no man what they had sene, tyll the sonne of man were rysen agayne
from the deed.
10 And they kepte that sayenge by them, and axed one another: What is that
rysinge agayne from the deed?
11 And they axed him, and sayde: Why saye the scrybes then, that Elias must
first come?
12 He answered and sayde vnto them: Elias shal come first in dede, and brynge
all thinges to right agayne. The sonne of man also shal suffre many thinges, and
be despysed, as it is wrytten.
13 But I saye vnto you: Elias is come, and they haue done vnto him what they
wolde, acordinge as it is wrytten of him?
14 And he came to his disciples, and sawe moch people aboute them, and the
scrybes disputynge with them.
15 And as soone as the people sawe, they were astonnyed, and ranne vnto him, and
saluted him.
16 And he axed the scrybes: What dispute ye with them?
17 And one of the people answered, and sayde: Master, I haue brought vnto the my
sonne, which hath a domme sprete:
18 and whan so euer he taketh him, he teareth him, and he fometh, and gnassheth
with the teth, and pyneth awaye, & I haue spoken to thy disciples that they
shulde cast him out, and they coude not.
19 He answered him, and sayde: O thou vnfaithfull generacion, how longe shal I
be with you? How longe shal I suffre you? Brynge hi hither to me.
20 And they brought him vnto him. And as soone as the sprete sawe him, he tare
him, and fell vpon the earth, and weltred and fomed.
21 And he axed his father: How longe is it, sens this happened vnto him? He
sayde: Of a childe,
22 and oft tymes hath he cast him in to the fyre and water, to destroye him: but
yf thou canst do enythinge, haue mercy vpon vs, and helpe vs.
23 Iesus sayde vnto him: Yf thou couldest beleue: All thinges are possible vnto
him that beleueth.
24 And immediatly the father of the childe cried with teares, and sayde: LORDE I
beleue: O helpe thou myne vnbeleue.
25 Now whan Iesus sawe that the people ranne to, he rebuked the foule sprete,
and sayde vnto him: Thou domme and deaf sprete, I charge the, departe out of
him, and entre nomore in to him from hence forth.
26 And he cried, and rent him sore, and departed. And he was as though he had
bene deed, in so moch that many sayde: he is deed.
27 But Iesus toke him by the hande, and set him vp. And he arose.
28 And whan he came home, his disciples axed him secretly: Why coulde not we
cast him out?
29 And he sayde: This kynde ca go out by no meanes, but by prayer and fastynge.
30 And they departed thece, and toke their iourney thorow Galile, and he wolde
not that eny man shulde knowe of it.
31 But he taught his disciples, and sayde vnto them: The sonne of ma shalbe
delyuered in to the handes of men, and they shal put him to death: and whan he
is put to death, he shal ryse ageyne the thirde daye.
32 But they vnderstode not that worde, and were afrayed to axe him.
33 And he came to Capernaum. And whan he was at home, he axed them? What
disputed ye amonge youre selues by ye waye?
34 But they helde their tuges: For they had disputed by the waye amonge them
selues, who shulde be ye greatest.
35 And he sat downe, and called the twolue, and sayde vnto them: Yf eny man wyl
be the first, the same shal be the last of all, and the seruaunt of all.
36 And he toke a childe, and set him in the myddest of them, and toke him in his
armes, and sayde vnto them:
37 Who so euer receaueth soch a childe in my name, receaueth me: and who so euer
receaueth me, receaueth not me, but him that hath sent me.
38 Ihon answered him, and sayde: Master, we sawe one dryue out deuels in thy
name, but he foloweth not vs, and we forbad him because he foloweth vs not.
39 But Iesus sayde: Forbyd him not: for there is no ma that doth a myracle in my
name, and can soone speake euell of me.
40 For who so euer is not agaynst vs, the same is for vs.
41 And who so euer geueth you a cuppe of water to drynke in my name, because ye
belonge vnto Christ, verely I saye vnto you: he shal not lose his rewarde.
42 And who so offendeth one of these litle ones that beleue in me, it were
better for him, that a mylstone were haged aboute his neck, and he cast in to
the see.
43 Yf thy hade offende the, cut him of. Better it is for the to entre in to life
lame, the hauynge two hondes to go in to hell in to the euerlastinge fyre,
44 where their worme dyeth not, and their fyre goeth not out.
45 Yf thy fote offende the, cut him of. Better it is for the to entre into life
crepell, the hauynge two fete to be cast in to hell in the fyre euerlastynge,
46 where their worme dyeth not, and their fyre goeth not out.
47 Yf thine eye offende the, cast him from the. Better it is for the to entre in
to ye kyngdome of God with one eye, then hauynge two eyes to be cast in to the
fyre of hell:
48 where their worme dyeth not, and their fyre goeth not out.
49 For euery ma must be salted wt fyre, & euery offerynge shalbe seasoned wt
salt.
50 The salt is good: but yf ye salt be vnsauery, wherwith all shal it be salted?
Haue salt in you & peace amonge yor selues one with another.

Chapter 10

1 And he rose vp, and came from thence in to the places of Iewry beyonde Iordan.
And the people wete agayne vnto him by heapes, and as his maner was he taught
them agayne.
2 And the Pharises came vnto him, and axed him, yf it were laufull for a man to
put awaye his wife, and tempted him withall.
3 But he answered and sayde: What hath Moses comaunded you?
4 They sayde: Moses suffred to wryte a testimoniall of deuorcemet, and to put
her awaye.
5 Iesus answered, and sayde vnto them: Because of ye hardnesse of yor hert dyd
Moses wryte you this commaundement.
6 But from the first creacion God made the man and woman.
7 For this cause shal a man leaue his father & mother, and cleue vnto his wife,
8 and they two shalbe one flesh. Now are they not twayne the, but one flesh.
9 Let not man therfore put asunder that, which God hath coupled together.
10 And at home his disciples axed him agayne of ye same.
11 And he sayde vnto the: Who so euer putteth awaye his wife, & marieth another,
breaketh wedlocke to her warde.
12 And yf a woma forsake hir hussbande, & be maried to another, she comitteth
aduoutrie.
13 And they brought childre vnto him, that he might touch them. But the
disciples reproued those that brought the.
14 Neuertheles whan Iesus sawe it, he was displeased, and sayde vnto them:
Suffre the children to come vnto me, and forbyd them not, for of soch is the
kyngdome of God.
15 Verely I saye vnto you: Who so euer receaueth not the kyngdome of God as a
childe, he shal not entre therin.
16 And he toke them vp in his armes, and layed his handes vpon them, and blessed
them.
17 And whan he was gone forth vpon the waye, there came one runninge, and kneled
vnto him, & axed him: Good Master, what shal I do, that I maye inheret
euerlastinge life?
18 But Iesus saide vnto him: Why callest thou me good? There is no man good, but
God onely,
19 Thou knowest the commaundementes: Thou shalt not breake wedlocke: thou shalt
not kyll: thou shalt not steale: thou shalt beare no false wytnesse: thou shalt
begyle no man: Honoure thy father and mother.
20 But he answered, and sayde vnto him: Master, all these haue I kepte fro my
youth vp.
21 And Iesus behelde him, and loued him, & sayde vnto him: Thou wantest one
thinge: Go thy waye, and sell all that thou hast, and geue it vnto ye poore: so
shalt thou haue a treasure in heauen, and come & folowe me, and take the crosse
vpon ye.
22 And he was disconforted at the sayenge, & wente awaye sory, for he had greate
possessions.
23 And Iesus loked aboute him, and sayde vnto his disciples: O how hardly shal
the ryche come into ye kyngdome of God?
24 And the disciples were astonnyed at his wordes. But Iesus answered agayne,
and sayde vnto them: Deare children, how harde is it for them that trust in
riches, to come into the kyngdome of God?
25 It is easier for a Camell to go thorow the eye of a nedle, then for a rich
man to entre in to ye kyngdome of God.
26 Yet were they astonnyed ye more, and sayde amonge the selues: Who can the be
saued?
27 But Iesus behelde them, and sayde: With men it is vnpossyble, but not with
God: for with God all thinges are possyble.
28 Then sayde Peter vnto him: Beholde, we haue forsaken all, and folowed the.
29 Iesus answered & sayde: Verely I saye vnto you: There is no man that
forsaketh house, or brethren, or sisters, or father or mother, or wife, or
children, or londes for my sake and the gospels,
30 that shal not receaue an hundreth folde now in this tyme, houses, and
brethre, and sisters, and mothers and children, and londes with persecucions,
and in the worlde to come euerlastinge life.
31 But many that are the first, shal be the last: and the last the first.
32 They were in the waye goinge vp to Ierusalem, and Iesus wente before them.
And they were astonnyed, and folowed him, and were afrayed. And Iesus toke the
twolue agayne, and tolde them what shulde happe vnto him.
33 Beholde, we go vp to Ierusalem, and the sonne of man shalbe delyuered vnto
the hye prestes and scrybes, and they shal condemne him to death, and delyuer
him vnto the Heythe.
34 And they shal mocke hi, and scourge him, and spyt vpon him, and put him to
death, and on the thirde daye shal he ryse agayne.
35 Then wete vnto him Iames and Ihon ye sonnes of Zebede, and sayde: Master, We
desyre, that what soeuer we axe of the, thou wilt do it for vs.
36 He sayde vnto the: What desyre ye that I shal do to you?
37 They sayde vnto him: Graunte vs, that we maye syt one at thy right hande, and
one at thy left hande in thy glory.
38 But Iesus sayde vnto the: Ye wote not what ye axe. Maye ye drynke the cuppe,
yt I shal drynke? and be baptysed with the baptyme that I shal be baptysed
withall?
39 They sayde vnto him: Yee yt we maye. Iesus sayde vnto them: The cuppe that I
drynke, shal ye drynke in dede: and be baptysed with the baptyme that I shall be
baptysed withall.
40 Neuertheles to syt at my right hande and at my left, is not myne to geue you,
but vnto them for whom it is prepared.
41 And wha the ten herde that, they disdayned at Iames and Ihon.
42 But Iesus called them, and sayde vnto them: Ye knowe that the prynces of ye
worlde haue domynacion of the people, and ye mightie exercise auctorite amonge
them.
43 So shal it not be amonge you: but who so euer wil be greate amoge you, shal
be youre mynister:
44 and who so wyl be chefest amonge you, shalbe seruaunt of all.
45 For the sonne of man also came not to be serued, but to do seruyce, and to
geue his life to a redempcion for many.
46 And they came vnto Iericho. And whan he wente out of Iericho, and his
disciples, and moch people, there sat one blynde Barthimeus the sonne of Thimeus
by ye waye, and begged.
47 And wha he herde that it was Iesus of Nazareth, he beganne to crie and saye:
Iesu thou sonne of Dauid haue mercy vpon me.
48 And many reproued him, that he shulde holde his tunge. But he cried moch
more: Thou sonne of Dauid haue mercyvpo me.
49 And Iesus stode styll, and bad call him. And they called the blynde, and
sayde vnto him: Be of good conforte, aryse, he calleth the.
50 And he cast awaye his garment from him, stode vp, aud came to Iesus.
51 And Iesus answered, & sayde vnto him: What wilt thou that I do vnto the? The
blynde sayde vnto him: Master, that I might se.
52 Iesus sayde vnto him: Go yi waye, thy faith hath helped ye. And immediatly he
had his sight and folowed him in the waye.

Chapter 11

1 And whan they came nye Ierusalem to Bethphage and Bethanye vnto mount Oliuete,
he sent two of his disciples,
2 and sayde vnto them: Go in to the towne that lyeth before you, and as soone as
ye come in, ye shal fynde a foale bounde, wher vpon no man hath sytte: lowse it,
and brynge it hither.
3 And yf eny man saye vnto you: wherfore do ye that? Then saye ye: The LORDE
hath nede therof, and forth with he shal sende it hither.
4 They wete their waie and founde the foale tyed by ye dore without at the
partynge of the waye, and lowsed it.
5 And certayne of those yt stode there, axed them: What do ye, that ye lowse the
foale?
6 But they sayde vnto the, like as Iesus had commaunded them. And so they let
them alone.
7 And they brought the foale vnto Iesus, and layed their clothes theron, and he
sat theron.
8 But many spred their garmetes in the waye: some cut downe braunches fro the
trees, and strowed the in the waye.
9 And they that wente before, and that folowed after, cried, and sayde:
Hosyanna, blessed be he, that commeth in the name of the LORDE:
10 blessed be the kyngdome of oure father Dauid, which commeth in the name of
the LORDE. Hosyanna in the height.
11 And the LORDE entred in to Ierusalem, and wente in to the temple, and loked
vpon all. And at euen he wente out vnto Bethany with the twolue:
12 and on the morow wha they departed from Bethanye, he hugred,
13 and sawe a fygge tre afarre of, which had leaues. Then came he nye, (to se)
yf he coude fynde eny thinge theron.And whan he came to it, he founde nothinge
but leaues (for the tyme of fygges was not yet)
14 And Iesus answered, and sayde vnto it: Neuer ma eate frute of the for
euermore. And his disciples herde it.
15 And they came to Ierusalem. And Iesus wente in to the temple, and beganne to
dryue out the sellers and byers in the teple, & ouerthrew the tables of the
money chaungers, and the stoles of the doue sellers,
16 and suffred not eny man to cary a vessell thorow the temple.
17 And he taught and sayde vnto them: Is it not wrytten: My house shalbe called
a house of prayer for all people? But ye haue made it a denne of murthurers.
18 And the scrybes and hye prestes herde of it. And they sought how they might
destroye him, but they were afrayed of him, for all the people marueled at his
doctryne.
19 And at euen he wente out of the cite.
20 And on the morow they passed by, and sawe the fygge tre, that it was wythred
vnto the rote.
21 And Peter thought theron, and sayde vnto him: Master, beholde, the fygge tre
yt thou cursedest, is wythred awaye.
22 Iesus answered, and sayde vnto them: Haue faith in God.
23 Verely I saye vnto you: Who so euer saieth vnto this mountayne: Avoyde, and
cast thy self in to the see, and douteth not in his hert, but beleueth that the
thinges shal come to passe which he saieth, then loke what he sayeth, it shal
come to passe.
24 Therfore I saye vnto you: What so euer ye desyre in youre prayer, beleue that
ye shal receaue it, and ye shal haue it.
25 And whan ye stonde and praye, forgeue yf ye haue ought ageynst eny man, that
youre father also in heauen, maye forgeue you youre trespaces.
26 (Omitted Text)
27 And they came agayne vnto Ierusalem and whan he wente in the temple, there
came vnto him the hye prestes and scrybes and the elders,
28 and sayde vnto him: By what auctorite dost thou these thinges? and who gaue
the this auctorite to do soch?
29 But Iesus answered and sayde vnto the: I wil axe you a worde also, answere
me, and I wyl tell you, by what auctorite I do these.
30 The baptyme of Ihon, was it from heauen, or of men? Answere me.
31 And they thought in them selues: yf we saye, it was from heauen, then shal he
saye: Why dyd ye not then beleue him?
32 But yf we saye: It was of men, then feare we the people, for they all helde
that Ihon was a true prophet.
33 And they answered, and saide vnto him: We can not tell. And Iesus answered,
and sayde vnto them: Nether tell I you, by what auctorite I do these thinges.

Chapter 12

1 And he beganne to speake vnto them by parables: A certayne ma planted a
vynyarde, and made a hedge aboute it, and dygged a wynne presse, and buylded a
tower, and let it out vnto hussbande men, and wente in to a straunge countre.
2 And whan the tyme was come, he sent a seruaut to the hussbande men, that he
might receaue of the hussbandmen, of the frute of the vynyarde.
3 But they toke him, and bet him, and sent him awaye emptye.
4 Agayne, he sent vnto them another seruaunt, whom they stoned, and brake his
heade, and sent him awaye shamefully dealt withall.
5 Agayne he sent another, whom they slew, and many other: some they bett, and
some they put to death.
6 Then had he yet one sonne onely, whom he loued, him he sent also vnto them at
the last, and sayde: they wyl stonde in awe of my sonne.
7 But the same hussbandmen sayde amonge them selues: This is the heyre, Come,
let vs kyll him, so shal the inheritaunce be ours.
8 And they toke him, and slewe him, and cast him out of the vynyarde.
9 What shal now the lorde of the vynyarde do? He shal come and destroye the
hussbande men, and geue the vynyarde vnto other.
10 Haue ye not red this scripture: The same stone which the buylders refused, is
become the headstone in the corner?
11 This was the LORDES doynge, and it is maruelous in oure eyes.
12 And they wente aboute to take him (but they feared the people) for they
perceaued, that he had spoke this parable agaynst the. And they left him, and
wente their waye.
13 And they sent vnto him certayne of the Pharises and Herodes officers to take
him in his wordes.
14 And they came, and sayde vnto hi: Master, we knowe that thou art true and
carest for no man. For thou regardest not the outwarde appearaunce of men, but
teachest ye waye of God truly. Is it laufull to geue tribute vnto the Emperoure,
or not?
15 Ought we to geue it, or ought we not to geue it? But he perceaued their
ypocrisye, and sayde vnto them: Why tempte ye me? Brynge me a peny, that I maye
se it.
16 And they brought it him. Then sayde he: Whose ymage and superscripcion is
this? They sayde vnto him: The Emperours.
17 Then answered Iesus and sayde vnto the: Geue therfore vnto the Emperoure that
which is the Emperours, and vnto God that which is Gods. And they marueled at
him.
18 Then came vnto him the Saduces (which holde that there is no resurreccion)
these axed him, and sayde:
19 Master, Moses wrote vnto vs. Yf eny mans brother dye, and leaue a wife, and
leaue no children, his brother shal take his wife, and rayse vp sede vnto his
brother.
20 Now were there seuen brethren: the first toke a wife, and dyed, and left no
sede:
21 and the seconde toke her, and dyed, and left no sede also: the thirde in like
maner.
22 And they all seuen toke her, and left no sede. At the last after them all,
the wyfe dyed also.
23 Now in the resurreccion whan they shal ryse agayne, whose wife shal she be of
them? For seuen had her to wife.
24 Then answered Iesus, and sayde vnto them: Do not ye erre? because ye knowe
not the scryptures ner ye power of God?
25 Whan they shal ryse agayne from the deed, they shal nether mary ner be
maried, but they are as the angels in heauen.
26 As touchinge the deed, that they shal ryse agayne, haue ye not red in the
boke of Moses, how God spake vnto him in the bush, and sayde: I am the God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, & the God of Iacob?
27 Yet is not God a God of the deed, but of the lyuynge. Therfore ye erre
greatly.
28 And there came vnto him one of the scrybes, that had herkened vnto the how
they disputed together, and sawe that he had answered them well, and axed him:
Which is the chefest comaundement of all?
29 Iesus answered him: The chefest commaundemet of all commaundementes is this:
Heare O Israel, the LORDE oure God is one God,
30 and thou shalt loue the LORDE thy God with all thy hert, with all thy soule,
with all thy mynde, and with all thy strength. This is the chefest
commaundement,
31 and the seconde is like vnto it: Thou shalt loue thy neghboure as thy self.
There is none other greater commaundement then these.
32 And the scrybe sayde vnto him: Master, Verely thou hast sayde right: for
there is but one God, & there is none other without him,
33 and to loue him with all the hert, with all the mynde, with all the soule,
and with all the strength, and to loue a mans neghboure as himself, is more then
brent sacrifices and all offerynges.
34 But wha Iesus sawe that he answered discretly, he sayde vnto him: Thou art
not farre from the kyngdome of God. And after this durst no man axe him eny mo
questions.
35 And Iesus answered, and sayde, whan he taught in the temple: How saye the
scrybes, yt Christ is the sonne of Dauid?
36 But Dauid himself saieth thorow the holy goost: The LORDE sayde vnto my
LORDE: Syt thou on my right honde, tyll I make thine enemies yi fotestole.
37 There Dauid calleth him his LORDE. How is he the his sonne? And many people
herde him gladly.
38 And he taught the, and sayde vnto the: Bewarre of the scrybes, that loue to
go in longe garmentes, and loue to be saluted in the market,
39 and syt gladly aboue in the synagoges and at the table:
40 they deuoure wyddowes houses, and vnder a coloure they make longe prayers.
These shal receaue the more damnacion.
41 And Iesus sat ouer agaynst the Gods chest, and behelde how the people put
money in to the Godschest. And many that were riche: put in moch.
42 And there came a poore wyddowe, and put in two mytes, which make a farthinge.
43 And he called vnto him his disciples, and sayde vnto them: Verely I saye vnto
you: this poore wyddowe hath put more in ye Godschest, then all they that haue
put in:
44 For they all haue put i of their superfluyte, but she of hir pouerte hath put
in all that she had, euen hir whole lyuynge.

Chapter 13

1 And whan he wete out of the temple, one of his disciples sayde vnto him:
Master, se, what stones and what a buyldinge is this?
2 And Iesus answered and sayde vnto him: Seist thou all this greate buyldinge?
There shal not one stone be left vpo another, yt shal not be broken downe.
3 And whan he sat vpon mount Oliuete ouer ageynst the temple, Peter and Iames,
and Ihon, and Andrew axed him pryuatly:
4 Tell vs, Whan shal all these come to passe? And what shalbe the toke, wha all
these shalbe fulfilled?
5 Iesus answered them, and beganne to saye: Take hede, that no man disceaue you,
6 for there shal many come vnder my name, and saye: I am Christ, & shal disceaue
many.
7 But whan ye shal heare of the noyse of warres, be not ye afrayed: for so must
it be, but ye ende is not yet.
8 One people shal ryse ageynst another, and one realme ageynst another, and
there shal be earth quakes here and there, and derth shal there be and troubles.
These are the begynnynge of sorowes.
9 But take ye hede to youre selues. For they shal delyuer you vp to the
councels, and synagoges, and ye shal be beaten, and shalbe brought before
prynces and kynges for my namessake, for a wytnesse vnto the.
10 And ye gospel must first be preached amoge all people.
11 Now whan they shal lede you and delyuer you vp, take ye no thought afore what
ye shal saye: and ymagyn ye nothinge afore hande, but what so euer shal be geue
you at the same houre, that speake: for it is not ye that speake, but the holy
goost.
12 One brother shal delyuer another vnto death, and the father the sonne, & the
children shal ryse ageynst their fathers and mothers, and shal helpe them to
death,
13 and ye shal be hated of all men for my names sake. But who so endureth to the
ende, shalbe saued.
14 Whan ye shal se the abhominacio of desolacion (wherof it is spoke by Daniel
the prophet) stonde where it ought not (who so readeth it, let him marck it
well) then let the which be in Iewry, flye vnto the mountaynes:
15 and let him that is on the house toppe not descede in to the house, ner come
therin, to fetch eny thinge out of the house.
16 And let him that is in the felde, not turne backe to fetch his clothes.
17 But wo vnto them that are with childe, and to them that geue suck in those
dayes.
18 Neuertheles praye ye, that youre flight be not in the wynter.
19 For in those dayes there shal be soch trouble as was not from the begynnynge
of ye creatures which God created, vnto this tyme, nether shal be.
20 And yf ye LORDE had not shortened those dayes, there shulde no man be saued.
But for the electes sake whom he hath chosen, he hath shortened those dayes.
21 Now yf eny man shal saye vnto you at yt tyme: Lo, here is Christ: lo, he is
there, beleue it not.
22 For there shal aryse false Christes, and false prophetes, which shal do
tokens & wonders, to disceaue euen the very chosen, yf it were possyble.
23 But take ye hede, Beholde, I haue tolde you all before.
24 But at the same tyme after this trouble, the Sonne and Mone shal lose their
light,
25 and the starres shall fall from heauen, and the powers of the heauens shal
moue:
26 and then shal they se the sonne of man commynge in the cloudes with greate
power and glory.
27 And the shal he sende his angels, and shal gather together his chosen fro the
foure wyndes, from one ende of the earth to the other.
28 Lerne a symilitude of the fyge tre: Wha his braunch is yet teder, and hath
brought forth leaues, ye knowe that the Sommer is nye.
29 So lykewyse wha ye se all these thinges come to passe, be ye sure, that it is
nye euen at the dores.
30 Verely I saye vnto you: this generacio shal not passe, tyll all these be
fulfilled.
31 Heauen and earth shal perishe, but my wordes shal not perishe.
32 But of that daye and houre knoweth no man, nether the angels in heauen, no
not the sonne him self, but the father onely.
33 Take hede, watch, & praye, for ye knowe not whan the tyme is.
34 Like as a man that wente in to a straunge countre, and left his house, and
gaue his seruauntes auctorite, vnto euery one his worke, and commaunded ye
porter, that he shulde watch.
35 Watch ye therfore, for ye knowe not wha the master of ye house cometh,
whether he cometh in the euenynge, or at mydnight, or aboute the cock crowynge,
or in the mornynge
36 that he come not sodenly, and fynde you slepynge.
37 Loke what I saye vnto you, that saye I vnto all. Watch.

Chapter 14

1 And after two dayes was Easter, and the daies of swete bred. And ye hye
prestes & scrybes sought how they might take him with disceate, & put him to
death.
2 But they sayde: Not in the feast daye, lest there be an vproure in the people.
3 And when he was at Bethanye in the house of Symon the leper, and sat at the
table, there came a woman, which had a boxe of pure and costly Nardus oyntment.
And she brake ye boxe, & poured it vpo his heade.
4 Then were there some, yt disdayned and sayde: Where to serueth this waist?
5 This oyntment might haue bene solde for more then thre hundreth pens, & bene
geue to ye poore. And they grudged agaynst her.
6 But Iesus sayde: let her be in rest. Why trouble ye her? She hath done a good
worke vpo me.
7 Ye haue allwaye the poore with you, and wha so euer ye wil, ye maye do the
good: but me haue ye not allwaie.
8 She hath done what she coulde, she is come before, to anoynte my body for my
buriall.
9 Verely I saye vnto you: Where so euer this gospell shalbe preached in all the
worlde, there shal this also that she hath now done, be tolde for a remembraunce
of her.
10 And Iudas Iscarioth one of the twolue wente vnto the hye prestes, to betraye
him vnto them.
11 Whan they herde yt, they were glad, & promysed that they wolde geue him
money. And he sought, how he might coueniently betraye him.
12 And vpon ye first daye of swete bred, wha the Easter lambe was offered, his
disciples sayde vnto him: Where wilt thou yt we go and prepare, yt thou mayest
eate ye Easter labe?
13 And he sent two of his disciples, and sayde vnto them: Go youre waye into the
cite, and there shal mete you a ma bearinge a pitcher with water, folowe him,
14 & where so euer he goeth in, there saye ye to the good man of the house: The
Master sendeth the worde: Where is the gest house, wherin I maye eate the Easter
labe, wt my disciples?
15 And he shal shewe you a greate parlour, which is paued & prepared, there make
readye for vs.
16 And ye disciples wete forth, & came in to ye cite, & foude it as he had sayde
vnto the. And they prepared ye Easter lambe.
17 At euen he came wt the twolue.
18 And as they sat at the table & ate, Iesus sayde: Verely I saye vnto you: One
of you yt eateth wt me, shal betraye me.
19 And they were sory, & sayde vnto hi one after another: Is it I? & another
(sayde:) is it I?
20 He answered & saide vnto the: One of the twolue, euen ye same yt dyppeth with
me in ye platter.
21 The sonne of man truly goeth forth, as it is wrytte of hi. But wo vnto that
ma, by whom the sonne of man is betrayed. It were better for the same man, that
he had neuer bene borne.
22 And as they ate, Iesus toke the bred, gaue thankes, & brake it, and gaue it
the, & sayde: Take, eate, this is my body.
23 And he toke the cuppe, thaked, and gaue it the, and they all dranke therof.
24 And he sayde vnto them: This is my bloude of the new Testament, which shalbe
shed for many.
25 Verely I saye vnto you, that from hence forth I wil not drynke of the frute
of the vyne, tyll ye daye yt I drynke it new in ye kyngdome of God.
26 And wha they had sayde grace, they wete forth vnto mount Oliuete.
27 And Iesus sayde vnto them: This night shal ye all be offended in me, for it
is wrytten: I wil smyte the sheperde, & the shepe shal be scatred abrode.
28 Neuertheles after yt I am rysen agayne, I wil go before you in to Galile.
29 But Peter sayde vnto him: And though all men shulde be offended, yet wolde
not I be offended.
30 And Iesus sayde vnto him: Verely I saye vnto ye: Todaye in this same night,
before ye cock crowe two tymes, shalt thou denye me thryse.
31 But he saide yet more: Yee though I shulde dye wt ye, yet wil I not denie ye.
So saide they all i like maner.
32 And they came in to ye felde called Gethsemane, and he saide vnto his
disciples: Syt ye here, tyll I go yonder, and praye.
33 And he toke with him Peter & Iames, & Ihon, and begane to waxe fearefull, &
to be in an agonye,
34 & sayde vnto the: My soule is heuy eue vnto ye death: tary ye here and watch.
35 And he wente forth a litle, fell vpon the grounde and prayed, that, (yf it
were possyble) ye houre might passe fro him,
36 and sayde: Abba, my father, all thinges are possyble vnto the, take this
cuppe awaye fro me: Neuertheles not what I wyl, but what thou wilt.
37 And he came vnto them, and founde the slepynge, and sayde vnto Peter: Symon,
slepest thou? Couldest thou not watch with me one houre?
38 Watch and praye, that ye fal not in to temptacion. The sprete is wyllinge,
but ye flesh is weake.
39 And he wete forth agayne, and prayde, and spake the same wordes,
40 and returned, and founde them slepynge agayne: for their eyes were heuy, &
they knewe not what they shulde answere him.
41 And he came the thirde tyme, and sayde vnto them: Slepe on now, and take
youre rest, It is ynough, the houre is come: beholde, ye sonne of man shalbe
delyuered in to the handes of synners:
42 aryse, let vs be goynge. Beholde, he is at hande, that betrayeth me.
43 And immediatly whyle he yet spake, came Iudas one of the twolue, and with him
a greate multitude, with swerdes and staues from the hye prestes and scrybes and
elders.
44 And the traytoure had geuen them a toke, and sayde: Whom so euer I kysse,
that same is he, laye handes vpon him, and lede him awaye warely.
45 And wha he was come, he wente straight waye vnto him, and sayde vnto him: O
master, master, and kyssed him.
46 Then layed they their handes vpon him, & toke him.
47 But one of the that stode by, drew out his swerde, and smote the hye prestes
seruaunt, and cut of his eare.
48 And Iesus answered, and sayde vnto the: Ye are come forth as it were to a
murthurer with swerdes and with staues to take me.
49 I was daylie with you in the temple, and taught, and ye toke me not. But this
is done, that the scrypture maye be fulfilled.
50 And all the disciples forsoke him, and fled.
51 And there folowed him a yonge ma, which was clothed in lynnen vpon the bare
skynne, and the yonge me toke holde of him.
52 But he let the lynnen go, and fled naked from them.
53 And they led Iesus vnto the hye prest, where all ye hye prestes, and elders
and scrybes were come together.
54 As for Peter, he folowed him a farre of in to the hye prestes palace. And he
was there, and sat with the seruauntes, and warmed him.
55 But the hye prestes and the whole councell sought wytnesse agaynst Iesus, yt
they might brynge him to death, and they founde none.
56 Many gaue false wytnesse agaynst him, but their wytnesses agreed not
together.
57 And some stode vp, and gaue false wytnes agaynst him, and sayde:
58 We herde him saye: I wil breake downe this temple that is made with hodes,
and in thre dayes buylde another not made wt handes.
59 But their wytnesse agreed not together.
60 And the hye prest stode vp amonge them, and axed Iesus, and sayde: Answerest
thou nothinge vnto it, that these testifie agaynst the?
61 But he helde his tunge, and answered nothinge. The the hye prest axed him
agayne, and sayde vnto him: Art thou Christ the sonne of the blessed?
62 Iesus sayde: I am. And ye shal se the sonne of man syt at the right hande of
power, and come in the cloudes of heaue.
63 Then the hye prest rent his clothes, & sayde: What nede we eny mo wytnesses?
64 Ye haue herde the blasphemy. What thynke ye? They all codemned him, that he
was giltie of death.
65 Then beganne there some to spyt vpo him, and to couer his face, and to smyte
him with fistes, and to saye vnto him Prophecie vnto vs. And the seruauntes
smote him on the face.
66 And Peter was beneth in ye palace. The came one of the wenches of the hye
prest:
67 And wha she sawe Peter warmynge him, she loked vpo hi, and sayde: And thou
wast with Iesus of Nazareth also.
68 But he denyed, & sayde: I knowe him not, nether can I tell what thou sayest.
And he wente out in to the fore courte, and the cock crew.
69 And a damsell sawe him, and beganne agayne to saye vnto them that stode by:
This is one of them.
70 And he denyed it agayne. And after a litle whyle they yt stode by, sayde
agayne vnto him: Of a trueth thou art one of them for thou art a Galilean, and
thy speach soundeth euen alike.
71 But he begane to curse and sweare: I knowe not the man, that ye speabe of.
72 And the cock crew agayne.Then thought Peter vpon the worde, that Iesus sayde
vnto him: Before ye cock crow two tymes, thou shalt denye me thryse. And he
beganne to wepe.

Chapter 15

1 And soone in the mornynge the hye prestes helde a councell wt the elders and
scrybes and the whole councell, & bounde Iesus, and led him awaye, and delyuered
him vnto Pylate.
2 And Pylate axed him: Art thou the kynge of the Iewes? He answered, and sayde
vnto him: Thou sayest it.
3 And the hye prestes accused him sore.
4 But Pylate axed him agayne, and sayde: Answerest thou nothinge? Beholde, how
sore they laye to yi charge.
5 Neuertheles Iesus answered nomore, in so moch yt Pylate marueyled.
6 At that feast of Easter he was wonte to delyuer vnto them a presoner, whom so
euer they wolde desyre.
7 There was i preson with the sedicious, one called Barrabas, which in the
vproure had committed murthur.
8 And the people wente vp, and prayed him, that he wolde do, as he was wonte.
9 Pylate answered them: wyl ye that I geue lowse vnto you the kynge of the
Iewes?
10 For he knew, that ye hye prestes had delyuered him of envye.
11 But the hye prestes moued ye people, that he shulde rather geue Barrabas
lowse vnto them.
12 Pylate answered agayne, and sayde vnto them: What wil ye the that I do vnto
him, whom ye accuse to be kynge of the Iewes?
13 They cried agayne: Crucifie hi.
14 Pylate sayde vnto the: What euell hath he done? But they cried yet moch more:
Crucifie him.
15 So Pylate thought to satisfie the people, and gaue Barrabas lowse vnto them,
and delyuered the Iesus, to be scourgd & crucified.
16 And the soudyers led him in to the como hall, and called the whole multitude
together,
17 and clothed him with purple, and plated a crowne of thorne, and crowned him
withall,
18 and beganne to salute him: Hayle kynge of the Iewes.
19 And smote him vpon the heade with a rede, and spytted vpo him, and fell vpo
the kne, & worshipped him.
20 And wha they had mocked him, they toke ye purple of him, and put his clothes
vpon him, & led him out, that they might crucifye him.
21 And they compelled one that passed by, called Symon of Cyren (which came from
the felde, and was the father of Alexander and Ruffus) to beare his crosse.
22 And they brought him to the place Golgatha, which is by interpretacion: a
place of deed mens skulles.
23 And they gaue him wyne myxted wt myrre, to drynke, & he toke it not.
24 And whan they had crucified him, they parted his garmetes, & cast lottes
therfore, what euery one shulde take.
25 And it was aboute ye thirde houre, & they crucified him.
26 And the tytle of his cause was wrytte ouer aboue him (namely:) The kynge of
the Iewes.
27 And they crucified him wt two murtherers, one at ye right hande, and one at
the left.
28 Then was the scrypture fulfilled, which sayeth: He was couted amonge the
euell doers.
29 And they that wete by, reuyled him, and wagged their heades, and sayde: Fye
vpon the, how goodly breakest thou downe ye teple, & buyldest it agayne in thre
dayes?
30 Helpe yi self now, & come downe fro the crosse.
31 The hye prestes also in like maner laughed him to scorne amonge the selues,
with the scrybes, & sayde: He hath helped other, himself can he not helpe.
32 Yf he be Christ and ye kynge of Israel, let him come downe now fro the
crosse, yt we maye se it, & beleue. And they yt were crucified wt hi, checked hi
also.
33 And wha it was aboute the sixte houre, there was a darcknesse ouer the whole
lode, tyll aboute ye nyenth houre.
34 And aboute ye nyenth houre Iesus cried loude, and sayde: Eli, Eli, lamma
asabthani? which is interpreted: My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?
35 And some that stode by, whan they herde yt, they sayde: Beholde, he calleth
Elias.
36 Then rane there one, & fylled a spoge wt vyneger, & stickte it vpo a rede, &
gaue hi to drynke, & sayde: Holde styll, let se, whether Elias wil come, and
take him downe.
37 But Iesus cried loude, and gaue vp the goost.
38 And the vale of the teple rent in two peces, from aboue tyll beneth.
39 The captayne that stode thereby ouer agaynst him, wha he sawe yt he gaue vp
the goost with soch a crye, he sayde: Verely this man was Gods sonne.
40 And there were wemen there also, which behelde this afarre of, amoge who was
Mary Magdalene, & Mary of Iames ye litle, & the mother of Ioses, & Salome,
41 which had folowed him wha he was in Galile, and mynistred vnto hi: & many
other yt wete vp wt hi to Ierusalem.
42 And at euen (for so moch as it was the daye of preparinge, which is the fore
Sabbath)
43 there came one Ioseph of Arimathia, a worshipfull Senatoure (which loked also
for the kyngdome of God) & wete in boldely vnto Pilate, & axed ye body of Iesus.
44 But Pylate marueyled yt he was deed all ready, & called ye captayne, & axed
hi, whether he had loge bene deed.
45 And wha he had gotten knowlege of the captayne, he gaue Ioseph ye body.
46 And he bought a lynne cloth, & toke him downe, & wrapped hi in ye lynne
clothe, & layed him in a sepulcre, which was hewe out of a rocke, & rolled a
stone before ye dore of ye sepulcre.
47 But Mary Magdalene and Mary Ioses behelde, where he was layed.

Chapter 16

1 And whan the Sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, & Mary Iames, and Salome,
bought spyces, yt they might come, & anoynte hi.
2 And they came to the sepulcre vpo a daye of ye Sabbathes very early, wha ye
Sonne arose,
3 & sayde one to another: Who shal rolle vs ye stone fro ye dore of the
sepulcre?
4 And whan they loked, they sawe, that the stone was rolled awaye: for it was a
very greate one.
5 And they wente in to the sepulcre, and on the right hande they sawe a yonge
man syttinge, which had a longe whyte garmet vpon him, and they were abasshed.
6 But he sayde vnto the: Be not ye afrayed, ye seke Iesus of Nazareth which was
crucified: he is rysen, he is not here. Beholde, ye place, where they layed him.
7 But go ye youre waye, and tell his disciples and Peter, that he wil go before
you in to Galile, there shal ye se him as he sayde vnto you.
8 And they wente forth in all the haist, and fled from the sepulcre: for there
was a tremblynge & feare come vpon them, nether sayde they eny thinge to eny
man, for they were afrayed.
9 But Iesus, whan he was rysen vp early vpo the first daye of the Sabbathes, he
appeared first vnto Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast out seuen deuels.
10 And she wete and tolde the that were with him, as they mourned and wepte.
11 And whan they herde that he lyued, and had appeared vnto her, they beleued it
not.
12 After warde as two of the were walkynge, he shewed himself vnder another
figure, whan they were goynge vpon the felde.
13 And they wente, and tolde the other: these they beleued not also.
14 At the last, as the eleuen sat at the table, he shewed himself vnto them, and
rebuked their vnbeleue, and ye hardnesse of their hert, because they beleued not
the which had sene him rysen.
15 And he sayde vnto them: Go ye youre waye in to all the worlde, and preach the
gospell vnto all creatures.
16 Who so beleueth and is baptysed, shalbe saued: but who so beleueth not,
shalbe damned.
17 As for the tokens, which shal folowe the that beleue, these are they: In my
name shal they cast out deuyls: Speake with new tunges:
18 Dryue awaye serpetes: And yf they drynke eny deedly thinge, it shal not hurte
them: They shal laye their handes vpo the sicke, and they shal recouer.
19 And the LORDE, after that he had spoken vnto them, was taken vp in to heauen,
and sytteth at the right hade of God.
20 And they wente out, and preached euery where. And the LORDE wrought with
them, and confirmed the worde with tokens folowynge.


Luke

Chapter 1

1 For so moch as many haue taken in hande, to set forth ye wordes of the actes
that are come to passe amonge vs,
2 like as they delyuered the vnto vs, which from the begynnynge sawe them their
selues, and were mynisters of the worde,
3 I thought it good (after that I had diligently searched out all from the
begynnynge) to wryte the same orderly vnto the (good Theophilus)
4 that thou mightest knowe the certete of ye wordes, wherof thou art infourmed.
5 In the tyme of Herode kynge of Iewry, there was a prest named Zachary of the
course of Abia: and his wife of the doughters of Aaron, & hir name Elizabeth.
6 They were both righteous before God, and walked in all the commaundementes and
statutes of the LORDE vnreproueably.
7 And they had no childe, for Elizabeth was baren, and they were both well
stricken in age.
8 And it came to passe as he executed the prestes office before God whan his
course came
9 (acordinge to the custome of the presthode) it fell to his lott to burne
incense.
10 And he wente in to the temple of the LORDE, and the whole multitude of the
people was without in prayer, whyle the incense was aburnynge.
11 And the angell of the LORDE appeared vnto him, and stode on the right syde of
the altare of incese.
12 And whan Zachary sawe him, he was abasshed, & there came a feare vpon him.
13 But the angell sayde vnto him: Feare not Zachary, for thy prayer is herde.
And yi wife Elizabeth shal beare the a sonne, whose name thou shalt call Ihon,
14 & thou shalt haue ioye and gladnesse: and many shal reioyce at his byrth,
15 for he shal be greate before the LORDE. Wyne and stronge drynke shal he not
drynke. And he shalbe fylled wt the holy goost, euen in his mothers wombe.
16 And many of the children of Israel shal he turne vnto the LORDE their God.
17 And he shal go before him in the sprete and power of Elias, to turne the
hertes of ye fathers vnto the children, and the vnfaithfull vnto the wyssdome of
the righteous, to make the people ready for the LORDE.
18 And Zachary sayde vnto the Angel: Wherby shal I knowe this? For I am olde,
and my wife well stricken in age.
19 The angell answered, and sayde vnto him: I am Gabriell that stonde before
God, and am sent to speake vnto the, and to shewe the these glad tydinges.
20 And beholde, thou shalt be domme, and not able to speake, vntyll the daye
that this come to passe, because thou hast not beleued my wordes, which shalbe
fulfylled in their season.
21 And the people wayted for Zachary, and marueyled, that he taried so longe in
the teple.
22 And wha he wete out, he coude not speake vnto them. And they perceaued, that
he had sene a vision in the teple. And he beckened vnto them, and remayned
speachlesse.
23 And it fortuned wha the tyme of his office was out, he wente home in to his
house.
24 And after those dayes Elizabeth his wife conceaued, and hyd hir self fyue
monethes, & sayde:
25 Thus hath ye LORDE done vnto me in ye dayes, wherin he hath loked vpo me, to
take awaye fro me my rebuke amoge men.
26 And in the sixte moneth was the angell Gabriel sent from God in to a cite of
Galile, called Nazareth,
27 vnto a virgin that was spoused vnto a man, whose name was Ioseph, of the
house of Dauid, and the virgins name was Mary.
28 And the angell came in vnto her, and sayde: Hayle thou full of grace, the
LORDE is with the: blessed art thou amonge wemen.
29 Wha she sawe him, she was abasshed at his sayenge, and thought: What maner of
salutacion is this?
30 And the angell sayde vnto her: Feare not Mary, for thou hast foude grace with
God.
31 Beholde, thou shalt coceaue in thy wobe, & beare a sonne & shalt call his
name Iesus:
32 he shalbe greate, & shalbe called ye sonne of the Hyest. And the LORDE God
shal geue him ye seate of Dauid his father,
33 & he shal be kinge ouer ye house of Iacob for euer & there shalbe no ende of
his kyngdome.
34 Then sayde Mary vnto the angell: How shal this be, seinge I knowe not a ma?
35 The angell answered, & sayde vnto her: The holy goost shal come vpon the, &
the power of the Hyest shal ouershadowe the. Therfore that Holy also which
shalbe borne (of the) shalbe called the sonne of God.
36 And beholde, thy cosen Elizabeth she also hath coceaued a sonne in hir olde
age, & this is the sixte moneth of her, which is reported to be baren:
37 for wt God is nothinge vnpossyble.
38 And Mary sayde: Beholde, here am I the handmayde of the LORDE: be it vnto me,
as thou hast sayde. And the angell departed fro her.
39 And Mary arose in those dayes,and wente in to the moutaynes with haist, into
ye cite of Iewry,
40 and came in to ye house of Zachary, and saluted Elizabeth.
41 And it fortuned as Elizabeth herde the salutacion of Mary, the babe sprange
in hir wombe. And Elizabeth was fylled with the holy goost,
42 & cried loude, and sayde: Blessed art thou amoge wemen, and blessed is the
frute of yi wombe.
43 And how happeneth this to me, that ye mother of my LORDE commeth vnto me?
44 Beholde, whan I herde the voyce of thy salutacion, the babe sprange in my
wombe wt ioye,
45 And blessed art thou that hast beleued, for ye thinges shalbe perfourmed,
which were tolde ye fro ye LORDE.
46 And Mary sayde:My soule magnifieth the LORDE.
47 And my sprete reioyseth i God my Sauioure.
48 For he hath loked vpo the lowe degre of his hande mayde. Beholde, fro hence
forth shal all generacions call me blessed.
49 For he that is Mightie, hath done greate thinges vnto me, and holy is his
name.
50 And his mercy endureth thorow out all generacions, vpon them that feare him.
51 He sheweth strength with his arme, and scatreth them that are proude in the
ymaginacion of their hert.
52 He putteth downe the mightie from the seate, and exalteth them of lowe degre.
53 He fylleth the hongrie with good thinges, and letteth the riche go emptye.
54 He remebreth mercy, and helpeth vp his seruaunt Israel.
55 Euen as he promysed vnto oure fathers, Abraham and to his sede foreuer.
56 And Mary abode with her aboute thre monethes, and then returned home agayne.
57 And Elizabethes tyme was come, that she shulde be delyuered, & she brought
forth a sonne.
58 And hir neghbours and kynsfolkes herde, yt the LORDE had shewed greate mercy
vpo her,& they reioysed with her.
59 And it fortuned vpon the eight daye, they came to circumcyse ye childe, and
called him Zachary after his father:
60 And his mother answered, and sayde: No, but he shalbe called Ihon.
61 And they sayde vnto her: There is none in yi kynne, yt is so called.
62 And they made signes vnto his father, how he wolde haue him called.
63 And he axed for wrytinge tables, wrote & sayde: His name is Ihon. And they
marueyled all.
64 And immediatly was his mouth and his toge opened, and he spake, & praysed
God.
65 And there came a feare vpon all their neghbours. And all this acte was noysed
abrode thorow out all the hill countre of Iewry:
66 And all they yt herde therof, toke it to hert, and sayde: What maner of man
wil this childe be? For the hande of the LORDE was with him.
67 And Zachary his father was fylled with the holy goost, and prophecied, and
sayde:
68 Blessed be ye LORDE God of Israel, for he hath vysited and redemed his
people.
69 And hath set vp an horne of saluacion in the house of his seruaunt Dauid.
70 Euen as he promysed afore tyme, by the mouth of his holy prophetes.
71 hat he wolde delyuer vs fro oure enemies, & from ye hande of all soch as hate
vs.
72 And yt he wolde shewe mercy vnto oure fathers, & thynke vpo his holy
couenaut.
73 Euen the ooth yt he sware vnto oure father Abraham,
74 for to geue vs.That we delyuered out of ye hade of or enemies, might serue
him without feare
75 all the dayes of oure life, in soch holynes and righteousnes as is accepte
before him.
76 And thou childe shalt be called a prophet of the Hyest: for thou shalt go
before ye LORDE, to prepare his wayes.
77 And to geue knowlege of saluacion vnto his people, for the remyssion of their
synnes.
78 Thorow the tender mercy of oure God, wherby the daye sprynge from an hye hath
vysited vs.
79 That he might geue light vnto them yt syt in darcknesse and shadowe of death,
and to gyde oure fete in to the waye of peace.
80 And the childe grew, and waxed stronge in sprete, and was in the wyldernes,
tyll the tyme that he shulde shewe him self vnto the people of Israel.

Chapter 2

1 It fortuned at the same tyme, that there wete out a comaundement fro Augustus
the Emperoure, that the whole worlde shulde be taxed.
2 And this taxynge was the first that was executed, whan Syrenius was leftenaunt
in Siria.
3 And they wente all, euery one to his owne cite to be taxed.
4 Then Ioseph gat him vp also fro Galile, out of the cite of Nazareth, in to
Iewry, to ye cite of Dauid, which is called Bethleem, (because he was of ye
house and lynage of Dauid)
5 that he might be taxed wt Mary his spoused wife, which was wt childe.
6 And it fortuned whyle they were there, ye tyme was come, that she shulde be
delyuered.
7 And she brought forth hir first begotte sonne, & wrapped him in swadlinge
clothes, and layed him in a maunger: for they had els no rowme in the ynne.
8 And there were in ye same region shepherdes in the felde by the foldes, and
watchinge their flocke by night.
9 And beholde, ye angell of the LORDE stode by the, and ye brightnes of the
LORDE shone rounde aboute them, and they were sore afrayed.
10 And the angell sayde vnto them: Be not afrayed. Beholde, I brynge you tydiges
of greate ioye, which shall happen vnto all people:
11 for vnto you this daye is borne ye Sauioure, eue Christ ye LORDE, in the cite
of Dauid.
12 And take this for a token: Ye shal fynde the babe swadled, and layed in a
maunger.
13 And straight waye there was by the angell a multitude of heauenly hoostes,
which praysed God, and sayde:
14 Glory be vnto God an hye, & peace vpon earth, and vnto men a good wyll.
15 And it fortuned wha the angels were gone from the in to heaue, the shepherdes
sayde one to another: let vs go now euen vnto Bethleem, and se this thinge that
is happened, which ye LORDE hath shewed vnto vs.
16 And they came wt haist, & founde both Mary and Ioseph, & the babe layed in ye
maunger.
17 And whan they had sene it, they published abrode the sayenge, yt was tolde
the of this childe.
18 And all they that herde it, wondred at the wordes, which the shepherdes had
tolde them.
19 But Mary kepte all these sayenges, and pondred them in hir hert.
20 And the shepherdes returned, praysinge and laudinge God, for all that they
had herde and sene, euen as it was tolde them.
21 And whan eight dayes were ended, that the childe shulde be circumcysed, his
name was called Iesus, which was named of ye angell, before he was conceaued in
his mothers wombe.
22 And wha the dayes of their purificacion after the lawe of Moses, were come,
they brought him to Ierusale, that they might present him vnto the LORDE
23 (As it is wrytten in the lawe of the LORDE: Euery machilde that first openeth
the Matrix, shalbe called holy vnto ye LORDE)
24 and that they might geue the offerynge, as it is wrytte in the lawe of the
LORDE (namely) a payre of turtle doues, or two yonge pigeons.
25 And beholde, there was a man (at Ierusale) whose name was Symeon, and the
same ma was iust, and feared God, and loged for the consolacion of Israel, and
the holy goost was in him.
26 And an answere was geue him of the holy goost, that he shulde not se death,
before he had sene ye LORDES Christ.
27 And he came by inspiracion in to the teple.And whan the elders brought the
childe Iesus in to the temple, to do for him after ye custome of the lawe,
28 then toke he him vp in his armes, and praysed God, and sayde:
29 LORDE, now lettest thou thy seruaut departe in peace, acordinge to thy
promesse.
30 For myne eyes haue sene thy Sauioure,
31 who thou hast prepared before all people.
32 A light for the lightenynge of the Heythe, & for the prayse of yi people of
Israel.
33 And his father and mother marueyled at the thinges that were spoke of him.
34 And Symeon blessed them, and sayde vnto Mary his mother: Beholde, this
(childe) shalbe set to a fall, and to an vprysinge agayne of many in Israel, and
for a token, which shalbe spoke agaynst.
35 And the swerde shal pearse thy soule, that the thoughtes of many hertes maye
be opened.
36 And there was a prophetisse, one Anna, the doughter of Phanuel of the trybe
of Aser, which was of a greate age, and had lyued seuen yeares with hir hussbade
from hir virginite,
37 & had now bene a wedowe aboute foure score & foure yeares, which came neuer
fro the teple, seruynge God wt fastynge and prayenge, daye and night:
38 the same came forth also the same houre, and praysed the LORDE, and spake of
him vnto all that loked for the redempcion at Ierusalem.
39 And whan they had perfourmed all acordinge to the lawe of the LORDE, thy
returned i to Galile, to their owne cite Nazareth.
40 And the childe grewe, and wexed stronge in sprete, full of wyssdome, & the
grace of God was with him.
41 And his elders wente to Ierusalem euery yeare at the feast of Easter.
42 And whan he was twolue yeare olde, they wente vp to Ierusalem, after the
custome of the feast.
43 And whan they had fulfilled the dayes, and were gone home agayne, the childe
Iesus abode styll at Ierusalem.And his elders knewe it not,
44 but thought he had bene in the company, and they came a dayes iourney, and
sought hi amoge their kynss folkes & acquataunce.
45 And wha they founde him not, they wete agayne to Ierusale, and sought him.
46 And it fortuned after thre dayes, yt they founde him in the temple, syttinge
amonge the teachers, hearynge the, and opposynge them.
47 And all they that herde him, wodred at his vnderstondynge and answeres.
48 And whan they sawe him, they were astonnyed. And his mother sayde vnto him:
My sonne, why hast thou done this vnto vs? Beholde, thy father and I haue sought
the sorowynge.
49 And he sayde vnto them: What is it, that ye haue sought me? Wyst ye not, yt I
must go aboute my fathers busynes?
50 And they vnderstode not the sayenge yt he spake vnto them.
51 And he wente downe with the, and came to Nazareth, and was obediet vnto them.
And his mother kepte all these wordes in hir hert.
52 And Iesus increased in wyssdome, age and fauoure with God and men.

Chapter 3

1 In the fiftenth yeare of the raigne of Tiberius the Emperoure, wha Pontius
Pilate was leftenaut in Iewry and Herode one of the foure princes in Galile, and
his brother Philippe one of the foure prynces in Iturea, & in the coastes of
Traconites, and Lysanias one of the foure princes of Abilene,
2 when Hannas and Caiphas were hye prestes, the came ye worde of God vnto Ihon
the sonne of Zachary in the wyldernes.
3 And he came in to all ye coastes aboute Iordan, and preached the baptyme of
repetaunce for the remyssion of synnes.
4 As it is wrytte in ye boke of ye sayenges of Esaye the prophet, which sayeth:
The voyce of a cryer in the wyldernes: prepare the waye of the LORDE, and make
his pathes straight.
5 Euery valley shalbe fylled, and euery mountayne & hyll shalbe brought lowe.
And what so is croked, shalbe made straight: and what rough is, shalbe made
smooth,
6 and all flesh shal se the Sauioure of God.
7 Then sayde he vnto the people, yt wente out to be baptysed of him: Ye
generacion of vipers, who hath certified you, that ye shal escape ye wrath to
come?
8 Take hede, brynge forth due frutes of repetauce, & begynne not to saye: We
haue Abraha to or father. For I saye vnto you: God is able of these stones to
rayse vp children vnto Abraham.
9 The axe is put vnto the tre allready: so that euery tre which bryngeth not
forth good frute, shalbe hewen downe, and cast in to the fyre.
10 And the people axed him, and sayde: What shal we do then?
11 He answered, & sayde vnto the: He that hath two coates, let him parte wt him
yt hath none: and he that hath meate, let him do likewyse.
12 The publicans came also, to be baptysed and sayde vnto him: Master, what shal
we do?
13 He sayde vnto them: Requyre nomore, then is appoynted you.
14 Then ye soudyours axed him likewyse, and sayde: What shal we do then? And he
sayde vnto the: Do no man violence ner wronge, and be content with youre wages.
15 But whan the people were in a doute, & thought all in their hertes, whether
he were Christ,
16 Ihon answered, and sayde vnto the all: I baptyse you with water, but after me
there cometh one stronger the I, whose shue lachet I am not worthy to lowse: he
shal baptyse you with the holy goost and with fyre.
17 Whose fanne is in his hande, and he shal pourge his floore, and shal gather
ye wheate in to his barne, and shal burne the chaffe with vnquencheable fyre.
18 And many other thynges more exorted he, & preached vnto the people.
19 But Herode the Tetrarcha (wha he was rebuked of him because of Herodias his
brothers wife, and for all the euels that Herode dyd)
20 besydes all this he layed Iho in preson.
21 And it fortuned whan all the people receaued baptyme, and whan Iesus also was
baptysed and prayed, that heauen opened,
22 and the holy goost came downe in a bodely shappe like a doue vpon him. And
out of heauen there came a voyce, which sayde: Thou art my deare sonne, in who I
delyte.
23 And Iesus was aboute thirtie yeares whan he beganne. And he was taken for the
sonne of Ioseph, which was the sonne of Eli,
24 which was the sonne of Mathat. Which was the sonne of Leui. Which was the
sonne of Melchi. Which was the sonne of Ianna. Which was the sonne of Ioseph.
25 Which was the sonne of Mathathias. Which was the sonne of Amos. Which was the
sonne of Nahum. Which was the sonne of Essli. Which was the sonne of Nange.
26 Which was the sonne of Maath. Which was the sonne of Mathathias. Which was
the sonne of Simei. Which was the sonne of Ioseph. Which was the sonne of Iuda.
27 Which was the sonne of Iohanna. Which was the sonne of Resia. Which was the
sonne of Zorobabel. Which was the sonne of Salathiel. Which was the sonne of
Neri.
28 Which was the sonne of Melchi. Which was the sonne of Abdi. Which was the
sonne of Cosam. Which was the sonne of Elmadam. Which was the sonne of Her.
29 Which was the sonne of Ieso. Which was the sonne of Eliezer. Which was the
sonne of Iorem. Which was the sonne of Mattha. Which was the sonne of Leui.
30 Which was the sonne of Simeon. Which was the sonne of Iuda. Which was the
sonne of Ioseph. Which was the sonne of Ionam. Which was the sonne of Eliachim.
31 Which was the sonne of Melca. Which was the sonne of Menam. Which was the
sonne of Mathathan. Which was the sonne of Nathan. Which was the sonne of Dauid.
32 Which was the sonne of Iesse. Which was the sonne of Obed. Which was the
sonne of Boos. Which was the sonne of Salmon. Which was the sonne of Naasson.
33 Which was the sonne of Aminadab. Which was the sonne of Aram. Which was the
sonne of Esrom. Which was the sonne of Phares. Which was the sonne of Iuda.
34 Which was the sonne of Iacob. Which was the sonne of Isaac. Which was the
sonne of Abraham. Which was the sonne of Thara. Which was the sonne of Nahor.
35 Which was the sonne of Serug. Which was the sonne of Regu. Which was the
sonne of Peleg. Which was the sonne of Eber. Which was the sonne of Salah.
36 Which was the sonne of Caynan. Which was the sonne of Arphachsad. Which was
the sonne of Sem. Which was the sonne of Noe. Which was the sonne of Lamech.
37 Which was the sonne of Mathusalah. Which was the sonne of Henoch. Which was
the sonne of Iared. Which was the sonne of Mahaleel. Which was the sonne of
Renan.
38 Which was the sonne of Enos. Which was the sonne of Seth. Which was the sonne
of Adam. Which was the sonne of God.

Chapter 4

1 Iesus full of the holy goost, came agayne from Iordane, and was led of ye
sprete into wyldernes,
2 & fourty dayes loge was he tepted of ye deuell. And in those dayes ate he
nothinge. And whan they were ended, he hongred afterwarde.
3 And the deuell sayde vnto him: Yf thou be ye sonne of God, comaunde this
stone, yt it be bred.
4 And Iesus answered & sayde vnto hi: It is wrytten: Man shal not lyue by bred
onely, but by euery worde of God.
5 And ye deuell toke him vp into an hye moutayne, and shewed him all the
kyngdomes of ye whole worlde in ye twinckelinge of an eye,
6 & sayde vnto him: All this power wil I geue vnto the, and the glory therof,
for it is geue ouer vnto me, and I geue it, to whom I wil.
7 Yf thou now wilt worshippe me, they shal all be thine.
8 Iesus answered him, and sayde: Auoyde fro me thou Satan. It is wrytten: Thou
shalt worshippe the LORDE thy God, and him onely shalt thou serue.
9 And he caried him to Ierusalem, and set him vpon a pynnacle of the temple, and
sayde vnto him: Yf thou be ye sonne of God, cast thy self downe from hence.
10 For it is wrytte: He shal geue his angels charge ouer the, to kepe the,
11 and with their handes they shal holde the vp, that thou dashe not thy fote
agaynst a stone.
12 And Iesus answered, and sayde vnto him: It is sayde: Thou shalt not tempte
the LORDE thy God.
13 And whan ye deuell had ended all the temptacions, he departed from him for a
season.
14 And Iesus came agayne in the power of the sprete in to Galile. And the fame
of him was noysed thorow out all ye region rounde aboute.
15 And he taught in their synagoges, and was commended of euery man.
16 And he came vnto Nazareth where he was noursed, and as his custome was, he
wete in to the synagoge vpon ye Sabbath, and stode vp for to rede.
17 Then was there delyuered him the boke of ye prophet Esay. And whan he had
turned ouer the boke, he founde the place where it is wrytten:
18 The sprete of the LORDE is with me, because he hath anoynted me: to preach
the Gospell vnto ye poore hath he sent me: to heale the broken harted: to preach
delyuerauce to the captyue, and sight to the blynde: and frely to set at liberty
them that are brused:
19 and to preach the acceptable yeare of the LORDE.
20 And whan he had closed the boke, he gaue it agayne to ye mynister, & sat him
downe. And the eyes of all that were in the synagoge, were fastened on him.
21 And he begane to saye vnto them: This daye is this scripture fulfilled in
youre eares.
22 And they all gaue him wytnesse, and wodred at the gracious wordes, which
proceaded out of his mouth, and they saide: Is not this Iosephs sonne?
23 And he sayde vnto them: Doutles ye wyl saye vnto me this prouerbe: Phisician,
heale thyself. For how greate thinges haue we herde done at Capernau? Do the
same here also in thine owne countre.
24 But he saide: Verely I saye vnto you: There is no prophet accepted in his
owne countre.
25 Neuertheles of a trueth I saye vnto you: There were many wedowes in Israel in
ye tyme of Elias, wha the heaue was shut thre yeares and sixe monethes, and whan
there was a greate derth in all the lande:
26 & to none of the was Elias sent, but onely vnto Sarepta of the Sydonyans to a
wedowe.
27 And many lepers were there in Israel in the tyme of Eliseus ye prophet, and
none of the was clensed, saue onely Naaman of Syria.
28 And as many as were in the synagoge, wha they herde yt, were fylled with
wrath.
29 And they rose vp, and thrust him out of the cite, and led him vp to the edge
of the hyll whervpo their cite was buylded, that they might cast him downe
headlynge.
30 But he wente his waye euen thorow the myddest of them,
31 and came to Capernaum a cite of Galile, and taught the vpo the Sabbathes.
32 And they wondred at his doctryne, for his preachinge was with power.
33 And in the Synagoge there was a man possessed with a foule deuell, & he cryed
loude,
34 and sayde: Let me alone, what haue we to do wt the thou Iesus of Nazareth?
Art thou come to destroye vs? I knowe ye who thou art, euen the Holy of God.
35 And Iesus rebuked him and sayde: holde thy tuge, and departe out of him. And
the deuell threw hi in the myddest amonge them, and departed from him, and dyd
him no harme.
36 And there came a feare ouer the all, and they spake amonge themselues, and
sayde: What maner of thinge is this? He commaundeth the foule spretes with
auctorite and power, and they departe out.
37 And ye fame of him was noysed thorow out all the places of ye countre rounde
aboute.
38 And he rose vp out of the synagoge, and came in to Symons house. And Symos
mother in lawe was take with a greate feuer, & they prayde him for her.
39 And he wete vnto her, & comaunded the feuer. And it left her, & imediatly she
rose vp, & mynistred vnto the.
40 And whan the Sonne was gone downe all they that had sicke of dyuerse
diseases, brought the vnto him. And he layed his hades vpon euery one of the, &
made the whole.
41 The deuels also departed out of many, criege and sayenge: Thou art Christ the
sonne of God. And he rebuked the, & suffred them not to speake: for they knewe
that he was Christ.
42 But wha it was daye, he wete out in to a deserte place. And the people sought
hi, and came vnto him, & kepte him, yt he shulde not departe fro the.
43 But he sayde vnto the: I must preach the Gospell of ye kyngdome of God to
other cities also: for there to am I sent.
44 And he preached in the synagoges of Galile.

Chapter 5

1 It came to passe, yt the people preassed vpon him to heare the worde of God,
and he stode by the lake of Genazereth,
2 and sawe two shippes stode by ye lake syde, but ye fishers were gone out of
the, and had wasshed their nettes.
3 Then wente he in to one of the shippes, which was Symons, and prayed him, yt
he wolde thrust out a litle fro the londe. And he sat him downe, and taught the
people out of ye shippe.
4 And whan he had left of talkynge, he sayde vnto Symon: Launch out in to the
depe & let slyppe yor nettes, to make a draught.
5 And Symon answered and sayde vnto him: Master, we haue laboured all ye night,
and taken nothinge. But vpo thy worde, I wil lowse forth the nett.
6 And wha they had so done, they toke a greate multitude of fisshes, & their net
brake.
7 And they made sygnes to their felowes which were in ye other shippe, yt they
shulde come, & helpe the. And they came, & fylled both the shippes full, so yt
they soncke.
8 Whan Symon Peter sawe yt, he fell downe at Iesus knees, & sayde: LORDE, go
9 fro me, for I am a synfull man: For he was astonnyed and all that were wt him,
at this draught of fishes which they toke,
10 and so were Iames and Ihon also the sonnes of Zebede, which were Symons
companyons. And Iesus sayde vnto Symo: Feare not, for fro hence forth thou shalt
take men.
11 And they brought the shippes to londe, and left all, and folowed him.
12 And it fortuned as he was in a cite, beholde, there was a man full of
leprosy. Wha he sawe Iesus, he fell vpo his face, & besought him, and sayde:
LORDE, yf thou wilt, thou canst make me cleane.
13 And he stretched out his hade, and touched him, and sayde: I wil, be thou
cleane. And immediatly the leprosy departed from him.
14 And he charged him, yt he shulde tell no ma, but go thy waye (sayde he) and
shewe thyself vnto ye prest, and offre for yi clensynge, as Moses comaunded, for
a witnesse vnto the.
15 But ye fame of hi wete out farther abrode, & there came moch people together,
to heare him, & to be healed by hi fro their sicknesses.
16 And he departed in to the wyldernesses, & gaue him self to prayer.
17 And it fortuned vpo a daye, yt he taught, and there sat ye Pharises and
scrybes, which were come out of all the townes of Galile, and Iewry, and fro
Ierusale, and the power of the LORDE wete fro him, & healed euery man.
18 And beholde, certayne men brought vpon a bed, a man yt had ye palsye, and
they sought how they might brynge him in, and laye him before him.
19 And whan they coude not fynde by what waye they might bringe him in (for ye
people) they clymmed vp to ye toppe of the house, & let him downe thorow the
tylinge wt the bed, amoge the before Iesus.
20 And whan he sawe their faith, he sayde vnto hi: Man, yi synnes are forgeue
ye.
21 And the scrybes and pharyses begane to thynke, & saide: What is he this, yt
speaketh blasphemy. Who ca forgeue synnes, but onely God?
22 Neuertheles wha Iesus perceaued their thoughtes, he answered, and saide vnto
the: What thynke ye in yor hertes?
23 Whether is easier to saye: Thy synnes are forgeue ye, Or to saye: Aryse, and
walke?
24 But that ye maye knowe, that the sonne of ma hath power to forgeue synnes
vpon earth, he sayde vnto ye sicke of the palsie: I saye vnto ye: Aryse, take vp
yi bed, and go home.
25 And immediatly he rose vp before the, & toke vp the bed yt he had lyen vpo,
and wete home, and praysed God.
26 And they were all astonnyed, and gaue God ye prayse, and were fylled wt
feare, and sayde: We haue sene maruelous thynges to daye.
27 And afterwarde he wete out, and sawe a publican named Leui, syttinge at ye
receate of custome, & he sayde vnto him: Folowe me.
28 And he left all, rose vp, & folowed him.
29 And Leui made hi a greate feast i his house. And many publicans & other sat
wt hi at ye table
30 And the scrybes and Pharyses murmured agaynst his disciples, & saide:
Wherfore do ye eate & drynke wt publicas & synners?
31 And Iesus answered, & sayde vnto the: The whole nede not ye phisician, but
they yt are sicke.
32 I am not come to call ye righteous, but sinners to repentauce.
33 But they sayde vnto him: Wherfore fast ye disciples of Iho so of, & praye so
moch, & the disciples of the Pharises likewyse, but yi disciples eate and
drynke?
34 And he sayde vnto them: Can ye make the weddynge childre fast, so loge as the
brydegrome is with the?
35 But the tyme wil come that the brydegrome shalbe take fro the, then shal they
fast.
36 And he sayde vnto them a symilitude: No man putteth a pece of new cloth in to
an olde garment: for els he renteth the new, and the pece of the new agreeth not
with the olde.
37 And no man putteth new wyne in to olde vessels, for els ye new wyne barsteth
the vessels, and runneth out it self, and the vessels perishe.
38 But new wyne must be put in to new vessels, and so are they both preserued.
39 And there is no man that drynketh the olde, and wolde straight waye haue the
new, for he sayeth: the olde is pleasaunter.

Chapter 6

1 And it fortuned vpon an after pryncipall Sabbath, that he wente thorow the
corne felde, & his disciples plucked the eares of corne, and ate, and rubbed the
with their hades.
2 But certayne of the Pharises sayde vnto them: Wherfore do ye that, which is
not laufull to do vpon the Sabbath?
3 And Iesus answered, and sayde vnto the: Haue ye not red what Dauid dyd, wha he
was hongrie, and they that were with him,
4 how he wente in to the house of God, and toke the shewbred, and ate, and gaue
also vnto them that were with him, which was laufull for no man to eate, but for
the prestes onely?
5 And he sayde vnto them: The sonne of man is LORDE euen ouer the Sabbath.
6 It came to passe vpo another Sabbath, that he wete in to the synagoge, and
taught and there was a man, whose right hande was wythred.
7 But ye scrybes and Pharises marked him, whether he wolde heale vpon the
Sabbath, that they might fynde an occasion agaynst him.
8 Neuertheles he perceaued their thoughtes, and sayde vnto the ma with the
wythred hande: Aryse, and steppe forth here. And he arose, and stepped forth.
9 Then sayde Iesus vnto the: I wil axe you a question: What is it laufull to do
vpo the Sabbath? good, or euell? to saue life, or to destroye it?
10 And he behelde the all rounde aboute, and sayde vnto the ma: Stretch out
thine hande. And he dyd so. Then was his hande restored him to right, euen as
whole as the other.
11 But they were fylled full of madnes, and commoned together, what they wolde
do to him.
12 And it fortuned at the same tyme, that he wente out in to a mountayne to
praye, and continued all night in prayer to God.
13 And wha it was daye, he called his disciples, and chose twolue of them, whom
he called also apostles.
14 Symon, whom he named Peter, and Andrew his brother, Iames and Ihon, Phylippe
and Bartylmew,
15 Mathew and Thomas, Iames the sonne of Alpheus, Symon called Zelotes,
16 Iudas the sonne of Iames, and Iudas Iscarioth, which was the traytoure.
17 And he wente downe with them, and stode vpon a playne in the felde, and the
company of his disciples, and a greate multitude of people, from all Iewry, and
Ierusale, and from Tyre and Sydon by the see coast, which were come to heare
him, and to be healed of their diseases,
18 and they that were vexed with foule spretes, were healed.
19 And all the people sought to touch him, for there wente vertue fro him, and
healed the all.
20 And he lift vp his eyes vpo his disciples, and sayde: Blessed are ye poore,
for yours is the kyngdome of God.
21 Blessed are ye that honger here, for ye shalbe satisfied. Blessed are ye yt
wepe here, for ye shal laugh.
22 Blessed are ye, whan men hate you, and put you out of their copanyes, and
reuyle you, and cast out youre name as an euell thinge, for the sonne of mans
sake.
23 Reioyse ye then, and be glad: for beholde, youre rewarde is greate in heauen.
Euen thus dyd their fathers vnto the prophetes also.
24 But wo vnto you riche, for ye haue youre cosolacion allready.
25 Wo vnto you that are full, for ye shal honger. Wo vnto you that laugh here,
for ye shal wepe and wayle.
26 Wo vnto you whan euery man prayseth you, Euen so dyd their fathers vnto the
false prophetes also.
27 But I saye vnto you that heare: Loue youre enemies: do good vnto them that
hate you:
28 blesse them that curse you: praye for them that wrongfully trouble you.
29 And who so smyteth the on the one cheke, offre him ye other also. And who so
taketh awaye thy cloake, forbyd him not yi cote also.
30 Who so euer axeth of the, geue him: and who so taketh awaye thyne, axe it not
agayne.
31 And as ye wolde that men shulde do vnto you, euen so do ye vnto them
likewyse.
32 And yf ye loue them that loue you, what thake haue ye therfore? For synners
also loue their louers.
33 And yf ye do good for youre good doers, what thanke haue ye therfore? For
synners also do euen the same.
34 And yf ye lende vnto them, of who ye hope to receaue what thake haue ye ther
fore? For synners also lende vnto synners, that they maye receaue as moch
agayne.
35 But rather loue ye yor enemies, do good, and lende, lokynge for nothinge
therof agayne: so shal yor rewarde be greate, and ye shalbe the children of the
Hyest, for he is kynde, euen to the vnthankfull and to the euell.
36 Be ye therfore mercifull, as youre father also is mercifull.
37 Iudge not, and ye shal not be iudged. Condepne not, and ye shal not be
condempned. Forgeue, and ye shal be forgeuen.
38 Geue, and to you shalbe geue. A good measure, pressed downe, shaken together,
& runynge ouer, shal me geue into youre bosome. For with what measure ye meete,
with the same shal it be measured to you agayne.
39 And he sayde a symilitude vnto the: Can the blynde shewe the waye to ye
blynde? Do they not both the fall in to the dyche?
40 The disciple is not aboue his master. But whosoeuer is perfecte, ye same
shalbe as his master.
41 But why seist thou a moote i thy brothers eye, and considrest not the beame,
that is in thine awne eye?
42 Or how canst thou saye vnto thy brother: holde styll brother, I wil plucke ye
moate out of thyne eye, and thou thy self seist not ye beame in thine awne eye?
Thou ypocryte, Fyrst cast the beame out of thine awne eye, and the shalt thou se
clearly to pull the moote out of thy brothers eye.
43 For it is no good tre, yt bryngeth forth euell frute: and no euell tre yt
bringeth forth good frute.
44 Euery tre is knowne by his frute. For me gather not fygges of thornes, ner
grapes of busshes.
45 A good ma out of ye good treasure of his hert, bryngeth forth yt which is
good: and an euell ma out of the euell treasure of his hert, bryngeth forth that
which is euell. For of the abundaunce of the hert, the mouth speaketh.
46 But why call ye me LORDE LORDE, & do not that I saye vnto you?
47 Who so euer commeth vnto me, and heareth my wordes and doth the, I wil shewe
you to whom he is lyke.
48 He is like vnto a man which buylded an house, and digged depe, and layed ye
foundacion vpon a rocke. Whan the waters came, the floudes bett vpon that house,
and coulde not moue it: for it was grouded vpo ye rocke.
49 But he that heareth and doth not, is like vnto a man that buylded his house
vpo the earth without foundacion, and the streames bett vpo it, and it fell
immediatly, and greate was the fall of that house.

Chapter 7

1 Whan he had ended his talkynge vnto the people, he wente in to Capernaum:
2 and a captaynes seruaunt laye deed sicke, whom he loued.
3 Wha he herde of Iesus, he sent the elders of the Iewes vnto him, and prayed
him, that he wolde come, and make his seruaunt whole.
4 But wha they came to Iesus, they besought him instantly, & sayde: He is worthy
yt thou shuldest shewe this for him,
5 for he loueth oure people, & hath buylded vs ye synagoge.
6 And Iesus wente wt them.Now whan they were not farre from ye house, ye
captaine sent fredes vnto hi, saiege vnto him: Oh LORDE, trouble not thy self, I
am not worthy, yt thou shuldest enter vnder my rofe,
7 and therfore I thought not my self worthy to come to ye: but speake ye worde,
& my seruaut shalbe whole.
8 For I my self also am a ma, subiecte to the hygher auctorite, & haue soudyers
vnder me. And I saye vnto one: Go, & he goeth. And to another: Come, & he
cometh. And to my seruaut: Do this, & he doeth it.
9 Whan Iesus herde yt, he marueyled at hi, & turned him aboute, & sayde vnto ye
people yt folowed hi: I saye vnto you: So greate faith haue I not founde, no not
in Israel.
10 And wha they that were sent, came home agayne, they founde the seruaut that
was sicke, whole.
11 And it fortuned afterwarde, that he wete in to a cite called Naim, and many
of his disciples wente with him, and moch people.
12 Whan he came nye to the gate of the cite, beholde, there was caried out one
deed, which was the onely sonne of his mother, and she was a wyddowe, and moch
people of the cite wente with her.
13 And whan the LORDE sawe her, he had copassion on her, and sayde vnto her:
Wepe not.
14 And he came nye, and touched the Coffyn. And they that bare him, stode styll.
And he sayde: Yonge man, I saye vnto the: Aryse.
15 And the deed sat vp, and beganne to speake. And he delyuered him vnto his
mother.
16 And there came a feare on them all, and they praysed God, and sayde: A greate
prophet is rysen amonge vs, and God hath vysited his people.
17 And this fame of him was noysed in all Iewry, and in all ye regions that laye
rounde aboute.
18 And the disciples of Iho shewed him of all these thinges.
19 And Ihon called vnto him two of his disciples, and sent the vnto Iesus
sayenge: Art thou he that shal come, or shal we loke for another?
20 Whan the men came to him, they sayde: Ihon ye baptist hath sent vs vnto the,
sayenge: Art thou he that shal come, or shal we loke for another?
21 At the same houre healed he many from sicknesses & plages, and fro euell
spretes, and vnto many that were blynde, he gaue sight.
22 And Iesus answered, & sayde vnto the: Go yor waye, shewe Ihon, what ye haue
sene & herde. The blynde se, the halt go, the lepers are clensed, the deaf
heare, the deed aryse, the Gospell is preached vnto ye poore,
23 and blessed is he, that is not offended at me.
24 Whan the messaungers of Iho were departed, Iesus begane to speake vnto ye
people cocernynge Iho: What are ye gone out for to se in ye wyldernesse? Wolde
ye se a rede, that is shake wt the wynde?
25 Or what are ye gone out for to se? Wolde ye se a ma clothed in soft rayment?
Beholde, they that are gorgiously arayed, & lyue delycately, are in kynges
courtes.
26 Or what are ye gone out for to se? Wolde ye se a prophet? Yee I saye vnto
you: one that is more the a prophet.
27 This is he, of whom it is wrytten: Beholde, I sende my messaunger before yi
face, which shal prepare thy waye before the.
28 For I saye vnto you: Amonge the yt are borne of weme, there is no greater
prophet the Ihon the baptist. Notwith stondynge he that is lesse in the kyngdome
of God, is greater then he.
29 And all the people that herde him, and ye publicans, iustified God, and were
baptysed with the baptyme of Ihon.
30 But the Pharises and scrybes despysed ye councell of God against theselues, &
were not baptised of hi.
31 But the LORDE saide: Where vnto shal I licken the men of this generacion? And
whom are they like?
32 They are like vnto childre which syt in the market, and crye one to another,
and saye: We haue pyped vnto you, and ye haue not daunsed: we haue mourned vnto
you, & ye haue not wepte.
33 For Ihon ye baptist came, and ate no bred, and drake no wyne, and ye saye: he
hath ye deuell.
34 The sonne of man is come, eateth and drynketh, & ye saye: This man is a
glutton and a wyne bebber, a frende of publicans and synners.
35 And wyssdome is iustified of all hir children.
36 And one of the Pharises desyred him, yt he wolde eate with him. And he wente
in to the Pharises house, and sat him downe at ye table.
37 And beholde, there was in the cite a woma, which was a synner. Whe she knewe
that Iesus sat at the table in the Pharises house, she brought a boxe with
oyntment,
38 & stode behynde at his fete, and wepte, and beganne to water his fete with
teares, and to drye the wt the hayres of hir heade, and kyssed his fete, &
anoynted the with oyntmet.
39 But whan the Pharise which had called him sawe that, he spake within himself,
and sayde: Yf this ma were a prophet, he wolde knowe who, & what maner of woman
this is that toucheth him, for she is a synner.
40 And Iesus answered, and saide vnto him: Simo, I haue somewhat to saye vnto
the. He sayde: Master saye on.
41 A certayne lender had two detters, the one ought fyue hundreth pens, the
other fiftie:
42 but whan they had nothinge to paye, he forgaue the both. Tell me which of
them wyl loue him most?
43 Symon answered, and sayde: He, (I suppose) to who he forgaue most. Then sayde
he vnto him: Thou hast iudged right.
44 And he turned him to the woman, and sayde vnto Symo: Seist thou this woma? I
am come in to thine house, thou hast geue me no water vnto my fete, but she hath
watred my fete with teares, and dryed the wt the hayres of hir heade:
45 Thou hast geue me no kysse, but she (sens the tyme she came in) hath not
ceassed to kysse my fete:
46 Thou hast not anointed my heade wt oyle, but she hath anoynted my heade with
oyntment.
47 Therfore I saye vnto the: Many synnes are forgeuen her, for she hath loued
moch. But vnto whom lesse is forgeuen, the same loueth the lesse.
48 And he sayde vnto her: Thy synnes are forgeuen the.
49 Then they that sat at the table with him, beganne to saye within them selues:
What is he this, that forgeueth synnes also?
50 But he sayde vnto the woman: Thy faith hath saued the, Go thy waye in peace.

Chapter 8

1 And it fortuned afterwarde, that he wente thorow the cities and townes, and
preached, and shewed ye Gospell of the kyngdome of God, and the twolue wt him.
2 And certayne wemen also, who he had healed fro euell spretes and infirmities:
Namely, Mary which is called Magdalene, out of whom wente seuen deuels,
3 and Ioanna ye wife of Chusa Herodes stewarde, and Susanna, and many other,
that mynistred vnto them of their substaunce.
4 Now wha moch people were gathered together, and haisted vnto him out of the
cities, He spake by a symilitude:
5 There wente out a sower to sowe his sede, & whyle he was sowynge, some fell by
the waye syde, and was trodde vnder fote, and the foules of the ayre ate it vp.
6 And some fell on stone, and whan it was spronge vp, it wythred awaye, because
it had no moystnesse.
7 And some fell amonge thornes, and the thornes sprange vp with it, and choked
it.
8 And some fell vpo a good grounde, and sprange vp, and bare frute an hundreth
folde. Wha he sayde this he cryed: Who so hath eares to heare, let him heare.
9 And his disciples axed him, and sayde: What symilitude is this?
10 And he sayde: Vnto you it is geue, to knowe the mysteryes of the kyngdome of
God, but vnto the other in parables, yt though they se it, they shulde not se
it, and though they heare it, they shulde not vnderstonde.
11 This is the parable: The sede is the worde of God:
12 As for those that are by ye waye syde, they are they that heare it,
afterwarde commeth the deuell, and taketh awaye the worde out of their hertes,
that they shulde not beleue, and be saued.
13 But they on ye stone, are soch as whan they heare it, receaue the worde with
ioye, and these haue no rote: they beleue for a whyle, and in the tyme of
temptacion they fall awaye.
14 As for it that fel amonge the thornes, are soch as heare it, and go forth
amonge the cares, riches and volupteousnesses of this life, and are choked and
brynge forth no frute.
15 But that on the good grounde, are they that heare the worde, and kepe it in a
pure good hert, and brynge forth frute in pacience.
16 No man lighteth a cadell, and couereth it with a vessell, or putteth it vnder
a table, but setteth it vpon a candelsticke, that soch as go in maye se light.
17 For there is nothinge hyd, that shal not be openly shewed: and there is
nothinge secrete, that shal not be knowne, and come to light.
18 Take hede therfore how ye heare. For who so hath, vnto him shalbe geue: but
who so hath not, from him shalbe taken awaye, eue the same that he thynketh to
haue.
19 There wente vnto him his mother and his brethren, and coude not come at him
for the people.
20 And it was tolde him. Thy mother and thy brethren stonde without, and wolde
se the.
21 But he answered, & sayde vnto the: My mother and my brethren are these, which
heare the worde of God, and do it.
22 And it fortuned vpon a certayne daye, yt he wente in to a shippe, and his
disciples wt him, & he sayde vnto the: Let vs passe ouer to the other syde of ye
lake. And they thurst of fro the lode.
23 And as they sayled, he slepte. And there came a storme of wynde vpon ye lake,
and the wawes fell vpon the, and they stode in greate ioperdy.
24 Then wete they vnto him, and waked him vp, & sayde: Master master, we
perishe. Then he arose, and rebuked the wynde, and the tepest of water, and they
ceassed, and it waxed calme.
25 But he sayde vnto the: Where is youre faith? Neuertheles they were afrayed,
and wodred, and sayde one to another: What is he this? For he comaundeth the
wyndes and the water, and they are obedient vnto him.
26 And they sayled forth in to the countre of the Gadarenites, which is ouer
agaynst Galile.
27 And whan he wente out to londe, there met him out of ye cite a ma, which had
a deuell longe tyme, & ware no clothes, & taried in no house, but in the graues.
28 Neuertheles wha he sawe Iesus, he cried, and fell downe before him, and cried
loude, & sayde: What haue I to do with the Iesus, thou sonne of the Hyest God? I
beseke the, that thou wilt not tormete me.
29 For he comaunded the foule sprete, that he shulde departe out of the ma, for
he had plaged hi a loge season. And he was bounde with cheynes, and kepte wt
fetters, and he brake the bondes in sonder, and was caried of the deuell in to
the wyldernesse.
30 And Iesus axed him, and sayde: What is thy name? He sayde: Legion. For there
were many deuels entred in to him.
31 And they besought him, that he wolde not comaunde the to go in to the depe.
32 But there was there a greate heerd of swyne fedynge vpon the mountayne, and
they besought him, that he wolde geue them leue, to entre in to ye same. And he
gaue the leue.
33 Then departed ye deuels out of the ma, and entred into the swyne. And the
heerd russhed headlynges with a storme in to the lake, and were drowned.
34 But wha ye herdmen sawe what had chaunsed, they fled, and tolde it in the
cite and in the vyllagies.
35 Then wente they out, for to se what was done, and came to Iesus, and founde
the ma (out of whom the deuyls were departed) syttinge at Iesus fete, clothed,
and in his right mynde, and they were afrayed.
36 And they yt had sene it, tolde the how the possessed was healed.
37 And the whole multitude of ye countre of the Gadarenites besought him, that
he wolde departe from them, for there was a greate feare come vpon the. And he
gat him in to ye shippe, and turned agayne.
38 And the man out of who the deuels were departed, besought him, yt he might be
with him. But Iesus sent him awaye, and sayde:
39 Go home agayne, and shewe how greate thinges God hath done for the. And he
wente his waye, & preached thorow out all ye cite, how greate thinges Iesus had
done for hi.
40 And it fortuned wha Iesus came agayne, the people receaued him, for they
wayted for him.
41 And beholde, there came a man named Iairus (and he was a ruler of the
synagoge) and fell at Iesus fete, & besought him, that he wolde come in to his
house.
42 For he had but one doughter (vpon a twolue yeare of age) and she laye at ye
poynt of death. And as he wente, the people thronged him.
43 And a woma hauynge the bloudyssue twolue yeares, (which had spent all hir
substaunte vpon phisicians, and coude be healed of none)
44 came behynde, & touched the hemme of his garmet, and immediatly hir yssue of
bloude was staunched.
45 And Iesus sayde: Who hath touched me? But whan they all denyed, Peter sayde,
and they that were with him: Master, the people thronge the and thrust the, and
thou sayest: Who hath touched me?
46 Iesus saide: Some body hath touched me, for I fele, that there is vertue gone
out fro me.
47 But whan the woman sawe that she was not hyd, she came treblynge, and fell
downe before him, and tolde him before all the people, for what cause she had
touched him, & how she was healed immediatly.
48 And he sayde vnto her: Doughter, be of good comforte, thy faith hath made the
whole, go thy waye in peace.
49 Whyle he yet spake, there came one fro ye ruler of ye synagoges house, and
sayde vnto him: Thy doughter is deed, disease not the master.
50 Whan Iesus herde that, he answered him, and sayde: Feare not, beleue onely,
and she shal be made whole.
51 But whan he came in to the house, he suffred no man to go in, saue Peter, and
Iames and Iho, and the father and mother of the mayden.
52 They wepte all, and sorowed for her. But he sayde: Wepe not, for she is not
deed, but slepeth.
53 And they laughed hi to scorne, knowynge well that she was deed.
54 But he thrust them all out, and toke her by the hande, and cryed, and sayde:
Mayde aryse.
55 And hir sprete came agayne, & she arose straight waye. And he comaunded to
geue her meate.
56 And hir elders were astonnyed. But he charged them, that they shulde tell no
man, what was done.

Chapter 9

1 And he called the twolue together, and gaue them power and auctorite ouer all
deuels, and that they might heale diseases.
2 And he sent the out to preach the kyngdome of God, and to heale ye sicke,
3 and sayde vnto them: Ye shal take nothinge with you by the waye, nether staff,
ner scryppe, ner bred, ner money: ner haue two coates.
4 And into what house so euer ye entre, there abyde, tyll ye go thence.
5 And who so euer receaue you not, departe out of the same cite, and shake of
the dust from youre fete, for a wytnesse ouer them.
6 And they departed, and wente thorow the townes, preachinge ye Gospell, &
healynge euery where.
7 Herode the Tetrarcha herde of all that was done by him. And he toke care, for
so moch as it was sayde of some: Iho is rysen agayne from the deed:
8 of some, Elias hath appeared: of some, One of the olde prophetes is rysen
agayne.
9 And Herode sayde: Iho haue I beheaded, who is this then, of who I heare soch
thinges? And he desyred to se him.
10 And the Apostles came agayne, and tolde him how greate thinges they had done.
And he toke them to him, and wente asyde into a solytary place by the cite
called Bethsaida.
11 Whan the people knew of it, they folowed him. And he receaued them, and spake
vnto them of the kyngdome of God, and healed soch as hade nede therof.
12 But the daye beganne to go downe. Then came the twolue to him, and sayde vnto
him: let the people departe fro the, that they maye go in to the townes rounde
aboute, and in to ye vyllagies, where they maye fynde lodgynge & meate, for we
are here in ye wyldernesse.
13 But he sayde vnto them: Geue ye them to eate. They sayde: We haue nomore but
fyue loaues and two fysshes. Excepte we shulde go & bye meate for so moch people
14 (for there were vpon a fyue thousande men) But he sayde vnto his disciples:
Cause them to syt downe by fifties in a copany.
15 And they dyd so, and made them all to syt downe.
16 Then toke he the fyue loaues and two fisshes, and loked vp towarde heaue, and
sayde grace ouer them, brake them, and gaue them to the disciples, to set the
before the people.
17 And they ate, and were all satisfied. And there were taken vp of that
remayned to them, twolue baskettes full of broken meate.
18 And it fortuned whan he was alone, and at his prayer, and his disciples with
him, he axed them, and sayde: Whom saye the people that I am?
19 They answered, and sayde: They saye, thou art Ihon the baptist: Some, that
thou art Elias: Some, that one of the olde prophetes is rysen agayne.
20 But he sayde vnto them: Whom saye ye that I am? Then answered Peter and
sayde: Thou art the Christ of God.
21 And he charged them strately, and commaunded them, that they shulde tell this
vnto no ma,
22 and sayde: For the sonne of man must suffre many thinges, and be cast out of
the Elders and of ye hye prestes, and scrybes, and be put to death, and ryse
agayne the thirde daye.
23 Then sayde he vnto them all: Yf eny ma wil folowe me, let hi denie himself, &
take vp his crosse daylie, & folowe me.
24 For who so euer wil saue his life, shal lose it. But who so loseth his life
for my sake, shal saue it.
25 For what auauntage hath a man, though he wanne the whole worlde, and loseth
himself, or runneth in dammage of himself?
26 Who so is ashamed of me and of my sayenges, of him shall the sonne of ma also
be ashamed, whan he commeth in his glory, and in the glory of his father, and of
the holy angels.
27 I saye vnto you of a treuth: there be some of them that stonde here, which
shall not taist of death, tyll they se the kyngdome of God.
28 And it fortuned, that aboute an eight dayes after these wordes, he toke vnto
him Peter, Ihon and Iames, and wente vp in to a mout for to praye.
29 And as he prayed, the shappe of his countenaunce was chaunged of another
fashion, and his garment was whyte, and shyned:
30 and beholde, two men talked with him, Which were Moses and Elias,
31 that appeared gloriously, and spake of his departynge, which he shulde
fulfill at Ierusalem.
32 As for Peter and them that were with him, they were full of slepe. But whan
they awoke, they saw his glory, and the two men stondynge with him.
33 And it chaunsed, whan they departed fro him, Peter sayde vnto Iesus: Master,
here is good beynge for vs. Let vs make thre tabernacles: one for the, one for
Moses, and one for Elias, and wyst not what he sayde.
34 But whyle he thus spake, there came a cloude, and ouershadowed them. And they
were afrayed, whan the cloude couered them.
35 And out of the cloude there came a voyce, which sayde: This is my deare
sonne, heare him.
36 And whyle this voyce came to passe, they founde Iesus alone. And they kepte
it close, and tolde no ma in those dayes eny of the thinges which they had sene.
37 And it chaunsed on the nexte daye after, whan they came downe from the mount.
moch people met him,
38 and beholde, a man amonge the people cryed out, and sayde: Master, I beseke
the, loke vpon my sonne, for he is my onely sonne:
39 beholde, the sprete taketh him, and sodenly he crieth, and he teareth him,
that he fometh, and with payne departeth he from him, whan he hath rente him.
And
40 I besought thy disciples to cast him out, and they coulde not.
41 Then answered Iesus, and sayde: Oh thou vnfaithfull and croked generacion,
how longe shal I be with you, & suffre you? Brynge hither thy sonne.
42 And whan he came to him, the deuell rente him and tare him. But Iesus rebuked
the foule sprete, and healed the chylde, and delyuered him vnto his father
agayne.
43 And they were all amased at the mighty power of God.And whyle they wondred
euery one at all thinges which he dyd, he sayde vnto his disciples:
44 Comprehende these sayenges in youre eares. For the sonne of man must be
delyuered in to the hades of men.
45 But they wyst not what that worde meaned, and it was hyd from them, that they
vnderstode it not. And they were afrayed to axe him of that worde.
46 There came a thought also amonge them, which of them shulde be the greatest.
47 But wha Iesus sawe the thoughtes of their hert, he toke a childe, & set him
harde by him,
48 and sayde vnto them? Whosoeuer receaueth this childe in my name, receaueth
me: and who so euer receaueth me, receaueth him that sent me. But who so is
leest amoge you all, ye same shal be greate.
49 Then answered Iho, and sayde: Master, we sawe one dryue out deuels in thy
name, and we forbad him, for he folowed the not with vs.
50 And Iesus saide vnto him: For byd him not, for he that is not agaynst vs, is
for vs.
51 And it fortuned whan the tyme was fulfylled that he shulde be receaued vp
from hence, he turned his face to go straight to Ierusalem,
52 and before him he sent messaungers, which wente their waye, and came into a
towne of the Samaritans, to prepare lodginge for him.
53 And they wolde not receaue him, because he had turned his face to go to
Ierusale.
54 But whan his disciples Iames and Ihon sawe that, they sayde: LORDE, wilt
thou, that we commaunde, that fyre fall downe from heauen, and consume them, as
Elias dyd?
55 Neuertheles Iesus turned him aboute, and rebuked them, and sayde: Knowe ye
not, what maner of sprete ye are of?
56 The sonne of man is not come to destroye mens soules, but to saue them. And
they wente in to another towne.
57 And it fortuned as they went by the waye, one sayde vnto him: I wil folowe
the, whyther so euer thou go.
58 And Iesus sayde vnto him: The foxes haue holes, and the byrdes vnder the
heaue haue nestes: but the sonne of man hath not wheron to laye his heade.
59 And he sayde vnto another: Folowe me. He sayde: Syr, geue me leue first to
go, and burye my father.
60 But Iesus sayde vnto him: Let the deed burye their deed. But go thou thy
waye, and preach the kyngdome of God.
61 And another sayde: Syr, I will folowe the, but geue me leue first, to go byd
them farwele, which are at home in my house.
62 Iesus sayde vnto him: Who so putteth his hade to the plowe, and loketh backe,
is not mete for the kingdome of God.

Chapter 10

1 Afterwarde the LORDE appoynted out other seuentie, and sent them two and two
before him in to euery cite and place, whither he himself wolde come,
2 and sayde vnto them: The haruest is greate, but the labourers are fewe. Praye
therfore the LORDE of the haruest, to sende forth labourers in to his haruest.
3 Go youre waye: beholde, I sende you forth as the labes amonge ye wolues.
4 Beare nether wallet, ner scryppe, ner shues, and salute no ma by the waye.
5 In to what so euer house ye entre, first saye: Peace be in this house.
6 And yf the childe of peace be there, youre peace shal rest vpon him. Yf no,
then shal youre peace turne to you agayne.
7 But tary ye still in the same house, eatinge aud drynkinge soch as they haue.
For the labourer is worthy of his rewarde.Go not from house to house.
8 And in to what so euer cite ye entre, and they receaue you, eate soch thinges
as are set before you.
9 And heale the sicke that are there, and saye vnto them: The kyngdome of God is
come nye vnto you.
10 But in to what so euer cite ye come, and they receaue you not, go youre waye
out in to the stretes of the same, and saye:
11 Euen the very dust which cleaueth vpon vs of youre cite, wype we of vpon you.
But of this ye shal be sure, that the kyngdome of God was come nye vnto you.
12 I saye vnto you: It shalbe easyer for Sodome in that daye, then for that
cite.
13 Wo vnto the Chorazin, wo vnto the Bethsaida: for yf the miracles which haue
bene done amonge you had bene done at Tyre and Sidon, they had done pennaunce
longe agoo, syttinge in sack cloth and in asshes.
14 Neuertheles it shalbe easyer for Tyre and Sidon at the iudgment, then for
you.
15 And thou Capernaum which art exalted vnto the heauen, shalt be thrust downe
vnto hell.
16 He that heareth you, heareth me: and he that despyseth you, despyseth me: but
who so despyseth me, despyseth him yt sent me.
17 The seuetye came agayne with ioye, and sayde: LORDE, the deuels also are
subdued vnto vs in thy name.
18 But he sayde vnto them: I sawe Sathan fall downe from heauen as a
lightenynge.
19 Beholde, I haue geuen you power to treade vpon serpetes and scorpions, and
ouer all power of the enemye, and nothinge shall hurte you.
20 Neuertheles, reioyce not ye in this, that the spretes are subdued vnto you:
but reioyse, that youre names are wrytten in heauen.
21 At the same houre reioysed Iesus in sprete, and sayde: I prayse the (O father
and LORDE of heauen and earth) that thou hast hyd these thinges from the wyse
and prudent, and hast opened them vnto babes. Euen so father, for so it pleased
the.
22 All thinges are geuen ouer vnto me of my father: and no man knoweth who the
sonne is, but onely the father: nether who the father is, saue onely the sonne,
and he to who the sonne wil open it.
23 And he turned him vnto his disciples, and sayde in especiall: Blessed are the
eyes, which se that ye se.
24 For I saye vnto you: Many prophetes and kynges, wolde haue sene the thynges
that ye se, and haue not sene them: and to haue herde the thynges that ye heare,
and haue not herde them.
25 And beholde, there stode vp a scrybe and tempted him, and sayde: Master, what
must I do, to inheret euerlastinge life?
26 He sayde vnto him: What is wrytten in the lawe? How readest thou?
27 He answered and sayde: Thou shalt loue thy LORDE God with all thy hert, with
all thy soule, with all thy strength, and with all thy mynde, and thy neghboure
as thy self.
28 He sayde vnto him: Thou hast answered right: this do, and thou shalt lyue.
29 But he wolde haue iustified himself, & sayde vnto Iesus: Who is then my
neghboure?
30 Then answered Iesus, and sayde: A certayne man wente downe from Ierusalem
vnto Iericho, and fell amonge murthurers, which stryped him out of his clothes,
and wounded him, and wente their waye, and left him half deed.
31 And by chauce there came downe a prest the same waye: and whan he sawe him,
he passed by.
32 And likewyse a Leuite, wha he came nye vnto the same place and sawe him, he
passed by.
33 But a Samaritane was goynge his iourney, and came that waye, and whan he sawe
him, he had compassion vpon him,
34 wente vnto him, bounde vp his woundes, and poured oyle and wyne therin, and
lifte him vp vpon his beast, and brought him in to the ynne, and made prouysion
for him.
35 Vpon the next daye whan he departed, he toke out two pens, and gaue them to
the oost, aud sayde vnto him: Take cure of him, and what so euer thou spendest
more, I wil paye it the, whan I come agayne.
36 Which of these thre now thinkest thou, was neghboure vnto him, that fell
amonge the murtherers?
37 He sayde: He that shewed mercy vpon him Then sayde Iesus vnto him: Go thy
waye then, and do thou likewyse.
38 It fortuned as they wete, that he entred in to a towne, where there was a
woman named Martha, which receaued him in to hir house.
39 And she had a sister, called Mary, which sat hir downe at Iesus fete, and
herkened vnto his worde.
40 But Martha made hirself moch to do, for to serue him. And she stepte vnto
him, and sayde: LORDE, carest thou not, that my sister letteth me serue alone?
Byd her therfore, that she helpe me.
41 But Iesus answered, and sayde vnto her: Martha Martha, thou takest thought,
and combrest thy self aboute many thinges:
42 there is but one thinge nedefull. Mary hath chosen a good parte, which shal
not be taken awaye from her.

Chapter 11

1 And it fortuned that he was in a place, and prayed. And whan he had ceassed,
one of his disciples sayde vnto him: LORDE, teach vs to praye, as Ihon also
taught his disciples.
2 He sayde vnto the: Whan ye praye, saye: O oure father which art in heauen,
halowed be thy name. Thy kyngdome come. Thy wil be fulfilled vpon earth, as it
is in heauen.
3 Geue vs this daye oure daylie bred.
4 And forgeue vs oure synnes, for we also forgeue all them that are detters vnto
vs. And lede vs not in to temptacion, but delyuer vs from euell.
5 And he sayde vnto them: Which of you is it that hath a frende, and shulde go
to him at mydinght, and saye vnto him: frende, lende me thre loaues,
6 for a frende of myne is come to me out of the waye, and I haue nothinge to set
before him:
7 and he within shulde answere and saye: Disquyete me not, the dore is shutt
allready, and my children are with me in the chamber, I can not ryse, and geue
the.
8 I saye vnto you: and though he wolde not aryse and geue him, because he is his
frende, Yet because of his vnshamefast begginge he wolde aryse, and geue him as
many as he neded.
9 And I saye vnto you also: Axe, and it shal be geuen you: Seke, and ye shal
fynde: knocke, and it shalbe opened vnto you.
10 For who so euer axeth, receaueth: and he that seketh, fyndeth: and to him
that knocketh, shal it be opened.
11 Yf the sonne axe bred of eny of you that is a father, wyl he geue him a stone
therfore? Or yf he axe a fysshe, wyl he for the fish offre him a serpent?
12 Or yf he axe an egg, wyl he profer him a scorpion?
13 Yf ye then which are euell, can geue youre children good giftes, how moch
more shal the father of heauen geue the holy sprete vnto them that axe him?
14 And he droue out a deuell that was domme: and it came to passe whan the
deuell was departed out, the domme spake, and the people wondred.
15 But some of them sayde: He dryueth out the deuels, thorow Beelzebub the chefe
of the deuels.
16 The other tempted him, and desyred a token of him from heauen.
17 But he knewe their thoughtes, and sayde vnto them: Euery kyngdome deuyded
within it self, shal be desolate, and one house shal fall vpo another.
18 Yf Sathan then be at variaunce within himself, how shal his kyngdome endure?
Because ye saye, that I dryue out deuels thorow Beelzebub.
19 And yf I dryue out deuels thorow Beelzebul, by whom the do youre children
dryue them out? Therfore shall they be youre iudges.
20 But yf I cast out the deuels by the fynger of God, then is the kyngdome of
God come vnto you.
21 Whan a stronge harnessed man kepeth his house, that he possesseth is in
peace:
22 but whan a stronger then he commeth vpo him, and ouer commeth him, he taketh
fro him all his wapens, wherin he trusted, and deuydeth the spoyle.
23 He that is not with me, is agaynst me: and he that gathereth not with me,
scatereth abrode.
24 Whan the vncleane sprete is gone out of a man, he walketh thorow drye places,
sekynge rest, and fyndeth none. Then sayeth he: I wil turne agayne in to my
house, from whence I wente out.
25 And whan he commeth, he fyndeth it swepte, and garnished.
26 Then goeth he, and taketh vnto him seuen other spretes, worse the himself.
And whan they are entred in, they dwell there. And the ende of that man is worse
then the begynnynge.
27 And it fortuned whan he spake soch, a certayne woman amonge the people lift
vp hir voyce, and sayde vnto him: Blessed is ye wombe that bare the, and the
pappes that thou hast sucked.
28 But he sayde: Yee blessed are they that heare the worde of God, and kepe it.
29 Whan the people were gathered thicke together, he beganne to saye: This is an
euell generacion, they desyre a toke, and there shal no token be geuen them, but
the toke of the prophet Ionas.
30 For like as Ionas was a toke vnto the Niniuytes, so shal the sonne of man be
vnto this generacion.
31 The quene of the south shal aryse at the iudgmet with the men of this
generacion, and shall condempne them: for she came from the ende of the worlde,
to heare the wyssdome of Salomon. And beholde, here is one more then Salomon.
32 The men of Niniue shal aryse at the iudgment with this generacion, and shall
condempne them: for they dyd pennaunce after the preachinge of Ionas: and
beholde, here is one more the Ionas.
33 No man lighteth a candell, and putteth it in a preuy place, nether vnder a
busshell, but vpon a candilsticke, that they which come in, maye se ye light.
34 The eye is the light of the body. Yf thine eye then be syngle, all thy body
shal be full of light: but yf thine eye be wicked, then shal all thy body be
full of darcknesse.
35 Take hede therfore, that the light which is in the, be not darcknesse.
36 Yf thy body now be light, so that it haue no parte of darknesse, then shal it
be all full of light, and shall light the euen as a cleare lightenynge.
37 But whyle he yet spake, a certayne Pharise prayed him, that he wolde dyne
with him. And he wente in, and sat him downe at the table.
38 Whan the Pharise sawe that, he marueyled, that he wasshed not first before
dyner.
39 But the LORDE sayde vnto him: Now do ye Pharises make cleane the out syde of
the cuppe and platter, but youre inwarde partes are full of robbery and
wickednesse.
40 Ye fooles, is a thinge made cleane within, because the outsyde is clensed?
41 Neuertheles geue almesse of that ye haue, and beholde, all is cleane vnto
you.
42 But wo vnto you Pharises, ye that tythe mynt and rewe, and all maner herbes,
and passe ouer iudgmet and ye loue of God. These ought to haue bene done, and
not to leaue the other vndone.
43 Wo vnto you Pharises, for ye loue to syt vppermost in the synagoges, and to
be saluted in the market.
44 Wo vnto you scrybes and Pharyses, ye ypocrites, for ye are like couered
sepulcres, where ouer men walke, and are not awarre of them.
45 Then answered one of the scrybes, and sayde vnto him: Master, with these
wordes thou puttest vs to rebuke also.
46 But he saide: And wo vnto you also ye scrybes, for ye lade men with
vntollerable burthens, and ye youre selues touch them not with one of yor
fyngers.
47 Wo vnto you, for ye buylde the sepulcres of the prophetes, but youre fathers
put them to death.
48 Doutles ye beare wytnesse, and consente vnto the dedes of yor fathers: for
they slewe them, and ye buylde their sepulcres.
49 Therfore sayde the wyssdome of God: I wil sende prophetes and Apostles vnto
the: and some of them shal they put to death and persecute,
50 hat the bloude of all the prophetes which hath bene shed sens the foundacion
of the worlde was layed, maye be requyred of this generacion:
51 from the bloude of Abell, vnto ye bloude of Zachary, which perished betwene
the altare and ye temple. Yee I saye vnto you: it shalbe requyred of this
generacion.
52 Wo vnto you scrybes, for ye haue receaued ye keye of knowlege. Ye are not
come in youre selues, and haue forbydden them that wolde haue bene in.
53 Whan he spake thus vnto them, the scrybes and Pharyses beganne to preasse
sore vpon him, and to stoppe his mouth with many questions,
54 and layed wayte for him, and sought to hunte out some thinge out of his
mouth, that they might accuse him.

Chapter 12

1 There were gathered together an innumerable multitude of people, in so moch
that they trode one another: Then beganne he, and sayde first vnto his
disciples: Bewarre of the leuen of the Pharises, which is ypocrisye.
2 But there is nothinge hyd, that shal not be discouered: nether secrete, that
shal not be knowne.
3 Therfore whatsoeuer ye haue spoke in darknesse, that same shal be herde in
light: and that ye haue spoken in to the eare in the chabers, shalbe preached
vpon the house toppes.
4 But I saye vnto you my frendes: Be not afrayed of them that kyll the body, and
after that haue nomore that they can do.
5 But I wil shewe you, whom ye shal feare. Feare him, which after he hath
kylled, hath power also to cast in to hell: Yee I saye vnto you: Feare him.
6 Are not fyue sparowes bought for two farthinges? Yet is not one of them
forgotten before God.
7 The very hayres of youre heade also are nombred euery one. Feare not therfore,
for ye are better then many sparowes.
8 I saye vnto you: Who so euer knowlegeth me before men, him shal the sonne of
ma also knowlege before the angels of God:
9 But he that denyeth me before men, shalbe denyed before the angels of God.
10 And who so euer speaketh a worde agaynst the sonne of man, it shalbe forgeuen
him: But who so blasphemeth the holy goost, it shal not be forgeuen him.
11 Whan they brynge you in to their synagoges, and to the rulers & officers,
take ye no thought, how or what ye shal answere, or what ye shal speake:
12 for the holy goost shal teach you in the same houre, what ye ought to saye.
13 But one of the people sayde vnto him: Master, byd my brother deuyde the
enheritaunce with me.
14 Neuertheles he sayde vnto him: Man, who hath set me to be a iudge or heretage
parter ouer you?
15 And he sayde vnto them: Take hede, and bewarre of couetousnesse, for no man
lyueth therof, that he hath abundaunce of goodes.
16 And he tolde them a symilitude, and sayde: There was a riche man, whose felde
had brought forth frutes plenteously,
17 and he thought in himself, and sayde: What shal I do? I haue nothinge wher in
to gather my frutes.
18 And he sayde: This wil I do, I wil breake downe my barnes, & buylde greater,
and therin wil I gather all myne increace, & my goodes,
19 & wil saye vnto my soule: Soule, thou hast moch goodes layed vp in stoare for
many yeares, take now thine ease, eate, drinke, and be mery.
20 But God sayde vnto him: Thou foole, this night shal they requyre thy soule
from the, and whose shal it be that thou hast prepared?
21 Thus goeth it with him yt gathereth treasure for himself, and is not riche in
God.
22 But he sayde vnto his disciples: Therfore I saye vnto you: Take ye no thought
for youre life, what ye shal eate: nether for youre body, what ye shal put on.
23 The life is more then meate, and the body more then raymet.
24 Consydre the rauens, they nether sowe ner reape, they haue also nether stoare
house ner barne, and yet God fedeth them. But how moch better are ye then the
foules?
25 Which of you (though he toke thought therfore) coulde put one cubyte vnto his
stature?
26 Seinge then ye be not able to do that which is least, why take ye thought for
the other?
27 Considre the lilies vpo the felde, how they growe: they laboure not, they
spynne not. But I saye vnto you: that euen Salomen in all his royalte was not
clothed like one of these.
28 Wherfore yf God so cloth the grasse, yt is to daye in ye felde, and tomorow
shalbe cast in to the fornace, how moch more shal he clothe you, o ye of litle
faith?
29 Axe not ye therfore what ye shal eate, or what ye shal drynke, and clymme not
vp an hye:
30 The Heithen in the worlde seke after all soch thinges.
31 But seke ye the kyngdome of God, and all these shal be mynistred vnto you.
32 Feare not thou litle flocke, for it is youre fathers pleasure to geue you the
kyngdome.
33 Sell that ye haue, and geue almesse. Make you bagges, which waxe not olde:
euen a treasure that neuer fayleth in heauen, where no thefe commeth, and no
moth corruppeth:
34 for where youre treasure is, there wil youre hert be also.
35 Let youre loynes be gerded aboute, and youre lightes burnynge,
36 and be ye like vnto men that wayte for their lorde, agaynst he returne from
the mariage, that whan he cometh & knocketh, they maye straight waye open vnto
him.
37 Blessed are those seruauntes, whom the LORDE (whan he cometh) shal fynde
wakynge. Verely I saye vnto you: He shal gyrde vp him self, and make them syt
downe at the table, and shal go by them, and mynister vnto them.
38 And yf he come in the seconde watch, and in the thirde watch, and fynde them
so, blessed are those seruauntes.
39 But be sure of this, that yf the good man of the house knewe, what houre the
thefe wolde come, he wolde surely watch, and not suffre his house to be broken
vp.
40 Therfore be ye ready also, for at an houre whan ye thynke not, shal the sonne
of man come.
41 But Peter sayde vnto him: LORDE, tellest thou this symilitude vnto vs, or to
all men also?
42 The LORDE sayde: How greate a thinge is a faithfull and wyse stewarde, whom
his lorde setteth ouer his houssholde, to geue the their dewtye in due season?
43 Blessed is that seruaunt, whom his lorde (whan he cometh) shal fynde so
doynge.
44 Verely I saye vnto you: he shal set him ouer all his goodes.
45 But yf the same seruaut shal saye in his hert: Tush, it wil be longe or my
lorde come, and shal begynne to smyte ye seruauntes and maydens, yee & to eate
and drynke,& to be dronke:
46 the same seruauntes lorde shal come in a daye whan he loketh not for him, and
in an houre that he is not aware of, & shal hew him in peces, and geue him his
rewarde with the vnbeleuers.
47 The seruaunt that knewe his lordes wil and prepared not himself, nether dyd
acordinge to his will, shal be beaten with many strypes:
48 But he that knewe it not, and yet dyd thinges worthy of strypes, shal be
beaten with few strypes. For loke vnto whom moch is geuen, of him shal moch be
sought: and loke to whom moch is commytted, of him shal moch be requyred.
49 I am come to kyndle fyre vpo earth, and what wolde I rather, the that it were
kyndled allready.
50 Notwithstodinge I must first be baptised with a baptyme, and how am I payned
tyll it be ended?
51 Thynke ye, that I am come to brynge peace vpon earth? I tell you nay, but
rather debate.
52 For from hence forth there shal be at varyauce in one house: thre agaynst
two, and two agaynst thre.
53 The father shal be deuyded agaynst ye sonne, and the sonne agaynst the
father: the mother agaynst the doughter, & the doughter agaynst the mother: the
mother in lawe agaynst hir doughter in lawe, and ye doughter in lawe agaynst hir
mother in lawe.
54 And he sayde vnto the people: Whan ye se a cloude ryse out of ye west,
straight waye ye saye: there cometh a shower, and so it is:
55 and whan ye se the southwynde blowe, ye saye: It wil be hote, and it commeth
so to passe.
56 O ye ypocrytes, ye can discerne the fashion of the skye and of the earth: Why
can ye not discerne this tyme also?
57 Yee and why iugde ye not of youre selues, what is right?
58 Whyle thou goest with thine aduersary vnto the Prynce, geue diligece by the
waye, that thou mayest be quyte of him, lest he brynge the before the iudge, and
the iudge delyuer the to the iaylar, and the iaylar cast the in to preson.
59 I tell the, thou shalt uot come out thence, tyll thou paye the vttemost myte.

Chapter 13

1 There were present at the same season certayne, that shewed him of ye
Galileans, whose bloude Pilate had megled with their awne sacrifice.
2 And Iesus answered, and sayde vnto them: Suppose ye, that these Galileas were
greater synners then all the other Galileans, because they suffred soch
punyshment?
3 I tell you naye, but excepte ye amede youre selues, ye shal all perishe
likewyse.
4 Or thinke ye that ye eightene (vpon whom the tower in Siloe fell and slewe
them) were giltie aboue all men that dwell at Ierusalem?
5 I tell you naye: but excepte ye amende youre selues, ye shal all perishe
likewyse.
6 And he tolde them this symilitude: A certayne ma had a fygge tre, which was
planted in his vynyarde, & he came and sought frute theron, and founde none.
7 Then sayde he vnto the wynegardener: Beholde, This thre yeare longe haue I
come euery yeare, and sought frute vpon this fygge tre, and fynde none: cut it
downe, why hyndreth it the grounde?
8 But he answered, and sayde: Syr, let it alone yet this yeare, tyll I dygge
roude aboute it and donge it,
9 yf it wyl brynge forth frute: Yf no, then cut it downe afterwarde.
10 And he taught in a synagoge vpon the Sabbath:
11 and beholde, there was a woma, which had a sprete of infirmyte eightene
yeares, and was croked, and coulde not well loke vp.
12 Whan Iesus sawe her, he called her to him, and sayde vnto her: Woman, be
delyuered from thy disease.
13 And he layed his handes vpo her, and immediatly she was made straight, and
praysed God.
14 Then answered the ruler of the synagoge, and toke indignacion (because Iesus
healed vpo ye Sabbath) and sayde vnto the people: There are sixe dayes, wherin
men ought to worke, in them come and be healed, and not on the Sabbath.
15 Then the LORDE answered him, and sayde: Thou ypocryte, doth not euery one of
you lowse his oxe or asse fro the crybbe vpo Sabbath, and leade him to the
water?
16 But shulde not this (which is Abrahams doughter) whom Sathan hath bounde now
eightene yeares, be lowsed from this bonde vpo the Sabbath?
17 And whan he thus sayde, all his aduersaries were ashamed. And all the people
reioysed ouer all the excellent dedes, that were done by him.
18 And he sayde: What is the kyngdome of God like? Or wher vnto shal I copare
it?
19 It is like a grayne of mustarde sede, which a man toke, and cast in his
garden: and it grewe, and waxed a greate tre, and the foules of the ayre dwelt
amonge the braunches of it.
20 And agayne he sayde: Where vnto shal I licken the kyngdome of God?
21 It is like vnto leuen, which a woman toke, and myxte it amoge thre peckes of
meele, tyll it was all leuended.
22 And he wete thorow cities and townes, and taught, and toke his iourney
towarde Ierusalem.
23 And one sayde vnto him: LORDE, are there few (thinkest thou) that shalbe
saued? But he sayde vnto them:
24 Stryue ye to entre in at the strayte gate, for many (I saye vnto you) shal
seke to come in, and shal not be able.
25 From that tyme forth, whan the good man of the house is rysen vp, and hath
shut the dore, then shal ye begynne to stonde without, and to knocke at ye dore,
and saye: LORDE LORDE, open vnto vs. And he shal answere, and saye vnto you: I
knowe you not whence ye are.
26 Then shal ye begynne to saye: We haue eaten and dronken before the, and thou
hast taught vs vpon ye stretes.
27 And he shal saye: I tell you, I knowe you not whence ye are. Departe fro me
all ye workers of iniquyte.
28 There shalbe wepynge and gnasshinge of teth, when ye shal se Abraham, and
Isaac, and Iacob and all the prophetes in ye kyngdome of God, and youre selues
thrust out,
29 And wha they shal come from the east and from the west, from the north and
from the south, which shal syt at ye table in the kyngdome of God.
30 And beholde, there are last, which shal be fyrst: and there are first, which
shalbe last.
31 Vpon the same daye there came certayne of ye Pharises, and sayde vnto him:
Get the out of the waye, and departe hence, for Herode wyl kyll the.
32 And he sayde vnto the: Go ye and tell that foxe: beholde, I cast out deuels,
and heale the people todaye and tomorow, and vpo the thirde daye shal I make an
ende:
33 for it can not be, that a prophet perishe without Ierusalem.
34 O Ierusalem Ierusale, thou that kyllest the prophetes, and stonest the that
are sent vnto ye, how oft wolde I haue gathered thy children together, euen as
the henne gathereth hir nest vnder hir wynges, and ye wolde not?
35 Beholde, yor habitacion shal be left vnto you desolate. For I saye vnto you:
ye shal not se me, tyll ye tyme come that ye shal saye: blessed be he, yt cometh
in ye name of the LORDE.

Chapter 14

1 And it fortuned that he came in to the house of one of ye chefe Pharises vpo a
Sabbath, to eate bred, & they watched him.
2 And beholde, there was a ma before him, which had ye dropsye.
3 And Iesus answered, & spake vnto the scrybes and Pharises, & sayde: Is it
laufull to heale on the Sabbath?
4 But they helde their tonge. And he toke him, and healed him, & let him go,
5 and answered, and sayde vnto the: Which of you shal haue an oxe or an asse
fallen in to a pytte, and wil not straight waye pull him out on the Sabbath
daye?
6 And they coude not answere him agayne to that.
7 And he tolde a symilitude vnto ye gestes, wha he marked how they chose the
hyest seates, & sayde vnto the:
8 Whan thou art bydde of eny man to a weddynge, syt not downe in the hyest
rowme, lest a more honorable man the thou be bydde of him,
9 and he that bade both the and him, come & saye vnto ye: geue this ma rowme,
and thou the begynne with shame to take ye lowest rowme.
10 But rather wha thou art bydde, go and syt in ye lowest rowme, that wha he
that bade the, cometh, he maye saye vnto the: Frende, syt vp hyer: then shalt
thou haue worshipe in the presence of them that syt at the table.
11 For who so euer exalteth himself, shalbe brought lowe: and he yt humbleth
himself, shalbe exalted.
12 He sayde also vnto him that had bydden him: Wha thou makest a dyner or a
supper, call not thy frendes, ner thy brethren, ner thy kynsfolkes, ner yi riche
neghbours, lest they call the agayne, and recompece be made ye.
13 But wha thou makest a feast, call the poore, the crepell, the lame, the
blynde,
14 then art thou blessed, for they can not recompece ye. But it shalbe
recompensed the in the resurreccion of the righteous.
15 Whan one of them that sat by at the table herde this, he sayde vnto him:
Blessed is he, that eateth bred in ye kyngdome of God.
16 But he sayde vnto him: A certayne ma made a greate supper, and called many
ther to.
17 And in ye houre of the supper he sent his seruaute, to saye vnto the yt were
bydde: Come, for now are all thinges ready.
18 And they begane all together to excuse the selues one after another: The
first saide vnto hi: I haue bought a ferme, and I must nedes go forth and se it,
I praye ye haue me excused.
19 And ye seconde sayde: I haue bought fyue yoke of oxen, and now I go to proue
them, I praye the haue me excused.
20 And the thirde sayde: I haue maried a wife, therfore can I not come.
21 And the seruaunt came, and brought his lorde worde agayne therof.Then was the
good man of the house displeased, and sayde vnto his seruaut: Go out quyckly in
to the stretes and quarters of ye cite, and brynge in hither the poore and
crepell, and lame and blynde.
22 And the seruaut sayde: lorde, it is done as thou hast comaunded, and there is
yet more rowme.
23 And the lorde sayde vnto the seruaunt: Go out into the hye wayes, and to the
hedges, and compell them to come in, that my house maye be fylled.
24 But I saye vnto you: that none of these men which were bydden, shal taist of
my supper.
25 There wente moch people with him, and he turned him aboute and sayde vnto
them:
26 Yf eny man come vnto me, and hate not his father, mother, wife, childre,
brethre, sisters, yee and his owne life also, he can not be my disciple.
27 And whosoeuer beareth not his crosse, and foloweth me, can not be my
disciple.
28 Which of you is it yt wil buylde a tower, and sytteth not downe first and
counteth ye cost, whether he haue sufficiet to perfourme, it?
29 lest after he hath layed the foundacio, and is not able to perfourme it, all
they that se it, begynne to laugh him to scorne,
30 & to saye: This man beganne to buylde, and is not able to perfurme it.
31 Or what kynge wil go to make battayl agaynst another kynge, and sytteth not
downe first, and casteth in his mynde, whether he be able with ten thousande, to
mete him that commeth agaynst him with twentye thousande?
32 Or els, whyle the other is yet a greate waye of he sendeth embassage, and
desyreth peace.
33 So likewyse euery one of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, can not be
my disciple.
34 Salt is a good thinge: but yf the salt be vnsauery, what shal they season
withall.
35 It is nether good vpon the lande, ner in the donge hyll, but shal be cast
awaye. He that hath eares to heare, let him heare.

Chapter 15

1 There resorted vnto him all the publicans and synners, that they might heare
him.
2 And ye Pharises and scrybes murmured, and sayde: This man receaueth synners,
and eateth with them.
3 But he tolde the this symilitude, and sayde:
4 What man is he amonge you, that hath an hundreth shepe, and yf he loose one of
the, that leaueth not the nyne and nyentye in the wyldernesse, and goeth after
that which is lost tyll he fynde it?
5 And whan he hath founde it, he layeth it vpon his shulders with ioye:
6 and whan he commeth home, he calleth his fredes and neghbours, and sayeth vnto
the: Reioyce with me, for I haue founde my shepe, yt was lost.
7 I saye vnto you: Eue so shal there be ioye in heauen ouer one synner that doth
pennaunce, more then ouer nyne and nyentye righteous, which nede not
repentaunce.
8 Or what woman is it that hath ten grotes, yf she loose one of them, that
lighteth not a candell, and swepeth the house, and seketh diligently, tyll she
fynde it?
9 And whan she hath founde it, she calleth hir frendes & neghbouresses, and
sayeth: Reioyce with me, for I haue foude my grote, which I had lost.
10 Euen so (I tell you) shal there be ioye before the angels of God, ouer one
synner yt doth pennaunce.
11 And he sayde: A certayne man had two sonnes,
12 and the yonger of them sayde vnto the father: Father, geue me the porcion of
ye goodes, that belongeth vnto me. And he deuyded the good vnto them.
13 And not longe therafter, gathered the yonger sonne all together, & toke his
iourney in to a farre countre, and there waisted he his goodes with ryotous
lyuynge.
14 Now whan he had spent all that he had, there was a greate derth thorow out
all the same lode. And he begane to lacke,
15 and wente his waye, and claue to a cytesin of that same countre, which sent
him in to his felde, to kepe swyne.
16 And he wolde fayne haue fylled his bely with the coddes, that the swyne ate.
And no man gaue him them.
17 Then came he to him self, and sayde: How many hyred seruauntes hath my
father, which haue bred ynough, and I perish of honger?
18 I wil get vp, and go to my father, and saye vnto him: Father, I haue synned
agaynst heauen and before the,
19 and am nomore worthy to be called thy sonne, make me as one of thy hyred
seruauntes.
20 And he gat him vp, & came vnto his father. But whan he was yet a greate waye
of, his father sawe him, and had copassion, and ranne, and fell aboute his neck,
and kyssed him.
21 Then sayde the sonne vnto him: Father, I haue synned agaynst heaue, and
before the, I am nomore worthy to be called thy sonne.
22 But the father sayde vnto his seruauntes: Brynge forth the best garment, and
put it vpon him, and geue him a rynge vpon his hande, and shues on his fete,
23 and brynge hither a fed calfe, and kyll it, lat vs eate and be mery:
24 for this my sonne was deed, and is alyue agayne: he was lost, and is founde.
And they beganne to be mery.
25 But the elder sonne was in the felde. And whan he came, and drewe nye to the
house, he herde ye mynstrelsye and daunsynge,
26 and called one of the seruauntes vnto him, and axed what it was.
27 He sayde vnto him: Thy brother is come, and thy father hath slayne a fed
calfe, because he hath receaued him safe and sounde.
28 Then was he angrie, and wolde not go in. Then wente his father out, and
prayed him.
29 But he answered, and sayde vnto his father: Lo, thus many yeares haue I done
the seruyce, nether haue I yet broken thy commaundement, and thou gauest me
neuer one kydd, yt I might make mery with my frendes.
30 But now that this thy sonne is come, which deuoured his goodes with
harlottes, thou hast slayne a fed calfe.
31 But he sayde vnto him: My sonne, thou art allwaye with me, and all that is
myne, is thine:
32 thou shuldest be mery and glad, for this yi brother was deed, and is alyue
agayne: he was lost, and is founde agayne.

Chapter 16

1 He sayde also vnto his disciples: There was a certayne riche man, which had a
stewarde, that was accused vnto him, that he had waisted his goodes.
2 And he called him, and sayde vnto him: How is it, that I heare this of the?
geue acomptes of yi stewardshipe, for thou mayest be no longer stewarde.
3 The stewarde sayde within himself: What shal I do? My lorde wil take awaye the
stewardshipe fro me. I ca not dygge, and to begg I am ashamed.
4 I wote what I wil do, that wha I am put out of the stewardshipe, they maye
receaue me in to their houses.
5 And he called vnto hi all his lordes detters, and sayde vnto the first: How
moch owest thou vnto my lorde?
6 He sayde: an hundreth tonnes of oyle. And he sayde: Take yi byll, syt downe
quyckly, & wryte fiftie.
7 Then sayde he vnto another: How moch owest thou? He sayde: an hundreth
quarters of wheate. And he sayde vnto him: Take thy byll, and wryte foure score.
8 And the lorde comended the vnrighteous stewarde, because he had done wysely.
For the children of this worlde are in their kynde wyser, the the children of
light.
9 And I saye vnto you: Make you frendes with the vnrighteous Mammon, yt whan ye
shal haue nede, they maye receaue you in to euerlastinge Tabernacles.
10 He that is faithfull in the least, is faithfull also in moch: and he that is
vnrighteous in the least, is vnrighteous also in moch.
11 Yf ye then haue not bene faithfull in the vnrighteous Mammon, who wyll beleue
you in that which is true?
12 And yf ye haue not bene faithfull in anothers mans busynesse, who wil geue
you that which is youre awne?
13 No seruaunt can serue two masters: for either he shal hate the one, and loue
ye other: or els he shal leane to the one, and despyse the other. Ye can not
serue God and Mammon.
14 All these thinges herde the Pharises, which were couetous, and they mocked
hi.
15 And he sayde vnto them: Ye are they that iustifie yor selues before men, but
God knoweth youre hertes. For yt which is hye amonge men, is an abhominacion
before God.
16 The lawe and ye prophetes prophecied vnto Ihon, and from that tyme forth is
ye kyngdome of God preached thorow ye Gospell, and euery man preasseth in to it
by violence.
17 But easier is it, for heauen and earth to perishe, then one tittle of ye lawe
to fall.
18 Who so euer putteth awaye his wife, & marieth another, breaketh matrimonye:
and he that marieth her which is deuorced fro hir hussbande, breaketh wedlocke
also.
19 There was a certayne riche man, which clothed him self with purple and costly
lynnen, and fared deliciously euery daye.
20 And there was a poore man named Lazarus which laye at his gate full of sores,
21 and desyred to be fylled with the crommes, that fell from the riche mans
table. Yet came the dogges, and licked his sores.
22 But it fortuned, that the poore man dyed, and was caried of the angels in to
Abrahams bosome. The riche man dyed also, and was buried.
23 Now whan he was in the hell, he lift vp his eyes in the payne, and sawe
Abraham afarre of, and Lazarus in his bosome:
24 and he cried, and sayde: Father Abraham, haue mercy vpon me, and sende
Lazarus, that he maye dyppe the typpe of his fynger in water, & coole my tonge,
for I am tormeted in this flame.
25 But Abraha saide: Remebre sonne, yt thou hast receaued good in yi life, &
contrary wyse Lazarus receaued euell. But now is he comforted, and thou art
tormented.
26 And beside all this, there is a greate space set betwene vs and you: so yt
they which wolde go downe from hence vnto you, cannot: nether maye they passe
ouer from thence vnto vs.
27 Then sayde he: I pray the then father, that thou wilt sende him vnto my
fathers house,
28 for I haue yet fyue brethren, that he maye warne them, lest they also come in
to this place of torment.
29 Abraham sayde vnto him: They haue Moses and the prophetes, let them heare
them.
30 But he sayde: Nay father Abraham, but yf one wente vnto them fro the deed,
they wolde do pennaunce.
31 Neuertheles he sayde vnto him: Yf they heare not Moses & the prophetes, then
shal they not beleue also, though one rose agayne fro the deed.

Chapter 17

1 He sayde vnto his disciples: It is vnpossible that offences shulde not come:
but wo vnto him by whom they come:
2 It were better for him, that a mylstone were hanged aboute his neck, and he
cast in to the see, then that he shulde offende one of these litle ones.
3 Take hede to youre selues. Yf thy brother trespace agaynst the, rebuke him:
4 and yf he amende, forgeue him. And though he synne agaynst the seuen tymes in
a daye, and come seuen tymes in a daye to ye agayne, and saye: It repenteth me,
forgeue him.
5 And the Apostles sayde vnto ye LORDE: Increace oure faith.
6 The LORDE sayde: Yf ye haue faith as a grayne of mustarde sede, and saye vnto
this Molbery tre: Plucke thy self vp by the rotes, and plate thy self in the
see, it shalbe obediet vnto you.
7 Which of you is it, that hath a seruaunt (which ploweth, or fedeth the catell)
wha he commeth home from ye felde, that he wil saye vnto him: Go quyckly, and
syt the downe to meate?
8 Is it not thus? that he sayeth vnto him: Make ready, that I maye suppe, gyrde
vp thyself, and serue me, tyll I haue eaten and dronken, afterwarde shalt thou
eate and drynke also.
9 Thanketh he the same seruaunt also, because he dyd that was commaunded him? I
trowe not.
10 So likewyse ye, wha ye haue done all that is comaunded you, saye: We are
vnprofitable seruauntes, we haue done that we were bounde to do.
11 And it fortuned, whan he toke his iourney towarde Ierusalem, he wente thorow
the myddest of Samaria and Galile.
12 And as he came in to a towne, there met him ten leporous men, which stode
afarre of,
13 and lift vp their voyce, and sayde: Iesu master, haue mercy vpon vs.
14 And whan he sawe them, he sayde vnto the: Go, and shewe youre selues vnto ye
prestes. And it came to passe, as they wente, they were clensed.
15 And one of them wha he sawe that he was clensed, he turned backe agayne, and
praysed God with loude voyce,
16 and fell downe on his face at his fete, and gaue him thankes. And the same
was a Samaritane.
17 Iesus answered and saide: Are there not ten clensed? But where are those
nyne?
18 There were els none founde, that turned agayne, and gaue God the prayse, saue
onely this strauger.
19 And he sayde vnto him: Aryse, go thy waye, thy faith hath made ye whole.
20 But whan he was demaunded of ye Pharises: Whan cometh the kyngdome of God? He
answered them, and sayde: The kyngdome of God commeth not with outwarde
appearaunce,
21 nether shal it be sayde: lo, here or there is it. For beholde, ye kyngdome of
God is inwarde in you.
22 And he sayde to the disciples: The tyme shal come, wha ye shal desyre to se
one daye of the sonne of man, and shal not se it.
23 And they shal saye vnto you: Se here, Se there. Go not ye, nether folowe,
24 for as the lightenynge shyneth aboue from the heauen, and lighteth ouer all
that is vnder the heaue, so shal the sonne of ma be in his daye.
25 But first must he suffre many thinges, and be refused of this generacion.
26 And as it came to passe in the tyme of Noe, so shal it come to passe also in
ye dayes of the sonne of man.
27 They ate, they dranke, they maried, and were maried, euen vnto ye daye that
Noe wente in to the Arke, and ye floude came, and destroyed them all.
28 Likewyse also as it came to passe in the tyme of Lot, they ate, they dranke,
they bought, they solde, they planted, they buylded.
29 But euen the same daye that Lot wente out of Sodom, it rayned fyre and
brymstone from heaue, and destroyed them all.
30 After this maner also shal it go, in the daye whan the sonne of man shal
appeare.
31 In that daye, who so is vpo the rofe, and his stuffe in ye house, let him not
come downe to fetch it: Likewyse he that is in the felde, let him not turne
backe, for it that is behynde him.
32 Remebre Lottes wife.
33 Who so euer goeth aboute to saue his life, shal lose it: and who so euer shal
lose it, shal saue it.
34 I saye vnto you: In yt night shal two lye vpon one bed, the one shalbe
receaued, the other shalbe for saken.
35 Two shalbe gryndinge together, the one shalbe receaued, the other shalbe
forsaken.
36 (Omitted Text)
37 And they answered, and sayde vnto him: Where LORDE? He sayde vnto the: Where
so euer ye deed carcase is there wil ye Aegles be gathered together.

Chapter 18

1 He tolde them a symilitude, signifienge, yt men ought allwayes to praye, & not
to leaue of,
2 & sayde: There was a iudge in a cite, which feared not God, and stode in awe
of no man.
3 And in the same cite there was a wedowe, which came vnto him, and sayde:
delyuer me fro myne aduersary.
4 And he wolde not a greate whyle. But afterwarde he thought within hi self:
Though I feare not God, & stonde in awe of no man,
5 yet seynge this weddowe is so importune vpon me, I wil delyuer her, lest she
come at the last, and rayle vpon me.
6 Then sayde the LORDE: Heare what ye vnrighteous iudge sayeth.
7 But shall not God also delyuer his chosen, that crye vnto hi daye and night,
though he differre the?
8 I saye vnto you: He shal delyuer them, and that shortly. Neuertheles, whan the
sonne of man cometh, suppose ye, that he shal fynde faith vpon earth?
9 And vnto certayne which trusted in the selues, that they were perfecte, and
despysed other,he spake this symilitude:
10 There wente vp two men in to the teple, to praye: the one a Pharise, the
other a publican.
11 The Pharise stode, and prayed by himself after this maner: I thanke the God,
that I am not as other men, robbers, vnrighteous, aduouters, or as this
publican.
12 I fast twyse in the weke, I geue the tithes of all that I haue.
13 And the publican stode afarre of, and wolde not lift vp his eyes to heauen,
but smote vpon his brest, and sayde: God be thou mercyfull vnto me synner.
14 I tell you: This man wente downe in to his house iustified more the the
other. For who so euer exalteth himself, shalbe brought lowe: and he that
humbleth himself, shalbe exalted.
15 They brought yonge children also vnto him, that he shulde touch them. But
whan the disciples sawe that, they rebuked them.
16 Neuertheles Iesus called them vnto him, and sayde: Suffre childre to come
vnto me, and forbyd the not, for of soch is ye kyngdome of God.
17 Verely I saye vnto you: Whosoeuer receaueth not ye kyngdome of God as a
childe, shal not enter therin.
18 And a certayne ruler axed him, and sayde: Good master, what must I do, that I
maye enheret euerlastinge life?
19 But Iesus sayde vnto him: Why callest thou me good? There is no man good, but
God onely.
20 Thou knowest the comaundementes: Thou shalt not breake wedlocke: Thou shalt
not kyll: Thou shalt not steale: Thou shalt not beare false wytnesse: Honoure
thy father and yi mother.
21 But he sayde: All these haue I kepte fro my youth vp.
22 Wha Iesus herde that, he sayde vnto him: Yet lackest thou one thinge, sell
all that thou hast, and geue it vnto ye poore, and thou shalt haue a treasure in
heauen, and come & folowe me.
23 Whan he herde that, he was sory, for he was very riche.
24 Whan Iesus sawe that he was sory, he sayde: How hardly shal the riche come in
to the kyngdome of God?
25 It is easyer for a Camell to go thorow the eye of a nedle, the for a rich man
to entre in to the kyngdome of God.
26 Then sayde they yt herde that: Who can then be saued?
27 But he sayde: loke what is vnpossible with me, is possible with God.
28 Then sayde Peter: Beholde, we haue forsake all, and folowed the.
29 He sayde vnto the: Verely I saye vnto you: There is no ma yt forsaketh house,
or elders, or brethren, or wife, or children for the kyngdome of Gods sake,
30 which shal not receaue moch more in this tyme, and euerlastinge life in the
worlde to come.
31 He toke vnto him the twolue, and sayde vnto them: Beholde, we go vp to
Ierusale, and it shal all be fulfilled, that is wrytten by the prophetes of the
sonne of man.
32 For he shal be delyuered vnto ye Heythen, and shalbe mocked, and despytefully
intreated, and spitted vpon:
33 and whan they haue scourged him, they shal put him to death, and vpon the
thirde daye shal he aryse agayne.
34 And they vnderstode nothinge of these thinges. And this sayenge was hyd from
them, and they perceaued not the thinges that were spoken.
35 And it came to passe, whan he came nye vnto Iericho, there sat one blynde by
the waye, and begged.
36 And whan he herde the people passe by, he axed what it was.
37 Then sayde they vnto him, that Iesus of Nazareth passed by.
38 And he cryed, and sayde: Iesu thou sonne of Dauid, haue mercy vpon me.
39 But the people that wente before, rebuked him, that he shulde holde his
tunge. Neuertheles he cried moch more: Thou sonne of Dauid haue mercy vpo me.
40 Iesus stode styl, & comaunded hi to be brought vnto hi. And whan he was come
neare, he axed him
41 and sayde: What wilt thou, that I do vnto the? He sayde: LORDE, that I maye
receaue my sight.
42 And Iesus sayde vnto him: Receaue thy sight, thy faith hath saued the.
43 And immediatly he sawe, and folowed him, & praysed God. And all the people
that sawe it, gaue God the prayse.

Chapter 19

1 And he entred in, and wente thorow Iericho:
2 & beholde, there was a man named Zacheus, which was a ruler of the publicans,
and was riche,
3 and desyred to se Iesus what he shulde be, and he coulde not for the people,
for he was lowe of stature.
4 And he ranne before, and clymmed vp in to a wylde fygge tre, that he might se
him: for he shulde come yt waye.
5 And whan Iesus came to the same place, he loked vp, and sawe him, and sayde
vnto him: Zache, come downe haistely, for todaye must I turne in to thy house.
6 And he came downe hastely, and receaued him with ioye.
7 Whan they sawe that, they murmured all, and sayde, yt he was gone in, to a
synner.
8 But Zacheus stode forth, and sayde vnto the LORDE: Beholde LORDE, the half of
my goodes geue I to the poore: and yf I haue defrauded eny man, I restore him
foure folde.
9 Iesus sayde vnto him: This daye is health happened vnto this house, for so
moch as he also is Abrahams sonne.
10 For the sonne of ma is come, to seke and to saue that which was lost.
11 Now whyle they herkened, he tolde a symilitude also, because he was nye vnto
Ierusalem, and because they thought, that the kyngdome of God shulde appeare
immediatly.
12 And he sayde: A certayne noble ma wete in to a farre countre, to receaue hi a
kyngdome, and then to come agayne.
13 This man called ten of his seruauntes, and delyuered them ten pounde, and
sayde vnto them: Occupye, tyll I come agayne.
14 But his citesyns hated him, and sent a message after him, and sayde: We wil
not haue this man to raigne ouer vs.
15 And it fortuned whan he came agayne, after that he had receaued the kyngdome,
he bade call for the seruauntes, vnto whom he had geue his money, yt he might
knowe, what euery one had done.
16 Then came the first and sayde: Syr, thy pounde hath wonne ten pounde.
17 And he sayde vnto him: Well thou good seruaut, for so moch as thou hast bene
faithfull in the least, thou shalt haue auctorite ouer ten cities.
18 The seconde came also, and sayde: Syr, thy pounde hath wonne fyue pounde.
19 And to him he sayde: And thou shalt be ouer fyue cities.
20 And ye thirde came, and sayde: Lo syr, here is thy pounde, which I haue kepte
in a napkyn.
21 I was afrayed of the, for thou art an harde man, thou takest vp yt thou hast
not layed downe, and reapest that thou hast not sowne.
22 He sayde vnto him: Of thine awne mouth iudge I the thou euell seruaunt.
Knewest thou thou that I am an harde man, takynge vp that I layde not downe, and
reapynge that I dyd not sowe?
23 Wherfore then hast thou not delyuered my money to the exchaunge banke? And at
my commynge might I haue requyred myne awne with vauntage?
24 And he sayde vnto them that stode by: Take ye pounde from him, and geue it
vnto him that hath ten pounde.
25 And they sayde vnto him: Syr, he hath ten pounde already.
26 But I saye vnto you: Whosoeuer hath, vnto him shal be geue: but from him that
hath not, shal be taken awaye euen that he hath.
27 As for those myne enemies, which wolde not that I shulde raigne ouer them,
bringe them hither, and slaye them before me.
28 And whan he had thus sayde, he wete on forwarde, and toke his iourney vp to
Ierusalem.
29 And it fortuned whan he came nye to Bethphage and Bethany vnto mount Oliuete,
he sent two of his disciples,
30 and sayde: Go in to the towne that lyeth ouer agaynst you, and assone as ye
are come in, ye shal fynde a foale tyed, wheron yet neuer man satt, lowse it,
and brynge it hither.
31 And yf eny ma axe you wherfore ye lowse it, saye thus vnto him. The LORDE
hath nede therof.
32 And they that were sent, wete their waye and founde euen as he had sayde.
33 But wha they lowsed ye foale; the owners therof sayde vnto the: Why lowse ye
the foale?
34 They sayde: The LORDE hath nede therof.
35 And they brought it vnto Iesus, and cast their clothes vpo the foale, and set
Iesus theron.
36 Now as he wente, they spred their garmentes in the waye.
37 And whan he wete downe fro mount Oliuete, ye whole multitude of his disciples
begane ioyfully to prayse God with loude voyce, ouer all the miracles that they
had sene,
38 and sayde: Blessed be he, that cometh a kynge in the name of the LORDE. Peace
be in heauen, and prayse in the height.
39 And some of the Pharises amonge the people sayde vnto him: Master, rebuke thy
disciples.
40 And he answered and sayde vnto them: I tell you, yf these holde their peace,
yet shal the stones crye.
41 And whan he was come neare, he behelde the cite, and wepte vpo it,
42 and sayde: Yf thou knewest what were for yi peace, thou shuldest remebre it
euen in this present daye of thine. But now is it hyd from thine eyes.
43 For the tyme shal come vpon the, that thine enimies shal cast vp a bake
aboute the, and aboute thy children with the, and besege ye, and kepe the in on
euery syde,
44 and make the eauen with the grounde, and shal not leaue in the one stone vpon
another, because thou hast not knowne ye tyme, wherin thou hast bene visited.
45 And he wente into the temple, and begane to dryue out them that bought and
solde therin,
46 and sayde vnto them: It is wrytten: My house is an house of prayer, but ye
haue made it a denne of murthurers.
47 And he taught daylie in the teple. But the hye prestes and the scrybes and
the chefest of ye people wente aboute to destroye him,
48 and founde not, what to do vnto him. For all the people stacke by him, and
gaue him audience.

Chapter 20

1 And it fortuned one of those dayes, whan he taught the people in the teple,
and preached the Gospell, the hye prestes and scrybes came to him with the
Elders,
2 and spake vnto him, and sayde: Tell vs, by what auctorite doest thou these
thinges? Or who gaue the this auctorite?
3 But he answered, & sayde vnto the: I wil axe you a worde also, tell it me:
4 The baptyme of Iho was it from heauen, or of men?
5 But they thought in them selues, and sayde: Yf we saye, from heauen, then shal
he saye: Why dyd ye not the beleue him?
6 But yf we saye, of men, then shal all the people stone vs, for they be
persuaded, that Ihon is a prophet.
7 And they answered, that they coulde not tell, whence it was.
8 And Iesus sayde vnto them: Nether tell I you, by what auctorite I do these
thinges.
9 And he beganne to tell the people this symilitude: A certayne man planted a
vynyarde, and let it out vnto hussbadmen, and wente himself in to a straunge
countre for a greate season.
10 And whan his tyme was come, he sent a seruaut to the hussbadmen, that they
might geue him of the frute of the vynyarde. But the hussbandmen bet him, and
sent him awaye emptye.
11 And agayne he sent yet another seruaut: but they bet him also, and intreated
him shamefully, & sent him awaye emptye.
12 And besydes this, he sent the thirde: but they wounded him also, and thrust
him out.
13 Then sayde the lorde of the vynyarde: What shal I do? I wil sende my deare
sonne, peraduenture they wil stonde in awe of him, whan they se him.
14 But whan the hussbande men sawe the sonne, they thought in the selues, and
sayde: This is the heyre, come, let vs kyll him, yt the inheritaunce maye be
oures.
15 And they thrust him out of ye vynyarde, and slew him. What shal now the lorde
of the vynyarde do vnto them?
16 He shal come, and destroye those hussbandmen, and let out his vynyarde vnto
other. Whan they herde that, they sayde: God forbyd.
17 But he behelde the, and sayde: What is this then that is wrytten: The same
stone which the buylders refused, is become the head corner stone?
18 Who so euer falleth vpon this stone, shalbe broken in sunder: but vpo who so
euer he falleth, he shall grynde him to poulder.
19 And the hye prestes and scrybes wente aboute to laye handes vpon him the same
houre, and they feared the people: for they perceaued, that he had spoke this
symilitude agaynst them.
20 And they watched hi, & sent forth spyes, which shulde fayne the selues
perfecte, that they might take him in his wordes, to delyuer him vnto the power
and auctorite of ye debite.
21 And they axed him, & sayde: Master, we knowe that thou sayest & teachest
right, and regardest the outwarde appearauce of no man, but teachest the waye of
God truly.
22 Is it laufull, that we geue tribute vnto the Emperoure, or not?
23 But he perceaued their craftynes, and sayde vnto them: Why tepte ye me?
24 Shewe me the peny. Whose ymage and superscripcion hath it? They answered, and
sayde: The Emperours.
25 Then sayde he vnto them: Geue the vnto the Emperoure, that which is the
Emperours: & vnto God, that which is Gods.
26 And they coude not reproue his worde before the people, and marueyled at his
answere, and helde their peace.
27 Then came vnto him certayne of the Saduces (which holde that there is no
resurreccion) and axed him,
28 and sayde: Master, Moses wrote vnto vs, yf eny mans brother dye hauynge a
wife, and dyeth without childre, then shal his brother take his wife, and rayse
vp sede vnto his brother.
29 Now were there seue brethre: the first toke a wife, and dyed childlesse:
30 and the seconde toke the wife, and deyed without children also:
31 and the thirde toke her, likewyse all the seue, and left no children behynde
the, and dyed.
32 At the last after them all, the woman dyed also.
33 Now in the resurreccion, whose wife shal she be of them For seuen had her to
wife.
34 And Iesus answered and saide vnto them: The childre of this worlde mary, &
are maried,
35 but they yt shalbe worthy to enioye that worlde and the resurreccion from the
deed, shal nether mary ner be maried,
36 for they can dye nomore. For they are like vnto the angels, and are the
children of God, in so moch as they are children of the resurreccion.
37 But that the deed ryse agayne, hath Moses also signified besydes the bush,
when he called the LORDE, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Iacob.
38 But God is not a God of the deed but of the lyuynge, for they lyue all vnto
him.
39 Then answered certayne of the scrybes, and sayde: Master, thou haist sayde
well.
40 And from that tyme forth they durst axe him no mo questions.
41 But he sayde vnto them: How saye they that Christ is Dauids sonne?
42 And Dauid himself sayeth in the boke of the Psalmes: The LORDE sayde vnto my
LORDE: Syt thou on my right honde,
43 tyll I make thine enemies thy fote stole.
44 Dauid calleth him LORDE, how is he then his sonne?
45 Now whyle all the people gaue audience, he sayde vnto his disciples:
46 Bewarre of the scrybes, which wyl go in longe garmentes, and loue to be
saluted vpon the market, and desyre to syt hyest in the synagoges, and at the
table.
47 They deuoure wedowes houses and that vnder a culoure of longe prayenge: These
shal receaue the greater danacion.

Chapter 21

1 And he loked vp, and behelde ye riche, how they put in their offerynges in to
the Gods chest.
2 He sawe also a poore wedowe, which put in two mytes,
3 and he sayde: Verely I saye vnto you: This poore wedowe hath put in more the
they all:
4 For these all haue of their excesse put in vnto the offerynge of God, but she
of hir pouerte hath put in all hir lyuynge that she had.
5 And wha some spake of the temple, that it was garnished with goodly stones and
Iewels, he saide:
6 The time shal come, wherin of all this that ye se, there shal not be left one
stone vpon another, which shal not be broken downe.
7 They axed him, and sayde: Master, wha shal these be? and what shalbe the
token, whan these shal come to passe?
8 He sayde: Take hede, that ye be not disceaued: For many shal come in my name,
and saye, I am he, & the tyme is come hard by. Folowe them not.
9 But whan ye heare of warres and insurreccions, be not ye afrayed, for soch
must come to passe, but the ende is not yet there so soone.
10 Then sayde he vnto them: One people shal ryse agaynst another, and one realme
ageynst another,
11 & shal be greate earthquakes here and there, pestilence, and derth, and
fearfull thinges. And greate tokes shal there be fro heaue.
12 But before all these, they shal laye handes vpon you, and persecute you, and
delyuer you vp in to their synagoges and presons, and brynge you before kynges &
prynces for my names sake.
13 But this shal happen vnto you for a wytnesse.
14 Be at a poynt therfore in youre hertes, that ye take no thought, how ye shal
answere:
15 for I wil geue you mouth & wyssdome, agaynst the which all youre aduersaries
shal not be able to speake ner to resist.
16 But ye shal be delyuered vp euen of youre elders, brethren, kynssfolkes and
frendes, and some of you shal they put vnto death,
17 and ye shal be hated of euery man for my names sake,
18 and yet shal not one hayre of youre heade perishe.
19 Holde fast youre soules with pacience.
20 But whan ye shal se Ierusalem beseged with an hoost, then vnderstonde, that
the desolacion of it is nye.
21 Then let them which be in Iewry, flye vnto the mountaynes: and let soch as be
in the myddest therof, departe out: and let soch as be in the countrees, not
come therin.
22 For these are the dayes of vengeaunce, that euery thinge which is
wrytten,maye be fulfilled.
23 But wo vnto them that are with childe, and to them that geue sucke in those
dayes: for there shalbe greate trouble vpon earth, and wrath ouer this people,
24 and they shal fall thorow the edge of the swerde, and be led captyue amoge
all nacions. And Ierusale shalbe troden downe of the Heithen, vntyll the tyme of
the Heithen be fulfilled.
25 And there shalbe tokens in the Sonne and Mone, and starres, and vpon earth
the people shalbe in soch perplexite, that they shal not tell which waye to
turne them selues. And the see and the waters shal roare,
26 and men shal pyne awaye for feare, and for lokynge after the thinges which
shal come vpo earth. For euen the very powers of heauen shal moue.
27 And then shal they se the sonne of man commynge in the cloude with power and
greate glory.
28 But whan these thinges begynne to come to passe, the loke vp, and lift vpp
youre heades, for youre redempcion draweth nye.
29 And he tolde them a symilitude: Beholde the fygge tre, and all tre trees,
30 wha they now shute forth their buddes, ye se by them, and perceaue, that
Sommer is now at hande.
31 So likewyse ye, whan ye se all these thinges come to passe, be sure that the
kyngdome of God is nye.
32 Verely I saye vnto you: This generacio shal not passe, tyll all be fulfilled.
33 Heauen and earth shal passe, but my wordes shal not passe.
34 But take hede vnto youre selues, that yor hertes be not ouerlade with excesse
of eatinge and with dronkennes, and with takinge of thought for lyuynge, and so
this daye come vpo you vnawares.
35 For as a snare shal it come on all them that dwell vpon earth.
36 Watch therfore cotynually, and praye, that ye maye be worthy to escape all
this that shal come, & to stode before ye sonne of man.
37 And on the daye tyme he taught in the temple, but in the night season he
wente out and abode all night vpon mount Oliuete.
38 And all the people gat them vp early vnto him in the temple, for to heare
him.

Chapter 22

1 The feast of swete bred (which is called Easter) drue nye.
2 And ye hye presstes and Scrybes sought how they might put him to death, and
were afrayed of the people.
3 But Satan was entred in to Iudas, named Iscarioth (which was of ye nombre of
ye twolue)
4 and he wete his waye, and talked with the hye prestes and with ye officers,
how he wolde betraye him vnto them.
5 And they were glad, and promysed to geue him money.
6 And he cosented, & sought oportunite, yt he might betraye hi without eny
rumoure.
7 Then came ye daye of swete bred, wherin the Easter lambe must be offered.
8 And he sent Peter and Ihon, and sayde: Go youre waye, prepare vs the Easter
lambe, that we maye eate.
9 But they sayde vnto him: Where wilt thou, that we prepare it?
10 He saide vnto them: Beholde, wha ye come in to ye cite, there shal mete you a
man, bearinge a pitcher of water, folowe him in to the house yt he entreth in,
11 and saye vnto the good man of the house: The master sendeth ye worde: Where
is ye gesthouse, wherin I maye eate the Easter labe with my disciples?
12 And he shal shewe you a greate parlour paued.
13 They wente their waye, and founde as he had sayde vnto them, and made ready
the Easter lambe.
14 And whan the houre came, he sat him downe, and the twolue Apostles with him,
15 and he sayde vnto them: I haue hertely desyred to eate this Easter labe with
you before I suffre.
16 For I saye vnto you: that hence forth I wil eate nomore therof, tyll it be
fulfilled in the kyngdome of God.
17 And he toke the cuppe, gaue thankes, and sayde: Take this and deuyde it
amonge you.
18 For I saye vnto you: I wil not drynke of the frute of ye vyne, vntyll the
kyngdome of God come.
19 And he toke the bred, gaue thankes, and brake it, and gaue it them, and
sayde: This is my body, which shalbe geuen for you. This do in the remembraunce
of me.
20 Likewyse also the cuppe, after they had supped, and sayde: This cuppe is the
new Testamet in my bloude, which shalbe shed for you.
21 But lo, the hande of him that betrayeth me, is with me on the table.
22 And the sonne of man trulye goeth forth, as it is appoynted. But wo vnto that
man, by whom he is betrayed.
23 And they beganne to axe amonge them selues, which of them it shulde be, that
shulde do that.
24 There rose a strife also amoge the, which of them shulde be take for the
greatest.
25 But he sayde vnto them: The kynges of ye worlde haue domynion ouer ye people,
and they that beare rule ouer the, are called gracious lordes.
26 But ye shal not be so: But the greatest amonge you, shalbe as the yongest:
and the chefest, as a seruaunt.
27 For which is the greatest? he that sytteth at the table, or he that serueth?
Is not he that sytteth at the table? But I am amoge you as a mynister.
28 As for you, ye are they, that haue bydde wt me in my temptacions.
29 And I wil appoynte the kyngdome vnto you, euen as my father hath appoynted
me,
30 that ye maye eate and drynke at my table in my kyngdome, and syt vpon seates,
and iudge the twolue trybes of Israel.
31 But the LORDE sayde: Simon Simon, beholde, Satan hath desyred after you, that
he might siffte you euen as wheate:
32 but I haue prayed for ye, that thy faith fayle not. And whan thou art
couerted, strength thy brethren:
33 But he sayde vnto him: LORDE, I am ready to go with the into preson, and in
to death.
34 Neuertheles he sayde: Peter, I saye vnto the: The cock shal not crowe this
daye, tyll thou haue thryse denyed, yt thou knewest me.
35 And he sayde vnto them: Whan I sent you without wallet, without scryppe, and
without shues, lacked ye eny thinge? They sayde: No.
36 Then sayde he vnto them: But now, he that hath a wallet, let him take it vp,
likewyse also the scryppe. But he that hath not, let him sell his coate, & bye a
swerde.
37 For I saye vnto you: It must yet be fulfilled on me, that is wrytte: He was
counted amonge the euell doers. For loke what is wrytten of me, it hath an ende.
38 But they sayde: LORDE, Beholde, here are two swerdes. He sayde vnto the: It
is ynough.
39 And he wente out (as he was wonte) vnto mout Oliuete. But his disciples
folowed him vnto the same place.
40 And whan he came thither, he sayde vnto the: Praye, that ye fall not in to
teptacion.
41 And he gat him from them aboute a stones cast, and kneled downe, prayed,
42 & sayde: Father, yf thou wilt, take awaye this cuppe fro me: Neuerthelesse,
not my wyll, but thyne be fulfylled.
43 And there appeared vnto him an angell fro heauen, and conforted him.
44 And it came so, that he wrestled with death, and prayed the longer. And his
sweate was like droppes of bloude, runnynge downe to the grounde.
45 And he rose vp fro prayer, and came to his disciples, and founde them
slepinge for heuynesse,
46 and sayde vnto them: What, slepe ye? ryse vp and praye, that ye fall not into
tentacion.
47 But whyle he yet spake, beholde, the multitude, and one of the twolue called
Iudas wente before them, and he came nye vnto Iesus, to kysse him.
48 But Iesus sayde vnto him: Iudas, betrayest thou the sonne of ma with a kysse?
49 Whan they that were aboute him, sawe what wolde folowe, they sayde vnto him:
LORDE, shal we smyte with the swerde?
50 And one of the stroke a seruaut of ye hye prestes, & smote of his eare.
51 But Iesus answered, and sayde: Suffre the thus farre forth. And he touched
his eare, & healed him.
52 But Iesus sayde vnto the prestes and rulers of the temple, and to the Elders
that were come vnto him: Ye are come forth as it were to a murthurer with
swerdes, & with staues.
53 I was daylie with you in the temple, and ye layed no handes vpon me. But this
is youre houre, and the power of darknesse.
54 Neuerthelesse they toke him, and led him, and brought him in to the hye
prestes house. As for Peter, he folowed hi a farre of.
55 Then kyndled they a fyre in the myddest of the palace, and sat them downe
together. And Peter sat him downe amonge them.
56 Then a damsell sawe him syttinge by the light, and behelde him well, and
sayde vnto him: This same was also with him.
57 But he denyed him, and sayde: Woma, I knowe him not.
58 And after a litle whyle, another sawe him, and sayde: Thou art one of them
also. But Peter sayde: Man, I am not.
59 And aboute the space of an houre after, another affirmed, & sayde: Verely
this was with him also, for he is a Galilean.
60 But Peter saide: Ma, I wote not what thou sayest. And immediatly whyle he yet
spake, ye cock crewe.
61 And the LORDE turned him aboute and loked vpo Peter. And Peter remembred the
wordes of ye LORDE, how he sayde vnto him: Before the cock crowe, thou shalt
denye me thryse.
62 And Peter wente out, and wepte bytterly.
63 The men that helde Iesus, mocked him, and stroke him,
64 blyndfolded him, and smote him on the face, and axed him, and sayde:
Prophecie, who is it that smote the?
65 And many other blasphemies sayde they vnto hi.
66 And whan it was daye, there gathered together the Elders of the people, the
hye prestes and scrybes, and led him vp before, their councell, and sayde:
67 Art thou Christ? Tell vs. But he sayde vnto them: Yf I tell you, ye wyl not
beleue:
68 But yf I axe you, ye wyl not answere me, nether wyl ye let me go.
69 From this tyme forth shal the sonne of man sytt at the right hade of the
power of God.
70 Then sayde they all: Art thou then ye sonne of God? He sayde vnto them: Ye
saye it, for I am.
71 They sayde: What nede we anye farther wytnesse? We oure selues haue herde it
of his awne mouth.

Chapter 23

1 And the whole multitude of the arose, and led him vnto Pilate,
2 and begane to accuse him, and sayde: We haue founde this felowe peruertinge
the people, and forbyddinge to geue trybute vnto the Emperoure, and sayeth, that
he is Christ a kynge.
3 But Pilate axed him, and sayde: Art thou the kynge of the Iewes? He answered
him, and sayde: Thou sayest it.
4 Pilate sayde vnto ye hye prestes and to the people: I fynde no cause in this
man.
5 But they were the more fearce, and sayde: He hath moued the people, in that he
hath taught here & there in all the londe of Iewry, and hath begonne at Galile
vnto this place.
6 Whan Pilate herde mencion of Galile, he axed whether he were of Galile.
7 And whan he perceaued that he was vnder Herodes iurisdiccion he sent him to
Herode, which was also at Ierusale in those dayes.
8 When Herode sawe Iesus, he was exceadinge glad, for he had longe bene desyrous
to se him: because he had herde moch of him, & hoped to se a miracle of hi.
9 And he axed him many thinges. Neuertheles he answered him nothinge.
10 The hye prestes and scrybes stode, and accused him sore.
11 But Herode wt his men of warre despysed him, and mocked him, put a whyte
garmet vpo him, and sent him agayne vnto Pilate.
12 Vpo ye same daye were Pilate and Herode made frendes together, for afore they
had bene at variaunce.
13 Pilate called the hye prestes, and the rulers, and the people together,
14 and sayde vnto the: Ye haue brought this man vnto me, as one that peruerteth
the people, and beholde, I haue examyned him before you, & fynde in the ma none
of the causes, wherof ye accuse him:
15 Nor yet Herode: for I sent you to him, and beholde, there is brought vpon hi
nothinge, that is worthy of death.
16 Therfore wil I chasten him, and let him lowse:
17 For he must haue let one lowse vnto them after the custome of the feast.
18 Then cried the whole multitude, and sayde: Awaye with him, and delyuer vnto
vs Barrabas,
19 which for insurreccion made in the cite, and because of a murthur, was cast
in to preson.
20 Then called Pilate vnto them agayne, & wolde haue let Iesus lowse.
21 But they cried, and sayde: Crucifye him, Crucifye him.
22 Yet sayde he vnto them, the thirde tyme: What euell the hath he done? I fynde
no cause of death in hi, therfore wil I chasten him, and let him go.
23 But they laye styll vpon him with greate crye, and requyred yt he might be
crucified. And the voyce of the and of the hye preastes preuayled.
24 And Pilate gaue sentence, that it shulde be as they requyred,
25 and let lowse vnto the, him, that for insurreccio and murthur was cast in to
preson, whom they desyred, but gaue Iesus ouer vnto their wyll.
26 And as they led him awaye, they toke one Simon of Cyren (which came from the
felde) and layed ye crosse vpon him, to beare it after Iesus.
27 And there folowed him a greate multitude of people and of wemen, which
bewayled and lamented him.
28 But Iesus turned him aboute vnto the, and sayde: Ye doughters of Ierusale,
wepe not ouer me: but wepe ouer youre selues, and ouer youre childre.
29 For beholde, the tyme wil come, wherin it shal be sayde: Blessed are the
baren, and the wombes that haue not borne, and the pappes that haue not geuen
sucke.
30 Then shal they begynne to saye vnto the mountaynes: Fall vpon vs. And to the
hylles: Couer vs.
31 For yf this be done to a grene tre, what shalbe done then to the drye?
32 And two other (which were myssdoers) were led out also, to be put to death
with him.
33 And wha they came to ye place, which is called Caluery, they crucifyed him
euen there, and the two myssdoers with him, the one on the righte hande, the
other on ye left.
34 But Iesus sayde: Father, forgeue them, for they wote not what they do. And
they parted his garmentes, and cast lottes therfore.
35 And the people stode and behelde. And the rulers mocked him with them, and
sayde: He hath helped other, let him helpe him self now, yf he be Christ ye
chosen of God.
36 The soudyers also mocked him, wete vnto him, & brought him vyneger,
37 and sayde: Yf thou be the kynge of the Iewes, then helpe thyself.
38 And aboue ouer him was this superscripcion wrytten with letters of Greke,
Latyn, and Hebrue: This is the kynge of the Iewes.
39 And one of the myssdoers that hanged there, blasphemed him, and sayde: Yf
thou be Christ, then helpe thy self and vs.
40 Then answered the other, rebuked him, and sayde: And thou fearest not God
also, which art yet in like danacion.
41 And truly we are therin be right, for we receaue acordinge to oure dedes. As
for this man, he hath done nothinge amysse.
42 And he sayde vnto Iesus: LORDE, remembre me, whan thou commest in to thy
kyngdome.
43 And Iesus sayde vnto him: Verely I saye vnto the: To daye shalt thou be with
me in Paradyse.
44 And it was aboute the sixte houre, and there was darknesse ouer ye whole
londe vntyll the nyenth houre.
45 And the Sonne was darkened, and the vayle of the temple rente in two euen
thorow the myddes.
46 And Iesus cryed loude, & sayde: Father, in to thy handes I commende my
sprete. And whan he had so sayde, he gaue vp the goost.
47 But whan the Captayne sawe what had happened, he praysed God, and sayde:
Verely this was a iust ma.
48 And all the people that stode by & behelde, whan they sawe what was done,
smote vpon their brestes, & turned backe agayne.
49 But all his acquantaunce, and the wemen that had folowed him out of Galile,
stode a farre of, and behelde all these thinges.
50 And beholde, a ma named Ioseph, a Senatour, which was a good iust man,
51 the same had not consented vnto their councell, and dede, which was of
Arimathia a cite of the Iewes, which same also wayted for the kyngdome of God:
52 he wete vnto Pilate, and axed the body of Iesus.
53 And the toke him downe, wrapped him in a lynnen cloth, and layed him in a
hewen sepulcre, wherin neuer man was layed.
54 And it was the daye of preparinge, and the Sabbath drue on.
55 The wemen that were come with him out of Galile, folowed him, and behelde the
Sepulcre, & how his body was layed.
56 But they returned, and made ready the spyces & anontmetes. And vpon the
Sabbath they rested, acordinge to the lawe.

Chapter 24

1 Bvt vpon one of the Sabbathes very early in the mornynge, they came vnto the
Sepulcre, and brought ye spyces which they had prepared, and certayne wemen with
the.
2 Neuertheles they founde the stone rolled awaye from the sepulcre,
3 and wente in, and founde not the body of ye LORDE Iesu.
4 And it happened as they were amased therat, beholde, there stode by them two
men in shyninge garmentes.
5 And they were afrayed, and cast downe their faces to the earth. Then sayde
they vnto the: What seke ye? the lyuynge amoge the deed?
6 He is not here. He is rysen vp. Remembre, how yt he tolde you wha he was yet
in Galile,
7 and sayde: The sonne of man must be delyuered in to the hades of synners, and
be crucified, and the thirde daye ryse agayne.
8 And they remebred his wordes,
9 and wente from the sepulcre, and tolde all this vnto the eleuen, and to all
the other.
10 It was Mary Magdalene, and Iohanna, and Mary Iames, and the other with them,
that tolde this vnto the Apostles.
11 And theyr wordes semed vnto them, as though they had bene but fables, and
they beleued them not.
12 But Peter arose, and ranne to the sepulcre, and stouped in, and sawe the
lynnen clothes layed by them selues, and departed. And he wondred within himself
at that which had happened.
13 And beholde, two of them wente that same daye, to a towne (which was thre
score furloges from Ierusalem) whose name was called Emaus.
14 And they talked together of all these thinges yt had happened.
15 And it chaunced as they were thus talkinge and reasonynge together, Iesus
himself drue nye, and wente with them.
16 But their eyes were holden, that they shulde not knowe hi.
17 And he sayde vnto them: What maner of comunicacions are these that ye haue
one to another as ye walke, and are sad?
18 Then answered the one, whose name was Cleophas, and sayde vnto him: Art thou
onely a straunger at Ierusale, not knowinge what is come to passe there in these
dayes?
19 And he sayde vnto the: What? They sayde vnto him: That of Iesus of Nazareth,
which was a prophet, mightie in dede and worde, before God and all ye people,
20 how oure hye prestes and rulers delyuered him to the condemnacion of death,
and crucified him.
21 But we hoped that he shulde haue delyuered Israel. And besydes all this,
todaye is the thirde daye that this was done.
22 Yee & certayne wemen also of oure company which were early at the Sepulcre,
23 and founde not his body, came and tolde, that they had sene a visio of
angels, which sayde he was alyue.
24 And certayne of them that were with vs, wente vnto the sepulcre, and founde
it euen so as ye weme sayde, but hi founde they not.
25 And he sayde vnto the: O ye fooles and slowe of hert to beleue all that the
prophetes haue spoke?
26 Ought not Christ to haue suffred these thinges, and to entre in to his glory?
27 And he beganne at Moses and at all the prophetes, and expounded vnto them all
the scriptures, that were spoken of him.
28 And they drue nye vnto the towne, which they wete vnto, and he made as though
he wolde haue gone farther.
29 And they compelled him, and sayde: Abyde with vs, for it draweth towardes
night, and the daye is farre passed. And he wente in to tary with the.
30 And it came to passe whan he sat at the table with the, he toke the bred,
gaue thankes, brake it, and gaue it them.
31 Then were their eyes opened, and they knewe him. And he vanyshed out of their
sight.
32 And they sayde, betwene the selues: Dyd not oure hert burne with in vs, whan
he talked with vs by the waye, whyle he opened the scriptures vnto vs?
33 And they rose vp the same houre, turned agayne to Ierusalem, and founde ye
eleue gathered together, and them that were with them, which
34 sayde: The LORDE is rysen of a trueth, and hath appeared vnto Symon.
35 And they tolde the what had happened by ye waye, and how they knewe him in
breakynge of the bred.
36 But whyle they were talkynge therof, Iesus himself stode in the myddes amonge
the, and sayde: Peace be with you.
37 But they were abashed and afrayed, supposinge that they had sene a sprete.
38 And he saide vnto the: Why are ye abashed? & wherfore ryse there soch
thoughtes in yor hertes?
39 Beholde my hades & my fete, it is euen I my self. Handle me, and se, for a
sprete hath not flesh and bones, as ye se me haue.
40 And whan he had thus spoke, he shewed the his hodes and his fete.
41 But whyle they yet beleued not for ioye and wondred, he sayde vnto them: Haue
ye eny thinge here to eate?
42 And they set before him a pece of a broyled fish, and an hony combe.
43 And he toke it, and ate it before the.
44 And he sayde vnto them: These are the wordes, which I spake vnto you, whyle I
was yet with you. For it must all be fulfilled that was wrytten of me in the
lawe of Moses, in the prophetes, & in the Psalmes.
45 The opened he their vnderstondinge, that they might vnderstonde the
scriptures,
46 and sayde vnto them: Thus is it wrytte, and thus it behoued Christ to suffre,
& the thirde daye to ryse agayne fro the deed,
47 and to let repentaunce and remyssion, of synnes be preached in his name amoge
all nacions, and to begynne at Ierusale.
48 As for all these thinges, ye are wytnesses of the.
49 And beholde, I wil sende vpon you the promes of my father: but ye shal tary
in the cite of Ierusalem, tyll ye be endewed with power from aboue.
50 But he led them out vnto Bethany, and lift vp his handes, and blessed them.
51 And it came to passe wha he blessed them, he departed from them, and was
caried vp in to heauen.
52 And they worshipped him, and turned agayne to Ierusalem with greate ioye:
53 and were contynnally in ye teple, geuynge prayse and thankes vnto God. Amen.


John

Chapter 1

1 In the begynnynge was the worde, and the worde was with God, and God was ye
worde.
2 The same was in the begynnynge wt God.
3 All thinges were made by the same, and without the same was made nothinge that
was made.
4 In him was the life, and the life was the light of men:
5 and the light shyneth in the darknesse, and the darknesse comprehended it not.
6 There was sent from God a man, whose name was Ihon.
7 The same came for a witnesse, to beare wytnesse of ye light, that thorow him
they all might beleue.
8 He was not that light, but that he might beare witnesse of ye light.
9 That was the true light, which lighteth all men, that come in to this worlde.
10 He was in the worlde, & the worlde was made by him, and ye worlde knewe him
not.
11 He came in to his awne, and his awne receaued him not.
12 But as many as receaued him, to them gaue he power to be the children of God:
euen soch as beleue in his name.
13 Which are not borne of bloude, ner of the wyl of the flesh, ner of the wyl of
man, but of God.
14 And the worde became flesh, and dwelt amonge vs: and we sawe his glory, a
glory as of the onely begotte sonne of the father, full of grace and trueth.
15 Ihon bare wytnesse of him, cryed, and sayde: It was this, of whom I spake:
After me shal he come, that was before me, For he was or euer I:
16 and of his fulnesse haue all we receaued grace for grace.
17 For the lawe was geuen by Moses, grace and trueth came by Iesus Christ.
18 No man hath sene God at eny tyme. The onely begotte sonne which is in the
bosome of the father, he hath declared the same vnto vs.
19 And this is the recorde of Ihon, whan the Iewes sent prestes and Leuites fro
Ierusalem, to axe him: Who art thou?
20 And he confessed and denyed not. And he confessed, and sayde: I am not
Christ.
21 And they axed him: What the? Art thou Elias? He sayde: I am not. Art thou the
Prophet? And he answered: No.
22 Then sayde they vnto him: What art thou the, yt we maye geue answere vnto the
that sent vs? What sayest thou of yi self?
23 He sayde: I am ye voyce of a cryer in the wyldernesse. Make straight ye waye
of the LORDE. As ye prophet Esay sayde:
24 And they that were sent, were of ye Pharises.
25 And they axed him, & sayde vnto him: Why baptysest thou then, yf thou be not
Christ, ner Elias, ner a prophet?
26 Ihon answered them, and sayde: I baptyse with water, but there is one come in
amonge you, whom ye knowe not.
27 It is he that cometh after me, which was before me: whose shue lachet I am
not worthy to vnlowse.
28 This was done at Bethabara beyonde Iordane, where Ihon dyd baptyse.
29 The nexte daye after, Ihon sawe Iesus commynge vnto him, and sayde: Beholde
the labe of God, which taketh awaye the synne of the worlde.
30 This is he, of whom I sayde vnto you: After me commeth a man, which was
before me. For he was or euer I,
31 and I knewe him not: but that he shulde be declared in Israel, therfore am I
come to baptyse with water.
32 And Ihon bare recorde, & sayde: I sawe the sprete descende from heauen like
vnto a doue, and abode vpon him,
33 & I knewe him not. But he that sent me to baptyse with water, ye same sayde
vnto me: Vpon whom thou shalt se the sprete descende and tary styll on him, the
same is he, that baptyseth with the holy goost.
34 And I sawe it, and bare recorde, that this is the sonne of God.
35 The nexte daye after, Ihon stode agayne, and two of his disciples.
36 And wha he sawe Iesus walkynge, he sayde: Beholde the labe of God.
37 And two of his disciples herde him speake, and folowed Iesus.
38 And Iesus turned him aboute, and sawe them folowinge, and sayde vnto the:
What seke ye? They sayde vnto him: Rabbi, (which is to saye by interpretacion,
Master.) Where art thou at lodginge?
39 He sayde vnto them: Come and se it. They came and sawe it, & abode with him
the same daye. It was aboute the tenth houre.
40 One of the two, which herde Ihon speake, and folowed Iesus, was Andrew the
brother of Symon Peter:
41 the same founde first his brother Symon, and sayde vnto him: We haue founde
Messias (which is by interpretacion, ye Anoynted)
42 and brought him to Iesus. Whan Iesus behelde him, he sayde: Thou art Symon
the sonne of Ionas, thou shalt be called Cephas, which is by interpretacion, a
stone.
43 The nexte daye after, wolde Iesus go agayne in to Galile, and founde
Philippe, and sayde vnto him: Folowe me.
44 Philippe was of Bethsaida the cite of Andrew and Peter.
45 Philippe founde Nathanael, and sayde vnto him: We haue founde him, of who
Moses in the lawe, and ye prophetes haue wrytten, euen Iesus the sonne of Ioseph
of Nazareth.
46 And Nathanaell sayde vnto him: What good can come out of Nazareth? Philippe
sayde vnto him: Come, and se.
47 Iesus sawe Nathanael comynge to him, and sayde of him: Beholde, a righte
Israelite, in whom is no gyle.
48 Nathanael sayde vnto him: From whence knowest thou me? Iesus answered, and
sayde vnto him: Before yt Philippe called the, whan thou wast vnder the fygge
tre, I sawe the.
49 Nathanaell answered, and sayde vnto hi: Rabbi, thou art ye sonne of God, thou
art ye kynge of Israel.
50 Iesus answered, & sayde vnto him: Because I sayde vnto the, that I sawe the
vnder the fygge tre, thou beleuest: thou shalt se yet greater thinges the these.
51 And he sayde vnto him: Verely verely I saye vnto you: Fro this tyme forth
shal ye se the heauen open, and the angels of God goinge vp & downe ouer the
sonne of man.

Chapter 2

1 And vpon the thirde daye there was a mariage at Cana in Galile, and the mother
of Iesus was there.
2 Iesus also and his disciples was called vnto ye mariage.
3 And whan the wyne fayled, the mother of Iesus saide vnto him: They haue no
wyne.
4 Iesus sayde vnto her: Woma, what haue I to do wt the? Myne houre is not yet
come.
5 His mother sayde vnto ye mynisters: Whatsoeuer he sayeth vnto you, do it.
6 There were set there sixe water pottes of stone, after ye maner of the
purifienge of ye Iewes, euery one coteyninge two or thre measures.
7 Iesus sayde vnto the: Fyll the water pottes with water. And they fylled the vp
to ye brymme.
8 And he sayde vnto the: Drawe out now, & brynge vnto the Master of the feast.
And they bare it.
9 Wha the master of ye feast had taisted ye wyne which had bene water, and knewe
not whence it came (but the mynisters that drue ye water, knewe it) the Master
of the feast called the brydegrome,
10 and sayde vnto him: Euery man at the first geueth the good wyne: & whan they
are dronken, the that which is worse. But thou hast kepte backe the good wyne
vntyll now.
11 This is the first token that Iesus dyd at Cana in Galile, and shewed his
glory, and his disciples beleued on him.
12 Afterwarde wente he downe to Capernaum, he, his mother, his brethre, and his
disciples, and taried not longe there.
13 And the Iewes Easter was at hande. And Iesus wete vp to Ierusalem,
14 and founde syttinge in the teple, those that solde oxen, shepe, and doues,
and chaungers of money.
15 And he made a scourge of small cordes, and droue them all out of the teple
with the shepe and oxen, and poured out the chaungers money, and ouerthrewe the
tables,
16 and sayde vnto them that solde the doues: Haue these thinges hece, and make
not my fathers house an house of marchaundyse.
17 His disciples remembred it, that is wrytten: The zele of thine house hath
euen eaten me.
18 Then answered the Iewes, and sayde vnto him: What token shewest thou vnto vs,
that thou mayest do these thinges?
19 Iesus answered & sayde vnto the: Breake downe this temple, and in thre dayes
wil I set it vp agayne.
20 Then sayde the Iewes: Sixe and fourtye yeare was this temple abuyldinge, and
wilt thou set it vp in thre dayes?
21 But he spake of ye teple of his body.
22 Now wha he was rysen agayne from the deed, his disciples remembred that he
thus sayde, and they beleued the scripture, and the wordes which Iesus spake.
23 Wha he was at Ierusale at Easter in ye feast, many beleued on his name, whan
they sawe ye tokes yt he dyd.
24 But Iesus comytted not himself vnto the, for he knewe the all,
25 & neded not yt eny ma shulde testifye of man, for he knewe well what was in
man.

Chapter 3

1 There was a man of the Pharises, named Nicodemus a ruler amoge the Iewes.
2 The same came vnto Iesus by night, & sayde vnto hi: Master, we knowe yt thou
art come a teacher fro God: for no ma can do these tokes yt thou doest, excepte
God be with him.
3 Iesus answered, and sayde vnto him: Verely verely I saye vnto the: Excepte a
man be borne a new, he can not se the kyngdome of God.
4 Nicodemus sayde vnto him: How can a man be borne, whan he is olde? Can he
entre into his mothers wombe, and be borne agayne?
5 Iesus answered: Verely verely I saye vnto the: Excepte a ma be borne of water
and of the sprete, he can not come in to ye kyngdome of God.
6 That which is borne of flesh, is flesh: & that which is borne of the sprete,
is sprete.
7 Maruell not, that I sayde vnto ye: Ye must be borne of new.
8 The wynde bloweth where he wyl, and thou hearest his sounde: but thou canst
not tell whece he commeth, and whither he goeth. So is euery one, that is borne
of the sprete.
9 Nicodemus answered, and sayde vnto him: How maye these be?
10 Iesus answered, & sayde vnto hi: Art thou a Master in Israel, & knowest not
these?
11 Verely I saye vnto ye: We speake that we knowe, and testifie that we haue
sene, and ye receaue not oure wytnesse.
12 Yf ye beleue not whan I tell you of earthly thinges, how shulde ye beleue,
wha I speake vnto you of heauenly thinges?
13 And no man ascendeth vp in to heauen, but he that is come downe from heaue,
(namely) the sonne of man which is in heauen.
14 And like as Moses lift vp the serpent in the wyldernes, euen so must the
sonne of man be lift vp,
15 that who so euer beleueth in him, shulde not perish, but haue euerlastinge
life.
16 For God so loued the worlde, that he gaue his onely sonne, that who so euer
beleueth in hi, shulde not perishe, but haue euerlastinge life.
17 For God sent not his sonne in to ye worlde to condempne the worlde, but that
the worlde might be saued by him.
18 He that beleueth on him, shal not be codemned. But he that beleueth not, is
codemned allready: because he beleueth not on the name of the onely sonne of
God.
19 But this is ye codempnacion, that the light is come in to the worlde, and men
loued the darknesse more the ye light: for their workes were euell.
20 Whosoeuer doth euell, hateth the light, and cometh not to the light, that his
dedes shulde not be reproued.
21 But he that doth the trueth, commeth to the light, that his workes maye be
knowne: for they are done in God.
22 Afterwarde came Iesus & his disciples in to the lode of Iewry, and had his
beynge there with them, and baptysed
23 Ihon baptysed also in Enon besyde Salem: for there was moch water there. And
they came thither, and were baptysed:
24 for Iohn was not yet put in preson.
25 Then arose there a question amonge the disciples of Ihon with the Iewes
aboute the purifienge,
26 and they came vnto Ihon, and sayde vnto him: Master, he yt was with the
beyonde Iordan, of whom thou barest wytnesse, beholde, he baptyseth, and euery
man cometh vnto him.
27 Ihon answered and sayde: A man can receaue nothinge, excepte it be geuen him
from heaue.
28 Ye youreselues are my witnesses, how that I sayde, I am not Christ, but am
sent before him.
29 He that hath the bryde, is the brydegrome: but the frende of the brydegrome
stondeth, and herkeneth vnto him, and reioyseth greatly ouer the voyce of the
brydegrome, this same ioye of myne is now fulfilled.
30 He must increace, but I must decreace.
31 He that commeth from an hye, is aboue all. He that is of the earth, is
earthly, and speaketh of the earth. He that commeth fro heauen, is aboue all,
32 and testifieth what he hath sene & herde, and no man receaueth his wytnesse.
33 But he that receaueth it, hath set to his seale, that God is true.
34 For he who God hath sent, speaketh ye wordes of God: for God geueth not the
sprete (vnto him) by measure.
35 The father loueth the sonne, and hath geuen him all thinges in to his hande.
36 He that beleueth on the sonne, hath euerlastinge life: he that beleueth not
the sonne, shal not se the life, but ye wrath of God abydeth vpon him.

Chapter 4

1 Now whan Iesus had knowlege, yt it was come to the eares of the Pharises, that
Iesus made and baptised mo disciples the Ihon
2 (howbeit Iesus himself baptysed not, but his disciples)
3 he left the londe of Iewry, and departed agayne in to Galile.
4 But he must nedes go thorow Samaria.
5 Then came he in to a cite of Samaria, called Sichar, nye vnto ye pece of lode,
yt Iacob gaue vnto Ioseph his sonne.
6 And there was Iacobs well. Now whan Iesus was weerye of his iourney, he satt
hi downe so vpo the well. And it was aboute the sixte houre.
7 Then came there a woman of Samaria to drawe water. Iesus sayde vnto her: Geue
me drynke.
8 (For his disciples were gone their waye in to ye cite, to bye meate.)
9 So the woman of Samaria sayde vnto him: How is it that thou axest drynke of
me, seynge thou art a Iewe, and I a woman of Samaria? For the Iewes medle not
with the Samaritans.
10 Iesus answered, and sayde vnto her: Yf thou knewest the gift of God, and who
it is that sayeth vnto the, geue me drynke, thou woldest axe of him, and he
wolde geue the, the water of life.
11 The woman sayde vnto him: Syr, thou hast nothinge to drawe withall, and the
well is depe, from whence hast thou then that water of life?
12 Art thou greater then oure father Iacob, which gaue vs this well? And he
himself dranke therof, and his children, and his catell.
13 Iesus answered, and sayde vnto her: Who so euer drynketh of this water, shal
thyrst agayne:
14 But whosoeuer shal drynke of the water that I shal geue him, shal neuer be
more a thyrst: but the water that I shal geue him, shalbe in him a well of
water, which spryngeth vp in to euerlastinge life.
15 The woman sayde vnto him: Syr, geue me that same water, that I thyrst not,
nether nede to come hither to drawe.
16 Iesus sayde vnto her: Go, call they hussbande, and come hither.
17 The woman answered, and sayde vnto him: I haue no hussbande.
18 Iesus sayde vnto her: Thou hast sayde well, I haue no hussbande: for thou
hast had fyue hussbandes, and he whom thou hast now, is not thine hussbande:
there saydest thou right.
19 The woma sayde vnto him: Syr, I se, that thou art a prophet.
20 Oure fathers worshipped vpon this mountayne, and ye saye, that at Ierusalem
is the place, where men ought to worshippe.
21 Iesus sayde vnto her: Woman, beleue me, the tyme commeth, that ye shal nether
vpon this mountayne ner at Ierusalem worshippe the father.
22 Ye wote not what ye worshippe, but we knowe what ye worshippe, for Saluacion
commeth of the Iewes.
23 But the tyme commeth, and is now allready, that the true worshippers shal
worshippe the father in sprete and in the trueth: For the father wil haue soch
so to worshippe him.
24 God is a sprete, and they that worshippe him, must worshippe in sprete and in
the trueth.
25 The woma sayde vnto him: I wote that Messias shal come, which is called
Christ. Whan he commeth, he shal tell vs all thinges.
26 Iesus sayde vnto her: I that speake vnto the, am he.
27 And in the meane season came his disciples, and they marueyled that he talked
with the woman. Yet sayde no man: What axest thou, or what talkest thou with
her?
28 Then the woman let hir pot stonde, and wente in to the cite, and sayde vnto
the people:
29 Come, se a man, which hath tolde me all that euer I dyd, Is not he Christ?
30 Then wente they out of the cite, and came vnto him:
31 In the meane whyle his disciples prayed him, and sayde: Master, eate.
32 But he sayde vnto them: I haue meate to eate, that ye knowe not of
33 Then sayde the disciples amoge them selues: Hath eny man brought him meate?
34 Iesus sayde vnto the: My meate is this, that I do the wyll of him that sent
me, and to fynish his worke.
35 Saye not ye youre selues: There are yet foure monethes, and then commeth the
haruest? Beholde, I saye vnto you: lift vp youre eyes, and loke vpon the felde,
for it is whyte allready vnto the haruest.
36 And he that reapeth, receaueth rewarde, and gathereth frute to euerlastinge
life, that both he that soweth and he that reapeth, maye reioyse together.
37 For herin is the prouerbe true: One soweth, another reapeth.
38 I haue sent you to reape that, wheron ye bestowed no laboure. Other haue
laboured, and ye are come in to their laboures.
39 Many Samaritans of the same cite beleued on him, for the sayenge of the
woman, which testified: He hath tolde me all that euer I dyd.
40 Now whan the Samaritans came to him, they besought him, that he wolde tary
with them. And he abode there two dayes,
41 and many mo beleued because of his worde,
42 and sayde vnto the woman: We beleue now hence forth, not because of thy
sayenge, we haue herde him oureselues, and knowe, that this of a trueth is
Christ the Sauioure of the worlde.
43 After two dayes he departed thence, and wente in to Galile.
44 For Iesus himself testified, that a prophet is nothinge set by at home.
45 Now wha he came in to Galile, the Galileas receaued him, which had sene all
that he dyd at Ierusalem in the feast: for they also were come thither in the
feast.
46 And Iesus came agayne vnto Cana in Galile, where he turned the water vnto
wyne. And there was a certayne ruler, whose sonne laye sicke at Capernaum.
47 This herde that Iesus came out of Iewry in to Galile, and wente vnto him, and
besought him, that he wolde come downe, and helpe his sonne, for he laye deed
sicke.
48 And Iesus sayde vnto him: Excepte ye se tokens and wonders, ye beleue not.
49 The ruler sayde vnto him: Come downe Syr, or euer my childe dye.
50 Iesus sayde vnto him: Go thy waye, thy sonne lyueth. The man beleued the
worde, that Iesus sayde vnto him, and wente his waye.
51 And as he was goinge downe, his seruauntes mett him, and tolde him, and
sayde: Thy childe lyueth.
52 Then enquyred he of them the houre, wherin he beganne to amende. And they
sayde vnto him: Yesterdaye aboute the seueth houre the feuer left him.
53 Then the father perceaued, that it was aboute the same houre, wherin Iesus
sayde vnto him: Thy sonne lyueth. And he beleued with his whole house.
54 This is now the seconde token that Iesus dyd, whan he came from Iewry in to
Galile.

Chapter 5

1 Afterwarde, there was a feast of the Iewes, and Iesus wente vpto Ierusalem.
2 There is at Ierusalem by the slaughter house a pole, which in Hebrue is called
Bethseda, & hath fyue porches,
3 wherin laye many sicke, blynde, lame, wythred, which wayted, whan the water
shulde moue.
4 For the angell wente downe at his tyme in to the pole, and stered the water.
Who so euer now wente downe first, after that the water was stered, ye same was
made whole, what soeuer disease he had.
5 And there was a man, which had lyen sicke eight and thirtie yeares.
6 Whan Iesus sawe him lye, & knewe that he had lyen so longe, he saide vnto him:
Wilt thou be made whole?
7 The sicke answered him: Syr, I haue no man, whan the water is moued, to put me
in to the pole. And whan I come, another steppeth downe in before me.
8 Iesus sayde vnto him: Aryse, take vp thy bed, and go thy waye.
9 And immediatly the man was made whole, and toke vp his bed and wente his waye.
But vpon the same daye it was the Sabbath.
10 Then sayde the Iewes vnto him that was made whole: To daye is ye Sabbath, it
is not laufull for the to cary the bed.
11 He answered them: He that made me whole, sayde vnto me: Take vp thy bed, and
go yi waye.
12 Then axed they him: What man is that, which sayde vnto the: Take vp thy bed,
and go yi waye?
13 But he that was healed, wyst not who he was: for Iesus had gotte him self
awaye, because there was moch people.
14 Afterwarde founde Iesus him in the teple, and sayde vnto him: Beholde, thou
art made whole, synne no more, lest a worse thinge happen vnto the.
15 The ma departed, and tolde the Iewes, that it was Iesus, which had made hi
whole.
16 Therfore dyd ye Iewes persecute Iesus, and sought to slaye him, because he
had done this vpo ye Sabbath.
17 But Iesus answered them: My father worketh hither to, and I worke also.
18 Therfore sought the Iewes the more to slaye hi: because he brake not onely ye
Sabbath, but saide also, that God was his father, and made him self equall with
God.
19 The answered Iesus, and sayde vnto them: Verely verely I saye vnto you: The
sonne can do nothinge of himself, but that he seyth the father do. For what
soeuer he doeth, that doeth ye sonne also.
20 The father loueth the sonne, & sheweth him all that he doth, and wyll shewe
him yet greater workes, so that ye shal marueyle.
21 For as the father rayseth vp the deed, and maketh them lyue, eue so the sonne
also maketh lyuynge whom he wyll.
22 For the father iudgeth no man, but hath geuen all iudgmet vnto the sonne,
23 that they all might honoure the sonne, euen as they honoure ye father. Who so
honoureth not the sonne, the same honoureth not the father, which hath sent him.
24 Verely verely I saye vnto you: Who so heareth my worde, and beleueth him that
sent me, hath euerlastinge life, and cometh not in to damnacion, but is passed
thorow from death vnto life.
25 Verely verely I saye vnto you: The houre cometh, & is now allready, yt the
deed shal heare ye voyce of ye sonne of God: and they that heare it, shal lyue.
26 For as the father hath life in him self, so likewyse hath he geuen vnto the
sonne, to haue life in himself:
27 & hath geue hi power also to execute iudgmet because he is the sonne of ma.
28 Maruayle not ye at this: for ye houre cometh, in ye which all that are in ye
graues, shal heare his voyce,
29 and shal go forth, they that haue done good, vnto the resurreccion of life:
but they that haue done euell, vnto the resurreccion of damnacion.
30 I can do nothinge of my self. As I heare, so I iudge: & my iudgmet is iust.
For I seke not myne owne wyll, but the wyll of the father which hath sent me.
31 Yf I beare wytnesse of my self, my wytnesse is not true.
32 There is another that beareth wytnesse of me, and I am sure, that the
wytnesse which he beareth of me, is true.
33 Ye sent vnto Ihon, and he bare wytnes of the trueth.
34 As for me, I take no recorde of ma, but these thinges I saye, that ye might
be saued.
35 He was a burnynge and shyninge light, but ye wolde haue reioysed a litle
whyle in his light.
36 Neuertheles I haue a greater wytnesse then the wytnesse of Ihon. For the
workes which the father hath geue me to fynish, the same workes which I do,
beare wytnesse of me, that the father hath sent me.
37 And ye father him self which hath sent me, beareth wytnesse of me. Ye haue
nether herde his voyce at eny tyme, ner sene his shappe:
38 and his worde haue ye not abydinge in you, for ye beleue not him, whom he
hath sent.
39 Searche the scripture, for ye thinke ye haue euerlastinge life therin: and
the same is it that testifyeth of me,
40 and ye wil not come vnto me, that ye might haue life.
41 I receaue not prayse of men.
42 But I knowe you, that ye haue not the loue of God in you.
43 I am come in my fathers name, and ye receaue me not. Yf another shal come in
his awne name, him wil ye receaue.
44 How can ye beleue which receaue prayse one of another, and seke not the
prayse, that is of God onely?
45 Ye shall not thynke that I wyll accuse you before ye father: there is one yt
accuseth you, euen Moses, in who ye trust.
46 Yf ye beleued Moses, ye shulde beleue me also: For he hath wrytte of me.
47 But yf ye beleue not his wrytinges, how shal ye beleue my wordes?

Chapter 6

1 After this wente Iesus ouer the see vnto the cite Tiberias in Galilee.
2 And moch people folowed him, because they sawe the tokens that he dyd vpon the
which were diseased.
3 But Iesus wete vp in to a mountayne, and there he sat with his disciples.
4 And Easter ye feast of the Iewes was nye.
5 Then Iesus lift vp his eyes, and sawe yt there came moch people vnto him, and
he sayde vnto Philippe: Whence shal we bye bred, yt these maye eate?
6 But this he sayde to proue him, for he himself knewe, what he wolde do.
7 Philippe answered him: Two hundreth peny worth of bred is not ynough amonge
the, yt euery one maye take a litle.
8 The sayde vnto hi one of his disciples, Andrew ye brother of Symo Peter:
9 There is a lad here, yt hath fyue barlye loaues, and two fishes, but what is
that amoge so many?
10 Iesus sayde: Make the people syt downe. There was moch grasse in the place.
Then they sat the downe, aboute a fyue thousande men.
11 Iesus toke the loaues, thanked, and gaue them to the disciples: the disciples
(gaue) to them that were set downe. Likewyse also of the fishes as moch as they
wolde.
12 Whan they were fylled, he sayde vnto his disciples: Gather vp the broken
meate that remayneth, that nothinge be lost.
13 The they gathered, and fylled twolue baskettes with the broke meate, that
remayned of the fyue barlye loaues, vnto them which had eaten.
14 Now whan the men sawe the token yt Iesus dyd, they saide: This is of a trueth
the Prophet, yt shulde come into the worlde.
15 Whan Iesus now perceaued that they wolde come, and take him vp, to make him
kynge, he gat him awaye agayne in to a mountayne himself alone.
16 At euen wente his disciples downe to ye see,
17 and entred in to the shippe, and came to the other syde of ye see vnto
Capernau. And it was darcke allready. And Iesus was not come to the.
18 And ye see arose thorow a greate wynde.
19 Now whan they had rowed vpo a fyue and twetie or thirtie furlonges, they sawe
Iesus goinge vpon the see, and came nye to the shippe. And they were afrayed.
20 But he sayde vnto them: It is I, be not afrayed.
21 Then wolde they haue receaued him in to ye shippe. And immediatly ye shippe
was at the londe whither they wente.
22 The nexte daye after, the people which stode on the other syde of the see,
sawe that there was none other shippe there saue that one, wherin to his
disciples were entred: and that Iesus wete not in with his disciples in to the
shippe, but yt his disciples were gone awaie alone.
23 Howbeit there came other shippes from Tiberias, nye vnto ye place where they
had eate the bred, after yt the LORDE had geuen thankes.
24 Now whan the people sawe that Iesus was not there, nether his disciples, they
toke shippe also, and came to Capernaum, and sought Iesus.
25 And whan they founde him on the other syde of the see, they sayde vnto him:
Master, whan camest thou hither?
26 Iesus answered the, & sayde: Verely verely I saye vnto you: Ye seke me not
because ye sawe ye tokes, but because ye ate of the loaues, and were fylled.
27 Laboure not for the meate which perisheth but yt endureth vnto euerlastinge
life, which the sonne of ma shal geue you: For him hath God the father sealed.
28 The sayde they vnto him: What shal we do, that we maye worke ye workes of
God?
29 Iesus answered, and sayde vnto the: This is the worke of God, that ye beleue
on him, whom he hath sent.
30 Then sayde they vnto him: What token doest thou the, that we maye se and
beleue ye? What workest thou?
31 Oure fathers ate Mana in the wyldernesse, as it is wrytte: He gaue the bred
fro heauen to eate.
32 Then sayde Iesus vnto the: Verely verely I saye vnto you: Moses gaue you not
bred from heaue, but my father geueth you the true bred from heauen:
33 For this is that bred of God, which commeth from heauen, and geueth life vnto
the worlde.
34 The sayde they vnto him: Syr, geue vs allwaye soch bred.
35 But Iesus sayde vnto the: I am yt bred of life. He that cometh vnto me, shal
not huger: & he that beleueth on me, shal neuer thyrst.
36 But I haue sayde vnto you, yt ye haue sene me, and yet ye beleue not.
37 All that my father geueth me, cometh vnto me: and who so cometh vnto me, him
wyl not I cast out:
38 for I am come downe from heaue, not to do myne awne wyll, but the wyll of him
that hath sent me.
39 This is ye will of the father, which hath sent me, that of all that he hath
geue me, I shulde lose nothinge, but shulde rayse it vp agayne at the last daye.
40 This is the wyl of him which hath sent me, that, who soeuer seyth the sonne
and beleueth on him, haue euerlastinge life, and I shal rayse him vp at the last
daye.
41 The murmured the Iewes ther ouer, that he sayde: I am yt bred which is come
downe from heaue,
42 and they sayde: Is not this Iesus, Iosephs sonne, whose father and mother we
knowe? How sayeth he then, I am come downe from heauen?
43 Iesus answered, and sayde vnto them: Murmur not amonge youre selues.
44 No man can come vnto me, excepte the father which hath sent me, drawe him.
And I shal rayse him vp at the last daye.
45 It is wrytten in the prophetes: They shal all be taught of God. Who so euer
now heareth it of the father, and lerneth it, commeth vnto me.
46 Not that eny man hath sene the father, saue he which is of the father, the
same hath sene the father.
47 Verely verely I saye vnto you: He that beleueth on me, hath euerlastinge
life.
48 I am that bred of life.
49 Youre fathers ate Manna in the wyldernes, and are deed.
50 This is that bred which commeth from heauen, that who so eateth therof,
shulde not dye.
51 I am that lyuynge bred, which came downe fro heauen: Who so eateth of this
bred, shal lyue for euer. And the bred that I wil geue, is my flesh which I wil
geue for ye life of the worlde.
52 Then stroue the Iewes amonge them selues, and sayde: How ca this folowe geue
vs his flesh to eate?
53 Iesus sayde vnto the: Verely verely I saye vnto you: Excepte ye eate ye flesh
of ye sonne of man and drynke his bloude, ye haue no life in you.
54 Who so eateth my flesh, and drynketh my bloude, hath euerlastinge life: and I
shal rayse him vp at the last daye.
55 For my flesh is ye very meate, and my bloude is ye very drynke.
56 Who so eateth my flesh, and drynketh my bloude, abydeth in me, and I in him.
57 As the lyuynge father hath sent me, and I lyue for the fathers sake: Euen so
he that eateth me, shall lyue for my sake.
58 This is ye bred which is come fro heauen: Not as youre fathers ate Manna, and
are deed. He that eateth of this bred, shal lyue for euer.
59 These thinges sayde he in the synagoge, wha he taught at Capernaum.
60 Many now of his disciples that herde this, sayde: This is an harde sayenge,
who maye abyde the hearynge of it?
61 But whan Iesus perceaued in hi self, that his discipes murmured ther at he
sayde vnto them: Doth this offende you?
62 What and yf ye shal se the sonne of man ascende vp thither, where he was
afore?
63 It is ye sprete that quyckeneth, ye flesh profiteth nothinge. The wordes that
I speake, are sprete, and are life.
64 But there are some amoge you, that beleue not. For Iesus knewe well from the
begynnynge, which they were that beleued not, and who shulde betraye him.
65 And he sayde: Therfore haue I sayde vnto you: No man can come vnto me,
excepte it be geuen him of my father.
66 From that tyme forth, many of his disciples wente backe, and walked nomore
with him.
67 Then sayde Iesus vnto the twolue: Wyll ye also go awaye?
68 Then answered Simon Peter: LORDE, Whither shal we go? Thou hast the wordes of
euerlastinge life:
69 and we haue beleued & knowne, that thou art Christ the sonne of the lyuynge
God.
70 Iesus answered them. Haue I not chosen you twolue, and one of you is a
deuell?
71 But he spake of Iudas Symon Iscarioth: the same betrayed him afterwarde, and
was one of the twolue.

Chapter 7

1 After that wente Iesus aboute in Galile, for he wolde not go aboute in Iewry,
because the Iewes sought to kyll him.
2 But the Iewes feast of Tabernacles was at hande.
3 Then sayde his brethren vnto him: Get the hece, and go into Iewry, that thy
disciples also maye se thy workes, that thou doest.
4 He that seketh to be openly knowne, doth nothinge in secrete. Yf thou do soch
thinges, the shewe yi self before the worlde:
5 For his awne brethren also beleued not in him.
6 Then sayde Iesus vnto them: My tyme is not yet come, but youre tyme is allwaye
ready.
7 The worlde can not hate you, but me it hateth: because I testifye of it, that
the workes of it are euell.
8 Go ye vp vnto this feast, I wyll not go vp yet vnto this feast, for my tyme is
not yet fulfylled.
9 Whan he sayde this vnto them, he abode styll in Galile.
10 But as soone as his brethren were gone vp, then wente he vp also vnto the
feast, not openly, but as it were secretly.
11 Then sought him ye Iewes at ye feast, and sayde: Where is he?
12 And there was a greate murmur of him amonge the people. Some sayde: He is
good. But other sayde: No, he doth but disceaue the people.
13 Howbeit no man spake frely of him, for feare of the Iewes.
14 But in the myddes of the feast wete Iesus vp in to the temple, and taught.
15 And the Iewes marueyled and sayde: How can he ye scrypture, seynge he hath
not lerned it?
16 Iesus answered them, and sayde: My doctryne is not myne, but his that hath
sent me.
17 Yf eny man wyl do his will, he shal knowe, whether this doctryne be of God,
or whether I speake of my self.
18 He that speaketh of himself, seketh his awne prayse: but he that seketh the
prayse of him that sent him, the same is true, & there is no vnrighteousnes in
him.
19 Hath not Moses geuen you the lawe? and none of you kepeth the lawe? Why go ye
aboute to kyll me?
20 The people answered, and sayde: Thou hast the deuell, who goeth aboute to
kyll the?
21 Iesus answered and sayde: One worke haue I done, and ye all maruayle.
22 Moses gaue you the circumcision, (not because it commeth of Moses, but of ye
fathers:) Yet do ye circumcyse a man vpon the Sabbath.
23 Yf a man receaue circucision vpon the Sabbath, that the lawe of Moses shulde
not be broken, dissdayne ye then at me, because I haue made a ma euery whyt
whole on the Sabbath?
24 Iudge not after the vtter appearauce, but iudge righteous iudgment.
25 Then sayde some of them of Ierusalem: Is not this he, who they go aboute to
kyll?
26 And beholde, he speaketh boldely, and they saye nothinge to him. Do oure
rulers knowe in dede, that he is very Christ?
27 Howbeyt we knowe, whence this is. But wha Christ commeth, no man shal knowe
whence he is.
28 Then cryed Iesus in the temple as he taught, and sayde: Yee ye knowe me, and
whence I am ye knowe, and of my self am I not come, but he yt sent me, is true,
whom ye knowe not.
29 But I knowe him, for I am of him, and he hath sent me.
30 Then sought they to take him, but no mam layed handes vpon him, for his houre
was not yet come.
31 But many of the people beleued on him, and sayde: Whan Christ commeth, shall
he do mo tokens, then this doth?
32 And it came to the Pharises eares, that ye people murmured soch thinges of
him. And the Pharises and hye prestes sent out seruauntes, to take him.
33 Then sayde Iesus vnto them: I am yet a litle whyle with you and then go I
vnto him that hath sent me.
34 Ye shal seke me, & not fynde me: and where I am, thither can ye not come.
35 Then sayde the Iewes amonge them selues: Whyther wil he go, that we shal not
fynde him? Wyl he go amoge the Grekes that are scatred abrode, and teach the
Grekes?
36 What maner of sayenge is this, that he sayeth: ye shal seke me, and not fynde
me: and where I am, thither can not ye come?
37 But in the last daye which was ye most solempne daye of the feast, Iesus
stode vp, cried, and sayde: Who so thyrsteth, let him come vnto me, and drynke.
38 He that beleueth on me, as the scripture sayeth, out of his body shal flowe
ryuers of the water of life.
39 (But this spake he of the sprete, which they that beleue on him, shulde
receaue. For the holy goost was not yet there, because Iesus was not yet
glorifyed.)
40 Many of the people now whan they herde this sayenge, sayde: This is a very
prophet.
41 Other sayde: He is Christ. But some sayde: Shal Christ come out of Galile?
42 Sayeth not the scripture, that Christ shal come of the sede of Dauid, and out
of the towne of Bethleem, where Dauid was?
43 Thus was there discencion amonge the people for his sake.
44 Some of them wolde haue taken him, but no man layed handes on him.
45 The seruauntes came to the hye prestes and pharises, and they sayde vnto
them: Why haue ye not brought him?
46 The seruauntes answered: Neuer ma spake as this man doth.
47 Then answered them the pharises: Are ye also disceaued?
48 Doth eny of the rulers or pharises beleue on him?
49 But the comon people which knowe not the lawe, are cursed.
50 Nicodemus sayde vnto them, he that came to him by night, which was one of
them:
51 Doth oure lawe iudge eny man, before it heare him, and knowe what he hath
done?
52 They answered and sayde vnto him? Art thou a Galilean also? Searche and loke,
out of Galile aryseth no prophet.
53 And so euery man wente home.

Chapter 8

1 Iesus wente vnto mount Oliuete,
2 and early in the mornynge came he agayne in to the temple, and all the people
came vnto him. And he sat downe, and taught them.
3 And ye scrybes and Pharises brought vnto him a woman taken in aduoutrye, and
set her there openly,
4 and sayde vnto him: Master, this woman was taken in aduoutrye, eue as the dede
was adoynge.
5 Moses in the lawe commaunded vs to stone soch. What sayest thou?
6 This they sayde, to tempte him, that they might haue wherof to accuse him. But
Iesus stouped downe, and wrote with his fynger vpo the grounde.
7 Now whyle they contynued axynge him, he lift him self vp, and sayde vnto them:
He that is amonge you without synne, let him cast the first stone at her.
8 And he stouped downe agayne, and wrote vpon the grounde.
9 But whan they herde that, they wente out, one after another: the eldest first,
and left Iesus alone, and the woman stondinge before him.
10 Iesus lift himself vp, and whan be sawe no man but the woman, he sayde vnto
her: Woman, where are thine accusers? Hath noman condempned the?
11 She sayde: LORDE, no man. Iesus sayde: Nether do I codempne the, Go thy waye,
and synne nomore.
12 Then spake Iesus agayne vnto them, and sayde: I am the light of the worlde.
He that foloweth me, shal not walke in darknesse, but shal haue the light of
life.
13 Then sayde the Pharises vnto him: Thou bearest recorde of thy self, thy
recorde is not true.
14 Iesus answered, and sayde vnto them: Though I beare recorde of my self, yet
my recorde is true: for I knowe whence I came, and whither I go: but ye can not
tell whence I come, and whither I go.
15 Ye iudge after the flesh, I iudge no man:
16 but yf I iudge, my iudgment is true: for I am not alone, but I and the father
that hath sent me.
17 It is wrytten also in youre lawe, that the testimony of two men is true.
18 I am one that beare wytnesse of my self: And the father that sent me, beareth
wytnes of me also.
19 Then sayde they vnto him: Where is thy father? Iesus answered: Ye nether
knowe me ner yet my father.Yf ye knewe me, ye shulde knowe my father also.
20 These wordes spake Iesus vpon the Godschest, as he taught in the teple. And
noman toke him, for his houre was not yet come.
21 Then sayde Iesus agayne vnto them: I go my waye, and ye shal seke me, and
shal dye in youre synnes: whither I go, thither can not ye come.
22 Then sayde ye Iewes: Wyl he kyll him self then, that he sayeth: whither I go,
thither can not ye come?
23 And he sayde vnto them: Ye are from beneth, I am from aboue: Ye are of this
worlde, I am not of this worlde.
24 Therfore haue I sayde vnto you, that ye shal dye in youre synnes. For yf ye
beleue not that I am he, ye shal dye in youre synnes.
25 Then sayde they vnto him: Who art thou then? And Iesus sayde vnto the: Eue
the very same thinge that I saye vnto you.
26 I haue many thinges to saye and to iudge of you. But he that sent me, is
true: and loke what I haue herde of him,that speake I before the worlde,
27 Howbeit they vnderstode not, that he spake of the father.
28 Then sayde Iesus vnto them: Whan ye haue lift vp an hye the sonne of man,
then shal ye knowe that I am he, and that I do nothinge of my self: but as my
father hath taught me, euen so I speake.
29 And he that sent me, is with me. The father leaueth me not alone, for I do
alwaie that pleaseth him.
30 Whan he thus spake, many beleued on him. Then sayde Iesus vnto the Iewes,
that beleued on him:
31 Yf ye contynue in my worde, then are ye my very disciples,
32 and ye shall knowe the trueth, and the trueth shal make you fre.
33 Then answered they him: We are Abrahams sede, we were neuer bonde to eny man,
how sayest thou then: Ye shal be fre?
34 Iesus answered them, and sayde: Verely verely I saye vnto you: Who so euer
doth synne,
35 is the seruaunt of synne: As for the seruaunt, he abydeth not in the house
for euer,
36 but the sonne abydeth euer. Yf the sonne therfore make you fre, then are ye
fre in dede.
37 I knowe that ye are Abrahams sede, but ye seke to kyll me. For my worde
taketh not amonge you.
38 I speake that I haue sene of my father, & ye do that ye haue sene of youre
father.
39 They answered, and sayde vnto him: Abraham is oure father. Iesus sayde vnto
them: Yf ye were Abrahams children, ye wolde do the dedes of Abraham.
40 But now ye go aboute to kyll me, a man, that haue tolde you the trueth, which
I haue herde of God, this dyd not Abraham.
41 Ye do the dedes of youre father. Then sayde they vnto him: We are not borne
of fornicacion, we haue one father, euen God.
42 Iesus sayde vnto them: Yf God were youre father, then wolde ye loue me. For I
am proceaded forth, and come from God. For I am not come of my self, but he hath
sent me.
43 Why knowe ye not the my speach? Eue because ye can not abyde the hearinge of
my worde.
44 Ye are of the father the deuell, and after the lustes of youre father wyl ye
do. The same was a murthurer from the begynnynge, and abode not in the trueth:
for the trueth is not in him. Whan he speaketh a lye, then speaketh he of his
awne: for he is a lyar, and a father of the same.
45 But because I saye the trueth, ye beleue me not.
46 Which of you can rebuke me of one synne? Yf I saye the trueth, why do ye not
beleue me?
47 He that is of God, heareth Gods worde. Therfore heare ye not, because ye are
not of God.
48 Then answered the Iewes, and sayde vnto him: Saye we not right, that thou art
a Samaritane, and hast the deuell?
49 Iesus answered: I haue no deuell, but I honoure my father, and ye haue
dishonoured me.
50 I seke not myne awne prayse, but there is one that seketh it, and iudgeth.
51 Verely verely I saye vnto you: Yf eny man kepe my worde, he shal neuer se
death.
52 Then sayde the Iewes vnto him: Now knowe me, that thou hast the deuell.
Abraham is deed and the prophetes, and thou sayest: Yf eny ma kepe my worde, he
shal neuer taist of death.
53 Art thou greater then oure father Abraham? which is deed, and the prophetes
are deed? Who makest thou thy self?
54 Iesus answered: Yf I prayse myself, then is my prayse nothinge. But it is my
father that prayseth me, which ye saye is youre God,
55 and ye knowe hi not: but I knowe him. And yf I shulde saye, I knowe him not,
I shulde be a lyar, like vnto you. But I knowe him, and kepe his worde.
56 Abraham youre father was glad, that he shulde se my daye, And he sawe it, and
reioysed.
57 Then sayde the Iewes vnto him: Thou art not yet fiftie yeare olde, and hast
thou sene Abraham?
58 Iesus sayde vnto the: Verely verely I saye vnto you: Or euer Abraham was, I
am.
59 Then toke they vp stones, to cast at him. But Iesus hyd himself, and wente
out of the temple.

Chapter 9

1 And Iesus passed by, and sawe a man that was borne blynde.
2 And his disciples axed him, & sayde: Master, Who hath synned? this, or his
elders, that he was borne blynde?
3 Iesus answered: Nether hath this synned, ner his elders, but that ye workes of
God shulde be shewed on him.
4 I must worke the workes of him that hath sent me, whyle it is daye. The night
commeth, whan no man can worke.
5 As longe as I am in the worlde, I am the light of the worlde.
6 Whan he had thus sayde, he spat on the grounde, and made claye of the spetle,
and rubbed the claye on the eyes of the blynde,
7 and sayde vnto him: Go thy waye to the pole of Syloha (which is interpretated,
sent) and wash the. Then wete he his waye and wasshed him, and came seynge.
8 The neghbours and they that had sene him before, that he was a begger, sayde:
Is not this he that sat, and begged?
9 Some sayde: It is he. Other sayde: he is like him. But he himself sayde: I am
euen he.
10 Then sayde they vnto him: How are thine eyes opened?
11 He answered, and sayde: The ma that is called Iesus, made claye, and anoynted
myne eyes, and sayde: Go thy waye to the pole of Siloha, and wash the. I wente
my waye, & washed me, and receaued my sight.
12 Then sayde they vnto him: Where is he? He sayde: I can not tell.
13 Then brought they vnto the pharises, him that a litle before was blynde
14 It was the Sabbath, whan Iesus made the claye, and opened his eyes.
15 Then agayne the Pharises also axed him, how he had receaued his sight. He
sayde vnto the: He put claye vpon myne eyes, and I wasshed me, & now I se.
16 Then sayde some of the pharises: This man is not of God, seynge he kepeth not
ye Sabbath. But the other sayde: How can a synfull man do soch tokens? And there
was a stryfe amonge the.
17 They sayde agayne vnto ye blynde: What sayest thou of him, that he hath
opened thine eyes? He sayde: he is a prophet.
18 The Iewes beleued not hi, that he was blynde, and had receaued his sight,
tyll they called the elders of him, that had receaued his sight,
19 and they axed them, and sayde: Is this youre sonne, whom ye saye, was borne
blynde? How doth he now se then?
20 His elders answered them, and sayde: We knowe, that this is oure sonne, and
that he was borne blynde.
21 But how he now seyeth, we can not tell: or who hath opened his eyes, can we
not tell. He is olde ynough himself, axe him, let him speake for him self.
22 This sayde his elders, because they feared the Iewes. For the Iewes had
conspyred allready, that yf eny man dyd confesse that he was Christ, the same
shulde be excomunicate.
23 Therfore sayde his elders: He is olde ynough, axe him.
24 Then called they the ma agayne yt was blynde, and sayde vnto him: Geue God ye
prayse, we knowe that this man is a synner.
25 He answered, & sayde: Whether he be a synner or no, I can not tell: one
thinge am I sure off, that I was blynde, and now I se.
26 The sayde they vnto him agayne: What dyd he vnto the? How opened he thine
eyes?
27 He answered them: I tolde you right now. Herde ye it not? What, wil ye heare
it agayne? Will ye also be his disciples?
28 Then rayted they him, and sayde: Thou art his disciple.
29 We are sure that God spake wt Moses: As for this felowe, we know not whece he
is.
30 The man answered, and sayde vnto the: This is a maruelous thinge, that ye
wote not whence he is, and he hath opened mine eyes.
31 For we knowe that God heareth not ye sinners: but yf eny ma be a fearer of
God, and doth his will, him heareth he.
32 Sens ye worlde beganne was it not herde, that eny man opened the eyes of one
that was borne blynde.
33 Yf this man were not of God, he coulde haue done nothinge.
34 They answered, and sayde vnto him: Thou art alltogether borne in synne, and
teachest thou vs? And they thrust him out.
35 Iesus herde, yt they had thrust him out, and wha he had founde him, he sayde
vnto him: Beleuest thou on the sonne of God?
36 He answered, and sayde: LORDE, who is it, yt I might beleue on him?
37 Iesus sayde vnto him: Thou hast sene him, and he it is, that talketh with
the.
38 He sayde: LORDE, I beleue. And he worshipped him.
39 And Iesus sayde: I am come to iudgmet in to this worlde, that they which se
not, might se: and that they which se, might be made blynde.
40 And some of the Pharises yt were with him, herde this, and sayde vnto him:
Are we then blynde also?
41 Iesus sayde vnto the: Yf ye were blynde, ye shulde haue no synne. But now
that ye saye, we se, therfore youre sonne remayneth.

Chapter 10

1 Verely verely I saye vnto you: He yt entreth not in at the dore in to the
shepefolde, but clymmeth vp some other waye, the same is a thefe & a murthurer.
2 But he that goeth in at the dore, is the shepherde of the shepe:
3 to him ye porter openeth, and the shepe heare his voyce, and he calleth his
awne shepe by name, and ledeth them out.
4 And whan he hath sent forth his awne shepe, he goeth before them, and the
shepe folowe him: for they knowe his voyce.
5 As for a straunger, they folowe him not, but flye from him: for they knowe not
the voyce of straungers.
6 This prouerbe spake Iesus vnto them, but they vnderstode not what it was, that
he sayde vnto them.
7 Then sayde Iesus vnto them agayne: Verely verely I saye vnto you: I am the
dore of the shepe.
8 All they that are come before me, are theues and murthures. But ye shepe
harkened not vnto them.
9 I am the dore. Yf eny man entre in by me, he shalbe saued, and shal go in and
out, and fynde pasture,
10 A thefe cometh not, but for to steale, kyll, and destroye. I am come, yt they
might haue life, and haue it more abundauntly.
11 I am a good shepherde. A good shepherde geueth his life for the shepe.
12 But an hyred seruaunt, which is not the shepherde, nether the shepe are his
awne, seyth ye wolfe comynge, and leaueth ye shepe, and flyeth. And the wolfe
catcheth & scatereth ye shepe.
13 But the hyred seruaut flyeth, because he is an hyred seruaunte, and careth
not for the shepe.
14 I am a good sheperde, and knowe myne, and am knowne of myne.
15 Eue as my father knoweth me, and I knowe ye father. And I geue my life for my
shepe.
16 And I haue yet other shepe, which are not of this folde, and those same must
I brynge also, and they shal heare my voyce, and there shalbe one flocke and one
shepherde.
17 Therfore doth my father loue me, because I leaue my life, that I maye take it
agayue.
18 Noma taketh it fro me, but I leaue it of myself. I haue power to leaue it,
and haue power to take it agayne. This commaundement haue I receaued of my
father.
19 Then was there discension amoge the Iewes for these sayenges.
20 Many of the sayde: He hath the deuell, and is madd, why heare ye him?
21 Other sayde: These are not wordes of one that is possessed. Can the deuell
also open ye eyes of the blynde?
22 It was the dedicacion of the teple at Ierusale, & was wynter,
23 and Iesus walked in Salomos porche.
24 The came ye Iewes rounde aboute hi, & saide vnto hi: How loge dost thou make
vs doute? Yf thou be Christ, tell vs planely.
25 Iesus answered the: I tolde you, & ye beleue not. The workes yt I do in my
fathers name, they beare wytnesse of me.
26 But ye beleue not, because ye are not of my shepe as I sayde vnto you.
27 My shepe heare my voyce, & I knowe the, & they folowe me.
28 And I geue the euerlastinge life, & they shal neuer perishe, and noma shal
plucke the out of my hande.
29 My father which gaue the me, is greater the all: & noman is able to plucke
them out of my fathers hande.
30 I and the father are one.
31 Then the Iewes toke vp stones agayne, to stone him.
32 Iesus answered the: Many good workes haue I shewed you fro my father, for
which of the stone ye me?
33 The Iewes answered hi, and sayde: For the good worke sake we stone the not,
but for the blasphemy: and because yt thou beynge a man, makest thyself God.
34 Iesus answered the: Is it not wrytten in youre lawe: I haue sayde, Ye are
Goddes?
35 Yf he call them Goddes, vnto whom the worde of God came (& the scripture can
not be broke)
36 saye ye the vnto hi, who ye father hath sanctified & sent in to ye worlde:
thou blasphemest God, because I sayde: I am ye sonne of God?
37 Yf I do not ye workes of my father, beleue me not:
38 but yf I do the, the (yf ye beleue not me) yet beleue ye workes, yt ye maye
knowe & beleue, yt the father is in me, & I in ye father.
39 They wente aboute agayne to take him, but he escaped out of their hades,
40 and wete awaye agayne beyode Iordane, into ye place where Iho had baptysed
before, & there he abode.
41 And many came to hi, and sayde: Iho dyd no tokes, but all yt Ihon spake of
this man, is true.
42 And many beleued on him there.

Chapter 11

1 There laye one sicke, named Lazarus of Bethania, in ye towne of Mary & hir
sister Martha.
2 It was yt Mary which anoynted ye LORDE wt oyntment, & dryed his fete wt hir
heer, whose brother Lazarus laye sicke.)
3 The sent his sisters vnto hi, & sayde: LORDE, beholde, he who thou louest
lyeth sicke.
4 Wha Iesus herde that, he sayde: This sicknesse is not vnto death, but for the
prayse of God, yt the sonne of God maye be praysed there thorow.
5 Iesus loued Martha & hir sister, & Lazarus.
6 Now wha he herde that he was sicke, he abode two dayes in ye place where he
was.
7 Afterwarde sayde he vnto his disciples: Let vs go agayne i to Iewry.
8 His disciples sayde vnto him: Master, lately wolde the Iewes haue stoned the,
& wilt thou go thither agayne:
9 Iesus answered: Are there not twolue houres in ye daye? He yt walketh in the
daye, stombleth not, for he seyeth ye light of this worlde.
10 But he that walketh in the night, stobleth: for there is no light in him.
11 This he spake, & after warde sayde he vnto the: Lazarus or frende slepeth,
but I go to wake him out of slepe.
12 The sayde his disciples: LORDE, yf he slepe, he shal do well ynough
13 (Howbeyt Iesus spake of his death but they thought yt he had spoke of ye
bodely slepe.)
14 The sayde Iesus vnto the planely: Lazarus is deed,
15 & I am glad for yor sakes, yt I was not there, that ye maye beleue.
Neuertheles let vs go vnto hi.
16 The sayde Thomas (which is called Didimus) vnto ye disciples: Let vs go also,
yt we maye dye wt hi.
17 The came Iesus, & founde yt he had lyen in ye graue foure dayes allready.
18 Bethanye was nye vnto Ierusale, aboute fiftene furloges.
19 And many of the Iewes were come to Martha & Mary, to coforte the ouer their
brother.
20 Now wha Martha herde yt Iesus came, she wete to mete him. But Mary satt styl
at home.
21 The sayde Martha vnto Iesus: LORDE, yf thou haddest bene here, my brother had
not bene deed.
22 But neuertheles I knowe also, what soeuer thou axest of God, that God wyl
geue it the.
23 Iesus sayde vnto her: Thy brother shal ryse agayne.
24 Martha sayde vnto hi: I knowe, yt he shal ryse agayne in the resurreccion at
ye last daye.
25 Iesus saide vnto her: I am the resurreccion & the life He yt beleueth on me,
shal lyue, though he were deed allready:
26 & whosoeuer lyueth and beleueth on me, shal neuer dye. Beleuest thou this?
27 She saide vnto him: Yee LORDE, I beleue, that thou art Christ the sonne of
God, which shulde come into the worlde.
28 And wha she had sayde this, she wete hir waye, & called Mary hir sister
secretly, & saide: The maister is come, & calleth for the.
29 She whan she herde that, rose vp quyckly, and came vnto him:
30 For Iesus was not yet come in to ye towne, but was yet in the place, where
Martha met him.
31 The Iewes that were wt her in the house and comforted her, whan they sawe
Mary, that she rose vp haistely, & wente out, they folowed her, & saide: She
goeth to the graue, to wepe there.
32 Now wha Mary came where Iesus was & sawe him, she fell downe at his fete, &
sayde vnto hi: LORDE, yf thou haddest bene here, my brother had not bene deed.
33 Wha Iesus sawe her wepe, & the Iewes wepinge also yt came wt her, he groned
in the sprete, & was sory wt in himself,
34 & sayde: Where haue ye layed him? They sayde: LORDE come, & se it.
35 And Iesus wepte.
36 Then sayde ye Iewes: Beholde how he loued him.
37 But some of the saide: Coulde no the which opened the eyes of ye blynde, haue
made also, that this ma shulde not haue dyed?
38 But Iesus groned agayne in himself, and came to the graue. It was a caue, and
a stone layed on it.
39 Iesus saide: Take awaye ye stone. Martha the sister of him yt was deed, saide
vnto hi: LORDE, he stynketh allready, for he hath bene deed foure dayes.
40 Iesus sayde vnto her: Sayde I not vnto the, that yf thou dyddest beleue, thou
shuldest se the glory of God?
41 Then toke they awaye the stone, where the deed laye. Iesus lift vp his eyes,
and sayde: Father, I thake ye, that thou hast herde me.
42 Howbeit I knowe, that thou hearest me allwaye: but because of ye people that
stonde by, I sayde it, that they maye beleue, that thou hast sent me.
43 Whan he had sayde this, he cryed loude: Lazarus come forth.
44 And ye deed came forth bounde hande & fote wt graue clothes, & his face
bounde wt a napkyn. Iesus sayde vnto the: Lowse him, & let him go.
45 Many now of ye Iewes which mere come vnto Mary, and sawe what Iesus dyd,
beleued on him.
46 But some of the wente their waye vnto the pharises, and tolde the what Iesus
had done.
47 Then the hye prestes, and the pharises gathered a councell, and sayde: What
do we? This man doth many tokens.
48 Yf we let him go thus, all me wyl beleue in him: the shal the Romaynes come,
and take awaye oure londe and people.
49 But one of them, named Caiphas, which was hye prest that same yeare, sayde
vnto them: Ye knowe nothinge nether considre ye eny thinge at all.
50 It is better for us that one ma dye for the people, then that all the people
shulde perishe.
51 This spake he not of himself, but for so moch as he was hye prest of the same
yeare, he prophecied. For Iesus was for to dye for the people,
52 and not for the people onely, but that he shulde gather together the children
of God, which were scatered abrode:
53 From that daye forth they toke coucell, how they might put him to death.
54 Iesus walked nomore openly amonge the Iewes, but wente from thence in to a
countre by the wyldernesse, to a cite called Ephraim, & there had he his beynge
with his disciples.
55 The Iewes Easter was nye at hande. And there wente vp many to Ierusale out of
that countre before ye Easter, to purifye them selues.
56 Then stode they vp, and axed after Iesus, and spake amonge them selues in the
temple: What thynke ye, that he cometh not to ye feast?
57 The hye prestes & pharises had geuen a commaundement, that yf eny man knewe
where he were, he shulde shewe it, that they might take him.

Chapter 12

1 Sixe dayes before Easter came Iesus vnto Bethanye, where Lazarus was, which
was deed, whom Iesus raysed vp from the deed.
2 There they made him a supper, and Martha serued. But Lazarus was one of them,
that sat at the table with him.
3 Then toke Mary a pounde of oyntment of pure and costly Nardus, and anoynted
Iesus fete, & dryed his fete with hir heer. The house was full of the sauoure of
the oyntment.
4 Then sayde one of his disciples, Iudas Iscarioth Symons sonne, which
afterwarde betrayed him:
5 Why was not this oyntment solde for thre hundreth pens, and geuen to the
poore?
6 (This sayde he not that he cared for the poore, but because he was a thefe,
and had the bagge, and bare that which was geue.)
7 Then sayde Iesus: Let her alone, this hath she kepte agaynst the daye of my
buryenge.
8 For the poore haue ye allwaye with you, but me haue ye not allwaye.
9 Then moch people of the Iewes had knowlege, that he was there, and they came
not for Iesus sake onely, but also yt they might se Lazarus, whom he had raysed
from the deed.
10 But ye hye prestes were aduysed to put Lazarus to death also:
11 because yt for his sake many of the Iewes wete awaye and beleued on Iesus.
12 Vpon the nexte daye moch people which were come vnto the feast, whan they
herde that Iesus came towarde Ierusalem,
13 they toke braunches of palme trees, and wete out to mete him, and cryed:
Hosianna, Blessed be he, that in the name of the LORDE commeth kynge of Israel.
14 Iesus gat a yonge Asse, and rode theron, As it is wrytte:
15 Feare not thou doughter of Sion, beholde, thy kynge cometh rydinge vpo an
Asses foale.
16 Neuertheles his disciples vnderstode not these thinges at the first, but whan
Iesus was glorified, then remebred they that soch thinges were wrytte of him,
and that they had done soch thinges vnto him.
17 The people that was with him whan he called Lazarus out of ye graue and
raysed him from the deed, commended the acte.
18 Therfore the people met him, because they herde, that he had done soch a
miracle.
19 But the pharises sayde amonge them selues: Ye se, that we preuayle nothinge,
beholde, all ye worlde runneth after him.
20 There were certayne Grekes (amonge the that were come vp to Ierusale to
worshipe at the feast)
21 the same came vnto Philippe, which was of Bethsaida out of Galile, & prayed
him, and sayde: Syr, we wolde fayne se Iesus.
22 Philippe came, & tolde Andrew. And agayne, Philippe and Andrew tolde Iesus.
23 Iesus answered the, and sayde: The houre is come, that the sonne of man must
be glorified.
24 Verely verely I saye vnto you: Excepte the wheatcorne fall in to the grounde,
and dye, it bydeth alone: But yf it dye, it bryngeth forth moch frute.
25 He that loueth his life, shal lose it: and he that hateth his life in this
worlde, shal kepe it vnto life euerlastinge.
26 He that wyl serue me, let him folowe me. And where I am, there shal my
seruaunt be also: and he that serueth me, him shal my father honoure.
27 Now is my soule heuy, and what shal I saye? Father, helpe me out of this
houre. But therfore am I come in to this houre.
28 Father, glorifye thy name. Then came there a voyce from heauen: I haue
glorified it, and wyl glorifye it agayne.
29 Then sayde the people that stode by and herde: It thondereth. Other sayde: An
angell spake vnto him.
30 Iesus answered, and sayde: This voyce came not because of me, but for youre
sakes.
31 Now goeth the iudgment ouer the worlde. Now shal the prynce of this worlde be
thrust out.
32 And I whan I am lift vp from the earth, wyl drawe all vnto me.
33 (But this he sayde, to signifye, what death he shulde dye.)
34 Then answered him the people: We haue herde in the lawe, that Christ endureth
for euer: and how sayest thou then, that the sonne of man must be lift vp? Who
is this sonne of man?
35 Then sayde Iesus vnto them: The light is yet a litle whyle with you, walke
whyle ye haue the light, that the darknesse fall not vpo you. He that walketh in
the darknesse, woteth not whither he goeth.
36 Beleue ye on the light, whyle ye haue it, that ye maye be the children of
light. These thinges spake Iesus, and departed awaye, and hyd himself from them.
37 And though he had done soch tokens before the, yet beleued they not on him,
38 that the sayenge of Esay the prophet might be fulfylled, which he spake:
LORDE, who beleueth oure preachinge? Or to whom is the arme of the LORDE opened?
39 Therfore coulde they not beleue, for Esay saide agayne:
40 He hath blynded their eyes, and hardened their hert, that they shulde not se
with the eyes, ner vnderstonde with the hert, & shulde be conuerted, and he
shulde heale them.
41 This sayde Esay, whan he sawe his glory, and spake of him.
42 Neuertheles many of the chefe rulers beleued on him, but because of the
Pharises they wolde not be aknowne of it, lest they shulde be excommunicate,
43 For they loued more the prayse with men, then with God.
44 Iesus cryed and sayde: He that beleueth on me, beleueth not on me, but on him
that sent me.
45 And he that seyth me, seyth him yt sent me.
46 I am come a light in to the worlde, that whosoeuer beleueth on me, shulde not
byde in darknesse.
47 And he that heareth my wordes and beleueth not, I iudge him not, for I am not
come to iudge the worlde, but to saue the worlde.
48 He that refuseth me, and receaueth not my wordes, hath one allready that
iudgeth him. The worde that I haue spoken, that shall iudge him at the last
daye,
49 For I haue not spoken of my self: but the father that sent me, hath geuen me
a commaundement, what I shulde do and saye.
50 And I knowe that his commaundement is life euerlastinge. Therfore loke what I
speake, that speake I eue so, as the father hath sayde vnto me.

Chapter 13

1 Before the feast of Easter whan Iesus knewe that his tyme was come, that he
shulde departe out of this worlde vnto ye father, as he loued his which were in
the worlde, euen so loued he them vnto the ende.
2 And after supper, whan the deuell had allready put into ye hert of Iudas
Iscarioth Symons sonne, to betraye him,
3 Iesus knowinge that the father had geuen all thinges in to his handes, & that
he was come from God, and wente vnto God,
4 he rose from supper, and layed asyde his vpper garmentes, and toke a towell,
and gyrde it aboute him.
5 Afterwarde poured he water into a basen, and beganne to wash the disciples
fete, and dryed them with the towell, yt he was gyrded withall.
6 Then came he vnto Symon Peter, and ye same sayde vnto him: LORDE, shalt thou
washe my fete?
7 Iesus answered and sayde vnto him: What I do, thou knowest not now, but thou
shalt knowe it herafter.
8 The sayde Peter vnto him: Thou shalt neuer wash my fete. Iesus answered him:
Yf I wash ye not, thou shalt haue no parte with me.
9 Symon Peter sayde vnto him: LORDE, not the fete onely, but the handes also and
the heade.
10 Iesus sayde vnto him: He that is wasshe, nedeth not, saue to washe ye fete,
but is cleane euery whytt. And ye are cleane but not all.
11 For he knewe his betrayer, therfore sayde he: ye are not all cleane.
12 Now whan he had wasshen their fete, and taken his clothes, he sat him downe
agayne, and sayde vnto the: Wote ye what I haue done vnto you?
13 Ye call me master and LORDE, and ye saye right therin, for so I am.
14 Yf I then youre LORDE and master haue wasshen youre fete, ye ought also to
wash one anothers fete.
15 I haue geue you an ensample, that ye shulde do as I haue done vnto you.
16 Verely verely I saye vnto you: the seruaunt is not greater then his lorde,
nether is the Apostell greater then he that sent him.
17 Yf ye knowe these thinges, blessed are ye yf ye do them.
18 I speake not of you all, I knowe whom I haue chosen, but that the scripture
might be fulfilled: He yt eateth my bred, hath lift vp his hele against me.
19 I tell it you now, before it come, that whan it is come to passe, ye maye
beleue, that I am he.
20 Verely verely I saye vnto you: He that receaueth whom so euer I sende,
receaueth me: and he that receaueth me, receaueth him that sent me.
21 Whan Iesus had thus sayde, he was heuy in sprete, and testified, and sayde:
Verely verely I saye vnto you: One amonge you shal betraye me.
22 Then the disciples loked one vpon another, & were in doute, of whom he spake.
23 But there was one amoge his disciples, that leaned at the table on Iesus
bosome, who Iesus loued:
24 to him beckened Symon Peter, that he shulde axe, who it was, of whom he
spake.
25 For the same leaued vpo Iesus brest, and sayde vnto him: LORDE, who is it?
26 Iesus answered: It is he, vnto whom I dyppe the soppe & geue it. And he dypte
in the soppe, and gaue it vnto Iudas Iscarioth Symons sonne.
27 And after ye soppe the deuell entred in to him. Then sayde Iesus vnto him:
That thou doest, do quyckly.
28 But ye same wyst no man at the table, for what intent he sayde it vnto him.
29 Some thought (for so moch as Iudas had the bagge) that Iesus had sayde vnto
him: Bye that is necessary for vs agaynst the feast: Or that he shulde geue some
thinge vnto the poore.
30 Whan he had receaued the soppe, he wente out immediatly, and it was night.
31 Whan he was gone forth, Iesus sayde: Now is the sonne of ma glorified, and
God is glorified in him.
32 Yf God be glorified in him, the shal god glorifie him also in hiself, &
straight waye shal he glorifye him.
33 Deare childre, I am yet a litle whyle with you. Ye shal seke me, and (as I
sayde vnto ye Iewes) whither I go, thither can ye not come. And now I saye vnto
you,
34 A new comaundemet geue I you, that ye loue together as I haue loued you, yt
euen so ye loue one another.
35 By this shal euery man knowe that ye are my disciples, yf ye haue loue one to
another.
36 Symon Peter sayde vnto him: LORDE, whither goest thou? Iesus answered him:
Whither I go, thou canst not folowe me now, but thou shalt folowe me herafter.
37 Peter sayde vnto him: LORDE, why ca not I folowe the now? I wil geue my life
for yi sake.
38 Iesus answered him: Wilt thou geue thy life for my sake? Verely verely I saye
vnto ye. The cock shal not crowe, tyll thou haue denyed me thryse.

Chapter 14

1 And he sayde vnto his disciples: Let not youre hert be afrayed. Yf ye beleue
on God, the beleue also on me.
2 In my fathers house are many dwellinges. Yf it were not so, I wolde haue tolde
you: I go to prepare the place for you.
3 And though I go to prepare the place for you, yet wil I come agayne, and
receaue you vnto myself, yt ye maye be where I am.
4 And whither I go, ye knowe, and the waye knowe ye also.
5 Thomas sayde vnto him: LORDE, we knowe not whither thou goest, & how can we
knowe the waye?
6 Iesus sayde vnto him: I am the waye, and the trueth, and the life. Noman
cometh to the father but by me.
7 Yf ye knewe me, ye knewe my father also. And fro hece forth ye knowe hi, &
haue sene him.
8 Philippe sayde vnto him: LORDE, shewe vs the father, and it sufficeth vs.
9 Iesus sayde vnto him: Thus longe am I with you, and hast thou not knowne me?
Philippe, he that seyth me, seyth the father. And how sayest thou then: Shewe vs
the father?
10 Beleuest thou not that I am in the father, and that ye father is in me? The
wordes that I speake vnto you, those speake not I of my self: but the father
that dwelleth in me, he doth the workes.
11 Beleue me, that I am in the father, and that ye father is in me: Or els,
beleue me at the leest for the workes sake.
12 Verely verely I saye vnto you: He that beleueth on me, shal do the workes
that I do, and shal do greater then these: for I go to the father.
13 And what soeuer ye axe ye father in my name, that wyl I do, that the father
maye be praysed in the sonne.
14 Yf ye axe eny thinge in my name, I wyl do it.
15 Yf ye loue me, kepe my commaundementes.
16 And I wyl praye the father, and he shal geue you another comforter, that he
maye byde wt you for euer:
17 euen ye sprete of trueth, whom ye worlde can not receaue, for it seyth him
not, nether doth it knowe him: but ye knowe him, for he abydeth wt you, & shalbe
in you
18 I wil not leaue you cofortles, I come vnto you.
19 It is yet a litle whyle, the shal the worlde se me nomore, but ye shal se me:
for I lyue, and ye shal lyue also.
20 In yt daye shal ye knowe, that I am in the father and ye in me, and I in you.
21 He that hath my comaundementes, and kepeth them, the same is he that loueth
me: and he that loueth me, shalbe loued of my father: & I wyl loue him, and wyl
shewe myne awne self vnto him.
22 Iudas sayde vnto hi: (not that Iscarioth) LORDE, What is the cause the, that
thou wilt shewe thy self vnto vs, and not vnto the worlde?
23 Iesus answered, and sayde vnto him: He that loueth me, wyl kepe my worde, and
my father wyl loue him: and we wyl come vnto him, and wyll make oure dwellynge
with him.
24 But he that loueth me not, kepeth not my sayenges. And the worde that ye
heare, is not myne, but the fathers which hath sent me.
25 This haue I spoken vnto you, whyle I was with you.
26 But that comforter euen ye holy goost, who my father shal sende in my name,
he shal teache you all thinges, & bringe all to youre remembraunce, what soeuer
I haue tolde you.
27 Peace I leaue vnto you, my peace I geue you: I geue not vnto you, as the
worlde geueth. Let not yor hert be troubled, nether let it be afrayed.
28 Ye haue herde, that I sayde vnto you: I go, & come agayne vnto you. Yf ye
loued me, ye wolde reioyse, because I saide, I go to the father: for ye father
is greater the I.
29 And now haue I tolde you, before it come, that whan it is come to passe, ye
maye beleue:
30 Here after wyl not I talke moch with you. For the prynce of this worlde
cometh, and hath nothinge in me.
31 But that the worlde maye knowe that I loue ye father. And as the father hath
comaunded me, so do I. Aryse, let vs go hence.

Chapter 15

1 I am a true vyne, and my father is an hussbande man.
2 Euery braunch that bringeth not forth frute in me, shal he cut of: and euery
one that bryngeth forth frute, shal he pourge, yt it maye bringe forth more
frute.
3 Now are ye cleane, because of the worde, that I haue spoke vnto you.
4 Byde ye in me, and I in you. Like as ye braunch can not brynge forth frute of
it self excepte it byde in the vyne, Euen so nether ye also, excepte ye abyde in
me.
5 I am the vyne, ye are the braunches. He that abydeth in me, and I in him, the
same bryngeth forth moch frute: for without me can ye do nothinge.
6 He that abydeth not in me, is cast out as a vyne braunche, and it wythereth,
and men gather it vp, and cast it in to the fyre, and it burneth.
7 Yf ye abyde in me, and my wordes abyde in you, ye shal axe what ye wyl, & it
shal be done vnto you.
8 Herin is my father praysed, that ye brynge forth moch frute, and become my
disciples.
9 Like as my father hath loued me, eue so haue I loued you. Cotynue ye i my
loue.
10 Yf ye kepe my comaundementes, ye shal cotynue in my loue: like as I haue
kepte my fathers comaundementes, and cotynue in his loue.
11 These thinges haue I spoken vnto you, that my ioye might remayne in you, and
yt youre ioye might be perfecte.
12 This is my comaundement, that ye loue together, as I haue loued you.
13 No man hath greater loue, then to set his life for his frende.
14 Ye are my frendes, yf ye do that I commaunde you.
15 Hence forth call I you not seruauntes, for a seruaunt knoweth not what his
lorde doeth. But I haue sayde that ye are frendes: For all that I haue herde of
my father, haue I shewed vnto you.
16 Ye haue not chosen me, but I haue chosen you, and ordeyned you, that ye go,
and bringe forth frute, and that youre frute contynne, that what soeuer ye axe
the father in my name, he shulde geue it you.
17 This I commaunde you, that ye loue one another.
18 Yf the worlde hate you, then knowe, that it hath hated me before you.
19 Yf ye were of the worlde, the worlde wolde loue his awne. Howbeit because ye
are not of the worlde, but I haue chosen you from the worlde, therfore the
worlde hateth you.
20 Remembre my worde, that I sayde vnto you: The seruaunt is not greater then
his lorde. Yf they haue persecuted me, they shal persecute you also: Yf they
haue kepte my worde, they shal kepe yours also.
21 But all this shal they do vnto you for my names sake, because they knowe not
him yt sent me.
22 Yf I had not come & spoke vnto the, the shulde they haue no synne But now
haue they nothinge to cloake their synne withall.
23 He yt hateth me, hateth my father also.
24 Yf I had not done amoge the the workes which no other ma dyd, they shulde
haue no synne. But now haue they sene it, and yet haue they hated both me & my
father.
25 Neuertheles that the sayenge might be fulfilled, which is wrytten in their
lawe: They haue hated me without a cause.
26 But wha the comforter commeth, who I shal sende you from the father eue the
sprete of trueth which proceadeth of the father, he shal testifie of me
27 and ye shal beare wytnesse also: for ye haue bene with me from the
begynnynge.

Chapter 16

1 These thinges haue I sayde vnto you, that ye shulde not be offended.
2 They shal excomunicate you. The tyme commeth, that who soeuer putteth you to
death, shal thynke that he doth seruyce vnto God.
3 And soch thinges shal they do vnto you, because they haue nether knowne ye
father ner yet me.
4 But these thinges haue I sayde vnto you, that whan the tyme cometh ye maye
thynke theron, that I tolde you. But these thinges haue I not sayde vnto you
from the begynnynge: For I was with you.
5 But now I go vnto him that sent me, & none of you axeth me: Whither goest
thou?
6 but because I haue sayde these thinges vnto you, youre hert is full of sorowe.
7 Neuertheles I tell you the trueth, It is better for you yt I go awaye: For yf
I go not awaye that comforter commeth not vnto you: but yf I departe, I wil
sende hi vnto you.
8 And whan he commeth, he shal rebuke the worlde of synne, and of righteousnes,
& of iudgment.
9 Of synne, because they beleue not on me.
10 Of righteousnes, because I go to the father, and ye shal se me nomore.
11 Of iudgmet, because the prynce of this worlde is iudged allready.
12 I haue yet moch to saye vnto you, but ye can not now beare it awaye:
13 howbeit whan he (the sprete of trueth commeth) he shal lede you in to all
trueth. For he shal not speake of himself, but what soeuer he shal heare, that
shal he speake: and he shall shewe you, what is for to come.
14 He shal glorifye me: for he shal receaue of myne, and shal shewe vnto you.
15 All that the father hath, is myne. Therfore haue I sayde: he shal receaue of
myne, and shewe vnto you.
16 After a litle whyle, and ye shal not se me: and agayne after a litle whyle,
and ye shal se me: for I go to the father.
17 The saide some of his disciples amonge themselues: What is this that he
sayeth vnto vs, After a litle whyle, and ye shal not se me: & agayne after a
litle whyle, & ye shal se me: for I go to the father?
18 Then sayde they: What is this, that he sayeth: After a litle whyle? We can
not tell what he sayeth.
19 Then perceaued Iesus that they wolde axe him, and he sayde vnto them: Ye
enquyre of this amonge youre selues, that I sayde: After a litle whyle, and ye
shal not se me: & agayne after a litle whyle, and ye shal se me.
20 Verely verely I saye vnto you: Ye shal wepe and lamente, but the worlde shal
reioyse: Ye shal be sory, but youre sorowe shal be turned in to ioye.
21 A woman whan she trauayleth, hath sorowe, for hir houre is come. But whan she
is delyuered of the childe, she thinketh nomore of the anguyshe, for ioye that a
man is borne in to the worlde.
22 And now haue ye sorowe also: but I wil se you agayne, and youre hert shal
reioyse, and youre ioye shal noman take from you.
23 And in that daye shal ye axe me no question. Verely verely I saye vnto you:
Yf ye axe ye father ought in my name, he shal geue it you.
24 Hither to haue ye axed nothinge in my name. Axe, and ye shal receaue, yt
youre ioye maye be perfecte.
25 These thinges haue I spoken vnto you by prouerbes. Neuertheles the tyme
commeth, that I shal speake nomore by prouerbes, but I shal shewe you planely of
my father.
26 In that daye shal ye axe in my name. And I saye not vnto you, that I wyl
praye vnto the father for you:
27 for the father himself loueth you, because ye haue loued me, & beleued that I
am come out from God.
28 I wente out from the father, and came in to the worlde: Agayne, I leaue ye
worlde, and go to the father.
29 His disciples sayde vnto him: Beholde, now talkest thou planely, and speakest
no prouerbe.
30 Now are we sure yt thou knowest all thinges, and nedest not that eny ma
shulde axe the. Therfore beleue we, that thou camest out from God:
31 Iesus answered them: Now ye do beleue:
32 Beholde, the houre draweth nye, and is come allready, that ye shalbe scatred,
euery man in to his awne, and shal leaue me alone: and yet am I not alone, for
the father is with me.
33 These thinges haue I spoken vnto you, that in me ye might haue peace. In ye
worlde haue ye trouble, but be of good comforte, I haue ouercome the worlde.

Chapter 17

1 These thinges spake Iesus, and lift vp his eyes towarde heauen, and sayde:
Father, the houre is come, that thou glorifye thy sonne, that thy sonne also
maye glorifye the.
2 Like as thou hast geuen him power ouer all fleshe, that he shulde geue
euerlastinge life to as many as thou hast geuen him.
3 But this is the life euerlastinge, that they knowe the (that thou onely art
the true God) and whom thou hast sent, Iesus Christ.
4 I haue glorified ye vpo earth, & fynished ye worke, yt thou gauest me to do.
5 And now glorifye me thou father by thine awne self, with ye glory which I had
or euer the worlde was.
6 I haue declared thy name vnto ye men, whom thou gauest me from the worlde.
They were thine, and thou gauest them vnto me, and they haue kepte thy worde.
7 Now knowe they, that all thinges what soeuer thou hast geuen me, are of the.
8 For ye wordes which thou gauest me, haue I geue vnto them, and they haue
receaued them, & knowne of a trueth, that I am come forth from the, and haue
beleued, that thou hast sent me.
9 I praye for them, and praye not for the worlde, but for them whom thou hast
geuen me, for they are thine.
10 And all that is myne, is thine: and what thine is, that is myne. And I am
glorifyed in them.
11 And now am I nomore in the worlde, and they are in ye worlde, and I come to
the. Holy father, kepe in thy name, those whom thou hast geue me, that they maye
be one, like as we are.
12 Whyle I was with the in the worlde, I kepte them in thy name. Those yt thou
gauest me, haue I kepte, and none of them is lost, but that lost childe, that
the scripture might be fulfylled.
13 But now come I vnto the, and this I speake in the worlde, that they maye haue
my ioye perfecte in them.
14 I haue geuen them thy worde, and the worlde hateth the: for they are not of
the worlde, euen as I also am not of the worlde.
15 I praye not that thou shuldest take them out of the worlde, but that thou
kepe the fro euell.
16 They are not of the worlde, as I also am not of the worlde.
17 Sanctifye them in thy trueth. Thy worde is the trueth.
18 Like as thou hast sent me in to the worlde, so haue I sent them in to the
worlde:
19 and for their sakes I sanctifye my self, that they also maye be sanctifyed in
the trueth.
20 Neuertheles I praye not for them onely, but also for those, which thorow
their worde shal beleue on me,
21 that they all maye be one, like as thou father art in me, and I in ye that
they also maye be one in vs: that the worlde maye beleue, that thou hast sent
me.
22 And the glory which thou gauest me, haue I geuen them: that they maye be one,
like as we are one.
23 I in the, and thou in me, that they maye be perfecte in one, and that the
worlde maye knowe, that thou hast sent me and hast loued them, as thou hast
loued me.
24 Father, I wil, that they whom thou hast geuen me, be with me where I am, yt
they maye se my glory, which thou hast geue me: for thou hast loued me, or euer
ye worlde was made.
25 Righteous father, the worlde hath not knowne ye, but I haue knowne ye: and
these haue knowne, that thou hast sent me.
26 And I haue declared thy name vnto them, & wyl declare it, yt the loue
wherwith thou hast loued me, maye be in the, & I in them.

Chapter 18

1 Whan Iesus had thus spoke, he wete forth with his disciples ouer the broke
Cedron, where there was a garde, in to the which Iesus entred and his disciples.
2 But Iudas yt betrayed hi, knewe the place also. For Iesus resorted thither oft
tymes wt his disciples.
3 Now whan Iudas had take vnto him the copany, & mynisters of the hye prestes
and Pharises, he came thither with creshettes, wt lanternes, and with weapens.
4 Iesus now knowinge all yt shulde come vpon him, wete forth, and sayde vnto
the: Whom seke ye?
5 They answered him: Iesus of Nazareth. Iesus sayde vnto them: I am he. Iudas
also which betrayed him, stode with the.
6 Now whan Iesus sayde vnto the: I am he, they wete bacwardes, and fell to the
grounde.
7 Then axed he the agayne: Whom seke ye? They sayde: Iesus of Nazareth.
8 Iesus answered: I haue tolde you, that I am he. Yf ye seke me, then let these
go their waye.
9 That the worde might be fulfylled, which he sayde: Of them who thou gauest me,
haue I not lost one.
10 Then had Symon Peter a swerde, and drewe it out, and smote the hye prestes
seruaut, and cut of his right eare. And ye seruautes name was Malchus.
11 Then sayde Iesus vnto Peter: Put vp thy swerde in to the sheeth. Shal I not
drynke of ye cuppe, which my father hath geue me?
12 Then the company and the captayne & the officers of the Iewes toke Iesus, and
bounde him,
13 & led him awaye first vnto Annas, that was fatherlawe vnto Caiphas, which was
hye prest yt same yeare.
14 It was Caiphas, which gaue coucell vnto ye Iewes that it were good, that one
man shulde dye for the people.
15 As for Symon Peter, he and another disciple folowed Iesus. The same disciple
was knowne vnto the hye prest,and wete in with Iesus in to the hye prestes
palace.
16 But Peter stode without at the dore. Then yt other disciple which was knowne
vnto the hye prest, wente out, and spake to the damsell yt kepte the dore, and
brought in Peter.
17 Then the damsell that kepte the dore, sayde vnto Peter: Art not thou also one
of this mans disciples? He sayde: I am not.
18 The seruauntes & officers stode, and had made a fyre of coles (for it was
colde) & warmed the selues. Peter also stode with them, and warmed him self.
19 The hye prest axed Iesus of his disciples, and of his doctryne.
20 Iesus answered him: I haue spoken openly before the worlde, I haue euer
taught in the synagoge and in the teple, whither all the Iewes resorted, & in
secrete haue I spoke nothinge.
21 Why axest thou me? Axe the yt haue herde, what I haue spoken vnto the:
beholde, they can tell what I haue sayde.
22 But whan he had thus spoke, one of the officers that stode by, smote Iesus on
the face, and sayde: Answerest thou the hye prest so?
23 Iesus answered him: Yf I haue euell spoke, the beare wytnesse of euell: but
yf I haue well spoken, why smytest thou me?
24 And Annas sent him bounde vnto Caiphas ye hye prest.
25 Symo Peter stode and warmed him self. The sayde they vnto him: Art not thou
one of his disciples? He denyed, and sayde: I am not.
26 A seruaut of the hye prestes, a kynssma of his, whose eare Peter had smytten
of, sayde vnto him: Dyd not I se the in the garde with him?
27 Then Peter denyed agayne. And immediatly the cock crew.
28 Then led they Iesus from Caiphas in to the comon hall. And it was early in
the mornynge. And they them selues wete not in to the como hall, lest they
shulde be defyled, but yt they might eate ye Pascall lambe.
29 Then wente Pilate out vnto the, and sayde: What accusacion brynge ye agaynst
this man?
30 They answered, and sayde vnto him: Yf he were not an euell doer, we had not
delyuered him vnto the.
31 Then sayde Pilate vnto the: Take ye him, and iudge him after yor lawe. Then
sayde ye Iewes vnto him: It is not laufull for vs to put eny ma to death.
32 That ye worde of Iesus might be fulfilled, which he spake, whan he signified,
what death he shulde dye.
33 Then entred Pilate in to the comon hall agayne, and called Iesus, & sayde
vnto him: Art thou the kynge of the Iewes?
34 Iesus answered: Sayest thou that of thy self, or haue other tolde it the of
me?
35 Pilate answered: Am I a Iewe? Thy people and the hye prestes haue delyuered
the vnto me. What hast thou done?
36 Iesus answered: My kyugdome is not of this worlde. Yf my kyngdome were of
this worlde, my mynisters wolde fight therfore, yt I shulde not be delyuered
vnto the Iewes. But now is my kyngdome not from hence.
37 The sayde Pilate vnto hi: Art thou a kynge the? Iesus answered: Thou sayest
it, for I am a kynge. For this cause was I borne, and came in to the worlde,
that I shulde testifye the trueth. Who so euer is of the trueth, heareth my
voyce.
38 Pilate sayde vnto hi: What is the trueth? And whan he had sayde that he wete
out agayne to the Iewes, and sayde vnto them: I fynde no gyltinesse in him:
39 But ye haue a custome, that I shulde geue one vnto you lowse at Easter. Wyl
ye now yt I lowse vnto you the kynge of ye Iewes?
40 The cryed they agayne alltogether, and sayde: Not him, but Barrabas. Yet was
Barrabas a murthurer.

Chapter 19

1 Then Pilate toke Iesus, and scourged him.
2 And the soudyers platted a crowne of thornes, and set it vpon his heade, and
put a purple garment vpon him,
3 and sayde: Hayle kynge of the Iewes. And they smote him on the face.
4 Then wente Pilate forth agayne, and sayde vnto the: Beholde, I brynge him
forth vnto you, yt ye maye knowe, yt I fynde no faute in hi.
5 So Iesus wente out, & ware a crowne of thorne and a purple robe. And he sayde
vnto them: Beholde, the man.
6 Whan the hye prestes & the mynisters sawe him, they cryed, & sayde: Crucifye,
crucifye. Pilate saide vnto the: Take ye him, and crucifye him, for I fynde no
giltynesse in him.
7 The Iewes answered him: We haue a lawe, & after oure lawe he ought to dye,
because he made him self the sonne of God.
8 Whan Pilate herde that worde, he was the more afrayed,
9 and wente agayne in to the comon hall, and sayde vnto Iesus: Whence art thou?
But Iesus gaue him no answere.
10 The sayde Pilate vnto him: Speakest thou not vnto me? Knowest thou not, yt I
haue power to crucifye ye, & haue power to lowse ye?
11 Iesus answered: Thou shuldest haue no power vpo me, yf it were not geue the
from aboue. Therfore he that delyuered me vnto ye, hath the more synne.
12 From that tyme forth Pilate sought meanes to lowse him. But the Iewes cryed,
& sayde: Yf thou let him go, thou art not the Emperours frede. For whosoeuer
maketh himself kynge, is agaynst the Emperoure.
13 Whan Pilate herde yt worde, he brought Iesus forth, & sat hi downe vpo ye
iugdmet seate, in the place which is called the Pauement, but in the Hebrue,
Gabbatha.
14 It was the daye of preparinge of the Easter aboute the sixte houre. And he
sayde vnto the Iewes: Beholde yor kynge.
15 But they cryed: Awaye wt him, awaye wt him, crucifie him. Pilate saide vnto
the: Shal I crucifye yor kynge? The hye prestes answered: We haue no kynge but
ye Emperor.
16 The delyuered he him vnto them, to be crucifyed.They toke Iesus, and led him
awaye.
17 And he bare his crosse, and wente out to the place called ye place of deed
men skulles, which in Hebrue is named Golgatha,
18 where they crucified him, and two other with him, on either syde one, but
Iesus in the myddes
19 Pilate wrote a superscripcion, and set vpon the crosse. And there was
wrytten: Iesus of Nazareth, kynge of the Iewes.
20 This superscripcion red many of the Iewes. For ye place where Iesus was
crucifyed, was nye vnto the cite. And it was wrytten in Hebrue, Greke & Latyn.
21 Then sayde the hye prestes of the Iewes vnto Pilate: Wryte not kynge of the
Iewes, but yt he sayde, I am kynge of the Iewes.
22 Pilate answered: What I haue wrytten, that haue I wrytten.
23 The sondyers, whan they had crucifyed Iesus, toke his garmentes, and made
foure partes, to euery soudyer one patte, and the cote also. As for the cote, it
was vnsowed fro aboue, wrought thorow and thorow.
24 Then sayde they one to another: Let vs not deuyde it, but cast lottes for it,
who shal haue it, that the scripture might be fulfilled, which sayeth: They haue
parted my garmentes amonge them, and on my cote haue they cast lottes. This dyd
the soudyers in dede.
25 There stode by the crosse of Iesus, his mother, and his mothers sister Mary,
the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene.
26 Now whan Iesus sawe his mother, and the disciple stondynge by, who he loued,
he sayde vnto his mother: Woman, beholde, that is thy sonne.
27 Then sayde he to the disciple: beholde, that is thy mother. And from that
houre the disciple toke her vnto him.
28 After that whan Iesus knewe that all was perfourmed, that the scripture might
be fulfylled, he sayde: I am a thyrst.
29 There stode a vessell full of vyneger. They fylled a sponge with vyneger and
wonde it aboute with ysope, and helde it to his mouth.
30 Now whan Iesus had receaued the vyneger, he sayde: It is fynished, and bowed
his heade, and gaue vp the goost.
31 The Iewes then, for so moch as it was the daye of preparinge, that ye bodies
shulde not remayne vpon the crosse on the Sabbath, (for ye same Sabbath daye was
greate) besought Pilate, that their legges might be broken, and that they might
be taken downe.
32 Then came the soudyers, and brake the legges of the first, and of the other
that was crucifyed with him.
33 But whan they came to Iesus, and sawe that he was deed allready, they brake
not his legges,
34 but one of the soudyers opened his syde with a speare. And immediatly there
wente out bloude and water.
35 And he that sawe it, bare recorde, and his recorde is true. And he knoweth
that he sayeth true, that ye might beleue also.
36 For this is done, yt the scripture might be fulfylled: Ye shal not breake a
bone of him.
37 And agayne, another scripture sayeth: They shal se him, whom they haue
pearsed.
38 After that, Ioseph of Arimathia, which was a disciple of Iesus (but secretly
for feare of the Iewes) besought Pilate, yt he might take downe the body of
Iesus. And Pilate gaue him lycence.
39 There came also Nicodemus, (which afore came vnto Iesus by night) & brought
of Myrre & Aloes mingled together, aboute an hudreth poude weight.
40 The toke they the body of Iesus, & wonde it with lynnen clothes, and with the
spyces, as the maner of the Iewes is to burye.
41 And by ye place where Iesus was crucified, there was a garde, and in the
garden a new sepulchre, where in was neuer man layed:
42 there layed they Iesus, because of the preparinge daye of ye Iewes, for the
sepulcre was nye at hande.

Chapter 20

1 Vpon one daye of the Sabbath, came Mary Magdalene early (whe it was yet
darcke) vnto the sepulcre, & sawe that the stone was take from the sepulcre.
2 Then ranne she, & came to Symon Peter, and to ye other disciple, whom Iesus
loued, and sayde vnto them: They haue take awaye the LORDE out of the sepulcre,
& we can not tell where they haue layed him.
3 The wete Peter forth and the other disciple, and came to the sepulcre.
4 They rane both together, and that other disciple out rane Peter, and came
first to the sepulcre,
5 and loked in, and sawe the lynnen clothes layed. But he wete not in.
6 The came Symon Peter after him, and wente in to the sepulcre, & sawe the lynne
clothes lye,
7 and the napkyn that was bounde aboute Iesus heade, not layed with the lynnen
clothes, but wrapped together in a place by it self.
8 The wete i also yt other disciple, which came first to ye sepulcre, & he sawe
& beleued:
9 for as yet they knewe not ye scriptures, yt it behoued hi to ryse agayne fro
ye deed.
10 The wete ye disciples againe together.
11 As for Mary, she stode before ye sepulcre & wepte without. Now as she wepte
she loked in to the sepulcre,
12 and sawe two angels in whyte garmentes syttinge, ye one at the heade, & the
other at ye fete, where they had layed the body of Iesus.
13 And they sayde vnto her: Woma, why wepest thou? She saide vnto the: They haue
taken awaye my LORDE, & I wote not where they haue layed hi.
14 And whan she had sayde yt, she turned her self backe, & sawe Iesus stondinge,
& knewe not yt it was Iesus.
15 Iesus sayde vnto her: Woman, why wepest thou? Whom sekest thou? She thought
yt it had bene ye gardener, & sayde vnto him: Syr, yf thou hast borne him hence:
then tell me where thou hast layed him? and I wil fetch hi.
16 Iesus sayde vnto her: Mary. Then turned she her aboute, & sayde vnto him:
Rabboni, yt is to saye: Master.
17 Iesus sayde vnto her: Touche me not, for I am not yet ascended vnto my
father. But go thou yi waye vnto my brethre & saye vnto the: I ascede vp vnto my
father and yor father: to my God, & yor God.
18 Mary Magdalene came, & tolde ye disciples: I haue sene the LORDE, & soch
thinges hath he spoken vnto me.
19 The same Sabbath at eue wha ye disciples were gathered together, and the
dores were shut for feare of ye Iewes, came Iesus, and stode i ye myddes, &
sayde vnto the: Peace be wt you.
20 And wha he had so sayde, he shewed the his hades & his syde. The were ye
disciples glad, yt they sawe ye LORDE.
21 The sayde Iesus vnto the agayne: Peace be with you. Like as my father sent
me, eue so sede I you.
22 And whan he had sayde yt, he brethed vpo the, and sayde vnto the: Receaue the
holy goost.
23 Whose synnes soeuer ye remytte, they are remytted vnto the: and whose synnes
so euer ye retayne, they are retayned.
24 But Thomas one of the twolue which is called Didimus, was not wt the wha
Iesus came.
25 The sayde the other disciples vnto him: We haue sene the LORDE. But he sayde
vnto the: Excepte I se in his handes the prynte of the nales, and put my hade in
to his syde, I wil not beleue.
26 And after eight dayes agayne were his disciples with in, & Thomas wt the. The
came Iesus (wha ye dores were shutt) & stode in the myddes, & sayde: Peace be wt
you.
27 After yt sayde he vnto Thomas: Reach hither yi fynger, and se my handes, and
reach hither yi hade, & put it i to my syde, & be not faithlesse, but beleue.
28 Thomas answered, & sayde vnto him: My LORDE, and my God.
29 Iesus sayde vnto him: Thomas, because thou hast sene me, thou hast beleued.
Blessed are they, that se not, and yet beleue.
30 Many other tokes dyd Iesus before his disciples, which are not wrytte in this
boke.
31 But these are wrytte, yt ye shulde beleue, yt Iesus is Christ the sonne of
God, & that ye thorow beleue might haue life in his name.

Chapter 21

1 After that shewed Iesus himself agayne at the see of Tiberias But on this wyse
shewed he himself.
2 There were together Symo Peter, & Thomas which is called Didimus, & Nathanael
of Cana a cite of Galile, & the sonnes of Zebede, & two other of his disciples.
3 Symon Peter sayde vnto the: I go a fyshinge. They sayde vnto hi: We also wil
go wt the. They wete out, & entred into a shippe straight waye. And yt same
night toke they nothinge.
4 But wha it was now morow, Iesus stode on the shore, but his disciples knewe
not yt it was Iesus.
5 Iesus sayde vnto the: Childre, haue ye eny thinge to eate? They answered
hi:No.
6 He sayde vnto the: Cast out the nett on ye right syde of the shippe, & ye shal
fynde. The they cast out, & coulde nomore drawe it for ye multitude of fishes.
7 The sayde ye disciple who Iesus loued, vnto Peter: It is the LORDE.Whan Simon
Peter herde that is was the LORDE, he gyrde his mantell aboute him (for he was
naked) and sprange in to ye see.
8 But other disciples came by shippe (for they were not farre fro londe, but as
it were two hundreth cubytes) and they drewe the net with the fisshes.
9 Now whan they were come to londe, they sawe coles layed, and fysh theron, and
bred.
10 Iesus sayde vnto the: Bringe hither of the fyshes, that ye haue taken now.
11 Symon Peter stepped forth, and drew the nett to the londe, full of greate
fysshes, an hundreth and thre and fyftie. And for all there were so many, yet
was not the net broken.
12 Iesus sayde vnto them: Come, and dyne. But none of the disciples durst axe
him: Who art thou? For they knewe, that it was the LORDE.
13 Then came Iesus, and toke ye bred, and gaue it the: and the fysshe likewyse.
14 This is now the thirde tyme that Iesus appeared vnto his disciples, after
that he was rysen agayne from the deed.
15 Now wha they had dyned, Iesus sayde vnto Symon Peter: Symo Iohana, louest
thou me more then these do? He sayde vnto him: Yee LORDE, thou knowest yt I loue
the. He sayde vnto him: Fede my labes.
16 He sayde vnto him agayne the seconde tyme: Symo Iohana, louest thou me? He
sayde vnto him: Yee LORDE, thou knowest, yt I loue ye. He sayde vnto him: Fede
my shepe.
17 He saide vnto him ye thirde tyme: Symon Iohana, louest thou me? Peter was
sory, because he sayde vnto him, louest thou me? And he sayde vnto him: LORDE,
thou knowest all thinges, thou knowest, that I loue ye. Iesus sayde vnto him:
Fede my shepe.
18 Verely verely I saye vnto the: Whan thou wast yoge, thou gerdedst thyselfe,
and walkedst whither thou woldest. But wha thou art olde, thou shalt stretch
forth thy handes, and another shal gyrde the, and lede the whither thou woldest
not.
19 But this he sayde, to signifye with what death he shulde glorifye God.Whan he
had spoken this, he sayde vnto him: Folowe me.
20 Peter turned him aboute, and sawe the disciple folowinge, whom Iesus loued, (
which also leaned vpo his brest at the supper, and sayde: LORDE, who is it that
betrayeth the)?
21 Wha Peter sawe him, he sayde vnto Iesus: LORDE, but what shal he do?
22 Iesus sayde vnto him: Yf I wil that he tary tyll I come, what is that to the?
Folowe thou me.
23 Then wente there out a sayenge amonge the brethren: This disciple dyeth not.
And Iesus sayde not vnto him: He dyeth not, but: Yf I wil that he tary tyll I
come, what is that to the?
24 This is the same disciple, which testifyeth of these thinges, and wrote these
thinges, and we knowe that his testimony is true.
25 There are many other thinges also that Iesus dyd, which, yf they shulde be
wrytte euery one, I suppose the worlde shulde not contayne the bokes, that were
to be wrytten.


Acts

Chapter 1

1 The first treatise (deare Theophilus) haue I made of all that Iesus beganne to
do and to teache,
2 vntyll ye daye that he was taken vp, after that he (thorow the holy goost) had
geuen commaundementes to to the Apostles, whom he had chosen:
3 to who also he shewed himself alyue after his passion, by many tokes, and
appeared vnto them fourtye dayes longe, and spake vnto them of the kyngdome of
God.
4 And whan he had gathered them together, he commaunded them that they shulde
not departe from Ierusalem, but to wayte for the promyse of the father, wherof
(sayde he) ye haue herde of me:
5 For Ihon baptysed with water, but ye shalbe baptysed wt ye holy goost, & that
within this few dayes.
6 Now whan they were come together, they axed him, and sayde: LORDE, shalt thou
at this tyme set vp the kyngdome of Israel agayne?
7 But he sayde vnto them: It belongeth not vnto you to knowe the tymes or
seasons, which the father hath kepte in his awne power,
8 but ye shal receaue the power of ye holy goost, which shal come vpon you, and
ye shalbe my witnesses at Ierusalem, and in all Iewrye and Samaria, and vnto the
ende of the earth.
9 And whan he had spoken these thinges, whyle they behelde, he was taken vp, and
a cloude receaued him from their sight.
10 And whyle they loked after him, as he wente in to heauen, beholde, there
stode by them two men in whyte garmentes,
11 which also sayde: Ye men of Galile, Why stonde ye gasynge vp in to heauen?
This Iesus which is take vp from you in to heauen shal come euen so as ye haue
sene him go in to heauen.
12 Then turned they agayne from ye mount that is called Oliuete, which is nye to
Ierusalem, and hath a Sabbath dayes iourney.
13 And whan they came in, they wente vp in to a parler, where abode Peter and
Iames, Ihon and Andrew, Philippe and Thomas, Bartilmew and Mathew, Iames the
sonne of Alpheus, and Simon Zelotes, and Iudas the sonne of Iames.
14 These all contynued with one acorde in prayer and supplicacion, with the
wemen and Mary the mother of Iesu and with his brethren.
15 And in those dayes Peter stode vp in the myddes amonge the disciples, and
sayde: (The company of the names together, was aboute an hundreth and twentye.)
16 Ye men and brethren, this scripture must nedes be fulfylled, which ye holy
goost by the mouth of Dauid spake before of Iudas, which was a gyde of the that
toke Iesus:
17 for he was nombred with vs, and had opteyned the felashippe of this
mynistracion.
18 This same trulye possessed the felde for the rewarde of vnrighteousnes, and
hanged himself, and brast asunder in the myddes, and all his bowels gusshed out.
19 And it is knowne vnto all the that dwell at Ierusalem, in so moch that the
same felde is called in their mother tonge Acheldema, that is to saye, the
bloude felde.
20 For it is wrytten in the boke of psalmes: His habitacion be voyde, and noman
be dwellinge therin. And: His bisshoprike another take.
21 Wherfore amonge these men which haue bene gathered together with vs (all the
tyme that the LORDE Iesus wete out and in amonge vs,
22 begynnynge from the baptyme of Ihon, vntyll ye daye that he was take vp from
vs) must one be a wytnesse with vs of his resurreccion.
23 And they appoynted two (Ioseph called Barsabas, whose syrname was Iustus, and
Mathias.)
24 makinge their prayer and sayenge: Thou LORDE, which knowest the hertes of all
men, shewe whether of these two thou hast chosen,
25 that the one maye take the rowme of this mynistracion and Apostelshippe, from
the which Iudas by transgression fell, that he might go awaye in to his awne
place.
26 And they gaue forth the lottes ouer them, and the lot fell vpon Mathias. And
he was counted with the eleuen Apostles.

Chapter 2

1 And whan the Whit sondaye was fulfylled, they were all with one acorde
together in one place.
2 And sodenly there came a sounde from heauen, as it had bene the comynge of a
mightie wynde, and it fylled the whole house where they sat.
3 And there appeared vnto them clouen tunges, like as they had bene of fyre. And
he sat vpon ech one of them,
4 and they were all fylled with the holy goost. And they beganne to preach with
other tunges, euen as the sprete gaue them vtteraunce.
5 There were dwellinge at Ierusalem Iewes, men that feared God, out of euery
nacion that is vnder heauen.
6 Now whan this voyce came to passe, the multitude came together, and were
astonyed: For euery one herde, that they spake with his awne tunge.
7 They wondred all and marueyled, and sayde amonge them selues: Beholde, are not
all these which speake, of Galile?
8 How heare we the euery one his awne tunge, wherin we were borne?
9 Parthians and Medes, and Elamites, and we that dwell in Mesopotamia, and in
Iewry and Capadocia, Pontus, and Asia,
10 Phrigia and Pamphilia, Egipte, and in the partes of Lybia by Cyren, and
straungers of Rome, Iewes and Proselytes,
11 Cretes and Arabians: we heare them speake with oure awne tunges the greate
workes of God.
12 They were all amased, and wondred, and sayde one to another: What wil this
be?
13 But other mocked them, and sayde: They are full of swete wyne.
14 Then stode Peter vp with the eleuen, and lift vp his voyce, and sayde vnto
them: Ye men of Iewry, and all ye that dwell at Ierusale, be this knowne vnto
you, and let my wordes entre in at youre eares.
15 For these are not dronken, as ye suppose, for it is yet but the thirde houre
of ye daye:
16 but this is it, that was spoke before by the prophet Ioel:
17 And it shal come to passe in the last dayes, sayeth God, I will poure out of
my sprete vpon all flesh, and youre sonnes and youre doughters shal prophecye,
and youre yonge men shal se visions and youre olde men shall dreame dreames,
18 and on my seruauntes and on my handmaydens wyll I poure out of my sprete in
those dayes, & they shal prophecye.
19 And I wil shewe wonders in heauen aboue, and tokens on the earth beneth,
bloude and fyre, and the vapoure of smoke.
20 The Sonne shalbe turned in to darknesse, and the Moone in to bloude, before
that greate and notable daye of the LORDE come.
21 And it shall come to passe, Who so euer shal call vpo the name of the LORDE,
shalbe saued.
22 Ye men of Israel, heare these wordes: Iesus of Nazareth, ye man approued of
God amonge you with miracles, and wonders and tokens, which God dyd by him in
the myddes amonge you, as ye yor selues knowe also,
23 him (after that he was delyuered by the determinate councell and foreknowlege
of God) haue ye taken by the handes of vnrighteous personnes, and crucifyed him,
& slayne him,
24 who God hath raysed vp, and lowsed the sorowes of death, for so moch as it
was vnpossyble that he shulde be holden of it.
25 For Dauid speaketh of him: Afore honde haue I set the LORDE allwayes before
me, for he is on my right hode, that I shulde not be moued.
26 Therfore dyd my hert reioyse, and my tunge was glad: For my flesh also shal
rest in hope.
27 For thou shalt not leaue my soule in hell, nether shalt thou suffer yi Holy
to se corrupcion.
28 Thou hast shewed me the wayes of life, thou shalt make me full of ioye with
thy countenaunce.
29 Ye men and brethren, let me frely speake vnto you of the Patryarke Dauid: For
he is deed and buried, and his sepulcre is with vs vnto this daye.
30 Wherfore now seinge yt he was a prophet, and knewe that God had promised him
with an ooth, that the frute of his loynes shulde syt on his seate,
31 he sawe it before, and spake of the resurreccion of Christ: for his soule was
not left in hell, nether hath his flesh sene corrupcion.
32 This Iesus hath God raysed vp, wherof we all are witnesses.
33 Seynge now that he by the right hande of God is exalted, and hath receaued of
ye father ye promyse of the holy goost, he hath shed forth this, that ye se and
heare.
34 For Dauid is not ascended in to heauen, but he sayde: The LORDE sayde vnto my
LORDE: Syt thou on my righte hande,
35 vntyll I make thine enemies yi fote stole.
36 So therfore let all the house of Israel knowe for a suertye, yt God hath made
this same Iesus (whom ye haue crucified) LORDE and Christ.
37 Whan they herde this, their hert pricked them, and they sayde vnto Peter and
to the other Apostles: Ye men and brethre, What shal we do?
38 Peter sayde onto them: Amede youre selues, and let euery one of you be
baptysed in the name of Iesus Christ, for the remyssion of synnes, and ye shal
receaue the gifte of the holy goost.
39 For this promyse was made vnto you and youre children, and to all that are
farre of, who so euer the LORDE oure God shal call.
40 And wt many other wordes bare he witnesse, and exorted them, and sayde: Saue
youre selues from this vntowarde generacion.
41 They that gladly receaued his preachinge, were baptysed, & the same daye
there were added vnto them aboute thre thousande soules.
42 They contynued in the Apostles doctryne, and in the felashippe, and in
breakynge of bred, and in prayer.
43 And feare came vpo euery soule, and many wonders and tokens were done by ye
Apostles.
44 But all they that beleued, were together, and had all thinges commen.
45 They solde their goodes and possessions, and parted them out amonge all,
acordinge as euery ma had nede.
46 And they contynued daylie with one acorde in the teple, and brake bred in
euery house: they toke their meate with ioye & synglenesse of hert,
47 praysinge God, and had fauoure with all ye people. And the LORDE added to the
congregacion daylie soch as shulde be saued.

Chapter 3

1 Peter and Ihon wente vp together in to the temple aboute the nyenth houre to
praye.
2 And there was a certayne man halt from his mothers wombe, whom they brought
and layed daylie at the gate of the teple, which is called, the Bewtyfull, that
he might axe almesse of them that wete in to the temple.
3 Now whan he sawe Peter and Ihon, that they wolde in to the temple, he desyred
to receaue an almesse.
4 Peter behelde him with Ihon, and sayde: Loke on vs.
5 And he gaue hede vnto them, hopynge to receaue some thinge of them.
6 Howbeit Peter saide: Syluer and golde haue I none: but soch as I haue geue I
the. In the name of Iesus Christ of Nazareth ryse vp & walke.
7 And he toke him by the righte hande and lifte him vp. Immediatly his legges &
ancle bones were made stroge,
8 and he sprange, stode and walked, and entred with them in to the teple,
walkynge, and leapinge and praysinge God.
9 And all the people sawe him walke and prayse God.
10 And they knewe him, yt it was he, which sat for almesse at the bewtyfull gate
of the temple. And they were fylled with wondrynge, and were astonnyed at that,
which had happened vnto hi.
11 But as this halt which was healed helde him to Peter and Ihon, all the people
ranne vnto them in to the porche,which is called Salomos, and wondred.
12 Whan Peter sawe that, he answered vnto the people: Ye men of Israel, why
maruayle ye at this, or why loke ye so at vs, as though we by oure awne power or
deseruynge, had made this man to walke?
13 The God of Abraham and of Isaac, and of Iacob, ye God of oure fathers hath
glorifyed his childe Iesus, whom ye delyuered and denyed in the presence of
Pilate, whan he had iudged him to be lowsed.
14 But ye denyed the holy and iust, and desyred the murthurer to be geuen you,
15 but ye slewe the prynce of life, whom God hath raysed from the deed, of the
which we are witnesses.
16 And thorow ye faith in his name, hath he confirmed his name vpon this man,
whom ye se and knowe: and faith thorow him, hath geue this man this health
before youre eyes.
17 Now deare brethre, I knowe that ye haue done it thorow ignoraunce, as dyd
also youre rulers.
18 But God, which by the mouth of all his prophetes had shewed before, yt his
Christ shulde suffre, hath so fulfilled it.
19 Do penaunce now therfore and turne you, that youre synnes maye be done awaye,
whan the tyme of refreshinge shal come before the presence of the LORDE,
20 and whan he shal sende him, which now before is preached vnto you, euen Iesus
Christ:
21 which must receaue heauen vntyll the tyme that all thinges, which God hath
spoken by the mouth of his holy prophetes sence ye worlde beganne, be restored
agayne.
22 For Moses sayde vnto ye fathers: A prophet shal the LORDE youre God rayse vp
vnto you, euen from amoge youre brethren, like vnto me: him shal ye heare, in
all that he shal saye vnto you.
23 And it shal come to passe, what soule soeuer shal not heare the same prophet,
shal be destroyed from amonge the people.
24 And all the prophetes from Samuel and thence forth as many as haue spoken,
haue likewyse tolde of these dayes.
25 Ye are the children of the prophetes and of the couenaunt, which God made
vnto or fathers, whan he sayde vnto Abraha: Thorow yi sede shal all ye nacios of
ye earth be blessed.
26 First vnto you hath God raysed vp his childe Iesus, & sent hi vnto you, to
blesse you yt euery one shulde turne fro his wickednesse.

Chapter 4

1 But as they spake to ye people, there came vnto the the prestes and the rulers
of the teple, and the Saduces,
2 who it greued yt they taught the people, & preached in Iesu ye resurreccion
fro the deed
3 and they layed handes vpon them, and put the in holde tyll the morow: for it
was now euentyde.
4 Howbeit many of the which herde the worde, beleued, and the nombre of ye men
was aboute fyue thousande.
5 And it chaunced on ye morow, that their rulers and Elders and scrybes
6 (as Annas ye hye prest and Caiphas, and Ihon & Alexander, and as many as were
of the hye prestes kynred) gathered them selues together at Ierusalem,
7 and set them before them, and axed them: By what auctorite, Or in what name
haue ye done this?
8 Peter full of the holy goost, sayde vnto them: Ye rulers of the people, and ye
Elders of Israel,
9 Yf we this daye be examyned concernynge this good dede vpon the sicke ma, by
what meanes he is made whole,
10 be it knowne then vnto you and to all the people of Israel, that in ye name
of Iesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, who God hath raysed vp from the
deed, stodeth this man here before you whole.
11 This is the stone refused of you buylders, which is become the heade corner
stone,
12 nether is there saluacion in eny other: Ner yet also is there geue vnto me
eny other name, wherin we must be saued.
13 They sawe the boldnesse of Peter & Ihon and marueyled, for they were sure yt
they were vnlerned men and laye people. And they knewe the also, that they were
wt Iesu.
14 As for the man yt was made whole, they sawe hi stodinge by the, & coulde not
saye agaynst it.
15 Then comaunded they the to stode asyde out of ye councell, & comened amoge
the selues,
16 & saide: What shal we do to these me? for a manyfest token is done by them,
and is openly knowne vnto the that dwell at Ierusalem, and we can not denye it.
17 But that it breake out no farther amoge the people, let vs threate them
earnestly, that hence forth they speake of this name vnto noman.
18 And they called them, and comaunded the, that in eny wyse they shulde not
speake ner teache in the name of Iesu.
19 But Peter & Ihon answered, and sayde vnto the: Iudge ye youre selues, whether
it be right before God, that we shulde be more obedient vnto you, then vnto God.
20 We can not chose, but speake that we haue sene & herde.
21 But they threatened them, and let them go, and founde nothinge how to punyshe
them because of ye people: for they all praysed God because of that, which was
done.
22 For the man, vpon whom this token of health was done, was aboue fourtye yeare
olde.
23 And whan they were let go, they came to their folowes, and tolde them what ye
hye prestes and Elders sayde vnto them.
24 Wha they herde that, they lifte vp their voyce wt one acorde vnto God, and
sayde: LORDE, thou that art the God which made heauen and earth, and the see,
and all that therin is thou
25 that by the mouth of Dauid thy seruaut hast sayde: Why do the Heythe rage?
and ye people ymagin vayne thinges?
26 The kynges of the earth stonde vp, and the prynces haue gathered them selues
together agaynst ye LORDE, and agaynst his. Christ.
27 Of a trueth agaynst thy holy childe Iesus, whom thou hast anoynted, both
Herode & Pontius Pilate with the Heythen and people of Israel, haue gathered the
selues together,
28 to do what soeuer thy hande and thy councell determyned before to be done.
29 And now LORDE, beholde their threatenynges, and graunte vnto thy seruauntes
with all stedfast boldnesse to speake thy worde:
30 and stretch out thine hande, that healinge and tokes and wonders maye be done
by the name of thy holy childe Iesus.
31 And wha they had prayed, the place moued where they were gathered together, &
they were all fylled with ye holy goost, & spake the worde of God boldly.
32 The multitude of them that beleued, were of one hert and of one soule. Also
none of them sayde of his goodes, that they were his awne, but had all thinges
comen.
33 And with greate power gaue the Apostles witnesse of the resurreccion of the
LORDE Iesu, and greate grace was with them all.
34 Nether was there eny amonge them that lacked. For as many as were possessers
of londes or houses, solde the and brought ye money of the goodes that were
solde,
35 and layed it at the Apostles fete. And distribucion was made vnto euery ma,
acordinge as he had nede.
36 Ioses which was also called of ye Apostles, Barnabas (that is to saye, the
sonne of consolacion) a Leuite, of the countre of Cypers,
37 had londe, and solde it, & brought the money, and layed it at the Apostles
fete.

Chapter 5

1 But a certayne man named Ananias with Saphira his wife, solde his possession,
2 and kepte awaye parte of the money (his wife knowinge of it) and broughte one
parte, & layed it at the Apostles fete.
3 But Peter sayde: Ananias, Wherfore hath Sathan fylled thine hert, that thou
shuldest lye vnto the holy goost, and withdrawe awaye parte of the money of the
lyuelod?
4 Mightest thou not haue kepte it, whan thou haddest it? And whan it was solde,
the money was also in thy power: Why hast thou then conceaued this thinge in
thine hert? Thou hast not lyed vnto me, but vnto God.
5 Whan Ananias herde these wordes, he fell downe, & gaue vp the goost. And there
came a greate feare vpon all the that herde of this.
6 The yonge men rose vp, and put him asyde, and caried him out, and buried him.
7 And it fortuned as it were aboute ye space of thre houres after, his wife came
in, and knewe not what was done.
8 But Peter answered vnto her. Tell me, solde ye the londe for somoch? She
sayde: Yee, for so moch.
9 Peter sayde vnto her: Why haue ye agreed together, to tempte the sprete of the
LORDE? Beholde, the fete of the which haue buried thy hussbande, are at the
dore, & shal carye the out.
10 And immediatly she fell downe at his fete, and gaue vp the goost. Then came
in the yonge men, and founde her deed, and caried her out, and buried her by hir
hussbade.
11 And there came a greate feare ouer the whole congregacion, and ouer all the
that herde it.
12 Many tokens and wonders were done amonge the people by the hades of the
Apostles (and they were all together with one acorde in Salomons porche:
13 but of other there durst no man ioyne him self vnto the, neuertheles the
people helde moch of them.
14 The multitude of the men and women that beleued in the LORDE, grewe more and
more)
15 In so moch that they brought out the sycke in to the stretes, and layed them
vpon beddes and barowes, that at the leest waye the shadowe of Peter (whan he
came by) might ouershadowe some of the.
16 There came many also out of ye cities rounde aboute vnto Ierusalem, and
brought the sicke and the that were vexed with vncleane spretes, and they were
healed euery one.
17 But the hye prest rose vp, and all they yt were with him, which is the secte
of the Saduces, and were full of indignacion,
18 & layed handes on the Apostles, and put them in the comon preson.
19 But the angell of ye LORDE by night opened the preson dores, and brought the
out, and sayde:
20 Go youre waye and steppe vp, and speake in the temple to the people all the
wordes of this life.
21 Whan they herde that, they entred in to the temple early in the mornynge: and
taught.But the hye prest came, and they yt were with him, and called the
councell together, & all ye Elders of the children of Israel, and sent to the
preson to fet them.
22 The mynisters came and founde them not in the preson, came agayne, and tolde,
23 and sayde:The preson founde we shut with all diligence, and the kepers
stondinge without before the dores: but wha we had opened, we founde noman
therin.
24 Whan the hye prest, and the rulers of the temple and the other hye prestes
herde these wordes, they douted of them, whervnto this wolde growe.
25 Then came there one, which tolde them: Beholde, the men that ye put in
preson, are in the temple, stondinge and teachinge the people.
26 Then wete ye rulers with their mynisters, and fetched them without violence:
for they feared the people, lest they shulde haue bene stoned.
27 And whan they had brought them, they set the before the councell. And the hye
prest axed them,
28 and sayde: Dyd not we comaunde you strately, that ye shulde not teache in
this name. And beholde, ye haue fylled Ierusalem with youre doctryne, and ye
intede to brynge this mans bloude vpon vs.
29 But Peter and the Apostles answered, and sayde: We ought more to obeye God
then men.
30 The God of oure fathers hath raysed vp Iesus, who ye slewe, and hanged on
tre.
31 Him hath the righte hande of God exalted, to be a prynce and Sauioure, to
geue repentaunce and forgeuenesse of synnes vnto Israel.
32 And we are his recordes of these wordes, and the holy goost, who God hath
geuen vnto the that obeye him.
33 Wha they herde that, it wente thorow the hertes of them, and they thoughte to
slaye them.
34 Then stode there vp in ye councell a pharyse, named Gamaliel, a scribe, had
in greate reputacion before all ye people, and bad put the Apostles asyde a
litle,
35 and sayde vnto them: Ye men of Israel, take hede to youre selues, what ye do
as touchinge these men.
36 Before these dayes rose vp one Theudas, boostinge himself. (And there cleued
vnto him a nobre of me, aboute a foure hundreth) which was slayne, and all they
yt enclyned vnto him, were scatred abrode, and brought to naught.
37 After this stode vp Iudas of Galile in ye dayes of trybute, and drewe awaye
moch people after him, & he also perished, & all they that enclyned vnto him,
are scatred abrode.
38 And now I saye vnto you: refrayne yor selues fro these men, and let the go.
Yf this councell or worke be of me, it wil come to naught:
39 but yf it be of God, ye are not able to destroye it, lest ye be founde to be
the men, that wil stryue agaynst God.
40 Then they agreed vnto him, and called the Apostles, and bet them, and
commaunded them, that they shulde speake nothinge in the name of Iesu, and let
them go.
41 But they departed from the presence of the councell, reioysinge, that they
were worthy to suffre rebuke for his names sake.
42 And daylie in the temple and in euery house they ceassed not, to teache and
to preache the Gospell of Iesus Christ.

Chapter 6

1 In those dayes whan the nombre of the disciples increased, there arose a
grudge amoge the Grekes agaynst the Hebrues, because their wyddowes were not
loked vpon in the daylie handreachinge.
2 Then the twolue called the multitude of the disciples together, and sayde: It
is not mete that we shulde leaue the worde of God, and to serue at the tables.
3 Wherfore brethren, loke out amonge you seue men, that are of honeste reporte,
and full of the holy goost and wyssdome, whom we maye appoynte to this nedefull
busynes.
4 But we wil geue oure selues vnto prayer, and to the mynistracion of the worde
of God.
5 And the sayenge pleased the whole multitude. And they chose Steuen, a man full
of fayth and of the holy goost, and Philippe, and Procorus, and Nicanor, and
Thimon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas the Proselite of Antioche.
6 These they set before ye Apostles, and they prayed, and layed their handes
vpon them.
7 And the worde of God increased, and the nombre of the disciples multiplied
greatly at Ierusalem. And there were many prestes also obedient vnto the fayth.
8 Steuen full of faith and power, dyd wonders and greate tokens amonge the
people.
9 Then arose there certayne of the synagoge, which is called (the synagoge) of
ye Libertynes, & of the Cyrenites, and of the Alexadrines, and of the yt were of
Celicia and Asia, & disputed with Steue,
10 and they coulde not resiste the wyssdome and the sprete, out of the which he
spake.
11 Then sent they in certayne men, that sayde: We haue herde him speake
blasphemous wordes agaynst Moses, and agaynst God.
12 And they moued the people, and the Elders and the scrybes, and came vpon him,
& caught him,
13 and brought him before the councell, and set false witnesses there, which
sayde: This man ceasseth not to speake blasphemous wordes agaynst this holy
place and the lawe.
14 For we herde him saye: Iesus of Nazareth shall destroye this place, and
chaunge the ordinaunces which Moses gaue vs.
15 And all they that sat in the councell, loked vpo him and sawe his face as the
face of an angell.

Chapter 7

1 Then sayde the hye prest: Is it eue so?
2 He sayde: Deare brethren and fathers, herken to, The God of glorye appeared
vnto or father Abraha, whyle he was yet in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in
Haran,
3 and sayde vnto him: Get ye out of thy coutre, and fro thy kynred, and come
into a londe which I wil shewe ye.
4 The wente he out of the lande of the Caldees, and dwelt in Haran. And from
thece, whan his father was deed, he brought him ouer in to this londe (where ye
dwell now)
5 and gaue him no enheritauce therin, no not ye bredth of a fote: and promysed
him, that he wolde geue it him to possesse, and to his sede after him, whan as
yet he had no childe.
6 But thus sayde God vnto him: Thy sede shalbe a straunger in a straunge londe,
and they shal make bonde men of them, and intreate the euell foure hundreth
yeares:
7 and ye people whom they shal serue, wil I iudge, sayde God. And after that
shal they go forth, and serue me in this place.
8 And he gaue him the couenaut of circucision. And he begat Isaac, and
circucised him the eight daye. And Isaac begat Iacob and Iacob begat the twolue
Patriarkes.
9 And the Patriarkes had indignacion at Ioseph, and solde hi in to Egipte. And
God was with him,
10 and delyuered him out of all his troubles, and gaue him fauoure ad wyssdome i
the sight of Pharao kynge of Egipte which made him prynce ouer Egipte and ouer
all his house.
11 But there came a derth ouer all the londe of Egipte and Canaan, and a greate
trouble, and oure fathers founde no sustenaunce.
12 But Iacob herde that there was corne in Egipte, and sent oure fathers out the
first tyme.
13 And at the seconde tyme was Ioseph knowne of his brethren, and Iosephs kynred
was made knowne vnto Pharao.
14 But Ioseph sent out, and caused his father and all his kynred to be broughte,
eue thre score and fyftene soules.
15 And Iacob wente downe in to Egipte, and dyed, both he and oure fathers
16 and were brought ouer vnto Siche, and layed in the sepulcre, that Abraham
boughte for money of the children of Hemor at Sichem.
17 Now wha the tyme of the promes drue nye (which God had sworne vnto Abraha)
the people grewe and multiplied in Egipte,
18 tyll there rose another kynge, which knewe not of Ioseph.
19 The same dealte suttely wt oure kynred, and intreated oure fathers euell and
made them to cast out the yonge children, that they shulde not remayne alyue.
20 At the same tyme was Moses borne, and was a proper childe before God, and was
norished thre monethes in his fathers house.
21 But whan he was cast out, Pharaos doughter toke him vp, and norished him vp
for hir awne sonne.
22 And Moses was learned in all maner wyssdome of the Egipcians, and was mightie
in dedes & wordes.
23 But whan he was fourtye yeare olde, it came in to his mynde to vyset his
brethren the children of Israel.
24 And whan he sawe one of them suffre wroge, he helped him, and delyuered him,
that had the harme done vnto him, and slewe the Egipcian.
25 But he thoughte that his brethren shulde haue vnderstonde, how that God by
his hande shulde saue the, howbeit they vnderstode it not.
26 And on the nexte daye he shewed himself vnto them as they stroue together,
and wolde haue set them at one agayne, and sayde: Syrs, ye are brethren, why
hurte ye one another?
27 But he that dyd his neghboure wronge, thrust him awaye, and sayde: Who made
the a ruler and iudge ouer vs?
28 Wilt thou slaye me also, as thou slewest the Egipcian yesterdaye?
29 But Moses fled at that sayenge, and was a straunger in the lande of Madian,
where he begat two sonnes.
30 And after fourtye yeares, the angell of ye LORDE appeared vnto him vpon mount
Sina, in a flamme of fyre in a busshe.
31 Wha Moses sawe it, he wondred at the sighte. But as he drue nye to beholde,
ye voyce of ye LORDE came vnto him:
32 I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and
the God of Iacob. Howbeit Moses trebled, and durst not beholde.
33 But ye LORDE sayde vnto hi: Put of thy shues from thy fete, for ye place
where thou stondest, is an holy grounde.
34 I haue well sene the trouble of my people in Egipte, and haue herde their
gronynge, and am come downe to delyuer them. And now come, I wil sende the in to
Egipte.
35 This Moses, whom they refused, and sayde: Who made ye a ruler and iudge ouer
vs? him had God sent to be a ruler & delyuerer by the hande of the angell, that
appeared vnto him in the busshe.
36 The same broughte them out, and dyd wonders and tokens in Egipte, and in the
reed see, and in ye wyldernesse fourtye yeares.
37 This is that Moses, which sayde vnto the children of Israel: A prophet shal
the LORDE youre God rayse vp vnto you euen from amonge youre brethren, like vnto
me. Him shal ye heare.
38 This is he, that was in the congregacion in the wyldernesse with the angell,
which talked with him, vpo mount Sina, and with oure fathers. This man receaued
the worde of life to geue vnto vs,
39 vnto whom oure fathers wolde not be obediet, but thrust him fro the, and in
their hertes turned backe agayne in to Egipte,
40 and sayde vnto Aaron: Make vs goddes to go before vs, for we can not tell
what is become of this Moses, yt broughte vs out of the lande of Egipte.
41 And they made a calfe at the same tyme, and offred sacrifice vnto the ymage,
and reioysed in the workes of their awne handes.
42 But God turned himselfe, & gaue them vp, so that they worshipped the hooste
of heaue, as it is wrytten in the boke of the prophetes: O ye house of Israel,
gaue ye me sacrifices and catel those fortye yeares in the wyldernesse?
43 And ye toke vnto you ye tabernacle of Moloch, and the starre of youre god
Remphan, ymages which ye youre selues made to worshippe the. And I wil cast you
out beyonde Babilon.
44 Oure fathers had the tabernacle of witnesse in ye wyldernesse, like as he
appoynted them, whan he spake vnto Moses, that he shulde make it (acordinge to
the patrone, yt he had sene.)
45 which oure fathers also receaued, and brought it with Iosue into the londe
that the Heythe had in possession, whom God droue out before the face of oure
fathers, vntyll the tyme of Dauid,
46 which founde fauoure with God, and desyred that he might fynde a tabernacle
for the God of Iacob.
47 But Salomon buylte hi an house.
48 Howbeit ye Hyest of all dwelleth not in temples that are made with handes: As
he sayeth by the prophete:
49 Heaue is my seate, and the earth is my fote stole. What house then wil ye
buylde vnto me? sayeth the LORDE: Or which is the place of my rest?
50 Hath not my hande made all these thinges?
51 Ye styffnecked & of vncircumcysed hertes and eares, ye allwaye resiste the
holy goost: Eue as yor fathers dyd, so do ye also.
52 Which of the prophetes haue not yor fathers persecuted? And they slewe the,
which tolde before of the comynge of ye righteous, whose traytours and
murthurers ye are now become.
53 Ye receaued the lawe by the mynistracion of angels, and haue not kepte it.
54 Whan they herde this, it wente thorow ye hertes of the, and they gnasshed vpo
him with their tethe.
55 But he beynge full of the holy goost, loked vp towarde heauen, and sawe the
glorye of God, and Iesus stodinge on the righte hande of God,
56 and sayde: Beholde, I se the heauens open, and the sonne of ma stondinge on
ye righte honde of God.
57 But they cried out with a loude voyce, & stopped their eares, and rane
violently vpon him all at once,
58 and thrust him out of the cite, and stoned him. And ye witnesses layed downe
their clothes at the fete of a yonge man, which was called Saul.
59 And they stoned Steuen, which cryed, & sayde: LORDE Iesu, receaue my sprete.
60 And he kneled downe, & cried with a loude voyce: LORDE, laye not this synne
to their charge. And wha he had thus spoken, he fell a slepe.

Chapter 8

1 Saul had pleasure in his death. At ye same tyme there was a greate persecucion
ouer the congregacion at Ierusale. And they were all scatered abrode in the
regions of Iewrye & Samaria, excepte the Apostles.
2 As for Steuen, men yt feared God dressed him, and made greate lamentacion ouer
him.
3 But Saul made hauocke of the congregacion, entred in to euery house, and drue
out men & wemen, & delyuered the to preson.
4 They now yt were scatered abrode wete aboute & preached the worde.
5 The came Philippe in to a cite of Samaria, and preached Christ vnto them.
6 And the people gaue hede with one acorde vnto ye thinges that Philip spake,
hearinge him, and seynge the tokes that he dyd.
7 For the vncleane spretes cryed loude, and departed out of many yt were
possessed. And many that were sicke of the palsie and lame, were healed.
8 And there was greate ioye in the same cite.
9 But afore there was in ye same cite a certayne ma, called Simon, which vsed
witche craft, and bewitched ye people of Samaria, sayenge, that he was a man
which coulde do greate thinges.
10 And they all regarded him from the leest vnto ye greatest, & sayde: This is
the power of God which is greate.
11 But they regarded him, because that of longe tyme he had bewitched them with
his sorcery.
12 Howbeit whan they beleued Philips preachinge of ye kyngdome of God, and of
the name of Iesu Christ, they were baptysed both me & weme.
13 Then Symon himself beleued also, and was baptysed, and cleued vnto Philippe.
And wha he sawe the dedes and tokens that were done, he wondred.
14 Whan the Apostles which were at Ierusalem, herde, that Samaria had receaued
ye worde of God, they sent vnto the Peter and Ihon.
15 Which, wha they were come, prayed for the, yt they might receaue the holy
goost.
16 For as yet he was come vpon none of them but they were baptysed onely in the
name of Christ Iesu.
17 Then layed they their hades on them, and they receaued the holy goost.
18 But whan Simon sawe, that by the layenge on of the Apostles hades ye holy
goost was geuen, he offred the money,
19 and sayde: Geue me also this power, that, on whomsoeuer I put the hodes, he
maye receaue the holy goost.
20 Howbeit Peter sayde vnto him: Perishe thou with thy money, because thou
thinkest that ye gifte of God maye be optayned with money.
21 Thou shalt haue nether parte ner felashipe in this worde, for yi hert is not
righte before God.
22 Repente therfore of this yi wickednesse, and praye vnto God, yf happly the
thought of thy hert maye be forgeue ye.
23 For I se, yt thou art full of bytter gall, and wrapped in wt
vnrighteousnesse.
24 Then answered Simon, & sayde: Praye ye vnto the LORDE for me, yt none of
these thinges wherof ye haue spoken, come vpon me.
25 And they, wha they had testified and spoke the worde of the LORDE, turned
agayne to Ierusalem, and preached the Gospell in many townes of the Samaritanes.
26 But the angell of the LORDE spake vnto Philippe, and sayde: Aryse, & go
towarde the South, vnto the waye that goeth downe from Ierusalem vnto Gaza,
which is deserte.
27 And he rose, and wente on. And beholde, a ma of the Morians lode (a
chamberlayne and of auctorite with Candace ye quene of the londe of the Morians)
which had the rule of all hir treasuries, ye same came to Ierusale to worshipe.
28 And returned home agayne, and satt vpon his charet, and red the prophet Esay.
29 The sprete sayde vnto Philippe: Go neare, and ioyne thy selfe to yonder
charet.
30 The ranne Philippe vnto him, and herde him rede the prophet Esay, and sayde:
Vnderstodest thou what thou readest?
31 He sayde: How can I, excepte some ma enfourme me?And he desyred Philippe,
that he wolde come vp, and syt with him.
32 The tenoure of the scripture which he red, was this: He was led as a shepe to
be slayne, and as a lambe voycelesse before his sherer, so opened he not his
mouth.
33 In his humblenesse is his iudgment exalted. Who shal declare his generacion?
for his life is taken awaye from the earth.
34 Then answered the chamberlayne vnto Philippe, and sayde: I praye the, of whom
speaketh the prophet this? of himselfe, or of some other man?
35 Philippe opened his mouth, and beganne at this scripture, and preached him
the Gospell of Iesus.
36 And as they wete on their waye, they came to a water. And the chamberlayne
sayde: Beholde, here is water, what hyndereth me to be baptysed?
37 Philippe sayde: Yf thou beleue from thy whole herte, thou mayest. He
answered, and sayde: I beleue, that Iesus Christ is the sonne of God.
38 And he commaunded to holde styll the charet, and they wente downe in to the
water, both Philippe and the chamberlayne. And he baptysed him.
39 But whan they were come vp out of the water, the sprete of the LORDE toke
Philippe awaye. And the Chamberlayne sawe him nomore. But he wente on his waye
reioysinge.
40 As for Philippe, he was founde at Assdod, and walked aboute, and preached the
Gospell vnto all the cities, tyll he came to Cesarea.

Chapter 9

1 Saul was yet breathinge out threatnynges and slaughter agaynst the disciples
of the LORDE. And wente vnto ye hye preste,
2 and desyred of him letters to Damascon vnto the synagoges, that yf he foude
eny of this waye (whether they were men or wemen) he mighte brynge the bounde
vnto Ierusalem.
3 And as he was goinge on his iourney, it fortuned, that he came nye vnto
Damasco, and sodenly there shyned rounde aboute hi a light fro heaue,
4 and he fell to the earth, and herde a voyce, which sayde vnto him: Saul Saul
why persecutest thou me?
5 He sayde: LORDE, who art thou? The LORDE sayde: I am Iesus, who thou
persecutest. It shalbe harde for ye to kycke agaynst the prycke.
6 And he both tremblinge and astonnyed, sayde: LORDE what wilt thou that I shal
do? The LORDE sayde vnto him: Aryse, and go into the cite, there shal it be
tolde the what thou shalt do.
7 As for ye me that iourneyed wt him, they stode and were amased: for they herde
a voyce, but sawe noman.
8 Saul rose from the earth, and whan he had opened his eyes, he sawe noman.
Neuertheles they toke him by the honde, & broughte him to Damasco:
9 and he was thre dayes without sighte, and nether ate ner dranke.
10 At Damascon there was a disciple named Ananias, and vnto him sayde the LORDE
in a vision: Ananias And he sayde: beholde, here am I LORDE.
11 The LORDE sayde vnto him: Aryse, and go in to the strete which is called
straight, and axe in the house of Iuda after one called Saul of Tharsis: for
beholde, he prayeth,
12 & hath sene in a vision a ma named Ananias comynge vnto him, & layenge the
hade vpo him, that he mighte receaue his sighte.
13 Ananias answered: LORDE, I haue herde by many of this mau, how moch euell he
hath done to thy sayntes at Ierusale.
14 And here hath he auctorite of the hye prestes, to bynde all those yt call
vpon thy name.
15 The LORDE sayde vnto him: Go thy waye, for this man is a chosen vessell vnto
me, that he maye beare my name before the Heythen, and before kynges, and before
the children of Israel.
16 I wil shewe him, how greate thinges he must suffre for my names sake.
17 And Ananias wente his waye, and came in to the house, and layed the handes
vpon him, and sayde: Brother Saul, the LORDE which appeared vnto ye in the waye
as thou camest, hath sent me, that thou mightest receaue thy sight, and be
fylled with the holy goost.
18 And immediatly there fell from his eyes as it had bene scales, and he
receaued his sighte, and rose, and was baptysed,
19 and toke meate, and was conforted.Then was Saul a certayne dayes with the
disciples that were at Damascon.
20 And straight waye he preached Christ in the synagoges, how that he was ye
sonne of God.
21 But all they that herde him, were amased, and sayde: Is not this he, which at
Ierusalem spoyled all those that called on his name? and came hither to the
intent that he shulde brynge them bounde vnto the hye prestes?
22 But Saul increased in strength, & cofounded ye Iewes which dwelt at Damascon,
and affirmed yt this was very Christ.
23 And after many dayes the Iewes helde a councell together to kyll him.
24 But it was tolde Saul, that they layed wayte for him. And they wayted at ye
gates daye & night, that they might kyll him.
25 Then the disciples toke him by nighte, & put him thorow the wall, and let him
downe in a baskett.
26 But whan Saul came to Ierusalem, he assayed to ioyne himself to ye disciples.
And they were all afrayed of him, and beleued not, yt he was a disciple.
27 Neuertheles Barnabas toke him, and broughte him to the Apostles, and tolde
them how he had sene the LORDE in the waye, and how he spake to him, & how he
had done boldly at Damascon in the name of Iesu.
28 And he was with them, and wente out and in at Ierusale,
29 and quyte him selfe boldly in ye name of ye LORDE Iesu. He spake also, and
disputed with ye Grekes. But they wete aboute to slaye him.
30 Whan the brethren knewe yt, they brought him to Cesarea, and sent him forth
to Tharsis.
31 So the congregacions had rest thorow out all Iewry, and Galile, and Samaria,
& were edified, and walked in the feare of the LORDE, and were fylled with the
comforte of the holy goost.
32 It chaunced that as Peter walked thorow all quarters, he came also vnto ye
sayntes which dwelt at Lydda.
33 There founde he a man named Eneas, which had lyen vpon his bedd eight yeares
sicke of ye palsye.
34 And Peter sayde vnto him: Eneas, Iesus Christ make the whole, aryse, and make
thy bedd for yi self. And he arose immediatly.
35 And all they that dwelt at Lydda and at Sarona, sawe him, and turned vnto the
LORDE.
36 At Ioppa there was a certayne woman that was a disciple, named Tabitha, which
by interpretacion is called Dorcas: ye same was full of good workes and almesse
dedes, which she dyd.
37 But it chaunced at the same tyme, that she was sicke, and dyed. Then wasshed
they her, and layed her in a chaber.
38 But for so moch as Lydda was nye vnto Ioppa, and the disciples herde that
Peter was there, they sent two men vnto him, and desyred him, yt he wolde take
it for no grefe to come vnto them.
39 Peter rose, and came with the. And wha he was come, they broughte him in to
the chamber, and all the wyddowes stode rounde aboute him, wepynge, and shewed
him the cotes and garmetes, which Dorcas made whyle she was with them.
40 And wha Peter had put them all forth, he kneled downe, made his prayer, and
turned him vnto the body, and sayde: Tabitha, ryse vp. And she opened hir eyes:
and whan she sawe Peter she sat hir downe agayne.
41 But he gaue her the hande, and lifte her vp, and called the sayntes and the
wedowes, and shewed her there alyue.
42 And it was knowne thorow out all Ioppa, & many beleued on ye LORDE.
43 And it fortuned, yt he taried a loge season at Ioppa by one Simo, which was a
tanner.

Chapter 10

1 There was a man at Cesarea, named Cornelius (a captayne of ye copany, which is
called ye Italianysh)
2 a deuoute man, & one that feared God wt all his house, & gaue moch almesse to
ye people, and prayed God allwaye.
3 The same sawe in a vision openly (aboute the nyenth houre of the daye) an
angell of God entringe in to him, and sayenge vnto him: Cornelius.
4 He loked vpon him, and was afrayed, and sayde: LORDE, what is it? He sayde
vnto him: Thy prayers & thine allmesses are come vp in to remebraunce before
God.
5 And now sende men vnto Ioppa, & call for Simo, whose syrname is Peter,
6 which is at lodginge with one Symon a tanner, whose house lyeth by ye see
syde: he shal tell ye, what thou oughtest to do.
7 And wha the angell which spake to Cornelius, was departed, he called two of
his housholde seruauntes, & a deuoute soudyer, of the that wayted vpon him:
8 and tolde them all, and sent the to Ioppa.
9 On the nexte daye after whan these were goinge on their iourney, and came nye
vnto the cite, Peter wente vp in to a chamber to praye aboute the sixte houre.
10 And whan he was hogrie, he wolde haue eate. But whyle they made ready for
him, he fell into a traunce,
11 and sawe heaue open, and a vessell comynge downe vnto him, as it had bene a
greate lynne clothe, knytt at the foure corners, and was let downe to ye earth,
12 wherin were all maner of foure foted beestes of the earth, & wylde beestes,
and wormes, and foules of the ayre.
13 And there came a voyce vnto him: Ryse Peter, slaye, & eate.
14 But Peter sayde: Oh no, LORDE, for I neuer ate eny commen or vncleane thinge.
15 And the voyce spake vnto him agayne ye secode tyme: What God hath clensed, yt
make not thou vncleane.
16 This was done thryse. And ye vessell was receaued vp agayne in to heauen.
17 But whyle Peter was combred in him selfe, what maner of vision this shulde be
which he had sene, beholde, the men yt were sent from Cornelius, enquered after
Simos house, and stode before the dore,
18 and called, and axed whether Simon (whose syrname was Peter) were lodged
there.
19 Whyle Peter was musinge of the vision, the sprete sayde vnto him:beholde, the
men seke the.
20 Aryse therfore, and get the downe, & go with the, and doute not, for I haue
sent them.
21 Then wente Peter downe to the men, yt were sent vnto him from Cornelius, and
sayde: lo, I am he whom ye seke: what is ye cause, wherfore ye are come?
22 They sayde: Cornelius the captayne, a iust man and one that feareth God, and
of good reporte amoge all the people of the Iewes, was warned by an holy angell,
to sende for the in to his house, and to heare wordes of the.
23 Then called he them in, and lodged them.The nexte daye after wente Peter
forth with them, and certayne brethren of Ioppa bare him company.
24 And ye daye folowinge came they to Cesarea. Cornelius wayted for the, and had
called together his kynssfolkes and speciall frendes.
25 And as it chaunced yt Peter came in, Cornelius mett him, and fell downe at
his fete, & worshipped him.
26 But Peter toke him vp, and sayde: Stonde vp, I am a man also.
27 And as he talked wt him, he wente in, and founde many that were come
together,
28 and he sayde vnto them: Ye knowe, that it is not laufull for a man beynge a
Iewe to ioyne him selfe or to come to a straunger. But God hath shewed me, yt I
shulde call no ma comen or vncleane.
29 Therfore haue I not douted to come, as soone as I was sent for. I axe you
therfore, for what intent haue ye sent for me?
30 Cornelius sayde: It is now foure dayes agoo, then fasted I, and at the nyenth
houre I prayed in my house, and beholde, there stode a ma before me in a bryghte
clothinge,
31 and sayde: Cornelius, yi prayer is herde, and thine allmesse dedes are had in
remebraunce iu the sighte of God.
32 Sende therfore to Ioppa, and call for one Simon (whose syrname is Peter)
which is at lodginge in ye house of Simon ye taner, by the see syde: ye same wha
he commeth, shal speake vnto ye.
33 Then sent I vnto the immediatly, and thou hast done well, that thou art come.
Now are we all here presente before God, to heare all thinges that are
commaunded the of God.
34 Peter opened his mouth, & sayde: Now perceaue I of a trueth, that God hath no
respecte of personnes,
35 but in all people he yt feareth him, and worketh righteousnes, is accepted
vnto him.
36 Ye knowe of ye preachinge that God sent vnto the children of Israel,
preachinge thorow Iesus Christ (which is LORDE ouer all)
37 which preachinge was published thorow out all Iewry, and begane in Galile
after ye baptyme that Ihon preached,
38 how God anoynted the same Iesus of Nazareth with the holy goost and wt power,
which wente aboute, & dyd good, and healed all those that were oppressed of the
deuell, for God was with him.
39 And we are witnesses of all that he dyd in the londe of the Iewes, & at
Ierusalem. Whom they slewe, and hanged on tre.
40 Him God raysed vp on the thirde daye, and caused him be openly shewed,
41 not to all the people, but to ye chosen witnesses of God euen vnto vs, which
ate & dronke with him, after he was rysen vp from the deed.
42 And he commaunded vs to preach vnto the people, and to testifye, that it is
he which is ordeyned of God a iudge of the lyuynge and of the deed.
43 Of him beare all the prophetes wytnesse, that thorow his name all they yt
beleue in him, shal receaue remyssion of synnes.
44 Whyle Peter was yet speakynge these wordes, the holy goost fell vpo all the
that herkened vnto the worde.
45 And the faithfull of the circucision which came with Peter, were astonnyed,
because that the gifte of ye holy goost was shed out also vpon the Heythen.
46 For they herde that they spake with tunges, and magnified God. The answered
Peter:
47 Maye eny man forbydde water, that these shulde not be baptysed, which haue
receaued the holy goost as well as we?
48 And he commaunded them to be baptysed in the name of the LORDE. The prayed
they him, that he wolde tary there certayne dayes.

Chapter 11

1 The Apostles and the brethren that were in Iewrye, herde saye, that the
Heythen also had receaued the worde of God.
2 And whan Peter was come vp to Ierusalem, they that were of the circucision,
chode with him,
3 and sayde: Thou wentest in to men that are vncircumcysed, and hast eaten with
them.
4 But Peter beganne, and expounded the thinge in order vnto the and sayde:
5 I was in ye cite of Ioppa prayege, and in a traunce I sawe a vision, a vessell
commynge downe, as it had bene a greate lynnen clothe with foure corners, and
let downe from heauen, and came vnto me.
6 Into the which I loked, and considered, and sawe foure foted beestes of the
earth, and wylde beestes, and wormes, and foules of the ayre.
7 And I herde a voyce, which sayde vnto me: Ryse Peter, slaye, & eate.
8 But I sayde: Oh no, LORDE, for there neuer entred eny commen or vncleane
thinge in to my mouth.
9 Neuertheles the voyce answered me agayne from heauen: What God hath clensed,
that call not thou vncleane.
10 This was done thre tymes, and all was taken vp agayne in to heauen.
11 And beholde, immediatly stode there thre men before the dore of the house
that I was in, sent from Cesarea vnto me.
12 But the sprete sayde vnto me, that I shulde go with the and doute nothinge.
These sixe brethre also came with me, and we entred in to the mas house.
13 And he shewed vs, how he had sene an angell stondinge in his house, which
sayde vnto him: Sende men to Ioppa, and call for Simon (whose syrname is Peter)
14 he shal tell ye wordes, wherby thou and all thy house shal be saued.
15 But whan I beganne to speake, the holy goost fell vpo them, like as vpon vs
at ye begynnynge.
16 Then thoughte I vpon the worde of the LORDE, how he sayde: Ihon baptysed with
water, but ye shalbe baptysed with ye holy goost.
17 For as moch then as God hath geuen them like giftes, as vnto vs, which beleue
on the LORDE Iesus Christ, who was I, that I shulde be able to withstode God?
18 Whan they herde this, they helde their peace, and praysed God, and sayde:
Then hath God also to the Heithen graunted repentaunce vnto life.
19 They that were scatred abrode thorow ye trouble yt rose aboute Steuen, walked
on euerysyde vntyll Phenices, and Cipers, and Antioche, and spake the worde vnto
no man but onely vnto ye Iewes.
20 Neuertheles some of the were men of Cipers and Cyren, which came to Antioche,
and spake also vnto the Grekes, & preached the Gospell of the LORDE Iesu.
21 And ye hande of the LORDE was with the. And a greate nombre beleued, and
turned vnto the LORDE.
22 This tydinges of them came to ye eares of the cogregacion at Ierusalem. And
they sent Barnabas, that he shulde go vnto Antioche.
23 Which whan he was come thither, & sawe the grace of God, he was glad, and
exorted them all, that with purpose of hert they wolde contynue in the LORDE.
24 For he was a good man, full of the holy goost and faith. And there was a
greate multitude of people added vnto the LORDE.
25 But Barnabas departed vnto Tharsus, to seke Saul
26 And wha he had foude hi, he brought hi to Anthioche. It chauced, that a whole
yeare they were there couersaunte together in the cogregacio, & taughte moch
people, so that the disciples at Antioche were first called Christen.
27 In those dayes came there prophetes fro Ierusalem vnto Antioche.
28 And one of them (whose name was Agabus) stode vp, and declared by the sprete
a greate derth, that shulde come ouer the whole compasse of the earth: which
came to passe vnder the Emperoure Claudius.
29 But the disciples cocluded (euery one acordinge to his abylite) to sende an
handreachinge vnto ye brethren that were in Iewry:
30 which thinge they also dyd, and sent it by the handes of Barnabas and Saul.

Chapter 12

1 At the same tyme layed kynge Herode handes vpon certayne of the congregacion,
to vexe them.
2 As for Iames the brother of Ihon, him he slewe with the swerde.
3 And whan he sawe that it pleased the Iewes, he proceaded farther to take Peter
also. But it was Easter.
4 Now whan he had taken him, he put him in preson, and delyuered him vnto foure
quaternions of soudyers, to kepe him: and thought after Easter to bringe him
forth to the people.
5 And Peter was kepte in the preson But prayer was made without ceassinge of the
congregacion, vnto God for him.
6 And whan Herode wolde haue broughte him out vnto the people, in the same
nighte slepte Peter betwene two soudiers, bounde with two cheynes. And the
kepers before the dore kepte the preson.
7 And beholde, the angell of the LORDE was there presente, and a lighte shyned
in the habitacion, and he smote Peter on the syde, and waked him vp, and sayde:
Aryse vp quyckly. And the cheynes fell of from his hondes.
8 And the angell sayde vnto him: Gyrde the, and put on thy shues. And he dyd so.
And he sayde vnto him: Cast thy mantle aboute the, and folowe me.
9 And he wente out, and folowed him, and wyst not, that it was trueth that was
done by ye angell, but thoughte he had sene a vision.
10 Neuertheles they wente thorow the first and seconde watch, and came to the
yron gate, that ledeth vnto the cite, which opened to the by his awne acorde.
And they wente out, and passed thorow one strete, and immediatly the angell
departed from him.
11 And whan Peter was come to himself, he sayde: Now I knowe of a trueth, that
ye LORDE hath sent his angell, and delyuered me out of the honde of Herode, and
from all the waytinge for of the people of the Iewes.
12 And as he considered the thinge, he came to the house of Mary the mother of
one Ihon, (which after his syrname was called Marke) where many were gathered
together, and prayed.
13 As Peter knocked at the entry dore, there came forth a damsell to herken,
named Rhoda.
14 And whan she knewe Peters voyce, she opened not the entrye for gladnes, but
rane in, and tolde, that Peter stode before ye entrye.
15 But they sayde vnto her: Thou art mad. Neuertheles she abode by it, that is
was so. They sayde: it is his angell.
16 But Peter contynued knockinge. Whan they opened the dore, they sawe him, and
were astonnyed.
17 But he beckened vnto them with the hande, to holde their peace, & tolde them,
how the LORDE had broughte him out of the preson. And he sayde: Shewe this vnto
Iames, and to the brethren. And he departed, and wete in to another place.
18 Whan it was daye, there was not a litle a doo amoge the soudyers, what was
become of Peter.
19 Whan Herode had called for him, and founde him not, he caused the kepers to
be examyned, and commaunded the to be caried awaye, and he wente downe fro Iewry
vnto Cesarea, and there abode.
20 But he was displeased with the of Tyre and Sido. Neuertheles they came vnto
him with one accorde, and made intercession to Blastus the kynges chamberlayne,
and desyred peace, because their countre was norished by the kynges londe.
21 But vpon a daye appoynted, Herode put on ye kyngly apparell, sat him downe
vpon the iudgment seate, and made an oracion vnto them.
22 As for the people, they cried therto: This is a voyce of God, and not of a
man.
23 Immediatly the angell of the LORDE smote him, because he gaue not God the
honoure: And he was eaten vp of wormes, and gaue vp the goost.
24 But the worde of God grewe, and multiplyed.
25 As for Barnabas and Saul, they came agayne to Ierusalem, and delyuered the
handreachinge, and toke with them Ihon, whose syrname was Marke.

Chapter 13

1 There were at Antioche in the congregacion, prophetes and teachers, as
Barnabas, and Simon called Niger, and Lucius of Cyren, and Manahen Herodes the
Tetrachas norsfelowe, and Saul.
2 As they serued ye LORDE, and fasted, the holy goost sayde: Separate me out
Barnabas and Saul for the worke, where vnto I haue called them.
3 Then fasted they and prayed, and layed the handes on them, and let them go.
4 And they beynge sent of the holy goost, came vnto Seleucia, from thence they
sayled vnto Cypers.
5 And whan they were come in to the cite Salamin, they shewed the worde of God
in the synagoges of ye Iewes. And they had Ihon to their mynister.
6 And whan they had gone thorow out the yle vnto the cyte of Paphos, they founde
a certayne Sorcerer and false prophete, a Iewe (whose name was Bariesu)
7 which was with Sergius Paulus the ruler of the countre, a ma of
vnderstondinge. The same called Barnabas and Saul vnto him, and desyred to heare
ye worde of God.
8 Then the Sorcerer Elimas (for so was his name by interpretacion) withstode
the, and soughte to turne awaye the ruler fro the faith.
9 But Saul which is also called Paul, beynge full of the holy goost, loked vpon
him,
10 and sayde: O thou childe of the deuell, full of all futtyltie and all
disceatfulnesse, and enemye of all righteousnes, thou ceassest not to peruerte
the straight wayes of ye LORDE.
11 And now beholde, the hade of the LORDE commeth vpon the, and thou shalt be
blynde, and not se the Sonne for a season, And immediatly there fell on him a
myst and darknesse, and he wente aboute, and soughte them that shulde lede him
by the hande.
12 Whan the ruler sawe what was done, he beleued, and wodred at the doctryne of
the LORDE.
13 Whan Paul and they that were with him, were departed by shippe fro Paphos,
they came to Perga in the londe of Pamphilia. But Ihon departed from them, and
wente agayne to Ierusalem.
14 Neuertheles they wandred thorow from Perga, and came to Antioche in the londe
of Pisidia, and wete in to the synagoge vpon the Sabbath daye, and sat downe.
15 But after the lecture of the lawe and of the prophetes, the rulers of the
synagoge sent vnto them, sayenge: Good brethren, yf ye haue eny sermon to exorte
the people, saye on.
16 Then stode Paul vp, and beckened with the hande (that they shulde holde their
peace) and sayde:Ye men of Israel, and ye that feare God, herke to:
17 The God of this people chose oure fathers, and exalted the people, whan they
were straungers in the lode of Egipte, and with a mightie arme broughte he them
out of it.
18 And by the space of fortye yeares suffred he their maners in the wyldernesse,
19 and destroyed seuen nacions in the lande of Canaan, and parted their londe
amonge them by lott.
20 After that gaue he them iudges by the space of foure hundreth and fiftye
yeares, vnto the prophet Samuel.
21 And after that they desyred a kynge, and God gaue vnto them Saul the sonne of
Cis, a man of the trybe of BenIamin, fortye yeares longe.
22 And whan he had put him downe, he set vp Dauid to be their kynge, of whom he
reported, sayenge: I haue founde Dauid the sonne of Iesse, a man after my hert,
he shal fulfyll all my wyll.
23 Of this mans sede hath God ( acordinge to the promesse) broughte forth vnto
the people of Israel, ye Sauioure Iesus:
24 whan Ihon had first preached before his comynge the baptyme of repentaunce
vnto Israel.
25 But whan Ihon had fulfylled his course, he sayde: I am not he, that ye take
me for. But beholde, there commeth one after me, whose shues of his fete I am
not worthy to lowse.
26 Ye men and brethren, ye children of the generacion of Abraham, and they that
feare God amonge you, vnto you is ye worde of this saluacion sent.
27 For the inhabiters of Ierusalem, and their rulers, for somoch as they knewe
him not, ner yet the voyces of the prophetes (which are red euery Sabbath) haue
fulfylled them in condemnynge him.
28 And though they founde no cause of death in him, yet desyred they Pilate to
kyll him.
29 And whan they had fulfylled all that was wrytten of him, they toke him downe
from the tre, and layed him in a sepulcre.
30 But on ye thirde daye God raysed him vp from the deed,
31 and he appeared many dayes vnto the, that wente vp with him from Galile vnto
Ierusalem, which are his witnesses vnto the people.
32 And we also declare vnto you ye promes, which was made vnto oure fathers,
33 how that God hath fulfylled the same vnto vs their children, in yt he raysed
vp Iesus agayne. As it is wrytten in the seconde Psalme: Thou art my sonne, this
daye haue I begotten the.
34 But that he hath raysed him vp fro the deed, now nomore to returne to
corrupcion, he sayde on this wyse: The grace promysed to Dauid, wyl I faithfully
kepe vnto you.
35 Therfore sayeth he also in another place: Thou shalt not suffre thy Holy to
se corrupcion.
36 For Dauid, whan he in his tyme had serued the wyll of God, he fell a slepe,
and was layed by his fathers, & sawe corrupcion.
37 But he who God raysed vp agayne, sawe no corrupcion.
38 Be it knowne vnto you therfore ye men and brethre, yt thorow this man is
preached vnto you ye forgeuenesse of synnes,
39 and fro all ye thinges, wherby ye mighte not be iustifyed in the lawe of
Moses.
40 But whosoeuer beleueth on this man, is iustifyed. Bewarre therfore, that it
come not vpon you, which is spoken in the prophetes:
41 Beholde ye despysers, and wonder at it, and perishe, for I do a worke in
youre tyme, which ye shal not beleue, yf eny man tell it you.
42 Whan the Iewes were gone out of the synagoge, the Heythen besoughte them, yt
they wolde speake ye worde vnto them betwene the Sabbath dayes.
43 And wha the cogregacion of the synagoge was broken vp, many Iewes and
Proselites yt serued God, folowed Paul and Barnabas, which spake to them, and
exorted them, that they shulde contynue in the grace of God.
44 On ye Sabbath folowinge, came almost the whole cite together, to heare the
worde of God.
45 But whan the Iewes sawe the people, they were full of indignacion, and spake
agaynst that which was spoken of Paul, speakinge agaynst it, & blasphemynge.
46 But Paul and Barnabas waxed bolde, and sayde: It behoued first the worde of
God to be spoken vnto you: but now that ye thrust it fro you, and counte youre
selues vnworthy of euerlastinge life, lo, we turne to the Gentyles.
47 For so hath the LORDE comaunded vs: I haue set the to be a lighte vnto ye
Gentyles, yt thou be ye Saluacion vnto the ende of the earth.
48 Whan the Gentyles herde that, they were glad, and praysed the worde of the
LORDE, and beleued, eue as many as were ordeyned to euerlastinge life.
49 And the worde of ye LORDE was spred abrode thorow out all the region.
50 Howbeit the Iewes moued the deuoute and honorable wemen, and the chefe men of
the citie, and raysed vp a persecucion agaynst Paul and Barnabas and expelled
them out of their coastes.
51 But they shoke of the dust of their fete agaynst them, and came to Iconium.
52 And the disciples were fylled with ioye and with the holy goost.

Chapter 14

1 It fortuned at Iconium, that they wete both together in to the synagoge of the
Iewes, and spake so, that a greate multitude of the Iewes & of the Grekes
beleued.
2 But the vnbeleuynge Iewes moued and disquyeted the soules of the Heythe
agaynst the brethre.
3 So they had their beynge there a loge season, and quyte them selues boldly in
the LORDE, which gaue testimony vnto the worde of his grace, and caused tokens
and wonders to be done by their handes.
4 Howbeyt the multitude of the cite was deuyded, some helde wt the Iewes, and
some with the Apostles.
5 But whan there rose vp an insurreccion of the Heythe and of ye Iewes, and of
their rulers, to put them to shame, and to stone the,
6 they perceaued it, and fled vnto lystra and Derba cities of ye countre of
Licaonia, and vnto ye region that lyeth rounde aboute,
7 and there they preached the Gospell.
8 And amonge them of Lystra, there was a man, which sat beynge impotent of his
fete, and was crepell fro his mothers wombe, and had neuer walked,
9 the same herde Paul speake. And whan he behelde him, and perceaued that he had
faith to be made whole,
10 he sayde wt a loude voyce: Stonde vp righte on thy fete. And he sprange vp
and walked.
11 But whan the people sawe what Paul had done, they lifte vp their voyce, and
sayde in ye speache of Lycaonia: The goddes are become like vnto men, and are
come downe vnto vs.
12 And they called Barnabas Iupiter, and Paul Mercurius, because he was the
preacher.
13 But Iupiters prest which dwelt before their cite, broughte oxen and garlandes
before the gate, and wolde haue done sacrifice with the people.
14 Whan ye Apostles Barnabas and Paul herde that, they rent their clothes, and
ranne in amonge the people, cryenge
15 and sayenge: Ye me, Why do ye this? We are mortall me also like vnto you, &
preach vnto you ye Gospell, that ye shulde turne from these vayne thinges vnto
ye lyuynge God, which made heaue and earth, and the see, and all that therin is,
16 which in tymes past suffred all ye Heythen to walke after their awne wayes.
17 Neuertheles he hath not left hi selfe without wytnesse, in yt he hath shewed
his benefites, and geuen vs rayne from heauen, and frutefull seasons, fyllynge
oure hertes with fode and gladnesse.
18 And whan they sayde this, they scarse refrayned the people, that they dyd not
sacrifice vnto them.
19 But there came thither certayne Iewes from Antioche and Iconiu, and persuaded
the people, and stoned Paul, and drue him out of the cite, supposinge he had
bene deed.
20 Howbeyt as ye disciples stode rounde aboute him, he rose vp, & came in to the
cite. And on the nexte daye he departed with Barnabas vnto Derba,
21 and preached the Gospell vnto the same cite, and taughte many of them. And
they wete agayne vnto Lystra, and Iconium and Antioche,
22 strengthinge the soules of ye disciples, and exortinge the to cotynue in the
faith: and that we thorow moch tribulacion must entre in to the kyngdome of God.
23 And wha they had ordeyned them Elders by eleccion thorow all the
congregacions, they prayed and fasted, and comended them vnto the LORDE, on whom
they beleued.
24 And they wente thorow Pisidia, and came to Pamphilia,
25 and spake the worde at Perga, and wete downe to Attalia,
26 and fro thence departed they by shippe vnto Antioche: from whence they were
delyuered to the grace of God vnto ye worke, which they had fulfylled.
27 Whan they came there, they gathered the congregacion together, & shewed them,
how greate thinges God had done with the, and how he had opened the dore of
faithe vnto the Heithen.
28 And there they abode a longe tyme with the disciples.

Chapter 15

1 And there came certayne fro Iewry, and taughte the brethren: Excepte ye be
circumcysed after the maner of Moses, ye can not be saued.
2 Now wha there rose a discesion, and Paul and Barnabas had set them selues
harde agaynst them, they ordeyned, that Paul and Barnabas and certayne other of
them shulde go vp to Ierusalem vnto the Apostles and Elders, aboute this
questio.
3 And they were broughte on their waye by ye cogregacion, & wente thorow
Phenices and Samaria, and declared the conuersacion of the Heythen, and brought
greate ioye vnto all the brethren.
4 Whan they came to Ierusale, they were receaued of ye cogregacion, & of the
Apostles, and of the Elders, & they tolde how greate thinges God had done with
the.
5 Then rose there vp certayne of the secte of ye Pharises (which beleued) and
sayde: They must be circumcysed and comaunded, to kepe the lawe of Moses.
6 But the Apostles and Elders came together, to reason vpon this matter.
7 Now whan there was moch disputinge Peter rose vp, and sayde vnto the: Ye men
and brethren, ye knowe that a good whyle agoo, God chose amonge vs, yt the
Heythe by my mouth shulde heare the worde of the Gospell, and beleue.
8 And God the knower of hertes bare wytnesse ouer the, and gaue the the holy
goost, like as vnto vs,
9 & put no dyfference betwixte vs & them, and purified their hertes thorow
fayth.
10 Now therfore why tempte ye God, with layenge vpon ye disciples neckes the
yocke, which nether or fathers ner we were able to beare?
11 But we beleue to be saued thorow the grace of the LORDE Iesu Christ, like as
they also.
12 Then all ye multitude helde their peace, and gaue audience vnto Paul and
Barnabas, which tolde how greate tokens and wonders God had done by the amoge
the Heythen.
13 Afterwarde whan they helde their peace, Iames answered, and sayde: Ye men and
brethren, herke vnto me,
14 Simo hath tolde, how God at the first vysited to receaue a people vnto his
name from amonge the Heythen.
15 And vnto this agree ye wordes of the prophetes, as it is wrytte:
16 After this wyl I returne and wyl buylde agayne ye tabernacle of Dauid, that
is fallen downe, and that which is fallen in decaye therof, wyl I buylde agayne,
and wyl set it vp,
17 that the residue of men maye seke after the LORDE: & also the Heythen vpo
whom my name is named, sayeth the LORDE, which doth all these thinges.
18 Knowne vnto God are all his workes from the begynnynge of ye worlde.
19 Wherfore my sentence is, that they which from amonge the Heythen are turned
vnto God, be not disquyeted,
20 but to wryte vnto them, that they absteyne them selues from fylthynesse of
Idols, from whordome, and from strangled, and bloude.
21 For Moses hath of olde tyme in euery cite them that preach him: and he is red
in the synagoges euery Sabbath daye.
22 And the Apostles and Elders with the whole congregacion thoughte it good, to
chose out men of them, and to sende them vnto Antioche with Paul and Barnabas,
namely Iudas, whose syrname was Barsabas, and Sylas (which were chefe men amoge
the brethre)
23 and gaue the letters in their handes after this maner: We the Apostles and
Elders & brethren, wysh health vnto the brethre of the Heythe which are at
Antioche, and Syria and Celicia.
24 For so moch as we haue herde that certayne of oures are departed, and haue
troubled you, and combred youre myndes, sayenge: ye must be circumcysed, and
kepe ye lawe (to whom we gaue no soch commaundemet)
25 it semed good vnto vs, beynge gathered together with one accorde, to chose
out men, and to sende them vnto you, with oure beloued Barnabas and Paul,
26 men that haue ioperded their lyues for ye name of oure LORDE Iesus Christ.
27 Therfore haue we sent Iudas and Sylas, which shal also tell you the same with
wordes.
28 For it pleased the holy goost and vs, to laye no charge vpon you, more then
these necessary poyntes:
29 That ye absteyne from the offeringes of Idols, and from bloude, and from
strangled, and from whordome. From the which yf ye absteyne youre selues, ye
shal do well. Fare ye well.
30 Whan these were sent forth, they came vnto Antioche, and gathered the
multitude together, and delyuered the epistle.
31 Whan they had red it, they were glad of that cosolacion.
32 As for Iudas & Sylas (which were prophetes also) they exorted ye brethre with
moch preachinge, and stregthed them.
33 And whan they had taried there for a season, they were let go of the brethren
in peace vnto the Apostles.
34 Notwithstondinge Sylas thoughte it good to byde there styll.
35 But Paul and Barnabas cotynued at Antioche, teachinge and preachinge the
worde of the LORDE, with other many.
36 Neuertheles after certayne dayes Paul sayde vnto Barnabas: let vs go agayne,
and vyset oure brethren thorow all the cities (wherin we haue shewed the worde
of the LORDE) how they do.
37 But Barnabas gaue councell, that they shulde take with the Ihon, whose
syrname was Marke.
38 Howbeit Paul thoughte it mete, not to take him with them, which departed from
them in Pamphilia, and wente not with them vnto the worke.
39 And so sharpe was the strife betwene them, that they departed asunder ye one
fro the other, and Barnabas toke Marke vnto him, and sayled vnto Cypers.
40 But Paul chose Sylas, and departed, beynge comytted of the brethren vnto the
grace of God.
41 He wente thorow Syria and Celicia, stablishynge the congregacions.

Chapter 16

1 He came vnto Derba and to Lystra, and beholde, a certayne disciple was there
named Timotheus, the sonne of a Iewish woman, which beleued, but his father was
a Greke:
2 ye same had a good reporte amonge the brethre of Lystra and at Iconium.
3 Paul wolde that the same shulde go forth with him, and toke and circumcysed
him because of the Iewes that were in those quarters. For they knewe all, that
his father was a Greke.
4 But as they wente thorow the cities, they delyuered them the sentence to kepe,
which was concluded of the Apostles and Elders at Ierusalem.
5 The were the congregacions stablyshed in the faith, and increased in nombre
daylie.
6 But as they wente thorow Phrygia and the londe of Galacia, they were forbydden
of the holy goost, to preache the worde in Asia.
7 Howbeit as they came in to Mysia, they proued to take their iourney in to
Bithinia, and the sprete suffred them not.
8 Neuertheles whan they had passed thorow Mysia, they came downe to Troada,
9 and there appeared a vision vnto Paul by night, that there was a man of
Macedonia which stode and prayed him, and sayde: Come downe to Macedonia, and
helpe vs.
10 Whan he had sene ye vision, we soughte immediatly to go, vnto Macedonia,
beynge certified, that ye LORDE had called vs thither, to preach the Gospell
vnto them.
11 The departed we from Troada, and came the straight course vnto Samothracia,
on the nexte daye to Neapolis,
12 and from thence to Philippis, which is the chefe cite of the londe of
Macedonia, and a fre cite. In this cite abode we certayne dayes.
13 On the daye of the Sabbathes wete we out of the cite besyde the water, where
men were wonte to praye, and we sat downe, and spake vnto the wemen that
resorted thither.
14 And a deuoute woman (named Lydia) a seller of purple, out of the cite of
Thiatira, herkened to, whose hert the LORDE opened that she gaue hede vnto the
thinges that Paul spake.
15 Whan she was baptysed and hir housholde, she besoughte vs, and sayde: Yf ye
thynke that I beleue on the LORDE, then come in to my house, and a byde there.
And she constrayned vs.
16 It fortuned whan we wente to prayer, yt there met vs a damsel, which had a
sprete of soythsayenge, and broughte hir master and mastresse greate vauntage
with soyth sayenge:
17 ye same folowed Paul and vs, and cryed, and sayde: These men are the
seruauntes of the most hye God, which shewe vs ye waye of saluacion.
18 This dyd she many dayes. But Paul was not content with it, and turned him
aboute, and sayde vnto the sprete: I comaunde the in the name of Iesu Christ,
that thou departe out of her. And he departed out at the same houre.
19 But wha hir master and mastresse sawe that the hope of their vauntage was
gone, they toke Paul and Sylas, drue them in to the market place before ye
rulers,
20 & broughte the vnto the officers, and sayde: These men trouble oure cyte, &
are Iewes,
21 and preach an ordynaunce, which is not laufull for vs to receaue, ner to
obserue, seynge we are Romaynes.
22 And the people rane on them, and the officers rente their clothes, and
comaunded them to be beaten with roddes.
23 And whan they had beaten them sore, they cast the in preson, and commaunded
the iayler, to kepe them diligetly.
24 Which whan he had receaued soch commaundement, he cast the in to the ynner
preson, and put their fete in the stockes.
25 But at mydnight prayed Paul and Sylas, and praysed God. And the presoners
herde them.
26 Sodenly was there a greate earth quake, so that the foundacions of the preson
were shaken. And immediatly were all the dores open, & all their bondes lowsed
27 Wha the keper of the preson waked out of slepe, and sawe the preson dores
open, he drue out his swerde, and wolde haue kylled him selfe: for he thoughte
ye presoners had bene fled.
28 But Paul cryed loude, and sayde: Do thy self no harme, for we are all here.
29 He called for a lighte, and sprange in, and trembled, and fell at the fete of
Paul and Sylas,
30 and broughte them out, and sayde: Syrs, what must I do, to be saued?
31 They sayde: Beleue on the LORDE Iesus, and so shalt thou and thy housholde be
saued.
32 And they preached the worde of the LORDE vnto him, and to all that were in
his house.
33 And he toke them to him in the same houre of the night, and wasshed their
strypes. And immediatly was he baptysed, and all his.
34 And he broughte them in to his house, and set them a table, and reioysed with
all his housholde, that he was become a beleuer on God.
35 And whan it was daye, the officers of the cite sent mynisters, and sayde: Let
those men go.
36 And the keper of the preson tolde this sayenge vnto Paul: The officers haue
sent hither, that ye shulde be lowse. Now therfore get you hece, and go in
peace.
37 But Paul sayde vnto them: They haue beaten vs openly vncondempned (where as
we are yet Romaynes) and haue cast vs in preson, and shulde they now thrust vs
out preuely? Not so, but let them come them selues, and brynge vs out.
38 The mynisters tolde these wordes vnto the officers. And they feared, whan
they herde that they were Romaynes,
39 and came and besoughte them, and prayed the to departe out of the cite.
40 Then wente they out of the preson, and entred in to the house of Lydia. And
whan they had sene the brethren and comforted them, they departed.

Chapter 17

1 As they made their iourney thorow Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to
Thessalonica, where was a synagoge of the Iewes.
2 And Paul (as his maner was) wete in vnto them, and vpon thre Sabbathes he
spake vnto them of the scripture, opened it vnto the,
3 and alleged, that Christ must nedes haue suffred, & ryse agayne from the deed:
and this Iesus, whom I preach vnto you (sayde he) is ye same Christ.
4 And some of the beleued, and were ioyned vnto Paul and Sylas, a greate
multitude also of the deuoute Grekes, and of the chefe wemen not a fewe.
5 But the styffnecked Iewes had indignacion, and toke vnto them certayne euell
men which were vagabundes, and gathered a company, and set the cite in a rore,
and preassed vnto the house of Iason, and soughte to brynge them out vnto the
comon people.
6 But whan they founde them not, they drue Iason, and certayne brethren vnto the
rulers of the cite, and cryed: These that trouble all the worlde, are come
hither also,
7 whom Iason hath receaued preuely. And these all do contrary to the decrees of
the Emperoure, sayenge, that there is another kynge, one Iesus.
8 They troubled the people, and the rulers of the cite, that herde this.
9 And whan they had receaued a sufficient answere of Iason and of the other,
they let them go.
10 But the brethren immediatly sent awaye Paul and Sylas by night vnto Berea.
Whan they came there, they wete in to the synagoge of the Iewes
11 (for they were the Eldest amonge the at Thessalonica) which receaued the
worde maruelous wyllingly, and searched the scriptures daylie, whether it were
euen so.
12 Then beleued many of them, and worshipfull wemen off the Grekes, and men not
a fewe.
13 But whan the Iewes off Thessalonica had knowlege, that the worde off God was
preached off Paul at Berea, they came, and moued the people there also.
14 Howbeit the brethren sent Paul awaye then immediatly, to go vnto the see. As
for Sylas and Timotheus, they abode there styll.
15 They that conueyed Paul, brought him vnto Athens. And whan they had receaued
a commaundement vnto Sylas and Timotheus, that they shulde come vnto him in all
the haist, they wente their waye.
16 But whyle Paul wayted for them at Athens, his sprete was moued in him, whan
he sawe the cite geue so to the worshippinge of ymages.
17 And he spake vnto the Iewes and deuoute personnes in the synagoge, & in ye
market daylie vnto the that came to him.
18 But certayne Philosophers of ye Epicurees and Stoikes disputed with him. And
some sayde: What will this babler saye? But some sayde: He semeth to be a
tidinges brynger of new goddes (That was, because he had preached vnto the the
Gospell of Iesus, & of the resurreccion.)
19 And they toke him, and broughte him before the councell house, and sayde:
Maye we not knowe, what new doctryne this is that thou teachest?
20 For thou bryngest strauge tidinges to oure eares? We wolde knowe therfore,
what this meaneth.
21 As for all they of Athens, and straungers & gestes, they gaue theselues to
nothinge els, but either to tell, or to heare some newes.
22 Paul stode on the myddes of the comon place, and sayde: Ye me of Athens, I se
that in all thinges ye are to supersticious.
23 I haue gone thorow, & sene youre gods seruyce, and founde an altare, where
vpo was wrytten: To the vnknowne God. Now shewe I vnto you ye same, whom ye
worshippe ignorauntly.
24 God which made ye worlde, and all that therin is, for so moch as he is LORDE
of heauen and earth, dwelleth not in temples made of handes,
25 nether is he worshipped with mens handes, as though he had nede of eny man,
seynge he himself geueth life and breth vnto all men euery where:
26 and hath made of one bloude all the generacion of men to dwell vpo all the
face of ye earth: and hath assygned borders appoynted before, how longe and
farre they shulde dwell,
27 that they shulde seke the LORDE, yf they mighte fele and fynde him. And truly
he is not farre from euery one of vs.
28 For in him we lyue, moue, and haue oure beynge, as certayne of youre awne
Poetes also haue sayde: We are his generacion.
29 For as moch then as we are the generacion of God, we oughte not to thinke
that the Godheade is like vnto golde or syluer, or ymagery worke of the crafte
or ymaginacion of man.
30 And truly God hath ouersene the tyme of ignoraunce: But now he commaundeth
all men euery where to repente,
31 because he hath appoynted a daye, in the which he wyl iudge the copasse of
the worlde, with righteousnesse, by that one man in who he hath appoynted it:
and offred faith vnto all men, after that he had raysed him vp from the deed.
32 Whan they herde of the resurreccion of the deed, some mocked. But some sayde:
We wyl heare the agayne of this matter.
33 So Paul departed from amonge them.
34 Howbeit certayne men claue vnto him, and beleued: amonge whom was Dionisius,
one of the councell: and a woman named Damaris, and other with them.

Chapter 18

1 After that departed Paul fro Athens, and came to Corinthum,
2 and founde a Iewe named Aquila, borne in Potus, which was lately come out of
Italy: and his wife Priscilla (because the Emperor Claudius had commaunded all
Iewes to departe from Rome) and he drue vnto the.
3 And because he was of the same crafte, he abode with the, and wroughte. Their
crafte was to make tentes.
4 And he preached in the synagoge euery Sabbath daye, and exhorted the Iewes and
the Grekes.
5 Whan Sylas and Timotheus were come fro Macedonia, Paul was constrayned by the
sprete to testifye vnto ye Iewes, that Iesus was very Christ.
6 But wha they sayde cotrary and blasphemed, he shoke his rayment, and sayde
vnto them: Youre bloude be vpon youre awne heade. From hence forth I go
blamelesse vnto the Gentyles.
7 And he departed thence, and came in to the house of a man named Iustus, which
feared God, and his house was nexte vnto the synagoge.
8 Howbeit Crispus the chefe ruler of the synagoge, beleued on ye LORDE with all
his housholde. And many of the Corinthians that gaue audience, beleued, and were
baptysed.
9 The LORDE spake vnto Paul by a vision in ye nighte: Be not afrayed, but
speake, and holde not thy peace,
10 for I am with the: and no man shal inuade the that shal hurte the, for I haue
moch people in this cite.
11 He contynued there a yeare and sixe monethes, and taught them the worde of
God.
12 But whan Gallio was ruler of the countre of Achaia, the Iewes made
insurreccion wt one acorde agaynst Paul, & broughte him before the iudgment
seate,
13 and sayde: This felowe counceleth men to worshipe God cotrary to the lawe.
14 Whan Paul was aboute to open his mouth, Gallio sayde vnto ye Iewes: Yf it
were a matter of wronge or an euell dede (O ye Iewes) reason wolde that I shulde
heare you:
15 but yf it be a question of wordes, and of names, and of ye lawe amoge you,
loke ye to it youre selues, I thinke not to be iudge there ouer.
16 And he droue them from the iudgmet seate.
17 Then all the Grekes toke Sosthenes the ruler of the Sinagoge, and smote him
before the iudgment seate. And Gallio cared for none of tho thinges.
18 Paul after yt he had taried a good whyle, toke his leue of the brethren, and
sayled in to Syria, Priscilla & Aquila bearinge him company. And he shore his
heade at Cenchrea (for he had a vowe)
19 & came downe to Ephesus, & lefte them there. But he himselfe wete in to the
synagoge, and reasoned with the Iewes.
20 And they desyred him, that he wolde tary with them a longer season. And he
cosented not,
21 but bad them farwele, and sayde: I must nedes in eny wyse kepe this feast
that commeth, at Ierusalem: but yf God wyl, I wil returne agayne vnto you. And
he departed from Ephesus,
22 and came to Cesarea, and wente vp, and saluted ye congregacion, and toke his
iourney downe to Antioche,
23 and taried there a certayne tyme, and departed, and walked thorow all ye
countre of Galatia and Phrigia by ordre, and strengthed all the disciples.
24 There came vnto Ephesus a certayne Iewe, named Apollo (borne at Alexadria) an
eloquent man, and mightie in the scriptures:
25 the same was infourmed in the waye of the LORDE, and spake feruently in the
sprete, and taughte diligently the thinges of the LORDE, and knewe but the
baptyme off Ihon onely.
26 The same beganne to speake boldly in the synagoge. Whan Aquila and Priscilla
herde him, they toke him vnto the, and expounded the waye of God vnto him more
perfectly.
27 But whan he wolde go in to Achaia, the brethren wrote, and exorted the
disciples to receaue him. And whan he was come thither, he helped them moch
which beleued thorow grace.
28 For he ouercame the Iewes mightely, and shewed openly by ye scripture, that
Iesus was Christ.

Chapter 19

1 Bvt it fortuned whan Apollo was at Corinthum, that Paul walked thorow the
vpper coastes, and came to Ephesus, and founde certayne disciples,
2 vnto whom he sayde: Haue ye receaued ye holy goost, sence ye beleued? They
sayde vnto hi: We haue not herde, whether there be an holy goost.
3 He sayde vnto them: Where with then were ye baptysed? They sayde: With the
baptyme of Ihon.
4 Paul sayde: Ihon baptysed with the baptyme of repentaunce, and spake vnto ye
people, that they shulde beleue on him, which shulde come after him, that is, on
Iesus, that the same is Christ.
5 Whan they herde that, they were baptysed in the name of the LORDE Iesu.
6 And whan Paul layed the hades on the, the holy goost came vpon them, and they
spake with tunges, and prophecied.
7 And all the men were aboute twolue.
8 He wete in to ye synagoge, and preached boldly thre monethes longe, teachinge,
and geuynge them exortacions of the kyngdome of God.
9 But whan dyuerse waxed herde herted, and beleued not, and spake euell of the
waye of the LORDE before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the
disciples, and disputed daylye in the scole of one called Tyrannus.
10 And this was done two yeares loge, so that all they which dwelt in Asia,
herde the worde of the LORDE Iesu, both Iewes & Grekes.
11 And God wroughte no small miracles by the handes of Paul,
12 so that from his body there were broughte napkyns or partlettes vnto the
sicke, and the diseases departed from them, and the euell spretes wente out of
them.
13 But certayne of the vagabounde Iewes which were coniurers, vndertoke to name
ye name of the LORDE Iesus, ouer those that had euell spretes, and sayde: We
charge you by Iesus whom Paul preacheth.
14 They were seuen sonnes of one Sceua a Iewe the hye prest, which dyd so.
15 The euell sprete answered, and sayde: Iesus I knowe, and Paul I knowe, but
who are ye?
16 And the ma in who the euell sprete was, ranne vpon them, and ouercame them,
and cast them vnder him, so that they fled out of the same house naked and
wounded.
17 This was knowne vnto all the Iewes and Grekes which dwelt at Ephesus, and
there fell a feare vpon them all. And ye name of the LORDE Iesus was magnified.
18 Many of the also that beleued, came and cofessed, and shewed their workes.
19 But many of them that had vsed curious craftes, broughte the bokes together,
and burnte them openly: and they counted the pryce of them, and founde it of
money fiftye thousande pens.
20 So mightely grewe ye worde of the LORDE, and preuayled.
21 Whan this was done, Paul purposed in sprete to take his iourney thorow
Macedonia and Achaia, and to go to Ierusale, and sayde: After that I haue bene
there, I must se Rome also.
22 And he sent into Macedonia two that mynistred vnto him, Timotheus and
Erastus. But he himselfe remayned in Asia for a season.
23 At the same tyme there rose no litle a doo aboute that waye.
24 For a certayne man named Demetrius a goldsmyth, which made syluer shrynes for
Diana, and broughte them of the crafte no small vauntage.
25 Them he gathered together, and the feloweworkme of the same occupacion, and
sayde: Syrs, ye knowe that by this crafte we haue vauntage,
26 and ye se and heare, that not onely at Ephesus, but almost also thorow out
all Asia, this Paul turneth awaye moch people with his persuadynge, and sayeth:
They be not goddes that are made with hondes.
27 Howbeit it shal not onely brynge oure occupacion to this poynte to be set at
naught, but also the temple of greate Diana shal from hence forth be despysed,
and hir maiestye also shalbe destroyed, who neuertheles all Asia and the worlde
worshippeth.
28 Whan they herde this, they were full of wrath, cried out, and sayde: Greate
is Diana of the Ephesians.
29 And all ye cite was on a roore, and they russhed in with one assent in to the
open place, and toke Gaius and Aristarchus of Macedonia, Pauls companyons.
30 Whan Paul wolde haue gone in amonge the people, the disciples suffred him
not.
31 Certayne also of ye chefe of Asia which were Pauls good frendes, sent vnto
him, and desyred him, that he shulde not preasse in to the open place.
32 Some cried one thinge, some another. And the congregacion was out of quyete,
and the more parte knewe not wherfore they were come together.
33 Some of the people drue forth Alexander, whan ye Iewes thrust him forwarde.
Alexader beckened with the hande, and wolde haue geuen the people an answere.
34 But whan they knewe that he was a Iewe, there arose a shoute of all, and
cried the space of two houres: Greate is Diana of the Ephesians.
35 Whan the towne clarke had stylled the people, he sayde: Ye men of Ephesus,
what man is it which knoweth not, that the cite of ye Ephesias is a worshipper
of the greate goddesse Diana, and of the heauenly ymage?
36 Seinge now that this can not be sayde agaynst, ye ought to be contente, and
to do nothinge without aduysement.
37 Ye haue broughte hither these men, which are nether churchrobbers ner
blasphemers off youre goddesse.
38 But yff Demetrius and they that are craftesmen with him, haue ought to saye
vnto eny man, the lawe is open, and there are rulers, let them accuse one
another.
39 But yf ye wil go aboute eny other thinge, it maye be determyned in a laufull
congregacion.
40 For we stonde in ioperdy to be accused of this dayes vproure: and yet is
there no man giltye, of whom we mighte geue a rekenynge of this vproure.
41 And whan he had sayde this, he let the congregacion departe.

Chapter 20

1 Now whan the vproure was ceassed, Paul called the disciples vnto him, and toke
his leue of them, and departed to go in to Macedonia.
2 And whan he had gone thorow those partes, and exhorted them with many wordes,
he came into Grekelonde,
3 and there abode thre monethes. But whan the Iewes layed wayte for him, as he
was aboute to sayle in to Syria, he purposed to turne agayne thorow Macedonia.
4 There accompanied him in to Asia, Sopater of Berrea: and of Thessalonica,
Aristarchus and Secundus: and Gaius of Derba, and Timotheus: but of Asia,
Tychicus and Trophimus.
5 These wente before, and taried for vs at Troada:
6 but we sayled after the Easter dayes from Philippos, vnto ye fyfth daye, and
came to them vnto Troada, and taried there seuen dayes.
7 Vpon one of the Sabbathes, whan the disciples came together to breake bred,
Paul preached vnto them, wyllinge to departe on the morow, and contynued the
preachinge vnto mydnight.
8 And there were many lightes in the chamber, where they were gathered together.
9 There sat a yonge man named Eutychos, in a wyndow, and fell in to a depe slepe
(whyle Paul was speakinge) and was ouercome with slepe, and fell downe from the
thirde lofte, and was taken vp deed.
10 But Paul wente downe, and fell on him, and enbraced him, and sayde: Make
nothinge a doo, for his soule is in hi.
11 Then wente he vp, and brake the bred, and ate, and talked moch with the, tyll
the daye brake, and so departed.
12 As for the yoge man, they broughte him alyue, and were not a litle conforted.
13 But we wente afore in to the shippe, and sayled towarde Asson, wyllinge there
to receaue Paul. For so had he appoynted, and wolde himselfe go on fote.
14 Whan he was come to vs vnto Asson, we toke him in, and came to Mitylenes,
15 and sayled from thence, and came on the nexte daye ouer agaynst Chios, and on
the daye folowinge we aryued at Samos, and taried at Tragilion, and on the nexte
daye came we to Mileton:
16 for Paul had determed to sayle ouer by Ephesus, that he nede not to spende
the tyme in Asia: for he haisted to be at Ierusalem vpo the Whitsondaye, yf it
were possible for him.
17 But from Mileton he sent vnto Ephesus, and called for the Elders of the
congregacion.
18 Whan they were come to him, he sayde vnto them: Ye knowe sence the first daye
that I came in to Asia, after what maner I haue bene with you at all tyme,
19 and serued ye LORDE with all humblenesse of mynde, and with many teares and
tentacions, which happened vnto me by ye layenges of wayte of the Iewes,
20 how yt I haue kepte backe nothinge yt was profitable, but that I haue shewed
you, and taughte you openly, and priuately from house to house.
21 And haue testifyed both vnto the Iewes & to the Grekes the repentaunce
towarde God, and faith towarde oure LORDE Iesus.
22 And now beholde, I go bounde in ye sprete vnto Ierusale, not knowinge what
shal happen there vnto me,
23 but yt the holy goost witnesseth in euery cite, and sayeth, that bondes and
troubles abyde me there.
24 But I regarde none of them, nether counte I my life dearer then my selfe,
that I maye fulfyll my course with ioye, and the office yt I haue receaued of
the LORDE Iesu, to testifye the Gospell of the grace of God.
25 And now beholde, I knowe that ye shal se my face nomore, all ye, thorow whom
I haue gone, and preached the kyngdome of God.
26 Wherfore I take you to recorde this daye, that I am pure from the bloude of
all men:
27 For I haue kepte nothinge backe, but haue shewed you all the councell off
God.
28 Take hede therfore vnto youre selues, and to all the flocke, amonge the which
the holy goost hath set you to be Bishoppes, to fede the congregacion of God,
which he hath purchaced thorow his owne bloude.
29 For this I knowe, that after my departinge there shal enter in amonge you
greuous wolues, which shal not spare the flocke.
30 Yee eue from amonge youre awne selues shal men aryse, speakynge peruerse
doctryne, to drawe disciples after them.
31 Therfore awake, and remembre, that by the space of thre yeares I ceassed not
to warne euery one off you both nighte and daye with teares.
32 And now brethren I commende you vnto God, and to ye worde of his grace, which
is mightie to edifye you, and to geue you the enheritaunce amoge all them that
are sanctified.
33 I haue not desyred syluer, golde or rayment off eny off you.
34 For ye youre selues knowe, that these handes haue mynistred vnto my
necessities, and them that were with me.
35 I haue shewed you all thinges, how that so labouringe ye oughte to receaue
the weake, and to remembre the worde of the LORDE, how that he sayde: It is more
blessed to geue, then to receaue.
36 And whan he had sayde this, he kneled downe, and prayed with them all.
37 But there was moch wepynge amonge them all, and they fell aboute Pauls necke,
and kyssed him,
38 and were sory, most of all because of the worde which he had sayde, that they
shulde se his face nomore. And they accopanied him vnto the shippe.

Chapter 21

1 Now whan it fortuned that we had launched forth and were departed from them,
we came with a straight course vnto Coon, and on the daye folowinge vnto the
Rhodes, and from thence vnto Patara.
2 And whan we founde a shippe ready to sayle vnto Phenices, we wente aborde and
set forth.
3 But wha we came within the sighte of Cypers, we lefte it on the lefte hande,
and sayled vnto Syria, and came vnto Tyre: for there the shippe shulde laye
forth the ware.
4 And whan we had founde disciples, we taried there seuen dayes. And they tolde
Paul thorow the sprete, that he shulde not go vp to Ierusalem.
5 And it fortuned wha we had fulfilled those dayes, we departed, and wente oure
wayes, and they all broughte vs on oure waye with wyues and childre, tyll we
were come out of ye cite, and we kneled downe vpo the shore, and prayed.
6 And whan we had taken oure leue one off another, we toke shippe, but they
turned agayne vnto theirs.
7 As for vs we ended the course from Tyre, and came to Ptolomaida, and saluted
the brethren, and abode with them one daye.
8 On the nexte daye we yt were with Paul, departed, and came vnto Cesarea, &
entred in to the house of Philippe the Euangelist (which was one of the seue)
and abode with him.
9 The same had foure doughters, which were virgins, and prophecied.
10 And as we taried there mo dayes, there came downe from Iewry a prophet, named
Agabus.
11 Wha he was come vnto vs, he toke Pauls gerdell, and bounde his hades and
fete, and sayde: Thus sayeth ye holy goost: The man whose gerdell this is, shal
the Iewes bynde thus at Ierusalem, and shal delyuer him in to the handes of the
Heythe.
12 Whan we herhe this, both we and they that were of the same place, besoughte
him, that he wolde not go vp to Ierusalem.
13 Then answered Paul and sayde: What do ye, wepynge, and breakynge my hert? For
I am redye not onely to be bounde, but also to dye at Ierusalem for ye name of
the LORDE Iesu.
14 But wha he wolde not be persuaded, we ceassed, and sayde: The will of the
LORDE be fulfylled.
15 And after those dayes we were ready, & wente vp to Ierusalem:
16 There came with vs also certayne of the disciples off Cesarea, and broughte
with them one of Cypers, named Mnason, an olde disciple, with whom we shulde
lodge.
17 Now wha we came to Ierusalem, the brethren receaued vs gladly.
18 But on the nexte daye Paul wente in with vs vnto Iames, and all the Elders
came together.
19 And whan he had saluted them, he tolde by order, what God had done amoge the
Heythen by his mynistracion.
20 Whan they herde that, they praysed the LORDE, and sayde vnto him: Brother,
thou seyst how many thousande Iewes there are which beleue, and are all Zelous
ouer ye lawe.
21 But they are enfourmed agaynst the, that thou teachest all the Iewes which
are amoge the Heythe, to forsake Moses, and sayest that they oughte not to
circumcyse their children, ner to walke after the same custome.
22 What is it therfore? The multitude must nedes come together, for they shal
heare that thou art come.
23 Do this therfore that we saye vnto the: We haue foure men, which haue a vowe
on them,
24 take them vnto ye, and purifye thyselfe with them, and do the cost on them,
that they maye shaue their heades: and they shal knowe, that it is nothinge,
wherof they are enfourmed agaynst the, but that thou also walkest and kepest the
lawe.
25 For as touchinge them that beleue amonge the Heythen, we haue wrytten, and
concluded, that they shulde obserue no soch, but onely to kepe them selues from
the offeringes of Idols, from bloude, from stragled, and from whordome.
26 Then Paul toke the men vnto him, and was purified with them on the nexte
daye, and entred in to the temple, declaringe that he fulfylled the dayes of
purificacion, tyll there was an offeringe offred for euery one of them.
27 But whan the seuen dayes were allmost fulfylled, the Iewes of Asia sawe him
in the temple, and moued all the people, layed handes vpon him,
28 and cryed: Ye men of Israel, helpe, this is the man, that teacheth all men
euery where agaynst oure people, the lawe, and this place. He hath broughte
Grekes also in to the temple, and hath defyled this holy place.
29 For they had sene Trophimus the Ephesian with him in the cite, him they
thoughte yt Paul had broughte in to the temple.
30 And all the cite was moued, and the people ranne together. And they toke
Paul, and drue him out off the temple, and forth with the dores were shut to.
31 But whan they wete aboute to kyll him, tydinges came to the chefe captayne of
the company, that all Ierusalem was moued.
32 Which immediatly toke soudyers and captaynes vnto him, and ranne in amoge
them. Whan they sawe the captayne and the soudyers, they lefte smytinge of Paul.
33 Whan the captayne came nye, he toke him, and commaunded him to be bounde with
two cheynes, and axed what he was, and what he had done.
34 One cried this, another that amonge the people. But whan he coulde not knowe
the certente because of the rumoure, he commaunded him to be caried in to the
castell.
35 And wha he came to the steppes, it fortuned that he was borne of ye soudyers
because of the violence of the people.
36 For the multitude off the people folowed after, and cryed: Awaye with him.
37 Whan Paul was now to be caried in to the castell, he sayde vnto ye captayne:
Maye I speake vnto the? He sayde: Canst thou Greke?
38 Art not thou the Egipcian, which before these dayes maydest an vproure, &
leddest out in to the wyldernesse foure thousande preuy murthurers?
39 Paull sayde: I am a man which am a Iewe off Tharsis, a citesyn of a famous
cite in Celicia: I beseke the, suffre me to speake vnto the people.
40 Whan he had geuen him lycence, Paul stode on the steppes, and beckened with
the hande vnto the people. Now whan there was made a greate sylece, he spake
vnto them in Hebrue, and sayde:

Chapter 22

1 Ye men, brethren, and fathers, heare myne answere which I make vnto you.
2 Whan they herde that he spake vnto them in the Hebrue, they kepte the more
sylence. And he sayde:
3 I am a man which am a Iewe, borne at Tharsis in Celicia, and broughte vp in
this cite at the fete off Gamaliel, enfourmed diligently in the lawe of the
fathers, and was feruent mynded to God warde, as ye all are also this daye,
4 and I persecuted this waye vnto the death. I bounde them and delyuered them
vnto preson, both men and wemen,
5 as ye hye prest also doth beare me wytnesse, and all ye Elders: of whom I
receaued letters vnto the brethren, and wente towarde Damascon, that I mighte
brynge them which were there, bounde to Ierusalem, to be punyshed.
6 But it fortuned as I made my iourney, and came nye vnto Damascon, aboute
noone, sodenly there shone a greate lighte aboute me from heauen,
7 and I fell to the earth, and herde a voyce which sayde vnto me: Saull Saull,
why persecutest thou me?
8 I answered: Who art thou LORDE? And he sayde vnto me: I am Iesus of Nazareth
whom thou persecutest.
9 As for them that were with me, they sawe ye lighte and were afrayed, but they
herde not the voyce of him that spake with me.
10 I sayde: LORDE, what shal I do? The LORDE sayde vnto me: Aryse, and go in to
Damascon, there shal it be tolde ye of all that is appoynted the to do.
11 But whan I sawe nothinge for the bryghtnesse of the lighte, I was led by the
hande of them that were with me, and came to Damascon.
12 There was one Ananias, a deuoute man after the lawe, which had a good reporte
of all the Iewes that dwelt there,
13 the same came, and stepte vnto me, and sayde: Brother Saul, loke vp. And I
loked vp vpon him the same houre.
14 He sayde: The God of oure fathers hath ordeyned the before, that thou
shuldest knowe his wyll, and se the thinge yt is rightfull, and heare the voyce
out of his mouth:
15 for thou shalt be his wytnesse vnto all men, of tho thinges which thou hast
sene and herde.
16 And now why tariest thou? Aryse, and be baptysed, and wasse awaye thy synnes,
and call vpon the name of the LORDE.
17 But it fortuned, that whan I was come agayne to Ierusale, and prayed in the
temple, I was in a traunce,
18 and sawe him. Then sayde he vnto me: Make haist, and get the soone out of
Ierusalem, for they wyl not receaue the witnesse that thou bearest of me.
19 And I sayde: LORDE, they the selues knowe that I put in preson and bett in
euery synagoge them that beleued on the.
20 And wha the bloude of Steue thy witnesse was shed, I stode by also, &
consented vnto his death, and kepte the clothes of them that slewe him.
21 And he sayde vnto me: Go thy waye, for I wil sende the farre amonge the Hey
then.
22 They gaue him audience vnto this worde, and lifte vp their voyce, & sayde:
Awaye with soch a felowe from the earth, for it is not reason that he shulde
lyue.
23 But as they cried, and cast of their clothes, & thrue dust in to the ayre,
24 the captayne bad brynge him into the castell, and commaunded him to be beaten
with roddes and to be examyned, that he mighte knowe, for what cause they cried
so vpon him.
25 And whan he bounde him with thonges, Paul sayde vnto the vndercaptayne that
stode by: Is it laufull for you to scourge a man that is a Romayne, and
vncondemned?
26 Whan the vndercaptayne herde that, he wete to the vpper captayne, and tolde
him, and sayde? What wilt thou do? This man is a Romayne.
27 Then came ye vpper captayne, and sayde vnto him: Tell me, art thou a Romayne?
He sayde: Yee.
28 And the vpper captayne answered: With a greate summe optayned I this
fredome.But Paul sayde: As for me, I am a Romayne borne.
29 The straight waye departed from him, they that shulde haue examyned him. And
ye chefe captayne was afrayed, whan he knewe that he was a Romayne, and because
he had bounde him.
30 On the nexte daye wolde he knowe the certentye wherfore he was accused of the
Iewes, and he lowsed him from the bondes, and commaunded the hye prestes and all
their councell to come together, and broughte Paul forth, and set him amonge
them.

Chapter 23

1 Paul behelde the councell, and sayde: Ye men and brethren, I haue lyued with
all good conscience before God vnto this daye:
2 But the hye prest Ananias commaunded them that stode aboute him, to smyte hi
on the mouth.
3 Then sayde Paul vnto him: God shal smyte the thou paynted wall. Syttest thou
and iudgest me after the lawe, and commaundest me to be smytten cotrary to ye
lawe?
4 And they that stode aboute hi, sayde: Reuylest thou Gods hye prest?
5 And Paul sayde: Brethre, I wyst not that he was the hye prest. For it is
wrytte: The ruler of thy people shalt thou not curse.
6 But whan Paul knewe that the one parte was Saduces, and the other parte
Pharises, he cried out in ye councell: Ye men and brethren, I am a Pharise, and
the sonne of a Pharise, Of hope and resurreccion of the deed am I iudged.
7 And whan he had so sayde, there arose a dissencion betwene ye Pharises and the
Saduces, and the multitude was deuyded:
8 for the Saduces saye that there is no resurreccion, nether angell, ner sprete:
but the Pharises graute both.
9 And there was made a greate crye. And ye Scrybes of the Pharyses secte, stode
vp, and stroue, and sayde: We fynde no euell in this ma. But yf a sprete or an
angell haue spoke vnto him, let vs not stryue agaynst God.
10 But whan the discension was greate, ye vpper captayne feared, that Paul
shulde haue bene pluckte a sonder of them, and commaunded the soudyers to go
downe, and to take him from them, and to brynge him in to the castell.
11 But in the nighte folowinge, the LORDE stode by him, and sayde: Be of good
cheare Paul, for as thou hast testified of me at Ierusalem so must thou testifye
at Rome also.
12 Now whan it was daye, certayne of the Iewes gathered them selues together,
and made a vowe nether to eate ner drynke, tyll they had kylled Paul.
13 They were mo then fortye, which had made this conspyracion.
14 These came to the hye prestes and Elders, and sayde: We haue bounde oure
selues wt a vowe, that we wil eate nothinge, tyll we haue slayne Paul.
15 Now therfore geue ye knowlege to the vpper captayne and to the councell, that
he maye brynge him forth vnto you tomorow, as though ye wolde heare him yet
better: As for vs, we are ready to kyll him, or euer he come nye you.
16 But whan Pauls sisters sonne herde of their layenge awayte, he came, and
entred into the castell, and tolde Paul.
17 So Paul called vnto him one of ye vnder captaynes, and sayde: Brynge this
yonge man to the vpper captayne, for he hath somewhat to saye to him.
18 He toke him, and broughte him to the vpper captayne, and sayde: Paul the
presoner called me vnto him, and prayed me to brynge to the this yonge man,
which hath somwhat to saye vnto the.
19 Then the hye captayne toke him by the hande, and wente asyde with him out of
the waye, and axed him: What is it, that thou hast to saye vnto me?
20 He sayde: The Iewes are agreed together, to desyre the, to let Paul be
broughte forth tomorow before the councell, as though they wolde yet heare him
better.
21 But folowe not thou their myndes, for there laye wayte for him mo then fortye
men off them, which haue bounde them selues with a vowe, nether to eate ner
drynke, tyll they haue slayne Paul: and euen now are they redye, and loke for
thy promes.
22 Then the vpper captayne let the yonge man departe, and charged him to tell
noman, that he had shewed him this.
23 And he called vnto him two vndercaptaynes, and sayde: Make redye two hundreth
soudyers, that they maye go to Cesarea, and thre score and ten horsmen, and two
hundreth speare men at the thirde houre of the nighte,
24 and delyuer the beastes, that they maye set Paul theron, and brynge him safe
vnto Felix the debyte,
25 and he wrote a letter on this maner:
26 Claudius Lysias, vnto the most mightie Debyte Felix, gretynge.
27 The Iewes had taken this man, and wolde haue slayne him, then came I with
soudyers, and rescued him, and perceaued that he is a Romayne.
28 And whan I wolde haue knowne the cause, wherfore they accused hi, I broughte
him in to their councell:
29 then perceaued I, that he was accused aboute questions of their lawe. But
there was no accusacion worthy of death or of bondes.
30 And whan it was shewed me, that certayne Iewes layed wayte for him, I sent
him straight waye vnto the, and commaunded the accusers also, that loke what
they had agaynst him, they shulde tell the same before the. Fare well.
31 The soudyers (as it was commaunded them) toke Paul, and broughte him to
Antipatras.
32 But on the nexte daye, they lefte ye horse men to go with him, and turned
agayne to the castell.
33 When these came to Cesarea, they delyuered the letter vnto the Debyte, &
presented Paul before him also.
34 Whan the Debyte had red the letter, he axed off what countre he was. And wha
he vnderstode that he was of Celicia,
35 he sayde: I wil heare the, whan thine accusers are come also. And he
commaunded him to be kepte in Herodes iudgment house.

Chapter 24

1 After fyue dayes the hye prest Ananias came downe with the Elders, and wt the
Oratour Tertullus, which appeared before the Debyte agaynst Paul.
2 Whan Paul was called forth, Tertullus begane to accuse him, and sayde: Seynge
that we lyue in greate peace by the meanes of ye, and that many good thinges are
done for this people thorow thy prouydence
3 (most mightie Felix)that alowe we euer and in all places with all thankes.
4 Notwithstondinge yt I be nomore tedious vnto the, I praye the, that of thy
curtesy thou woldest heare vs a few wordes.
5 We haue founde this man a pestilent felowe, and a sterer vp of sedicion amonge
all the Iewes thorow out all the worlde, and a manteyner of the secte of the
Nazaretes,
6 and hath taken in hande also to suspende the temple, whom we toke, and wolde
haue iudged him acordinge to oure lawe.
7 But Lysias the hye captayne came vpo vs, and with greate violence delyuered
him out of oure handes,
8 and commaunded his accusers to come vnto the: of whom (yf thou wilt enquyre)
thou mayest haue knowlege of all these thinges, wherof we accuse him.
9 The Iewes likewyse affirmed and sayde, that it was euen so.
10 But Paul (whan the debyte had beckened vnto him, that he shulde speake)
answered: Seynge I knowe that thou hast bene iudge now many yeares amonge this
people, I wil not be afrayed to answere for my selfe,
11 because that thou mayest knowe, that there are yet no more but twolue dayes
sence I came vp to Ierusalem for to worshippe,
12 and that they nether founde me in the temple disputinge with eny man, or
makynge eny vproure amonge the people, ner in ye synagoges, ner in the cite:
13 nether can they proue the thinges, wherof they accuse me.
14 But this I confesse vnto the, that after this waye which they call heresye,
so worshippe I the God of my fathers, that I beleue all that is wrytten in the
lawe and in the prophetes,
15 and haue hope towardes God, that the same resurreccion of the deed (which
they them selues loke for also) shalbe, both of the iust and vniust.
16 Therfore studye I to haue allwaye a cleare conscience towarde God and towarde
men.
17 But after many yeares I came and broughte allmesse vnto my people, and
offeringes:
18 whervpon they founde me purifyed in the temple without eny maner of rumoure
or vnquyetnesse. Howbeit there were certayne Iewes out of Asia,
19 which shulde be here presente before the, and accuse me, yf they had oughte
agaynst me:
20 or els lett these same here saye, yf they haue founde eny vnrighteousnes in
me, whyle I stonde here before ye councell:
21 excepte it be for this one worde, that I cried stondinge amonge them: Of the
resurreccion off the deed am I iudged of you this daye.
22 Whan Felix herde this, he dyfferred the (for he knewe very well of that waye)
and sayde: Whan Lysias the vpper captayne commeth downe, I wyl knowe ye vttemost
of youre matter
23 But he commaunded the vndercaptayne to kepe Paul, and to let him haue rest,
and that he shulde forbydde none of his acquauntauce to mynister vnto him, or to
come vnto him.
24 But after certayne dayes came Felix wt his wife Drusilla, which was a
Iewesse, and called for Paul, and herde him of the faith in Christ.
25 Howbeit whan Paul spake off righteousnesse, and off chastite and off the
iudgment to come, Felix trembled, and answered: Go thy waye for this tyme. Whan
I haue a conuenyent tyme, I wil sende for the.
26 He hoped also, that money shulde haue bene geuen him of Paul, therfore called
he oft for him, and commened with him.
27 But after two yeares came Portius Festus in to felix rowme. Yet Felix
wyllinge to shewe the Iewes a pleasure, left Paul bounde.

Chapter 25

1 Now whan Festus was come in to the countre, ouer thre dayes he wente vp from
Cesarea to Ierusalem.
2 Then appeared the hye prestes and the chefe of the Iewes before him agaynst
Paul, and intreated him,
3 and desyred fauoure agaynst him, that he wolde sende for him to Ierusalem, and
layed wayte for him, that they might slaye him by the waye.
4 Then answered Festus, that Paul shulde be kepte at Cesarea, but that he
himselfe wolde shortly go thither agayne.
5 Let them therfore (sayde he) which are able amonge you, come downe with vs to
accuse the man, yf there be ought in him.
6 Whan he had taried amonge them more then ten dayes, he wente downe to Cesarea.
And on the nexte daye he sat downe on the iudgment seate, and commaunded Paul to
be broughte.
7 Whan he was come, ye Iewes which were come downe from Ierusalem, stode rounde
aboute him, and broughte vp many and greuous quarels agaynst Paul, which they
coulde not proue,
8 whyle he answered for himselfe: I haue nether offended ought agaynst the lawe
of the Iewes, ner agaynst the teple, ner agaynst the Emperoure.
9 But Festus wyllinge to shewe the Iewes a pleasure, answered Paul, and sayde:
Wilt thou go vp to Ierusalem, and there be iudged off these thinges before me?
10 But Paul sayde: I stonde at the Emperours iudgmet seate, where I ought to be
iudged: to the Iewes haue I done no harme, as thou also knowest very well.
11 Yf I haue hurte eny man, or committed eny thinge worthy off death, I refuse
not to dye. But yf there are no soch thinges as they accuse me off, then maye no
man delyuer me vnto them. I appeale vnto the Emperoure.
12 Then spake Festus with the Councell, and answered: Thou hast appealed vnto
the Emperoure, to the Emperoure shalt thou go.
13 After certayne dayes came kynge Agrippa and Bernice to Cesarea to welcome
Festus.
14 And whan they had taried there many dayes, Festus rehearsed Pauls cause vnto
the kynge, and sayde: There is a man left bounde of Felix,
15 for whose cause the hye prestes and Elders of the Iewes appeared before me
whan I was at Ierusalem, and desyred a sentence agaynst him.
16 Vnto whom I answered: It is not the maner off the Romaynes to delyuer eny man
that he shulde perishe, before that he which is accused, haue his accusers
presente, and receaue libertye to answere for him selfe to the accusacion.
17 Wha they were come hither together, I made no delaye, but sat the nexte daye
in iudgment, and commaunded the man to be broughte forth.
18 Of whom, whan the accusers stode vp, they broughte no accusacion of soch
thinges as I supposed:
19 But had certayne questions agaynst him of their awne supersticions, and of
one Iesus deed, whom Paul affirmed to be alyue.
20 Howbeit because I vnderstode not the question, I axed hi, whether he wolde go
to Ierusale, and there be iudged of these matters.
21 But wha Paul had appealed, that he might be kepte vnto the knowlege of the
Emperoure, I comaunded him to be kepte, tyll I mighte sende him to the
Emperoure.
22 Agrippa sayde vnto Festus: I wolde fayne heare the man also. He sayde:
Tomorow shalt thou heare him.
23 And on the nexte daye came Agrippa & Bernice with greate pompe, and wete in
to the comon hall with the captaynes & chefe me of the cite. And at Festus
comaundement, Paul was brought forth.
24 And Festus sayde: Kynge Agrippa, and all ye men which are here with vs, ye se
this man, aboute whom all the multitude of the Iewes haue entreated me, both at
Ierusale and here also, and cried, that he ought not to lyue eny lenger.
25 But whan I perceaued that he had done nothinge worthy off death, and that he
himselfe also had appealed vnto the Emperoure, I determyned to sende him,
26 of who I haue no certayne thinge to wryte vnto my lorde. Therfore haue I
caused hi to be broughte forth before you, specially before the (O kynge
Agrippa) that after examinacion had, I might haue somwhat to wryte.
27 For me thynke it an vnreasonable thinge to sende a presoner, and not to shewe
the causes which are layed agaynst him.

Chapter 26

1 Agrippa sayde vnto Paul: Thou hast leue to speake for thy selfe.The Paul
stretched forth the hande, and answered for himselfe:
2 I thinke my selfe happye (O kynge Agrippa) because I shal answere this daye
before the, of all the thinges wherof I am accused of the Iewes:
3 specially for so moch as thou art experte in all customes and questions, which
are amonge the Iewes. Wherfore I beseche the, to heare me paciently.
4 My lyuynge truly from youth vp (how it was led from the begynnynge amonge this
people at Ierusale) knowe all the Iewes
5 which knewe me afore at the first, yf they wolde testifye, for after the most
strayte secte of oure Iewysh lawe, I lyued a Pharise.
6 And now stonde I, and am iudged because of the hope of the promes, that was
made of God vnto oure fathers,
7 vnto the which (promes) oure twolue trybes hope to come, seruynge God instatly
daye and nighte. For the which hopes sake (O kynge Agrippa) I am accused of the
Iewes.
8 Wherfore is this iudged amonge you not to be beleued, that God rayseth vp the
deed?
9 I also verely thoughte by my selfe, that I oughte to do many cotrary thinges
cleane agaynst the name off Iesus off Nazareth,
10 which I dyd at Ierusalem, whan I shut vp many sayntes in preson, whervpon I
receaued auctorite of ye hye prestes. And wha they shulde be put to death, I
broughte the sentence.
11 And thorow all the synagoges I punyshed them oft, and compelled the to
blaspheme, and was exceadinge mad vpon them, and persecuted them euen vnto
straunge cities.
12 Aboute which thinges as I wente towarde Damascon with auctorite and lycence
of the hye prestes,
13 euen at myddaye (O kynge) I sawe in the waye, that a lighte from heaue
(clearer then the brightnesse of the Sonne) shyned rounde aboute me, and them
that iourneyed with me.
14 But whan we were all fallen downe to the earth, I herde a voyce speakynge
vnto me, and sayege in Hebrue: Saul Saul, why persecutest thou me? It shalbe
harde for the to kycke agaynst the prycke.
15 But I sayde: LORDE, who art thou? He sayde: I am Iesus, whom thou
persecutest.
16 But ryse vp, and stonde vpon thy fete, for therfore haue I appeared vnto the,
that I mighte ordeyne the to be a mynister and witnesse of it that thou hast
sene, and that I wyll yet cause to appeare vnto the.
17 And I wil delyuer the from the people, and from the Heythen, amonge who I wil
now sende the,
18 to ope their eyes, that they maye turne from the darknesse vnto the lighte,
and from the power of ye deuell vnto God, that they maye receaue forgeuenesse of
synnes, and the enheritaunce with them that are sanctified by faith in me.
19 Wherfore (O kynge Agrippa) I was not faithlesse vnto ye heauely vision,
20 but shewed it first vnto them at Damascon, and at Ierusale, and in all the
coastes of Iewry, and to the Heythen, that they shulde do pennaunce, and turne
vnto God, and to do the righte workes of pennaunce.
21 For this cause the Iewes toke me in the temple, and wente aboute to kyll me.
22 But thorow the helpe of God lent vnto me, I stonde vnto this daye, and
testifye both vnto small and greate, and saye no other thinge, the that ye
prophetes haue sayde (that it shulde come to passe) and Moses,
23 that Christ shulde suffre, and be the first of the resurreccion from the
deed, and shew light vnto the people, and to the Heythen.
24 Whan he thus answered for himselfe, Festus sayde with a loude voyce: Paul,
thou art besydes thy selfe, moch lernynge maketh ye madd.
25 But Paul sayde: I am not madd (most deare Festus) but speake the wordes of
trueth and sobernesse:
26 for ye kynge knoweth this well, vnto whom I speake frely. For I thinke that
none off these thinges is hyd from him: for this was not done in a corner.
27 Beleuest thou the prophetes, O kynge Agrippa? I knowe that thou beleuest.
28 Agrippa sayde vnto Paul: Thou persuadest me in a parte to become a Christen.
29 Paul sayde: I wolde to God, that (not onely in a parte but alltogether,) I
mighte persuade not the onely, but all them that heare me this daye, to be soch
I am, these bondes excepte.
30 And whan he had spoken this, the kynge rose vp, and the Debyte, and Bernice,
and they that sat with them,
31 and wente asyde, and talked together, and sayde: This man hath done nothinge
that is worthy of death or of bondes.
32 But Agrippa sayde vnto Festus: This man mighte haue bene lowsed, yf he had
not appealed vnto the Emperoure.

Chapter 27

1 Whan it was concluded that we shulde sayle in to Italy, they delyuered Paul
and certayne other presoners to the vndercaptayne named Iulius, of the Emperours
soudyers.
2 And whan we were entred in to a shippe of Adramitium, to sayle by Asia, we
lowsed from londe. And there was with vs one Aristarchus out of Macedonia off
Thessalonica,
3 and on the nexte daye we came vnto Sidon. And Iulius intreated Paul
curteously, and gaue him liberty to go to his frendes, and to refresh himselfe.
4 And from thence launched we, and sayled harde by Cypers (because the wyndes
were agaynst vs)
5 and sayled ouer the see of Celicia and Pamphilia, and came to Myra in Lycia.
6 And there the vndercaptayne founde a shippe of Alexadria, ready to sayle in to
Italy, and put vs therin.
7 And whan we had sayled slowly, and in many dayes were scarcely come ouer
agaynst Gnydon (for the wynde with stode vs) we sayled by Candy nye vnto the
cite off Salmo,
8 and came scarcely beyonde it. Then came we to a place, which is called
Goodhauen, nye where vnto was the cite Lasea.
9 Now whan moch tyme was spent, and saylinge was now ioperdous, because that
they also had fasted ouerlonge, Paul exhorted them,
10 and sayde vnto them: Syrs, I se that this saylinge wyl be with hurte and moch
dammage, not onely of the ladynge and of the shippe, but also of oure lyues.
11 Neuertheles ye vndercaptayne beleued the gouernoure of the shippe and ye
master, more then it that was spoken of Paul.
12 And for somoch as the haue was not comodious to wynter in, the more parte off
them toke councell to departe thece, yf by eny meanes they might come to
Phenices to wynter there, which is an hauen of Candy, towarde the Southwest and
Northwest wynde.
13 Whan the South wynde blewe, they supposinge to haue had their purpose, lowsed
vnto Asson, and sayled past all Candy.
14 But not longe after, there rose agaynst their purpose a flawe of wynde, which
is called the Northeast.
15 And whan the shippe was caught, and coulde not resist ye wynde, we let her
go, and draue with the wedder.
16 But we came to an Ile named Claudia, where we coulde scarce get a bote.
17 Which they toke vp, and vsed helpe, and bounde it vnder harde to the shippe,
fearinge lest they shulde haue fallen in to the Syrtes, and let downe the
vessell, and so were caried.
18 And whan we had bydden a greate tepest, on the nexte daye they made an
outcastinge.
19 And on the thirde daye with oure awne handes we cast out the tacklynge of the
shippe.
20 But wha nether Sonne ner starres appeared in many dayes, and no small tempest
laye vpon vs, all the hope of oure life was taken awaye.
21 And after longe abstinence, Paul stode forth in the myddes of the, and sayde:
Syrs, ye shulde haue herkened vnto me, and not to haue lowsed from Candy, and
not to haue broughte vs this harme and losse.
22 And now I exhorte you to be of good cheare, for there shal none of oure lyues
perishe, but the shippe onely.
23 For this night stode by me the angell off God (whose I am, & who I serue)
24 & saide: Feare not Paul, thou must be broughte before the Emperoure. And lo,
God hath geuen vnto the all the that sayle with the.
25 Wherfore syrs be of good cheare: for I beleue God, yt it shal come so to
passe, as it was tolde me.
26 Howbeit we must be cast in to a certayne ylonde.
27 But whan the fourtenth night came, as we were caried in Adria aboute
mydnight, ye shipmen demed that there appeared some countre vnto them,
28 and they cast out the leade, and founde it twetye feddoms: and wha they were
gone a litle farther, they cast out the leade agayne, and founde fyftene
feddoms.
29 Then fearinge lest they shulde fall on some rocke, they cast foure anckers
out of the sterne, and wysshed for the daye.
30 Whan the shipmen were aboute to flye out of the shippe, and let downe the
bote in to the see, (vnder a coloure as though they wolde cast ankers out of the
fore shippe)
31 Paul sayde to ye vndercaptayne and to the soudyers: Excepte these byde in the
shippe, ye can not be saued.
32 Then the soudyers cut of the rope from the bote, and let it fall.
33 And whan it beganne to be daye, Paul exhorted them all to take meate, and
sayde: To daye is the fourtene daye that ye haue taried and contynued fastinge,
and haue receaued nothinge:
34 Wherfore I praye you to take meate, for youre health: for there shal not one
heer fall from the heade of eny of you.
35 And whan he had thus spoken, he toke bred, and gaue thankes to God before
them all, and brake it, and begane to eate.
36 Then were they all of good cheare, and toke meate also.
37 We were all together in the shippe two hundreth thre score and sixtene
soules.
38 And whan they had eaten ynough, they lightened the shippe, and cast out the
wheate in to the see.
39 Whan it was daye, they knewe not the londe. But they spyed an hauen with a
banke, in to which they were mynded (yf it were possible) to thrust in the
shippe.
40 And whan they had take vp the anckers, they commytted them selues to the see,
and lowsed the rudder bandes, and hoyssed vp the mayne sayle to the wynde, and
drue towarde londe.
41 And whan we chaunced on a place which had the see on both the sydes, the
shippe dasshed vpon it. And the fore parte abode fast vnmoued, but the hynder
parte brake thorow the violence of the wawes.
42 The soudyers councell was to kyll ye presoners, lest eny of them whan he had
swymmed out, shulde flye awaye.
43 But the vndercaptayne wyllinge to saue Paul, keped them from their purpose,
and commaunded that they which coulde swymme, shulde cast them selues first in
to the see, and escape vnto londe:
44 and the other, some on bordes, some on broken peces of the shippe. And so it
came to passe, that all the soules came safe vnto londe.

Chapter 28

1 And wha we were escaped, we knewe that the Ile was called Melite.
2 As for the people, they shewed vs no litle kyndnesse: for they kyndled a fyre,
and receaued vs all because of the rayne that was come vpo vs, and because of
the colde.
3 Whan Paul had gathered a bondell of stickes, and layed them on the fyre, there
came a vyper out of the heate, and leape on Pauls hande.
4 Whan the people sawe the beest hange on his hande, they sayde amonge them
selues: This man must nedes be a murthurer, who vengeaunce suffreth not to lyue,
though he haue escaped the see.
5 But he shoke of ye beest in to the fyre, and and felt no harme.
6 Howbeit they wayted, wha he shulde haue swollen, or fallen downe deed sodenly.
But whan they had loked a greate whyle, and sawe yt there happened no harme vnto
him, they chaunged their myndes, and sayde that he was a God.
7 In the same quarters the chefe man of the Ile whose name was Publius had a
lordshipe: the same receaued vs, and lodged vs thre dayes curteously.
8 It fortuned wha Publius father laye sicke of the feuers and of a bloudy fluxe,
Paul wente in vnto him, and prayed, and layed the handes on him, and healed him.
9 Whan this was done, other also which had diseases in the Ile, came, and were
healed.
10 And they dyd vs greate honoure. And whan we departed, they laded vs with
thinges necessary.
11 After thre monethes we sayled in a shippe of Alexandria, which had wyntred in
the Ile, and had a badge of Castor and Pollux.
12 And whan we came to Syracusa, we taried there thre dayes.
13 And whan we had sayled aboute, we came to Rhegium: and after one daye whan
the south wynde blewe, we came to Putiolus,
14 where we founde brethre and were desyred of them to tarye there seue dayes,
and so came we to Rome.
15 And from thence whan the brethren herde of vs, they came forth to mete vs to
Apiforum and to the Thre tauerns. Whan Paul sawe them, he thaked God, and waxed
bolde.
16 But wha we came to Rome, the vndercaptayne delyuered the presoners to ye
chefe captayne. As for Paul, he had leue to byde alone with one soudyer that
kepte him.
17 After thre dayes it fortuned, yt Paul called ye chefe of ye Iewes together.
And wha they were come, he sayde vnto the: Ye me & brethre I haue comytted
nothinge agaynst or people, ner agaynst ye lawes of ye fathers, yet was I boude,
delyuered out of Ierusale in to ye Romaynes hades:
18 which wha they had examyned me, wolde haue let me go, for so moch as there
was no cause of death i me.
19 But wha ye Iewes spake ye cotrary, I was costrayned to appeale vnto ye
Emperor: not as though I had ought to accuse my people of.
20 For this cause haue I called you, eue to se you, & to speake wt you: because
yt for ye hope of Israel, I am bounde wt this cheyne.
21 They sayde vnto hi: We haue nether receaued letter out of Iewry cocernynge
the, nether came there eny of the brethre, yt shewed or spake eny harme of ye.
22 But we wyl heare of ye what thou thinkest: for we haue herde of this secte,
that euery where it is spoken agaynst.
23 And wha they had appoynted hi a daye, there came many vnto hi in to his
lodginge: vnto who he expouded ye kyngdome of God & preached vnto the of Iesu,
out of ye lawe and out of the prophetes, eue fro mornynge vntyll the eue.
24 And some beleued ye thinge yt he sayde, but some beleued not.
25 But wha they agreed not amoge the selues, they departed, wha Paul had spoke
one worde: Full well hath the holy goost spoke by ye prophet Esay vnto or
fathers,
26 & sayde: Go vnto this people, and saye: With eares ye shal heare, & not
vnderstode: & with eyes shal ye se, & not perceaue.
27 For ye hert of this people is waxed grosse, & they heare hardly wt their
eares: & their eyes haue they closed, yt they shulde not once se wt their eyes,
& heare wt their eares, & vnderstode i their hertes, and be couerted, yt I
mighte heale the.
28 Be it knowne therfore vnto you, yt this saluacio of God is sent vnto ye
Heythe, and they shal heare it.
29 And wha he sayde yt, ye Iewes departed, & had a greate disputacion amonge the
selues.
30 But Paul abode two whole yeares in his owne hyred dwellinge, & receaued all
the yt came in vnto hi,
31 preachinge ye kyngdome of God, and teachinge those thinges which concerne the
LORDE Iesus with all boldnesse, vnforbydden.


Romans

Chapter 1

1 Pavl the seruaunte of Iesus Christ, called to be an Apostle, put aparte to
preach the Gospell of God
2 (which he promysed a fore by his prophetes in ye holy scriptures)
3 off his sonne, which was begotte of ye sede of Dauid after the flesh:
4 and mightely declared to be the sonne of God after the sprete which
sanctifieth, sence the tyme that he rose agayne from the deed, namely, Iesus
Christ oure LORDE,
5 by whom we haue receaued grace and Apostelshippe amonge all Heythen, to set vp
the obedience of faith vnder his name,
6 of whom ye are a parte also, which are called of Iesus Christ.
7 To all you that be at Rome, beloued of God, and sayntes by callynge Grace be
wt you and peace fro God oure father, and the LORDE Iesus Christ.
8 First, I thanke my God thorow Iesus Christ for you all, that youre faith is
spoken of thorow out all the worlde.
9 For God is my witnesse ( whom I serue in my sprete in the Gospell of his
sonne) that without ceassynge I make mencion of you besekinge allwayes in my
prayers,
10 that I mighte once haue a prosperous iourney ( by the will off God) to come
vnto you.
11 For I longe to se you, that I mighte bestowe vpon you some spirituall gifte
to stregth you
12 (that is)that I mighte be conforted with you, thorow yor faith & myne, which
we haue together.
13 But I wolde ye shulde knowe (brethren) how that I haue often tymes purposed
to come vnto you (but haue bene let hither to) that I mighte do some good amonge
you, like as amonge other Gentyles.
14 I am detter both to the Grekes, and to the vngrekes, to the wyse and to the
vnwyse.
15 Wherfore (as moch as i me is) I am ready to preach the Gospell vnto you at
Rome also.
16 For I am not ashamed of the Gospell of Christ: for it is the power of God,
which saueth all that beleue theron, the Iewe first & also the Greke:
17 for in it ye righteousnes that is of value before God, is opened, which
cometh out of faith i to faith.
18 As it is wrytte: The iust shal lyue by his faith. For ye wrath of God is
declared from heauen vpon all vngodlynes and vnrighteousnes of me,which witholde
the trueth of God in vnrighteousnes:
19 because that it, which maye be knowne of God, is manifest with the. For God
hath shewed it vnto the,
20 that the inuisible thinges of God (that is, his euerlastinge power and
Godheade) mighte be sene whyle they are considered by the workes from the
creacion of the worlde: so that they are without excuse,
21 in as moch as they knewe, that there is a God, and haue not praysed him as
God ner thanked him, but became vayne in their ymaginacions, and their foolish
hert was blynded.
22 Whan they counted them selues wyse, they became fooles:
23 and turned ye glory of the incorruptible God in to ye symilitude of ye ymage
of a corruptible ma, & of byrdes, & of foure foted, & of crepinge beestes
24 Wherfore God likewyse gaue them vp vnto their hertes lustes in to vnclennes,
to defyle their awne bodies in them selues,
25 which turned the trueth of God vnto a lye, & worshipped and serued the
creature more then the maker, which is blessed for euer. Amen.
26 Therfore God gaue the vp vnto shamefull lustes. For their wemen chaunged the
naturall vse in to the vnnaturall:
27 likewyse ye me also lefte the naturall vse of the woman, and brent in their
lustes one on another, and man with man wrought fylthines, and receaued in them
selues the rewarde of their erroure, as it was acordinge.
28 And as they regarded not to knowe God, euen so God gaue the vp in to a lewde
mynde, to do those thinges which were not comly,
29 beynge full of all vnrighteousnes, whordome, wickednes, couetousnes,
maliciousnes, full of enuye, murthur, strife, disceate, euell codicioned
whisperers,
30 backbyters, despysers of God, doers of wronge, proude, boosters, bryngers vp
of euell thinges, disobedient to their Elders,
31 without vnderstondinge, couenaunt breakers, vnlouynge, stubborne,
vnmercifull:
32 which men, though they knowe the righteousnes of God (that they which do
soch, are worthy of death) yet not onely do the same, but also haue pleasure in
those that do the.

Chapter 2

1 Therfore canst thou not excuse thyselfe (O ma) who soeuer thou be that
iudgest: for loke wherin thou iudgest another, thou condemnest thy selfe, in so
moch as thou that iudgest, doest euen the same.
2 For we are sure that the iudgment of God is (acordinge to the trueth) ouer
them that do soch.
3 But thinkest thou this O thou man, that iudgest them which do soch thinges,
and doest euen the very same thy selfe, that thou shalt escape ye iudgmet of
God?
4 Or despysest thou the riches of his goodnesse, pacience, and loge sufferinge?
Knowest thou not, that ye louynge kyndnesse of God leadeth the to repentaunce?
5 But thou after thine harde and impenitent hert, heapest vnto thy selfe a
treasure of wrath, agaynst the daye of wrath and of the openynge of the
righteous iudgment of God,
6 which shal rewarde euery man acordinge to his dedes:
7 namely, prayse & honoure, and vncorrupcion, vnto them that with pacience in
doinge good, seke euerlastinge life:
8 But vnto them that are contencious & not obedient vnto the trueth, but obeye
vnrighteousnes, shal come indignacion and wrath,
9 trouble and anguysh vpo all the soules of me that do euell, of the Iewe first
and also of the Greke:
10 But vnto all the that do good (shal come) prayse and honoure, and peace, vnto
the Iewe first, and also to the Greke.
11 For there is no respecte of personnes before God: Who so euer haue synned
without lawe,
12 shal perish also without lawe: and whosoeuer haue synned in the lawe, shalbe
iudged by the lawe.
13 For before God, they are not righteous, which heare ye lawe: but they that do
the lawe, shalbe iustified.
14 For yf the Gentyles which haue not the lawe, do of nature the thinges
conteyned in the lawe, then they hauynge not the lawe, are a lawe vnto them
selues,
15 in that they shewe, that the worke of ye lawe is wrytte in their hertes:
whyle their conscience beareth witnesse vnto the, and also the thoughtes which
accuse or excuse them amonge them selues,
16 in the daye whan God shal iudge the secretes of men by Iesus Christ,
acordinge to my Gospell.
17 But take hede, thou art called a Iewe, and trustest in the lawe, & makest thy
boost of God,
18 and knowest his will: & for so moch as thou art enfourmed out of ye lawe,
19 thou prouest what is best to do, and presumest to be a leader of the blynde:
a lighte of them yt are in darcknes:
20 an enformer of ye vnwyse: a teacher of ye symple: which hast the ensample of
knowlege & of the trueth in the lawe.
21 Now teachest thou other, and teachest not thy selfe. Thou preachest that a
man shulde not steale, and thou stealest.
22 Thou sayest, that a man shulde not breake wedlocke, and thou breakest
wedlocke. Thou abhorrest ymages, and robbest God of his honoure.
23 Thou makest thy boost of the lawe, and thorow breakynge of the lawe thou
dishonorest God.
24 For thorow you is the name of God euell spoken of amonge the Gentyles, as it
is wrytten.
25 The circucision verely avayleth, yf thou kepe the lawe: but yf thou breake
the lawe, then is thy circumcision become vncircumcision.
26 Therfore yf the vncircumcision kepe the righte thinges conteyned in the lawe,
shal not his vncircumcision be counted for circumcision?
27 And so it that of nature is vncircumcision, and fulfilleth the lawe shal
iudge the, which vnder the letter and circumcision trasgressest the lawe.
28 For he is not a Iew which is a Iewe outwarde: nether is that circucision
which is done outwardly in ye flesh:
29 But he is a Iewe, which is hydd within. And the circumcision of ye hert is
the circumcision, which is done in the sprete and not in the letter: Whoseprayse
is not of men, but of God.

Chapter 3

1 What furtheraunce then haue the Iewes? Or what avauntageth circucision?
2 Surely very moch. First Vnto them was commytted what God spake.
3 But where as some of them dyd not beleue theron, what then? Shulde their
vnbeleue make the promes of God of none effecte?
4 God forbyd. Let it rather be thus, that God is true, and all me lyers. As it
is wrytten: That thou mayest be iustified in thy sayenges, and shuldest
ouercome, wha thou art iudged.
5 But yf it be so, that oure vnrighteousnes prayseth ye righteousnes of God,
what shal we saye? Is God then vnrighteous, that he is angrie therfore? (I
speake thus after the maner off men)
6 God forbyd. How mighte God the iudge ye worlde?
7 For yf the trueth of God be thorow my lye the more excellent vnto his prayse,
why shulde I the be iudged yet as a synner?
8 & not rather to do thus (as we are euell spoken of, and as some reporte, that
we shulde saye) Let vs do euell, yt good maye come therof. Whose danacio is
inste.
9 What saye we then? Are we better then they? No, in no wyse: for we haue proued
afore, yt both the Iewes and Grekes are all vnder synne.
10 As it is wrytte: There is none righteous, no not one.
11 There is none yt vnderstondeth, there is none that seketh after God.
12 They are all gone out of the waye, they are alltogether become vnprofitable:
there is none that doeth good, no not one.
13 Their throte is an open sepulcre, with their tunges they haue disceaued, the
poyson off Aspes is vnder their lippes.
14 Their mouth is full of cursynge and bytternesse.
15 Their fete are swifte to shed bloude.
16 Destruccion & wrechidnes are in their wayes,
17 and ye waye of peace haue they not knowne.
18 There is no feare of God before their eyes.
19 But we knowe, yt, what soeuer the lawe sayeth, it sayeth it vnto them which
are vnder the lawe, yt euery mouthe maye be stopped, & yt all the worlde maye be
detter vnto God,
20 because yt by ye dedes of the lawe no flesh maye be iustified in his sighte.
For by the lawe commeth but the knowlege of synne.
21 But now without addinge to of ye lawe is the righteousnes which avayleth
before God, declared, hauynge witnesse of ye lawe and the prophetes:
22 but I speake of ye righteousnes before God, which cometh by the faith on
Iesus Christ, vnto all, and vpo all them that beleue.For here is no difference.
23 For they are all synners, and wate the prayse that God shulde haue of the,
24 but without deseruynge are they made righteous eue by his grace, thorow the
redempcion that is done by Christ Iesu,
25 whom God hath set forth for a Mercyseate thorow faith in his bloude, to shewe
the righteousnes which avayleth before him, in that he forgeueth the synnes,
which were done before vnder the sufferaunce of God, which he suffred,
26 that at this tyme he mighte shewe ye righteousnes which avayleth before him:
yt he onely mighte be righteous, & the righteous maker of him which is of the
faith on Iesus.
27 Where is now then thy reioysinge? It is excluded. By what lawe? By the lawe
of workes? Nay, but by the lawe of faith.
28 We holde therfore that a man is iustified by faith, without the workes of the
lawe.
29 Or is God the God of the Iewes onely? Is he not also the God of the Heythen?
Yes verely the God of the Heythen also,
30 for so moch as he is the God onely that iustifieth the circumcision which is
of faith, and the vncircucision thorow faith.
31 Destroye we then the lawe thorow faith? God forbyd. But we mantayne the lawe.

Chapter 4

1 What shal we saye the, that Abraha or father as pertayninge to ye flesh dyd
fynde?
2 This we saye: Yf Abraham were made righteous thorow workes, then hath he
wherin to reioyse, but not before God.
3 But what sayeth ye scripture? Abraha belened God, & yt was counted vnto him
for righteousnes.
4 Vnto hi yt goeth aboute wt workes, is the rewarde not rekened of fauoure, but
of dutye:
5 owbeit vnto him, yt goeth not aboute with workes, but beleueth on him yt
iustifieth the vngodly, is his faith counted for righteousnes.
6 Euen as Dauid sayeth also, that blessednes is onely that mans, vnto who God
counteth righteousnes without addinge to of workes, where he sayeth:
7 Blessed are they, whose vnrighteousnesses are forgeuen, and whose synnes are
couered.
8 Blessed is the man, vnto whom the LORDE imputeth no synne.
9 Now this blessednes, goeth it ouer the circucision, or ouer the
vncircumcision? We must nedes graunte, yt Abrahas faith was couted vnto hi for
righteousnes.
10 How was it the rekened vnto him? In the circucision, or in the
vncircumcision? Doutles not in the circucision, but in the vncircumcision.
11 As for the toke of circucision he receaued it for a seale off the
righteousnes off faith, which he had yet in ye vncircusion, yt he shulde be a
father of all the yt beleue, beinge in ye vncircucisio, yt it might be couted
vnto the also for righteousnes:
12 & that he might be a father of circumcision, not onely of the that are of ye
circumcision, but of them also that walke in the fotesteppes of the faith, which
was in the vncircumcision of oure father Abraham.
13 For the promes (that he shulde be ye heyre of the worlde) was not made vnto
Abraham or to his sede thorow the lawe, but thorow the righteousnes of faith.
14 For yf they which are of the lawe be heyres, the is faith vayne, and the
promes of none effecte,
15 for so moch as the lawe causeth but wrath. For where the lawe is not, there
is also no transgression.
16 Therfore was the promes made thorow fayth, that it myght come off fauoure,
wherby the promesse myghte be made sure vnto all the sede: not onely vnto him
which is off the lawe, but also vnto him that is of the faith of Abraha which is
the father of vs all.
17 As it is wrytten: I haue made the a father of many Heythe before God, whom
thou hast beleued: which quyckeneth the deed, and calleth it which is not, that
it maye be.
18 And he beleued vpo hope, where nothinge was to hope, that he shulde be a
father of many Heythen. Acordinge as it was sayde vnto him:
19 Euen so shal thy sede be. And he was not faynte in faith, nether cosidred his
awne body, which was deed allready, whyle he was almost an hundreth yeare olde,
nether the deed wombe of Sara.
20 For he douted not in the promes of God thorow vnbeleue, but was stroge in
faith, and gaue God the prayse:
21 & was sure, that loke what God promyseth, he is able to make it good.
22 And therfore was it rekened vnto him for righteousnes.
23 But this is not wrytte onely for his sake, yt it was counted vnto him,
24 but also for oure sakes: vnto who it shalbe counted, yf we beleue on him,
that raysed vp oure LORDE Iesus from the deed.
25 Which was geuen for oure synnes, and raysed vp for oure righteousnesse sake.

Chapter 5

1 Because therfore that we are iustified by faith, we haue peace with God thorow
oure LORDE Iesus Christ
2 by who also we haue an intraunce in faith vnto this grace, wherin we stonde, &
reioyse in the hope of ye glorye for to come, which God shal geue.
3 Not onely yt, but we reioyse also i troubles, for so moch as we knowe, yt
trouble bryngeth paciece,
4 paciece bryngeth experiece, experiece bryngeth hope:
5 As for hope, is letteth vs not come to cofusion, because the loue of God is
shed abrode in oure hertes, by the holy goost which is geuen vnto vs.
6 For whan we were yet weake acordinge to the tyme, Christ dyed for vs vngodly.
7 Now dyeth there scace eny man for the righteous sake: Peraduenture for a good
man durst one dye.
8 Therfore doth God set forth his loue towarde vs, in yt Christ dyed for vs,whan
we were yet synners:
9 Moch more then shal we be saued from wrath by him seynge we are now made
righteous thorow his bloude.
10 For yf we were recocyled vnto God by ye death of his sone, wha we were yet
enemies: moch more shal we be saued by him, now yt we are reconcyled.
11 Not onely that, but we reioyse also in God thorow oure LORDE Iesus Christ, by
whom we haue now receaued the attonement.
12 Wherfore as by one man synned entred in to the worlde, and death by ye meanes
off synne:
13 euen so wente death also ouer all men, in so moch as they all haue synned.
For synne was in ye worlde vnto the lawe: but where no lawe is, there is not
synne regarded.
14 Neuertheles death reigned from Adam vnto Moses, euen ouer them also that
synned not with like trangression as dyd Adam, which is ye ymage of him yt was
to come.
15 But it is not with the gifte as with the synne: for yf thorow the synne of
one many be deed, yet moch more plenteously came the grace and gifte of God vpon
many by the fauoure that belonged vnto one man Iesus Christ.
16 And the gifte is not onely ouer one synne, as death came thorow one synne of
one that synned. For the iudgment came of one synne vnto condempnacion, but the
gifte to iustifye fro many synnes.
17 For yf by ye synne of one, death raigned by the meanes of one, moch more shal
they which receaue the abudaunce of grace and of the gifte vnto righteousnes,
raigne in life by ye meanes of one Iesus Christ.
18 Likewyse the as by the synne of one, condemnacion came on all men, euen so
also by the righteousness of one, came the iustififienge off life vpon all men.
19 For as by the disobedience of one, many became synners, euen so by the
obedience of one shal many be made righteous.
20 But the lawe in the meane tyme entred, that synne shulde increace.
Neuertheles where abundaunce of synne was, there was yet more plenteousnes of
grace:
21 that, like as synne had reigned vnto death, eue so mighte grace reigne also
thorow righteousnes to euerlastinge life by the meanes of Iesus Christ.

Chapter 6

1 What shal we saye then? Shal we contynue in synne, that there maye be
abundaunce of grace?
2 God forbyd. How shal we lyue in synne, yt are deed from it?
3 Knowe ye not, that all we which are baptysed into Iesu Christ, are baptysed in
to his death?
4 Therfore are we buried wt him by baptyme in to death, that, like as Christ was
raysed vp from the deed by the glory of the father, euen so we also shulde walke
in a new life.
5 For yf we be grafted wt him vnto like death, then shal we be like the
resurreccion also:
6 For so moch as we knowe, that oure olde man is crucified with him, that the
synfull body mighte ceasse, that hence forth we shulde serue synne no more.
7 For he that is deed, is made righteous fro synne
8 But yf we be deed with Christ, we beleue, that we shal lyue also with him,
9 and are sure, that Christ raysed from the deed, dyeth nomore: Death shal haue
nomore power ouer him.
10 For as touchinge that he dyed, he dyed cocernynge synne once: but as
touchinge that he lyueth, he lyueth vnto God.
11 Likewyse ye also, counte youre selues to be euen deed concernynge synne, and
to lyue vnto God thorow Iesus Christ oure LORDE.
12 Let not synne reigne therfore in youre mortall bodye, that ye shulde obeye
vnto the lustes of it.
13 ether geue ye ouer youre membres vnto synne to be wapens of vnrighteousnes,
but geue ouer youre selues vnto God, as they that off deed are become lyuynge,
and youre membres vnto God to be wapes off righteousnes.
14 For synne shal not haue power ouer you, in so moch as ye are not vnder the
lawe, but vnder grace.
15 How then? Shal we synne, because we are not vnder ye lawe, but vnder grace?
God forbyd.
16 Knowe ye not, that loke vnto who ye geue ouer youre selues as seruauntes to
obeye, his seruauntes ye are to whom ye obey, whether it be of synne vnto death,
or of obediece vnto righteousnes?
17 But God be thanked, that though ye haue bene the seruauntes of synne, ye are
now yet obedient of herte to the ensample off the doctryne, whervnto ye are
commytted.
18 For now that ye are made fre from synue, ye are become the seruauntes of
righteousnes.
19 I wil speake grosly, because of the weaknes of youre flesh. Like as ye haue
geuen ouer youre membres to the seruyce of vnclennesse, from one wickednesse to
another: Eue so now also geue ouer youre membres to the seruyce of
righteousnesse, that they maye be holy.
20 For whan ye were the seruauntes of synne, ye were lowse from righteousnes.
21 What frute had ye at that tyme in those thinges, wherof ye are now ashamed?
For the ende of soch thinges is death.
22 But now that ye be fre from synne, and are become the seruauntes of God, ye
haue youre frute that ye shulde be holy: but the ende is euerlastinge life.
23 For death is the rewarde of synne, but the gifte of God is euerlastinge life.

Chapter 7

1 Knowe ye not brethren (for I speake vnto them that knowe the lawe) how that ye
lawe hath power vpon a man as longe as he lyueth?
2 For the woman yt is in subieccion to the man, is bounde vnto the lawe whyle
the man lyueth: but yf the man dye, then is she lowsed from the lawe that
concerneth the man.
3 Yf she be now with another man, whyle the man lyueth, she shal be called a
wedlocke breaker. But yf the man be deed, then is she fre from the lawe, so that
she is no wedlocke breaker, yf she be with another man.
4 Euen so my brethren, ye also are deed vnto the lawe by the body of Christ,
that ye shulde be with another (namely wt him which is raysed vp from the deed)
that we shulde brynge forth frute vnto God.
5 For whan we were in the flesh, the synfull lustes (which were stered vp by the
lawe) were mightie in oure membres to brynge forth frute vnto death.
6 But now are we lowsed from the lawe, and deed vnto it, that helde vs captyue,
so that we shulde serue in a new conuersacion of the sprete, and not in the olde
conuersacion of the letter.
7 What shal we saye then? Is the lawe synne? God forbyd: Neuertheles I knewe not
synne, but by ye lawe. For I had knowne nothinge of lust, yf the lawe had not
sayde: Thou shalt not lust.
8 But then toke synne occasion at the commaundement, and stered vp in me all
maner of lust. For without the lawe synne was deed.
9 As for me, I lyued some tyme without lawe. Howbeit whan the commaundement
came, synne reuyued, but I was deed.
10 And the very same commaundement that was geuen me vnto life, was founde to be
vnto me on occasion of death.
11 For synne toke occasion at the comaundement, and disceaued me, and slewe me
by the same commaundement.
12 The lawe in dede is holy, and the commaundement holy, iust and good.
13 Is that then which is good, become death vnto me? God forbyd. But synne, that
it mighte appeare how yt it is synne, hath wroughte me death thorow good: that
synne mighte be out of measure synfull by the commaundement.
14 For we knowe, that the lawe is spirituall, but I am carnall, solde vnder
synne:
15 because I knowe not what I do. For I do not yt I will, but what I hate, yt do
I.
16 Yf I do now that which I wil not, the graunte I, that the lawe is good.
17 So then it is not I that do it, but synne that dwelleth in me:
18 for I knowe that in me (yt is, in my flesh) there dwelleth no good thinge.To
wyll is present wt me, but to perfourme yt which is good,
19 I fynde not. For ye good that I wyll, do I not: but the euell which I wil
not, that do I.
20 Yf I do now that I wil not, then is it not I that do it, but synne that
dwelleth in me.
21 Thus fynde I now by the lawe, yt whan I wyl do good, euell is present with
me.
22 For I delite in the lawe of God after the inwarde man:
23 but I se another lawe in my membres, which stryueth agaynst ye lawe of my
mynde, and taketh me presoner in ye lawe of synne, which is in my membres.
24 O wretched man that I am, who shal delyuer me from the body of this death?
25 I thanke God thorow Iesus Christ oure LORDE. So then wt the mynde I serue ye
lawe of God, but with the flesh the lawe of synne.

Chapter 8

1 Then is there now no damnacion vnto the that are in Christ Iesu, which walke
not after the flesh, but after ye sprete.
2 For ye lawe of ye sprete (yt bryngeth life i Christ Iesu) hath made me fre fro
the lawe of synne & death.
3 For what vnpossible was vnto ye lawe (in as moch as it was weake because of
the flesh) yt perfourmed God, & sent his sonne in ye similitude of synfull
flesh,
4 & by synne daned synne in ye flesh: that the righteousnes requyred of the
lawe, mighte be fulfylled in vs, which walke not after the flesh, but after the
sprete.
5 For they that are fleshly, are fleshly mynded: but they that are goostly, are
goostly mynded.
6 To be fleshly mynded, is death: but to be goostly mynded, is life and peace.
7 For to be fleshly mynded is enemyte agaynst. God, syth it is not subdued vnto
ye lawe of God, for it can not also.
8 As for the that are fleshlye, they can not please God.
9 Howbeit ye are not fleshly, but goostly, yf so be that the sprete of God dwell
in you. But who so hath not the sprete of Christ, the same is not his.
10 Neuertheles yf Christ be in you, then is the body deed because of synne. But
the sprete is life for righteousnes sake.
11 Wherfore yf the sprete of him, that raysed vp Iesus from the deed, dwell in
you, then shal euen he also that raysed vp Christ from the deed, quycke youre
mortal bodies, because yt his sprete dwelleth in you.
12 Therfore brethre we are now detters, not to the flesh,
13 to lyue after the flesh: for yf ye lyue after ye fleshe, ye must dye: but yf
ye mortyfye the dedes of the body thorow the sprete, ye shal lyue.
14 For who so euer are led by the sprete of God,
15 are Gods childre: for ye haue not receaued the sprete of bondage to feare eny
more, but ye haue receaued ye sprete of adopcion, wherby we crye: Abba, deare
father.
16 The same sprete certifieth oure sprete, that we are the childre of God.
17 Yf we be childre, then are we heyres also, namely the heyres of God, and
heyres annexed with Christ, yf so be that we suffer together, that we maye be
also glorified together.
18 For I suppose, that the affliccions off this tyme, are not worthy of ye
glorye, which shalbe shewed vpon vs.
19 For the feruent loginge of ye creature loketh for the appearinge of the
children of God,
20 because the creature is subdued vnto vanyte agaynst hir will, but for his
wyll that hath subdued her vpon hope.
21 For the creature also shal be fre from the bondage of corrupcion, vnto the
glorious libertye of the childre of God.
22 For we knowe, that euery creature groneth, and trauayleth with vs in payne
vnto the same tyme.
23 Not they only, but we oure selues also, which haue the first frutes of the
sprete, grone within in oure selues for the childshippe, and loke for ye
delyueraunce of oure bodye.
24 For we are saued i dede, howbeit i hope: but ye hope that is sene, is no
hope: for how can a man hope for that which he seyeth?
25 But yf we hope for that which we se not, the do we thorow pacience abyde for
it.
26 Likewyse the sprete also helpeth oure weaknesse: for we knowe not what we
shulde desyre as we oughte: neuertheles ye sprete it selfe maketh intercession
mightely for vs with vnoutspeakable gronynges.
27 Howbeit he yt searcheth the hert, knoweth what the mynde of the sprete is:
for he maketh intercession for the sayntes acordinge to the pleasure of God.
28 But sure we are, that all thinges serue for the best vnto them that loue of
God, which are called of purpose.
29 For those whom he knewe before, hath he ordeyned also before, yt they shulde
be like fashioned vnto ye shappe of his sonne, yt he mighte be the first begotte
amoge many brethre.
30 As for those whom he hath ordeyned before, them hath he called also: and whom
he hath called, the hath he also made righteous: and whom he hath made
righteous, them hath he glorified also.
31 What shal we saye then vnto these thinges? Yff God be on oure syde, who can
be agaynst vs.
32 Which spared not his owne sonne, but hath geuen him for vs all: how shal he
not with him geue vs all thinges also?
33 Who wyl laye enythinge to ye charge of Gods chosen? Here is God that maketh
righteous,
34 who wil then condemne? Here is Christ that is deed, yee rather which is
raysed vp agayne, which is also on ye righte hande of God, and maketh
intercession for vs.
35 Who will separate vs from the loue of God? Trouble? or anguysh? or
persecucio? or honger? or nakednesse? or parell? or swerde?
36 As it is wrytten: For thy sake are we kylled all the daye longe, we are
counted as shepe appoynted to be slayne.
37 Neuerthelesse in all these thinges we ouercome farre, for his sake that loued
vs.
38 For sure I am, that nether death ner life, nether angell, ner rule, nether
power, nether thinges present, nether thinges to come,
39 nether heyth, ner loweth, nether eny other creature shalbe able to separate
vs from the loue of God, which is in Christ Iesu oure LORDE.

Chapter 9

1 I saye the trueth in Christ, and lye not (wherof my conscience beareth me
witnesse in the holy goost)
2 that I haue greate heuynesse & contynuall sorowe in my hert.
3 I haue wysshed my selfe to be cursed from Christ for my brethren, that are my
kynsmen after the flesh,
4 which are off Israel: vnto whom pertayneth the childshippe, and the glory, and
the couenauntes and lawe, and the seruyce of God, and the promyses:
5 whose are also the fathers, off whom (after the flesh) commeth Christ, which
is God ouer all, blessed for euer, Ame.
6 But I speake not these thinges, as though the worde of God were of none
effecte: for they are not all Israelites, which are of Israel:
7 nether are they all children, because they are the sede of Abraham: but in
Isaac shal the sede be called
8 vnto the, that is, They which are children after the flesh, are not the
children of God, but the children of the promes are counted for the sede.
9 For this is a worde of the promes, where he sayeth: Aboute this tyme wyl I
come, and Sara shal haue a sonne.
10 Howbeit it is not so with this onely, but also whan Rebecca was with childe
by one (namely by oure father Isaac)
11 or euer the childre were borne, & had done nether good ner bad (that the
purpose of God might stode acordinge to the eleccion, not by the deseruynge of
workes, but by the grace of the caller)
12 it was sayde thus vnto her: The greater shal serue the lesse.
13 As it is wrytten: Iacob haue I loued, but Esau haue I hated.
14 What shal we saye then? Is God then vnrighteous? God forbyd.
15 For he sayeth vnto Moses: I shewe mercy, to whom I shewe mercy: and haue
copassion,
16 on who I haue compassion. So lyeth it not then in eny mans wyll or runnynge,
but in the mercy of God.
17 For the scripture sayeth vnto Pharao: For this cause haue I stered the vp,
euen to shewe my power on the, that my name mighte be declared in all lodes.
18 Thus hath he mercy on whom he wyl: and whom he wyl, he hardeneth.
19 Thou wilt saye then vnto me: Why blameth he vs yet? For who can resiste his
will?
20 O thou man, who art thou, that disputest with God? Sayeth the worke to his
workman: Why hast thou made me on this fashion?
21 Hath not the potter power, out of one lompe of claye to make one vessell vnto
honoure, and another vnto dishonoure?
22 Therfore whan God wolde shewe wrath, and to make his power knowne, he
broughte forth with greate pacience the vessels off wrath, which are ordeyned to
damnacion:
23 that he mighte declare the riches off his glorye on ye vessels of mercy,
which he hath prepared vnto glorye,
24 whom he hath called (namely vs) not onely of the Iewes, but also of the
Gentyles.
25 As he sayeth also by Osee: I wil call that my people, which is not my people:
and my beloued, which is not ye beloued.
26 And it shal come to passe in ye place, where it was sayde vnto them: Ye are
not my people, there shal they be called the children of the lyuynge God.
27 But Esay crieth ouer Israel: Though the nombre of the children of Israel be
as the sonde of the see, yet shal there but a remnaunt be saued.
28 For there is the worde, that fynisheth and shorteneth in righteousnes: for a
shorte worde shal God make vpon earth.
29 And as Esay sayde before: Excepte the LORDE of Sabbaoth had lefte vs sede, we
shulde haue bene as Sodoma, and like vnto Gomorra.
30 What shal we saye then? This wil we saye: The Heythen which folowed not
righteousnes, haue ouertaken righteousnes: but I speake of the righteousnes that
commeth of faith.
31 Agayne, Israel folowed the lawe of righteousnes, and attayned not vnto the
lawe of righteousnes.
32 Why so? Euen because they soughte it not out of faith, but as it were out of
the deseruynge of workes. For they haue stombled at the stomblinge stone.
33 As it is wrytten: Beholde, I laye in Sion a stone to stoble at, and a rocke
to be offended at: and who so euer beleueth on him, shal not be confounded.

Chapter 10

1 Brethren, my hertes desyre, & prayer vnto God for Israel is, that they might
be saued.
2 For I beare them recorde, that they are zelous for Gods cause, but not wt
vnderstondinge.
3 For they knowe not the righteousnes which auayleth before God, and go aboute
to manteyne their awne righteousnes: and thus they are not subdued vnto the
righteousnes, that is off value before God.
4 For Christ is the ende of the lawe, vnto righteousnes for euery one yt
beleueth.
5 Moses wryteth of ye righteousnes which commeth of the lawe, that the man which
doth ye same, shal lyue therin.
6 But ye righteousnes which cometh of faith, speaketh on this wyse: Saye not in
thine hert: Who wil go vp in to heaue? (that is nothinge els then to fetch
Christ downe)
7 Or who wyl go downe in to ye depe? (that is nothinge els the to fetch vp
Christ from the deed.)
8 But what sayeth the scripture? The worde is nye the, euen in thy mouth and in
thine hert. This is ye worde of faith yt we preach.
9 For yf thou knowlegest Iesus with thy mouth, that he is the LORDE, and
beleuest in thine hert, that God hath raysed him vp from the deed, thou shalt be
saued.
10 For yf a man beleue from the hert, he shalbe made righteous: and yf a ma
knowlege with the mouth, he shal be saued.
11 For the scripture sayeth: Who so euer beleueth on him, shal not be
confounded.
12 Here is no difference, nether of the Iewe ner of the Gentyle. For one is
LORDE of all, which is riche vnto all yt call vpo him.
13 For who so euer shal call vpon the name of the LORDE, shalbe saued.
14 But how shal they call vpo him, on who they beleue not? How shal they beleue
on him, of who they haue not herde? How shal they heare without a preacher?
15 But how shal they preach, excepte they be sent? As it is wrytte: How
beutyfull are the fete of the yt preach peace, yt brynge good tidinges?
16 But they are not all obedient vnto the Gospell. For Esaye sayeth: LORDE, who
beleueth oure preachinge?
17 So the faith cometh by hearynge, but hearinge cometh by the worde of God.
18 But I saye: Haue they not herde? No doute their sounde wete out into all
londes, and their wordes in to the endes of the worlde.
19 But I saye: Hath not Israel knowne? First, Moses sayeth: I wil prouoke you to
enuye, by them that are not my people: & by a foolish nacion wyl I anger you.
20 Esaye after him is bolde, aud sayeth: I am founde of them, that sought me
not: & haue appeared vnto them, that axed not after me.
21 But vnto Israel he sayeth: All the daye loge haue I stretched forth my handes
vnto a people yt beleueth not, but speaketh agaynst me.

Chapter 11

1 I saye then: Hath God thrust out his people? God forbyd: for I also am an
Israelite, of the sede of Abraham out of the trybe of Ben Iamin.
2 God hath not thrust out his people, whom he knewe before. Or wote ye not what
the scripture sayeth of Elias, how he maketh intercession vnto God agaynst
Israel, and sayeth:
3 LORDE, they haue slayne thy prophetes, & dydged downe thine altares, and I am
lefte ouer onely, and they seke my life?
4 But what sayeth the answere of God vnto him? I haue reserued vnto me seuen
thousande men, which haue not bowed their knee before Baal.
5 Eue so goeth it now at this tyme also wt this remnaunt after ye eleccion of
grace.
6 Yf it be done of grace, the is it not of deseruynge: els were grace no grace.
But yf it be of deseruynge, then is grace nothinge: els were deseruynge no
deseruynge.
7 What the? Israel hath not optayned yt which he soughte, but the eleccion hath
optayned it. As for ye other, they are blynded.
8 As it is wrytten: God hath geuen them the sprete of vnquyetnesse, eyes that
they shulde not se, and eares that they shulde not heare, eue vnto this daye.
9 And Dauid sayeth: Let their table be made a snare to take the withall, & an
occasion to fall, & a rewarde vnto the.
10 Let their eyes be blynded that they se not, and euer bowe downe their backes.
11 I saye then: Haue they therfore stombled, yt they shulde cleane fall to
naughte? God forbyd: but thorow their fall is saluacion happened vnto ye
Heythen, that he mighte prouoke them to be zelous after them.
12 For yf their fall be the riches of the worlde, and the mynishinge of the the
riches of the Heythen: how moch more shulde it be so, yf their fulnesse were
there?
13 I speake vnto you Heythen: for in as moch as I am ye Apostle of the Heythen,
I wil prayse myne office,
14 yf I mighte prouoke them vnto zele, which are my fleshe, and saue some of
them.
15 For yf the losse of them by the recocylinge of the worlde, what were that
els, then as yf life were taken of the deed?
16 Yf the begynnynge be holy, then is all ye dowe holy: and yf the rote be holy,
then are the braunches holy also.
17 But though some of ye braunches now be broke, and thou, wha thou wast a wylde
olyue tre,art grafte in amonge them, and made partaker of the rote and sappe of
the olyue tre,
18 boost not thy selfe agaynst the braunches. Yf thou boost thy selfe agaynst
them, then bearest not thou the rote, but the rote beareth the.
19 Thou wilt saye then: the braunches are broke of, that I mighte be grafted in.
20 Thou sayest well. They are broken of because off their vnbeleue, but thou
stondest thorow beleue
21 Be not thou hye mynded, but feare, seynge God hath not spared the naturall
braunches, lest he also spare not the.
22 Beholde therfore the kyndnesse and rigorousnes off God: on them which fell,
rigorousnes: but towarde the, kyndnes, yf thou contynue in the kyndnesse. Els
shalt thou be hewe of:
23 and they, yf they byde not styll in vnbeleue, shal be grafted in agayne. For
God is of power to grafte the in agayne.
24 For yf thou be cut out of the naturall wilde olyue tre, and grafted (contrary
to nature) in the good olyue tre, how moch more shal they that are naturall, be
grafted in their awne olyue tre agayne?
25 I wolde not that this secrete shulde be hyd from you brethre (lest ye shulde
be wyse in youre awne cosaytes) that partly blyndnesse is happened vnto Israel,
so longe tyll the fulnesse of the Heythen be come in,
26 and so all Israel shalbe saued. As it is wrytten: There shal come out of Sion
he that doth delyuer, and shal turne awaye vngodlynes from Iacob.
27 And this is my couenaut with them, wha I shal take awaye their synnes.
28 As concernynge the Gospell, I holde them as enemies for youre sakes: but as
touchinge the eleccion, I loue them for the fathers sakes.
29 For verely the giftes & callynge of God are soch, that it can not repente him
of them.
30 For likewyse as ye also in tyme passed haue not beleued, but now haue
optayned mercy thorow their vnbeleue:
31 Euen so now haue they not beleued on the mercy which his happened vnto you,
that they also maye optayne mercy.
32 For God hath closed vp all vnder vnbeleue, that he mighte haue mercy on all.
33 O the depenesse of the riches, both of the wyssdome and knowlege of God? How
incomprehensible are his iudgmentes, and his wayes vnsearcheable?
34 For who hath knowne the mynde of the LORDE? Or who hath bene his councell
geuer?
35 Or who hath geue him ought afore hande, that he mighte be recompenced agayne?
36 For of him, and thorow him, and in him are all thinges. To him be prayse for
euer, Amen.

Chapter 12

1 I beseke you brethre by the mercyfulnesse of God, that ye geue ouer youre
bodies for a sacrifice, yt is quycke holy, and acceptable vnto God, which is yor
reasonable seruynge off God.
2 And fashion not youre selues like vnto this worlde, but be chaunged thorow the
renewynge off yor mynde, yt ye maye proue, what thinge that good, yt acceptable,
& perfecte wil of God is.
3 For I saye thorow the grace yt is geue me, vnto euery man amonge you: that no
man esteme off him selfe more, then it becometh him to esteme: but that he
discretly iudge of himselfe, acordinge as God hath dealte vnto euery man the
measure of faith.
4 For like as we haue many membres in one body, but all the membres haue not one
maner of operacion:
5 Euen so we beynge many are one body in Christ. But amonge oure selues euery
one is the membre of another,
6 and haue dyuers giftes, acordinge to the grace that is geuen vnto vs Yf eny
man haue the gifte of prophecienge, let it be acordinge to the faith.
7 Let him that hath an office, wayte vpo the office: let him that teacheth, take
hede to the doctryne:
8 Let him that exhorteth, geue attedaunce to the exhortacion. Yf eny ma geueth,
let hi geue with synglenesse. Let him that ruleth, be diligent. Yf eny man shewe
mercy, let him do it with chearfulnesse.
9 Let loue be without dissimulacion. Hate that which is euell: Cleue vnto that
which is good.
10 Be kynde one to another with brotherly loue. In geuynge honoure go one before
another.
11 Be not slouthfull in the busynesse that ye haue in hande. Be feruent in the
sprete. Applye youre selues vnto the tyme.
12 Reioyse in hope, be pacient in trouble. Continue in prayer.
13 Distribute vnto the necessities of the sayntes. Be glad to harbarow.
14 Blesse the that persecute you. Blesse, & curse not.
15 Be mery with them that are mery and wepe with them that wepe.
16 Be of one mynde amonge youre selues. Be not proude in youre awne consaytes,
but make youre selues equall to them of ye lowe sorte. Be not wyse in youre awne
opinions
17 Recompese vnto no man euell for euell. Prouyde honestie afore hade towarde
euery ma.
18 Yf it be possible (as moch as in you is) haue peace with all men.
19 Dearly beloued, auenge not youre selues, but geue rowme vnto the wrath off
God. For it is wrytte: Vengeaunce is myne, and I wil rewarde, sayeth ye LORDE.
20 Therfore yf thine enemye hunger, fede him: Yf he thyrst, geue him drinke. For
in so doinge thou shalt heape coales of fyre vpo his heade.
21 Be not ouercome with euell, but ouercome thou euell with good.

Chapter 13

1 Let euery soule submytte himselfe to the auctorite off the hyer powers. For
there is no power but of God.
2 The powers that be, are ordeyned of God: so that who so euer resisteth the
power, resisteth the ordinaunce of God. And they that resiste, shal receaue to
them selues danacion.
3 For rulers are not to be feared for good workes, but for euell. Yf thou wilt
be without feare off the power, do well then, and thou shalt haue prayse of the
same:
4 for he is the minister off God for thy wealth. But yff thou do euell, then
feare, for he beareth not the swerde for naughte. For he is the mynister of God,
a taker of vengeaunce, to punyshe him that doth euell.
5 Wherfore ye must nedes obeye, not onely for punyshmet, but also because of
conscience.
6 For this cause must ye geue trybute also. For they are Gods mynisters, which
mateyne ye same defence.
7 Geue to euery man therfore his dutye: tribute, to whom tribute belongeth:
custome, to whom custome is due: feare, to whom feare belongeth: honoure, to
whom honoure pertayneth.
8 Owe nothinge to eny man, but to loue one another. For he that loueth another,
hath fulfylled the lawe.
9 For where it is sayde: ( Thou shalt not breake wedlocke: thou shalt not kyll:
thou shalt not steale: thou shalt not beare false witnesse: thou shalt not lust)
and yf there be eny other commaundement, it is compreheded in this worde.Thou
shalt loue thy neghboure as thy selfe.
10 Loue doth his neghboure no euell. Therfore is loue ye fulfillynge of the
lawe.
11 And for so moch as we know this, namely the tyme that the houre is now for vs
to ryse from slepe (For now is oure saluacion nearer, then whan we beleued:
12 the nighte is past, but the daye is come nye.) Let vs therfore cast awaye ye
workes of darknesse, and put on the armoure of lighte.
13 Let vs walke honestly as in the daye, not in excesse off eatinge aud in
dronkennesse, not in chamburynge and wantonnesse, not in stryfe and enuyenge:
14 but put ye on the LORDE Iesus Christ, and make not prouysion for ye flesh, to
fulfill the lustes of it.

Chapter 14

1 Him that is weake in the faith, receaue vnto you, and trouble not the
consciences.
2 One beleueth that he maye eate all thinge: but he that is weake, eateth
herbes.
3 Let not him that eateth, despyse him that eateth not: and let not him which
eateth not, iudge him that eateth: for God hath receaued him.
4 Who art thou, that iudgest another mans seruaut? He stondeth or falleth vnto
his LORDE: Yee he maye well stode, for God is able to make hi stode.
5 Some man putteth differece betwene daye & daye, but another man counteth all
dayes alyke. Let euery man be sure of his meanynge.
6 He that putteth difference in the daye, doth it vnto the LORDE: & he that
putteth no differece in the daye, doth it vnto ye LORDE also. He yt eateth,
eateth vnto the LORDE, for he geueth God thakes:
7 and he that eateth not, eateth not vnto ye LORDE, and geueth God thankes.
8 For none of vs lyueth to himselfe, and none dyeth to him selfe. Yf we lyue, we
lyue vnto the LORDE: Yf we dye, we dye vnto the LORDE. Therfore, whether we lyue
or dye, we are the LORDES.
9 For therto dyed Christ, and rose agayne, and reuyued, that he mighte be LORDE
both of deed and quycke.
10 But why iudgest thou yi brother? Or thou other, why despysest thou yi
brother? We shal all be broughte before ye iudgmet seate of Christ.
11 For it is wrytte: As truly as I lyue, (sayeth the LORDE) all knees shal bowe
vnto me, & all tuges shal knowlege vnto God.
12 Thus shal euery one of vs geue acomptes for himselfe vnto God.
13 Let vs not therfore iudge one another enymore. But iudge this rather, yt noma
put a stomblinge blocke or an occasion to fall in his brothers waye.
14 I knowe, & am full certified in ye LORDE Iesu, yt there is nothinge comen of
itselfe: but vnto him yt iudgeth it to be comen, to him is it comen.
15 But yf yi brother be greued ouer yi meate, the walkest thou not now after
charite. Destroye not wt thy meate, him, for whom Christ dyed,
16 Se therfore that youre treasure be not euell spoke of.
17 For the kyngdome of God is not meate and drynke, but righteousnes, & peace,
and ioye in the holy goost.
18 He that in these thinges serueth Christ, pleaseth God, & is comended of me.
19 Let vs therfore folowe those thinges which make for peace, & thinges wherwith
one maye edifye another.
20 Destroye not ye worke of God for eny meates sake. All thinges truly are
cleane, but it is euell for yt ma, which eateth wt hurte of his coscience
21 It is moch better yt thou eate no flesh, and drynke no wyne, nor eny thinge,
wherby thy brother stombleth, or falleth, or is made weake.
22 Hast thou faith, haue it with yi selfe before God Happye is he, that
codemneth not him selfe in yt thinge which he aloweth.
23 But he that maketh conscience of it and yet eateth, is dampned: because he
doth it not of faith. For what so euer is not of faith, that same is synne.

Chapter 15

1 We that are stronge ought to beare ye fraylnesse of them which are weake, and
not to stonde in oure awne consaytes.
2 Let euery one of vs ordre himselfe so, that he please his neghboure vnto his
welth, and edifienge:
3 For Christ pleased not himselfe, but as it is wrytten: The rebukes of them
which rebuked the, are fallen vpon me.
4 What so euer thinges are wrytte afore tyme, are wrytten for oure learnynge,
that we thorow pacience and comforte off the scriptures, might haue hope.
5 The God of pacience and consolacion graunte you to be like mynded one towarde
another, acordinge vnto Iesu Christ,
6 that ye beynge of one mynde, maye wt one mouth prayse God the father of oure
LORDE Iesu Christ.
7 Wherfore receaue ye one another, as Christ hath receaued you to the prayse off
God.
8 But I saye that Christ Iesus was a mynister of the circumcision for the trueth
of God, to cofirme the promyses made vnto the fathers,
9 and that the Heythen mighte prayse God because of mercy, as it is wrytten: For
this cause wyl I prayse the amoge the Getyles, and synge vnto thy name.
10 And agayne he sayeth: Reioyse ye Heythen with his people.
11 And agayne: Prayse the LORDE all ye Gentiles, and laude him all ye nacios.
12 And agayne Esay sayeth: There shalbe the rote of Iesse, and he that shal ryse
to rule the Gentyles, in him shal the Gentyles trust.
13 The God off hope fyll you wt all ioye and peace in beleuynge, yt ye maye be
plenteous in hope thorow ye power of the holy goost.
14 I my selfe am full certified of you (my brethren) that ye youre selues are
full of goodnes, fylled with all knowlege, so that ye are able to exhorte one
another.
15 Neuertheles (brethre) I haue somwhat more boldly wrytten vnto you, as one
that putteth you in remembraunce, for the grace that is geue me of God,
16 that I shulde be a mynister of Iesu Christ amonge the Heythen, to declare the
gospell of God, that the Heythen mighte be an acceptable offerynge vnto God,
sanctified by the holy goost.
17 Therfore maye I boost myselfe thorow Iesu Christ, that I medle with thinges
perteyninge vnto God.
18 For I durst not speake ought, excepte Christ had wroughte the same by me, to
make the Heythen obediet thorow worde and dede,
19 thorow the power of tokens and wonders, and thorow the power of the sprete of
God, so that from Ierusale, and roude aboute vnto Illyricon, I haue fylled all
with the Gospell of Christ.
20 So haue I enforced myselfe to preach ye Gospell, not where Christes name was
knowne, lest I shulde buylde on another mans foundacion,
21 but as it is wrytten: To whom he was not spoken of, they shal se: and they
that haue not herde, shal vnderstonde.
22 This is also the cause, wherfore I haue bene oft tymes let to come vnto you.
23 But now syth I haue nomore place in these countrees, hauynge yet a desyre
many yeares sence to come vnto you,
24 whan I shal take my iourney in to Spayne, I wil come to you: for I trust that
I shal passe yt waye and se you, and to be broughte on my waye thitherwarde by
you: but so, that I first refresh my selfe a litle with you.
25 But now go I to Ierusalem, to mynister vnto the sayntes.
26 For they of Macedonia and Achaia haue wyllingly prepared a commen colleccion
together, for the poore sayntes at Ierusalem.
27 They haue done it wyllingly, and their detters are they. For yf ye Heythen be
made partakers off their spiritual thinges, their dutye is to mynister vnto the
in bodely thinges.
28 Now whan I haue perfourmed this, and haue broughte the this frute sealed, I
wil take my iourney by you in to Spayne.
29 But I am sure whan I come vnto you, that I shal come with ye full blessynge
of the Gospell of Christ.
30 I beseke you brethren thorow oure LORDE Iesu Christ, and thorow the loue of
the sprete, yt ye helpe me in my busynes with youre prayers vnto God for me,
31 that I maye be delyuered from the vnbeleuers in Iewrye and that this my
seruyce which I do to Ierusalem, maye be accepted of the sayntes,
32 yt I maye come vnto you with ioye by ye wyll of God, and refreshe my selfe
with you.
33 The God of peace be with you all. Amen.

Chapter 16

1 I commende vnto you Phebe oure sister, which is a mynister of the congregacion
of Cenchrea,
2 that ye receaue her in the LORDE, as it be cometh the sayntes, and that ye
helpe her in whatsoeuer busynesse she hath neade off you. For she hath succoured
many, and myne awne selfe also.
3 Grete Prisca and Aquila my helpers in Christ Iesu,
4 which for my life haue layed downe their awne neckes: vnto whom not I onely
geue thankes, but all the congregacions of the Heythen.
5 Grete the congregacion also in their house. Salute Epenetos my beloued, which
is ye first frute amoge the of Achaia i Christ.
6 Grete Mary, which hath bestowed moch laboure on vs.
7 Salute Andronicus & Iunia my cosens, & felowe presoners, which are awncient
Apostles, & were before me in Christ.
8 Grete Amplias my beloued in ye LORDE.
9 Salute Vrban or helper in Christ, & Stachis my beloued.
10 Salute Apelles approued in Christ. Salute them which are of Aristobolus
housholde.
11 Salute Herodion my kynssman. Grete the which are of Narcissus housholde in
the LORDE
12 Salute Tryphena & Tryphosa, which haue laboured in ye LORDE. Salute my
beloued Persida, which hath laboured moch & ye LORDE.
13 Salute Ruffus ye chosen in ye LORDE: & his mother & myne.
14 Grete Asyncritus, Phlego, Herman, Patrobas, Hermen, & ye brethre wt the.
15 Salute Philologus & Iulia, Nerius & his sister, & Olympa, & all the sayntes.
wt the
16 Salute one another wt an holy kysse. The cogregacions of Christ salute you.
17 I beseke you brethren, marke them which cause deuysion & geue occasions of
euell, contrary to ye doctryne which ye haue learned, & avoyde them.
18 For they yt are soch, serue not the LORDE Iesu Christ, but their awne belly:
& thorow swete preachinges & flateringe wordes, they disceaue ye hertes of ye
innocentes.
19 For youre obedience is published amonge all men, therfore am I glad of
you.But yet I wolde haue you wyse in that which is good, & symple in euell.
20 The God of peace treade Sathan vnder yor fete shortly. The grace of or LORDE
Iesu Christ be with you
21 Timotheus my helper, & Lucius, & Iason, & Sopater my kynsme salute you.
22 I Tertius which haue writte this epistle in ye LORDE,
23 salute you Gaius myne ooste & ye oost of ye whole cogregacion saluteth you.
Erastus ye chaberlaine of ye cite saluteth you & Quartus a brother saluteth you.
24 The grace of or LORDE Iesu Christ be wt you all Ame,
25 To him yt is of power to stablyshe you, acordinge to my Gospell & preachinge
of Iesu Christ, wherby is vttered ye mystery which hath bene kepte secrete,
sence ye worlde begane,
26 but now is opened, & shewed by the scriptures of ye prophetes, at the
comaundemet of the euerlastinge God, to set vp ye obediece of the faith amonge
all Heythen:
27 to the same God, which alone is wyse, be prayse thorow Iesus Christ for euer,
Amen.


1 Corinthians

Chapter 1

1 Paul, called to be an Apostle of Iesus Christ thorow ye will of God, and
brother Sosthenes,
2 vnto the congregacion off God which is at Corinthum, to them that are
sanctified in Christ Iesus, sayntes by callinge, with all them that call vpon
the name of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, in euery place both off theirs and oures.
3 Grace be with you and peace from God oure father, and from the LORDE Iesus
Christ.
4 I thake my God allwayes on youre behalfe, for the fauoure of God which is geue
you in Iesus Christ,
5 that in all poyntes ye are made ryche by him, in euery worde, and in all maner
of knowlege
6 (eue as ye preachinge of Christ is confirmed in you)
7 so that ye wante nothinge in eny gifte, and wayte but for the appearinge of
oure LORDE Iesus Christ:
8 which shal strength you also vnto ye ende, that ye maye be blamelesse in the
daye of oure LORDE Iesus Christ.
9 For God is faithfull, by who ye are called vnto the fellishippe of his sonne
Iesus Christ oure LORDE.
10 But I beseke you brethre thorow the name of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, that ye
all speake one thinge, and let there be no discension amonge you, but that ye be
perfecte in one meanynge.
11 For it is shewed me (my brethren) of you, by them which are of ye housholde
of Cloes, that there is stryfe amonge you. I speake of that,
12 which euery one of you sayeth: I holde of Paul. Another, I holde of Apollo.
The thirde, I holde of Cephas. The fourth, I holde off Christ.
13 Is Christ then deuyded in partes? Was Paul crucified for you? Or were ye
baptysed in ye name of Paul?
14 I thanke God that I haue baptised none of you, but Crispus and Gaius:
15 lest eny shulde saye, yt I in myne awne name had baptised.
16 I baptysed also ye housholde of Stephana. Farthermore knowe I not, whether I
baptysed eny other.
17 For Christ sent me not to baptyse, but to preach the Gospell, not with
wyssdome of wordes, lest ye crosse of Christ shulde haue bene made of none
effecte.
18 For the worde of ye crosse is foolishnesse to the that perishe but vnto vs
which are saued, it is the power of God.
19 For it is wrytte: I wyl destroye the wyssdome of the wyse, & wil cast away
the vnderstondinge of ye prudet.
20 Where are the wyse? Where are ye scrybes? where are ye disputers of this
worlde?
21 Hath not God made the wyssdome of this worlde foolishnesse? For in so moch as
the worlde by the wyssdome therof knewe not God in his wyssdome, it pleased God
thorow foolish preachinge to saue them yt beleue.
22 For the Iewes requyre tokens, and the Grekes axe after wyssdome.
23 But we preach Christ the crucified: to the Iewes an occasion off fallinge,
and vnto the Grekes foolishnes.
24 But vnto them that are called (both Iewes and Grekes) we preach Christ the
power of God and the wyssdome off God.
25 For the foolishnes of God is wyser then men: and the weaknes of God is
stroger the men.
26 Brethren loke on youre callinge, how that not many wyseme after the flesh,
not many mightie, not many of hye degre are called:
27 but that foolish is before the worlde, hath God chosen, that he mighte
cofounde the wyse: And that weake is before ye worlde, hath God chosen, yt he
mighte confounde the mightye.
28 And the vyle and despysed before the worlde hath God chosen, yee and that
which is nothinge, that he mighte destroye that which is oughte,
29 that no flesh shulde reioyse in his presence.
30 Of the same are ye also in Christ Iesu, which of God is made vnto vs wyssdome
and righteousnes, and sanctifienge and redepcion,
31 that, acordinge as it is wrytten: He that reioyseth, shulde reioyse in the
LORDE.

Chapter 2

1 And I brethre, wha I came vnto you came not wt hye wordes or hye wyssdome, to
shewe vnto you the preachinge of Christ.
2 For I shewed not forth my selfe amonge you that I knewe eny thinge, saue onely
Iesus Christ, euen the sam thate was crucified.
3 And I was amonge you in weaknes, and in feare, and in moch tremblinge:
4 and my worde and my preachinge was not with entysinge wordes of mans wyssdome,
but in shewinge of the sprete and of power:
5 that youre faith shulde not stonde in the wyssdome of men, but in the power of
God.
6 That we speake of, is wyssdome amonge the yt are perfecte: not ye wyssdome of
this worlde, nether of the rulers of this worlde which go to naughte:
7 but we speake of the wyssdome of God, which is in secrete and lyeth hyd: which
God ordeyned before the worlde vnto oure glorye:
8 which none of ye rulers of this worlde knewe. For yf they had knowne it, they
had not crucified the LORDE of glorye,
9 but as it is wrytten: The eye hath not sene, and the eare hath not herde,
nether hath it entred in to the hert of man that God hath prepared for them that
loue him.
10 But God hath opened it vnto vs by his sprete. For the sprete searcheth out
all thinges, yee euen the depenesses of the God heade.
11 For what ma knoweth what is in man, saue the sprete of ma which is in him?
Euen so no man knoweth what is in God, saue ye sprete of God.
12 As for vs, we haue not receaued the sprete of this worlde, but the sprete
which cometh of God, so that we ca knowe what is geue vs of God:
13 which we also speake, not with connynge wordes of mas wyssdome, but with the
conynge wordes of the holy goost, and iudge spirituall matters spiritually.
14 Howbeit the naturall man perceaueth nothinge of ye sprete of God. It is
foolishnes vnto him, and he can not perceaue it: for it must be spiritually
discerned.
15 But he that is spirituall, discusseth all thinges, and he is iudged of no
man.
16 For who hath knowne ye mynde of the LORDE? Or who shal enfourme him? But we
haue the mynde of Christ.

Chapter 3

1 And I brethren, coulde not speake vnto you as vnto spirituall, but as vnto
carnall, euen as vnto babes in Christ.
2 I gaue you mylke to drynke, and not meate, for ye mighte not then awaye
withall, nether maye ye yet euen now, in so moch as ye are yet fleshlye.
3 For seynge there is enuyenge, stryfe, and discencion amonge you, are ye not
fleshly, & walke after ye maner of men?
4 For whan one sayeth: I holde of Paul: another, I holde of Apollo, are ye not
the fleshlye?
5 What is Paul? What is Apollo? Eue mynisters are they, by whom ye are come to
the beleue, and the same, acordinge as the LORDE hath geuen vnto euery man.
6 I haue planted, Apollo hath watred, but God hath geuen the increase.
7 So then nether is he that planteth, eny thinge, nether he that watreth, but
God which geueth the increase.
8 As for him that planteth, and he that watreth, ye one is as the other: but yet
shal euery one receaue his rewarde acordinge to his laboure.
9 For we are Gods labourers, ye are Gods hussbandry, ye are Gods buyldinge.
10 Acordinge to the grace of God which is geuen vnto me, as a wyse buylder haue
I layed the foundacion, but another buyldeth theron. Yet let euery man take hede
how he buyldeth theron.
11 For other foudacion can noman laye, then that which is layed, the which is
Iesus Christ.
12 But yf eny man buylde vpon this foundacion, golde, syluer, precious stones,
tymber, haye, stobble,
13 euerymas worke shal be shewed. For the daye of the LORDE shal declare it,
which shal be shewed with fyre: and the fyre shal trye euery mas worke what it
is.
14 Yf eny mans worke that he hath buylde theron, abyde, he shal receaue a
rewarde:
15 Yf eny mans worke burne, he shal suffre losse: but he shal be saued himselfe,
neuertheles as thorow fyre.
16 Knowe ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the sprete of God
dwelleth in you?
17 Yf eny man defyle the teple of God, him shal God destroye. For the temple of
God is holy, which ye are.
18 Let no ma disceaue himselfe. Yf eny man thinke himselfe wyse amoge you, let
him become a foole in this worlde, that he maye be wyse.
19 For the wyssdome off this worlde is foolishnes with God. For it is wrytten:
He compaseth the wyse in their craftynesse.
20 And agayne: The LORDE knoweth the thoughtes of the wyse, that they are vayne.
21 Therfore let no man reioyse in men. For all is youres,
22 whether it be Paul or Apollo, whether it be Cephas or the worlde, whether it
be life or death, whether it be presente or for to come. All is youres,
23 but ye are Christes, and Christ is Gods.

Chapter 4

1 Let euery man this wyse esteme vs, euen for the mynisters of Christ, and
stewardes of the secretes of God.
2 Now is there no more requyred of the stewardes, then, that they be founde
faithfull.
3 It is but a small thinge vnto me, that I shulde be iudged of you, or of mans
daye, nether iudge I myne awne selfe.
4 I knowe noughte by my selfe, yet am I not therby iustified. It is the LORDE
that iudgeth me.
5 Therfore iudge ye nothinge before ye tyme, vntyll the LORDE come, which shal
brynge it to lighte that is hyd in darknesse, and ope the councels of ye hertes,
and the shal euery one haue prayse of God.
6 These thinges brethren haue I described in myne awne preson & in Apollos for
youre sakes, that ye mighte lerne by vs, that noman counte hygher of him self,
then aboue is wrytten, that one be not puft vp agaynst another for eny mans
cause.
7 For who preferreth the? What hast thou that thou hast not receaued? Yf thou
hast receaued it, why makest thou the thy boost, as though thou haddest not
receaued it?
8 Now ye are full, now ye are made riche, ye raigne without vs, and wolde God ye
dyd raigne, that we might raigne with you.
9 Me thynketh that God hath set forth vs Apostles for the lowest off all, euen
as those that are appoynted vnto death. For we are a gasynge stocke vnto ye
worlde and to the angels, and vnto men.
10 We are fooles for Christes sake, but ye are wyse in Christ: We weake, but ye
stroge: Ye honorable, but we despysed.
11 Euen vnto this daye we hoger and thyrst, and are naked, and are boffetted
with fystes, and haue no certayne dwellinge place,
12 and laboure and worke with oure awne handes. We are reuyled, and yet we
blesse: we are persecuted, and suffre it:
13 We are euell spoken of, and we praye: We are become as it were the very
outswepinges of ye worlde, yee the of scowringe of all men vnto this tyme.
14 I wryte not this to shame you, but as my deare childre I warne you.
15 For though ye haue ten thousande instructours in Christ yet haue ye not many
fathers. For I haue begotten you in Christ Iesu thorow ye Gospell?
16 Wherfore I exhorte you, be ye my folowers.
17 For this cause haue I sent vnto you Timotheus (which is my deare sonne, and
faithfull in the LORDE) that he maye put you in remembraunce of my wayes, which
are in Christ, eue as I teach euery where in all congregacions.
18 Some are puft vp, as though I wolde come nomore at you.
19 But I wil come to you shortly ( yf the LORDE wyl) and wyl knowe, not the
wordes of the that are puft vp, but ye power.
20 For the kyngdome of God is not i wordes, but in power.
21 What wil ye? Shal I come vnto you wt the rodd, or with loue and the sprete of
mekenesse?

Chapter 5

1 There goeth a commen reporte, that there is whordome amoge you, and soch
whordome, as is not once named amoge the Heythen, that one shulde haue his
fathers wife.
2 And ye are puft vp, and haue not rather sorowed, that he which hath done this
dede, mighte be put fro amoge you.
3 For I verely as absent in body, but present in sprete, haue determyned
allready as though I were present (cocernynge him that hath done this dede)
4 in ye name of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, wha ye are gathered together with my
sprete, and with the power of oure LORDE Iesus Christ,
5 to delyuer him vnto Sathan for the destruccion of the flesh, that the sprete
maye be saued in the daye of the LORDE Iesus.
6 Youre reioysinge is not good. Knowe ye not that a litle leuen sowereth the
whole lompe of dowe.
7 Pourge out therfore the olde leuen, that ye maye be new dowe, like as ye are
swete bred. For we also haue an Easter lambe, which is Christ, that is offred
for vs.
8 Wherfore let vs kepe Easter, not in ye olde leuen, ner in the leuen of
maliciousnes, and wickednes, but in the swete bred of purenesse and of the
trueth.
9 I wrote vnto you in the Epistle, that ye shulde haue nothinge to do with
whoremogers,
10 & that meant I not at all of the whoremongers of this worlde, ether of the
couetous, or of extorcioners, or of the that worshippe ymages, for then must ye
nedes haue gone out of the worlde.
11 But now haue I wrytte vnto you, yt ye shulde haue nothinge to do with them:
(Namely,) yf there be eny man that is called a brother, and is an whoremonger,
or couetous, or a worshipper of ymages, ether a raylar, or a dronkarde, or an
extorcioner, with soch shal ye not eate.
12 For what haue I to do to iudge them that are without? Do ye not iudge the
that are within?
13 As for them that are without, God shal iudge them. Put awaye fro you him that
is euell.

Chapter 6

1 How dare one off you hauynge busynes with another, go to lawe before the
vnrighteous, and not before the sayntes?
2 Do ye not knowe that the sayntes shal iudge the worlde? Yf the worlde then
shalbe iudged off you, are ye not good ynough to iudge small matters?
3 Knowe ye not that we shal iudge the angels? how moch more thinges that
pertayne to the teporall life?
4 Therfore yf ye haue iudgmentes of temporall matters, take them that are
despysed in the congregacion, and set them to be iudges.
5 This I saye to youre shame. Is there vtterly no wyse man amoge you? What not
one at all, that can iudge betwene brother & brother?
6 but one brother goeth to lawe with another, and that before the vnbeleuers?
7 Now therfore is there vtterly a faute amoge you, that ye go to lawe one with
another. Why rather suffre ye not wronge? Why suffre ye not youre selues rather
to be defrauded?
8 but ye youre selues do wroge and defraude, and that euen the brethre.
9 Knowe ye not that ye vnrighteous shal not inheret the kyngdome of God? Be not
disceaued. Nether whoremongers, ner worshippers off ymages, ner breakers off
wedlocke, ner weaklinges, nether abusers of them selues with mankynde,
10 ner theues, nether the couetous, ner drokardes, ner cursed speakers, ner
extorcioners shal inheret the kyngdome of God.
11 And soch haue some of you bene, but ye are wasshed, ye are sanctified, ye are
made righteous by the name of the LORDE Iesus, and by the sprete of oure God.
12 I maye do all thinges, but all thinges are not profitable. I maye do all
thinges, but I wil be broughte vnder no mas power.
13 Meates are ordeyned for ye bely, & the bely for meates. But God shal destroye
both it and them. The body belongeth not vnto whordome, but vnto the LORDE, and
the LORDE vnto the body
14 God hath raysed vp the LORDE, and shal rayse vs vp also by his power.
15 Knowe ye not that youre bodies are the mebres of Christ? Shal I now take the
membres of Christ, and make them the membres of an harlot? God forbyd.
16 Or do ye not knowe, that he which cleueth vnto an harlot, is one body? For
they shalbe two ( sayeth he) in one flesshe.
17 But he that cleueth vnto the LORDE, is one sprete.
18 Fle whordome. All synnes yt a man doth, are without the body. But he that
commytteth whordome, synneth agaynst his awne body.
19 Or knowe ye not that youre body is the temple of the holy goost? Whom ye haue
of God, and are not youre awne?
20 For ye are dearly boughte. Prayse ye God therfore in yor body & in yor
sprete, which are Gods.

Chapter 7

1 As concernynge the thinges wherof ye wrote vnto me, I answere: It is good for
a man not to touche a woman.
2 Neuertheles to avoyde whordome, let euery man haue his awne wife, and let
euery woman haue hir awne hussbande.
3 Let the ma geue vnto the wife due beneuolence: likewyse also the wife vnto ye
man.
4 The wife hath not power ouer hir awne body, but the hussbande: & likewyse the
man hath not power ouer his awne body, but the wife.
5 Withdrawe not yor selues one fro another, excepte it be with the consent of
both for a tyme, that ye maye geue youre selues vnto fastinge and prayer, and
the come together agayne, lest Sathan tempte you for yor incontynecye.
6 But this I saye of fauoure, and not of commaundemet.
7 Howbeit I wolde rather yt all me were as I am. Neuertheles euery one hath his
proper gifte of God: one thus, another so.
8 To them verely yt are vnmaried and to wedowes I saye: It is good for the that
they abyde also as I do.
9 But yf they cannot absteyne, let them mary. For it is better to mary, then to
burne.
10 But vnto them that are maried, commaunde not I, but the LORDE, that the wife
separate not her selfe from the hussbande:
11 but yf she separate her selfe, yt she remayne vnmaried, or be reconcyled to
hir hussbande: and let not the hussbande put awaye his wife from him.
12 As for the other, vnto the saye I, not ye LORDE: Yf eny brother haue an
vnbeleuynge wife, and she is content to dwell with him, let him not put hir
awaye.
13 And yf a woman haue an vnbeleuynge hussbande, and he is content to dwell with
her, let her not put him awaye.
14 For the vnbeleuynge hussbande is sanctified by the wife, and the vnbeleuynge
wife is sanctified by the hussbande: or els were youre children vncleane, but
now are they holy.
15 But yf the vnbeleuynge departe, let him departe. A brother or a sister is not
boude in soch cases, but God hath called vs in peace.
16 For what knowest thou O woma, whether thou shalt saue ye ma? Or what knowest
thou O man, whether thou shalt saue the woman?
17 But euen as God hath distributed vnto euery one and as the LORDE hath called
euery man, so let him walke: and so orden I in all congregacions.
18 Yf eny man be called beynge circumcysed let him take no Heythenshippe vpon
him. Yf eny man be called in the Heythenshippe, let him not be circumcysed.
19 Circumcision is nothinge, and vncircumcision is nothinge, but the kepynge of
the commaundementes of God.
20 Let euery one abyde in the callynge wherin he is called.
21 Art thou called a seruaut, care not for it: neuertheles yf thou mayest be
fre, vse it rather.
22 For he that is called in the LORDE beynge a seruaute, is a fre man of the
LORDE. Likewyse he that is called beynge fre, is a seruaut of Christ.
23 Ye are dearly boughte, be not ye the seruauntes of men.
24 Brethren let euery one wherin he is called, therin abyde with God.
25 As concernynge virgins, I haue no commaundement of the LORDE, neuertheles I
saye my goodmeanynge, as I haue optayned mercy of the LORDE to be faithfull.
26 I suppose it is good for ye present necessite: for it is good for a man so to
be.
27 Art thou bounde vnto a wife, seke not to be lowsed: Art thou lowsed fro a
wife, seke not a wife.
28 But yf thou take a wife, thou synnest not. And yf a virgin mary, she synneth
not Neuertheles soch shal haue trouble in the flesshe. But I fauoure you.
29 Howbeit this I saye brethren: the tyme is shorte. Farthermore this is the
meanynge, yt they which haue wyues, be as though they had none:
30 and they that wepe, be as though they wepte not: and they that reioyse, be as
though they reioysed not: & they that bye, be as though they possessed not:
31 & they that vse this worlde, be as though they vsed it not. For the fasshion
off this worlde passeth awaye.
32 But I wolde that ye shulde be without care. He that is syngle, careth for the
thinges of the LORDE,how he maye please the LORDE.
33 But he that is maried, careth for the thinges of the worlde, how he maye
please his wife,
34 and is deuyded. A woman and a virgin that is syngle, careth for the thinges
of the LORDE, that she maye be holy both in body & also in sprete. But she that
is maried, careth for ye thinges of the worlde, how she maye please hir
hussbande.
35 This I saye for youre profit, not that I wil tangle you in a snare, but for
that which is honest and comly vnto you, that ye maye cotynually cleue vnto the
LORDE without hynderaunce.
36 But yf eny man thinke that it is vncomly for his virgin yf she passe the tyme
of mariage, and if nede so requyre, let him do what he lyst, he synneth not, let
the be coupled in mariage.
37 Neuertheles he that purposeth surely in his hert, hauynge no nede, but hath
power of his awne wyll, and determeth so in his hert to kepe his virgin, doth
well. Fynally, he that ioyneth his virgin in mariage, doth well:
38 but he that ioyneth not his virgin in mariage, doth beter.
39 The wife is bounde to the lawe, as longe as hir hussbande lyueth. But yf hir
hussbande slepe, she is at liberty to mary vnto whom she wil, onely that it be
done in the LORDE.
40 But she is happier yf she so abyde after my iudgment. I thinke verely that I
also haue the sprete of God.

Chapter 8

1 As touchinge thinges offred vnto Idols we are sure yt we all haue knowlege.
Knowlege puffeth a ma vp, but loue edifyeth.
2 Neuertheles yf eny ma thinke yt he knoweth eny thinge, he knoweth not yet how
he oughte to knowe.
3 But yf eny man loue God, the same is knowne of him.
4 So are we sure now cocernynge the meates offred vnto Idols, that an Idoll is
nothinge in the worlde, and that there is none other God but one.
5 And though there be that are called goddes, whether in heauen or in earth (as
there be goddes many and lordes many)
6 yet haue we but one God, euen the father, of who are all thinges, and we in
him & one LORDE Iesus Christ, by who are all thinges, and we by him.
7 But euery man hath not knowlege: for some make yet consciece ouer the Idoll,
and eate it as a thinge offred vnto Idols: and so their conscience beynge weake,
is defyled.
8 Neuertheles meate furthureth not vs vnto God. Yf we eate, we shal not therfore
be the better: yf we eate not, we shal not therfore be the lesse.
9 But take hede that this youre liberty be not an occasion of fallynge vnto ye
weake.
10 For yf eny man se the (which hast knowlege) syt at the table in the Idols
house, shal not his conscience whyle it is weake, be occasioned to eate of the
Idoll offeringes?
11 And so thorow thy knowlege shal the weake brother perishe, for who Christ
dyed.
12 But whan ye synne so agaynst the brethren, and wounde their weake coscience,
ye synne agaynst Christ.
13 Wherfore yf meate offende my brother, I wyl neuer eate flesh, lest I offende
my brother.

Chapter 9

1 Am I not an Apostle? Am I not fre? Haue I not sene Iesus Christ oure LORDE?
2 Are not ye my worke in the LORDE? Yf I be not an Apostle vnto other, yet am I
youre Apostle: for the seale of myne Apostleshippe are ye in the LORDE.
3 Myne answere vnto them that axe me, is this:
4 Haue we not power to eate and drynke?
5 Haue we not power also to leade aboute a sister to wife, as well as other
Apostles, and as the brethren of the LORDE, and Cephas?
6 Or haue onely I and Barnabas not power this to do?
7 Who goeth a warfare at eny tyme vpon his awne wages? Who planteth a vynyarde,
and eateth not of the frute therof? Who fedeth a flocke, and eateth not of the
mylke of the flocke?
8 Saye I these thinges after the maner of men? Sayeth not the lawe the same
also?
9 For it is wrytten in the lawe off Moses: Thou shalt not mosell the mouth of
the oxe that treadeth out the corne. Doth God take thought for the oxen?
10 Or sayeth he it not alltogether for oure sakes? For no doute it is wrytte for
oure sakes. For he that eareth, shulde eare vpon hope: and he yt throssheth,
shulde trosshe vpon hope, yt he mighte be partaker of his hope.
11 Yf we haue sowne vnto you spiritual thinges, is it a greate thige yf we reape
yor bodely thiges?
12 But yf other be partakers of this power on you, wherfore are not we rather?
Neuertheles we haue not vsed this power, but suffre all thinges, lest we shulde
hynder the Gospell off Christ.
13 Knowe ye not that they which laboure in the temple, haue their lyuynge of ye
temple: and they that wayte at the altare, enioye the altare?
14 Euen thus also hath ye LORDE ordeyned, that they which preach the Gospell,
shulde lyue of ye Gospell.
15 But I haue vsed none of these thinges. Nether wryte I therof, that it shulde
be done so vnto me: for I had rather dye, the that eny man shulde brynge my
reioysinge to naughte.
16 For in that I preach the Gospell, I neade not boost my selfe, for I must
nedes do it. And wo vnto me, yff I preach not the Gospell.
17 Yf I do it with a good wyll, I shall haue my rewarde: but yff I do it agaynst
my wyll, yet is the office commytted vnto me.
18 Wherfore the shal I be rewarded? (Namely therfore) that I preach the Gospell,
and do the same frely for naughte, that I abuse not my libertye in ye Gospell.
19 For though I am fre from all men, yet haue I made my selfe euery mans
seruaunt, yt I mighte wynne ye moo.
20 Vnto the Iewes I am become as a Iewe, to wynne ye Iewes. To them that are
vnder the lawe, I am become as though I were vnder the lawe, to wynne them which
are vnder the lawe.
21 Vnto them that are without lawe, I am become as though I were without lawe
(where as yet I am not without the lawe of God, but am in ye lawe of Christ) to
wynne the that are without lawe.
22 To the weake, am I become as weake, to wynne the weake. I am become of all
fasshions vnto euery man, to saue some at ye leest.
23 But this I do for the Gospels sake, that I mighte be partaker therof.
24 Knowe ye not, that they which runne in a course, runne all, yet but one
receaueth the rewarde? Runne ye so, that ye maye optayne.
25 Euery one that proueth mastrye, absteyneth from all thinges, and they do it,
that they maye optayne a corruptible crowne, but we to optayne an vncorruptible
crowne.
26 I therfore so runne, not as at an vncertayne thinge: So fighte I, not as one
yt beateth ye ayre:
27 but I tame my body, and brynge it in to subieccion, lest whan I preach vnto
other: I my selfe be a cast awaye.

Chapter 10

1 Brethren, I wolde not that ye shulde be ignoraunt of this, that oure fathers
were all vnder the cloude, and all passed thorow the see,
2 & were all baptised vnder Moses in the cloude and in the see,
3 and dyd all eate of one spirituall meate,
4 and dyd all drynke of one spirituall drynke: but they dronke of the spirituall
rocke that folowed the, which rocke was Christ.
5 Neuertheles in many of them had God no delyte, for they were smytten downe in
the wyldernesse.
6 These are ensamples vnto vs, yt we shulde not lust after euell thinges, as
they lusted.
7 Nether be ye worshippers off ymages, as were some of them. Acordinge as it is
wrytte: The people sat downe to eate and drynke, and rose vp to playe.
8 Nether let vs commytte whordome, as some of them comytted whordome, and fell
in one daye thre & twenty thousande.
9 Nether let vs tempte Christ, as some of them tempted him, and were destroyed
of serpetes.
10 Nether murmur ye, as some of them murmured, and were destroyed thorow the
destroyer.
11 All these thinges happened vnto the for ensamples, but they are wrytte to
warne vs, vpon whom the ende of ye worlde is come.
12 Therfore let him that thinketh he stondeth, take hede, lest he fall.
13 There hath yet no teptacion ouertaken you, but soch as foloweth the nature of
man. Neuertheles God is faithfull, which shal not suffre you to be tempted aboue
youre strength, but shal in the myddes of ye temptacion make a waye to come out,
that ye maye beare it.
14 Wherfore my dearly beloued, fle from worshippinge of Idols.
15 I speake vnto them which haue discrecio, iudge ye what I saye.
16 The cuppe of thakesgeuynge wherwith we geue thankes, is it not the partakinge
of the bloude of Christ?
17 The bred that we breake, is it not ye partakinge of ye body of Christ? For we
many, are one bred & one body, in as moch as we all are partakers of one bred.
18 Beholde Israel after the flesshe. They yt eate the sacrifices, are they not
partakers of the altare?
19 What shal I now saye then? Shal I saye that the Idoll is enythinge? Or that
it which is offred vnto the Idoll is eny thinge?
20 Nay. But this I saye, that loke what the Heythen offre, that offre they vnto
deuels, and not vnto God. Now wolde I not that ye shulde be in the fellishippe
of deuels.
21 Ye can not drynke of the cuppe of the LORDE and of the cuppe of the deuels.
Ye can not be partakers of the LORDES table, and of the table of deuels.
22 Or wyl we prouoke the LORDE? I maye do all thinges, but all thinges are not
profitable.
23 I maye do all thinges, but all thinges edifye not.
24 Let noman seke his awne profit, but let euery man seke anothers welth.
25 What soeuer is solde in the fleshmarket, that eate, and axe no question for
conscience sake.
26 For the earth is the LORDES, and all yt therin is.
27 Yf eny of the yt beleue not, byd you to a feast, and yf ye be disposed to go,
what soeuer is set before you, that eate, axinge no question for conscience
sake.
28 But yf eny man saye vnto you: This is offred vnto Idols, the eate not of it,
for his sake that shewed it, and for hurtinge of conscience. (The earth is the
LORDES and all that therin is.)
29 Neuertheles I speake of consciece, not thine, but of ye other. For why shulde
my liberty be iudged of another mas coscience?
30 For yf I take my parte wt thankesgeuynge, why am I euell spoken of, for yt
thinge wherfore I geue thankes?
31 Therfore whether ye eate or drynke, or what so euer ye do, do all to ye
prayse of God.
32 Be not ye an occasion of fallinge, nether to the Iewes, ner to the Gentyles,
ner to the congregacion of God,
33 eue as I also please all men in all thinges, not sekinge myne awne profit,
but the profit of many, that they mighte be saued. Folowe ye me, as I do Christ.

Chapter 11

1 I commende you
2 brethren, that ye remembre me in all poyntes, and kepe the ordinaunces, eue as
I delyuered them vnto you.
3 But I certifye you, that Christ is the heade of euery man. As for ye man, he
is the heade of ye woman, but God is Christes heade.
4 Euery man that prayeth or prophecieth, and hath eny thinge on his heade,
shameth his heade.
5 But euery woman that prayeth or prophecieth with vncouered heade, dishonesteth
hir heade. For it is euen a lyke moch as yf she were shauen.
6 Yf the woma be not couered, let hir heer also be cut of. But yf it be vncomely
for a woman to haue hir heer cut of or to be shauen, then let hir couer hir
heade.
7 Neuertheles the man oughte not to couer his heade, for so moch as he is the
ymage and glory of God: but the woma is the glory of the man.
8 For the man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man.
9 Nether was the man created for the womans sake, but the woma for the mans
sake.
10 Therfore ought the woman to haue a power vpon hir heade, for the angels
sakes.
11 Neuertheles nether is the man without ye woman, nether the woman without the
ma in the LORDE.
12 For as the woman is of the man, euen so commeth the man also by the woman,
but all of God.
13 Iudge ye by yor selues, whether it be comly, yt a woma praye before God bare
headed?
14 Or doth not nature teach you, yt it is a shame for a man
15 yf he weere loge heer, & a prayse to ye woma, yf she weere loge heer? For hir
heer is geue heer to couer her withall.
16 But yf there be eny man amoge you that hath lust to stryue, let him knowe,
that we haue no soch custome, nether the congregacions of God.
17 But this must I warne you of: I commende it not, that ye come together not
after a better maner but after a worse.
18 First, whan ye come together in the congregacion, I heare, that there are
discensions amonge you, and I partly beleue it.
19 For there must be sectes amonge you, that they which are perfecte amonge you,
mighte be knowne.
20 Now whan ye come together, the LORDES supper can not be kepte. For whan it
shulde be kepte, euery ma taketh his awne supper afore.
21 And one is hogrie, another is dronke. Haue ye not houses to eate and drynke
in?
22 Or despyse ye ye cogregacion of God, and shame them that haue not? What shal
I saye vnto you? Shal I prayse you? in this prayse I you not.
23 That which I delyuered vnto you, receaued I of the LORDE. For the LORDE Iesus
the same nighte in the which he was betrayed, toke the bred,
24 & gaue thankes, and brake it, and sayde: Take ye, & eate ye, this is my body,
which is broken for you. This do in the remembraunce of me.
25 After the same maner also he toke ye cuppe whan supper was done, and sayde:
This cuppe is the new Testament in my bloude, this do (as oft as ye drynke it)
in the remebrauce of me.
26 For as oft as ye shal eate of this bred, & drynke of this cuppe, ye shal
shewe the LORDES death, vntyll he come.
27 Wherfore who soeuer shal eate off this bred, and drynke off this cuppe of the
LORDE vnworthely, shalbe giltye of the body and bloude of the LORDE.
28 But let a man examen himselfe, and so let him eate of this bred, and drynke
of this cuppe.
29 For he that eateth and drynketh vnworthely, eateth & drynketh his awne
damnacion, because he maketh no differece of the LORDES body.
30 Therfore are there so many weake and sicke amoge you, and many slepe.
31 For yf we iudged oure selues, we shulde not be iudged.
32 But whan we are iudged, we are chastened of ye LORDE, that we shulde not be
daned with the worlde.
33 Wherfore my brethren, whan ye come together to eate, tary one for another.
34 But yf eny man honger, let him eate at home, that ye come not together vnto
codempnacion. As for other thinges, I wil set them in order whan I come.

Chapter 12

1 As concernynge spirituall giftes (brethren) I wolde not that ye were
ignoraunt.
2 Ye knowe that ye were Heythe and wente youre wayes vnto dome Idols, eue as ye
were led.
3 Wherfore I declare vnto you, that no man speakynge thorow the sprete of God,
defyeth Iesus. And no man can saye that Iesus is the LORDE, but by the holy
goost.
4 There are dyuerse giftes, yet but one sprete:
5 and there are dyuerse offices, yet but one LORDE:
6 and there are dyuerse operacions yet is there but one God, which worketh all
in all.
7 The giftes of the sprete are geuen vnto euery man to profit the cogregacion.
8 To one is geuen thorow the sprete the vtteraunce of wissdome: to another is
geuen the vtteraunce of knowlege acordinge to the same sprete:
9 to another, faith in the same sprete: to another, the giftes of healinge in
the same sprete:
10 to another, power to do miracles: to another, prophecienge: to another,
iudgment to discerne spretes: to another, dyuerse tunges: to another, the
interpretacion of tunges.
11 These all doth ye same onely sprete worke, and distributeth vnto euery man,
acordinge as he will.
12 For as the body is one, and hath yet many membres, neuertheles all the
membres of the body though they be many, are yet but one body: euen so Christ
also.
13 For we are all baptysed in one sprete to be one body, whether we be Iewes or
Gentyles, whether we be bonde or fre, and haue all dronke of one sprete.
14 For the body also is not one membre, but many.
15 Yf the fote saye: I am not ye hande, therfore am I not a membre of the
body,is he therfore not a membre of ye body?
16 And yf the eare saye: I am not the eye, therfore am I not a membre of the
body, is he therfore not a membre of the body?
17 Yf all the body were an eye, where were then the hearinge? Yf all were
hearinge, where then the smellinge?
18 But now hath God set the membres, euery one seuerally in the body, as it hath
pleased him.
19 Neuertheles yf all the mebres were one membre, where were then the body?
20 But now are the membres many, yet is the body but one.
21 The eye can not saye vnto the hande: I haue no nede of the: or agayne the
heade vnto the fete, I haue no nede of you:
22 but rather a greate deale the mebres of the body which seme to be most feble,
are most necessary:
23 and vpon those membres of the body which we thinke least honest, put we most
honestie on: and oure vncomly partes haue most beutye on.
24 For oure honest membres neade it not. But God hath so measured ye body, and
geuen most honoure vnto that mebre which had nede,
25 that there shulde be no stryfe in the body, but that the membres shulde
indifferently care one for another. And yf one membre suffre, all the membres
suffre with him:
26 and yf one membre be had in honoure, all the membres are glad with him also.
27 But ye are the body of Christ, and membres, euery one of another.
28 And God hath ordeyned in the congregacion, first the Apostles, secodly
prophetes, thirdly teachers, then doers of miracles, after that the giftes of
healinge, helpers, gouerners, dyuerse tunges.
29 Are they all Apostles? Are they all prophetes? Are they all teachers? Are
they all doers of miracles?
30 Haue they all the giftes of healinge? Speake they all with tunges? Can they
all interprete?
31 But covet ye the best giftes. And yet shewe I you a more excellent waye.

Chapter 13

1 Though I spake with the tunges of men and angels, and yet had not loue, I were
euen as sowndinge brasse, or as a tynklinge Cymball.
2 And though I coulde prophecy, & vnderstode all secretes, and all knowlege, and
had all faith, so that I coulde moue moutaynes out of their places, and yet had
not loue, I were nothinge.
3 And though I bestowed all my goodes to fede ye poore, and though I gaue my
body euen that I burned, and yet haue not loue, it profiteth me nothinge.
4 Loue is pacient & curteous, loue envyeth not, loue doth not frowardly, is not
puft vp, dealeth not dishonestly,
5 seketh not hir awne, is not prouoked vnto anger, thynketh not euell,
6 reioyseth not ouer iniquyte, but reioyseth in the trueth,
7 beareth all thinges, beleueth all thinges, hopeth all thinges, suffreth all
thinges.
8 Though prophecienges fayle, or tunges ceasse, or knowlege perishe, yet loue
falleth neuer awaye.
9 For oure knowlege is vnparfecte, and oure prophecienge is vnparfecte.
10 But wha that which is perfecte, commeth, then shal the vnparfecte be done
awaye.
11 Whan I was a childe, I spake as a childe, I vnderstode as a childe, I
ymagined as a childe. But as soone as I was a man, I put awaye childishnes.
12 Now we se thorow a glasse in a darke speakynge, but the shal we se face to
face. Now I knowe vnperfectly: but the shal I knowe eue as I am knowne.
13 Now abydeth faith, hope, loue, these thre: but the greatest of these is loue.

Chapter 14

1 Laboure for loue. Couet spirituall giftes, but specially that ye maye
prophecye.
2 For he yt speaketh with tunges, speaketh not vnto men, but vnto God: for no
man heareth him. Howbeit in ye sprete he speaketh misteries.
3 But he that prophecieth, speaketh vnto men to edifienge, & to exhortacion, and
to coforte.
4 He that speaketh with tunges, edifieth himselfe: but he that prophecieth,
edifieth the cogregacion.
5 I wolde that ye all spake with tunges, but rather that ye prophecied. For
greater is he that prophecieth, then he that speaketh wt tuges: excepte he also
expounde it, that the congregacion maye haue edifienge.
6 But now brethren yf I come vnto you, and speake with tunges, what shal I
profet you, excepte I speake vnto you ether by reuelacion or by knowlege, or by
prophecienge, or by doctryne?
7 Likewyse is it also in ye thinges that geue sounde, and yet lyue not: whether
it be a pype or an harpe, excepte they geue distyncte soundes from them, how
shal it be knowne what is pyped or harped?
8 And yf the trope geue an vncertayne sounde, who wil prepare himselfe to the
battayll?
9 Euen so ye likewyse, whan ye speake with tunges, excepte ye speake playne
wordes, how shal it be knowne what is spoke? for ye shal but speake in ye ayre.
10 So many kyndes of voyces are in the worlde, and none of them is without
significacion.
11 Yf I knowe not now what ye voyce meaneth, I shalbe an aleaunt vnto him that
speaketh: & he that speaketh, shalbe an aleaut vnto me.
12 Eue so ye (for so moch as ye couet spirituall giftes (seke yt ye maye haue
plentye to the edifienge of the congregacion.
13 Wherfore let him that speaketh wt tunges, praye, that he maye interprete
also.
14 Yf I praye with tunges, my sprete prayeth, but my vnderstodinge bryngeth no
man frute.
15 How shal it be then? Namely thus: I wil praye with ye sprete, and wil praye
with the vnderstodinge also: I wil synge psalmes in the sprete, and wil synge
spalmes with ye vnderstondinge also.
16 But whan thou geuest thankes with ye sprete, how shal he that occupieth the
rowme of the vnlearned, saye Ame at thy geuynge of thankes, seynge he knoweth
not what thou sayest?
17 Thou geuest well thankes, but the other is not edifyed.
18 I thanke my God, that I speake with tunges more then ye all.
19 Yet had I leuer in the cogregacion to speake fyue wordes with my
vnderstondinge yt I maye enfourme other also, rather then ten thousande wordes
with tunges.
20 Brethren be not children in vnderstondinge, howbeit as concerninge
maliciousnes be childre, but in vnderstondinge be parfecte.
21 In the lawe it is wrytten: With other tunges and with other lippes wyl I
speake vnto this people, and yet shal they not so heare me, sayeth the LORDE
22 Therfore are tunges for a token, not to the that beleue, but to them that
beleue not. Contrary wyse, prophecienge, not to them that beleue not, but to
them which beleue.
23 Yf the whole cogregacion now came together in to one place, & spake all with
tunges, and there came in they that are vnlearned, or they which beleue not,
shulde they not saye, that ye were out of youre wyttes?
24 But yff all prophecied, and there came in one yt beleueth not, or one
vnlerned, he shulde be rebuked of them all, and iudged of all,
25 and so shulde the secrete of his hert be opened, and so shulde he fall downe
vpon his face, worshippinge God, and knowleginge, that of a trueth God is in
you.
26 How is it then brethren? Whan ye come together, euery one hath a psalme, hath
doctryne, hath a tunge, hath a reuelacion, hath an interpretacion. Let all be
done to edifyenge.
27 Yf eny ma speake with tunges, let him do it him selfe beynge the seconde, or
at the most him selfe beynge ye thirde, and one after another, and let one
interprete it.
28 But yf there be not an interpreter, then let him kepe sylence in the
congregacion, howbeit let him speake to himselfe and to God.
29 As for the prophetes, let two or thre speake and let the other iudge.
30 But yf eny reuelacion be made vnto another that sytteth, then let the first
holde his peace.
31 Ye maye all prophecye one after another that they all maye lerne, and that
all maye haue comforte.
32 And the spretes of the prophetes are subiecte vnto the prophetes.
33 For God is not a God off discension, but off peace, like as in all
congregacions off the sayntes.
34 Let youre wyues kepe sylence in the cogregacion, for it shal not be permytted
vnto the to speake, but to be vnder obedience, as ye lawe sayeth also.
35 But yf they wyll lerne eny thinge, let them axe their hussbades at home. For
it becommeth not weme to speake in the congregacion.
36 Or spronge the worde of God from amonge you? Or is it come vnto you onely?
37 Yf eny man thynke himselfe to be a prophet, or spirituall, let him knowe what
I wryte vnto you, for they are the commaundementes of the LORDE.
38 But yf eny man be ignoraunt, let him be ignoraunt.
39 Wherfore brethren, couet to prophecye, and forbyd not to speake with tunges.
40 Let all thinges be done honestly and in order.

Chapter 15

1 I declare vnto you brethren, the Gospell that I haue preached vnto you (which
ye haue also accepted, and in the which ye stode,
2 by the which also ye are saued) after what maner I preached it vnto you, yf ye
haue kepte it, excepte ye haue beleued in vayne.
3 For first of all I delyuered vnto you that which I also receaued, how that
Christ dyed for oure synnes acordinge to the scriptures,
4 and that he was buried, and that he rose agayne ye thirde daye acordinge to
the scriptures,
5 and that he was sene of Cephas, then of the twolue:
6 after that was he sene of mo then fyue hundreth brethren at once, wherof there
are yet many alyue, but some are fallen aslepe.
7 Afterwarde was he sene of Iames, then of all the Apostles.
8 Last of all was he sene of me also, as of one borne out of due tyme.
9 For I am ye leest of the Apostles, which am not worthy to be called an
Apostle, because I persecuted the congregacion of God.
10 But by the grace of God I am that I am. And his grace in me hath not bene
vayne, but I haue laboured more then they all: howbeit not I but the grace of
God which is wt me.
11 Now whether it be I or they, thus haue we preached, and thus haue ye beleued.
12 But yf Christ be preached, that he is rysen from the deed, how saye then some
amoge you, that there is no resurreccion of the deed?
13 Yf there be no resurreccio of the deed, then is Christ not rysen.
14 Yf Christ be not rysen, then is oure preachinge in vayne,and youre faith is
also in vayne:
15 yee and we are founde false witnesses of God, because we haue testified
agaynst God, that he hath raysed vp Christ, whom he hath not raysed vp, yf the
deed ryse not agayne.
16 For yf the deed ryse not agayne, the is Christ also not rysen agayne.
17 But yf Christ be not rysen agayne, then is youre faith in vayne, and ye are
yet in youre synnes:
18 they also that are falle a slepe in Christ, are perished.
19 Yf in this life onely we hope on Christ, then are we of all men the most
miserable.
20 But now is Christ rysen from the deed, and is become ye first frutes of them
that slepe.
21 For by one man commeth death, and by one man the resurreccion of the deed.
22 For as they all dye in Adam, so shal they all be made alyue in Christ,
23 but euery one in his order. The first is Christ, then they that beloge vnto
Christ, whan he commeth.
24 Then the ende, wha he shal delyuer vp the kyngdome vnto God the father, whan
he shal put downe all rule, and all superiorite, & power.
25 For he must raygne, tyll he haue put all his enemies vnder his fete.
26 The last enemye that shal be destroyed, is death,
27 for he hath put all thinges vnder his fete. But wha he sayeth, that all
thinges are put vnder him, it is manifest that he is excepted, which put all
thinges vnder him.
28 Whan all thinges shalbe subdued vnto him, then shal the sonne himselfe also
be subiecte vnto him, which put all thinges vnder him, that God maye be all in
all.
29 Or els what do they which are baptised ouer ye deed, yf the deed ryse not at
all? Why are they then baptysed ouer the deed?
30 And why stonde we in ioperdy euery houre?
31 By oure reioysinge which I haue in Christ Iesu or LORDE, I dye daylie.
32 That I haue foughte with beestes at Ephesus after ye maner of men, what
helpeth it me, yf the deed ryse not agayne? Let vs eate and drynke, for tomorow
we shal dye.
33 Be not ye disceaued. Euell speakinges corruppe good maners.
34 Awake righte vp, and synne not: for some haue not ye knowlege of God. This I
saye to youre shame.
35 But some man mighte saye: How shal the deed aryse? And with what maner off
body shal they come?
36 Thou foole, yt which thou sowest is not quyckened, excepte it dye.
37 And what sowest thou? thou sowest not ye body that shalbe, but a bare corne,
namely of wheate, or of some other.
38 But God geueth it a body as he wil, and vnto euery one of ye sedes his owne
body.
39 All flesshe is not one maner of flesshe, but there is one maner flesshe of
men, another of beastes, another of fisshes, another of byrdes.
40 And there are heauenly bodies, and there are earthy bodies: but the heauenly
haue one glory, and ye earthy another.
41 The Sonne hath one clearnes, the Moone hath another clearnesse, and the
starres haue another clearnesse, for one starre excelleth another in clearnesse:
42 Euen so the resurreccion of the deed. It is sowne in corrupcion,and shal ryse
in vncorrupcion:
43 It is sowne in dishonoure, & shal ryse in glory:It is sowne in weaknesse, and
shal ryse in power: It is sowne a naturall body, & shal ryse a spirituall body.
44 Yf there be a naturall body, there is a spirituall body also.
45 As it is wrytten: The first man Adam was made in to a naturall life, and the
last Ada in to a spiritual life.
46 Howbeit the spirituall body is not the first, but ye naturall, and then the
spirituall.
47 The first man is of the earth, earthy: ye seconde ma is fro heaue, heauely.
48 As the earthy is, soch are they also that are earthy: and as ye heauenly is,
soch are they also yt are heauenly.
49 And as we haue borne the ymage of the earthy, so shal we beare the ymage of
the heauenly also.
50 This I saye brethren, that flesh & bloude can not inheret ye kyngdome of God:
nether shal corrupcion inheret vncorrupcion.
51 Beholde, I saye vnto you a mystery: We shal not all slepe, but we shall all
be chaunged,
52 and that sodenly and in the twinklynge of an eye, at the tyme of the last
trompe. For the trompe shal blowe, and the deed shal ryse vncorruptible, and we
shalbe chaunged.
53 For this corruptible must put on vncorrupcion, and this mortall must put on
immortalite.
54 But whan this corruptible shal put on vncorrupcion, and this mortall shal put
on immortalite, the shal the worde be fulfylled that is wrytte:
55 Death is swalowed vp in victory. Death, where is thy stynge? Hell, where is
yi victory?
56 The stynge of death is synne: The strength of synne is the lawe.
57 But thankes be vnto God, which hath geue vs the victory thorow oure LORDE
Iesus Christ.
58 Therfore my deare brethre, be ye stedfast, vnmoueable, & all waye riche in
the worke of the LORDE, for as moch as ye knowe, that youre laboure is not in
vayne in the LORDE.

Chapter 16

1 Concernynge the gadderynge that is made for the sayntes, as I haue ordeyned in
the congregacions of Galacia, euen so do ye also.
2 Vpon some Sabbath daye let euery one of you put aside by him selfe, and laye
vp what so euer he thinketh mete, that the colleccion be not to gather whan I
come.
3 Whan I am come, whom so euer ye shal alowe by youre letters, the wyll I sende
to brynge youre liberalite vnto Ierusalem.
4 Neuertheles yf it be mete that I go thither also, they shal go with me.
5 But I wil come vnto you, whan I go thorow Macedonia: for thorow Macedonia wyl
I take my iourney.
6 With you peradueture wil I abyde, or els wynter, that ye maye brynge me on my
waye, whither so euer I go.
7 I wyl not se you now in my passage, for I hope to abyde a whyle with you, yf
the LORDE shal suffre me.
8 But I wil tary at Ephesus vntyll whitsontyde.
9 For a greate and frutefull dore is opened vnto me, and there are many
aduersaries.
10 Yf Timotheus come, se that he be without feare with you, for he worketh ye
worke of the, LORDE as I do.
11 Let no man therfore despyse him, but conuaye him forth in peace, that he maye
come vnto me, for I loke for him with the brethren.
12 As for brother Apollo, be ye sure, that I greatly desyred him to come vnto
you with the brethre. And his mynde was not at all to come at this tyme,but he
wyl come wha he hath oportunyte.
13 Watch ye, stonde fast in the faith, quyte you like men, and be stronge:
14 let all youre thinges be done in loue.
15 But brethren (ye knowe the house off Stephana, that they are the first frutes
in Achaia, and that they haue appoynted the selues to mynister vnto the sayntes)
16 I exhorte you to be obedient vnto soche, and to all that helpe and laboure.
17 I am glad of the comynge of Stephana and Fortunatus, and Achaicus. For loke
what was lackynge vnto me on youre parte, yt haue they suppleed:
18 they haue refresshed my sprete and youres. Knowe them therfore that are soch.
19 The congregacions of Asia salute you. Aquila and Priscilla salute you moch in
the LORDE, and so doth the cogregacion that is in their house.
20 All the brethren salute you. Salute ye one another with an holy kysse.
21 The salutacion of me Paul wt myne awne hande.
22 Yf eny ma loue not the LORDE Iesus Christ, the same be Anathema Maharan
Matha.
23 The grace of the LORDE Iesus Christ be with you.
24 My loue be with you all in Christ Iesu. Amen.


2 Corinthians

Chapter 1

1 Paul an Apostle of Iesu Christ, by the will of God, and brother Timotheus.
Vnto the congregacion of God which is at Corinthu, with all the sayntes which
are i all Achaia.
2 Grace be with you, and peace fro God oure father, and from the LORDE Iesus
Christ.
3 Blessed be God the father of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, the father of mercy and
ye God of all comforte,
4 which comforteth vs in all oure trouble: in so moch yt we are able to comforte
them that are in eny maner of trouble, with the same comforte wher with we oure
selues are comforted of God.
5 For as the affliccios of Christ are plenteous in vs, euen so is or cosolacion
plenteous by Christ.
6 But whether we haue trouble or comforte, it is done for youre welth. Yf it be
trouble, it is done for youre coforte and health, which health sheweth hir
power, in that ye suffre the same affliccions which we suffre. Yf it be
comforte, it is done also for youre comforte and health.
7 Therfore is oure hope fast for you, in as moch as we knowe, that, like as ye
are partakers of the affliccios, so shal ye be partakers also of the
consolacion.
8 Brethren we wolde not haue you ignoraunt of oure trouble, which happened vnto
vs in Asia, for we were greued out off measure passynge strength, so that we
euen dispared of life,
9 and had concluded in oure selues yt we must nedes dye. But this was done,
because we shulde not put oure trust in oure selues, but in God, which rayseth
vp the deed to life agayne:
10 which delyuered vs from so greate a death, and yet delyuereth daylie, On whom
we trust, that he wil delyuer vs here after also,
11 by the helpe of youre prayer for vs that on oure behalfe many thankes maye be
geuen by many personnes, for the gifte that is geuen vs.
12 For oure reioysinge is this, euen the testimony of oure conscience, that in
synglenes & godly purenesse, not in fleshlye wyssdome, but in the grace of God,
we haue had oure conuersacion in the worlde, but most of all with you.
13 For we wryte nothinge els vnto you, then that ye rede and also knowe. Yee & I
trust that ye shal fynde vs vnto the ende, euen as ye haue founde vs partly.
14 For we are youre reioysinge, eue as ye also are oure reioysinge in ye daye of
the LORDE Iesus.
15 And in this confidence was I mynded the other tyme to come vnto you (that ye
mighte haue yet another pleasure more)
16 & to passe by you in to Macedonia, & to come againe out of Macedonia vnto you
& to be led forth to Iewrye warde of you.
17 Whan I thus wyse was mynded, dyd I vse ligthnesse? Or are my thoughtes
fleshly.? Not so but with me yee is yee, and nay is naye.
18 O faithfull God, that oure worde vnto you hath not bene yee and naye.
19 For Gods sonne Iesus Christ, which was preached amonge you by vs (namely, by
me and Siluanus and Timotheus) was not yee and naye, but in him it was yee.
20 For all the promyses of God are yee in him, & are Ame in him, to the prayse
of God by vs.
21 But it is God which stablysheth vs wt you in Christ, and hath anoynted us,
22 and sealed us, and geuen the ernest of the sprete in oure hertes.
23 Bvt I call God to recorde vnto my soule, that to fauoure you withall I came
not agayne vnto Corinthum.
24 Not that we are lordes ouer youre faith, but we are helpers of youre ioye,
for ye stonde in faith.

Chapter 2

1 But I determyned this wt my selfe, that I wolde not come agayne to you in
heuynes.
2 For yf I make you sory, who is it that shal make me glad, but the same which
is made sory by me?
3 And the same haue I wrytten vnto you, lest wha I come, I shulde take heuynes
of them, of whom I oughte to reioyse: for somoch as I haue this confidence in
you all, that my ioye is the ioye of you all.
4 For in greate trouble and anguysh of hert wrote I vnto you with many teares:
not yt ye shulde be sory, but that ye mighte perceaue the loue, which I haue
most specially vnto you.
5 But yf eny man haue caused sorowe, the same hath not made me sory, but
partely, lest I shulde greue you all.
6 It is sufficient, that the same man is so rebuked of many,
7 so that from hence forth ye oughte the more to forgeue him and to comforte
him, lest he be swalowed vp in ouer moch heuynesse.
8 Wherfore I exhorte you, that ye shewe loue vpo him.
9 For therfore dyd I wryte vnto you also, that I mighte knowe the profe of you,
whether ye were obediet in all thinges.
10 But loke vnto who ye forgeue eny thinge, I forgeue hi also. For I also, yf I
forgeue ought vnto eny ma, that forgeue I for youre sakes in the rowme of
Christ,
11 lest we shulde be preuented of Sathan. For his thoughtes are not vnknowne
vnto vs.
12 But wha I came to Troada to preach ye Gospell of Christ (and a dore was
opened vnto me in ye LODRE)
13 I had no rest in my sprete, because I founde not Titus my brother: but I toke
my leue of them, and wente awaye in to Macedonia.
14 Yet thankes be vnto God, which all waye geueth vs the victory in Christ, and
openeth ye fauoure of his knowlege by vs in euery place.
15 For we are vnto God the good fauoure of Christ, both amonge the yt are saued,
& amonge them yt perishe.
16 To these, ye sauoure of death vnto death: but vnto ye other, the sauoure of
life vnto life. And who is mete therto?
17 For we are not as many are, which choppe & chaunge wt the worde of God, but
eue out of purenesse, and out of God, in ye sighte of God, so speake we in
Christ.

Chapter 3

1 Begynne we then agayne to prayse or selues? Or nede we (as some other) of
pistles of commedacion vnto you or letters of commedacion from you?
2 Ye are oure epistle wrytten in oure hertes: which is vnderstonde and red of
all me,
3 in that ye are knowne, how that ye are ye epistle of Christ, mynistred by vs,
and wrytte, not with ynke, but with the sprete of the lyuynge God: not in tables
of stone, but in fleshy tables of the hert.
4 Soch trust haue we thorow Christ to God warde,
5 not that we are sufficient of oure selues to thynke eny thinge, as of oure
selues, but oure ablenesse commeth of God,
6 which hath made vs able, to be mynisters of the new Testament: not of the
letter, but of the sprete. For the letter kylleth, but the sprete geueth life.
7 But yf the mynistracion yt kylleth thorow the letter, and was figured in
stones, was glorious, so that the childre of Israel mighte not beholde the face
of Moses, for ye clearnesse of his countenauce, (which glory neuertheles is done
awaye)
8 how shal not ye mynistracion of ye sprete be moch more glorious?
9 For yf the office that preacheth damnacion be glorious, moch more doth the
office that preacheth righteousnes exceade in glory.
10 For ye other parte that was glorified is nothinge glorified in respecte of
this exceadinge glory.
11 For yf that which is done awaye, be glorious, moch more shal yt which
remayneth, be glorious.
12 Seynge then that we haue soch trust, we vse greate boldnesse,
13 and do not as Moses, which put a vayle before his face, so that ye children
of Israel mighte not se the ende of it, that is done awaye.
14 But their myndes are blynded. For vnto this daye remayneth the same coueringe
vntake awaye in the olde Testament, whan they rede it, which in Christ is put
awaye.
15 But euen vnto this daye whan moses is red, the vayle hangeth before their
hertes:
16 Neuertheles wha they turne to the LORDE, the vayle shalbe taken awaye.
17 For the LORDE is a sprete: & where the sprete of the LORDE is, there is
libertye.
18 But now the glory of ye LORDE apeareth in vs all with open face, and we are
chaunged into the same ymage, from one clearnes to another, eue as of the sprete
of the LORDE.

Chapter 4

1 Therfore seynge we haue soch an office (euen as mercy is come vpon vs) we
faynte not,
2 but cast from vs the clokes of vnhonestye, and walke not in craftines: nether
corruppe we the worde of God but open the trueth, and reporte oure selues to
euery mans conscyence in the sighte of God.
3 Yf oure Gospell be yet hyd, it is hyd in them that are lost:
4 amonge whom the God of this worlde hath blynded ye myndes of them which beleue
not, that ye lighte of the Gospell of the glory of Christ ( which is the ymage
of God) shulde not shyne vnto them.
5 For we preach not or selues, but Iesus Christ to be the LORDE, and oure selues
youre seruauntes for Iesus sake.
6 For God that comaunded the light to shyne out of darcknesse, hath geuen a
cleare shyne in oure hertes, yt by vs ye light of ye knowlege of the glory of
God mighte come forth, in the face of Iesus Christ.
7 But this treasure haue we in earthen vessels, that ye power which excelleth
might be of God, and not of vs.
8 We are troubled on euery syde, yet are we not without shift. We are in
pouertie, but not vtterly without somwhat.
9 We are persecuted, but we are not forsaken. We are oppressed, neuertheles we
perish not.
10 We allwayes beare aboute in oure body the dyenge of the LORDE Iesus yt the
life also of the LORDE Iesus might appeare in oure body.
11 For we which lyue, are alwayes delyuered vnto death for Iesus sake, that the
life also of Iesus might appeare in oure mortall flesh.
12 Therfore is death now mightie in vs, but life in you.
13 But seynge that we haue the same sprete of faith (acordinge as it is wrytten:
I beleued, and therfore haue I spoke.) we also beleue, & therfore we speake,
14 for we knowe that he, which raysed vp ye LORDE Iesus, shal rayse vs vp also
by ye meanes of Iesus, and shal set vs with you.
15 For all thinges do I for youre sakes, that the pleteous grace by the
thakesgeuynge of many, maye redounde to the prayse of God.
16 Therfore are we not weery, but though or outwarde man be corrupte, yet the
inwarde is renewed daye by daye.
17 For oure trouble, which is but temporall and lighte, worketh an exceadinge
and an eternall weighte of glorye
18 vnto vs, which loke not on the thinges that are sene, but on them which are
not sene. For ye thinges which are sene, are temporall: but the thinges that are
not sene, are eternall.

Chapter 5

1 We knowe surely, yt yf oure earthy house of this dwellynge were destroyed, we
haue a buyldynge ordeyned of God, an house not made with handes, but
euerlastynge in heauen.
2 And in the same sighe we also after oure masion, which is from heauen:
3 and longe to be clothed therwith, so yet, yf that we be founde clothed, and
not naked.
4 For as longe as we are in this tabernacle, we sighe and are greued, for we had
rather not be vnclothed, but to be clothed vpon, that mortalite might be
swalowed vp of life.
5 But he that hath ordeyned vs for this, is God, which hath geuen vs the earnest
of the sprete.
6 Therfore are we allwaye of good cheare, and knowe, that as longe as we dwell
here in the body, we are not at home with the LORDE:
7 for we walke in faith, and se him not.
8 Neuertheles we are of good comforte, and had leuer to be absent from the body,
& to be at home with the LORDE.
9 Wherfore, whether we be at home or fro home, we endeuoure oure selues to
please him.
10 For we must all appeare before the iudgment seate of Christ, yt euery one
maye receaue in his body, acordinge to yt he hath done, whether it be good or
bad.
11 Seynge then that we knowe, how that the LORDE is to be feared, we fare fayre
with men, but we are knowne well ynough vnto God: I trust also, that we are
knowne in youre consciences.
12 We prayse not oure selues agayne vnto you, but geue you an occasion to
reioyse of vs, yt ye maye haue to reioyse agaynst them, which reioyse after the
outwarde appearaunce, and not after the hert.
13 For yf we do to moch, we do it vnto God: yf we kepe measure,we do it for
youre sakes.
14 For the loue of Christ constrayneth vs, in as moch as we thus iudge, that yf
one be deed for all, then are all deed.
15 And therfore dyed he for all, that they which lyue, shulde not hence forth
lyue vnto them selues, but vnto him, which dyed for them and rose agayne.
16 Therfore hence forth knowe we noman after ye flesh: and though we haue knowne
Christ also after the flesh, yet knowe we him now so nomore.
17 Therfore yf eny man be in Christ, he is a new creature. Olde thinges are past
awaye, beholde, all are become new.
18 Neuertheles all thinges are off God, which hath reconcyled vs vnto himselfe
by Iesus Christ, and hath geuen vs the office to preach the attonement.
19 For God was in Christ, and reconcyled the worlde vnto himselfe, and counted
not ther synnes vnto them, and amonge vs hath he set vp the worde of ye
attonemet.
20 Now the are we messaungers in the rowme of Christ, euen as though God
exhorted by vs. We beseke you now therfore in Christes steade, that ye be at one
with God:
21 for he hath made him which knewe no synne, to be synne for vs, yt we by his
meanes shulde be that righteousnes, which before God is alowed.

Chapter 6

1 We as helpers therfore exhorte you, that ye receaue not ye grace of God in
vayne.
2 For he sayeth: I haue herde the in the tyme accepted, and in the daye of
saluacion haue I succoured the. Beholde, now is the accepted tyme, now is the
daye of saluacion.
3 Let vs geue no man occasion of euell, that oure office be not euell spoken of:
4 but in all thinges let vs behaue oure selues as the mynisters of God: in moch
pacience, in troubles, in necessities, in anguysshes,
5 in strypes, in presonmentes, in vproures, in laboures, in watchinges, in
fastynges,
6 in purenesse, in knowlege, in longe sufferynge, in kyndnesse, in the holy
goost, in loue vnfayned,
7 in the worde of the trueth, in the power of God, by the armoure of
righteousnes on the rightehande and on the lefte,
8 by honoure and dishonoure, by euell reporte and good reporte: as disceauers, &
yet true:
9 as vnknowne, and yet knowne: as dyenge, and beholde, we lyue: as chastened,
and not kylled:
10 as sorowynge, and yet allwaye mery: as poore, & yet make many riche: as
hauynge nothinge, & yet possessynge all thinges.
11 O ye Corinthians, oure mouth is open vnto you, oure hert is made large.
12 Ye are in no straytnesse on oure behalfe: but where as ye are in straytnesse,
that do ye of youre owne hertely meanynge.
13 I speake to you, as to childre, that haue like rewarde with vs.
14 Set youre selues therfore at large.Beare not a straunge yock with the
vnbeleuers. For what fellishippe hath righteousnes with vnrighteousnes? What
company hath lighte wt darknesse?
15 How agreeth Christ with Belial? Or what parte hath the beleuer with the
infydele?
16 How acordeth ye teple of God with ymages? Ye are the temple of the lyuynge
God, as sayeth God: I wyl dwell in them, and walke in them, and wyl be their
God, & they shalbe my people.
17 Wherfore come out from amoge them, and separate youre selues (sayeth the
LORDE) and touche no vncleane thinge, so wyl I receaue you,
18 & be youre father, & ye shalbe my sonnes and doughters, sayeth ye Allmightie
LORDE.

Chapter 7

1 Seynge now that we haue soch promyses (dearly beloued) let vs clense
oureselues from all fylthynes of the flesh and sprete, and growe vp to full
holynes in ye feare of God.
2 Vnderstode vs right. We haue hurte no ma, we haue corrupte no man, we haue
defrauded no man.
3 I speake not this to codemne you, for I haue shewed you before, that ye are in
oure hertes, to dye and to lyue wt you.
4 I am very bolde towarde you, I make moch boost of you, I am fylled with
comforte, I am exceadynge ioyous in all oure tribulacion.
5 For whan we were come into Macedonia, oure flesh had no rest, but we were
troubled on euery syde: outwarde was fightinge, inwarde was feare.
6 Neuertheles God that comforteth the abiecte, comforted vs by the comynge of
Titus.
7 Not onely by his commynge, but also by the cosolacion wherwith he was coforted
of you, whan he tolde vs yor desyre, youre wepynge, yor feruet mynde for me, so
yt I now reioyse ye more.
8 For where as I made you sory by the letter, it repenteth me not, though I dyd
repete. For I se, that the same epistle made you sory (though it were but for a
ceason).
9 But now I reioyce, not that ye were sory, but that ye were sory to
repentaunce. For ye sorowed godly, so that in nothinge ye were hurte by vs.
10 For godly sorowe causeth repentaunce vnto saluacion, not to be repented of:
but worldly sorowe causeth death.
11 Beholde, where as ye haue had godly sorowe, what diligence hath it wrought in
you? Yee a sufficiet answere, displeasure, feare, desyre, a feruet mynde,
punyshment. For in all poyntes ye haue shewed youre selues, that ye are cleare
in that matter.
12 Wherfore though I wrote vnto you, yet is it not done for his cause that dyd
hurte, nether for his cause that was hurte, but that youre diligence (which ye
haue for vs in the sighte of God) mighte be manifest wt you.
13 Therfore are we comforted, because ye are comforted: but exceadingly the more
ioyed we, for the ioye of Titus, because his sprete was refresshed of you all.
14 I am therfore not now ashamed, though I boasted my selfe vnto him of you: but
like as all is true that I haue spoke vnto you, euen so is oure boastinge vnto
Titus founde true also.
15 And his inwarde affeccion is more abundaunt towarde you, whan he remembreth
the obedience of you all, how ye receaued him with feare and treblynge.
16 I reioyse, that I maye be bolde ouer you in all thinges.

Chapter 8

1 I do you to wit (brethren) the grace of God, which is geue in the
congregacions of Macedonia.
2 For their reioysinge was most abundaunt, whan they were tryed by moch trouble:
& though they were exceadinge poore, yet haue they geue exceadinge richely, and
that in synglenesse.
3 For to their power (I beare recorde) yee and beyonde their power, they were
wyllinge of their awne acorde,
4 and prayed vs with greate instauce, that we wolde receaue their benefite and
fellishippe of the hadreachinge that is done for the sayntes:
5 And not as we loked for, but gaue ouer them selues first to the LODRE, and
afterwarde vnto vs by ye wyl of God,
6 so that we coulde not but desyre Titus, that like as he had begonne afore he
wolde euen so accomplish the same beniuolence amonge you.
7 Now as ye are riche in all poyntes, in faith and in worde, and in knowlege,
and in all diligence, and in youre loue towarde vs, euen so se that ye be
plenteous also in this benyuolece.
8 This I saye not as commaudynge, but seynge, other are so diligent, I proue
youre loue also, whether it be perfecte or no.
9 For ye knowe the liberalite of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, which though he be
riche, yet for youre sakes he became poore, yt ye thorow his pouerte mighte be
made riche.
10 And my councell herin I geue, for this is profitable for you, which haue
begonne a yeare a goo,not onely to do, but also to wyll.
11 But now perfourme the dede also, that like as there is a ready mynde to wil,
there maye be a ready mynde also to perfourme the dede of that which ye haue.
12 For yf there be a wyllinge mynde, it is accepted acordinge to that a man
hath, not acordinge to that he hath not.
13 This is not done to the intent, that other shulde haue ease, and ye
cobraunce,
14 but that it be a lyke. Let youre abundaunce sucker their lacke in this tyme
off derth, that their abundaunce also herafter maye supplee youre lacke,
15 that there maye be equalite. As it is wrytten: He yt gathered moch, had not
the more: and he that gathered litle, wanted nothinge.
16 Thakes be vnto God, which put in the hert of Titus, the same diligence
towarde you.
17 For he accepted the request in dede, yee he was rather so well wyllynge, that
of his awne acorde, he came vnto you.
18 We haue sent with him that brother, whose prayse is in the Gospell thorow out
all the congregacions.
19 Not onely that, but he is chosen also of the congregacions, to be a felowe
with vs in oure iourney, for this benyuolence that is mynistred by vs vnto the
prayse of the LORDE, and to stere vp youre prompte mynde,
20 and to bewarre, lest eny ma reporte euell of vs because of this plenteousnes,
which is mynistred by vs:
21 and therfore make we prouision for honest thinges, not onely before the
LORDE, but also before men.
22 We haue sent with them also a brother of oures, whom we haue oft proued
diliget in many thinges, but now moch more diligent.
23 And this haue we done in greate hope towarde you, whether it be for Titus
sake (which is my felowe and helper amonge you) or for oure brethre (which are
Apostles of the cogregacions, & the prayse of Christ.)
24 Shewe now the profe off youre loue and off oure boastinge of you, vnto these,
and opely in the sighte of the cogregacions.

Chapter 9

1 Of the handreachinge vnto ye sayntes, it is no nede for me to wryte vnto you:
2 for I knowe youre redynesse of mynde, wherof I boast my selfe amonge them of
Macedonia, and saye: Achaia was ready a yeare agoo. And youre feruentnesse hath
prouoked many.
3 Neuertheles yet haue we sent these brethren, lest oure reioysinge ouer you
shulde be in vayne in this behalfe, that ye mighte be ready, as I haue reported
of you:
4 lest whan they of Macedonia come with me, and fynde you vnprepared, we (I wyl
not saye ye) shulde be ashamed in this presumpcion of boostinge.
5 Wherfore I thoughte it necessary to exhorte the brethren, to come before hande
vnto you, for to prepare this blessynge promysed afore, that it mighte be ready,
so that it be a blessynge, and not a defraudynge.
6 This I thynke: that he which soweth litle, shal reape litle also: and he yt
soweth plenteously,shal likewyse reape plenteously,
7 euery one acordynge as he hath purposed in his hert, not grudgingly, or of
compulsion. For God loueth a chearfull geuer.
8 God is able to make you riche in all grace, yt ye in all thinges hauynge
sufficiet to the vttemost, maye be riche to all maner of good workes.
9 As it is wrytte: He hath sparsed abrode & geue to ye poore, his righteousnes
remayneth for euer.
10 He that geueth sede vnto the sower, shal mynistre bred also for fode, and
shal multiplye youre sede, and increase the frutes of yor righteousnes,
11 that in all thinges ye maye be made riche vnto all singlenesse, which causeth
thorow vs, thankesgeuynge vnto God.
12 For the hadreachinge of this colleccion not onely suppleeth the nede off the
sayntes, but also is abudaunt herin, that for this laudable mynistracion many
mighte geue thakes vnto God,
13 and prayse God for yor obedient professynge of the Gospell of Christ, & for
yor synglenesse in distributynge vnto the, and to all men,
14 and in their prayer for you, which longe after you, for the abundaunt grace
of God in you.
15 Thankes be vnto God for his vnoutspeakeable gifte.

Chapter 10

1 I Paul my selfe beseke you by the mekenesse and softnesse off Christ, which
when I am present amonge you, am of small reputacion, but am bolde towarde you
beynge absent.
2 I beseke you that I nede not be bolde whan I am present, & to vse yt boldnesse
wherwith I am supposed to be bolde, agaynst some, which repute vs as though we
walked after ye flesh:
3 for though we walke in the flesh, yet fighte we not after a fleshly maner.
4 For the wapens of oure warre are not fleshly, but mightie before God to cast
downe stroge holdes,
5 wherwith we ouerthrowe ymaginacions, & euery hye thinge yt exalteth it selfe
agaynst the knowlege of God, and brynge in to captiuyte all vnderstondinge to
the obedience of Christ,
6 & are ready to take vengeaunce on all disobedience, whan youre obediece is
fulfylled.
7 Loke ye on thinges after ye vtter appearauce?Yf eny man trust of himselfe yt
he is Christes, let him thinke this also by himselfe, yt like as he is Christes,
eue so are we Christes also.
8 And though I shulde boast my selfe somwhat more of oure auctorite which ye
LORDE hath geue vs to edifye and not to destroye, it shulde not be to my shame.
9 This I saye, lest I shulde seme, as though I wente aboute to make you afrayed
with letters.
10 For the pistles (saye they) are sore and stronge, but his bodely presence is
weake, and his speache rude.
11 Let him yt is soche, thinke on this wyse, that as we are in worde by letters
wha we are absente, soch are we also in dede whan we are present.
12 For we darre not reken or compare oure selues, vnto some that prayse them
selues: Neuertheles whyle they measure them selues by them selues, and holde
onely of them selues, they vnderstonde nothinge.
13 Howbeit we wil not boast or selues aboue measure, but onely acordinge to the
measure of the rule, wherwith God hath distributed vnto vs the measure to reach
euen vnto you.
14 For we stretche not or selues to farre as though we had not reached vnto you.
For euen vnto you haue we come with the Gospell of Christ,
15 and boast not oure selues out of measure in other mens laboures: Yee and we
hope whan youre faith is increased in you, that we wil come farther (acordinge
to oure measure)
16 and preach the Gospell vnto them that dwell beyonde you, and not to reioyse
in that, which is prepared with another mans measure.
17 Let him that reioyseth, reioyse in the LORDE:
18 for he yt prayseth him selfe, is not alowed, but he who ye LORDE prayseth.

Chapter 11

1 Wolde God ye coulde suffre me a litle in my foloshnes, yet do ye forbeare me.
2 For I am gelous ouer you wt godly gelousy. For I haue maried you vnto one ma,
to brynge a chaste virgin vnto Christ.
3 But I feare, lest as ye serpet begyled Eue wt his sutteltie, eue so yor wyttes
shulde be corrupte from the synglenesse that is in Christ.
4 For yf he that commeth vnto you, preach another Iesus, whom we haue not
preached, or yf ye receaue another sprete, yt ye haue not receaued, or another
Gospell which ye haue not accepted, ye might right well haue bene cotent.
5 For I suppose that I am no lesse the the hye Apostles are.
6 And though I be rude in speakynge, yet am I not rude in knowlege. Howbeit
amoge you I am knowne to the vttemost.
7 Or dyd I synne therin because I submytted my selfe, that ye mighte be
exalted?For I preached vnto you the Gospell of God frely,
8 and robbed other cogregacions, and toke wages of the, to preach vnto you.
9 And whan I was present with you, and had nede, I was greuous to no man: for yt
which was lackynge vnto me, the brethren which came fro Macedonia, suppleed. And
in all thinges I kepte myselfe so, yt I shulde not be greuous to you, & so wyl I
kepe my selfe.
10 As surely as the trueth of Christ is in me, this reioysinge shal not be taken
fro me in the regions of Achaia.
11 Wherfore? because I shulde not loue you? God knoweth.
12 Neuertheles what I do and wyl do, that do I to cut awaye occasion, from the
which seke occasion, that they mighte boast the selues to be like vnto vs.
13 For soch false Apostles & disceatfull workers fashion them selues like vnto
the Apostles of Christ.
14 And that is no maruell: for Sathan himfelfe is chaunged in to ye fashion of
an angell of light.
15 Therfore is it no greate thinge, though his mymisters fashion them selues as
though they were the preachers of righteousnes, whose ende shalbe acordinge to
their dedes.
16 I saye agayne, lest eny man thynke that I am folish: or els take me euen now
as a fole, yt I maye boast my selfe a litle also.
17 That I speake now, that speake I not after the LORDE, but as it were in
folishnes, whyle we are now come to boastinge:
18 Seynge that many boaste them selues after ye flesh, I wil boast my selfe
also.
19 For ye suffre foles gladly, in so moch as ye youre selues are wyse.
20 For ye suffre euen yf a man brynge you in to bondage, yf a man put you to
dishonesty, yf a man take ought fro you, yf a man exalte himselfe ouer you, yf a
man smyte you on the face.
21 I speake concernynge rebuke, as though we were weake.Wherin so euer now eny
man darre be bolde (I speake folishly) therin darre I be bolde also.
22 They are Hebrues, so am I. They are Israelites, euen so am I. They are the
sede of Abraham, so am I.
23 They are the mynisters of Christ (I speake as a fole) I am more: in laboures
more abudaunt, in strypes aboue measure, in presonmentes more plenteously, in
death oft.
24 Of the Iewes receaued I fyue tymes fortye strypes, one lesse.
25 Thryse was I beaten with roddes. I was once stoned, I suffred thryse
shypwracke: nighte and daye haue I bene in the depe of the see:
26 I haue oft iourneyed: I haue bene oft in parels of waters, in parels amonge
murthurers, in parels amonge the Iewes, in parels amonge the Heythen, in parels
in cities, in parels in the wylderners, in parels vpon the See, in parels amonge
false brethre,
27 in laboure & trauayle, in moch watchinges, in honger and thyrst, in moch
fastinges in colde and nakednesse:
28 Besyde those thynges which are outwarde, namely my daylie combraunce, my
daylie care for all cogregacions.
29 Who is weake, and I be not weake? Who is offended, & I burne not?
30 Yf I must nedes make my boast, I wil boast my selfe of myne infirmyte.
31 God ye father of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, which is blessed for euer, knoweth
that I lye not.
32 At Damascon the gouernoure of ye people vnder kynge Aretas, kepte ye cite of
the Damascenes, & wolde haue taken me.
33 and at a wyndowe was I let downe in a basket thorow the wall, & so escaped
his handes.

Chapter 12

1 It profiteth me nothinge (no doute) to boaste. Neuertheles I wil come to ye
visions and reuelacions off the LORDE.
2 I knowe a man in Christ aboue fourtene yeares a goo (whether he was in ye
body, I can not tell: or whether he was out of the body, I can not tell, God
knoweth.) the same was taken vp in to the thirde heauen:
3 and I knowe the same man (whether he was in ye body or out of the body, I can
not tell, God knoweth)
4 how that he was take vp in to Paradise, and herde wordes not to be spoken,
which no man can vtter.
5 Here of will I boast, but of my selfe wil I make no boast, excepte it be of
myne infirmyties.
6 And though I wolde boast my selfe, I dyd not foolishly, for I wolde saye the
trueth. But I refrayne my selfe, lest eny ma shulde thinke of me aboue yt he
seyth in me, or heareth of me.
7 And lest I shulde exalte my selfe out of measure because of the hye
reuelacions, there is a warnynge geuen vnto my flesh, euen ye messaunger of
Satan, to buffet me, that I shulde not exalte my selfe out off measure:
8 for ye which I besoughte the LORDE thryse, that it mighte departe fro me.
9 And he sayde vnto me: My grace is sufficiet for the. For my strength is made
perfecte thorow weaknes. Very glad therfore wil I reioyse in my weaknesses, that
the strength of Christ maye dwell in me.
10 Therfore am I contente in infirmities, in rebukes, in necessities, in
persecucions, in anguysshes for Christes sake: for wha I am weake, the am I
stroge.
11 I am become a fole i boastinge my selfe: Ye haue copelled me. For I oughte to
be comended of you, in so moch as I am in nothinge inferior to ye hye Apostles.
Though I be nothinge,
12 yet are ye tokens of an Apostle wrought amoge you, with all paciece, with
signes, & with woders & with mightie dedes.
13 For what is it, wherin ye are inferiours to the other congregacions? excepte
it be yt I haue not bene greuous vnto you.Forgeue me this wroge.
14 Beholde, I am ready the thirde tyme to come vnto you, and wyl not be
chargeable vnto you. For I seke not youres, but you. For ye childre ought not to
gather treasure for the elders, but the elders for the children.
15 I wil very gladly bestowe, and wyl be bestowed for youre soules: though ye
more I loue you, the lesse am I loued agayne.
16 But let it be so that I greued you not, neuertheles for so moch as I was
craftye, I toke you wt gyle.
17 Haue I defrauded you by eny of the, who I sent vnto you?
18 I desyred Titus, & with him I sent a brother: dyd Titus defraude you? Haue we
not walked in one sprete? Wete we not in like fotesteppes?
19 Agayne, thynke ye yt we excuse oure selues? We speake in Christ in the sighte
off God. But all this (dearly beloued) is done for yor edifyenge.
20 For I feare, lest whan I come, I shal not fynde you soch as I wolde: and lest
ye shal fynde me soch as ye wolde not: lest there be amonge you, debates,
envyenges, wrathes, stryuynges, bacbytinges, whysperinges, swellinges, vproures:
21 lest whan I come agayne, God bringe me lowe amoge you & lest I be constrayned
to bewayle many of the yt haue synned before, & haue not repented ouer ye
vnclennesse and whordome, and wantonnes, which they haue comytted.

Chapter 13

1 Now come I the thirde tyme vnto you. In the mouth of two or thre witnesses
shal euery matter be stablisshed.
2 I haue tolde you before, & tell you before as present ye seconde tyme, & wryte
it now beynge absent, vnto the which in tyme passed haue synned, & to all other:
& yf I come agayne, I wil not spare,
3 seynge that ye seke experiece of him, which speaketh in me, euen Christ, which
amonge you is not weake, but is mightie amoge you.
4 And though he was crucified in weaknes, yet lyueth he in the power of God. And
though we are weake in him, yet lyue we with him in the power of God amonge you.
5 Proue youre selues, whether ye are in the faith, exame youre selues. Or knowe
ye not yor selues, yt Iesus Christ is in you? Excepte ye be cast awayes.
6 But I trust ye knowe, yt we are not cast awayes.
7 I desyre before God yt ye do no euell: not yt we shulde seme comendable, but
yt ye shulde do yt which is good, & let vs be as cast awayes.
8 For we maye do nothinge agaynst ye trueth, but for ye trueth.
9 We are glad whan we are weake, & ye stronge: & the same also we wysshe for,
namely yor perfectnesse.
10 Therfore wryte I these thinges beynge absent, lest wha I am present, I shulde
vse sharpnesse, acordinge to the power which the LORDE hath geue me to edifye,
and not to destroye.
11 Fynally brethren, reioyse, be parfecte, coforte yor selues, be of one mynde,
be peaceable, and the God of loue and peace shalbe wt you.
12 Salute one another with an holy kysse.
13 All the sayntes salute you.
14 The grace of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, & the loue of God, and the fellishippe
of ye holy goost be with you all. Amen.


Galatians

Chapter 1

1 Paul an Apostle (not of men, nor by ma, but by Iesus Christ & by God the
father, which raysed him vp fro ye deed)
2 & all the brethre which are wt me. Vnto the cogregacios in Galacia.
3 Grace be with you, and peace fro God the father, and oure LORDE Iesus Christ,
4 which gaue him selfe for oure synnes, that he mighte delyuer vs from this
present euel worlde, acordinge to the wyll of God oure father,
5 to whom be prayse for euer and euer. Amen.
6 I maruell yt ye are so soone turned (from him that called you in the grace of
Christ) vnto another Gospell:
7 which is nothinge els, but that there be some, which trouble you, and intende
to peruerte the Gospell of Christ.
8 Neuertheles though we oure selues, or an angell from heaue preach vnto you eny
other Gospel, the yt which we haue preached vnto you, the same be acursed.
9 As we haue sayde afore, so saye we now agayne: Yf eny ma preach vnto you eny
other thinge, the yt ye haue receaued, ye same be acursed.
10 Preach I men now or God? Or go I aboute to please men? Yf I shulde yet please
men, I were not the seruaunt of Christ.
11 But I certifye you brethren, yt the Gospell which is preached of me, is not
of men.
12 For I nether receaued it ner lerned it of ma, but by the reuelacion of Iesus
Christ.
13 For ye haue herde of my conuersacion afore tyme in the Ieweshippe, how that
beyode measure I persecuted the cogregacion of God, and spoyled it,
14 and preuayled in the Ieweshippe aboue many of my companyons in my nacion, &
was a moch more feruent manteyner of the tradicions of the fathers.
15 But whan it pleased God which separated me fro my mothers wombe, and called
me by his grace,
16 for to declare his sonne in me, that I shulde preach him thorow the Gospell
amonge the Heythen, immediatly I commened not of the matter with flesh and
bloude:
17 nether came I to Ierusalem vnto them which were Apostles before me: but wente
my wayes in to Arabia, and came agayne to Damascon.
18 Then after thre yeare I came to Ierusale to se Peter, and abode with him
fyftene dayes.
19 As for the other Apostles, I sawe none of them, saue Iames the LORDES
brother.
20 The thinges that I wryte vnto you, beholde, God knoweth, I lye not.
21 After that wente I in to the coastes of Syria and Celicia:
22 but of face I was vnknowne to ye Christen congregacions in Iewrye.
23 Neuertheles they had herde onely, that: He that persecuted vs in tyme passed,
preacheth now ye faith which some tyme he destroyed:
24 and they praysed God in me.

Chapter 2

1 Then after fourtene yeares, I wente vp agayne to Ierusale with Barnabas, and
toke Titus with me also.
2 But I wente vp by reuelacion, and commened with the of ye Gospell, which I
preach amonge the Heythe: but specially with the which were in reputacion, lest
I shulde runne or had runne in vayne.
3 But Titus which was also with me, was not compelled to be circucysed, though
he was a Greke:
4 and that because of certayne incommers beynge false brethre, which came in
amoge other, to spye out oure libertye, which we haue in Christ Iesus, that they
mighte brynge vs in to bondage:
5 To whom we gaue no rowme, no not for the space of an houre, as concernynge to
be broughte in to subieccion: yt the trueth of the Gospell mighte comtynue with
you.
6 As for the that semed to be greate, what they were in tyme passed, it maketh
no matter to me. For God loketh not on the outwarde appearaunce of men.
Neuertheles they which semed greate, taught me nothinge:
7 but contrary wyse, whan they sawe that the Gospell ouer the vncircumcision was
comytted vnto me, as ye Gospell ouer ye circucision was commytted vnto Peter.
8 (For he yt was mightie with Peter to the Apostleshippe ouer the circumcision,
the same was mightie with me also amoge the Heythen)
9 they perceaued the grace that was geuen vnto me. Iames and Cephas and Ihon,
which semed to be pilers, gaue me and Barnabas ye righte handes, and agreed with
vs, that we shulde preach amonge the Heythe, and they amonge the Iewes:
10 onely that we shulde remebre the poore, which thinge also I was diligent to
do.
11 But wha Peter was come to Antioche, I withstode him in ye face: for he was
worthy to be blamed.
12 For afore there came certayne from Iames, he ate with the Heythe. But wha
they were come, he withdrue and separated himselfe, fearinge the which were of
the circumcision.
13 And the other Iewes dyssembled with him likewyse, in so moch yt Barnabas was
brought in to their symulacion also.
14 But whan I sawe that they walked not right after ye trueth of the Gospell, I
sayde vnto Peter openly before all: Yf thou beynge a Iewe, lyuest after the
maner of the Gentyles, and not as do the Iewes, why causest thou the Gentyles
then to lyue as do the Iewes?
15 Though we be Iewes by nature, and not synners of the Gentyles,
16 yet (in so moch as we knowe, that a man is not made righteous by the dedes
off the lawe, but by the faith on Iesus Christ) we haue beleued also on Iesus
Christ, yt we might be made righteous by the faith of Christ, and not by the
dedes of the lawe, because that by the dedes of the lawe no flesh shal be
iustified.
17 Yf we then which seke to be made righteous by christ, shulde be yet founde
synners or selues, is not Christ then the mynister of synne? God forbyd.
18 For yf I buylde agayne yt which I haue destroyed, then make I my selfe a
trespacer.
19 But I thorow the lawe am deed vnto the lawe, that I might lyue vnto God.
20 I am crucified with Christ, yet do I lyue: neuerthelesse now not I, but
Christ lyueth in me. For ye life which I now lyue in ye flesshe, I lyue in the
faith of ye sonne of God which loued me, and gaue himselfe for me.
21 I cast not awaye the grace of God. For yf righteousnes come by the lawe, then
dyed Christ in vayne.

Chapter 3

1 O ye folishe Galathias, who hath bewitched you, that ye shulde not beleue the
trueth? To who Iesus Christ was descrybed before the eyes and amonge you
crucified.
2 This onely wolde I lerne of you: Receaued ye the sprete by the dedes of the
lawe, or by the preachinge of the faith?
3 Are ye so vnwyse? Ye beganne in the sprete, wolde ye ende now the in the
flesh?
4 Haue ye suffred so moch in vayne? Yf it be els in vayne.
5 He that geueth you the sprete, and doth soch greate actes amoge you, doth he
it thorow the dedes of the lawe, or by ye preachinge of the faith?
6 Euen as Abraha beleued God, and it was counted vnto him for righteousnes.
7 Thus ye knowe, that they which are of faith, are Abrahams children.
8 The scripture sawe afore hade, that God iustifieth the Heythen thorow faith.
Therfore shewed it glad tydinges afore vnto Abraham, and sayde: In the shal all
the Heythen be blessed.
9 So then they which be of faith, are blessed with faithfull Abraham.
10 For as many as go aboute with the workes of the lawe, are vnder ye curse: For
it is wrytte: Cursed be euery man, which cotynueth not in all thinges that are
wrytte in the boke of the lawe, to do them.
11 That no man is iustified by the lawe in the sighte of God, it is euydet: For
ye iust shal lyue by his faith.
12 The lawe is not of faith, but the ma that doth ye same, shal lyue therin.
13 But Christ hath delyuered vs from ye curse of the lawe, whan he became a
curse for vs. (For it is wrytte: Cursed is euery man that hangeth on tre)
14 yt the blessynge of Abraham mighte come on the Gentyles in Christ Iesu, and
yt we might so receaue ye promysed sprete, thorow faith.
15 Brethren, I wil speake after the maner of men. Though it be but a mas
Testamet, yet no man despyseth it, or addeth eny thinge therto, whan it is
confirmed.
16 To Abraham and his sede were the promyses made. He sayeth not: In the sedes,
as in many, but in thy sede, as in one, which is Christ.
17 This Testament (I saye) which afore was confirmed to Christ warde, is not
disanulled (that the promes shulde be made of none affecte) by the lawe which
was geuen beyonde foure hundreth & thirtie yeares therafter.
18 For yf the enheritaunce be gotten by the lawe, then is it not geuen by
promes. But God gaue it frely vnto Abraham by promes.
19 Wherfore the serueth the lawe? It was added because of trangression, tyll the
sede came, to the which the promes was made. And it was geuen of angels, by the
hande of the mediatoure.
20 A mediatour is not a mediatour of one onely, but God is one.
21 Is the lawe then agaynst the promyses of God? God forbyd. Howbeit yf there
had bene geuen a lawe which coulde haue geue life, the no doute righteousnes
shulde come of the lawe.
22 But ye scripture hath shut vp all vnder synne, that ye promes shulde come by
the faith on Iesus Christ, geue vnto the that beleue.
23 Before faith came, we were kepte and shut vp vnder the lawe, vnto the faith
which shulde afterwarde be declared.
24 Thus ye lawe was or scolemaster vnto Christ, that we might be made righteous
by faith.
25 But now that faith is come, we are nomore vnder the scolemaster.
26 For ye all are the children of God by the faith in Christ Iesu.
27 For as many of you as are baptysed, haue put on Christ.
28 Here is nether Iewe ner Greke: here is nether bode ner fre: here is nether
man ner woman, for ye are all one in Christ Iesu.
29 Yf ye be Christes, the are ye Abrahas sede and heyres acordynge to the
promes.

Chapter 4

1 But I saye: As longe as the heyre is a childe, there is no difference betwene
him and a seruaunt, though he be lorde of all ye goodes:
2 but he is vnder tuters and gouerners, vntyll the tyme appoynted of the father.
3 Euen so we also, wha we were children, were in bondage vnder the outwarde
tradicions.
4 But whan the tyme was fulfylled, God sent his sonne, borne of a woma, and put
vnder the lawe,
5 to redeme them which were vnder the lawe, that we mighte receaue ye
childshippe.
6 For so moch the as ye are children, God hath sent the sprete of his sonne in
to oure hertes, which cryeth: Abba, deare father.
7 Wherfore now, thou art not a seruaunt, but a sonne. Yf thou be a sonne, then
art thou the heyre of God thorow Christ.
8 Notwithstondinge whan ye knewe not God, ye dyd seruyce vnto them, which by
nature are no Goddes.
9 But now seynge ye knowe God (yee rather are knowne off God) how is it that ye
turne you backe agayne vnto the weake and beggerly tradicions, wher vnto ye
desyre agayne afresh to be in bondage?
10 Ye obserue dayes and monethes, and tymes and yeares.
11 I am in feare of you, lest I haue bestowed laboure on you in vayne.
12 Brethre I beseke you, be ye as I am, for I am as ye are. Ye haue not hurte me
at all.
13 For ye knowe how that in weaknes after ye flesh I preached ye Gospell vnto
you at the first:
14 and my tentacion which I suffred after the flesh, ye despysed not, nether
abhorred, but receaued me as an angell of God, yee euen as Christ Iesus.
15 How happy were ye then? For I beare you recorde, that yf it had bene
possible, ye had plucked out youre awne eyes, and geue them vnto me.
16 Am I therfore become yor enemy, because I tell you ye trueth?
17 They are gelous ouer you amysse. Yee they wolde make you to fall backe, that
ye might be feruet to the warde.
18 It is good to be feruent, so yt it be allwaye in a good thinge, and not onely
whan I am present wt you.
19 My litle children (of whom I trauayle in byrth agayne, vntyll Christ be
fashioned in you)
20 I wolde I were wt you now, and coulde chauge my voyce, for I stode i doute of
you.
21 Tell me ye that wylbe vnder the lawe, haue ye not herde the lawe?
22 For it is wrytten, that Abraham had two sonnes the one by a bonde mayde, the
other by a fre woman.
23 As for him that was of the bode mayde, he was borne after ye flesh: but he
which was of the fre woman, was borne by promes.
24 These wordes betoken somwhat. For these wemen are the two Testamentes: The
one from the mount Sina, that gendreth vnto bondage, which is Agar.
25 For Agar is called in Arabia ye mount Sina, and reacheth vnto Ierusalem which
now is, and is in bondage with hir children.
26 But Ierusalem that is aboue, is the fre woman, which is the mother of vs all.
27 For it is wrytte: Reioyse thou baren, that bearest no childre: breake forth
and crye thou yt trauaylest not, for the desolate hath many mo childre, then she
which hath an hussbande.
28 As for vs (brethren) we are the children of Isaac acordinge to the promes.
29 But like as at that tyme, he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him
yt was borne after the sprete, euen so is it now also.
30 But what sayeth the scripture? Put awaye the bonde mayden and hir sonne: for
the sonne of ye bondmayde shal not be heyre with ye sonne of the fre woman.
31 So now brethren, we are not children of the bonde mayde, but of the fre
woman.

Chapter 5

1 Stonde fast therfore in the libertye wherwith Christ hath made vs fre, and be
not wrapped agayne in the yocke off bondage.
2 Beholde, I Paul saye vnto you: Yf ye be circumcysed, Christ profiteth you
nothinge at all.
3 I testifye agayne vnto euery man which is circumcysed, that he is bounde to
kepe the whole lawe.
4 Ye are gone quyte from Christ, as many off you as wylbe made righteous by the
lawe, and are fallen from grace.
5 But we wayte in the sprete off hope, to be made righteous by faith.
6 For in Christ Iesu nether is circumcision eny thinge worth ner vncircumcision,
but faith which by loue is mightie in operacion.
7 Ye ranne well, who was a let vnto you, that ye shulde not obeye the trueth?
8 Soch councell is not of him that hath called you.
9 A litle leuen sowreth the whole lompe of dowe.
10 I haue trust towarde you in ye LORDE, that ye wylbe none otherwyse mynded.
But he that troubleth you, shal beare his iudgment, what so euer he be.
11 Brethren yf I yet preach circumcision, why do I suffre persecucion? then had
the slaunder off the crosse ceassed.
12 Wolde God they were roted out fro amoge you, which trouble you.
13 But brethre, ye are called vnto liberty, onely let not youre libertie be an
occasion vnto the flesh, but by loue serue one another.
14 For all the lawe is fulfylled in one worde, namely in this: loue thy
neghboure as thy selfe.
15 But yf ye byte and deuoure one another, take hede, that ye be not consumed
one of another.
16 I saye: Walke in the sprete, and so shal ye not fulfill the lustes off the
flesshe.
17 For the flesh lusteth agaynst the sprete, and the sprete agaynst the flesh.
These are contrary one to the other, so that ye can not do that which ye wolde:
18 But and yf ye be led of the sprete, then are ye not vnder the lawe.
19 The dedes of ye flesh are manifest, which are these: Aduoutrye, whordome,
vnclenes, wantanes,
20 Idolatrye, witchcraft, hatred, variaunce, zele, wrath, stryfe, sedicion,
sectes,
21 envyenge, murthur, dronkennes, glotony, and soch like: of the which I tell
you before, as I haue tolde you in tyme past, that they which commytte soch,
shal not inheret the kyngdome of God.
22 But the frute of the sprete, is loue, ioye, peace, longe sufferinge,
getlenes, goodnesse, faithfulnes,
23 mekenesse, teperaunce, Agaynst soch is not ye lawe:
24 But they that are Christes, haue crucified their flesh, with the lustes and
desyres.
25 Yf we lyue in the sprete, let vs walke also in the sprete.
26 Let vs not be vayne glorious, prouokinge one another, and envyenge another.

Chapter 6

1 Brethren, Yf eny ma be ouertaken of a faute, ye which are spirituall, enfourme
him with a meke sprete: and considre thine owne selfe, that thou also be not
tempted.
2 Beare ye one anothers burthe, and so shal ye fulfyll the lawe of Christ.
3 But yf eny man thinke himselfe to be somwhat (whan in dede he is nothinge) the
same disceaueth himselfe.
4 Let euery man proue his owne worke, and the shal he haue reioysinge in his
awne selfe, and not in another.
5 For euery one shal beare his owne burthen.
6 But let him that is taughte with the worde, mynister in all good thinges, vnto
him that teacheth him.
7 Be not disceaued, God wil not be mocked. For what soeuer a man soweth, that
shal he reape.
8 He that soweth vpon the flesh, shal of the flesh reape destruccion: But he
that soweth vpon ye sprete, shal of the sprete reape life euerlastinge.
9 Let vs not be weery of well doynge: for wha the tyme is come, we shal reape
without ceassinge.
10 Whyle we haue tyme therfore, let vs do good vnto all men but specially vnto
the which are of ye housholde of faith.
11 Beholde, with how many wordes I haue wrytten vnto you with myne awne hande.
12 They that wil please in the flesh, constrayne you to be circumcysed, onely
lest they shulde be persecuted with the crosse of Christ.
13 For eue they them selues which are circumcysed, kepe not the lawe, but wolde
haue you circucysed, that they mighte reioyse in youre flesh.
14 But God forbyd that I shulde reioyse, saue onely in the crosse of oure LORDE
Iesus Christ, wherby the worlde is crucified vnto me, and I vnto the worlde.
15 For in Christ Iesu nether circucision avayleth eny thinge, ner
vncircumcision, but a new creature.
16 And as many as walke acordynge to this rule, peace and mercy be vpon the, and
vpon Israel of God.
17 From hence forth let no man put me to busynesse, for I beare in my body the
markes of the LORDE Iesu.
18 Brethren, the grace of oure LORDE Iesu Christ be with youre sprete Amen.


Ephesians

Chapter 1

1 Paul an Apostle of Iesus Christ by the will of God. To ye sayntes which are
Ephesus, & to the that beleue on Iesus Christ.
2 Grace be with you and peace from God oure father, & fro the LORDE Iesus
Christ.
3 Blessed be God the father of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, which hath blessed vs wt
all maner of spirituall blessynge in heauenly thynges by Christ
4 acordinge as he had chosen vs by him, or euer the foundacion of the worlde was
layed, that we shulde be holy and without blame before him in loue,
5 & ordeyned vs before, to receaue vs as children thorow Iesus Christ, acordinge
to the pleasure of his will,
6 vnto the prayse of the glory of his grace, wherby he hath made vs accepted in
the Beloued,
7 in whom we haue redempcion thorow his bloude (namely) the forgeuenes of
synnes, acordynge to ye riches of his grace,
8 which he hath shed vpon vs abundauntly in all wyssdome and prudece:
9 and hath opened vnto vs the mystery of his wil acordinge to his pleasure,
which he had purposed in himselfe,
10 yt it shulde be preached wha the tyme was full come, that all thinges shulde
be gathered together by Christ, both the thinges which are in heauen, and also
the thinges that are vpon earth,
11 euen by him, by whom also we are come to the inheritaunce we that were therto
predestinate before, acordinge to ye purpose of him, which worketh all thinges
after ye councell of his owne wyll,
12 that we mighte be to the prayse of his glory, euen we that before beleued on
Christ,
13 on who also ye beleued, after that ye herde the worde of trueth, namely ye
Gospell of youre saluacion: wherin whan ye beleued, ye were sealed with the holy
sprete of promes,
14 which is the ernest of oure inheritaunce to oure redempcion, that we mighte
be his owne to the prayse off his glory.
15 Wherfore I also, (in so moch as I haue herde of the faith which ye haue in ye
LORDE Iesu, and of youre loue vnto all ye sayntes)
16 ceasse not to geue thankes for you, and make mencion of you in my prayers,
17 that ye God of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, the father of glory maye geue vnto
you the sprete of wyssdome, and open vnto you the knowlege of himselfe,
18 and lighten the eyes of youre vnderstondinge, that ye maye knowe what is the
hope of youre callynge, and what the riches of his glorious enheritaunce is vpon
the sayntes,
19 & what is the exceadinge greatnesse of his power towarde vs, which beleue
acordinge to ye workynge of his mightie power,
20 which he wroughte in Christ, whan he raysed him vp fro the deed, and set him
on his righte hade i heauely thinges,
21 aboue all rule, power, and mighte, and dominacio, and aboue all that maye be
named, not onely in this worlde, but also in ye worlde to come.
22 And hath put all thinges vnder his fete, and hath made him aboue all thinges
the heade of the cogregacion,
23 which is his body, and the fulnesse of him that fylleth all in all.

Chapter 2

1 And quyckened you also, whan ye were deed thorow trespaces and synnes,
2 in the which in tyme past ye walked, acordinge to the course off this worlde,
and after the prynce that ruleth in the ayre namely, after ye sprete, which now
worketh in the children of vnbeleue,
3 amonge whom we also had oure conuersacion in tyme past in the lustes of oure
flesh, and dyd the wyll of the flesh and of the mynde, and were naturally the
children of wrath, euen as well as other.
4 But God which is riche in mercy thorow his greate loue wherwith he loued vs
5 eue wha we were deed in synnes, hath quyckened vs in Christ ( for by grace are
ye saued)
6 and hath raysed vs vp with him, and set vs with him in heauely thinges thorow
Christ Iesus,
7 yt in tymes to come he mighte shewe the exceadinge riches of his grace, in
kyndnesse to vs warde in Christ Iesu.
8 For by grace are ye saued thorow faith, and that not of youre selues, For it
is ye gifte of God,
9 not of workes, lest eny ma shulde boast him selfe.
10 For we are his workmanshippe, created in Christ Iesu vnto good workes, to ye
which God ordeyned vs before, that we shulde walke in them.
11 Wherfore remebre, that ye (which afore tyme were Gentyles after the flesh,
and were called vn circumcision, of the that are called circumcision after the
flesh, which circumcision is made with the hande)
12 that ye at the same tyme were without Christ, and reputed aleauntes from the
comen welth of Israel, and were straungers from the Testamentes of promes,
therfore had ye no hope, and were without God in this worlde.
13 But now ye that be in Christ Iesu, and afore tyme were farre of, are now made
nye by the bloude of Christ.
14 For he is or peace, which of both hath made one, and hath broken downe the
wall, that was a stoppe betwene vs,
15 and hath also thorow his flesh put awaye the cause off hatred (namely the
lawe of the commaundemetes contayned in the lawe wrytten) that of twayne he
mighte create one new man in him selfe, and make peace,
16 and to reconcyle both vnto God in one body thorow the crosse, and so he slewe
ye hatred thorow his owne selfe,
17 and came and preached peace in the Gospell, vnto you which were afarre of,
and to the that were nye.
18 For thorow him we both haue intraunce in one sprete vnto the father.
19 Now therfore ye are nomore gestes and straungers, but citesins with the
sayntes, & of the housholde of God,
20 buylded vpon ye foundacion of ye Apostles and prophetes where Iesus Christ is
ye heade corner stone
21 in whom euery buyldinge coupled together, groweth to an holy temple in the
LODRE,
22 in whom ye also are buylded together, to be an habitacion of God in the
sprete.

Chapter 3

1 For this cause I Paul am a presoner of Iesus Christ for you Heythen,
2 acordinge as ye haue herde of ye office of the grace of God which is geuen me
to you warde.
3 For by reuelacion was this mystery shewed vnto me, as I wrote aboue in fewe
wordes:
4 wherby whan ye rede it, ye maye perceaue myne vnderstondynge in ye mystery of
Christ,
5 which (mystery) in tymes past was not opened vnto the childre of me as it is
now declared to his holy Apostles and prophetes by the sprete: namely,
6 that the Heythen shulde be inheritours also, and of the same body, and
partakers of his promes in Christ by the Gospell,
7 wherof I am made a mynister acordynge to the gifte of the grace of God, which
is geue me acordinge to the workynge of his power.
8 Vnto me the leest of all sayntes is this grace geuen, that I shulde preach
amonge the Heythe ye vnsearcheable riches of Christ,
9 and to make all men se, what is the fellishippe of the mystery, which fro the
begynnynge of the worlde hath bene hyd in God, which made all thiges thorow
Iesus Christ:
10 to the intent that now vnto the rulers and powers in heaue mighte be knowne
by the congregacion the manifolde wyssdome off God,
11 acordinge to ye eternall purpose, which he hath shewed in Christ Iesu oure
LORDE
12 by whom we haue boldnesse and intraunce in all confidece thorow faith on him.
13 Wherfore I desyre that ye faynte not because of my tribulacions, yt I suffre
for you, which is youre prayse.
14 For this cause I bowe my knees vnto the father of oure LORDE Iesus Christ,
15 which is the true father, ouer all that is called father in heauen and in
earth,
16 that he graunte you (acordinge to ye riches of his glory) to be strengthed
with power by his sprete in ye inwarde ma,
17 that Christ maye dwell in youre hertes by faith, that ye beynge roted and
grounded in loue,
18 maye be able to coprehende with all sayntes, what is the bredth, and the
length, and the deepth, and the heyth:
19 and to knowe the loue of Christ, which loue yet passeth all knowlege: that ye
maye be fylled with all maner of fulnesse of God.
20 Vnto him that is able to do exceadinge abundauntly, aboue all that we axe or
vnderstonde (acordinge to ye power that worketh in vs)
21 be prayse in the congregacion, which is in Christ Iesu, at all tymes for euer
and euer, Amen.

Chapter 4

1 I therfore which am presoner in the LORDE, exhorte you, that ye walke as it
becometh yor callinge wherin ye are called,
2 with all humblenes off mynde and mekenes, and longe sufferinge, forbearinge
one another in loue,
3 and be diligent to kepe the vnite of the sprete thorow the bonde of peace.
4 One body and one sprete, eue as ye are called in one hope of youre callynge.
5 One LORDE, one faith, one baptyme,
6 one God and father of vs all, which is aboue all, and thorow all, and in you
all.
7 Vnto euery one of vs is geuen grace, acordinge to the measure off the gifte
off Christ.
8 Therfore sayeth he: He is gone vp an hye, and hath led awaye captiuyte
captyue, and hath geue giftes vnto men.
9 That he wente, vp what is it, but that he first came downe in to ye lowest
partes of ye earth?
10 He that came downe, is euen the same which is gone vp aboue all heauens, to
fulfill all.
11 And ye same hath set some to be Apostles, some to be prophetes, some to be
Euangelistes, some to be shepherdes & teachers,
12 wherby the sayntes mighte be coupled together thorow comen seruyce to the
edifienge of ye body of Christ,
13 tyll we all come vnto one maner of faith and knowlege of the sonne of God,
and become a perfecte man in to the measure of the perfecte age of Christ
14 that we be nomore children, waueringe & caried aboute with euery wynde of
doctryne thorow the wickednes of men and craftynes, wherby they laye awayte for
vs to disceaue vs.
15 But let vs folowe the trueth in loue, and in all thinges growe in him, which
is the heade, euen Christ,
16 in whom all the body is coupled together, and one membre hangeth by another
thorow out all ye ioyntes. Wherby one mynistreth vnto another (acordinge to the
operacion as euery membre hath his measure) and maketh, that ye body groweth to
the edifienge of it selfe in loue.
17 This I saye therfore, and testifye in the LORDE, that ye walke nomore as ye
other Heythen walke in the vanite of their mynde,
18 blynded in their vnderstondinge, beynge straungers fro the life which is in
God thorow the ignoraunce that is in them, because of the blyndnes of their
hert:
19 which beynge past repentaunce, haue geue them selues ouer vnto wantonnes, to
worke all maner of vnclennes euen with gredynesse.
20 But ye haue not so learned Christ,
21 yf so be that ye haue herde of him, & are taught in him, euen as the trueth
is in Iesu.
22 So then as concernynge the conuersacion in tyme past laye from you that olde
man which marreth himselfe thorow disceauable lustes:
23 but be ye renued in the sprete of youre mynde,
24 and put on that new man, which is shapen after God, in true righteousnes and
holynes.
25 Wherfore put awaye lyenge, and speake euery man the trueth vnto his
neghboure, for as moch as we are membres one of another.
26 Be angrie, but synne not. Let not ye Sonne go downe vpo youre wrath:
27 nether geue place to the bacbyter.
28 He that hath stollen, let him steale nomore: but let him laboure rather, and
do some good with his hondes, that he maye haue to geue vnto him that nedeth.
29 Let no filthy communicacion proceade out of youre mouth, but that which is
good to edifye withall, wha nede is, that it be gracious to heare.
30 And greue not the holy sprete of God, wherwith ye are sealed vnto ye daye of
redempcion.
31 Let all bytternes, and fearsnes, and wrath, and roaringe, & cursed speakynge
be farre fro you with all maliciousnes.
32 But be ye curteous one to another, mercifull, and forgeue one another, eue as
God hath forgeuen you in Christ.

Chapter 5

1 Be ye the folowers therfore of God as deare children,
2 and walke in loue, euen as Christ loued vs, and gaue him selfe for vs an
offerynge and sacrifice of a swete sauoure vnto God.
3 As for whordome and all vnclennes, or couetousnes, let it not be named amoge
you, as it becommeth sayntes:
4 nether fylthines, ner folish talkynge, ner ieastynge (which are not comly) but
rather geuynge of thakes.
5 For be sure, that no whore monger, or vncleane person, or couetous person
(which is a worshipper off ymages) hath inheritaunce in the kyngdome of Christ
and of God.
6 (Let no man disceaue you with vayne wordes) for because of these commeth the
wrath of God vpon the children of vnbeleue.
7 Be not ye therfore companions with them.
8 For sometyme ye were darknesse, but now are ye lighte in the LORDE. Walke as
the children of lighte.
9 (For the frute of the sprete is all maner of goodnes, and righteousnes and
trueth:)
10 and prone what is pleasinge vnto the LORDE,
11 and haue no fellishippe with ye vnfrutefull workes of darknes, but rather
rebuke the.
12 For it is shame euen to name those thinges, which are done of them in
secrete.
13 But all thinges are manifest, whan they are rebuked of the lighte. For what
so euer is manifest, that same is lighte.
14 Therfore sayeth he: Awake thou that slepest, and stonde vp fro the deed, and
Christ shal geue the lighte.
15 Take hede therfore how ye walke circumspectly, not as the vnwyse, but as ye
wyse,
16 and redeme the tyme, for it is a miserable tyme.
17 Wherfore be not ye vnwyse, but vnderstonde what the wil of the LORDE is,
18 and be not dronken with wyne, wherin is excesse: but be full of the sprete
19 and talke amoge youre selues of Psalmes, and ymnes, and spirituall songes,
synginge and makynge melody vnto the LORDE in youre hertes
20 geuynge thankes alwayes for all thinges vnto God the father, in the name of
oure LORDE Iesus Christ,
21 submyttinge youreselues one to another in the feare of God.
22 Let the wemen submytte them selues vnto their hussbandes, as vnto the LORDE.
23 For the hussbande is the wyues heade, eue as Christ also is the heade of the
congregacion, and he is the Sauioure of his body.
24 Therfore as the congregacion is in subieccion to Christ, likewyse let the
wyues be in subieccion to their hussbandes in all thinges.
25 Ye hussbandes loue youre wyues, euen as Christ loued the congregacion, and
gaue himselfe for it,
26 to sanctifye it, and clensed it in the fountayne of water by the worde,
27 to make it vnto himselfe a glorious congregacion, hauynge no spot ner
wrynkle, ner eny soch thinge, but that it shulde be holy and without blame.
28 So oughte men also to loue their wyues, euen as their awne bodyes. He that
loueth his wife, loueth himselfe.
29 For no ma euer yet hated his awne flesshe, but norisheth and cherissheth it,
euen as the LORDE doth also the congregacion.
30 For we are membres of his body, of his flesh and of his bones.
31 For this cause shal a man leaue father and mother, and cleue vnto his wife,
and they two shal be one flesh:
32 This is a greate secrete: but I speake of Christ and the congregacion.
33 Neuertheles do ye so, that euery one of you loue his wife euen as himselfe:
but let the wife feare hir hussbande.

Chapter 6

1 Ye children, obey youre elders in the LORDE, for that is righte.
2 Honoure thy father and thy mother ( That is the first commaundement, that hath
eny promes)
3 that thou mayest prospere, and lyue longe vpon earth.
4 And ye fathers, prouoke not youre children vnto wrath, but brynge the vp in
the nourtoure and informacion of the LORDE.
5 Ye seruauntes, obey youre bodely masters, with feare and tremblynge, in
synglenes of youre hert, euen as vnto Christ,
6 not with seruyce onely in the eye sighte, as men pleasers: but as the
seruauntes off Christ, doynge the wyll off God from the hert
7 with good wyll. Thynke that ye serue the LORDE and not me:
8 and be sure, that what good soeuer a man doth, he shal reaceaue it agayne of
the LORDE, whether he be bonde or fre.
9 And ye masters, do euen the same vnto the, puttynge awaye threatenynges, and
knowe that euen youre master also is in heauen, nether is there eny respecte of
personnes with him.
10 Fynally my brethren, be stronge in the LORDE, and in the power of his mighte:
11 put on the armor of God, that ye maye stonde stedfast agaynst the craftie
assautes off the deuell.
12 For we wrestle not agaynst flesh and bloude, but agaynst rule, agaynst power
namely, agaynst the rulers of the worlde, of the darknesse of this worlde,
agaynst ye spretes of wickednes vnder the heauen.
13 For this cause take ye the armoure of God, yt ye maye be able to resiste in
the euell daye, and stonde perfecte in all thinges.
14 Stonde therfore, and youre loynes gyrde aboute with the trueth, hauynge on
the brest plate of righteousnes,
15 and shod vpo yor fete with the gospell of peace, that ye maye be prepared:
16 Aboue all thinges take holde of the shylde of faith, wherwith ye maye quenche
all the fyrie dartes of the wicked.
17 And take the helmet of saluacion, & the swerde of the sprete, which is the
worde of God.
18 And praye allwayes with all maner of prayer and supplicacion in the sprete,
and watch there vnto with all instaunce and supplicacion for all sayntes
19 and for me, that the worde maye be geuen me, that I maye open my mouth
boldly, to vtter the secretes of the Gospell,
20 wherof I am a messaunger in bondes, that I maye speake therin frely, as it
becommeth me to speake.
21 But that ye maye also knowe, what case I am in, and what I do, Tichicus my
deare brother and faithfull mynister in the LORDE, shal shewe you all:
22 whom I haue sent vnto you for the same cause, that ye mighte knowe what case
I stonde in, and that he mighte comforte youre hertes.
23 Peace be vnto the brethre, and loue with faith, from God the father, & from
the LORDE Iesu Christ.
24 Grace be with all them that loue oure LORDE Iesus Christ vnfaynedly. Amen.


Philippians

Chapter 1

1 Paul and Timotheus the seruauntes of Iesu Christ. Vnto all the sayntes in Iesu
Christ, which are at Philippos, with the Bisshoppes and mynisters.
2 Grace be with you and peace from God oure father, and from the LORDE Iesus
Christ.
3 I thanke my God, as oft as I remebre you
4 (which I allwayes do in all my prayers for you all, and praye with gladnesse)
5 because of youre fellishippe which ye haue in the Gospell from the first daye
vnto now,
6 and am surely certified of this, yt he which hath begonne that good worke in
you, shal go forth with it vntyll ye daye of Iesus Christ:
7 as it becommeth me to iudge of you all, because I haue you in my hert, as
those that are partakers with me of grace in my bondes, in defendinge and
stablyshinge of the Gospell.
8 For God is my recorde, how I loge after you all euen fro the very hert rote in
Iesus Christ.
9 And for the same I praye, yt yor loue maye increace more & more in all maner
of knowlege and in all experience,
10 yt ye maye proue what is best, that ye maye be pure, & soch as hurte no mans
conscience, vnto the daye of Christ:
11 fylled with the frutes of righteousnes, which come by Iesus Christ vnto the
glorye and prayse of God.
12 I wolde ye vnderstode brethren, that my busynes is happened vnto the greater
furtheraunce of the Gospell,
13 so that my bondes in Christ are manifest thorow out all ye iudgmet hall, and
in all other places:
14 In so moch that many brethren in the LORDE, are boldened thorow my bodes, and
darre more largely speake the worde without feare.
15 Some (no doute) preach Christ of enuye and stryfe, but some of good wil.
16 The one parte preacheth Christ off stryfe and not purely, supposynge to adde
more aduersite vnto my bondes.
17 The other parte of loue, for they knowe that I lye here for the defence of
the Gospell.
18 What then? So that Christ be preached all maner of wayes (whether it be done
by occasion or of true meaninge) I reioyce therin, and wil reioyce.
19 For I knowe that the same shal chaunce to my saluacion, thorow youre prayer
and mynistrynge of the sprete of Iesu Christ,
20 as I loke for and hope, that in nothinge I shalbe ashamed: but yt with all
cofidence (as allwayes in tymes past, eue so now) Christ shalbe magnified in my
body whether it be thorow life or thorow death.
21 For Christ is to me life, & death is to me auautage.
22 But in as moch as to lyue in ye flesh is frutefull to me for the worke, I
wote not what
23 I shal chose, for both these thinges lye harde vpon me. I desyre to be
lowsed, & to be with Christ, which thinge were moch better (for me)
24 but to abyde in the flesh is more nedefull for you.
25 And this am I sure of, that I shal abyde, and contynue with you all, for the
furtheraunce and ioye of youre faith,
26 that ye maye abundauntly reioyse in Christ Iesu thorow me, by my comynge to
you agayne.
27 Onely let youre conuersacion be as it becommeth the Gospell of Christ, that
whether I come & se you, or els be absent, I maye yet heare of you that ye
cotynue in one sprete and one soule, labourynge (as we do) to mayntayne the
faith of the Gospell,
28 and in nothinge fearinge youre aduersaries, which is to them a token off
perdicion, but vnto you of saluacion, and that of God.
29 For vnto you it is geuen, not onely that ye shulde beleue on Christ, but also
suffre for his sake,
30 and to haue euen the same fighte, which ye haue sene in me, and now heare of
me.

Chapter 2

1 Yf there be amonge you eny consolacion in Christ, yf there be eny comforte of
loue, yf there be eny fellishippe off the sprete, yf there be eny compassion and
mercy,
2 fulfyll my ioye, that ye drawe one waye, hauynge one loue, beynge of one
accorde, and of one mynde:
3 that there be nothinge done thorow stryfe and vayne glory, but that thorow
mekenesse of mynde euery man esteme another better then himselfe:
4 and let euery ma loke not for his awne profet, but for the profet of other.
5 Let the same mynde be in you, that was in Christ Iesu:
6 which beyinge in the shappe of God, thought it not robbery to be equall with
God,
7 but made him selfe of no reputacion, and toke vpon him the shappe of a
seruaunt, became like another man,
8 and was founde in his apparell as a man: he humbled himselfe, and became
obedient vnto the death, euen vnto the death of the crosse.
9 Therfore hath God also exalted him, and geuen him a name, which is aboue all
names,
10 that in the name of Iesus euery kne shulde bowe, both of thinges in heauen of
thinges vpo earth, and of thinges vnder the earth,
11 and that all tunges shulde confesse, that Iesus Christ is the LORDE vnto the
prayse of God the father.
12 Wherfore my dearly beloued, as ye haue allwayes obeyed (not onely in my
presence, but now also moch more in my absence) euen so worke out youre awne
saluacion with feare and tremblynge.
13 For it is God which worketh in you both the wyll and the deed, euen of his
owne good wyll.
14 Do all thinges without murmurynges and disputinges,
15 that ye maye be fautles and pure, and the childre of God without rebuke, in
the myddes of ye croked and peruerse nacion, amonge whom se that ye shyne as
lightes in the worlde,
16 holdinge fast the worde of life, vnto my reioysinge in the daye of Christ,
that I haue not runne in vayne, nether laboured in vayne.
17 Yee and though I be offred vp vpo the offerynge & sacrifice of youre faith, I
am glad, and reioyce with you all:
18 be ye glad also, and reioyce ye with me.
19 I trust in the LORDE Iesus, to sende Timotheus shortly vnto you, that I also
maye be of good comforte, whan I knowe what case ye stonde in.
20 For I haue no man that is so like mynded to me, which with so pure affeccio
careth for you:
21 for all other seke their awne, not that which is Iesus Christes.
22 But ye knowe the profe of him: for as a childe vnto the father, so hath he
mynistred vnto me in the Gospell.
23 Him I hope to sende, as soone as I knowe how it wyll go with me.
24 But I trust in the LORDE, that I also my selfe shal come shortly.
25 Neuertheles I thoughte it necessary to sende vnto you the brother Ephraditus,
which is my companyon in laboure and felowe soudyer, and youre Apostell, and my
mynister at my nede,
26 for so moch as he longed after you all, and was full of heuynes, because ye
had herde that he was sicke.
27 And no doute he was sicke, and that nye vnto death: but God had mercy on him,
and not on him onely, but on me also, lest I shulde haue had sorowe vpon sorowe.
28 I haue sent him therfore the more haistely, that ye mighte se him, and
reioyce agayne, and that I also mighte haue the lesse sorowe.
29 Receaue him therfore in the LORDE with all gladnes, and make moch of soche:
30 for because of the worke of Christ, he wente so farre, that he came nye vnto
death, and regarded not his life, to fulfyll that seruyce which was lackynge on
youre parte towarde me.

Chapter 3

1 Morover my brethren, reioyce in the LORDE. Where as I wryte euer one thinge
vnto you, it greueth me not, and maketh you the surer.
2 Bewarre off dogges, bewarre of euell workers, bewarre off discension:
3 for we are the circumcision, euen we that serue God in the sprete, and reioyce
in Christ Iesu, and haue no confidence in the flesh,
4 though I haue wherof I mighte reioyce in ye flesh. Yf eny other ma thynke that
he hath wherof he mighte reioyce in the flesh, moch more I,
5 which was circucysed on the eight daye, one of the people of Israel, of the
trybe off Ben Iamin, an hebrue of the Hebrues: as concernynge the lawe a
Pharise:
6 as concernynge feruentnes I persecuted the cogregacion: and as touchinge the
righteousnes which is in the lawe, I was vnrebukable.
7 But the thinges that were vauntage vnto me, haue I counted losse for Christes
sake.
8 Yee I thynke all thinges but losse, for that excellent knowleges sake of
Christ Iesu my LORDE: for whom I haue counted all thinge losse, and do iudge
them but donge, that I mighte wynne Christ,
9 & be founde in him, not hauynge myne awne righteousnes which commeth of the
lawe, but by the faith of Christ (namely) the righteousnes which commeth of God
in faith,
10 to knowe him and the vertue of his resurreccion, and the fellishippe of his
passion, that I maye be conformable vnto his death,
11 yff by eny meanes I mighte attayne to the resurreccion from the deed.
12 Not that I haue attayned vnto it all ready, or that I am allready perfecte:
but I folowe, yf I maye comprehende that, wherin I am comprehended off Christ
Iesu.
13 Brethren, I counte not my selfe yet that I haue gotten it: but one thinge I
saye: I forget that which is behynde, and stretch my selfe vnto that which is
before,
14 & preace vnto ye marck apoynted, to optayne the rewarde of the hye callynge
of God in Christ Iesu.
15 Let vs therfore (as many as be parfecte) be thus wyse mynded: and yf ye be
otherwyse mynded, I praye God open euen this vnto you.
16 Neuertheles in that wher vnto we are come, let vs procede by one rule, that
we maye be of one accorde.
17 Brethren, be ye ye folowers of me, and loke on the which walke eue so as ye
haue vs for an ensample.
18 For many walke (off whom I haue tolde you often, but now I tell you wepynge)
eue enemies of the crosse of Christ,
19 whose ende is damnacion, whose God is the bely, & whose glory shalbe to their
shame, which are earthly mynded.
20 But oure conuersacion is in heauen, from whence we loke for the Sauioure Iesu
Christ ye LORDE,
21 which shal chauge or vyle body, yt it maye be like fashioned vnto his
glorious body, acordinge to ye workynge wherby he is able to subdue all thinges
vnto himselfe.

Chapter 4

1 Wherfore my brethre dearly beloued & longed for, my ioye & my crowne contynue
so in the LORDE ye beloued.
2 I praye Euodias, & beseke Syntiches, that they be of one mynde in the LORDE.
3 Yee and I beseke the my faithfull yock felowe, helpe the wemen, which haue
laboured with me in the Gospell, with Clement & with my other helpers, whose
names are in the boke of life.
4 Reioyce in the LORDE allwaye, & agayne I saye, Reioyse.
5 Let youre softnes be knowne vnto all men. The LORDE is euen at honde.
6 Be not carefull, but in all thinges let yor peticions in prayer and
supplicacion, with geuynge of thankes be knowne before God.
7 And ye peace of God, which passeth all vnderstodinge, kepe youre hertes and
myndes in Christ Iesu.
8 Furthermore brethren, whatsoeuer thinges are true, whatsoeuer thinges are
honest, what soeuer thinges are iust, what so euer thinges are pure, what soeuer
thinges pertayne to loue, whatsoeuer thinges are of honest reporte: yf there be
eny vertuous thinge, yf there be eny laudable thinge,
9 haue those same in yor mynde, which ye haue both lerned and receaued, and
herde and sene in me: those thinges do, and the God of peace shalbe with you.
10 I reioyse greatly in ye LORDE, that now at the last ye are reuyued agayne to
care for me, as ye cared for me afore, but ye lacked oportunyte.
11 I speake not this because of necessite: for I haue lerned in what soeuer
estate I am, therwith to be contete
12 I can be lowe, and I ca be hye. Euery where and in all thinges I am mete,
both to be full, and to be hongrie: to haue plentye, and to suffre nede.
13 I can do all thinges thorow Christ, which stregtheth me.
14 Notwith stondinge ye haue done well, that ye bare parte with me in my
tribulacion.
15 But ye of Philippos knowe, that in the begynngnge of the Gospell whan I
departed fro Macedonia, no congregacion bare parte with me concernynge geuynge
and receauynge, but ye onely.
16 For vnto Tessalonica ye sent once and afterwarde agayne vnto my necessite.
17 Not that I seke giftes, but I seke the frute, that it be abudaunt in yor
rekenynge.
18 For I haue all, and haue plentye. I was euen fylled wha I receaued of
Epaphroditus, that which came from you, an odoure of swetenes, a sacrifice
accepted & pleasaunt vnto God.
19 My God fulfyll all yor nede, acordinge to his riches in glory i Christ Iesu.
20 Vnto God and oure father be prayse for euer and euer Amen.
21 Salute all ye sayntes in Christ Iesu. The brethre that are with me, salute
you.
22 All the sayntes salute you, but specially they that are of the Emperours
house.
23 The grace of oure LORDE Iesu Christ be with you all, Amen.


Colossians

Chapter 1

1 Paul an Apostle of Iesu Christ by the will of God, and brother Timotheus.
2 To ye sayntes which are at Colossa and brethren that beleue in Christ. Grace
be with you and peace from God oure father & fro the LORDE Iesus Christ.
3 We geue thankes vnto God and the father of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, prayenge
allwayes for you
4 (sence we herde of youre faith in Christ Iesu, and of youre loue to all
sayntes)
5 for ye hopes sake which is layed vp in stoare for you in heauen: of the which
ye haue herde before by the worde of trueth in the Gospell,
6 which is come vnto you, eue as it is into all the worlde: and is frutefull, as
it is in you, sence ye daye yt ye herde and knewe the grace of God in ye trueth,
7 as ye learned of Epaphras oure deare felowe seruaunt, which is a faithfull
mynister of Christ for you,
8 which also declared vnto vs youre loue in the sprete.
9 For this cause we also, sence the daye yt we herde of it, ceasse not to praye
for you, & desyre that ye mighte be fulfylled with the knowlege of his will, in
all wyssdome and spirituall vnderstondinge,
10 that ye mighte walke worthy off the LORDE, to please him in all thinges, and
to be frutefull in all good workes, and growe in the knowlege of God:
11 & to be strengthed wt all power acordinge to the mighte of his glory, to all
pacience and longsufferynge with ioyfulnes,
12 and geue thankes vnto the father, which hath made vs mete for the
enheritaunce of sayntes in lighte.
13 Which hath delyuered vs fro the power of darknesse, & translated vs in to the
kyngdome of his deare sonne
14 ( in whom we haue redempcion thorow his bloude, namely, the forgeuenes of
synnes.)
15 Which is the ymage of the inuisyble God, first begotte before all creatures.
16 For by him were all thinges created, that are in heauen and earth, thinges
vysible and thinges inuysible, whether they be maiesties or lordshippes, ether
rules or powers: All thinges are created by him and in him,
17 and he is before all thinges, and in him all thinges haue their beynge.
18 And he is the heade of the body, namely, of the cogregacion: he is the
begynnynge and first begotten from the deed, that in all thinges he mighte haue
the preemynence.
19 For it pleased the father, that in him shulde dwell all fulnesse,
20 and that by him all thinges shulde be reconciled vnto himselfe, whether they
be thinges vpon earth or in heauen, that thorow the bloude on his crosse he
mighte make peace euen thorow his owne selfe.
21 And you (which were in tymes past straungers and enemies, because youre
myndes were set in euell workes) hath he now reconcyled
22 in the body of his flesh thorow death, to make you holy, and vnblameable &
with out faute in his awne sighte,
23 yf ye contynue grounded and stablished in the faith, and be not moued awaye
from ye hope of the Gospell, wherof ye haue herde: which is preached amonge all
creatures yt are vnder heauen, wherof I Paul am made a mynister.
24 Now ioye I in my sufferynges, which I suffre for you, and fulfill that which
is behynde of the passions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodyes sake, which is
the congregacion,
25 wherof I am made a mynister, acordinge to ye Godly office of preachinge,
which is geuen vnto me amonge you, that I shulde richely preach the worde of
God,
26 namely, that mystery which hath bene hyd sence the worlde beganne, and sence
the begynnynge of tymes: but now is opened vnto his sayntes,
27 to whom God wolde make knowne the glorious riches of this mistery amoge ye
Heythen: which (riches) is Christ in you, eue he that is the hope of glory,
28 who we preach, and warne all men, and teach all men in all wyssdome, to make
euery man parfecte in Christ Iesu:
29 Wherin I also laboure, and stryue acordinge to the workynge of him which
worketh mightely in me.

Chapter 2

1 I wolde ye knewe what fightinge I haue for youre sakes, and for them of
Laodicea, and for as many as haue not sene my personne in the flesh,
2 that their hertes mighte be comforted and knytt together in loue, to all
riches of full vnderstodinge, which is in the knowlege of the mystery of God the
father and of Christ,
3 in whom are hyd all the treasures of wyssdome and knowlege.
4 This I saye, lest eny man shulde begyle you with entysinge wordes.
5 For though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I present with you in the sprete:
ioyenge, and beholdinge youre order and the stedfastnes of youre faith in
Christ.
6 As ye haue therfore receaued Christ Iesu the LORDE, euen so walke in him,
7 and be roted & buylded in him, and be stedfast in faith, as ye haue learned: &
be plenteous in the same in geuynge thankes.
8 Bewarre lest eny ma spoyle you thorow philosophy and disceatfull vanite after
the tradicions of men, and after the ordinauces of the worlde, and not after
Christ.
9 For in him dwelleth all the fulnes of the Godheade bodely,
10 and ye are complete in him, which is the heade of all rule and power:
11 in whom also ye are circumcysed with circumcision without handes, by puttynge
of the synfull body of the flesh: (namely) with the circumcysion of Christ,
12 in that ye are buried with him thorow baptyme: in whom ye are also rysen
agayne thorow faith, that is wrought by the operacion of God, which raysed him
vp from the deed.
13 And with him he quyckened you, whan ye were deed in synnes, and in the
vncircumcision of youre flesh, and hath forgeuen vs all synnes,
14 and put out the handwrytinge that was agaynst vs (cotayned in the lawe
wrytten) and that hath he taken out of the waye, and fastened it to the crosse:
15 And hath spoyled rule and power, and hath made a shewe of them openly, and
triumphed ouer them in his awne persone.
16 Let no man therfore trouble youre consciences aboute meate or drynke, or for
a pece of an holy daye, as the holy daye of ye newe Mone, or of the Sabbath
dayes,
17 which are the shadowe of the thinges that were for to come: but the body
selfe is in Christ.
18 Let no man make you shote at a wronge mark, which after his owne chosynge
walketh in humblenes and spiritualtye of angels, thinges which he neuer sawe,
and is vayne, and puft vp in his owne fleshly mynde:
19 and holdeth not himselfe to the heade, wherof the whole body by ioyntes and
couples receaueth norishment, and is knyt together, and so groweth to the
greatnes that commeth of God.
20 Wherfore yf ye be deed with Christ from the ordinaunces of the worlde, why
are ye holden the with soch tradicions, as though ye lyued after the worlde? As
whan they saye:
21 Touch not this, taist not that, handle not that.
22 All these thinges do hurte vnto men, because of the abuse of them, which
abuse commeth onely of the commaundementes and doctrynes of men:
23 which thinges haue a shyne of wyssdome thorow chosen spiritualtie and
humblenes, and in that they spare not the body, and do the flesh no worshipe
vnto his nede.

Chapter 3

1 Yf ye be rysen now with Christ, seke those thinges then which are aboue where
Christ is, syttinge on the righte hande of God.
2 Set youre mynde on the thinges which are aboue, not on ye thinges that are
vpon earth.
3 For ye are deed, and youre life is hyd with Christ in God.
4 But whan Christ or life shal shewe himselfe, the shal ye also appeare with him
in glory.
5 Mortifye therfore youre mebres which are vpon earth, whordome, vnclennes,
vnnaturall lust, euell concupiscece, and couetousnes, which is a worshippynge of
Idols:
6 for which thinges sakes the wrath of God commeth vpon the children of
vnbeleue:
7 in the which thinges ye walked some tyme, whan ye lyued in them.
8 But now put all awaye fro you: wrath, fearcenesse, maliciousnes, cursed
speakynge, fylthie wordes out of youre mouth.
9 Lye not one to another. Put of ye olde ma with his workes,
10 and put on ye newe, which is renued in knowlege after ye ymage of him that
made him:
11 where there is no Greke, Iewe, circumcision, vncircumcision, Barbarous,
Sithian, bode, fre: but Christ is all and in all.
12 Now therfore as the electe of God, holy and beloued, put on tender mercye,
kyndnes, humblenes of mynde, mekenesse, longe sufferynge,
13 forbearinge one another, and forgeuynge one another, yf eny man haue a
quarell agaynst another. Like as Christ hath forgeuen you, euen so do ye also.
14 But aboue all thinges put on loue, which is the bonde of perfectnesse.
15 And the peace of God rule in youre hertes, to the which (peace) ye are called
also in one body: and se yt ye be thanfull.
16 Let ye worde of Christ dwell in you plenteously in all wyssdome. Teach and
exhorte youre awne selues with psalmes and ymnes, and spirituall songes which
haue fauoure with them, synginge in youre hertes to the LORDE.
17 And what soeuer ye do in worde or worke, do all in the name of the LORDE
Iesu, and geue thankes vnto God the father by him.
18 Ye wyues, submytte youre selues vnto youre hussbandes, as it is comly in the
LORDE.
19 Ye hussbandes, loue youre wyues, and be not bytter vnto them.
20 Ye children, obeye youre elders in all thinges, for that is well pleasynge
vnto the LORDE.
21 Ye fathers, rate not yor children, lest they be of a desperate mynde.
22 Ye seruauntes, be obedient vnto youre bodely masters in all thinges, not with
eye seruyce as men pleasers, but in synglenes of hert, fearinge God.
23 What so euer ye do, do it hertely, euen as vnto the LORDE and not vnto men.
24 And be sure, that of the LORDE ye shal receaue the rewarde of ye
enheritaunce: For ye serue the LORDE Christ.
25 But he that doth wronge, shal receaue for the wronge that he hath done, for
there is no respecte of persons (with God.)

Chapter 4

1 Ye masters, do vnto youre seruauntes that which is iust and equall, and knowe,
yt ye also haue a master in heauen.
2 Contynue in prayer, and watch in the same with thankesgeuynge,
3 and praye also together for vs, that God open vnto vs the dore of the worde,
to speake the mystery of Christ (wherfore I am also in bodes)
4 that I maye vtter ye same, as it becommeth me to speake.
5 Walke wysely towarde them that are without, and redeme ye tyme.
6 Let youre speach be allwaye fauorable, seasoned with salt, that ye maye knowe
how to answere euery man.
7 Tichicus the deare brother and faithfull mynister & felowe seruaut in ye
LORDE, shal tell you what case I am in.
8 Whom I haue sent vnto you for the same purpose, that he mighte knowe how ye
do, & that he mighte comforte youre hertes,
9 with one Onesimus a faithfull and beloued brother, which is one of you: they
shal shewe you of all thinges, which are adoynge here
10 Aristarchus my preson felowe saluteth you, and Marcus Barnabasses sisters
sonne, touchinge whom ye receaued commaundementes: Yf he come vnto you, receaue
him,
11 and Iesus, which is called Iustus, which are of the circumcision. These onely
are my helpers in the kyngdome of God, which were to my consolacion.
12 Epaphras a seruaunt of Christ, which is one of you, saluteth you, & allwaye
laboureth feruently for you in prayers, yt ye maye stonde perfecte and full, in
all that is the wil of God.
13 I beare him recorde, that he hath a feruent mynde for you, and for the at
Laodicea, and at Hierapolis.
14 Deare Lucas the Phisician saluteth you, and so doth Demas.
15 Salute the brethre, which are at Laodicea, and salute Nymphas, and the
cogregacion which is in his house.
16 And whan the epistle is red of you, cause it to be red also in the cogregacio
at Laodicea, & that ye likewyse reade the epistle of Laodicea.
17 And saye to Archippus: Take hede to the office which thou hast receaued in
the LORDE, that thou fulfyll it.
18 My salutacion with the hnade of me Paul. Remembre my bodes. Grace be with
you, Amen.


1 Thessalonians

Chapter 1

1 Pavl and Siluanus and Timotheus. Vnto the cogregacion of the Tessalonyans, in
God the father and in the LORDE Iesus Christ. Grace be with you, and peace from
God oure father and from the LORDE Iesus Christ.
2 We geue thankes vnto God allwaye for you all, makynge mesion of you in or
prayers
3 without ceassynge, and call to remembraunce youre worke in the faith, and
youre laboure in loue, & youre pacience in hope, which is oure LORDE Iesus
Christ before God oure father:
4 Because we knowe (brethren, beloued of God) how that ye are electe:
5 for oure Gospell hath not bene with you in worde onely, but both in power and
in the holy goost, and in moch certayntie, as ye knowe after what maner we were
amonge you for youre sakes.
6 And ye became the folowers of vs and of the LORDE: and receaued the worde in
moch affliccion with ioye of the holy goost:
7 so that ye were an example to all that beleued in Macedonia and Achaia.
8 For fro you was the worde of the LORDE noysed out, not onely in Macedonia &
Achaia, but i all quarters also is yor faith i God spred abrode so that it
nedeth not vs to speake eny thinge at all.
9 For they them selues shewe of you, what maner of entrynge in we had vnto you,
and how ye are turned vnto God from ymages, for to serue the lyuynge and true
God,
10 and to loke for his sonne from heaue: whom he raysed vp from the deed, euen
Iesus, which hath delyuered vs fro the wrath to come.

Chapter 2

1 For ye youre selues (brethren) knowe of oure intrauce vnto you, how that it
was not in vayne,
2 but as we had suffred afore, & were shamefully intreated at Philippos (as ye
knowe) we were bolde in oure God, to speake vnto you ye Gospel of God with moch
stryuynge.
3 For oure exhortacion was not to brynge you to erroure ner yet to vnclennes,
nether was it with gyle:
4 but as we are alowed of God, that the Gospell shulde be commytted vnto vs to
preache, euen so we speake, not as though we wolde please me, but God, which
tryeth oure hertes.
5 For we haue not gone aboute with flateringe wordes (as ye knowe) ner wayted
for oure owne profit ( God is recorde)
6 nether soughte we prayse of men, nether of you ner of eny other, whan we
mighte haue bene chargeable vnto you as the Apostles off Christ,
7 but we were tender amonge you. Like as a norsse cherisheth hir children,
8 euen so had we hartely affeccion towarde you, and wolde with good wyl haue
dealte vnto you, not onely the Gospell of God, but oure lyues also, because ye
were deare vnto vs.
9 Ye remembre brethren oure laboure and trauayle. For daye and nighte wroughte
we (because we wolde not be chargeable vnto eny of you) and preached the Gospell
of God amonge you.
10 Ye are witnesses, and so is God, how holyly and iustly and vnblameable we
behaued oure selues amoge you that beleue:
11 as ye knowe, how that as a father his children, euen so exhorted we and
comforted and besoughte euery one of you,
12 that ye wolde walke worthely before God, which hath called you vnto his
kyngdome & glory.
13 For this cause thanke we God without ceassynge, because that wha ye receaued
of vs the worde of the preachinge of God, ye receaued it not as ye worde of men,
but (eue as it is of a trueth) the worde of God, which worketh in you that
beleue.
14 For ye brethren are become the folowers off the congregacions off God which
in Iewry are in Christ Iesu, so that ye haue suffred euen like thinges of youre
kynsmen, as they haue suffred of the Iewes.
15 Which as they put the LORDE Iesus to death, and their awne prophetes, euen so
haue they persecuted vs also, and please not God, and are cotrary to all men,
16 forbyddinge vs to speake vnto the Heythen that they mighte be saued, to
fulfill their synnes allwaye: for the wrath is come vpon them allready vnto ye
vttemost.
17 But we (brethren) for as moch as we haue bene kepte from you for a season, as
concernynge the bodely presence, but not in the hert, we haue haisted the more
with greate desyre to se you personally.
18 Therfore wolde we haue come vnto you, (I Paul) two tymes, but Sathan
withstode vs.
19 For who is oure hope, or ioye, or crowne of reioysinge? are not ye it in ye
sighte of oure LORDE Iesus Christ at his commynge?
20 Yes ye are oure prayse and ioye.

Chapter 3

1 Wherfore sence we coulde no longer forbeare, we thoughte it good to remayne at
Athens alone,
2 & sent Timotheus oure brother and mynister of God, and oure helper in ye
gospell of Christ, to stablysh you and to comforte you in youre faith,
3 that noman shulde be moued in these troubles: (for ye youre selues knowe, that
we are euen appoynted there vnto.
4 And whan we were with you, we tolde you before, that we shulde suffre
tribulacion, euen as it is come to passe, & as ye knowe.)
5 For this cause seynge I coulde no longer forbeare, I sent, that I mighte haue
knowlege of youre faith, lest happly the tempter had tempted you, and lest oure
laboure had bene in vayne.
6 But now that Timotheus is come fro you vnto vs, and hath shewed vs of youre
faith and loue, & how that ye haue allwaye good remembraunce of vs, desyringe to
se vs as we also longe to se you:
7 therfore brethren we haue consolacion in you in all oure trouble and necessite
thorow youre faith.
8 For now are we alyue, yf ye stonde stedfast in ye LORDE.
9 For what thankes can we recompece to God agayne for you, because of this ioye
that we haue concernynge you before oure God?
10 We praye exceadingly daye and nighte, that we mighte se you presently, and
fulfill that which is lackynge in yor faith.
11 God himselfe or father & or LORDE Iesus Christ gyde oure iourney vnto you.
12 But the LORDE increace you, & make you flowe ouer in loue one towarde
another, and towarde all men (euen as we do towarde you)
13 that yor hertes maye be stable and vnblameable in holynes before God oure
father, at the commynge of oure LORDE Iesus Christ with all his sayntes.

Chapter 4

1 Fvrthermore we beseke you brethren and exhorte you in the LORDE Iesus, that ye
increace more and more, euen as ye haue receaued of vs how ye oughte to walke
and to please God.
2 For ye knowe what commaundementes we gaue you by oure LORDE Iesus Christ.
3 For this is the will of God, euen youre sanctifienge, that ye shulde absteyne
from whordome,
4 yt euery one of you shulde knowe how to kepe his vessell in holynes and
honoure,
5 & not in the lust of concupiscence, as the Heythen which knowe not God.
6 And that no man go to farre, ner defraude his brother in bargayninge. For the
LORDE is the auenger of all soch thinges, as we haue sayde & testified vnto you
afore tyme.
7 For God hath not called vs to vnclennesse, but vnto holynes.
8 He therfore that despyseth, despyseth not man, but God, which hath geuen his
holy sprete in to you.
9 But as touchinge brotherly loue, ye nede not that I wryte vnto you, for ye
youre selues are taught of God to loue one another:
10 yee and that thinge ye do vnto all the brethre, which are thorow out all
Macedonia. But we beseke you brethren that ye increace yet more and more,
11 and that ye study to be quyete, and to medle with youre awne busynesse, and
to worke with youre awne hades, as we commaunded you,
12 that ye maye walke honestly towarde the that are without, and that nothinge
be lackynge vnto you.
13 We wolde not brethren that ye shulde be ignoraunt concernynge them which are
fallen a slepe, that ye sorowe not as other do which haue no hope.
14 For yf we beleue that Iesus dyed and rose agayne, euen so the also which
slepe by Iesus, shal God brynge with him.
15 For this we saye vnto you in the worde of the LORDE, that we which lyue and
are remaynynge in the comynge of the LORDE, shal not come yer they which slepe.
16 For the LORDE himselfe shal come downe fro heauen with a shoute and voyce of
ye Archangell and with the trompe of God, and the deed in Christ shal aryse
first:
17 then shal we which lyue and remayne, be caught vp wt them also in the
cloudes, to mete the LORDE in the ayre, and so shal we euer be with the LORDE.
18 Wherfore comforte youre selues one another with these wordes.

Chapter 5

1 Bvt of ye tymes and seasons (brethre) it is no nede to wryte vnto you.
2 For ye youre selues knowe perfectly, that the daye of the LORDE shal come euen
as a thefe in the nighte.
3 For whan they shal saye: Tush, It is peace, there is no daunger, then shall
soden destruccion come vpo the, euen as the payne of a woman trauaylinge with
childe, and they shal not escape.
4 But ye brethren are not in darknes, that that daye shulde come on you as a
thefe.
5 Ye are alltogether children of lighte, and children of the daye. We are not of
the night, nether of darknesse.
6 Therfore let vs not slepe as do other, but let vs watch, and be sober.
7 For they that slepe, slepe in the nighte: and they that be dronken, are
dronken in the nighte.
8 But let vs which are of the daye, be sober, armed wt the brestplate of faith
and loue, and with ye helmet of hope to saluacion.
9 For God hath not appoynted vs vnto wrath, but to optayne saluacion by ye
meanes of oure LORDE Iesu Christ,
10 which dyed for vs: that whether we wake or slepe, we shulde lyue together
with him.
11 Wherfore comforte youre selues together, and edifye one another, euen as ye
do.
12 We beseke you brethren, that ye knowe them which laboure amonge you, and haue
the ouersighte of you in the LORDE,
13 and geue you exhortacion, that ye haue the the more in loue for their workes
sake, and be at peace with them.
14 We desyre you brethre, warne them that are vnruly, coforte the feble mynded,
forbeare the weake, be pacient towarde all men.
15 Se that none recompence euell for euell vnto eny man: but euer folowe that
which is good, both amoge youre selues and to all men.
16 Reioyse alwaye,
17 praye contynually,
18 in all thinges be thankfull: for this is the wyll of God in Christ Iesu
towarde you.
19 Quech not ye sprete:
20 despyse not prophecieges:
21 proue all thiges, & kepe yt which is good.
22 Abstayne fro all suspicious thinges.
23 The very God of peace sanctifye you thorow out. And I praye God, that youre
whole sprete, soule & body be kepte blameles vnto ye comynge of oure LORDE Iesus
Christ.
24 Faithfull is he which hath called you, which wil also do it.
25 Brethren, praye for vs.
26 Grete all the brethre with an holy kysse.
27 I charge you by ye LORDE, that this epistle be red vnto all ye holy brethren.
28 The grace of oure LORDE Iesus Christ be with you, Amen.


2 Thessalonians

Chapter 1

1 Pavl and Siluanus and Timotheus. To the congregacion of ye Tessalonias in God
oure father and in the LORDE Iesus Christ.
2 Grace be with you, and peace from God oure father, and from the LORDE Iesus
Christ.
3 We are bounde to thanke God allwayes for you brethren, as it is mete: because
that youre faith groweth exceadingly, and the loue of euery one of you
increaseth towarde another amoge youre selues,
4 so that we oure selues make oure boast of you (in the congregacions of God) of
youre paciece and faith in all youre persecucions and troubles that ye suffre,
5 which is a token of the righteous iudgment of God, that ye are counted worthy
of the kyngdome of God, for the which ye also suffre.
6 For it is a righteous thinge with God, to recopence tribulacion vnto the yt
trouble you:
7 but vnto you which are troubled, rest with vs, wha the LORDE Iesus shal shewe
himselfe from heauen, with the angels of his power,
8 and with flammynge fyre, to geue vengeauce vnto them that knowe not God, and
to them that obeye not the Gospell of oure LORDE Iesus Christ.
9 Which shalbe punyshed with euerlastinge damnacion, from ye presence of the
LORDE, and from the glory of his power,
10 whan he shal come to be glorified in his sayntes, and to become maruelous in
all them that beleue: because ye haue beleued oure testimony vnto you of the
same daye.
11 Wherfore we praye allwayes for you, that oure God make you worthy of ye
callynge, and fulfill all delectacion of goodnes, and the worke of faith in
power,
12 that ye name of oure LORDE Iesus Christ maye be praysed in you, and ye in
him, acordinge to the grace of oure God, and of the LORDE Iesus Christ.

Chapter 2

1 We beseke you brethren by the commynge of or LORDE Iesus Christ, and in that
we shal assemble vnto him,
2 that ye be not sodenly moued fro youre mynde, and be not troubled, nether by
sprete, nether by wordes, ner yet by letter, which shulde seme to be sent from
vs, as though ye daye of Christ were at hande.
3 Let noman disceaue you by eny meanes. For the LORDE commeth not, excepte the
departynge come first, and that that Man of synne be opened, euen the sonne of
perdicion,
4 which is an aduersary, and is exalted aboue all yt is called God or Gods
seruyce, so that he sytteth as God in the temple of God, and boasteth himselfe
to be God.
5 Remembre ye not, that whan I was yet with you, I tolde you these thinges?
6 And now ye knowe what witholdeth it, eue that it mighte be vttered at his
tyme.
7 (For the mystery of the iniquyte worketh allready, tyll he which now onely
letteth, be take out of the waye.)
8 And then shal that wicked be vttered, whom the LORDE shal cosume with ye
sprete of his mouth, & shal destroye with the appearaunce of his commynge:
9 euen him, whose commynge is after the workynge of Sathan with all lyenge
power, and signes and wonders,
10 and with all deceauablenes of vnrighteousnes amonge them that perishe,
because they receaued not the loue of ye trueth, that they might haue bene
saued.
11 Therfore shal God sende them stroge delusion, that they shulde beleue lyes,
12 yt all they might be daned, which beleued not the trueth, but had pleasure in
vnrighteousnes.
13 But we are bounde to geue thankes allwaye vnto God for you, brethren be loued
of the LORDE, because that God hath from the begynnynge chosen you to saluacion
in the sanctifienge of the sprete and in beleuynge of the trueth,
14 whervnto he hath called you by oure Gospell, to optayne the glory of oure
LORDE Iesus Christ.
15 Therfore brethren stonde fast, and kepe the ordinaunces which ye haue lerned,
whether it were by oure preachinge or by epistle.
16 But oure LORDE Iesus Christ himselfe, and God oure father, which hath loued
vs and geuen vs euerlastinge consolacion, and a good hope thorow grace,
17 comforte youre hertes, and stablysh you in all doctryne & good doynge.

Chapter 3

1 Fvrthermore brethren praye for vs, that the worde of God maye haue fre passage
and be glorified as it is with you,
2 and that we maye be delyuered from vnreasonable and euell me. For faith is not
euery mas.
3 But the LORDE is faithfull, which shal stablyshe you and kepe you from euell.
4 We haue confidence in the LORDE to you warde, that ye both do and wyll do that
which we comaunde you.
5 The LORDE gyde youre hertes vnto the loue of God and pacience of Christ.
6 But we requyre you brethren, in the name of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, that ye
withdrawe youre selues from euery brother that walketh inordinatly, and not
after the institucion which he receaued of vs.
7 For ye yor selues knowe, how ye oughte to folowe vs: for we behaued not oure
selues inordinatly amonge you,
8 nether toke we bred of eny man for naughte but wrought wt laboure and trauayle
night and daye, lest we shulde be chargeable to eny of you.
9 Not but that we had auctorite, but to geue oure selues for an ensample vnto
you to folowe vs.
10 And whan we were wt you, this we warned you of, that yf there were eny which
wolde not worke, ye same shulde not eate.
11 For we heare saye, that there are some which walke amonge you inordinatly,
and worke not at all, but are busy bodies.
12 But them that are soche, we commaunde and exhorte by oure LORDE Iesus Christ,
that they worke with quyetnes, and eate their awne bred.
13 Neuertheles brethren, be not ye weery of well doynge.
14 But yf eny man obey not oure sayenges, sende vs worde of him by a letter, and
haue nothinge to do with him, yt he maye be ashamed.
15 Yet counte him not as an enemye, but warne him as a brother.
16 The very LORDE of peace geue you peace allwayes by all meanes. The LORDE be
with you all.
17 The salutacion of me Paul with myne awne hande: This is the token in all
epistles, So I wryte,
18 The grace of oure LORDE Iesus Christ be with you all. Amen.


1 Timothy

Chapter 1

1 Paul an Apostle of Iesus Christ acordinge to the commaundement of God oure
Sauioure, and of the LORDE Iesus Christ, which is oure hope.
2 Vnto Timothy my naturall sonne in the faith. Grace, mercy, and peace from God
oure father, and oure LORDE Iesus Christ.
3 As I besoughte ye to abyde still at Ephesus ( whan I departed in to Macedonia)
eue so do, that thou commaunde some, that they teach none other wyse,
4 nether geue hede to fables and genealogies, which are endlesse, and brede
doutes more then godly edifyenge, which is by faith.
5 For ye chefe summe of the commaundement is loue of a pure hert, and of a good
coscience, and of faith vnfayned.
6 From the which some haue erred, & haue turned vnto vayne iangelynge,
7 wyllinge to be doctours of the scripture, and vnderstonde not what they
speake, nether wherof they affirme.
8 But we knowe that the lawe is good, yf a man vse it laufully,
9 vnderstodinge this, that the lawe is not geuen vnto the righteous, but to the
vnrighteous & dishobedient, to the vngodly & to synners, to the vnholy &
vncleane, to murthurers of fathers and murthurers of mothers, to manslayers,
10 to whoremongers, to the that defyle them selues with mankynde, to
menstealers, to lyars, to periured, & so forth yf there be eny other thinge yt
is cotrary to ye wholsome doctryne,
11 acordinge to ye Gospell of ye glory of the blessed God, which (Gospell) is
comytted vnto me.
12 And I thanke Christ Iesus or LORDE, which hath made me stroge, for he counted
me faithfull, & put me in office,
13 wha before I was a blasphemer, & a persecuter, & a tyraunt: but I optayned
mercy, because I dyd it ignorauntly in vnbeleue.
14 Neuertheles the grace of or LORDE was more abudaunt thorow ye faith & loue
which is in Christ Iesu.
15 For this is a true sayenge, and by all meanes worthy to be receaued, that
Christ Iesus came in to ye worlde to saue synners, of whom I am chefe.
16 Notwithstondynge for this cause optayned I mercy, that Iesus Christ mighte
pryncipally shewe in me all longe pacience, to the ensample of them which shulde
beleue in him vnto eternall life.
17 So then vnto God kynge euerlastinge, immortall and invisible, and wyse onely,
be honoure and prayse for euer and euer Amen.
18 This commaundement commytte I vnto the (my sonne Timotheus) acordinge to ye
prophecies which in tyme past were prophecied of the, that thou in them shuldest
fighte a good fighte,
19 hauynge faith & good conscience, which some haue put awaye fro them, and as
concernynge faith haue made shypwrake:
20 of whose nombre is Hymeneos and Alexander, whom I haue delyuered vnto Sathan,
that they might be taught, nomore to blaspheme.

Chapter 2

1 I exhorte therfore, yt aboue all thinges, prayers, supplicacions,
intercessions and geuynge of thakes be had for all men
2 for kynges, and for all that are in auctorite, that we maye lyue a quyete &
peaceable life in all godlynes and honestie.
3 For that is good and accepted in ye sighte of God oure Sauioure,
4 which wil haue all men saued, and to come vnto the knowlege of ye trueth.
5 For there is one God, and one mediatour betwene God and men, (namely) the man
Christ Iesus,
6 which gaue him selfe a raunsome for all men, that at his tyme it shulde be
preached,
7 wherevnto I am ordeyned a preacher & an Apostle (I tell ye trueth in Christ
and lye not) a teacher of the Heythe in faith and in the trueth.
8 I wil therfore that men praye in all places, liftinge vp pure hades without
wrath or dowtynge.
9 Likewyse also the wemen, that they araye them selues in comly apparell with
shamfastnes and discrete behaueor, not with broyded heer, or golde, or perles,
or costly araye:
10 but with soch as it becommeth weme that professe godlynes thorow good workes.
11 Let the woman lerne in sylece with all subieccion.
12 I suffre not a woma to teach ner to haue auctorite ouer the man, but for to
be in sylence.
13 For Adam was first formed, and the Eue:
14 Adam also was not disceaued, but the woman was disceaued, and hath brought in
the trasgression.
15 Notwitstondynge thorow bearynge of children she shalbe saued, yf she contynue
in faith and in loue & in the sanctifyenge with discrecion.

Chapter 3

1 This is a true sayege: Yf a ma covet ye office of a Bisshoppe, he desyreth a
good worke.
2 But a Bisshoppe must be blamelesse, the hussbade of one wife, sober, discrete,
manerly, harberous, apte to teach:
3 Not geuen to moch wyne, no fighter, not geuen to filthy lucre: but gentle,
abhorrynge stryfe, abhorrynge couetousnes:
4 & one that ruleth his awne house honestly, hauynge obedient children with all
honestye.
5 (But yf a man can not rule his owne house, how shal he care for the
congregacion of God?)
6 He maye not be a yoge scolar, lest he be puft vp, and fall in to the iudgment
of ye euell speaker.
7 He must also haue a good reporte of them which are without, lest he fall in to
the rebuke and snare of the euell speaker.
8 Likewyse must the mynisters be honest, not double tonged, not geuen to moch
wyne, nether vnto fylthie lucre,
9 but hauynge the mystery of faith in pure conscience.
10 And let them first be proued, and then let them mynister, yf they be
blamelesse.
11 Euen so must their wyues be honest, not euell speakers, but sober and
faithfull in all thinges.
12 Let the mynisters be, euery one the hussbade of one wyfe, and soch as rule
their children well, and their owne housholdes.
13 For they that mynister well, get them selues a good degree and greate
libertye in the faith which is in Christ Iesu.
14 These thinges wryte I vnto the, trustinge shortly to come vnto the:
15 but yf I tary loge, that then thou mayest yet haue knowlege, how thou
oughtest to behaue thy selfe in Gods house, which is the congregacion of the
lyuynge God, the piler and grounde of trueth:
16 and without naye, greate is that mystery of godlynes. God was shewed in the
flesh: was iustified in the sprete: was sene of angels: was preached vnto the
Heythen: was beleued on in the worlde: was receaued vp in glory.

Chapter 4

1 The sprete speaketh euydently, that in ye latter tymes some shal departe from
the faith, and shal geue hede vnto spretes of erroure, and deuelish doctrynes,
of them
2 which speake false thorow ypocrysie, and haue their coscience marked with an
whote yron,
3 forbyddinge to mary, and comaundynge to abstayne fro the meates, which God
hath created to be receaued wt geuynge thankes of them which beleue and knowe
the trueth.
4 For euery creature off God is good, and nothinge to be refused, yt is receaued
with thankesgeuynge:
5 for it is sanctifyed by the worde of God and prayer.
6 Yf thou shalt put the brethren in remembraunce of these thinges, thou shalt be
a good mynister of Iesu Christ, which hast bene norished vp in the wordes of
faith and of good doctryne, which thou hast folowed hither to.
7 As for vngoostly and olde wyuesh fables, cast them awaye, but exercyse thy
selfe vnto godlynes.
8 For bodely exercyse profyteth litle, but godlynes is profytable vnto all
thinges, as a thinge which hath promyses of the life that is now, and of the
life for to come.
9 This is a sure sayenge, & of all partes worthy to be receaued.
10 For therfore we laboure and suffre rebuke, because we hope in the lyuynge
God, which is the Sauioure of all men, but specially of those that beleue.
11 Soch thinges commaunde thou and teach.
12 Let no man despyse yi youth, but be thou vnto them that beleue, an ensample,
in worde, in couersacion, in loue, in ye sprete, in faith, in purenesse.
13 Geue attendaunce to readynge, to exhortacion, to doctryne, vntyll I come.
14 Be not necligent in the gifte that is geuen the thorow prophecye, with layege
on of the handes of the Elders.
15 These thinges exercyse, and geue thy selfe vnto them, that thine increase
maye be manifest vnto euery man.
16 Take hede vnto thy selfe, and to learnynge, cotynue in these thinges. For yf
thou so do, thou shalt saue thy selfe, and them that heare the.

Chapter 5

1 Rebuke not an Elder, but exhorte him as a father: and the yoger men as
brethren:
2 the elder wemen as mothers: the yonger as sisters with all purenes.
3 Honor wedowes, which are true wedowes.
4 Yf eny wedowe haue children or neves, let them lerne first to rule their awne
houses godly, and to recompence their elders. For yt is good & acceptable before
God.
5 But she that is a right wedowe, & desolate, putteth hir trust in God, &
cotynueth in prayer and supplicacion nighte and daye.
6 But she that lyueth in pleasures, is deed, euen yet a lyue.
7 And these thinges commaunde, that they maye be without blame.
8 But yf there be eny man that prouydeth not for his awne, and specially for
them of his houssholde, the same hath denyed the faith, and is worse then an
infydele.
9 Let no wedowe be chosen vnder threscore yeare olde, and soch one as was ye
wife of one man,
10 and well reported of in good workes, yf she haue brought vp children well, yf
she haue bene harberous, yf she haue wasshed the sayntes fete, yf she haue
mynistred vnto the which were in aduersite, yf she were continually geuen to all
maner of good workes.
11 But ye yonger wedowes refuse. For whan they haue begonne to waxe wanton
agaynst Christ, then wil they mary,
12 hauynge their damnacion, because they haue broke ye first faith.
13 Besydes this they are ydell, and lerne to runne aboute fro house to house.
Not onely are they ydell, but also tryflinge & busybodies, speakynge thinges
which are not comly.
14 I wil therfore that the yonger wemen mary, beare children, gyde the house, to
geue ye aduersary no occasion to speake euell.
15 For some are turned back allready after Satha.
16 Yf eny man or woman that beleueth haue wedowes, let them make prouysion for
the, and let not the congregacion be charged: that they which are righte
wedowes, maye haue ynough.
17 The Elders that rule well, are worthy of double honoure, most specially they
which laboure in the worde & in teachinge.
18 For ye scripture sayeth: Thou shalt not mosell the mouth of ye oxe yt
treadeth out ye corne. And: The labourer is worthy of his rewarde.
19 Agaynst an Elder receaue none accusacion, but vnder two or thre witnesses.
20 The that synne, rebuke in the presence of all, that other also maye feare.
21 I testifye before God and the LORDE Iesus Christ, and ye electe angels, that
thou obserue these thinges without haistie iudgment, and do nothinge parcially.
22 Laye hondes sodenly on no ma, nether be partaker of other mes synnes. Kepe yi
selfe pure.
23 Drynke no lenger water, but vse a litle wyne for yi stomackes sake, and
because thou art oft tymes sicke.
24 Some mes synnes are ope, so that they maye be iudged afore hande: but some
mens (synnes) shal be manifest herafter.
25 Likewyse also good workes are manifest afore hade: and they that are
otherwyse can not be hyd.

Chapter 6

1 Let as many seruauntes as are vnder the yocke, counte their masters worthy of
all honoure, that the name of God and his doctrine be not euell spoken of.
2 Se that they which haue beleuynge masters, despyse them not because they are
brethre, but rather do seruyce, for so moch as they are beleuynge, and beloued,
and partakers of the benefite.
3 These thinges teach and exhorte. Yf eny ma teach otherwyse, and agreeth not
vnto the wholsome wordes of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, and to the doctryne of
godlynes,
4 he is puft vp, and knoweth nothinge, but waysteth his brayne aboute questions
and stryuynges of wordes: wherof sprynge envye, stryfe, raylinges, euell
surmysinges,
5 vayne disputacios of soch men as haue corrupte myndes, and are robbed of the
trueth, which thynke that godlynes is lucre: From soch separate thy selfe.
6 Howbeit it is greate avautage, who so is godly, and holdeth him content with
that he hath.
7 For we broughte nothinge in to the worlde, therfore is it a playne case yt we
can cary nothinge out.
8 Whan we haue fode and rayment, let vs therwith be content.
9 For they that wylbe riche, fall in to the teptacion and snare, and in to many
folisshe & noysome lustes, which drowne men in destruccion and damnacion.
10 For Couetousnes is the rote of all euell, which whyle some lusted after, they
erred from the faith, and tangled them selues with many sorowes.
11 But thou man of God, flye soche thinges: folowe righteousnes, godlynes,
faith, loue, pacience, mekenes:
12 fighte a good fighte of faith: laye honde on eternall life, where vnto thou
art called, and hast professed a good profession before many witnesses.
13 I geue the charge before God, which quyckeneth all thinges, & before Iesu
Christ, which vnder Pontius Pilate witnessed a good witnessynge,
14 that thou kepe the commaundement, without spot, vnreproueable, vntyll the
appearynge of oure LORDE Iesus Christ,
15 which appearynge (at his tyme) he shal shewe that is blessed, and mightie
onely, the kynge of all kynges, and LORDE of all lordes:
16 which onely hath immortalite, and dwelleth in a lighte, that no man can
attayne: whom no man hath sene, nether can se. Vnto whom be honoure and empyre
euerlastinge, Amen.
17 Charge the which are riche in this worlde, that they be not proude, ner trust
in the vncertayne riches, but in the lyuynge God (which geueth vs abundauntly
all thinges to enioye them:)
18 That they do good: that they be rich in good workes: that they geue and
distribute with a good wyll:
19 gatherynge vp treasure for them selues, a good foundacion, agaynst ye tyme to
come, that they maye laye honde on eternall life.
20 O Timothy, kepe that which is committed vnto the, and avoyde vngoostly vayne
wordes, and opposicions of science falsly so called,
21 which whyle some professed, they haue erred as concernynge the faith. Grace
be with the, Amen.


2 Timothy

Chapter 1

1 Paul an Apostle of Iesus Christ, by the wyll of God, to preach the promes of
ye life which is in Christ Iesu.
2 To my deare sonne Timotheus. Grace, mercy, and peace from God the father and
from Christ Iesu oure LORDE.
3 I thanke God, whome I serue fro my fore elders in a pure conscience, that
without ceassynge I make mencion of the in my prayers night and daye:
4 and longe to se the (whan I remembre thy teares) so that I am fylled with
ioye,
5 whan I call to remembraunce the vnfayned faith that is in the, which dwelt
first in thy graundemother Lois, and in thy mother Eunica: And am assured, that
it dwelleth in ye also.
6 Wherfore I warne the, that thou stere vp ye gifte of God which is in the by
puttynge on of my handes.
7 For God hath not geuen vs the sprete of feare, but of power, and of loue, and
of right vnderstondynge.
8 Be not thou asshamed therfore of ye testimony of or LORDE, nether of me, which
am his presoner: but suffre thou aduersite also wt the Gospell, acordinge to the
power of God
9 which hath saued vs, and called vs with an holy callynge: not acordinge to
oure dedes, but acordinge to his owne purpose and grace, which was geuen vs in
Christ Iesu before the tyme of the worlde,
10 but is now declared openly by the appearynge of oure Sauioure Iesu Christ.
Which hath taken awaye ye power of death, and hath brought life and immortalite
vnto lighte, thorow the Gospell:
11 whervnto I am appoynted a preacher and an Apostell, and a teacher of the
Heythen:
12 for the which cause I also suffre these thinges, neuertheles I am not
ashamed. For I knowe whom I haue beleued, and am sure that he is able to kepe
that which I haue commytted vnto his kepynge agaynst that daye.
13 Holde the after ye ensample of the wholsome wordes, which thou heardest of
me, concernynge faith and loue in Christ Iesu.
14 This hye charge kepe thou thorow the holy goost, which dwelleth in vs.
15 This thou knowest, that all they which are in Asia, be turned fro me, of
which sorte are Phigelus and Hermogenes.
16 The LORDE geue mercy vnto the house of Onesiphorus: for he oft refresshed me,
and was not asshamed of my cheyne:
17 but whan he was at Rome he soughte me out very diligently, and founde me.
18 The LORDE graunte vnto him, that he maye fynde mercy with the LORDE in that
daye. And how moch he mynistred vnto me at Ephesus, thou knowest very well.

Chapter 2

1 Thou therfore my sonne, be stronge thorow the grace which is in Christ Iesu.
2 And what thinges thou hast herde of me by many witnesses, the same commytte
thou vnto faithfull men, which are apte to teach other.
3 Thou therfore suffre affliccion as a good soudyer off Iesu Christ.
4 No ma that warreth, tangleth him selfe with wordly busynesses, & that because
he wolde please him, which hath chosen him to be a soudyer.
5 And though a man stryue for a mastrye, yet is he not crowned, excepte he
stryue laufully.
6 The hussbandman that laboureth, must first enioye the frutes.
7 Consydre what I saye. The LORDE shal geue the vnderstondynge in all thinges.
8 Remembre that Iesus Christ, beynge of the sede of Dauid, rose agayne fro the
deed, acordynge to my Gospell,
9 where in I suffre as an euell doer euen vnto bandes: but the worde of God is
not bounde.
10 Therfore suffre I all for the electes sakes, that they also mighte optayne
the saluacion in Christ Iesu with eternall glory.
11 This is a true sayenge: Yf we be deed wt him, we shal lyue with him also:
12 Yf we be pacient, we shal also raigne with him: Yf we denye him, he also shal
denye vs:
13 Yf we beleue not, yet abydeth he faithfull, he can not denye himselfe.
14 Of these thinges put thou them in remebraunce, and testifye before the LORDE,
that they stryue not aboute wordes, which is to no profit, but to peruerte the
hearers.
15 Study to shewe thy selfe vnto God a laudable workman, that nedeth not to be
ashamed, deuydynge the worde of trueth iustly.
16 As for vngoostly and vayne talkynges, eschue them: for they helpe moch to
vngodlynes,
17 and their worde fretteth as doth a canker: Of whose nombre is Hymeneos &
Philetus,
18 which as concernynge the trueth haue erred, sayenge, that the resurreccion is
past allready, and haue destroyed the faith of dyuerse personnes.
19 But ye sure grounde of God stondeth fast, and hath this seale: The LORDE
knoweth them that are his, and let euery ma that calleth vpon the name of
Christ, departe from iniquyte.
20 Not withstondynge in a greate house are not onely vessels of golde and of
syluer, but also of wod and of earth: some for honoure, and some to dishonoure.
21 But yf a man pourge himselfe from soch felowes, he shalbe a vessell
sanctified vnto honoure, mete for the LORDE, and prepared vnto all good workes.
22 Fle thou the lustes of youth, but folowe righteousnes, faith, loue, peace,
with all them that call vpon the LORDE with pure hert.
23 As for folish questions and soch as teach not, put them fro the: for thou
knowest that they do but geder stryfe.
24 The seruaunt of the LORDE ought not to stryue, but to be gentle vnto euery
man: apte to teach, one that can forbeare
25 the euell, one yt can with mekenesse enfourme them yt resist: yf God at eny
tyme wyl geue them repentaunce for to knowe the trueth,
26 and to turne agayne from the snare of the deuell, which are holden in preson
of him at his will.

Chapter 3

1 Bvt this shalt thou knowe, that in the last dayes shal come parelous tymes.
2 For there shalbe me which shal holde of the selues, couetous, boasters,
proude, cursed speakers, dishobedient to their elders, vnthankfull, vngoostly,
3 vnkynde, truce breakers, false accusers, ryatours, fearce, despysers of them
which are good,
4 traytours, heady, hye mynded, gredy vpon voluptuousnes more then the louers of
God,
5 hauynge a shyne off godly lyuynge, but denyenge the power therof. And soch
avoyde.
6 Of this sorte are they which rune fro house to house, & brynge in to bondage
weme lade wt synne: which (wemen) are led with dyuerse lustes,
7 euer lernynge, and are neuer able to come vnto the knowlege of the trueth.
8 But like as Iamnes and Iabres withstode Moses, euen so do these also resist
the trueth: me they are of corrupte myndes, and lewde as cocernynge ye faith:
9 but they shal preuayle no longer. For their folishnes shalbe manifest vnto all
men, as theirs was.
10 But thou hast sene the experience of my doctryne, my fasshion of lyuynge, my
purpose, my faith, my longsufferynge, my loue, my pacience,
11 my persecucions, my affliccions, which happened vnto me at Antioche, at
Iconium, at Lystra, which persecucions I suffred paciently, and from the all the
LORDE delyuered me.
12 Yee and all they that wil lyue godly in Christ Iesu, must suffre persecucion.
13 But the euell men and disceauers shal waxe worse and worse, disceauynge and
beynge disceaued.
14 But contynue thou in the thinges that thou hast lerned, which also were
comytted vnto the, seynge thou knowest of who thou hast learned them,
15 And for so moch as thou hast knowne holy scripture of a childe, the same is
able to make ye wyse vnto saluacion thorow the faith in Christ Iesu.
16 For all scripture geue by inspiracion of God, is profitable to teach, to
improue, to amende, and to instructe in righteousnes,
17 that a man off God maye be perfecte, and prepared vnto all good workes.

Chapter 4

1 I testifye therfore before God & before the LORDE Iesu Christ, which shal come
to iudge the lyuynge and the deed, at his appearynge in his kyngdome:
2 Preach thou the worde, be feruent, be it in season or out of season: Improue,
rebuke, exhorte with all longe sufferynge and doctryne.
3 For the tyme wil come, whan they shal not suffre wholsome doctryne, but after
their awne lustes shal they (whose eares ytche) get them an heape of teachers,
4 and shal turne their eares from the trueth, and shalbe geuen vnto fables.
5 But watch thou in all thinges, suffre aduersite, do the worke of a preacher of
the Gospell, fulfyll thine office vnto the vttemost.
6 For I am now ready to be offered, and the tyme of my departinge is at honde.
7 I haue foughte a good fighte: I haue fulfylled the course: I haue kepte the
faith.
8 From hence forth there is layed vp for me a crowne of righteousnes, which the
LORDE the righteous iudge shal geue me in yt daye: Howbeit not vnto me onely,
but vnto all them that loue his comynge.
9 Make spede to come vnto me atonce.
10 For Demas hath lefte me, and loueth this present worlde, and is departed vnto
Tessalonica, Crescens in to Galacia, Titus vnto Dalmacia,
11 Onely Lucas is with me. Take Marke, & brynge him with the: for he is
profitable vnto me to the mynistracion.
12 Tichicus haue I sent to Ephesus.
13 The cloke that I lefte at Troada with Carpus brynge with the whan thou
commest: and the bokes, but specially the parchemet.
14 Alexader the coppersmyth dyd me moch euell, the LORDE rewarde him acordynge
to his dedes,
15 of whom be thou ware also. For he withstode oure wordes sore.
16 In my first answerynge no man assisted me, but all forsoke me. I praye God
that it be not layed to their charges.
17 Notwitstondynge the LORDE stode by me, & stregthed me, that by me the
preachinge shulde be fulfylled to the vttemost, and that all the Heythe shulde
heare. And I was delyuered out of the mouth of the lyon.
18 And the LORDE shal delyuer me from all euell doynge, and shal kepe me vnto
his heauenly kyngdome. To whom be prayse for euer and euer, Amen.
19 Salute Prisca and Aquila, and ye houssholde of Onesiphorus.
20 Erastus abode at Corinthum. But Trophimus left I sicke at Miletu.
21 Make spede to come before wynter. Eubolus, and Pudens, and Linus, and
Claudia, and all the brethren salute the.
22 The LORDE Iesus Christ be with thy sprete. Grace be with you, Amen.


Titus

Chapter 1

1 Pavl the seruaunt of God, and an Apostle off Iesus Christ, to preach the faith
off Gods electe, and the knowlege of ye trueth, which ledeth vnto godlynes,
2 vpon the hope of eternall life: which God that can not lye hath promysed
before the tymes of the worlde:
3 but at his tyme hath opened his worde thorow preachinge, which is commytted
vnto me acordinge to the commaundemet of God oure Sauioure.
4 Vnto Titus my naturall sonne after ye comen faith. Grace, mercy, and peace
from God the father, and fro the LORDE Iesu Christ oure Sauioure.
5 For this cause left I the in Creta, that thou shuldest perfourme that which
was lackynge, and shuldest ordeyne Elders in euery cite, as I appoynted ye.
6 Yf eny be blamelesse, the hussbande of one wife, hauynge faithfull children,
which are not slaundred or ryote, nether are dishobedient.
7 For a Bisshoppe must be blamelesse, as the stewarde of God: not wylfull, not
angrye, not geuen vnto moch wyne, no fyghter, not gredye of filthye lucre:
8 but harbarous, one that loueth goodnes, sober mynded, righteous, holy,
temperate,
9 and soch one as cleueth vnto the true worde of doctryne: that he maye be able
to exhorte with wholsome lernynge, & to improue them that saye agaynst it.
10 For there are many dishobedient, and talkers of vanite, and disceauers of
myndes: namely they of the circucision,
11 whose mouthes must be stopped: which peruerte whole houses, teachinge thinges
which they oughte not, because of filthye lucre.
12 One of them selues euen their awne prophet, sayde: The Cretayns are alwayes
lyars, euell beestes, and slowe belies.
13 This witnesse is true. Wherfore rebuke them sharply, yt they maye be sounde
in the faith,
14 and not to take hede vnto Iewes fables and commaundementes of men, which
turne them awaye from the trueth.
15 Vnto ye cleane are all thinges cleane: but. to the vncleane & vnbeleuers,
there is nothinge cleane, but both their mynde & conscience is defyled.
16 They saye that they knowe God, but with the dedes they denye him: for so moch
as they are abhominable and dishobedient, and vnmete to all good workes.

Chapter 2

1 Bvt speake thou that which becommeth wholsome learnynge.
2 That ye elder men be sober, honest, discrete, sounde in the faith, in loue, in
pacience.
3 And the elder wemen likewyse that they shewe them selues as it becommeth
holynes, that they be no false accusers, not geuen to moch wyne, that they teach
honest thinges,
4 that they enfourme the yonge wemen to be sober mynded, to loue their
hussbandes, to loue their childre,
5 to be discrete, chaste, husswyfly, good, obedient vnto their awne hussbandes,
that the worde of God be not euell spoken of.
6 Exhorte the yonge men likewyse, that they be sober mynded.
7 Aboue all thinge shewe thy selfe an ensample off good workes, with vncorrupte
doctryne, with honestye, with the wholsome
8 worde which can not be rebuked: that he which withstodeth maye be ashamed,
hauynge nothinge in you that he maye disprayse.
9 Exhorte the seruauntes, to be obedient vnto their masters, to please in all
thinges, not answeringe agayne,
10 nether to be pykers, but to shewe all good faithfulnes, that in all thinges
they maye do worshippe vnto the doctryne off God oure Sauioure.
11 For the grace of God that bryngeth Saluacion vnto all men, hath appeared,
12 and teacheth vs, that we shulde denye vngodlynes, and wordly lustes: and that
we shulde lyue discretly, righteously, and godly in this worlde,
13 lokynge for that blessed hope and appearynge of the glory of ye greate God
and of oure Sauioure Iesu Christ:
14 which gaue him selfe for vs, to redeme vs fro all vnrighteousnes, and to
pourge vs to be a peculiar people vnto himselfe, to be feruently geuen vnto good
workes.
15 These thinges speake and exhorte, and rebuke with all earnest. Se that no man
despyse the.

Chapter 3

1 Warne them that they submytte them selues vnto Prynces and to the hyer
auctorite, to obey the officers, to be ready vnto all good workes,
2 that they speake euell of no man, that they be no stryuers, but soft, shewynge
all mekenes vnto all men.
3 For we oure selues also were in tymes past, vnwyse, dishobedient, in erroure,
seruynge lustes and dyuerse maners of voluptuousnes, lyuynge in maliciousnes and
envye, full of hate, hatynge one another.
4 But after that ye kyndnesse and loue of God oure Sauioure to man warde
appeared,
5 not for ye dedes of righteousnes which we wroughte, but after his mercy he
saued vs by the fountayne of the new byrth, and renuynge of the holy goost,
6 which he shed on vs abundauntly, thorow Iesus Christ oure Sauioure:
7 yt we beynge made righteous by his grace, shulde be heyres of eternall life
acordynge to hope.
8 This is a true sayege. Of these thinges wolde I that thou shuldest speake
earnestly, that they which are become beleuers in God, might be diligent to
excell in good workes: for these thinges are good and profitable vnto me.
9 As for folish questions, and genealogies, and braulynges and stryuynges aboute
ye lawe, auoyde the, for they are vnprofitable and vayne.
10 A ma that is geuen vnto heresye, after ye first and seconde monicion, auoyde,
11 and knowe, that he that is soch, is peruerted, & synneth euen damned by his
awne iudgment.
12 Whan I shal sende Artemas or Tichicus vnto ye, make spede to come to me vnto
Nicopolis, for I haue determyned there to wynter.
13 Brynge Zenas ye Scrybe and Apollos on their iourney diligently, that nothinge
be lackynge vnto them.
14 And let oures also learne to excell in good workes, as farre forth as nede
requyreth, that they be not vnfrutefull.
15 All they that are with me, salute the. Grete them that loue vs in the faith.
Grace be with you all, Amen.


Philemon

Chapter 1

1 Paul the presoner of Iesu Christ, and brother Timotheus. Vnto Philemon the
beloued, and oure helper,
2 and to the beloued Appia, and to Archippus or felowe soudyer, and to the
congregacion in thy house.
3 Grace be with you, and peace from God oure father and from the LORDE Iesus
Christ.
4 I thanke my God, makynge mencion allwayes of the in my prayers
5 (for so moch as I heare of thy loue and faith which thou hast on the LORDE
Iesu, and towarde all sayntes)
6 that oure comen faith maye be frutefull in the, thorow knowlege of all ye good
that ye haue in Christ Iesu.
7 Greate ioye and consolacion haue I in thy loue. For by the (brother) the
sayntes are hertely refresshed.
8 Wherfore though I haue great boldnes in Christ to commaunde the that which
becommeth the,
9 yet for loues sake I rather beseke ye, though I be as I am, eue Paul aged, and
now a presoner also of Iesu Christ.
10 I beseke the for my sonne Onesimus (whom I haue begotten in my bondes)
11 which in tyme past was to the vnprofitable, but now profitable both to the
and me.
12 Whom I haue sent agayne: but receaue thou him (that is) euen myne awne hert.
13 For I wolde haue kepte him styll with me, that in thy steade he might haue
mynistred vnto me in ye bondes of ye Gospell:
14 Neuertheles without thy mynde wolde I do nothinge, that ye good which thou
doest, shulde not be of compulsion, but wyllingly.
15 Happly he therfore departed for a season, that thou shuldest receaue him for
euer:
16 not now as a seruaunt, but aboue a seruaunt, euen a brother beloued,
specially to me, but how moch more vnto ye, both in ye flesh and in the LORDE?
17 Yf thou holde me for thy companyon, receaue him then euen as my selfe.
18 But yf he haue hurte the, or oweth the oughte, that laye to my charge.
19 I Paul haue wrytten it with myne awne hande. I wil recompence it: so that I
do not saye vnto ye, how that thou owest vnto me euen thine owne selfe.
20 Euen so brother, let me enioye the in the LORDE: refresh thou my hert in the
LORDE.
21 Trustinge in thine obediece, I haue wrytten vnto the, for I knowe that thou
wilt do more then I saye.
22 Morouer prepare me lodginge, for I hope that thorow youre prayers I shalbe
geuen vnto you.
23 There saluteth the, Epaphras my felowe presoner in Christ Iesu,
24 Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas, Lucas, my helpers.
25 The grace of oure LORDE Iesu Christ be with youre sprete, Amen.


Hebrews

Chapter 1

1 God in tyme past dyuersly & many wayes, spake vnto ye fathers by prophetes,
2 but in these last dayes he hath spoken vnto vs by his sonne, whom he hath made
heyre of all thinges, by whom also he made the worlde.
3 Which (sonne) beynge the brightnes of his glory, & the very ymage of his
substaunce, bearinge vp all thinges with the worde of his power, hath in his
owne personne pourged oure synnes, and is set on the righte hande of the
maiestie on hye:
4 beynge eue as moch more excellet the ye angels, as he hath optayned a more
excellet name then they.
5 For vnto which of the angels sayde he at eny tyme: Thou art my sonne, this
daye haue I begotten the? And agayne: I will be his father, & he shalbe my
sonne:
6 And agayne, wha he bryngeth in the fyrst begotte sonne in to the worlde, he
sayeth: And all the angels of God shal worshippe him.
7 And of the angels he sayeth: He maketh his angels spretes, & his mynisters
flames of fyre.
8 But vnto ye sonne he sayeth: God, yi seate endureth for euer & euer: the
cepter of yi kyngdome is a right cepter.
9 Thou hast loued righteousnes, & hated iniquyte: wherfore God (which is thy
God) hath anoynted the with the oyle of gladnesse aboue yi felowes.
10 And thou LORDE in ye begynnynge hast layed the foundacion of the earth, and
ye heaues are the workes of thy handes,
11 they shal perishe, but thou shalt endure: they all shal waxe olde as doth a
garmet,
12 and as a vesture shalt thou chaunge them, and they shalbe chaunged. But thou
art ye same, and thy yeares shal not fayle.
13 Vnto which of the angels sayde he at eny tyme: Syt thou on my righte hade,
tyll I make thyne enemies thy fote stole?
14 Are they not all mynistrynge spretes, sent to mynister for their sakes, which
shalbe heyres of saluacion?

Chapter 2

1 Wherfore we ought to geue the more hede vnto the thinges which we haue herde,
lest we perisshe.
2 For yf the worde which was spoke by angels, was stedfast, and euery
trasgression and dishobedience receaued a iust recompence of rewarde,
3 how shal we escape, yf we despyse so greate a saluacion: which after that it
beganne to be preached by the LORDE himselfe, was confirmed vpon vs, by them
that herde it,
4 God bearynge witnesse therto, with tokens, wonders and dyuerse powers, and
giftes of the holy goost acordinge to his awne wyll.
5 For vnto the angels hath he not subdued the worlde to come, wherof we speake.
6 But one in a certayne place witnesseth & sayeth: What is man, that thou art
myndefull of him?or the sonne of man, that thou vysitest him?
7 After thou haddest for a litle season made him lower the ye angels, thou
crownedst him with honoure and glory, and hast set him aboue the workes of thy
handes.
8 Thou hast put all thinges in subieccion vnder his fete. In that he subdued all
thinges vnto him, he lefte nothinge that is not put vnder him.
9 Neuertheles now se we not all thinges yet subdued vnto him. But him, which for
a litle season was made lesse then the angels, we se that it is Iesus: which is
crowned with honoure and glory for the sufferynge of death, that he by the grace
of God, shulde taist of death for all men.
10 For it became him, for whom are all thinges, and by who are all thinges
(after yt he had broughte many children vnto glory) that he shulde make the
LORDE of their saluacion perfecte thorow sufferynge,
11 for so moch as they all come of one, both he that sanctifieth; & they which
are sanctified.For the which causes sake, he is not ashamed to call them
brethren,
12 sayenge: I will declare thy name vnto my brethren, and in the myddes of the
cogregacion wil I prayse the.
13 And agayne: I wyl put my trust in him. And agayne: beholde, here am I and my
children, which God hath geuen me.
14 For as moch then as the children haue flesh and bloude. he also himselfe
likewyse toke parte with them, yt he thorow death, mighte take awaye ye power of
him, which had lordshippe ouer death, that is to saye, ye deuell:
15 & that he mighte delyuer the which thorow feare of death were all their life
tyme in dauger of bodage.
16 For he in no place taketh on him the angels, but ye sede of Abraham tabeth he
on him.
17 Wherfore in all thinges it became him to be made like vnto his brethren, that
he mighte be mercyfull and a faithfull hye prest in thinges concernynge God, to
make agrement for the synnes of ye people.
18 For in that he himselfe suffred and was tempted, he is able to sucker them
that are tempted.

Chapter 3

1 Wherfore holy brethren, ye that are partakers of the heauely callynge,
consyder the Embasseatour and hye prest of or profession, Christ Iesus,
2 which is faithfull to him that ordeyned him, euen as was Moses in all his
house.
3 But this man is worthy of greater honoure then moses, in as moch as he which
prepareth the house, hath greater honoure in it, then the house it selfe.
4 For euery house is prepared of some ma: but he that ordeyned all thinges, is
God.
5 And Moses verely was faithfull in all his house as a mynister, to beare witnes
of those thinges which were to be spoken afterwarde:
6 But Christ as a sonne hath rule ouer his house, whose house are we, yf we
holde fast the confidence and reioysinge of that hope vnto the ende.
7 Wherfore, as ye holy goost sayeth: Todaye yf ye shal heare his voyce,
8 harden not youre hertes, as in the prouokynke in the daye of temptacion in the
wyldernes,
9 where youre fathers tempted me, proued me, and sawe my workes fortye yeares
longe.
10 Wherfore I was greued wt that generacion, and sayde: They erre euer in their
hertes. But they knewe not my wayes,
11 so that I sware in my wrath, that they shulde not enter in to my rest.
12 Take hede brethren, that there be not in eny of you an euell hert of
vnbeleue, to departe from the lyuynge God:
13 but exhorte youre selues daylie, whyle it is called to daye, lest eny of you
waxe harde harted thorow ye disceatfulnes of synne.
14 For we are become partakers of Christ, yf we kepe sure vnto ye ende the
begynnynge of the substace,
15 solonge as it is sayde: Todaye, yf ye shal heare his voyce, harde not youre
hertes, as in the prouocacio.
16 For some whan they herde, prouoked. Howbeit not all they yt came out of
Egipte by Moses.
17 But with whom was he displeased fortye yeares longe? Was he not displeased
with them yt synned, whose carcases were ouerthrowne in ye wyldernesse?
18 To whom sware he, yt they shulde not enter in to his rest, but vnto the yt
beleued not?
19 And we se yt they coulde not enter in because of vnbeleue.

Chapter 4

1 Let vs feare therfore, lest eny of vs forsakynge the promes of entrynge in to
his rest, shulde seme to come behinde:
2 for it is declared vnto vs as well as vnto the. But the worde of preachinge
helped not the, wha they that herde it, beleued it not.
3 (For we which haue beleued, enter in to his rest) acordynge as he sayde: Euen
as I haue sworne in my wrath, They shal not enter in to my rest. And that (spake
he) verely loge after that the workes fro the begynnynge of the worlde were
made:
4 For he spake in a certayne place of the seueth daye, on this wyse: And God
rested on the seuenth daye from all his workes.
5 And in this place agayne: They shal not come in to my rest.
6 Seynge it foloweth the, that some must enter there in to: and they, to whom it
was first preached, entred not therin for vnbeleues sake,
7 therfore appoynteth he a daye agayne after so longe tyme, and sayeth: Todaye
(as it is rehearsed by Dauid) Todaye yf ye shal heare his voyce, then harden not
youre hertes.
8 For yf Iosua had geuen them rest, the wolde he not afterwarde haue spoken, of
another daye.
9 Therfore remayneth there yet a rest vnto the people of God.
10 For he that is entred in to his rest, ceasseth from his workes, as God doth
from his
11 Let vs make haist therfore to enter in to that rest, lest eny man fall after
the same ensample of vnbeleue.
12 For ye worde of God is quycke, and mightie in operacion, and sharper the eny
two edged swerde, and entreth thorow, euen to the deuydinge of the soule & the
sprete, and of ye ioyntes & the mary, and is a iudger of the thoughtes & intetes
of the hert,
13 nether is there eny creature invisible in ye sighte of him. But all thinges
are naked & bare vnto ye eyes of hi of who we speake.
14 Seynge then that we haue a greate hye prest, eue Iesus ye sonne of God, which
is entred in to heauen, let vs holde oure profession.
15 For we haue not an hye prest which ca not haue copassion on or infirmities,
but was in all poyntes tepted, like as we are, but without synne.
16 Let vs therfore go boldely vnto the seate of grace that we maye receaue
mercy, and fynde grace to helpe in the tyme of nede.

Chapter 5

1 For euery hye prest that is taken fro amoge men, is ordeyned for men in
thinges pertayninge to God, to offer giftes and sacrifices for synne:
2 which can haue copassion on the ignoraunt, and on them that are out of the
waye, for so moch as he himselfe also is compased aboute with infirmyte.
3 Therfore is he bounde to offer for synnes, as well for him selfe as for ye
people.
4 And noma taketh ye honoure vnto himselfe, but he that is called of God, as was
Aaron.
5 Euen so Christ glorified not himselfe to be made hye prest, but he yt sayde
vnto him: Thou art my sonne, this daye haue I begotten the.
6 As he sayeth also in another place: Thou art a prest for euer after ye order
of Melchisedech.
7 And in ye dayes of his fleshe, he offred vp prayers & supplicacions, wt stroge
cryenge & teares vnto him yt was able to saue him fro death: & was herde also,
because he had God in honoure.
8 And though he was Gods sonne, yet lerned he obedience, by those thinges which
he suffred.
9 And he beynge made perfecte, became the cause of euerlastinge saluacio, vnto
all the yt obeye him,
10 and is called of God an hye prest after the order of Melchisedech.
11 Wherof we haue many thinges to saye, which are harde to be vttered, because
ye are dull of hearynge.
12 For where as concernynge the tyme ye ought to be teachers, yet haue ye nede
agayne, yt we teach you the first preceptes of the worde of God: and are become
soch as haue nede of mylke, and not stronge meate.
13 For euery one that is fed yet with mylte, is vnexperte in the worde of
righteousnes, for he is but a babe.
14 But stronge meate belongeth vnto them yt are perfecte, which thorow custome
haue their wyttes exercysed to iudge both good and euell.

Chapter 6

1 Wherfore let vs leaue the doctryne pertaynynge to the begynnynge of a Christen
life, and let vs go vnto perfeccion: and now nomore laye ye foundacion of
repetaunce from deed workes, and of faith towarde God,
2 of baptyme, of doctryne, of layenge on of hades, of resurreccion of the deed,
& of eternall iudgment.
3 And so wil we do yf God permytte.
4 For it is not possible, that they which were once lighted, and haue taisted of
the heauely gyfte, and are become partakers of the holy goost,
5 & haue taisted of ye good worde of God, and of the power of the worlde to
come,
6 yf they fall awaye (and concernynge them selues crucifye the sonne of God
afresshe, and make a mocke off him) that they shulde be renued agayne vnto
repentaunce.
7 For the earth, that drynketh in the rayne, which commeth oft vpon it, and
bringeth forth herbes mete for them that dresse it, receaueth blessynge of God:
8 But yt grounde which beareth thornes and thistles, is nothinge worth, and nye
vnto cursynge: whose ende is to be brent.
9 Neuertheles (ye dearly beloued) we trust to se better of you, and yt saluacio
is nyer, though we thus speake.
10 For God is not vnrighteous, that he shulde forget youre worke and laboure of
loue, which ye shewed in his name, whan ye mynistred vnto the sayntes, and yet
mynister.
11 Yee and we desyre, that euery one of you shewe the same diligence, to the
stablyshinge of hope euen vnto the ende,
12 that ye faynte not, but folowe them which thorow faith and paciece inheret
the promyses.
13 For whan God made promes to Abraham, because he had none greater to sweare
by, he sware by himselfe,
14 and sayde: Surely I wil blesse the and multiplye ye in dede.
15 And so he abode pacietly, and optayned the promes.
16 As for men, they sweare by him that is greater then them selues: and the ooth
is the ende of all stryfe to confirme the thinge amoge them.
17 But God, wyllinge very abundauntly to shewe vnto the heyres of promes the
stablenes of his councell, added an ooth
18 yt by two immutable thinges (in the which it is vnpossible yt God shulde lye)
we mighte haue a stronge consolacion: euen we, which are fled to holde fast the
hope that is set before vs,
19 which (hope) we haue as a sure and stedfast anker of oure soule. Which (hope)
also entreth in, in to those thinges that are within ye vayle,
20 whither the foreruner is for vs entred in, eue Iesus, which is made an hye
prest for euer after ye order of Melchisedech.

Chapter 7

1 This Melchisedech kynge of Salem (which beynge prest of the most hye God, met
Abraham as he returned agayne from the slaughter of the kynges, & blessed him,
2 vnto whom Abraham also gaue tithes of all the goodes) first is by
interpretacion kynge of righteousnes: after that is he kynge of Salem also (that
is to saye, kynge of peace)
3 without father, without mother, without kynne, and hath nether begynnynge of
dayes, ner ende of life: but is likened vnto the sonne of God, and contynueth a
prest for euer.
4 But cosider how greate a man this was, to whom the Patriarke Abraham gaue
tithes of the spoyles.
5 And verely the children of Leui, whan they receaue the presthode, haue a
commaundement acordynge to the lawe, to take the tithes of the people, that is
to saye, of their brethre, though they also came out of the loynes of Abraham.
6 But he whose kynred is not counted amoge them, receaued tithes of Abraham, and
blessed him that had the promes.
7 Now is it so without all naysayenge, that the lesse receaueth blessynge of ye
better.
8 And here men that dye, receaue tithes. But there he receaueth tithes, of whom
it is witnessed that he lyueth.
9 And to saye the trueth, Leui himselfe also which receaueth tithes, payed
tithes in Abraham:
10 for he was yet in the loynes of his father Abraham, whan Melchisedech met
him.
11 Yf now therfore perfeccion came by the presthode of the Leuites (for vnder
the same (presthode) the people receaued the lawe) what neded it then
furthurmore, that another prest shulde ryse after the order of Melchisedech, and
not after the order of Aaron?
12 For yf the presthode be traslated, the of necessite must the lawe be
translated also.
13 For he of whom these thinges are spoken, is of another trybe, of the which
neuer man serued at the altare.
14 For it is euidet, that oure LORDE spronge of the trybe of Iuda, to the which
trybe Moses spake nothinge cocernynge presthode,
15 And it is yet a more euident thinge, yf after the symilitude of Mechisedech
there aryse another prest,
16 which is not made after ye lawe of the carnall commaundement, but after the
power of the endlesse life
17 (For he testifieth: Thou art a prest for euer after the order of
Melchisedech)
18 then the commaundement that wente before, is disanulled, because of his
weaknesse, and vnprofitablenes.
19 For the lawe made nothinge perfecte, but was an introduccion of a better
hope, by ye which hope we drawe nye vnto God.
20 And for this cause is it a better hope, yt it was not promysed without an
ooth.
21 Those prestes were made without an ooth, but this prest with an ooth, by him
that sayde vnto him: The LORDE sware, and wyl not repente: Thou art a prest for
euer after the order of Melchisedech.
22 Thus is Iesus become a stablissher of so moch a better Testamete.
23 And amonge them many were made prestes, because they were not suffred to
endure by the reason of death.
24 But this man, because that he endureth euer, hath an euerlastinge presthode.
25 Wherfore he is able also euer to saue them, that come vnto God by him: &
lyueth euer, to make intercession for vs.
26 For it became vs to haue soch an hye prest as is holy, innocent, vndefyled,
separate from synners, and made hyer then heauen:
27 which nedeth not daylie ( as yonder hye prestes) to offre vp sacrifice first
for his awne synnes, and then for the peoples synnes. For that dyd he once for
all, whan he offered vp him selfe.
28 For the lawe maketh men prestes which haue infirmitie: but the worde of the
ooth, that came sence the lawe, maketh the sonne prest, which is perfecte for
euermore.

Chapter 8

1 Of the thinges which we haue spoken, this is the pyth: We haue soch an hye
prest, that is set on ye righte hande of the seate of maiestie in heaue:
2 and is a mynister of holy thinges, and of the true Tabernacle, which God
pitched, & not man.
3 For euery hye prest is ordened to offre giftes and sacrifices: Wherfore it is
of necessite, yt this man haue somwhat also to offer.
4 For he were not a prest, yf he were vpon earth, where are prestes yt acordynge
to the lawe
5 offer giftes (which prestes serue vnto the ensample and shadowe of heauely
thinges, euen as the answere of God was geuen vnto Moses, whan he was aboute to
fynish the Tabernacle: Take hede (sayde he) that thou make all thinges acordinge
to the patrone shewed the in the mount.)
6 But now hath he optayned a more excellent office, in as moch as he is the
mediatour of a better Testament, which was made for better promyses.
7 For yf that first (Testament) had bene fautles, then shulde no place haue bene
soughte for the secode.
8 For in rebukynge the he sayeth: Beholde, the dayes wyll come (sayeth the
LORDE) that I wyl fynish vpo the house of Israel, and vpon the house off Iuda,
9 a new Testament: not as the Testament which I made with their fathers, in that
daye whan I toke them by the handes, to lede them out of the londe of Egipte:
for they contynued not in my Testament, and I regarded them not, sayeth the
LORDE.
10 For this is the Testament, that I wil make wt the house of Israell after
those dayes, sayeth the LORDE. I wyl geue my lawes in their mynde, and in their
hertes wyl I wryte them: And I wil be their God, and they shal be my people:
11 and they shal not teach euery ma his neghboure, and euery man his brother,
sayenge: knowe ye LORDE, for they shal knowe me from the leest to the most of
them:
12 for I wil be mercifull ouer their vnrighteousnesses: And on their synnes & on
their iniquyties wyl I not thynke enymore.
13 In that he sayeth: A new, he weereth out ye olde. Now yt which is worne out
and waxed olde, is ready to vanish awaye

Chapter 9

1 That first Tabernacle verely had ordinaunces, and seruynges off God and
outwarde holynes.
2 For there was made a foretabernacle, wherin was ye candilsticke, and the
table, and the shewe bred: and this is called ye Holy.
3 But behynde the seconde vayle was the Tabernacle which is called Holiest of
all,
4 which had the golden censor, and the Arke of the Testament ouerlayed rounde
aboute with golde, wherin was the golden pot with Manna, and Aarons rodd that
florished, and the tables of the Testament:
5 Aboue therin were the Cherubins off glory ouershadowynge the Mercyseate: Of
which thinges it is not now to speake perticularly.
6 When these thinges were thus ordeyned, the prestes wente allwayes in to the
first Tabernacle, and excuted ye seruyce of God.
7 But in to the seconde wente the hye prest alone once in the yeare, not without
bloude, which he offred for himselfe and for the ignoraunce of the people.
8 Wherwith the holy goost this signifyeth, that the waye of holynes was not yet
opened, whyle as yet the first Tabernacle was stondynge.
9 Which was a symilitude for the tyme then present, in the which were offred
giftes and sacrifices, and coulde not make perfecte (as partaynynge to the
conscience) him, that dyd the Gods seruyce
10 onely with meates and drynkes, and dyuerse wasshinges, and iustifienges of
the flesh, which were ordeyned vnto the tyme of reformacion.
11 But Christ beynge an hye prest of good thinges to come, came by a greater and
a more perfecte Tabernacle, not made with handes, that is to saye, not of this
maner buyldynge:
12 nether by the bloude of goates or calues: but by his owne bloude entred he
once for all in to the holy place, and hath founde eternall redempcion.
13 For yff the bloude off oxen and off goates, and the asshes off the cowe whan
it is sprenkled, haloweth the vncleane as touchynge the purificacion of the
flesh,
14 How moch more shal the bloude of Christ (which thorow the eternall sprete
offred him selfe without spot vnto God) pourge oure conscience from deed workes,
for to serue the lyuynge God?
15 And for this cause is he ye mediatour of the new Testament, that thorow death
which chaunsed for the redempcion of those trasgressions (that were vnder the
first Testament) they which were called mighte receaue the promes of eternall
inheritaunce.
16 For where soeuer is a Testament, there must also be the death of him that
maketh the testament.
17 For a Testamet taketh auctorite whan men are deed: for it is no value, as
longe as he that made it is alyue.
18 For the which cause that first Testamet also was not ordeyned without bloude.
19 For whan all the commaundementes (acordinge to the lawe) were red of Moses
vnto all the people, he toke ye bloude of calues and of goates, with water and
purple woll and ysope, and sprenkled the boke and all the people,
20 sayenge: This is the bloude of the Testament, which God hath appoynted vnto
you.
21 And the Tabernakle and all the vessels of the Gods seruyce sprenkled he with
bloude likewyse.
22 And allmost all thinges are pourged with bloude after the lawe: and without
sheddynge of bloude is no remyssion.
23 It is necessary then, that the symilitude of heauenly thinges be purified
with soche: but ye heauenly thinges themselues are purified with better
sacrifices, then are those.
24 For Christ is not entred into the holy places yt are made with handes (which
are but symilitudes of true thinges) but in to the very heauen, for to apeare
now before the face of God for vs:
25 Not to offer himselfe offt as the hye prest entreth in to the holy place
euery yeare with straunge bloude:
26 for the must he often haue suffred sence the worlde beganne. But now in the
ende of the worlde hath he appeared once, to put synne to flight, by the
offerynge vp of himselfe.
27 And as it is appoynted vnto me yt they shal once dye, and then cometh the
iudgmet: Eue
28 so Christ was once offred, to take awaye the synnes of many. And vnto them
that loke for him, shal he appeare agayne without synne vnto saluacion.

Chapter 10

1 For the lawe which hath but the shadowe off good thinges to come, and not the
thinges in their awne fashion, can neuer by the sacrifices which they offer
yeare by yeare continually, make the commers there vnto perfecte:
2 Els shulde they haue ceassed to haue bene offred, because that the offerers
once pourged, shulde haue had nomore conscience of synnes.
3 Neuertheles in those sacrifices there is made but a remembraunce of synnes
euery yeare.
4 For it is vnpossible yt the bloude of oxen and of goates shulde take awaye
synnes.
5 Wherfore whan he commeth in to the worlde, he sayeth: Sacrifice & offerynge
thou woldest not haue, but a body hast thou ordeyned me.
6 Burntofferynges and synneofferynges hast thou not alowed.
7 Then sayde I: Lo, I come. I the begynnynge of the boke it is wrytten of me,
that I shulde do yi wyll O God.
8 Aboue wha he had sayde: Sacrifice and offerynge, and burntsacrifices &
synofferynges thou woldest not haue, nether hast alowed (which yet are offered
after ye lawe).
9 The sayde he: Lo, I come to do wil thy O God: there taketh he awaye the first,
to stablysshe the latter:
10 In the which wyll we are sanctified by the offerynge vp of the body of Iesus
Christ once for all.
11 And euery prest is ready daylie mynistringe, and oftymes offereth one maner
of offerynges, which can neuer take awaye synnes.
12 But this man whan he had offred for synnes, one sacrifice which is of value
for euer, sat him downe on the righte hande of God,
13 and from hence forth tarieth, tyll his foes be made his fote stole.
14 For with one offerynge hath he made perfecte for euer, the that are
sanctified.
15 And the holy goost also beareth vs recorde of this, euen whan he sayde
before:
16 This is the Testament, that I wyl make vnto them after those dayes, sayeth ye
LORDE: I wyl geue my lawes in their hertes, and in their myndes wyl I wryte
them,
17 and their synnes and iniquities wil I remebre nomore.
18 And where remyssion of these thinges is, there is nomore offerynge for synne.
19 Seynge now brethre, that we haue a fre sure intraunce in to that Holy place,
20 by the bloude of Iesu (which he hath prepared vnto vs for a new and lyuynge
waye, thorow the vayle, that is to saye, by his flesh)
21 and seynge also that we haue an hye prest ouer the house of God,
22 let vs drawe nye with a true hert in a full faith, sprenkled in oure hertes
from an euell conscience, and washed in oure bodies with pure water:
23 and let vs kepe the profession of oure hope without wauerynge (for he is
faithfull that hath promysed)
24 and let vs considre one another to ye prouokinge of loue and of good workes:
25 and let vs not forsake the fellishippe that we haue amoge oure selues, as the
maner of some is: but let vs exhorte one another, and that so moch the more,
because ye se that the daye draweth nye.
26 For yf we synne wylfully after that we haue receaued the knowlege of the
trueth, there remayneth vnto vs nomore sacrifice for synnes,
27 but a fearfull lokynge for iudgment, and violente fyre, which shal deuoure ye
aduersaries.
28 He yt despyseth Moses lawe, dyeth without mercy vnder two or thre witnesses:
29 Of how moch sorer punyshment (suppose ye) shal he be counted worthy, which
treadeth vnder fote the sonne of God, and couteth the bloude of ye Testamet
(wherby he is sanctified) an unwholy thinge, & doth dishonoure to the sprete of
grace?
30 For we knowe him that hath sayde: Vengeaunce is myne, I wil recompence,
sayeth the LORDE. And agayne: The LORDE shal iudge his people.
31 It is a fearfull thinge to fall in to the handes of the lyuynge God.
32 But call ye to remebrauce ye dayes yt are past, i ye which after ye had
receaued lighte, ye endured a greate fighte off aduersities:
33 partly whyle all me wodred & gased at you for the shame and tribulacion that
was done vnto you: and partly whyle ye became copanyons of them which so passed
their tyme.
34 For ye haue suffred with my bodes, and toke a worth ye spoylinge of youre
goodes, and that with gladnes, knowynge in youre selues, how that ye haue in
heauen a better & an enduringe substaunce.
35 Cast not awaye therfore yor confidence, which hath so greate a rewarde.
36 For ye haue nede of pacience, that after ye haue done the wil of God, ye
mighte receaue the promes.
37 For yet ouer a litle whyle, and then he that shal come, wyl come, and wyl not
tary.
38 But the iust shal lyue by his faith: And yf he withdrawe himselfe awaye, my
soule shal haue no pleasure in him.
39 As for vs, we are not of those which withdrawe them selues to damnacion: but
of them that beleue to the wynnynge of the soule.

Chapter 11

1 Faith is a sure confidence of thinges which are hoped for, and a certaynte of
thinges which are not sene.
2 By it ye Elders were well reported of.
3 Thorow faith we vnderstonde, that the worlde and all the thinges which are
sene, were made of naughte by the worde of God.
4 By faith offered Abell vnto God a more plenteous sacrifice: by the which he
optayned wytnesse, that he was righteous: God testifyenge of his giftes, by the
which also he beynge deed, yet speaketh.
5 By faith was Enoch take awaye, that he shulde not se death: and was not
founde, because God had taken him awaye. For afore he was taken awaye, he had
recorde that he pleased God.
6 But without faith it is vnpossible to please God. For he that commeth vnto
God, must beleue that God is, & yt he is a rewarder of them that seke him.
7 By faith Noe honoured God, after yt he was warned of thinges which were not
sene, & prepared the Arke, to ye sauinge of his housholde: thorow the which Arke
he condemned the worlde, and became heyre of the righteousnes, which commeth by
faith.
8 By faith Abraham (wha he was called) obeyed, to go out in to the place, which
he shulde afterwarde receaue to inheritaunce: and he wente out, not knowynge
whither he shulde go.
9 By faith was he a straunger in the lode of promes as in a straunge countre, &
dwelt in tabernacles: and so dyd Isaac & Iacob, heyres with him of the same
promes:
10 for he loked for a cite which hath a foundacion, whose buylder and maker is
God.
11 By faith Sara also receaued strength to be with childe, and was delyuered of
a childe whan she was past age, because she iudged him to be faithfull which had
promysed.
12 And therfore spronge there of one (yee euen off one which was as good as deed
concernynge the body) so many in multitude as the starres off the skye, and as
the sonde off the See shore, which is innumerable.
13 All these dyed acordinge to faith, and receaued not the promyses, but sawe
the afarre off, and beleued them, and saluted them: and cofessed, that they were
straungers & pilgrems vpo earth.
14 For they that saye soch thinges, declare, that they seke a naturall countre.
15 And doutles yf they had bene myndefull off that countre from whence they came
out, they had leysure to haue returned agayne.
16 But now they desyre a better, that is to saye, a heauely. Wherfore God is not
ashamed of the, eue to be called their God: for he hath prepared a cite for
them.
17 By faith Abraha offered vp Isaac, wha he was tempted, and gaue ouer his onely
begotten sonne, in whom he had receaued the promyses,
18 of whom it was sayde: In Isaac shal thy sede be called:
19 For he considered, yt God was able to rayse vp agayne from the deed. Therfore
receaued he him for an ensample.
20 By faith Isaac blessed Iacob and Esau, concernynge thinges to come.
21 By faith Iacob, whan he was a dyenge, blessed both the sonnes off Ioseph, &
bowed himselfe towarde the toppe of his cepter.
22 By faith Ioseph whan he dyed, remembred ye departynge of the childre of
Israel, & gaue comaundemet concernynge his bones.
23 By faith Moses wha he was borne, was hyd thre monethes of his Elders, because
they sawe that he was a proper childe, nether feared they the kynges
comaundemet.
24 By faith Moses whan he was greate, refused to be called the sonne of Pharaos
doughter:
25 and chose rather to suffre aduersite with the people of God, then to enioye
ye pleasures of synne for a season:
26 and estemed the rebuke of Christ greater riches, then the treasure of Egipte:
for he had respecte vnto the rewarde.
27 By faith he forsoke Egipte, and feared not the fearcenes of the kynge: for he
endured, eue as though he had sene him which is inuisible.
28 By faith he helde Easter, and the effusion of bloude, lest he which slewe the
firstborne, shulde touche them.
29 By faith they passed thorow the reed See as by drye londe: which wha the
Egipcians assayed to do, they were drowned.
30 By faith the walles of Iericho fell, wha they were compased aboute seuen
dayes.
31 By faith the harlot Raab perished not with the vnbeleuers, wha she had
receaued the spyes to lodginge peaceably.
32 And what shal I more saye? ye tyme wolde be to shorte for me to tell of
Gedeon, of Barac, and of Samson, & of Iepthae, and of Dauid, and Samuel, and of
the prophetes,
33 which thorow faith subdued kyngdomes, wroughte righteousnes, optayned ye
promyses, stopped ye mouthes of lyos
34 quenched the violece of fyre, escaped ye edge of the swerde, of weake were
made stronge, became valeaunt in batayll, turned to flighte the armyes of the
aleauntes,
35 the wemen receaued their deed agayne from resurreccion. But other were
racked, and accepted no delyueraunce, that they mighte optayne the resurreccion
that better is.
36 Other taisted of mockinges and scourginges, of bondes also and presonment:
37 were stoned, were hewen a sunder, were tempted, were slayne with the swerde,
wente aboute in shepe skynnes and goates skynnes, in nede, in tribulacion, in
vexacion,
38 which (men) the worlde was not worthy of: they wandred aboute in
wyldernesses, vpon mountaynes, in dennes and caues of the earth.
39 And these all thorow faith optayned good reporte, and receaued not ye promes:
40 because God had prouyded a better thinge for vs, that they without vs shulde
not be made perfecte.

Chapter 12

1 Wherfore seynge we haue so greate a multitude of witnesses aboute vs let vs
also laye awaye all yt presseth downe, and the synne that hangeth on, and let vs
runne with pacience vnto the batayl that is set before vs,
2 lokynge vnto Iesus ye auctor and fynissher of faith: which whan the ioye was
layed before him, abode the crosse, and despysed the shame, and is set downe on
ye righte hade of ye trone of God.
3 Cosidre him therfore that endured soch speakinge agaynst hi of synners, lest
ye be weery and faynte in youre myndes:
4 for ye haue not yet resisted vnto bloude, stryuynge agaynst synne,
5 and haue forgotten the consolacion, which speaketh vnto you as vnto children:
My sonne, despyse not the chastenynge off the LORDE, nether faynte whan thou art
rebuked of him:
6 for who the LORDE loueth, him he chasteneth, yee and he scourgeth euery sonne
that he receaueth.
7 Yf ye endure chastenynge, God offereth himselfe vnto you as vnto sonnes. What
sonne is that, whom the father chasteneth not?
8 Yf ye be not vnder correccion (wherof all are partakers) then are ye bastardes
and not sonnes.
9 Morouer seyenge we haue had fathers off oure flesh which corrected vs, & we
gaue them reuerence, shulde we not then moch rather be in subieccion vnto ye
father of spirituall giftes, yt we mighte lyue?
10 And they verely for a few dayes nurtred vs after their awne pleasure: but he
lerneth vs vnto yt which is profitable, that we mighte receaue of his holynes.
11 No maner chastisynge for the present tyme semeth to be ioyous, but greuous:
neuertheles afterwarde it bringeth the quyete frute of righteousnes, vnto them
which are exercysed therby.
12 Life vp therfore the handes which were let downe, and the weake knees,
13 and se that ye haue straight steppes vnto youre fete, lest eny haltinge turne
you out of the waye, yee let it rather be healed.
14 Folowe after peace with all men, and holynes, without the which no man shal
se the LORDE,
15 ad loke well, that no ma be destitute of the grace of God, lest there sprynge
vp eny bytter rote, and cause disquyetnes, and therby many be defyled:
16 that there be no whoremonger, or vncleane person, as Esau, which for one
meate sake solde his byrth righte.
17 For ye knowe, how that afterwarde whan he wolde haue inhereted the blessynge,
he was put by: for he foude no place of repetaunce, though he desyred (ye
blessynge) with teares.
18 For ye are not come to ye mout that can be touched and burneth with fyre,
nether yet to myst and darcknes, and tempest of wedder,
19 nether to the sounde of the trompe, and ye voyce of wordes: which they that
herde, wysshed awaye, that the worde shulde not be spoken to them,
20 for they were not able to abyde that which was spoken. And yf a beest had
touched the mountayne, it must haue bene stoed, or thrust thorow with a darte.
21 And so terrible was the sighte which appeared, that Moses sayde: I feare and
quake.
22 But ye are come to the mount Sion, and to the cite of the lyuynge God, to the
celestiall Ierusalem, and to the multitude of many thousande angels,
23 and vnto the congregacion of the first borne, which are wrytten in heauen,
and to God the iudge of all, and to the spretes of iust and perfecte men,
24 and to Iesus the mediatoure of the new Testament, and to the sprenklynge off
bloude, that speaketh better then the bloude of Abel.
25 Se that ye despyse not him that speaketh vnto you: for yf they escaped not
which refused him that spake on earth, moch more shal we not escape, yf we turne
awaye from him that speaketh from heaue:
26 whose voyce shoke the earth at that tyme. But now promyseth he, & sayeth: Yet
once more wyl I shake, not the earth onely, but also heauen.
27 No doute that same that he sayeth yet once more, signifieth the remouynge
awaye of those thinges which are shaken, as off thinges which are made: that ye
thinges which are not shake, maye remayne.
28 Wherfore, seynge we receaue the vnmoueable kyngdome, we haue grace, wherby we
maye serue God, & please him, with reuerence and godly feare.
29 For oure God is a consumynge fyre.

Chapter 13

1 Let brotherly loue cotynue.
2 Be not forgetfull to lodge straungers: for therby haue dyuerse receaued angels
in to their houses vnawares.
3 Remembre them that are in bondes, eue as though ye were bounde with them: and
be myndefull off them which are in aduersite, as ye which are also in the bodye.
4 Let wedlocke be had in pryce in all poyntes, & let ye chamber be vndefyled.
For whorekepers and aduouterers God wil iudge.
5 Let youre conuersacion be without couetousnes, and be content with that ye
haue allready, for he hath sayde: I wyl not fayle the nether forsake the,
6 so that we maye boldely saye: The LORDE is my helper, and I wyl not feare what
man maye do vnto me.
7 Remembre the which haue the ouersighte of you, which haue declared vnto you
the worde of God. The ende of whose couersacion se that ye loke vpon, and folowe
their faith.
8 Iesus Christ yesterdaye and Todaye, & the same cotinueth for euer.
9 Be not caried aboute wt dyuerse and straunge lernynges: for it is a good
thinge that the herte be stablysshed with grace, and not with meates, which haue
not profited them, that haue had their pastyme in them.
10 We haue an altare, wherof they haue no power to eate, which serue in the
Tabernacle.
11 For the bodies of those beestes whose bloude is broughte in to the holy place
by ye hye prest to pourge synne, are brent without the tetes.
12 Therfore Iesus also, to sanctifye ye people by his awne bloude, suffred
without ye gate.
13 Let vs go forth therfore out of the tentes, and suffre rebuke with him:
14 for here haue we no contynuynge cite, but we seke one to come.
15 Let vs therfore by him offre allwayes vnto God the sacrifice of prayse: that
is to saye, the frute of those lippes which confesse his name.
16 To do good and to destribute forget not, for wt soch sacrifices God is
pleased.
17 Obey them that haue the ouersighte off you, and submytte youre selues vnto
them: for they watch for youre soules, euen as they that must geue accoptes
therfore, that they maye do it with ioye, and not with grefe: for that is an
vnprofitable thinge for you.
18 Praye for vs. We haue confidence, because we haue a good coscience in all
thinges, and desyre to lyue honestly.
19 But I desyre you ye more abundauntly, that ye so do, yt I maye be restored
vnto you the more quyckly.
20 The God of peace (that broughte agayue fro the deed oure LORDE Iesus the
greate shepherde of the shepe thorow the bloude of the euerlastinge Testament)
21 make you perfecte in all good workes, to do his wyll, workynge in you that
which is pleasaunt in his sighte thorow Iesus Christ, to whom be prayse for euer
and euer Amen.
22 I beseke you brethren, suffre the worde of exhortacion, for I haue wrytten
vnto you in few wordes.
23 Knowe or brother Timotheus, whom we haue sent from vs, with whom (yf he come
shortly) I wil se you.
24 Salute the that haue the ouersighte of you and all ye sayntes. The brethren
of Italy salute you.
25 Grace be with you all, Amen.


James

Chapter 1

1 Iames the seruaunt of God and of the LORDE Iesus Christ, sendeth gretinge to
the xij. trybes which are scatered here & there.
2 My brethren, counte it exceadynge ioye whe ye fall in to diuers temptacions,
3 for as moche as ye knowe, how yt the tryinge of youre faith bringeth pacience:
4 and let pacience haue her parfect worke, yt ye maye be parfecte aud sounde,
lakinge nothinge.
5 Yf eny of you lacke wyssdome, let him axe of God, which geueth to all men
indifferentlie, and casteth no man in the teth: and it shal be geue him.
6 But let him axe in faith and wauer not. For he that douteth, is lyke the wawes
of ye See, tost of the wynde, and caried wt violence.
7 Nether let yt man thinke that he shal receaue eny thige of ye LORDE.
8 A wauerynge mynded ma ys vnstable in all his waies.
9 Let the brother of lowe degre reioyce, in yt he is exalted:
10 and the rich, in yt he is made lowe. For eue as the flor of ye grasse shal he
vanyshe awaye.
11 The Sonne ryseth wt heat and the grasse wydereth, & his floure falleth awaye,
and the beautie of the fassion of it perissheth: euen so shal the ryche man
perisshe with his abundaunce.
12 Happy is the man that endureth in teptacion, for when he is tryed, he shal
receaue the crowne of life, which the LORDE hath promised to them that loue him.
13 Let no man saye when he is tempted, yt he is tempted of God. For God tepteth
not vnto euell, nether tepteth he eny man.
14 But euery ma is tepted, drawne awaye, & entysed of his awne cocupiscece.
15 The whe lust hath conceaued, she bringeth forth synne, & synne when it is
fynished, bringeth forth deeth.
16 Erre not my deare brethre.
17 Euery good gifte, & euery parfait gift, is from aboue, and cometh downe from
ye father of light, with whom is no variablenes, nether is he chaunged vnto
darcknes.
18 Of his awne will begat he vs with the worde of life, that we shulde be the
fyrst frutes of his creatures.
19 Wherfore deare brethren, let euery man be swifte to heare, slowe to speake,
and slowe to wrath.
20 For the wrath of ma worketh not that which is righteous before God.
21 Wherfore laye aparte all fylthines, all superfluite of maliciousnes, &
receaue with meknes ye worde yt is grafted in you, which is able to saue youre
soules.
22 And se that ye be doers of ye worde & not heares only, deceauinge youre awne
selues.
23 For yf eny heare the worde, and do it not, he is like vnto a ma that
beholdeth his bodily face in a glasse.
24 For assone as he hath loked on himselfe, he goeth his waye, and forgetteth
immediatly what his fasshion was.
25 But who so loketh in ye perfect lawe of libertie, and continueth therin (yf
he be not a forgetfull hearer, but a doar of the worke) the same shalbe happie
in his dede.
26 Yf eny man amonge you seme deuoute, & refrayne not his toge: but deceaue his
awne herte, this mannes deuocion is in vayne.
27 Pure deuocion and vndefiled before God the father, is this: to visit the
frendlesse and widdowes in their aduersite, and to kepe him selfe vnspotted of
the worlde.

Chapter 2

1 Brethren, haue not the faith of oure LORDE Iesus Christ ye LORDE of glory in
respecte of persons.
2 Yf ther come in to yor copany a ma wt a golde rynge and in goodly aparell, &
ther come in also a poore man in vyle raymet,
3 & ye haue a respecte to him yt weareth the gaye clothinge & saye vnto hi: Sit
thou here i a good place, & saye vnto ye poore, stonde thou there or sit here
vnder my fote stole:
4 are ye not parciall in youre selues, and haue iudged after euyll thoughtes?
5 Harken my deare beloued brethre. Hath not God chosen the poore of this worlde,
which are ryche in faith, and heyres of the kyngdom which he promysed to the
that loue him?
6 But ye haue despised the poore. Are not the rych they which oppresse you: &
they which drawe you before iudges?
7 Do not they speake euell of that good name after which ye be named.
8 Yf ye fulfill the royall lawe acordinge to the scripture which saith: Thou
shalt loue thyne neghbour as thyselfe, ye do well.
9 But yf ye regarde one person more then another, ye comit synne, and are
rebuked of the lawe as trsagressours.
10 Whosoeuer shal kepe the whole lawe, and yet fayle in one poynt, he is gyltie
in all.
11 For he that sayde: Thou shalt not commit adulterie, sayed also: thou shalt
not kyll. Though thou do none adulterie, yet yf thou kill, thou art a
transgresser of the lawe.
12 So speake ye, and so do as they that shalbe iudged by the lawe of libertie.
13 For ther shalbe iudgement merciles to him that sheweth no mercy, & mercy
reioiseth against iudgment.
14 What a vayleth it my brethre, though a man saye he hath faith, when he hath
no dedes? Can faith saue him?
15 If a brother or a sister be naked or destitute of dayly fode,
16 & one of you saye vnto them: Departe in peace, God sende you warmnes and
fode: notwithstodinge ye geue them not tho thinges which are nedfull to the
body: what helpeth it them?
17 Euen so faith, yf it haue no dedes, is deed in it selfe.
18 Ye & a man might saye: Thou hast faith, and I haue dedes: Shewe me thy faith
by thy dedes: and I wil shewe the my faith by my dedes.
19 Beleuest thou yt ther is one God? Thou doest well. The deuils also beleue and
tremble.
20 Wilt thou vnderstode o thou vayne man that faith with out dedes is deed:
21 Was not Abraham oure father iustified thorow workes when he offered Isaac his
sonne vpon the aulter?
22 Thou seist how yt faith wrought with his dedes, and through ye dedes was the
faith made perfect:
23 & the scripture was fulfilled which faith: Abraha beleued God and it was
reputed vnto him for rightewesnes: and he was called ye frende of God.
24 Ye se then how that of dedes a man is iustified, and not of faith only
25 Likewise also was not Raab the harlot iustified thorow workes, when she
receaued the messengers, and sent them out another waye?
26 For as the body, with oute the sprete is deed, euen so faith wt out dedes is
deed.

Chapter 3

1 My brethre, be not euery man a master, remebrynge how that we shall receaue
the more damnacion:
2 for in many thinges we synne all. Yf a man synne not in worde, the same is a
parfecte man, & able to tame all the body.
3 Beholde, we put bittes into the horses mouthes yt they shulde obeye vs, and we
turne aboute all the body.
4 Beholde also ye shyppes, which though they be so gret, and are dryuen of
fearce windes, yet are they turned about with a very smale helme, whither soeuer
the violence of the gouerner wyll.
5 Euen so the toge is a lyttell member, and bosteth great thinges. Beholde how
gret a thinge a lyttell fyre kyndleth,
6 and the tonge is fyre, and a worlde of wyckednes. So is the tonge set amonge
oure membres, that it defileth the whole body, and setteth a fyre all that we
haue of nature, and is it selfe set a fyre euen of hell.
7 All the natures of beastes, and of byrdes, and of serpentes, and thinges of
the see, are meked and tamed of the nature of ma.
8 But the toge can no man tame. Yt is an vnruely euell full of deedly poysou.
9 Therwith blesse we God the father, and therwith cursse we men which are made
after the similitude of God.
10 Out of one mouth proceadeth blessynge and cursynge. My brethre these thinges
ought not so to be.
11 Doth a fountayne sende forth at one place swete water and bytter also?
12 Can the fygge tree, my Brethren, beare oliue beries: ether a vyne beare
fygges?
13 So can no fountayne geue bothe salt water and fresshe also. If eny man be
wyse and endued with learnynge amonge you, let him shewe the workes of his good
couersacion in meknes that is coupled with wissdome.
14 But yf ye haue bitter enuyenge and stryfe in yor hertes, reioyce not: nether
be lyars agaynst the trueth.
15 This wissdome descendeth not from aboue: but is erthy, and naturall, and
dyuelishe.
16 For where enuyenge and stryfe is, there is vnstablenes and all maner of euell
workes.
17 But the wissdom that is fro aboue, is fyrst pure, the peasable, gentle, and
easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good frutes, without iudgynge, and
without simulacion:
18 yee, and the frute of rightewesnes is sowen in peace, of the that mayntene
peace.

Chapter 4

1 From whence commeth warre and fightynge amonge you: come they not here hence?
euen of yor volupteousnesses that rayne in youre mebres?
2 Ye lust, and haue not. Ye envie and haue indignacion, and can not obtayne. Ye
fight & warre, and haue not, because ye axe not.
3 Ye axe & receaue not because ye axe amysse: eue to cosume it vpo yor
voluptuousnes.
4 Ye aduouterars, & weme that breke matrimonie: knowe ye not how that the
frenshippe of ye worlde is ennimite to godwarde? Whosoeuer wilbe a frende of the
worlde, is made ye enemie of god.
5 Ether do ye thinke yt the scripture sayth in vayne. The sprete yt dwelleth in
you, lusteth euen contrary to enuie:
6 but geueth more grace.
7 Submit youre selues to God, and resist the deuell, & he wil flye fro you.
8 Drawe nye to God & he wil drawe nye to you. Clense yor hondes ye synners, and
pourge youre hertes ye wauerynge mynded.
9 Suffre affliccions: sorowe ye and wepe. Let youre laughter be turned to
mornynge, and youre ioye to heuynes.
10 Cast downe youre selues before the LORDE, and he shal lift you vp.
11 Backbyte not one another, brethren. He that backbyteth his brother, and he yt
iudgeth his brother, backbyteth the lawe, and iudgeth the lawe. But and yf thou
iudge the lawe, thou art not an obseruer of the lawe: but a iudge.
12 There is one lawe geuer, which is able to saue and to distroye. What art thou
that iudgest another man?
13 Go to now ye that saye: to daye & to morow let vs go into soche a citie and
continue there a yeare, and bye and sell, and wynne:
14 & yet ca not tell what shal happe to morowe. For what thinge is youre life?
It is euen a vapoure that apereth for a lytell tyme, and the vanysheth awaye:
15 For that ye ought to say: yf the LORDE wil, and yf we liue, let vs do this or
that.
16 But nowe ye reioyce in youre bostinges. All soche reioysynge is euell.
17 Therfore to him that knoweth how to do good, and doth it not, to him it is
synne.

Chapter 5

1 Goo to now ye riche men. Wepe, and howle on yor wretchednes that shal come
vpon you.
2 Youre riches is corrupte, youre garmetes are motheaten.
3 Youre golde & yor siluer are cancred, & the rust of them shalbe a witnes vnto
you, & shal eate youre flesshe, as it were fyre. Ye haue heaped treasure
togedder in yor last dayes:
4 Beholde, the hyre of the labourers which haue reped downe youre feldes (which
hyer is of you kept backe by fraude) cryeth: and the cryes of the which haue
reped, are entred in to the eares of the LORDE Sabaoth.
5 Ye haue liued in pleasure on the earth and in wantannes. Ye haue norysshed
youre hertes, as in a daye of slaughter.
6 Ye haue codempned and haue killed the iust, and he hath not resisted you.
7 Be pacient therfore brethren, vnto the comynge of the LORDE. Beholde, the
hussbade man wayteth for the precious frute of ye earth, and hath longe pacience
there vpon, vntill he receaue the erly and the latter rayne.
8 Be ye also pacient therfore, and settle youre hertes, for the commynge of the
LORDE draweth nye.
9 Grodge not one agaynst another brethren, lest ye be damned. Beholde, the iudge
stondeth before the dore.
10 Take (my brethren) the prophetes for an ensample of sufferynge aduersitie,
and of longe pacience, which spake in the name of the LORDE.
11 Beholde we counte them happy which endure. Ye haue hearde of ye paciece of
Iob, and haue knowen what ende the LORDE made. For the LORDE is very pitifull
and mercifull.
12 But aboue all thinges my brethre, sweare not, nether by heaue, nether by
earth, nether by eny other othe. Let youre ye be ye, and yor naye naye: lest ye
faule in to ypocricy.
13 Yf eny of you be euell vexed, let hi praye. Yf eny of you be mery, let him
singe Psalmes.
14 Yf eny be deseased amonge you, let him call for the elders of the
congregacion, & let the praye ouer him, and anoynte him with oyle in the name of
the LORDE:
15 and ye prayer of faith shal saue the sicke, and the LORDE shal rayse him vp:
and yf he haue comitted synnes, they shalbe forgeuen him.
16 Knowlege youre fautes one to another: and praye one for another, that ye maye
be healed. The prayer of a righteous man auayleth moche, yf it be feruet.
17 Helias was a ma mortall euen as we are, and he prayed in his prayer, that it
might not rayne: & it rayned not on the earth by the space of thre yeares and
sixe monethes.
18 And he prayed agayne, and ye heaue gaue rayne, & ye earth brought forth her
frute.
19 Brethren, yf eny of you erre fro the trueth and another conuert him,
20 let ye same knowe that he which conuerted the synner from goynge astraye out
off his waye, shal saue a soule fro death, and shal hyde the multitude of
synnes.


1 Peter

Chapter 1

1 Peter an Apostle of Iesu Christ, to the that dwell here and there as
straungers thorow out Pontus, Galacia, Capadocia, Asia and Bithinia, electe
2 acordinge to the foreknowlege of God the father thorow sanctifienge of the
sprete, vnto obedience and sprenklynge of the bloude of Iesus Christ. Grace and
peace be multiplied with you.
3 Blessed be God and the father of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, which acordinge to
his greate mercy hath begotten vs agayne vnto a lyuely hope by the resurreccion
of Iesus Christ from the deed,
4 to an vncorruptible and vndefyled inheritaunce, which neuer shal fade awaye,
but is reserued in heauen for you
5 that are kepte by the power of God thorow faith to saluacion, which is
prepared all ready to be shewed in the last tyme:
6 in the which ye shal reioyse, though now for a litle season (yff nede requyre)
ye are in heuynes thorow manyfolde temptacions:
7 that youre faith once tryed (beynge moch more precious then the corruptible
golde that is tryed thorow the fyre) might be founde vnto laude, glory and
honoure at the appearynge of Iesus Christ:
8 whom ye haue not sene, and yet loue him: in whom now ye beleue, though ye se
him not. Euen so shal ye reioyce also with vnoutspeakable and glorious ioye,
9 receauynge the ende of youre faith, euen the saluacion of youre soules.
10 Of which saluacion the prophetes haue enquyred and searched, which prophecied
off the grace that shulde come vpon you:
11 searchinge whan or at what tyme the sprete off Christ that was in them,
shulde signifye, which (sprete) testified before the passions that shulde come
vnto Christ, and the glory that shulde folowe after.
12 Vnto the which (prophetes) it was declared, that not vnto them selues, but
vnto vs they shulde mynister the thinges which are now shewed vnto you, by them
which thorow ye holy goost sent downe from heauen, haue preached vnto you the
thinges which the angels delyte to beholde.
13 Wherfore gyrde op the loynes off youre mynde, be sober, and trust perfectly
on the grace that is brought vnto you, by the declarynge of Iesus Christ,
14 as obedient childre, not fasshionynge youre selues to yor olde lustes of
ignoraunce:
15 but as he which hath called you is holy, eue so be ye holy also in all youre
conuersacion:
16 for it it wrytte: Be ye holy, for I am holy.
17 And yf so be that ye call on the father, which without respecte of personnes
iudgeth acordynge to euery mans worke, se yt ye passe ye tyme of youre
pilgremage in feare:
18 and knowe, that ye were not redemed wt corruptible syluer and golde, from
youre vayne conuersacion (which ye receaued by the tradicios of the fathers)
19 but with the precious bloude of Christ, as of an innocet and vndefyled lambe,
20 which was ordeyned before the worlde was made, but is declared in these last
tymes for youre sakes,
21 which thorow him beleue on God, that raysed him vp from the deed, and hath
geue him the glory, that ye might haue faith & hope in God:
22 Euen ye which haue purifyed youre soules in obeyenge the trueth thorow the
sprete, for to loue brotherly without faynynge, & feruently one to loue another
wt a pure hert,
23 as they that are borne a new, not of corruptible sede, but of vncorruptible,
eue by the lyuynge worde of God, which endureth for euer.
24 For all flesh is as grasse, and all the glory of man is as the floure of
grasse. The grasse withereth, & the floure falleth awaye
25 but the worde of the LORDE endureth for euer. This is the worde, that is
preached amonge you.

Chapter 2

1 Wherfore laye asyde all maliciousnes and all gyle, and ypocrisye, and envye,
and all bacbytinge,
2 & as new borne babes desyre that reasonable mylke, which is without
corrupcion, that ye maye growe therin,
3 yf so be that ye haue taisted how frendly the LORDE is.
4 Vnto whom ye are come, as to the lyuynge stone, which is disalowed of men, but
chosen of God and precious.
5 And ye also as lyuynge stones are made a spirituall house, and an holy
presthode, to offre vp spirituall sacrifices, acceptable vnto God by Iesus
Christ.
6 Wherfore it is conteyned in the scripture: Beholde, I put in Sion an heade
corner stone, electe & precious, and he that beleueth on him, shal not be
cofounded.
7 Vnto you therfore which beleue, he is precious: but vnto them that beleue not,
is ye same stone which the buylders refused, made the heade stone in the corner,
8 and a stone to stomble at, and a rock to be offended at, namely in the which
stomble at ye worde, and beleue not that wheron they were set.
9 But ye are that chosen generacion, that kyngly presthode, that holy nacion,
that peculier people, yt ye shulde shewe the vertues of him, which hath called
you out of darknesse in to his maruelous lighte:
10 Euen you which in tyme past were not a people, but now are the people of God:
which were not vnder mercy, but now haue optayned mercy.
11 Dearly beloued, I beseke you as straungers and pilgrems, absteyne fro the
fleshly lustes, which fighte agaynst the soule,
12 and lede an honest conuersacion amonge the Heythen, that they which bacbyte
you as euell doers, maye se youre good workes, and prayse God in the daye of
visitacion.
13 Submytte youre selues vnto all maner ordinaunce of men for the LORDES sake:
whether it be vnto the kynge as vnto ye chefe heade,
14 or vnto rulers, as vnto them that are sent of him, for the punyshment of
euell doers, but for the prayse of the that do well.
15 For so is the will of God, that ye with well doynge shulde put to sylence the
ignoraunce of folishmen:
16 as fre, and not as hauynge the libertye for a cloke of wickednes, but eue as
the seruauntes of God.
17 Honoure all men. Loue brotherly fellishippe. Feare God. Honoure the kynge.
18 Ye seruautes, obey youre masters with all feare: not onely yf they be good
and curteous, but also though they be frowarde.
19 For that is grace, yf a man for conscience towarde God endure grefe, and
suffre wronge.
20 For what prayse is it, yf wha ye be buffeted for yor fautes, ye take it
paciently? But yf whan ye do well, ye suffre wronge, and take it paciently, that
is grace with God.
21 For here vnto are ye called, for so moch as Christ also suffred for vs,
leauynge vs an ensample, that ye shulde folowe his fotesteppes,
22 which dyd no synne, nether was there gyle founde in his mouth:
23 which whan he was reuyled, reuyled not agayne: wha he suffred, he threatened
not: but commytted the cause vnto him, that iudgeth righteously:
24 which his owne selfe bare oure synnes in his body vpon the tre, that we
shulde be delyuered from synne, & shulde lyue vnto righteousnes: by whose
strypes ye were healed.
25 For ye were as shepe goinge astraye, but now are ye turned vnto the shepherde
and Bisshoppe of youre soules.

Chapter 3

1 Likewyse let the wyues be in subieccion to their hussbandes, that euen they
which beleue not the worde, maye without the worde be wonne by ye couersacion of
the wyues,
2 whan they beholde yor pure conuersacion in feare.
3 Whose apparell shal not be outwarde wt broyded heer, & hanginge on of golde,
or in puttynge on of gorgious araye,
4 but let ye inwarde ma of ye hert be vncorrupte wt a meke & a quyete sprete,
which before God is moch set by.
5 For after this maner in the olde tyme, dyd ye holy weme which trusted in God,
tyer the selues, & were obedient vnto their hussbades:
6 Euen as Sara obeyed Abraham, and called him lorde: whose doughters ye are, as
loge as ye do well, not beynge afrayed for eny trouble.
7 Likewyse ye men, dwell with them acordinge vnto knowlege, geuynge honor vnto
the wife, as to the weaker vessel: & as vnto the yt are heyres with you of the
grace of life, that youre prayers be not let.
8 But in conclusion be ye all of one mynde, one suffre with another, loue as
brethren, be pitefull, be curteous.
9 Recopence not euell for euell, nether rebuke for rebuke: but cotrary wyse,
blesse: and knowe that ye are called therto, euen yt ye shulde be heyres of ye
blessynge.
10 For who so listeth to lyue, and wolde fayne se good dayes, Let him refrayne
his tonge from euell, and his lippes yt they speake no gyle.
11 Let him eschue euell, & do good: Let him seke peace and ensue it.
12 For ye eyes of the LORDE are ouer the righteous, & his eares are open vnto
their prayers. But ye face of the LORDE beholdeth the yt do euell.
13 And who is it that can harme you, yf ye folowe that which is good?
14 Not withstodinge blessed are ye, yf ye suffre for righteousnes sake Feare not
ye their threatnynge, nether be troubled,
15 but sanctifye the LORDE God in youre hertes. Be ready allwayes to geue an
answere to euery ma, that axeth you a reason of the hope that is in you, and
that with mekenes & feare,
16 hauynge a good conscience, that they which bacbyte you as euell doers, maye
be ashamed, that they haue falsely accused youre good couersacion in Christ.
17 For it is better (yf the wyll of God be so) that ye suffre for well doynge,
the for euell doynge.
18 For as moch as Christ hath once suffred for oure synnes, ye iust for the
vniust, for to brynge vs to God: & was slayne after the flesh, but quyckened
after the sprete.
19 In the which sprete he also wente, and preached vnto ye spretes that were in
preson,
20 which in tyme past beleued not, whan God once a bode and suffred pacietly in
the tyme of Noe, whyle the Arke was a preparynge: Wherin fewe (that is to saye
eight soules) were saued by water.
21 Which signifieth baptyme yt now saueth vs: not ye puttinge awaye of the fylth
of the flesh, but in yt a good cosciece cosenteth vnto God by ye resurreccion of
Iesus Christ,
22 which is on the righte hande of God, and is gone in to heaue, angels, power
and mighte subdued vnto him.

Chapter 4

1 For as moch then as Christ hath suffred for vs in ye flesh, arme youre selues
likewyse with the same mynde. For he which suffreth in the flesh, ceasseth fro
synne,
2 yt hece forth (as moch tyme as yet remayneth in ye flesh) he shulde not lyue
after the lustes of me, but after the wil of God.
3 For it is ynough, yt we haue spent ye tyme past of the life, after the will of
ye Heythen, wha we walked in wantannesse, lustes, dronkenes, glotony, ryotous
drynkynge, & i abhominable Idolatrye.
4 And it semeth to the a straunge thinge, yt ye runne not also wt them vnto the
same excesse of ryote, & speake euell of you.
5 (Which shal geue acoptes vnto hi yt is ready to iudge ye quycke & ye deed.)
6 For vnto this purpose also was ye Gospell preached vnto the deed, yt they
shulde be iudged like other me i ye flesh, but shulde lyue vnto God in ye
sprete.
7 The ende of all thiges is at hade.Be ye therfore sober & watch vnto prayers:
8 but aboue all thinges haue feruent loue amonge you one to another. For loue
couereth the multitude of synnes.
9 Be ye herberous one to another without grudginge,
10 & mynister one to another, eueryone with the gifte yt he hath receaued, as
good stewardes of the manifolde grace of God.
11 Yf eny ma speake, let hi speake it as ye wordes of God. Yf eny man haue an
office, let him execute it as out of the power yt God mynistreth vnto hi, yt God
maye be praysed in all thinges thorow Iesus Christ, To who be honor and domynion
for euer and euer Amen.
12 Derely beloued, maruell not at this heate (which is come amoge you to trye
you) as though some strauge thinge happened vnto you:
13 but reioyce, in as moch as ye are partakers of Christes passios, yt wha his
glory appeareth, ye maye be mery & glad.
14 Yf ye be reuyled for ye name of Christ, blessed are ye, for ye sprete (which
is ye sprete of glory & of God) resteth vpon you. On their parte he is euell
spoken of, but on yor parte he is praysed.
15 But se that none of you suffre as a murthurer, or as a thefe, or as an euell
doer, or as a busy body in other mens matters.
16 Yf eny man suffre as a Christen man, let him not be ashamed, but let him
prayse God on this behalfe.
17 For ye tyme is come, that iudgmet must begynne at the house of God. Yf it
first begynne at vs, what shal the ende be of the which beleue not the Gospell
of God?
18 And yf ye righteous scacely be saued, where shal ye vngodly & synner appeare?
19 Wherfore let them that suffer acordynge to the will off God, commytte their
soules vnto him with well doynge, as to the faithfull creator.

Chapter 5

1 The Elders which are amonge you I exhorte, which am also an Elder, and a
witnes off the affliccions in Christ, and partaker of the glory that shalbe
opened.
2 Fede Christes flocke which is amonge you, and take the ouersighte of the, not
as though ye were copelled therto, but wyllingly: not for the desyre of filthye
lucre, but of a good mynde:
3 not as though ye were lordes ouer the parishes, but that ye be an ensample to
the flocke:
4 & whan the chefe shepherde shal appeare, ye shal receaue the vncorruptible
crowne of glory.
5 Likewyse ye yoger submytte youre selues vnto the elder. Submytte youre selues
euery man one to another, and knyt yor selues together in lowlynes of mynde. For
God resisteth the proude, but geueth grace to the humble.
6 Submytte yor selues therfore vnder the mightie hande of God, that he maye
exalte you whan the tyme is come.
7 Cast all youre care on him, for he careth for you.
8 Be sober and watch, for yor aduersary ye deuell, walketh aboute as a roaringe
lyon, sekynge whom he maye deuoure,
9 whome resiste stedfast in the faith, and knowe, that youre brethren in the
worlde haue euen the same affliccions.
10 But ye God of all grace, which hath called you to his euerlastinge glory in
Christ Iesu, shal his owne selfe make you perfecte, which suffre a litle season:
eue he shal settle, strength, and stablish you.
11 To him be prayse and domynion for euer and euer, Amen.
12 By Siluanus youre faithfull brother (as I suppose) haue I wrytte vnto you
breuely, exhortinge and testifyenge, how that this is the true grace of God
wherin ye stode.
13 The companyons of youre eleccion that are at Babilon, salute you, and Marcus
my sonne.
14 Grete ye one another with the kysse of loue. Peace be with you all which are
in Christ Iesus, Amen.


2 Peter

Chapter 1

1 Symon Peter a seruaut and an Apostle of Iesus Christ.Vnto the which haue
optayned like faith with vs in the righteousnes that commeth of oure God, and
Sauioure Iesus Christ.
2 Grace and peace be multiplied with you thorow the knowlege of God and of Iesus
Christ oure LORDE.
3 For so moch as his godly power hath geuen vs all thinges (that pertayne vnto
life and godlynes) thorow the knowlege of him that hath called vs by his owne
glorie and power,
4 wherby the excellent and most greate promyses are geue vnto vs: namely, that
ye by the same shulde be partakers of the godly nature, yf ye flye the corrupte
lust of the worlde:
5 Geue ye all youre diligence therfore here vnto, and in youre faith mynister
vertue: in vertue, knowlege:
6 in knowlege, temperancy: in temperancy, pacience: in pacience, godlynes:
7 in godlynes, brotherly loue: in brotherly loue, generall loue.
8 For yf these thinges be plenteous in you, they will not let you be ydle nor
vnfrutefull in ye knowlege of oure LORDE Iesus Christ.
9 But he that lacketh these thinges, is blynde, & gropeth for the waye with the
hade, and hath forgotten, that he was clensed from his olde synnes.
10 Wherfore (brethre) geue the more diligence, to make youre callynge and
eleccion sure: for yf ye do soch thinges, ye shal not fall,
11 and by this meanes shal there be plenteously mynistred vnto you an entrynge
in vnto ye euerlastinge kyngdome of oure LORDE and Sauioure Iesus Christ.
12 Therfore wil I not be necliget to put you allwayes in remembraunce of soch
thinges: though ye knowe them youre selues, and be stablished in the present
trueth.
13 Notwithstondinge I thinke it mete, as loge as I am in this tabernacle, to
stere you vp by puttinge you in remembraunce.
14 For I am sure, that I must shortly put of my tabernacle, euen as oure LORDE
Iesus Christ hath shewed vnto me.
15 Yet wyl I do my diligece, that allwaye after my departynge ye maye haue
wherwith to kepe these thinges in remembraunce.
16 For we folowed not deceaueable fables, whan we declared vnto you the power
and commynge of oure LORDE Iesus Christ: but with oure eyes we sawe his
maiestie,
17 whan he receaued of God the father honoure & prayse, by a voyce that came
vnto him from the excellent glory, after this maner: This is my deare sonne, in
whom I haue delyte.
18 And this voyce herde we broughte downe fro heauen, whan we were with him on
the holy mount.
19 We haue also a sure worde of prophecie, and ye do well that ye take hede
thervnto, as vnto a lighte that shyneth in a darke place vntyll the daye dawne,
and the daye starre aryse in youre hertes.
20 And this shal ye knowe first, that no prophecie in the scripture is done of
eny priuate interpretacion.
21 For the prophecie was neuer broughte by the wyll of man, but the holy men of
God spake, as they were moued of ye holy goost.

Chapter 2

1 Bvt there were false prophetes also amonge the people, euen as there shalbe
false teachers amonge you likewyse, which preuely shal brynge in damnable
sectes, euen denyenge the LORDE that hath boughte them, and shal brynge vpon
them selues swift damnacion:
2 and many shal folowe their damnable wayes, by who the waye of the trueth shal
be euell spoke of:
3 and thorow cuvetousnes shal they with fayned wordes make marchaundise of you,
vpo who the iudgment is not necliget in tarienge of olde, and their damnacion
slepeth not.
4 For yf God spared not the angels that synned, but cast them downe with the
cheynes of darknes in to hell, and delyuered the ouer to be kepte vnto iudgment:
5 Nether spared the olde worlde, but saued Noe the preacher of righteousnes
himselfe beynge ye eight, and brought the floude vpo the worlde of the vngodly:
6 And turned the cities of Sodom and Gomor into asshes, ouerthrue them, damned
them, and made on them an ensample, vnto those that after shulde lyue vngodly:
7 And delyuered iust Loth which was vexed with the vngodly conuersacion of ye
wicked.
8 For in so moch as he was righteous and dwelt amonge them, so that he must
nedes se it and heare it, his righteous soule was greued from to daye to daye
with their vnlaufull dedes.
9 The LORDE knoweth how to delyuer the godly out of tentacion, and how to
reserue the vniust vnto the daye of iudgment for to be punyshed:
10 but specially them that walke after the flesh in ye lust of vnclennes, and
despyse the rulers: beynge presumptuous, stubborne, and feare not to speake
euell of the yt are in auctorite
11 wha the angels yet which are greater both in power and might, beare not that
blasphemous iudgment agaynst them of the LORDE.
12 But these are as ye brute beestes, which naturally are broughte forth to be
take and destroyed: speakynge euell of yt they knowe not, and shal perishe in
their owne destruccion,
13 and so receaue ye rewarde of vnrighteousnes.They counte it pleasure to lyue
deliciously for a season: Spottes are they and fylthynes: lyuynge at pleasure
and in disceaueable wayes: feastynge wt that which is youres,
14 hauynge eyes full of aduoutrye, and ca not ceasse from synne, entysinge
vnstable soules: hauynge an hert exercysed wt couetousnes: they are cursed
children,
15 and haue forsaken the righte waye, and are gone astraye: folowinge the waye
of Balaam the sonne of Bosor, which loued the rewarde of vnrighteousnes:
16 but was rebuked of his iniquyte. The tame and domme beast spake with mas
voyce, & forbad the foolishnes of ye prophet.
17 These are welles without water, & cloudes caried aboute of a tepest: to who
ye myst of darknesse is reserued foreuer.
18 For they speake ye proude wordes of vanite, vnto ye vttemost, and entyse
thorow wantannes vnto ye luste of the flesh, euen them that were cleane escaped,
and now walke in erroure:
19 and promyse them libertye, where as they them selues are seruauntes off
corrupcion. For off whom so euer a man is ouercome, vnto the same is he in
bondage.
20 For yf they (after they haue escaped from the fylthynes of the worlde, thorow
the knowlege of ye LORDE and Sauioure Iesus Christ) are yet tangled agayne
therin and ouercome, then is the latter ende worse vnto them then the
begynnynge.
21 For it had bene better for them, not to haue knowne the waye of righteousnes,
then after they haue knowne it, to turne from the holy commaundemet, that was
geuen vnto them.
22 It is happened vnto them acordynge vnto the true prouerbe: ye dogg is turned
to his vomyte agayne: and ye sowe that was wasshed, vnto hir walowynge in the
myre.

Chapter 3

1 This is the seconde Epistle that I now wryte vnto you (ye dearly beloued)
wherin I stere vp and warne youre pure mynde, that ye maye remembre
2 the wordes, which were tolde before of the holy prophetes: and also the
commaundement of vs, that be the Apostles of the LORDE and Sauioure.
3 This first vnderstonde, that in the last dayes there shal come mockers, which
wyll walke after their awne lustes,
4 & saye: Where is the promes of his commynge? For sence the fathers fell on
slepe, euery thinge contynueth as it was from the begynnynge of ye creature.
5 This they knowe not (and that wylfully) how that the heauens were afore tyme
also, and the earth out of the water, & was in the water by the worde of God,
6 yet was the worlde at that tyme destroyed by the same with the floude.
7 But the heauens which are yet, and ye earth, are kepte in stoare by his worde,
to be reserued vnto fyre agaynst the daye of iudgment and damnacion of vngodly
men.
8 Dearly beloued, be not ignoraunt of this one thinge, how that one daye is with
the LORDE as a thousande yeare: and a thousande yeare as one daye.
9 The LORDE is not slacke to fulfyll his promes (as some me counte slacknesse)
but is paciet to vs warde, and wyl not that eny ma shulde be lost, but that
euery man shulde amende himselfe.
10 Neuertheles the daye of the LORDE shal come euen as a thefe in the night: in
the which (daye) the heauens shal perishe with a greate noyse, and the Elementes
shal melte with heate, and the earth and ye workes that are therin, shal burne.
11 Yf all these thinges shal perishe, what maner persons then ought ye to be in
holy couersacion and godlynes,
12 lokynge for and hastynge vnto the commynge of the LORDE? In the which the
heauens shal perishe with fyre, and the elementes shal melt with heate.
13 Neuertheles we loke for a new heauen and a new earth (acordynge to his
promes) wherin dwelleth righteousnes.
14 Wherfore dearly beloued, seynge that ye loke for soch thinges, be diligent,
yt ye maye be founde before him in peace without spot and vndefyled:
15 and counte the longsufferynge of oure LORDE youre saluacion, Euen as oure
dearly beloued brother Paul (acordinge to the wyssdome geue vnto him) wrote vnto
you:
16 yee speakinge therof allmost in all Epistles, wherin are many thinges harde
to be vnderstonde, which they that are vnlerned and vnstable, peruerte, as they
do the other scriptures also, to their awne danacion.
17 Ye therfore beloued, seynge ye knowe it before hande, bewarre, lest ye also
be plucte awaye thorow the erroure of ye wicked, and fall from yor owne
stedfastnes.
18 But growe in grace, and in the knowlege of oure LORDE and Sauioure Iesus
Christ. To him be prayse now and for euer, Amen.


1 John

Chapter 1

1 That which was from ye begynnynge, which we haue herde, which we haue sene
with or eyes, which we haue loked vpon, and or handes haue handled of the worde
of life:
2 and the life hath appeared, and we haue sene, and beare wytnes, and shewe vnto
you ye life that is euerlastinge, which was with the father, and hath apeared
vnto vs.
3 That which we haue sene & herde, declare we vnto you, that ye also maye haue
fellishippe with vs, and that oure fellishippe maye be with the father and with
his sonne Iesus Christ.
4 And this wryte we vnto you, that youre ioye maye be full.
5 And this is the tydinges which we haue herde of him, & declare vnto you, that
God is lighte, and in him is no darknes at all.
6 Yf we saye that we haue fellishippe with him, and yet walke in darknes, we
lye, and do not the trueth.
7 But yf we walke in lighte, euen as he is in lighte, then haue we fellishippe
together, and the bloude of Iesus Christ his sonne clenseth vs from all synne.
8 Yf we saye that we haue no synne, we disceaue oure selues, and the trueth is
not in vs.
9 But yf we knowlege oure synnes, he is faithfull and iust to forgeue vs oure
synnes, & to clense vs from all vnrighteousnes.
10 Yf we saye, we haue not synned, we make him a lyar, and his worde is not in
vs.

Chapter 2

1 My litle children, these thinges wryte I vnto you, that ye shulde not synne:
and yf eny man synne, we haue an aduocate with the father, euen Iesus Christ
which is righteous:
2 and he it is that optayneth grace for oure synnes: not for oure synnes onely,
but also for the synnes of all the worlde.
3 And hereby are we sure that we knowe him, yf we kepe his comaundemetes.
4 He that sayeth: I knowe him, and kepeth not his comaundemetes, is a lyar, and
the trueth is not in him,
5 But who so kepeth his worde, in him is the loue of God perfecte in dede.
Hereby knowe we, that we are in him.
6 He yt sayeth he abydeth in him, oughte to walke euen as he walked.
7 Brethren, I wryte no new commaundement vnto you, but that olde commaundement,
which ye haue herde from the begynnynge.
8 The olde comaundement is the worde, which ye haue herde from the begynnynge.
Agayne, a new comaundemet wryte I vnto you, a thinge that is true in him & also
in you: for the darknesse is past, and the true lighte now shyneth.
9 He that sayeth he is in lighte, and hateth his brother, is yet in darknesse.
10 He yt loueth his brother, abydeth in the lighte, and there is none occasion
of euell in him.
11 But he yt hateth his brother, is in darknes, and walketh in darknes, and can
not tell whither he goeth, for ye darknes hath blynded his eyes.
12 Babes, I wryte vnto you, that yor synnes are forgeuen you for his names sake.
13 I wryte vnto you fathers, how that ye haue knowne him which is from ye
begynnynge. I wryte vnto you yonge me, how that ye haue euercome the wicked. I
wryte vnto you litle children, how that ye haue knowne the father.
14 I haue wrytten vnto you fathers, how that ye haue knowne him, which is fro
the begynnynge. I haue wrytten vnto you yonge men, how that ye are stronge, and
the worde of God abydeth in you, and ye haue ouercome that wicked.
15 Se that ye loue not the worlde, nether ye thinges that are in the worlde. Yf
eny man loue the worlde, the loue of the father is not in him:
16 for all that is in the worlde (namely the lust of the flesh, and the lust of
the eyes, and the pryde of life) is not of the father, but of the worlde.
17 And the worlde passeth awaye and the lust therof. But he that fulfylleth the
wyll of God, abydeth for euer.
18 Litle children, it is the last houre, and (as ye haue herde that Antechrist
shal come) euen now are there many become Antechristes allready: wherby we
knowe, that it is ye last houre.
19 They wente out fro vs, but they were not of vs: for yf they had bene of vs,
they wolde no doute haue contynued with vs. But that they maye be knowne, how
that they are not all of vs.
20 But ye haue the anoyntinge of him yt is holy, & ye knowe all thiges.
21 I haue not wrytte vnto you, as though ye knewe not ye trueth but ye knowe it,
& are sure, yt no lye cometh of ye trueth.
22 Who is a lyar, but he yt denyeth yt Iesus is Christ? The same is ye
Antichrist, yt denyeth the father & ye sonne.
23 Whosoeuer denyeth the sonne, the same hath not the father.
24 Loke what ye haue herde now from ye begynnynge, let the same abyde in you. Yf
yt which he herde from the begynnynge shal remayne in you, then shal ye also
abyde in ye sonne and in the father.
25 And this is the promes yt he hath promysed vs, eue eternall life.
26 This haue I wrytte vnto you cocerninge the that disceaue you.
27 And the anoyntinge which ye haue receaued of him, dwelleth in you: & ye nede
not yt eny ma teach you, but as the anoyntinge teacheth you all thiges, euen so
is it true, & is no lye. And as it hath taughte you, eue so abide ye therin.
28 And now babes, abyde in hi, yt wha he shal appeare, we maye be bolde, & not
be made ashamed of him at his commynge.
29 Yf ye knowe yt he is righteous, knowe also that he which doth righteousnes,
is borne of him.

Chapter 3

1 Beholde what loue the father hath shewed on vs, yt we shulde be called the
childre of God. Therfore ye worlde knoweth you not, because it knoweth not him.
2 Dearly beloued, we are now ye childre of God, and yet hath it not appeared
what we shalbe. But we knowe yt when he shal appeare, we shal be like him: for
we shal se him as he is.
3 And euery man yt hath this hope in him, pourgeth him selfe, euen as he is
pure.
4 Who so euer comytteth synne, comytteth vnrighteousnes also, and synne is
vnrighteousnes.
5 And ye knowe that he appeared to take awaye oure synnes: and in him is no
synne.
6 Who so euer abydeth in him, synneth not: who soeuer synneth, hath not sene him
nether knowne him.
7 Babes, let noman disceaue you. He that doeth righteousnes, is righteous, euen
as he is righteous.
8 He that commytteth synne, is of the deuell: for the deuell synneth sence ye
begynnynge. For this purpose appeared the sonne of God, to lowse the workes of
the deuell.
9 Who so euer is borne of God, synneth not: for his sede remayneth in him, & he
ca not synne, because he is borne of God.
10 By this are the children of God knowne & the children of the deuell. Who so
euer doeth not righteousnes, is not of God, nether he thath loueth not his
brother.
11 For this is the tydinges which ye haue herde from the begynnynge, that ye
shulde loue one another,
12 not as Cain, which was of the wicked, and slewe his brother. And wherfore
slewe he him? euen because his awne workes were euell, and his brothers
righteous.
13 Maruayle not (my brethren) though the worlde hate you.
14 We knowe yt we are traslated from death vnto life, because we loue the
brethren. He that loueth not his brother, abydeth in death.
15 Who soeuer hateth his brother, is a mansleyer. And ye knowe that a mansleyer
hath not eternall life abydinge in him.
16 Hereby haue we perceaued loue, that he gaue his life for vs, and therfore
ought we also to geue oure lyues for the brethre.
17 But he yt hath this worldes good, & seyth his brother haue nede, and shutteth
vp his hert fro him, how dwelleth the loue of God in him?
18 My litle children, let vs not loue with worde nether with tonge, but with ye
dede, and with the trueth.
19 Hereby knowe we, that we are of the verite, and can quyete oure hertes before
him.
20 But yf oure hert condemne vs, God is greater the oure hert, and knoweth all
thinges.
21 Dearly beloued, yf oure hert condemne vs not, then haue we a fre boldnes to
God warde.
22 And what so euer we axe, we shal receaue it: because we kepe his
comaundemetes, and do those thinges, which are pleasaunt in his sighte.
23 And this is his comaundement, that we beleue on ye name of his sonne Iesus
Christ, and loue one another, as he gaue commaundement.
24 And he that kepeth his commaundementes, dwelleth in him, and he in him. And
hereby knowe we that he abydeth in vs, euen by the sprete which he hath geuen
vs.

Chapter 4

1 Dearly beleued, beleue not ye euery sprete, but proue the spretes, whether
they be of God. For many false prophetes are gone out in to the worlde.
2 Hereby shal ye knowe the sprete of God: Euery sprete which confesseth, that
Iesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God:
3 And euery sprete which confesseth not that Iesus Christ is come in the flesh,
is not off God. And this is that sprete of Antechrist, off whom ye haue herde,
how that he shal come, and euen now allready is he in the worlde.
4 Litle children, ye are off God, and haue ouercome them: for greater is he that
is in you, then he that is in the worlde.
5 They are off the worlde, therfore speake they off the worlde, and the worlde
herkeneth vnto them.
6 We are of God, and he that knoweth God, herkeneth vnto vs: he that is not of
God, heareth vs not. Here by knowe we the sprete of trueth, and ye sprete of
erroure.
7 Dearly beloued, let vs loue one another, for loue commeth of God. And euery
one yt loueth, is borne of God, and knoweth God.
8 He that loueth not, knoweth not God: for God is loue.
9 By this appeared the loue of God to vs warde, because that God sent his onely
begotten sonne in to this worlde, that we mighte lyue thorow him.
10 Herein is loue, not that we loued God, but that he loued vs, and sent his
sonne to make agremet for oure synnes.
11 Dearly beloued, yf God so loued vs, we oughte also to loue one another.
12 No man hath sene God at eny tyme. Yf we loue one another, God dwelleth in vs,
and his loue is perfecte in vs.
13 Hereby knowe we that we dwell in him, and he in vs, because he hath geuen vs
of his sprete.
14 And we haue sene, & testifye that the father sent the sonne to be the
Sauioure of the worlde.
15 Whosoeuer now confesseth yt Iesus is the sonne of God in him dwelleth God,
and he in God:
16 and we haue knowne and beleued the loue that God hath to vs. God is loue, and
he that dwelleth in loue dwelleth in God, and God in him.
17 Here in is the loue perfecte with vs, that we shulde haue a fre boldnesse in
the daye of iudgment: for as he is, eue so are we in this worlde.
18 Feare is not in loue, but perfecte loue casteth out feare: for feare hath
paynefulnes. He that feareth, is not perfecte in loue.
19 Let vs loue him, for he loued vs first.
20 Yf eny man saye: I loue God, & yet hateth his brother, he is a lyar. For he
that loueth not his brother whom he seyth, how can he loue God, whom he seyth
not?
21 And this comaundement haue we of him, that he which loueth God, shulde loue
his brother also.

Chapter 5

1 Who so euer beleueth that Iesus is Christ, is borne of God. And who soeuer
loueth him that begat, loueth him also which was begotten of him.
2 By this we knowe that we loue Gods children, whan we loue God, and kepe his
commaundementes.
3 For this is the loue of God, that we kepe his commaundementes, and his
commaundemetes are not greuous.
4 For all that is borne of God, ouercommeth the worlde: and this is the victory
that ouercommeth the worlde, eue oure faith.
5 Who is it yt ouercommeth the worlde, but he which beleueth that Iesus is the
sonne of God?
6 This is he that cometh with water and bloude, euen Iesus Christ: not with
water onely, but with water and bloude. And it is the sprete that beareth
wytnes: for the sprete is the trueth.
7 (For there are thre which beare recorde in heauen: the father, the worde, and
the holy goost, & these thre are one.)
8 And there are thre which beare recorde in earth: the sprete, water and bloude,
and these thre are one.
9 Yf we receaue the witnesse of men, the witnesse of God is greater: for this is
the wytnesse of God, which he testifyed of his sonne.
10 He that beleueth on ye sonne of God, hath the wytnes in him selfe. He that
beleueth not God, hath made him a lyar.
11 And this is that recorde, euen yt God hath geue vs euerlastinge life. And
this life is in his sonne.
12 He that hath the sonne of God, hath life: He that hath not the sonne of God,
hath not life.
13 These thinges haue I wrytte vnto you, which beleue on the name of the sonne
of God, that ye maye knowe, how that ye haue eternall life, and that ye maye
beleue on ye name of the sonne of God.
14 And this is the fre boldnesse which we haue towarde him, that yf we axe eny
thinge acordinge to his wyll, he heareth vs.
15 And yf we knowe that he heareth vs what so euer we axe, then are we sure that
we haue ye peticions, which we haue desyred of him.
16 Yf eny man se his brother synne a synne not vnto death, let him axe, and he
shal geue him life, for the yt synne not vnto death. There is a synne vnto
death, for the which saye I not that a man shulde praye.
17 All vnrighteousnes is synne, and there is synne not vnto death.
18 We knowe, that whosoeuer is borne off God, synneth not: but he that is
begotte of God, kepeth himselfe, & yt wicked toucheth him not.
19 We knowe that we are of God, & the worlde is set alltogether on wickednes.
20 But we knowe, that the sonne of God is come, and hath geuen vs a mynde, to
knowe him which is true: and we are in him yt is true, in his sonne Iesu Christ.
This is the true God, and euerlastinge life.
21 Babes kepe youre selues from ymages. Amen.


2 John

Chapter 1

1 The Elder. To ye electe lady and hir childre whom I loue in the trueth: & not
I onely, but all they also that haue knowne the trueth,
2 for the truthes sake which dwelleth in vs, and shalbe with vs for euer.
3 Grace, mercy, and peace be with you fro the LORDE Iesus Christ ye sonne of the
father in the trueth and in loue.
4 I am greatly reioysed, that I haue founde amonge thy children, them that walke
in ye trueth, as we haue receaued a commaundement of the father.
5 And now lady I beseke the (not as though I wrote a new commaundement vnto the,
but the same which we haue had from the begynnynge) that we loue one another.
6 And this is the loue, that we walke after his commaundementes. This is the
commaundement (as ye haue herde fro the begynnynge) that we shulde walke therin.
7 For many disceauers are come in to the worlde, which confesse not yt Iesus
Christ is come in the flesh: this is a disceauer and an Antechrist.
8 Take hede to youre selues, that we lose not that which we haue wrought, but
that we maye receaue a full rewarde.
9 Whoso euer transgresseth, and abydeth not in the doctryne of Christ, hath not
God: he that abydeth in ye doctryne of Christ, hath both the father and the
sonne.
10 Yf eny man come vnto you, and brynge not this doctryne, receaue him not in to
the house, nether salute him:
11 for he that saluteth him, is partaker of his euell dedes.
12 I had many thinges to wryte vnto you: neuertheles I wolde not wryte wt papyre
and ynke, but I trust to come vnto you, and to speake with you mouth mouth, that
oure ioye maye be full.
13 The children of thy electe sister salute the. Amen.


3 John

Chapter 1

1 The Elder. To the beloued Gaius, whom I loue in the trueth.
2 My beloued, I wysshe in all thinges, that thou prospere and fare well euen as
thy soule prospereth.
3 I reioysed greatly, whan the brethren came, and testified of the trueth that
is in ye, how thou walkest in the trueth.
4 I haue no greater ioye, the to heare that my childre walke in the trueth.
5 My beloued, thou doest faithfully what so euer thou doest to the brethren and
to straugers,
6 which haue borne witnesse of thy loue before the congregacion: and thou hast
done well that thou dyddest brynge them forwarde on their iourney, worthely
before God.
7 For because of his names sake they wente forth, and toke nothinge of the
Heythen.
8 We therfore oughte to receaue soch, that we mighte be helpers vnto the trueth.
9 I wrote to the congregacion, but Diotriphes, which loueth to haue the
preemynence amonge them, receaued vs not.
10 Wherfore, yf I come, I wil declare his dedes which he doeth, ieastinge vpo vs
with malicious wordes: nether is he therwith cotent. Not onely he himselfe
receaueth not the brethre, but also he forbyddeth them that wolde, and thrusteth
them out of the congregacion.
11 My beloued, folowe not yt which is euell, but that which is good. He that
doeth well, is of God: but he that doeth euell, seyth not God.
12 Demetrius hath good reporte of all men, and of the trueth: yee and we oure
selues also beare recorde, and ye knowe that oure recorde is true.
13 I had many thinges to wryte, but I wolde not with ynke, and pen wryte vnto
the.
14 But I trust shortly to se the and so wyl we speake together mouth to mouth.


Jude

Chapter 1

1 Ivdas the seruaunt of Iesus Christ, the brother off Iames. To the which are
called, and sanctified in God the father, and preserued in Iesu Christ.
2 Mercy vnto you, and peace and loue be multiplied.
3 Beloued, when I gaue all diligence to wryte vnto you of the commen saluacion:
it was nedefull for me to wryte vnto you, to exhorte you, that ye shulde
continually laboure in the faith which was once geue vnto the sayntes.
4 For there are certayne craftely crept in, of which it was wrytten afore tyme
vnto soche iudgement. They are vngodly, and turne the grace of oure God vnto
wantanes, and denye God the onely LORDE, and oure LORDE Iesus Christ.
5 My minde is therfore to put you in remebrauce, for as moche as ye once knowe
this, how that ye LORDE (after that he had deliuered the people out of Egipt)
destroyed them which afterwarde beleued not.
6 The angels also which kept not their first estate: but lefte their awne
habitacion, he hath reserued in euerlastinge chaynes vnder darcknes vnto the
iudgement of the greate daye:
7 euen as Sodom and Gomor, and the cities aboute them (which in lyke maner
defiled them selues with fornicacion and folowed straunge flesshe) are set forth
for an ensample, and suffre the vengeaunce of eternall fyre.
8 Lykewyse these dremers defyle the flesshe despyse rulers, and speake euell of
them that are in auctoritie.
9 Yet Michael the archangell when he stroue agaynst the deuell, & disputed
aboute the body of Moses, durst not geue raylinge sentence, but sayde: the LORDE
rebuke the.
10 But these speake euell off those thinges which they knowe not: and what
thinges they knowe naturally, as beastes which are without reason, in tho
thinges they corrupte them selues.
11 Wo be vnto the, for they haue folowed the waye of Cain, and are vtterly geue
to the erroure of Balaam for lukers sake, and perysshe in the treason of Core.
12 These are spottes which of youre kindnes feast togedder, without feare,
fedynge the selues. Cloudes they are withouten water, caried about of wyndes,
and trees without frute at gadringe tyme, twyse deed and plucked vp by the
rotes.
13 They are the ragynge waues of the see, fominge out their awne shame. They are
wandrynge starres, to who is reserued the myst of darcknes for euer.
14 Enoch the seuenth from Adam prophecied before of suche, saienge: Beholde, the
LORDE shal come with thousandes of sayntes,
15 to geue iudgemet agaynst all men, and to rebuke all that are vngodly amonge
the, of all their vngodly dedes, which they haue vngodly committed, and of all
their cruell speakynges, which vngodly synners haue spoken agaynst him.
16 These are murmurers, complaners, walkynge after their awne lustes, whose
mouthes speake proude thynges. They haue me in greate reuerence because of
avauntage.
17 But ye beloued, remeber the wordes which were spoken before of the Apostles
of oure LORDE Iesus Christ,
18 how that they tolde you yt their shulde be begylers in the last tyme, which
shulde walke after their awne vngodly lustes.
19 These are makers off sectes fleshlie, hauynge no sprete.
20 But ye derlye beloued, edifye youre selues in youre most holy faith, prayenge
in the holy goost,
21 and kepe youre selues in the loue of God, lokinge for the mercy of oure LORDE
Iesus Christ, vnto eternall life.
22 And haue copassion on some, separatinge the:
23 and other saue with feare, pullinge them out of the fyre, and hate the fylthy
vesture of the fleshe.
24 Vnto him that is able to kepe you, that ye faule not, and to present you
fautlesse before ye presence of his glory with ioye,
25 yt is to saye, to God oure saueoure which only is wyse, be glory, maiestie,
dominion, & power, now and for euer. Amen.


Revelation

Chapter 1

1 The reuelacion of Iesus Christ, which God gaue vnto him, for to shewe vnto his
seruautes thiges which muste shortly come to passe. And he sent and shewed by
his angel vnto his seruaunt Ihon
2 which bare recorde of the worde of God, and of the testimony of Iesus Christe,
and of all thinges that he sawe.
3 Happy is he yt readeth, and they that heare the wordes of the prophesy and
kepe thoo thinges which are wrytten therin. For the tyme is at honde.
4 Ihon to the seuen cogregacions in Asia. Grace be with you & peace, fro him
which is and which was, and which is to come, & fro the seuen spretes which are
present before his trone,
5 and from Iesus Christ which is a faithfull witnes, and first begotten of the
deed: & LORDE ouer ye kinges of the earth. Vnto him that loued vs and wesshed vs
fro synnes in his awne bloud,
6 and made vs kinges & Prestes vnto God his father, be glory, and dominion for
euer more. Amen.
7 Beholde, he commeth with cloudes, and all eyes shall se him: & they also which
peersed him. And all kinredes of the earth shal wayle. Euen so. Amen.
8 I am Alpha and Omega, the begynninge and the endinge, sayteh ye LORDE
almighty, which is and which was and which is to come.
9 I Ihon youre brother and copanyon in tribulacion, and in the kyngdome and
paciece which is in Iesu Christe, was in the yle of Pathmos for the worde of
God, and for ye witnessynge of Iesu Christe.
10 I was in the sprete on a sondaye, and herde behynde me, a gret voyce, as it
had bene of a trompe,
11 sayenge: I am Alpha and Omega, the fyrst and ye laste. That thou seist, write
in a boke, and sende it vnto the cogregacions which are in Asia, vnto Ephesus
and vnto Smyrna, and vnto Pargamos, and vnto Thiatira, and vnto Sardis, and vnto
Philadelphia, and vnto Laodicia.
12 And I turned backe to se the voyce that spake to me. And whe I was turned: I
sawe seue golde candestyckes,
13 and in the myddes of the candelstyckes, one like vnto the sonne of man
clothed with a lynnin garmet downe to the ground, and gyrd aboute the brest with
a golden gyrdle.
14 His heed, and his heares were whyte, as whyte woll, & as snowe: and his eyes
were as a flamme of fyre:
15 and his fete like vnto brasse, as though they bret in a fornace: and his
voyce as the sounde of many waters.
16 And he had in his right honde seue starres. And out of his mouth went a
sharpe two edged swearde. And his face shone euen as the sonne in his strength.
17 And when I sawe him, I fell at his fete, euen as deed. And he layde his right
honde vpon me, sayenge vnto me: feare not. I am the fyrst, and the laste,
18 and am alyue, and was deed. And beholde, I am alyue for euer more and haue
the kayes of hell & of deth.
19 Wryte therfore the thinges which thou hast sene, and the thinges which are,
and ye thinges which shalbe fulfylled here after:
20 & the mistery of the seuen starres which thou sawest in my right honde, and
the seuen golden candelstickes. The seuen starres are the angels of the seue
congregacions: And the seuen candelstyckes which thou sawest, are the seuen
congregacions.

Chapter 2

1 Vnto the angell of the congregacion of Ephesus wryte: These thinges sayth he
that holdeth the seuen starres in his righthonde, and walketh in the myddes of
the seuen golde candelstickes:
2 I knowe thy workes, and thy labour, and thy pacience, & howe thou cannest not
forbeare them which are euell: and examinest them which saye they are Apostles,
and are not: & hast founde the lyars
3 and hast suffred. And hast paciece: and for my names sake hast laboured and
hast not faynted.
4 Neuerthelesse I haue somwhat agaynst the, for thou hast lefte thy fyrst loue.
5 Remember therfore fro whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the fyrst
workes. Or elles I wyl come vnto the shortly, and wil remoue thy cadelstycke out
of his place, excepte thou repent.
6 But this thou hast because thou hatest ye dedes of the Nicolaitans, which
dedes I also hate.
7 Let him yt hath eares, heare, what ye sprete saith vnto the congregacions. To
him that ouercommeth, will I geue to eate of the tree of life, which is in the
myddes of ye paradise of God.
8 And vnto the angell of the congregacion of Smyrna wryte: These thinges saith
he that is fyrst, and the last, which was deed, and is aliue:
9 I knowe thy workes and tribulacion and pouerte, but thou art ryche: And I
knowe the blaspheny of them which call them selues Iewes and are not: but are
the cogregacion of Sathan.
10 Feare none of tho thinges which thou shalt soffre. Beholde, ye deuell shal
cast of you in to preson, to tempte you, and ye shal haue tribulacion x. dayes.
Be faithfull vnto the deeth, and I wil geue ye a crowne of life.
11 Let him that hath ears, heare, what the sprete saith to the congregacions: He
that ouercometh, shal not be hurte of the seconde deeth.
12 And to the angell of the congregacion in Pergamos wryte: This sayth he which
hath the sharpe swearde with two edges:
13 I knowe thy workes, and where thou dwellest, euen where Sathans seat is, and
thou kepest my name, & hast not denyed my faith. And in my dayes Antipas was a
faithfull witnes of myne, which was slayne amonge you, where Sathan dwelleth.
14 But I haue a fewe thinges agaynst the: that thou hast there, the that
manyntayne the doctryne of Balaam, which taught in Balak, to put occasion of syn
before the children of Israell, that they shulde eate of meate dedicat vnto
ydoles, and to commyt fornicacion.
15 Euen so hast thou them that mayntayne ye doctryne of the Nicolaytans, which
thinge I hate.
16 But be couerted, or elles I wil come vnto the shortly, and wil fight agaynste
the with the swearde of my mouth.
17 Let him yt hath eares, heare, what the sprete saith vnto the cogregacions: To
him that ouercommeth, wil I geue to eate mana that is hyd, and wil geue him a
whyte stone, & in the stone a newe name wrytte, which no man knoweth, sauinge he
that receaueth it.
18 And vnto the angell of the cogregacion of Theatira write: This saith the
sonne of God, which hath his eyes lyke vnto a flame of fyre, whose fete are like
brasse:
19 I knowe thy workes and thy loue, seruice, and faith and thy pacience, and thy
dedes, which are mo at the last then at the firste
20 Not withstondinge I haue a feawe thinges agaynst the, that thou sufferest
that woman Iesabell (which called her selfe a prophetisse) to teache and to
deceaue my seruauntes, to make them committ fornicacion, and to eate meates
offered vp vnto ydoles.
21 And I gaue her space to repet of her fornicacion, and she repented not.
22 Beholde, I wil cast her into a bed, and them that commit fornicacion with
her, in to gret aduersite, excepte they turne from their dedes.
23 And I wil kyll her childre with deeth. And all the cogregacios shal knowe, yt
I am he which searcheth the reynes and hertes. And I wil geue vnto euery one of
you acordynge vnto youre workes.
24 Vnto you I saye, and vnto other of the of Thiatyra, as many as haue not this
lernynge and which haue not knowen the depnes of Sathan (as they saye) I wil put
vpo you none other burthen,
25 but yt which ye haue already. Holde fast tyll I come,
26 and whosoeuer ouercometh and kepeth my workes vnto ye ende, to him wil I geue
power ouer nacions,
27 and he shal rule them with a rodde of yron: and as the vessels of a potter,
shal he breake them to sheuers. Eue as I receaued of my father,
28 so wil I geue him ye mornynge starre.
29 Let him yt hath eares, heare, what the sprete sayth to the cogregacions.

Chapter 3

1 And wryte vnto the angell of the congregacion off Sardis: this sayth he that
hath the seuen spretes of God, & the seuen starres. I knowe thy workes, thou
hast a name that thou lyuest, and thou art deed.
2 Be awake, and strength the thinges which remayne, that are redy to dye. For I
haue not founde thy workes perfecte before God.
3 Remember therfore how thou hast receaued and hearde, and holde fast, and
repent. Yf thou shalt not watche, I wil come on the as a thefe, and thou shalt
not knowe what houre I wil come vpon ye
4 Thou hast a fewe names in Sardis, which haue not defyled their garmentes: and
they shal walke with me in whyte, for they are worthy.
5 He that ouercommeth, shalbe clothed in whyte araye, and I wil not put out his
name out of the boke of life, and I wil cofesse his name before my father, and
before his angels.
6 Let him yt hath eares, heare, what the sprete sayth vnto the congregacions.
7 And wryte vnto ye angell of the cogregacio of Philadelphia: this sayth he yt
is holy and true, which hath the keye of Dauid: which openyth and noman
shutteth, and shutteth and no man openeth.
8 I knowe thy workes. Beholde, I haue set before the an open doore, and no man
can shut it, for thou hast a lyttell strength and hast not denyed my name.
9 Beholde, I shal geue some of the congregacion of Sathan, which call them
selues Iewes and are not, but do lye: Beholde: I wil make them, that they shal
come & worshippe before thy fete: and shal knowe that I haue loued the.
10 Because thou hast kept the wordes of my pacience, therfore wil I kepe the
from the houre of temptacion, which will come vpon all the worlde, to tempte
them that dwell vpo the earth.
11 Beholde, I come shortly. Holde that which thou hast, that no ma take awaye
thy crowne.
12 Him that ouer commeth, will I make a pyllar in the temple of my God, and he
shal goo no more out.And I will wryte vpon him, the name of my God, and the name
of ye cite of my God, newe Ierusalem, which cometh downe out of heauen from my
God, and I will wryte vpo him my newe name.
13 Let him that hath eares, heare, what the sprete saith vnto the congregacions.
14 And vnto the angell of the cogregacion, which is in Laodicia wryte: This
sayth Amen the faithfull and true witnes, the begynnynge of ye creatures of God.
15 I knowe thy workes, yt thou art nether colde nor hot: I wolde thou were colde
or hote.
16 So then because thou art bitwene bothe, and nether colde ner hote I wyll spew
the out off my mouth:
17 because thou saist thou art riche and incresyd with goodes and hast nede of
nothinge, and knowest not how thou art wretched & miserable, poore, blynde, and
nakyd.
18 I counsell the to bye of me golde tryed in the fyre, that thou mayste be
riche: and whyte rayment, that thou mayste be clothed, that thy fylthy nakednes
do not apere: anoynt thine eyes with eye salue, yt thou mayste se.
19 As many as I loue, I rebuke & chasten. Be feruent therfore and repent.
20 Beholde, I stonde at the doore & knocke. Yf eny man heare my voyce and vpen
the dore, I wil come in vnto him and will suppe with him, & he with me.
21 To him that ouercomth, will I graute to sytt with me on my seate, eue as I
ouercam and haue sytte with my father on his seate.
22 Let him that hath eares, heare, what the sprete saith vnto the cogregacios.

Chapter 4

1 After this I loked, and beholde, a dore was open in heaue, and the fyrste
voyce which I harde, was as it were of a trompet talkinge with me, which sayde:
come vp hydder, and I wil shewe the thinges which must be fulfylled her after.
2 And immediatly I was in the sprete: & beholde, a seate was set in heauen, and
one sat on the seate.
3 And he that sat, was to loke vpon like vnto a iaspar stone, and a sardyne
stone: And there was a rayne bowe aboute the seate, in syght like to a Smaragde.
4 And aboute the seate were xxiiij. seates. And vpon the seates xxiiij. elders
syttinge clothed in whyte rayment, and had on their heades crownes of golde.
5 And out of ye seate proceded lightnynges, and thundrynges, & voyces, and there
wer seuen lapes of fyre, burninge before the seate, which are the seuen spretes
of God.
6 And before the seate there was a see of glasse like vnto crystall, and in the
mydes off the seate, and rounde aboute the seate, were foure beastes full of
eyes before and behynde.
7 And the first beest was like a lion, the seconde beest like a calfe, and the
thyrde beest had a face as a man and the fourth beest was like a flyenge egle.
8 And the foure beestes had eche one off them vj. wynges aboute him, and they
were full of eyes with in. And they had no rest daye nether night, sayenge:
holy, holy, holy, is the LORDE God almyghty, which was, and is, and is to come.
9 And when those beestes gaue glory and honour and thankes to him that sat on
the seate, which lyueth for euer and euer:
10 ye xxiiij. elders fell downe before him that sat on the trone, and worshipped
him yt lyueth for euer, and cast their crounes before ye trone, sayenge:
11 thou art worthy LORDE to receaue glory, and honor, and power, for thou hast
created all thinges, and for thy willes sake they are, and were created.

Chapter 5

1 And I sawe in the right hode of him, that sat in the trone, a boke wrytten
with in & on the backside, sealed with seue seales.
2 And I sawe a stroge angell preachinge with a loude voyce: Who is worthy to
open the boke, and to loose the seales therof?
3 And no ma in heaue ner in earth, nether vnder ye earth, was able to ope ye
boke, nether to loke thereon.
4 And I wepte moch, because no man was founde worthy to open and to rede the
boke, nether to loke thereon.
5 And one of the elders sayde vnto me: wepe not: Beholde, the lyon which is off
the trybe of Iuda, ye rote of Dauid, hath obtayned to ope the boke, and to lowse
the seue seales therof.
6 And I behelde, & lo, in the myddes of the seate, and of ye foure beastes, and
in the myddes of ye elders, stode a lambe as though he had bene kylled, which
had seuen hornes and seue eyes, which are the seue spretes of God, sent in to
all the worlde.
7 And he came and toke the boke out of the right hode of him that sat vpon the
seate.
8 And when he had taken the boke, the foure beestes and the xxiiij. elders fell
downe before the lambe, hauinge harpes and golden vialles full of odoures (which
are ye prayers of the sayntes)
9 and they songe a newe songe saynge: thou art worthy to take the boke & to ope
the seales therof: for thou wast kylled, and hast redemed vs by thy bloud, out
of all kynreddes, and toges, and people, and nacions,
10 & hast made vs vnto or God, kynges and prestes, and we shal raygne on ye
earth.
11 And I behelde, and I herd the voyce of many angilles aboute the trone, and
aboute the beestes and ye elders, and I herde thousand thousandes,
12 sayenge with a loude voyce: Worthy is the lambe that was killed, to receaue
power, and riches & wissdome, and strength, and honoure and glory, and
blessynge.
13 And all creatures, which are in heaue, & on the earth, & vnder the earth, &
in the see, & all yt are in the, herd I sayenge: blessinge, honoure, glory, &
power, be vnto him, yt sytteth vpo the seate, and vnto the labe for euermore.
14 And the foure beestes saide: Ame. And ye xxiiij. elders fell vpon their
faces, and worshipped him that lyueth for euermore.

Chapter 6

1 And I sawe when the labe opened one of the seales, & I herde one of the foure
beestes saye, as it wer the noyse off thonder: come and se.
2 And I sawe, and beholde there was a whyte horsse, and he yt sat on him had a
bowe, and a crowne was geuen vnto him, and he went forth conquerynge and for to
ouercome.
3 And whe he opened the seconde seale, I herde the seconde beeste saye: come and
se.
4 And there went out another horsse that was reed, & power was geuen to him that
sat there on, to take peace from the earth, and that they shulde kyll one
another. And there was geue vnto him a gret swearde.
5 And when he opened the thyrde seale, I herde the thyrde beeste saye: come &
se. And I behelde, and lo, a blacke horsse: and he that sate on him, had a payre
of balances in his honde.
6 And I herde a voyce in the myddes of the foure beastes saye: a measure of
whete for a peny, and thre measures of barly for a peny: and oyle and wyne se
thou hurte not.
7 And when he opened the fourth seale, I herde the voyce of the fourthe beaste
saye: come and se.
8 And I loked, and beholde a pale horsse, and his name that sat on him was
deeth, and hell folowed after him, & power was geue vnto them ouer the fourthe
parte of the earth, to kyll with swearde, and wt honger, and with deeth, of the
vermen of the earth.
9 And when he opened the fyfte seale, I sawe vnder the aultre, the soules of
them yt were kylled for the worde of God, and for ye testimony which they had,
10 and they cryed with a lowde voyce sayege: How loge tariest thou LORDE holy
and true, to iudge & to auenge oure bloude on them that dwell on the earth?
11 And longe whyte garmentes were geuen vnto euery one of them. And it was sayde
vnto them, that they shulde reste for a lyttle season, vntyll the nomber of
their felowes, and brethre, and of them that shulde be killed as they were, were
fulfilled.
12 And I behelde when he opened the sixte seale, and loo, there was a grett
earthquake, and ye sonne was as blacke as sacke cloth made of heare. And the
mone wexed eue as bloude:
13 and the starres of heauen fell vnto the earth, euen as a fygge tree castith
from her her fygges, when she is shaken off a mighty wynde.
14 And heauen vanysshed awaye, as a scroll when it is rolled togedder. And all
mountayns and yles, were moued out of their places.
15 And the kynges of ye earth, and the grete men, and the riche men, and the
chefe captaynes, and the myghte men, and euery free man, hyd them selues in
dennes, and in rockes of ye hylles,
16 and sayde to the hylles, and rockes: fall on vs, and hyde vs from the
presence of him that sytteth on the seate, and from the wrath of the lambe,
17 for the grete daye of his wrath is come. And who can endure it?

Chapter 7

1 And after that sawe I foure angels stode on ye foure corners of the earth,
holdinge ye foure wyndes of ye earth, yt ye wyndes shulde not blowe on ye earth,
nether on ye see, nether on eny tree.
2 And I sawe another angel ascende fro the rysinge of the sonne: which had the
seale of ye lyuinge God and he cryed with a loude voyce to the foure angelles
(to whom power was geuen to hurt the earth and the see)
3 sayenge: Hurt not the earth nether the see, nether the trees, till we haue
sealed the seruautes of oure God in their forheddes.
4 And I herde the nombre of them which were sealed, and there were sealed an c.
and xliiij. M. of all the trybes of the children of Israell.
5 Of ye trybe of Iuda were sealed xij. M. Of the trybe of Ruben were sealed xij.
M. Of the trybe of Gad were sealed xij. M.
6 Of the trybe of Asser were sealed xij. M. Of the trybe of Neptalym were sealed
xij. M. Of ye trybe of Manasses were sealed xij. M.
7 Of the trybe of Symeon were sealed xij. M. Of the trybe of Leui were sealed
xij. M. Of the trybe of Isacar were sealed xij. M.
8 Of the trybe of Zabulon were sealed xij. M. Of the trybe of Ioseph were sealed
xij. M. Of the trybe of Beniamin were sealed xij. thousande.
9 After this I behelde, and lo, a gret multitude (which no man coulde nombre) of
all nacions and people, and tonges, stode before the seate, and before the
lambe, clothed wt longe whyte garmetes, and palmes in their hondes,
10 and cryed with a loude voyce, sayenge: saluacion be asscribed to him yt
sytteth vpon the seate of oure God, and vnto the lambe.
11 And all the angels stode in the compase of the seate, and of the elders and
of the foure beastes, and fell before ye seat on their faces, and worshipped
God,
12 sayenge, amen: Blessynge and glory, wissdome and thakes, and honour, and
power and might, be vnto oure God for euermore Amen.
13 And one of the elders answered, sayenge vnto me: what are these which are
arayed in longe whyte garmetes, and whence cam they?
14 And I sayde vnto him: LORDE thou wotest. And he sayde vnto me: these are they
which cam out of gret tribulacion, and made their garmentes large, and made the
whyte in the bloude of the lambe:
15 therfore are they in the presence of the seate of God and serue him daye and
night in his temple, and he that sytteth in the seate, wyll dwell amonge them.
16 They shal honger nomore nether thyrst, nether shal the sonne lyght on them,
nether eny heate:
17 For the labe which is in the myddes of the seate, shal fede them, and shal
leade them vnto fountaynes of lyuynge water, and God shal wype awaye all teares
from their eyes.

Chapter 8

1 And when he had opened the seuenth seale, there was silece in heauen aboute
the space of halfe an houre.
2 And I sawe seue angels stondinge before God, and to them were geuen seuen
trompettes.
3 And another angell cam and stode before the aultre, hauynge a golden senser,
and moch of odoures was geuen vnto him, that he shulde offre of the prayers of
all sayntes vpon the golden aultre, which was before the seate.
4 And the smoke of the odoures which came of the prayers of all sayntes,
ascended vppe before God out of the angelles honde.
5 And the angell toke the senser, and fylled it with fyre of the aultre, and
caste it into the earth, and voyces were made, and thodrynges and lightnynges,
and earthquake.
6 And the seuen angels which had the seuen trompettes, prepared them selues to
blowe.
7 The first angel blewe, and there was made hayle and fyre, which were myngled
with bloud, & they were cast in to the earth: and the thyrd parte of trees was
burnt, and all grene grasse was brent.
8 And the seconde angell blewe: and as it were a greate mountayne burnynge with
fyre was cast in to the see, and the thyrde parte of the see turned to bloud,
9 and the thyrde parte of the creatures which had life, dyed, and the thyrde
part of shippes were destroyed.
10 And the thyrde angell blewe, and there fell a greate starre from heauen,
burnynge as it were a lampe, and it fell in to the thyrde parte of the ryuers,
and in to fountaynes of waters,
11 and the name of the starre is called Wormwod. And the thyrde parte of the
waters was turned to Wormwod. And many men dyed of the waters, because they were
made bytter.
12 And the fourth angel blew, and the thyrde parte of ye Sonne was smytten, and
ye thyrde parte of the mone, & the thyrde parte of starres: so that the thyrde
parte of them was darckned. And the daye was smytte, that the thyrde parte of it
shulde not shyne, and lyke wyse the nyght.
13 And I behelde, and herde an angel flyenge thorowe the myddes of heaue, and
sayege with a lowde voyce: Wo, wo, wo to the inhabiters of the earth, because of
the voyces to come of the trompe of the thre angels which were yet to blowe.

Chapter 9

1 And the fyfte angell blewe, & I sawe a starre fall from heaue vnto ye earth.
And to him was geue the kaye of the bottomlesse pytt.
2 And he opened the bottomlesse pytt, and there arose the smoke of a greate
fornace. And the Sonne, and ye ayer were darkned by the reason of the smoke of
the pytt.
3 And there came out of the smoke locustes vpon the earth: and vnto the was
geuen power as the scorpions of the earth haue power.
4 And it was sayde vnto them, that they shulde not hurt the grasse of the earth:
nether eny grene thinge: nether eny tre: but onely those men which haue not the
seale in their forhedes,
5 and to them was comaunded, that they shulde not kyll the, but that they shulde
be vexed fyue monethes, and their payne was as the payne that cometh of a
scorpion, when he hath stonge a man.
6 And in those dayes shal me seke deeth, and shal not fynde it: and shal desyre
to dye, and death shal flye from them.
7 And the similitude of the locustes was lyke vnto horses prepared vnto
battayll, and on their heades were as it were crownes, lyke vnto golde: and
their faces were as it had bene the faces of men.
8 And they had heere as the heere of wemen. And their tethe were as the tethe of
lyons.
9 And they had habbergions, as it were habbergions of yron. And the sounde of
their wynges, was as ye sounde of charettes whe many horsses runne together to
battayle.
10 And they had tayles lyke vnto scorpions, and there were stynges in their
tayles. And their power was to hurt me fyue monethes.
11 And they had a kinge ouer them, which is the angel of the bottomlesse pyt,
whose name in the hebrew tonge, is Abadon: but in the greke tonge, Apollion.
12 One wo is past, and beholde two woes come yet after this.
13 And the sixte angel blewe, and I herde a voyce from the foure corners of the
golden aultre which is before God,
14 sayenge to the sixte angel, which had the trompe: Lowse the foure angels,
which are bounde in the greate ryuer Eufrates.
15 And ye foure angels were lowsed, which were prepared for an houre, for a
daye, for a moneth, and for a yeare, for to slee the thyrde parte of men.
16 And the nombre of horsmen of warre, were twenty tymes x M. And I herde ye
nombre of them.
17 And thus I sawe the horses in a vision, and them that sat on the hauynge fyry
habbergions of a yalowe and brymstony color, and the heades of ye horses werre
as the heades of lyons. And out of their mouthes went forth fyre, and smoke, and
brymstone.
18 And of these thre was the thirde parte of men kylled: that is to saye, of
fyre, smoke, and brymstone, which proceded out of the mouthes of the:
19 For their power was in their mouthes and in their tayles: for their tayles
were like vnto serpetes, and had heades, and with the they dyd hurt:
20 And the remnaunt of the me which were not kylled by these plages, repeted not
of the dedes of their hondes, yt they shulde not worshippe deuels, and ymages of
golde, and syluer, and brasse, & stone, and of wod, which nether can se, nether
heare, nether go.
21 Also they repented not of their murthur, and of their witchcraft, nether of
their whordome, nether of their thefte.

Chapter 10

1 And I sawe another mightye angell come doune fro heauen, clothed with a
cloude, and the rayne bowe vpon his heed. And his face as it were ye Sonne, and
his fete as it were pyllars of fyre:
2 and he had in his honde a lytell boke opyn: and he put his right fote vpon ye
see, and his lifte fote on ye earth.
3 And cryed with a lowde voyce, as when a lyon roreth. And when he had cryed,
seue thondres spake their voyces.
4 And when the seue thodres had spoke their voyces, I was aboute to wryte. And I
herde a voyce from heauen sayenge vnto me: seale vp those thinges which the
seuen thondres spake, and wryte them not.
5 And the angel which I sawe stonde vpo the see, and vpon the earth, lifte vppe
his honde to heauen,
6 and swore by him that liueth for euermore, which created heauen, and the
thinges that there in are, and ye see, and the thinges which are therin: that
there shalbe nomore tyme:
7 but in the dayes of the voyce of the seueth angel, when he shal begynne to
blowe, the mistery of God shalbe fynisshed, as he preached by his seruauntes the
prophetes.
8 And the voyce which I herde from heaue, spake vnto me agayne, and sayde: go
and take the lytle boke which is open in the honde of the angel, which stondeth
vpo the see, and vpon the earth.
9 And I went vnto the angel, and sayde vnto him: geue me the lytle boke. And he
sayde vnto me: Take it, and eate it vp, and it shal make thy belly bytter, but
it shalbe in thy mouth as swete as hony.
10 And I toke the lytle boke out of his honde, and ate it vp, and it was in my
mouth as swete as hony, and as sone as I had eaten it, my belly was bytter.
11 And he sayde vnto me: thou muste prophesy agayne vnto the people, and to the
Heythen, and tonges, and to many kynges.

Chapter 11

1 And there was geuen me a rede lyke vnto a rodd, and it was sayde vnto me: Ryse
and mete the teple of God, and the aultre, and them that worshippe therin:
2 and the quyre which is within the temple, cast out, and mete it not: for it is
geuen vnto the Gentyles, and ye holy cite shal they treade vnderfote xlij.
monethes.
3 And I wil geue power vnto my two wytnesses, and they shal prophesy.M.ijc. and
lx. dayes clothed in sacke cloth.
4 These are two olyue trees, and two candelstyckes, stondinge before the God of
the earth.
5 And if eny man wil hurt them, fyre shal procede out of their mouthes, and
consume their enemyes. And yf eny ma wil hurt the, this wyse muste he be kylled.
6 These haue power to shut heauen, that it rayne not in the dayes of their
prophesyinge: and haue power ouer waters, to turne them to bloud, and to smyte
the earth with all maner plages, as often as they will.
7 And when they haue fynisshed their testimony, the beest that cam out of the
bottomlesse pytt, shal make warre agaynst the, and shal ouer come them, and kyll
the.
8 And their bodies shal lye in the stretes of the greate cite, which spiritually
is called zodom and Egypte, where oure LORDE is crucified.
9 And some of the people and kynredes, and tonges, & of the nacios, shal se
their bodies, thre dayes, and an halfe, and shal not suffre their bodies to be
put in graues.
10 And they that dwell vpo the earth, shal reioyce ouer them and be glad, and
shal send giftes one to another: for these two prophetes vexed them that dwelt
on the earth.
11 And after thre dayes and an halfe the sprete of life from God, entred in to
them. And they stode vp vpon their fete: & greate feare came vpon them which
sawe them.
12 And they herde a greate voyce from heaue, sayenge vnto them: Come vp hidder.
And they ascended vp in to heaue in a cloude, and their enemyes sawe the.
13 And the same houre was there a greate earthquake, & the tenth parte of the
cite fell, and in the earthquake were slayne names of men seuen M. and the
remnaunt were feared, and gaue glory to God of heauen.
14 The seconde wo is past, and beholde, the thyrd wo wyl come anone.
15 And the seuenth angel blewe, and ther were made greate voyces in heauen,
sayege: the kyngdoms of this worlde are oure LORDES and his Christes, and he
shal reigne for eurmore.
16 And the foure and twentye Elders, which sat before God on their seatts, fell
vpon their faces, and worshipped God
17 sayenge: we geue the thankes LORDE God allmyghte: which art and wast, and art
to come, for thou hast receaued thy greate might, and hast raygned.
18 And the Heythen were angry, & thy wrath is come, and the tyme of the deed
that they shulde be iudged, and that thou shuldest geue rewarde vnto thy
seruautes the prophettes and saynctes, and to the that feare thy name, small &
greate: and shuldest destroye them which destroye the earth.
19 And the temple of God was opened in heauen, and there was sene in his temple
the arcke of his testament: and there folowed lightnynges, and voyces, and
thondrynges and earth quake, and a greate hayle.

Chapter 12

1 And there appeared a greate token in heauen. A woman clothed with the Sonne,
and the mone vnder her fete, and vpon her heed a crowne of twolue starres.
2 And she was with childe, and cryed trauaillinge in byrth, and payned redy to
be delyuered.
3 And there appeared another token in heauen, and beholde a greate reed dragon,
hauinge seuen heades, and ten hornes and seue crownes vpo his heades:
4 and his tayle drue the thyrde parte of the starres, and cast them to the
earth. And the dragon stode before the woma, which was ready to be delyuered:
for to devoure her childe as sone as it were borne.
5 And she brought forth a man childe, which shulde rule all nacions with a rod
of yron. And her sonne was taken vp vnto God, and to his seate.
6 And the woman fled in to wyldernes, where she had a place prepared off God,
that they shulde fede her there a M.ij.C. and lx. dayes.
7 And there was a greate batayll in heaue Michael and his angels foughte with
the dragon, and the dragon fought and his angels,
8 and preuayled not, nether was their place founde eny more in heauen.
9 And the greate dragon that olde serpent (called the deuell and Sathanas) was
cast out. Which disceaued all the worlde. And he was cast in to the earth, and
his angelles were cast out with him also.
10 And I harde a lowde voyce, which sayde in heauen: Now is saluacion, and
strength and the kyngdome become oure Gods, and ye power his Christes: For he is
cast downe, which accused them before God daye and night.
11 And they ouercame him by the bloude of the lambe, and by the worde of their
testimony, and they loued not their lyues vnto the deeth.
12 Therfore reioyce ye heauens, and ye that dwell in them. Wo to the inhabiters
of the earth, and of the see: for the deuell is come downe vnto you, which hath
greate wrath, because he knoweth, that he hath but a short tyme.
13 And when the dragon sawe, that he was cast vnto the earth, he persecuted the
woman, which brought forth the man childe.
14 And to the woman were geue two wynges of a greate egle that she might flye in
to the wyldernes, in to her place, where she is norysshed for a tyme, two tymes,
and halffe a tyme, from the presence of the serpet.
15 And the dragon cast out of his mouth water after the woma, as it had bene a
ryuer, that he might cause her to be caught of ye floud.
16 And the earth holpe the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swalowed
vp the ryuer which the dragon cast out of his mouth.
17 And the dragon was wroth with the woma: and went and made warre with the
remnaunt of hyr sede, which kepe the comaundementes of God, and haue the
testimony of Iesus Christ. And I stode on the see sonde.

Chapter 13

1 And I sawe a beest rise out of the see, hauinge seuen heades, and x. hornes,
and vpon his hornes x. crownes, and vpo his heed, the names of blasphemy.
2 And the beest which I sawe was lyke a catt of the mountayne, and his fete were
as the fete of a bear, and his mouth as the mouthe of a lyon. And ye drago gaue
him his power and his seate, and greate auctorite:
3 and I sawe one of his heades as it were wounded to death, and his dedly wounde
was healed. And all the worlde wodred at the beest,
4 and they worshipped the dragon which gaue power vnto the beest, and they
worshipped the beest, sayenge: who is like vnto the beest? who is able to warre
with him?
5 And there was geuen vnto him a mouth to speake greate thinges & blasphemies,
and power was geuen vnto him, to do xlij. monethes.
6 And he opened his mouth vnto blasphemy agaynst God, to blaspheme his name, and
his tabernacle and them that dwell in heauen.
7 And it was geuen vnto him to make warre with the sayntes, and to ouercome
them. And power was geuen him ouer all kynred, tonge, and nacion:
8 and all that dwell vpon the earth worshipt him: whose names are not wrytten in
the boke of life of the lambe, which was kylled from the beginnynge of the
worlde.
9 Yf eny man haue an eare, let him heare.
10 He that leadeth in to captiuite, shal go in to captiuite: he that killeth
with a swearde, must be killed with ye swearde. Heare is the pacience, and the
faith of the saynctes.
11 And I behelde another beest commynge vp out of the earth, and he had two
hornes like a lambe, and he spake as dyd the drago.
12 And he dyd all that the first beest coulde do in his presence, and he caused
the earth, and them which dwell therin, to worshippe the fyrst beest, whose
deedly woude was healed.
13 And he dyd greate wonders, so that he made fyre come downe from heaue in the
sight of men.
14 And deceaued them that dwelt on the earth by ye meanes of those signes which
he had power to do in the sight of the beest, sayenge to them that dwelt on the
earth: that they shulde make an ymage vnto the beest, which had the wounde of a
swearde and dyd liue.
15 And he had power to geue a sprete vnto the ymage of the beest, and that the
ymage of the beest shulde speake, and shulde cause, that as many as wolde not
worshippe the ymage of the beest, shulde be kylled.
16 And he made all bothe smale and greate, ryche and poore, fre and bond, to
receaue a marke in their right hondes, or in their forheades.
17 And that no man might by or sell, saue he yt had ye marke, or the name of the
beest, ether the nombre of his name.
18 Here is wissdome. Let him that hath wyt, count the nombre of the beest. For
it is the nombre of a man, and his nombre is sixe hondred, thre score and sixe.

Chapter 14

1 And I loked, and lo, a lambe stode on the mout Syon, and with him.C. and
xliiij. thousande hauynge his fathers name wrytten in their forheades.
2 And I herde a voyce from heauen, as the sounde of many waters, and as the
voyce of a greate thondre. And the voyce that I herde, was as the harpers that
playe vpon their harpers.
3 And they songe as it were a newe songe, before the seate, & before ye foure
beestes, and the elders, and no man coulde learne yt songe, but the hondred and
xliiij.M. which were redemed from the earth.
4 These are they, which were not defyled with wemen, for they are virgyns. These
folowe the lambe whither soeuer he goeth. These were redemed from men, beynge
the fyrst frutes vnto God and to the lambe,
5 and in their mouthes was founde no gyle. For they are withoute spot before the
trone of God.
6 And I sawe an angell flye in the myddes of heauen hauinge an euerlastinge
Gospell, to preache vnto them that syt and dwell on the earth, and to all
nacions, kinreddes, and toges and people,
7 sayege with a lowde voyce: Feare God, and geue honour to him, for the houre of
his iudgement is come: and worshippe him that made heauen and earth, and the
see, and the fountaynes off water.
8 And there folowed another angell, sayenge: She is fallen, she is fallen: eue
Babilon that greate cite, for she made all nacions drynke off the wyne off hyr
whordome.
9 And the thyrde angel folowed the, sayenge with a loude voyce: Yf eny man
worshippe the beest and his ymage, and receaue his marke in his forhed, or on
his honde,
10 the same shall drynke of the wyne of the wrath of God, which is powred in the
cuppe of his wrath. And he shalbe punysshed in fyre and brymstone, before the
holy Angels, and before the lambe.
11 And the smoke of their torment ascendeth vp euermore. And they haue no rest
daye ner nyght, which worshippe the beast and his ymage, and whosoeuer receaueth
the prynt of his name.
12 Here is the pacience of sayntes. Heare are they that kepe the commaundementes
and the faith off Iesu.
13 And I herde a voyce from heauen, sayenge vnto me: wryte: Blessed are ye deed,
which here after dye in the LORDE. Yee the sprete sayeth, that they rest from
their laboures, for their workes folowe them.
14 And I loked and beholde, a whyte cloude, and vpo ye cloude one syttynge like
vnto the sonne of man, hauinge on his heed a golden crowne, and in his hode a
sharpe sykle.
15 And another angell came out of the temple, cryenge with a loude voyce to him
that sat on the cloude: Thruste in thy sycle and reepe: for the tyme is come to
reepe, for the corne of the earth is rype.
16 And he that sat on ye cloude thrust in his sykle on the earth, and the earth
was reeped.
17 And another angell came out of the temple, which is in heauen, hauinge also a
sharpe sykle.
18 And another angel came out from the aultre, which had power ouer fyre, and
cryed with a loude crye vnto hym that had the sharpe syckle, and sayde: Thruste
in thy sharpe syckle, and gather the clusters of ye earth, for hir grapes are
rype.
19 And the angell thrust in his syckle on the erthe, and cut downe the grapes of
the vynyarde of the earth, and cast them in to the greate wynefat of ye wrath of
God:
20 & the wynefat was trodden without the cite, and bloude came out of the fat,
euen vnto the horsse brydles by the space of a thousande and sixe hundreth
furlonges.

Chapter 15

1 And I sawe another signe in heuen grett & mervellous.vii. angells havinge the
seven laste plages, for in the is fulfylled the wrath of god.
2 And I sawe as it were a glassye see, mingled with fyre, and them that had
gotten victory of the beest, and of his ymage, and of his marke, and of the
nombre of his name, stonde on the glassye see, hauinge ye harpes of God:
3 and they songe the songe of Moses the seruaunt of God, and the songe of the
lambe, saynge: Greate and maruellous are thy workes LORDE God almyghty, iust and
true are thy wayes, thou kynge of sayntes.
4 Who shal not feare the O LORDE and gloryfie thy name? For thou only art holy,
for all getiles shall come and worshippe before the, for thy iudgmentes are made
manyfest.
5 And after that, I loked, and beholde, the temple of the Tabernacle of
testimony was open in heauen,
6 and the seuen angelles came out of the temple, which had the seuen plages,
clothed in pure and bryght lynne, and hauynge their brestes gyrded with golden
gerdelles.
7 And one of the foure beestes gaue vnto the seuen angelles seuen golden
vialles, full of the wrath of God which liueth for euermore.
8 And the temple was full of smoke for the glory off God, and for his power, and
no man was able to entre in to the temple, tyll the seuen plages of the seue
angels were fulfilled.

Chapter 16

1 And I herde a greate voyce out of the temple, sayenge to the seuen angels: go
youre wayes, poure out youre vialles of wrath vpon the earth.
2 And the fyrst went, and poured out his viall vpon the earth, and there fell a
noysom & a sore botch vpon the men which had the marke of the beest, and vpon
them that worshipped his ymage.
3 And the seconde angel shed out his viall vpo the see, and it turned as it were
in to the bloud of a deed man: and euery lyuinge thinge dyed in the see,
4 And the thyrde angel shed out his vyall vpon the ryuers and fountaynes of
waters, and they turned to bloude.
5 And I herde an angel saye: LORDE which art and wast, thou art righteous and
holy, because thou hast geue soche iudgmentes,
6 for they shed the bloude of sayntes, and prophetes, and therfore hast thou
geuen them bloude to drynke: for they are worthy.
7 And I herde another angell out of the aulter, saye: euen so LORDE God
almighty, true and righteous are thy iudgmentes.
8 And the fourth angell poured out his viall on the Sonne, and power was geuen
vnto him to vexe men with heate of fyre.
9 And the men raged in gret heate, and spake euell of the name of God, which had
power ouer those plages, and they repented not, to geue him glory.
10 And the fifte angell poured out his vyall vpon the seate of the beest, and
his kyngdome wexed derke, and they gnewe their tonges for sorowe,
11 and blasphemed the God of heaue for sorowe, and payne of their sores, and
repented not of their dedes.
12 And the sixte angell poured out his vyall vpon the gret ryuer Euphrates, and
the water dryed vp, that the waye of the kynges of the Easte shulde be prepared.
13 And I sawe thre vncleane spretes kike frogges come out of the mouth of the
dragon, and out off the mouth off the beest, and out off the mouth of the false
prophet.
14 For they are the spretes of deuels workynge myracles, to go out vnto the
kynges of the earth and of the whole worlde, to gaddre them to the battayle of
that gret daye of God allmighty.
15 Beholde, I come as a thefe. Happy is he that watcheth and kepeth his
garmentes, lest he be founde naked, and men se his filthynes.
16 And he gaddered them togedder in to a place, called in the hebrue tonge,
Armagedon.
17 And the seuenth angell poured out his viall in to the ayre. And there came a
greate voyce out of heauen from the seate, sayenge: It is done.
18 And there folowed voyces, thondringes, and lightnynges, and there was a gret
earthquake, soch as was not sence me were vpon the earth, so myghty an
earthquake and so greate.
19 And the greate cite was deuyded in to thre parties. And the cities of nacions
fell. And greate Babilon came in remembraunce before God, to geue vnto hyr the
cuppe of wyne of the fearcenes of his wrath.
20 And euery yle fled awaye, and the mountaynes were not founde.
21 And there fell a greate hayle, as it had bene talentes, out of heaue vpon the
men, and the men blasphemed God, because of the plage of the hayle, for it was
greate, and the plage of it sore.

Chapter 17

1 And there cam one of the seue angels, which had the seuen vialles, and talked
with me, sayenge vnto me: Come, I wil shewe the the iugdment of the greate
whore, that sytteth vpon many waters,
2 with whom the kynges of the earth haue commytted whordome, and the inhabiters
of the earth are dronken with the wyne of her fornicacion.
3 And he caryed me awaye into the wildernes in ye sprete. And I sawe a woman syt
vpon a rose colored beest, full of names of blasphemie, which had seue heades &
ten hornes.
4 And ye woman was arayed in purple and rose color, and decked with golde,
precious stone, and pearles, and had a cupp of golde in her honde, full of
abhominacions, and fylthines of her wordome.
5 And in her forhed was a name wrytte, a mistery; greate Babilon the mother of
whordome, and abominacios of the earth.
6 And I sawe the wyfe dronke with the bloude of sayntes, and with the bloud of
the witnesses of Iesu. And when I sawe her, I wondred with greate mervayle.
7 And the angell sayde vnto me: wherfore meruayllest thou? I wyl shewe the the
mistery of the woman, and of the beest that beerith her, which hath seuen
heades, and ten hornes.
8 The beest that thou seest, was, and is not, and shall ascende out of the
bottomlesse pytt, and shal go in to perdicion, and they that dwell on the earth
shal wondre (whose names are not wrytten in the boke of life from the begynnynge
of the worlde) when they beholde the beest that was, and is not.
9 And here is a mynde, that hath wissdome. The seuen heades are seuen mountanes,
on which the woman sytteth:
10 they are also seuen kynges. Fyue are fallen, and one is, and the other is not
yet come. When he commeth, he muste continue a space.
11 And the beest that was, and is not, is eue the eyght, and is of the seuen,
and shal go in to destruccion.
12 And ye ten hornes which thou sawest, are ten kynges, which haue not yet
receaued the kyngdome, but shal receaue power as kynges at one houre with ye
beest.
13 These haue one mynde, and shal geue their power and stregth vnto ye beeste.
14 These shal fyght with the lambe, and the labe shal ouercome them: For he is
LORDE of all lordes, and kinge of all kinges: and they that are on his syde, are
called, and chosen and faithfull.
15 And he saide vnto me: The waters which thou sawest, where ye whore sytteth,
are people, and folke, and nacions, and tonges.
16 And the ten hornes, which thou sawest vpon the beest, are they that shal hate
the whore, and shal make her desolate, and naked, and shall eate hir flesshe,
and burne her with fyre.
17 For God hath put in their hertes, to fulfill his wyll, and to do with one
consent, for to geue hir kyngdome vnto the beest, vntill the wordes of God be
fulfylled.
18 And the woma which thou sawest, is that greate cite, which raigneth ouer the
kynges of the earth.

Chapter 18

1 And after that I sawe another angel come downe fro heaue, hauinge greate
power, and ye earth was lyghtned with his bryghtnes.
2 And he cryed mightely with a stronge voyce, sayenge: She is fallen, she is
fallen, euen greate Babilon, and is become the habitacion of deuels, and ye
holde of all fowle spretes, and a cage of all vncleane and hatefull byrdes:
3 for all nacios haue dronken of the wyne of the wrath of her whordome. And the
kynges of the earth haue committed fornicacion with her, and her marchauntes are
wexed ryche of the abundaunce of her pleasures.
4 And I herde another voyce from heauen saye: come awaye from her my people,
that ye be not partakers of her synnes, lest ye receaue of her plages.
5 For her synnes are gone vp to heauen, and the LORDE hath remembred her
wyckednes.
6 Rewarde her euen as she rewarded you, and geue her dubble acordinge to her
workes. And poure in dubble to her in the same cuppe, which she fylled vnto you.
7 And as moche as she gloryfied her selfe and lyued wantanly, so moch poure ye
in for her of punysshmet, and sorowe, for she sayeth in her herte: I syt beinge
a quene, and am no wyddowe, and shall se no sorowe.
8 Therfore shal her plages come at one daye, death, and sorowe, and honger, and
she shalbe bret with fyre: for stronge is the LORDE God which shal iudge her.
9 And the kynges of the earth shal bewepe her and wayle ouer her, which haue
committed fornicacion and lyued wantanly with her, when they shal se the smoke
of her burnynge,
10 and shal stonde a farre of for feare of her punysshment, sayenge: Alas, Alas,
that greate cite Babylon, that mighty cite: For at one houre is thy iudgment
come.
11 And the marchauntes off the earth shall wepe and wayle in them selues,
because no man will bye their ware eny more,
12 the ware of golde, and syluer, and of precious stones, off pearle, & sylke,
and purple, and skarlet, & all Thynen wod, and all manner vessels of yuery, and
all manner vessels of most precious wod, and of brasse, and of yron,
13 & synomom and odours, and oyntmentes, and frankynsence, and wyne, and oyle,
and fyne floure, and wheate, and catell, and shepe, and horses, and charrettes,
and bodies and soules of men.
14 And the apples that thy soule lusted after, are departed from the. And all
thinges which were deyntie, and had in pryce, are departed from the, and thou
shalt fynde them no more.
15 The marchauntes of these thinges which were wexed ryche by her, shall stonde
afarre of for feare of the punysshment of her, wepynge and waylinge,
16 and sayenge: alas alas, that greate cite, that was clothed in sylke, and
purple, and scarlet, and decked with golde, and precious stone, and pearles:
17 for at one houre so greate ryches is come to naught. And euery shippe
gouerner, and all they that occupie shippes, and shippmen which worke in the
see, stode a farre of,
18 and cryed, when they sawe the smoke of her burnynge, and sayde: what cite is
like vnto this greate cite?
19 And they cast dust on their heades, and cryed wepynge, and waylinge, and
sayde: Alas, Alas the greate cite, wherin were made ryche all that had shippes
in the see, by the reason of her wares: for at one houre is she made desolate.
20 Reioyce ouer her thou heaue, and ye holy Apostles, and prophetes: for God
hath geuen youre iudgmet on her.
21 And a mighty angell toke vp a greate stone lyke a mylstone, and cast it in to
the see, sayenge: with suche violece shal that greate cite Babylon be cast, and
shalbe founde no more.
22 And the voyce of harpers, and musicions, and of pypers, and trompetters,
shalbe herde no more in the: and no craftes man (of what soeuer craft he be)
shalbe founde eny more in the: and the sounde of a myll shalbe herde no more in
the:
23 and the voyce of the brydegrome and of the bryde, shalbe herde no more in the
for thy marchauntes were prynces of the earth. And with thyne inchautment were
deceaued all nacions:
24 and in her was founde the bloude of the prophetes, and of the sayntes, and of
all that were slayne vpo the earth.

Chapter 19

1 And after that, I herde the voyce of moch people in heauen, sayenge: Alleluia.
Saluacion and glory and honour, and power be ascribed to the LORDE or God,
2 for true and righteous are his iudgmentes, because he hath iudged the greate
whore (which did corrupt ye earth with her fornicacion) and hath auenged the
bloud of his seruautes of her hond.
3 And agayne they sayde: Alleluia. And smoke rose vp for euermore.
4 And ye xxiiij: elders, & the foure beestes fell downe, and worshipped God that
sat on the seate, sayenge: Amen: Alleluia.
5 And a voice came out of the seate, sayenge: prayse or LORDE God all ye that
are his seruautes, & ye that feare him both small and greate.
6 And I herde the voyce of moch people, eue as ye voyce of many waters, & as ye
voyce of stronge thondrynges, sayenge: Alleluia, for God omnipotent raigneth.
7 Let vs be glad and reioyce, and geue honour to him: for the mariage of the
labe is come, and his wife made her selfe ready.
8 And to her was graunted, that she shulde be arayed with pure and goodly sylke.
(As for the sylke, it is the rightewesnes of sayntes.)
9 And he sayde vnto me: Blessed are they which are called vnto the Lambes
supper. And he sayde vnto me: these are the true sayenges of God.
10 And I fell at his fete, to worshippe him. And he sayde vnto me: Se thou do it
not. For I am thy felowe seruaunt, and one of thy brethren, and of them that
haue the testimony of Iesus. Worshippe God. For the testimony of Iesus is ye
sprete of prophesy.
11 And I sawe heaue open, & beholde, a whyte horsse and he yt sat vpon him, was
called faithfull and true, & in rightewesnes dyd iudge and make battayle.
12 His eyes were as a flame of fyre, and on his heade were many crounes: & he
had a name wrytten, that noman knewe but him selfe.
13 And he was clothed with a vesture dipt in bloude, and his name is called, ye
worde of God.
14 And ye warriers which were in heauen, folowed him vpon whyte horsses, clothed
with whyte and pure sylke
15 and out of his mouthe wente a sharppe swerde, that with it he shulde smyte
the Heithen: And he shall rule them with a rodde of yron, and he trode the
wynefatte of the fearcenesse and wrath of allmightye God.
16 And hath on his vesture and on his thyghe a name wrytten: Kynge of all
kinges, and LORDE of all lordes.
17 And I sawe an angell stonde in the Sonne, and he cryed with a lowde voyce,
sayenge to all the fowles that flye by the myddes vnder the heauen: Come and
gaddre youre selues togedder vnto the supper of the gret God,
18 that ye maye eate the flesshe of kynges, and of hye captaynes, and the
flesshe of mighty men, and the flesshe of horsses, and of the that syt on them,
and the flesshe of all free men and bond men, both of small and greate.
19 And I sawe the beeste and the kynges of ye earth, and their warriers gadred
togedder, to make battayle agaynste him that sat vpon the horsse, and agaynst
his sowdiers.
20 And the beeste was taken, and with him that false prophet that wrought
myracles before him, with which he disceaued them that receaued the beestes
marke, and them that worsshipped his ymage. These both were cast in to a ponde
of fyre burnynge wt brymstone:
21 and the remnaunte were slayne with the swearde of him that sat vpon the
horsse, which swearde proceded out of his mouth, and all the foules were filled
with their flesshe.

Chapter 20

1 And I sawe an angell come downe from heauen, hauinge the keye of the
bottomlesse pyt, and a gret chayne in his honde.
2 And he toke the dragon that olde serpent (which is the deuell and Satanas) and
he bounde him a thousand yeares:
3 and cast him in to the bottomlesse pyt, and he bounde him, and set a seale on
him, that he shuld disceaue the people nomoare, tyll the thousand yeares were
fulfilled. And after that muste he be lowsed for a littell season.
4 And I sawe seates, and they sat vpon them, and the iudgement was geuen vnto
them: and I sawe the soules of them that were beheaded for the witnes of Iesu,
and for the worde of God: which had not worshipped the beest, nether his ymage,
nether had taken his marke vpon their forheades, or on their hondes: and they
lyued, and raygned with Christ a thousand yeare:
5 but the other of the deed men lyued not agayne, vntill the thousand yeare were
fynisshed. This is that fyrst resurreccion.
6 Blessed and holy is he that hath parte in the fyrst resurreccion. On soch hath
the seconde deeth no power, but they shalbe the prestes of God and of Christ,
and shall raygne with him a thousand yeare.
7 And when the thousand yeares are expyred, Sathan shalbe lowsed out of his
preson,
8 and shal go out to deceaue the people which are in the foure quarters of the
earth. Gog and Magog, to gadder them togedder to batayle, whose nombre is as the
sonde off the see:
9 and they went vp on the playne of the earth, and compased the tentes of the
sayntes aboute, and the beloued cite. And fyre cam doune from God out of heauen,
and deuoured them:
10 and the deuell that disceaued them, was cast in to a lake of fyre and
brymstone, where the beest and the false prophet were, and shalbe tormented daye
and night for euermore.
11 And I sawe a gret whyte seate, and him that sat on it, from whose face fled
awaye both the earth and heauen, and their place was nomore founde.
12 And I sawe the deed, both gret and small stonde before God: And the bokes
were opened, and another boke was opened, which is (the boke) of life, and the
deed were iudged of tho thinges which were wrytten in the bokes accordinge to
their dedes:
13 and the see gaue vp her deed, which were in her, and deeth and hell delyuered
vp the deed, which were in them: and they were iudged euery man accordynge to
his dedes.
14 And deth and hell were cast in to the lake of fyre. This is that second
deeth.
15 And whosoeuer was not founde wrytten in the boke off life, was cast in to the
lake of fyre.

Chapter 21

1 And I sawe a newe heauen and a newe earth. For the fyrst heauen, and the fyrst
earth were vanisshed awaye, and there was nomore See.
2 And I Ihon sawe that holy cite newe Ierusalem come downe from God out of
heauen, prepared as a bryde garnisshed for hyr hussband.
3 And I herde a greate voyce from the seate, sayenge: beholde, the tabernacle of
God is with men, and he wil dwell with them. And they shalbe his people, and God
himselfe shalbe with the, and shalbe their God.
4 And God shal wipe awaye all teares from their eyes. And there shalbe nomore
deeth, nether sorowe, nether shal there be eny more payne, for ye olde thinges
are gone.
5 And he that sat vpon the seate, sayde: Beholde, I make all thinges newe. And
he sayde vnto me: wryte for these wordes are faithfull and true,
6 And he sayde vnto me: it is done I am Alpha and Omega, the begynnynge, and the
ende. I wil geue to him that is a thyrst of the well of the water of life fre.
7 He that ouercommeth, shal inheret all thinges I wil be his God, and he shalbe
my sonne.
8 But the fearefull and vnbeleuynge, and the abhominable, and murthurers, and
whormongers, and sorcerers, and ydolaters, & all lyars, shal haue their parte in
the lake, that burneth with fyre and brymstone, which is the seconde death.
9 And there came vnto me one of the seuen angels, which had the seuen vials full
of the seuen last plages: and talked with me, sayenge: come hydder, I wil shewe
the the bryde, ye labes wyfe.
10 And he caryed me awaye in ye sprete to a greate and an hye moutayne, and he
shewed me the greate cite, holy Ierusale descendinge out of heauen from God,
11 hauynge the brightnes of God. And her shynynge was lyke vnto a stone most
precious, euen a Iaspar cleare as cristall:
12 & had greate and hye walles, and had twolue gates, and at ye gates twolue
angels: and names wrytten, which are the twolue trybes of Israel:
13 on the est parte thre gates, and on the north syde thre gates, and towarde
the south thre gates, and from the west thre gates:
14 and the wall of the cite had twolue foundacios, and in them the names of the
lambes twolue Apostles.
15 And he that talked with me, had a golden rede to measure the cite with all,
and the gates therof, and the wall therof.
16 And the cite was bylt foure square, and the length was as large as the bredth
of it, and he measured the cite with the rede twolue M. furlonges: and the
length and the bredth, and ye heyth of it, were equall.
17 And he measured the wall therof, an cxliiij. cubittes, after ye measure of a
man, which the angel had.
18 And the buyldinge of the wall of it was of Iaspar. And the cite was of pure
golde, like vnto cleare glasse:
19 and ye foundacios of the walles and of ye cite were garnysshed with all maner
of precious stones. The fyrst foundacion was a Iasper, the seconde a Saphyre, ye
thyrde a Calcedony, the fourth a Smaragde:
20 the fyft a Sardonix: the sixt a Sardeos: the seuenth a Crysolite, the eyght
berall: the nynth a Topas: the tenth a Crysoprasos: the eleueth a Iacyncte: the
twelfte an Amatist.
21 And the twolue gates were twolue pearles, and euery gate was of one pearle,
and ye strete of the cite was pure golde, as a thoroweshyninge glasse.
22 And I sawe no temple therin. For the LORDE God allmighty and the lambe is the
temple of it,
23 and the cite hath no nede of the Sonne, nether of the mone to lyghten it. For
the bryghtnes of God doth light it: and the lambe is the lyght of it.
24 And ye people which are saued, shal walke in the light of it: and the kynges
of the earth shal brynge their glory vnto it.
25 And the gates of it shal not be shut by daye. For there shalbe no nyght
there.
26 (Omitted Text)
27 And there shal entre in to it none vncleane thinge: nether what soeuer
worketh abhominacion: or maketh lyes: but they which are wrytten in the lambes
boke of life.

Chapter 22

1 And he shewed me a pure ryuer of water of life clere as cristall: proceadinge
out of the seate of God and of ye lambe
2 in the myddes of the strete of it, and of ether syde of the ryuer was there
wod of life: which bare twolue maner of frutes: and gaue frute euery moneth: and
the leaues of the wodd serued to heale the people withall.
3 And there shalbe no more cursse, but the seate of God and ye labe shalbe in
it: and his seruauntes shal serue him:
4 And shal se his face, and his name shalbe in their for heades.
5 And there shalbe no night there, and they nede no candle, nether light of the
Sonne: for the LORDE God geueth the light, and they shal reygne for euermore.
6 And he sayde vnto me: these sayenges are faithfull, and true. And the LORDE
God of the holy prophetes sent his angell to shewe vnto his seruantes, the
thinges which muste shortly be fulfylled.
7 Beholde, I come shortly. Happy is he yt kepeth ye sayege of ye prophesy of
this boke.
8 I am Ihon, which sawe these thinges and herde them. And whe I had herde and
sene the, I fell downe to worshippe before the fete of the angell which shewed
me these thinges.
9 And he saide vnto me: se thou do it not, for I am thy felowe seruaunt and the
felowe seruaut of thy brethren the prophetes, and of them, which kepe the
sayenges of this boke. Worshippe God.
10 And he sayde vnto me: seale not the sayenges of the prophesy of this boke.
For the tyme is at hode.
11 He that doeth euell, let him do euell styll: and he which is filthy, let him
be filthy styll: and he that is righteous, let him be more righteous: and he
that is holy, let him be more holy.
12 And beholde, I come shortly, and my rewarde with me, to geue euery ma
acordinge as his dedes shalbe.
13 I am Alpha and Omega, ye beginnynge and the ende: the first & the last.
14 Blessed are they that do his commaundementes, that their power maye be in the
tree of life, and maye entre in thorow the gates in to the cite.
15 For without are dogges and inchaunters and whormongers, and mortherers, and
ydolaters, and whosoeuer loueth or maketh lesinges.
16 I Iesus haue sent myne angell, to testifie vnto you these thinges in the
cogregacions. I am the rote and the generacion of Dauid, and the bright mornynge
starre.
17 And the sprete and the bryde saye: Come. And let him that heareth, saye also:
Come. And let him that is a thyrst, come. And let whosoeuer wyll, take of the
water of life fre.
18 I testifye vnto euery man that heareth the wordes of prophesy of this boke yf
eny man shal adde vnto these thinges, God shal adde vnto him the plages that are
wrytten in this boke.
19 And yf eny man shal mynishe of the wordes of the boke of this prophesy, God
shal take awaye his parte out of the boke of life, and out of the holy citie,
and fro tho thinges which are wrytten in this boke.
20 He which testifyeth these thinges, sayth: Yee I come quyckly, Amen. Euen so:
come LORDE Iesu.
21 The grace of oure LORDE Iesu Christ be with you all. Amen.
