Bishops Bible

This Bible is in the Public Domain.


Genesis

Chapter 1

1 In the beginnyng GOD created ye heauen and the earth.
2 And the earth was without fourme, and was voyde: & darknes was vpon the face
of the deepe, and the spirite of God moued vpon the face of the waters.
3 And God sayde, let there be light: and there was light.
4 And God sawe the lyght that it was good: and God deuided the lyght from the
darknes.
5 And God called the light day, and the darknes night: and the euenyng & the
mornyng were the first day.
6 And God said: let there be a firmament betwene the waters, and let it make a
diuision betwene waters and waters.
7 And God made the firmament, and set the diuision betwene the waters which were
vnder the firmament, and the waters that were aboue the firmament: and it was
so.
8 And God called the firmament the heauen: and the euenyng and the mornyng were
the seconde day.
9 And God saide: let the waters vnder the heauen be gathered together into one
place, and let the drye lande appeare: and it was so.
10 And God called the drie lande ye earth, and the gatheryng together of waters
called he the seas: and God sawe that it was good.
11 And God sayde: let the earth bryng foorth both budde and hearbe apt to seede,
and fruitfull trees yeeldyng fruite after his kynde, which hath seede in it
selfe vpon the earth: and it was so.
12 And the earth brought forth both bud and hearbe apt to seede after his kynde,
and tree yeeldyng fruite, whiche hath seede in it selfe, after his kynde.
13 And God sawe that it was good. And the euenyng and the mornyng were the
thirde day.
14 And God sayde: let there be lyghtes in the firmament of the heauen, that they
may deuide the day and the nyght, and let them be for signes, & seasons, and for
dayes, and yeres.
15 And let them be for lyghtes in the firmament of the heauen, that they maye
geue light vpo the earth: and it was so.
16 And God made two great lyghtes: a greater lyght to rule the day, and a lesse
lyght to rule the nyght, and he made starres also.
17 And God set them in the firmament of the heauen, to shyne vpon the earth,
18 And to rule the day and nyght, and to make difference betweene the lyght and
the darknesse: and God saw that it was good.
19 And the euenyng and the mornyng were the fourth day.
20 And God sayde: let the waters bryng foorth mouyng creature that hath lyfe,
and foule that may flee vpon the earth in the open firmament of heauen.
21 And God created great whales, and euery lyuyng & mouing creature, which the
waters brought foorth after theyr kynde, & euery fethered foule after their
kynde: and God saw that it was good.
22 And God blessed them, saying: Be fruiteful, and multiplie, and fyll the
waters of the sea, and let foule multiplie in the earth.
23 And the euenyng and mornyng were the fift day.
24 And God sayde: let the earth bryng foorth lyuyng creature after his kynde,
cattell, worme, and beastes of the earth after his kynde: and it was so.
25 God made the beast of the earth after his kynde, and cattell after his kynde,
and euery thyng that creepeth vpon the earth after his kynde: and God sawe that
it was good.
26 God saide: let vs make man in our image, after our lykenesse, and let them
haue rule of the fisshe of the sea, & of the foule of the ayre, and of cattell,
& of all the earth, and of euery creepyng thyng that creepeth vpon the earth.
27 So God created man in his owne image, in the image of God created he him,
male and female created he them.
28 And God blessed them, and God sayde vnto them: be fruitefull, & multiplie,
and replenishe the earth, & subdue it, and haue dominion of the fisshe of the
sea, and foule of the ayre, & of euery lyuing thing that moueth vpon the earth.
29 And God sayde: beholde, I haue geuen you euery hearbe bearing seede, which is
in the vpper face of all ye earth, and euery tree in the which is the fruite of
a tree bearing seede, that they may be meate vnto you:
30 To euery beast of the earth also, and to euery birde of the aire, and to
euery such thing that creepeth vpon ye earth, which doth liue, I haue geuen
euery greene hearbe for meate: and it was so.
31 And God sawe euery thyng that he had made: and beholde, it was exceedyng
good. And the euenyng & the mornyng were the sixth day.

Chapter 2

1 The heauens also & the earth were finisshed, & all the hoast of them.
2 And in the seuenth day God ended his worke whiche he had made. And the seueth
day he rested from all his worke which he had made.
3 And God blessed the seuenth daye, & sanctified it: because that in it he had
rested from all his worke whiche God ordeyned to make.
4 These are the generations of the heauens and of the earth when they were
created, in the day when the Lord God made the earth and the heauens.
5 And euery plant of the fielde before it was in the earth, and euery hearbe of
the fielde before it grewe. For the Lord God had not yet caused it to rayne
vppon the earth, neither was there a man to tyll the grounde.
6 But there went vp a miste from the earth, & watered the whole face of the
grounde.
7 The Lorde God also dyd shape man, euen dust fro of the grounde, & breathed
into his nosethrylles the breath of lyfe, and man was a lyuyng soule.
8 And the Lord God planted a garden eastwarde in Eden, and there he put the man
whom he had shapen.
9 Moreouer, out of the grounde made the Lorde God to growe euery tree, that was
fayre to syght, and pleasaunt to eate: The tree of lyfe in the myddest of the
garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and euyll.
10 And out of Eden there went foorth a flood to water the garden, and from
thence it was deuided, and became into foure heades.
11 The name of ye first is Pison, the same is it that compasseth the whole lande
of Hauilah, where there is golde:
12 And the golde of the lande is very good. There is also Bdellium, and the Onix
stone.
13 The name of the seconde riuer is Gyhon: the same is it that compasseth the
whole lande of Ethiopia.
14 The name of ye thirde ryuer is Hidekel, & it goeth toward the east side of
Assiria: & the fourth ryuer is Euphrates.
15 And the Lord God toke the man, and put hym in the garden of Eden, that he
myght worke it, and kepe it.
16 And the Lorde God commaunded the man, saying: eating, thou shalt eate of
euery tree of the garden:
17 But as touching the tree of knowlege of good and euyll thou shalt not eate of
it: For in what daye so euer thou eatest therof, thou shalt dye the death.
18 And the Lord God sayde: It is not good yt the man should be alone, I wyll
make hym an helpe lyke vnto hym.
19 And so out of the grounde the Lorde God had shapen euery beast of the field,
and euery foule of the ayre, and brought it vnto man, that he myght see howe he
woulde call it. For lykewyse as man hym selfe named euery lyuyng thyng, euen so
was the name therof.
20 And the man gaue names to all cattell, and foule of the ayre, & euery beast
of the fielde: but for man founde he not an helpe lyke vnto hym.
21 The Lord God caused a deepe sleepe to fall vpon Adam, and he slept, and he
toke one of his ribbes, and closed vp the place with fleshe in steade therof.
22 And the ribbe which the lord god had taken from man, made he a woman, &
brought her vnto the man.
23 And man saide: this is nowe bone of my bones, and fleshe of my fleshe, she
shalbe called woman, because she was taken out of man.
24 For this cause shall man leaue his father and his mother, and shalbe ioyned
with his wyfe: and they shall become one fleshe.
25 And they were both naked the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.

Chapter 3

1 And the serpent was suttiller then euery beast of the fielde which ye lord God
hadde made, and he sayde vnto the woman: yea, hath God saide, ye shall not eate
of euery tree of the garden?
2 And the woman sayde vnto the serpent: We eate of ye fruite of the trees of the
garden.
3 But as for the fruite of the tree which is in the myddes of the garden, God
hath sayde, ye shall not eate of it, neither shal ye touche of it, lest
peraduenture ye dye.
4 And the serpent sayde vnto the woman: ye shall not dye the death.
5 For God doth knowe, that the same day that ye eate therof, your eyes shall be
opened, and ye shalbe eue as gods, knowyng good and euyll.
6 And so the woman, seing that the same tree was good to eate of, and pleasaunt
to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, toke of the fruite
therof, and dyd eate, and gaue also vnto her husbande beyng with her, and he dyd
eate.
7 Then the eyes of them both were opened, and they knewe that they were naked,
and they sowed fygge leaues together, & made them selues apernes.
8 And they heard the voyce of the Lord God, walkyng in the garden in ye coole of
the day: and Adam and his wyfe hyd themselues from the presence of the lord God
amongst ye trees of the garden.
9 And the Lorde called Adam, & sayde vnto hym: where art thou?
10 Which sayde: I hearde thy voyce in the garden, and was afrayde because I was
naked, and hyd my selfe.
11 And he sayde: Who tolde thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou not eaten of the
same tree, concernyng the which I commaunded thee that thou shouldest not eate
of it?
12 And Adam said: The woman whom thou gauest to be with me, she gaue me of the
tree, and I dyd eate.
13 And the Lord God sayd vnto the woman: Why hast thou done this? And the woman
sayde: the serpent begyled me, and I dyd eate.
14 And the lord god said vnto ye serpent: Because thou hast done this, thou art
cursed aboue all cattel, and aboue euery beast of the fielde: vpon thy belly
shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eate all the dayes of thy lyfe.
15 I wyll also put enmitie betweene thee & the woman, betweene thy seede and her
seede: and it shall treade downe thy head, and thou shalt treade vpon his heele.
16 But vnto the woman he sayde: I wyll very much multiplie thy sorowe, and thy
griefes of chylde bearyng, In sorowe shalt thou bring foorth children: thy
desire shalbe to thy husbande, and he shall haue the rule of thee.
17 Unto Adam he sayde: Because thou hast hearkened vnto the voyce of thy wyfe,
and hast eaten of the tree concernyng the whiche I commaunded thee, saying, thou
shalt not eate of it, cursed is the grounde for thy sake, in sorowe shalt thou
eate of it all the dayes of thy lyfe.
18 Thorne also and thistle shall it bryng foorth to thee, and thou shalt eate
the hearbe of the fielde.
19 In the sweatte of thy face shalt thou eate thy breade, tyll thou be turned
agayne into the ground, for out of it wast thou taken: For dust thou art, and
into dust shalt thou be turned agayne.
20 And Adam called his wyfes name Heua, because she was the mother of all
lyuyng.
21 Unto Adam also and to his wyfe dyd the Lorde God make garments of skynnes,
and he put them on.
22 And the Lorde God sayde: Beholde, the man is become as one of vs, in knowing
good and euyll: And now lest peraduenture he put foorth his hande, and take also
of the tree of lyfe and eate, and lyue for euer.
23 Therefore the Lorde God sent hym foorth fro the garden of Eden, to worke the
grounde whence he was taken.
24 And so he droue out man, and at the east side of the garde of Eden he set
Cherubins, and a fierie two edged sworde, to kepe the way of the tree of lyfe.

Chapter 4

1 And Adam knewe Heua his wyfe, who conceauing bare Cain, saying: I haue gotten
a man of the Lorde.
2 And she proceading, brought foorth his brother Habel, and Habel was a keper of
sheepe, but Cain was a tyller of the grounde.
3 And in processe of dayes it came to passe, that Cain brought of the fruite of
the grounde, an oblation vnto ye lorde:
4 Habel also brought of the firstlynges of his sheepe, & of the fatte thereof:
and the Lorde had respect vnto Habel, and to his oblation.
5 But vnto Cain and to his offeryng he had no respect: for the whiche cause Cain
was exceedyng wroth, and his countenaunce abated.
6 And the Lorde saide vnto Cain: why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenaunce
abated?
7 If thou do well, shalt thou not receaue? and yf thou doest not well, lyeth not
thy sinne at the doores? Also vnto thee shall his desire be, and thou shalt haue
dominion ouer hym.
8 And Cain talked with Habel his brother: and it came to passe when they were in
the fielde, Cain rose vp agaynst Habel his brother, & slewe him.
9 And the Lorde said vnto Cain: where is Habel thy brother? Which sayde I wote
not: Am I my brothers keper?
10 And he sayde: What hast thou done? the voyce of thy brothers blood cryeth
vnto me out of the grounde.
11 And nowe art thou cursed from the earth, which hath opened her mouth to
receaue thy brothers blood from thy hande.
12 If thou tyll the grounde, she shall not yeelde vnto thee her strength. A
fugitiue and a vacabound shalt thou be in the earth.
13 And Cain sayde vnto the Lord: My iniquitie is more then that it may be
forgeuen.
14 Beholde, thou hast cast me out this day from the vpper face of the earth, &
from thy face shall I be hyd, fugitiue also and a vacabounde shall I be in the
earth: and it shall come to passe, that euery one that fyndeth me shal slay me.
15 And the Lorde said vnto him: Uerely whosoeuer slayeth Cain, he shalbe
punished seuen folde. And the Lorde set a marke vpon Cain, lest any man fyndyng
hym shoulde kyll hym.
16 And Cain went out from the presence of the Lorde, & dwelt in the lande of
Nod, eastwarde from Eden.
17 Cain also knewe his wyfe, whiche conceaued and bare Henoch, and buyldyng a
citie, he called the name of the same citie after the name of his sonne Henoch.
18 Unto ye same Henoch was borne Irad: Irad begat Mehuiael, Mehuiael begat
Methusael, Methusael begat Lamech.
19 And Lamech toke vnto hym two wyues, the name of the one was Ada, and the name
of the other was Sella.
20 And Ada bare Iabel, which was the father of such as dwel in the tentes, and
of such as haue cattell.
21 His brothers name was Iubal, which was the father of such as handle Harpe and
Organ.
22 And Sella also bare Thubalcain, which wrought cunnyngly euery craft of brasse
and of iron, the sister of Thubalcain was Noema.
23 And Lamech saide vnto his wiues Ada and Sella: Heare my voyce ye wyues of
Lamech, hearken vnto my speache: for I haue slayne a man to the woundyng of my
selfe, & a young man to myne owne punishment.
24 If Cain shalbe auenged seuen folde, truely Lamech seuentie tymes & seuen
tymes.
25 Adam knewe his wyfe agayne, and she bare a sonne, and called his name Seth:
For God sayde she hath appoynted me another seede in steade of Habel whom Cain
slewe.
26 And vnto the same Seth also there was borne a sonne, and he called his name
Enos: then began men to make inuocation in the name of the Lorde.

Chapter 5

1 This is the booke of the generations of Ada. In the day that God created man,
in the lykenesse of God made he hym.
2 Male and female created he them, and blessed them, and called their name Adam
in the daye of their creation.
3 And Adam lyued an hundreth and thirtie yeres, and begate a sonne in his owne
lykenesse, after his image, & called his name Seth.
4 Al the dayes of Adam after he had begotten Seth, were eyght hudreth yeres, and
he begat sonnes and daughters.
5 And all the dayes that Adam lyued were nine hundreth and thirtie yeres, and he
dyed.
6 Seth lyued an hundreth & fyue yeres, and begat Enos.
7 And Seth lyued after he begat Enos eyght hundreth and seuen yeres, and begat
sonnes and daughters.
8 And all the dayes of Seth were nine hundreth & twelue yeres, and he dyed.
9 Enos lyued ninetie yeres, and begate Kenan.
10 And Enos lyued after he begate Kenan eyght hundreth & fiftie yeres, and
begate sonnes and daughters.
11 And all the dayes of Enos were nine hundreth & fyue yeres, and he dyed.
12 Kenan lyued seuentie yeres, and begate Mahalaleel.
13 And Kenan liued after he begate Mahalaleel eyght hudreth & fourtie yeres, and
begate sonnes and daughters.
14 And all the dayes of Kenan were nine hundreth and ten yeres, and he dyed.
15 Mahalaleel liued sixtie and fiue yeres, and begate Iered.
16 And againe Mahalaleel liued after he begate Iered eyght hundreth & thirtie
yeres, and begate sonnes & daughters.
17 And al the dayes of Mahalaleel, were eyght hundreth ninetie and fiue yeres,
and he dyed.
18 Iered lyued an hundreth sixtie & two yeres, and he begate Henoch.
19 And Iered liued after he begat Henoch, eyght hundreth yeres, & begate sonnes
and daughters.
20 And all the dayes of Iered were nine hundreth sixtie and two yeres, & he
died.
21 Henoch lyued sixtie and fiue yeres, & begate Methuselah.
22 And Henoch walked with God after he begate Methuselah three hundreth yeres,
and begate sonnes & daughters.
23 And al ye dayes of Henoch were three hundreth sixtie and fiue yeres.
24 And Henoch walked with God: and he was no more seene, for God toke him away.
25 Methuselah also lyued an hundreth eyghtie and seue yeres, and begate Lamech.
26 And agayne Methusalah lyued after he begat Lamech seue hundreth eightie and
two yeres, and begate sonnes and daughters.
27 And all the dayes of Methuselah were nine hundreth sixtie & nine yeres, and
he dyed.
28 Lamech liued an hundreth eyghtie & two yeres, and begate a sonne,
29 And called his name Noah, saying: This same shall comfort vs as concerning
our worke, & sorowe of our handes about the earth, which God cursed.
30 And Lamech lyued after he begat Noah, fiue hudreth ninetie & fiue yeres, and
begate sonnes and daughters.
31 And all the dayes of Lamech were seuen hundreth seuentie and seue yeres, and
he dyed.
32 Noah was fiue hundreth yere olde, & Noah begate Sem, Ham, & Iapheth.

Chapter 6

1 And it came to passe, that when men began to be multiplied in the vpper face
of the earth, there were daughters borne vnto the:
2 And the sonnes of God also sawe the daughters of men that they were fayre, &
they toke them wyues, such as theyliked, from among them all.
3 And the Lorde sayde: My spirite shall not alwayes stryue with man, because he
is fleshe: yet his dayes shalbe an hundreth and twentie yeres.
4 But there were Giantes in those dayes in ye earth: yea & after that the sonnes
of God came vnto the daughters of me, and hadde begotten chyldren of them, the
same became myghtie men of the worlde, and men of renowme.
5 But God sawe that the malice of man was great in the earth, and all the
imagination of the thoughtes of his heart was only euyll euery day.
6 And it repented the Lord that he had made man vpon the earth, & he was touched
with sorowe in his heart.
7 And the Lorde sayde: I wyll from the vpper face of the earth, destroy man whom
I haue created, from man vnto cattell, vnto worme, and vnto foules of the ayre:
For it repenteth me that I haue made them.
8 But Noah founde grace in the eyes of the Lorde.
9 These are the generations of Noah: Noah was a iust man, and perfect in his
generations: And Noah walked with God.
10 Noah begat three sonnes, Sem, Ham, and Iapheth.
11 The earth also was corrupt before God, and the same earth was fylled with
crueltie.
12 And God loked vpon the earth, and beholde it was corrupt: for all fleshe had
corrupt his way vpon earth.
13 And God sayd vnto Noah: the ende of all fleshe is come before me, for the
earth is fylled with crueltie through them, and beholde I wyl destroy them with
the earth.
14 Make thee an Arke of Pine trees: Habitations shalt thou make in the arke, and
shalt pitch it within and with out with pitche.
15 And of this fashion shalt thou make it: The length of the arke shalbe three
hundreth cubites, the breadth of it fiftie cubites, & the height of it thirtie
cubites.
16 A wyndowe shalt thou make in the arke, and in a cubite shalt thou finishe it
aboue: but the doore of the arke shalt thou set in the syde therof. With three
loftes one aboue another shalt thou make it.
17 And beholde, I, euen I do bryng a fludde of waters vpon the earth, to destroy
all fleshe wherin is the breath of lyfe vnder heauen, and euery thyng that is in
the earth shall perishe.
18 With thee also wyll I make my couenaunt: and thou shalt come into the arke,
thou and thy sonnes, thy wife, and thy sonnes wyues with thee.
19 And of euery lyuyng thyng of all fleshe, a payre of euery one shalt thou
bryng into the arke to kepe them alyue with thee, they shalbe male & female.
20 Of fethered foules also after their kinde, and of all cattell after their
kinde: of euery worme of the earth after his kynde, two of euery one shall come
vnto thee, to kepe them alyue.
21 And take thou with thee of all meate that is eaten, and thou shalt lay it vp
with thee, that it may be meate for thee and them.
22 Noah therfore dyd according vnto all that God commaunded hym euen so dyd he.

Chapter 7

1 And the Lord said vnto Noah: come thou and al thy house into ye arke: for thee
haue I seen ryghteous before me in this generation.
2 Of euery cleane beast thou shalt take with thee seuen and seuen, the male and
his female, but of vncleane cattell two, the male and his female.
3 Of foules also of the ayre seuen and seuen, the male and the female, to kepe
seede alyue vpon the face of all the whole earth.
4 For after seuen dayes, I wyl rayne vpon the earth fourtie dayes and fourtie
nightes: & all substaunce that I haue made, wyll I destroy from the vpper face
of the earth.
5 Noah therfore did according vnto all that God commaunded him.
6 And Noah was sixe hundreth yere olde, when the fluddes of water came vpon the
earth.
7 And Noah came, and his sonnes, and his wyfe, and his sonnes wyues with him to
the arke, because of the waters of the fludde.
8 Of cleane beastes, and of vncleane beastes, and of foules, and of euery such
as creepeth vpon the earth,
9 There came two & two vnto Noah vnto the arke, the male and the female, as God
had commaunded Noah.
10 And so it came to passe after seuen dayes, that the waters of the flud were
vpon the earth.
11 In the sixe hundreth yere of Noahs lyfe, in the seconde moneth, the
seuenteene day of ye moneth, in the same day were all the fountaynes of the
great deepe broken vp, and the wyndowes of heauen were opened.
12 And the rayne was vpon the earth fourtie dayes and fourtie nightes.
13 In the selfe same day, entred Noah, and Sem, and Ham, and Iapheth the sonnes
of Noah, and Noahs wyfe, and the three wiues of his sonnes with the into the
arke.
14 They, and euery beast after his kinde, and al the cattel after their kinde,
yea, and euery worme that creepeth vpon the grounde after his kinde, and euerye
byrde after his kinde, and euery fleeyng and fethered foule.
15 And they came vnto Noah into the arke, two and two, of all fleshe wherein is
the breath of lyfe.
16 And they entryng in, came male and female of all fleshe, as God had
commaunded him: and God shut hym in rounde about.
17 And the fludde came fourtie dayes vpon the earth, and the waters were
increased, and bare vp the arke, whiche was lyft vp aboue the earth.
18 The waters also waxed strong, and were encreased exceedyngly vpon the earth:
and so the arke went vpon the vpper face of the waters.
19 And the waters preuayled exceedingly vpon the earth, and al the high hilles
that are vnder the whole heauen, were couered.
20 Fyfteene cubites vpward did the waters preuayle, so that the mountaynes were
couered.
21 And all fleshe perished, that moued vpon the earth, in foule, in cattell, in
beast, and in euery worme that creepeth vpon the earth, yea, and euery man also.
22 So that all that had the breath of lyfe in his nostrilles throughout all that
was on the drye lande, dyed.
23 And euery substaunce was destroyed that remayned and that was in the vpper
part of the grounde, both man and cattell, and worme, and the foule of the
heauen, they were euen destroyed from of the earth, and Noah onlye remayned
aliue, and they that were with him in the arke.
24 But the water preuayled vpon the earth, a hundreth and fiftie dayes.

Chapter 8

1 And God remebred Noah and euery beast, and all the cattell that was with hym
in the arke: and God made a wynde to passe vpon the earth, and the waters
ceassed.
2 The fountaynes also of the deepe, and the windowes of heauen were stopped, and
the rayne from heauen was restrayned.
3 And the waters from the earth returned, goyng and comming agayne: and after
the ende of the hundreth and fiftith day, the waters were abated.
4 And in the seuen moneth, in the seuenteenth day of ye moneth, the arke rested
vpon the mountaynes of Armenia.
5 And the waters were goyng and decreasing vntyll the tenth moneth: In the tenth
moneth, and in the first day of the same moneth, were the toppes of the
mountaynes seene.
6 And after the ende of the fourtith day, it came to passe that Noah opened the
wyndowe of the arke which he had made,
7 And he sent foorth a Rauen, whiche went out, goyng foorth, and returnyng,
vntyll the waters were dryed vp vpon the earth.
8 And agayne he sent foort a Doue from him, that he myght see yf the waters were
abated from the vpper face of the grounde.
9 And the Doue founde no rest for the sole of her foote, and she returned vnto
him into the arke, for the waters were in the vpper face of the whole earth,
Then he put foorth his hande, & tooke her, and pulled her to him into the arke.
10 And he abode yet other seuen dayes, and agayne he sent foorth the Doue out of
the arke:
11 And the Doue came to hym in the euentide, and loe, in her mouth was an Oliue
leafe that she had pluct, wherby Noah dyd knowe that the waters were abated vpon
the earth.
12 And he abode yet other seuen dayes, and sent foorth the Doue, whiche returned
not vnto him any more.
13 And it came to passe, in the sixe hundreth and one yere, in ye first moneth,
the first day of the moneth, the waters were dryed vp from the earth, and Noah
remoued the coueryng of the arke, and looked, and beholde, the vpper face of the
grounde was dryed vp.
14 And in the seconde moneth, in the seuen and twentie day of the moneth was the
earth dryed.
15 And God spake vnto Noah, saying:
16 Go foorth of the arke, thou, and thy wife, thy sonnes, and thy sonnes wiues
with thee.
17 And bryng foorth with thee euery beast that is with thee, of all fleshe, both
foule and cattell, and euery worme that crepeth vpon the earth, that they may
breede in the earth, and bring foorth fruite, and multiplie vpon earth.
18 And so Noah came foorth, and his sonnes, his wyfe, and his sonnes wiues with
hym:
19 Euery beast also, and euery worme, euery foule, and whatsoeuer crepeth vpon
the earth after their kyndes, went out of the arke.
20 And Noah builded an aulter vnto ye Lorde, and tooke of euery cleane beast,
and of euery cleane foule, & offred burnt offering on the aulter
21 And the Lorde smelled a sweete or quiet sauour, and the Lord sayde in his
heart: I wyll not hencefoorth curse the grounde any more for mans sake, for the
imagination of mans heart is euyll euen from his youth: neyther wyll I smyte any
more euery thyng lyuyng, as I haue done.
22 Yet therefore shall not sowyng tyme and haruest, colde and heate, sommer and
wynter, day and nyght, ceasse all the dayes of the earth.

Chapter 9

1 And god blessed Noah, and his sonnes, & saide vnto them, be fruitfull and
multiplie, and replenishe the earth.
2 The feare of you, & the dread of you, shalbe vpon euery beast of the earth,
and vpon euery foule of the ayre, vpon al that moueth vpon the earth, and vpon
all the fishes of the sea, into your hande are they deliuered.
3 Euery thyng that moueth it selfe, and that liueth, shall be meate for you,
euen as the greene hearbe haue I geue you all thinges.
4 But flesh in the life therof which is the blood therof, shall ye not eate.
5 And surely your blood of your lyues wyl I require: at the hande of euery beast
wyll I require it, and at the hand of man, at the hande of mans brother wyll I
require the life of man.
6 Who so sheddeth mans blood, by man shall his blood be shed, for in the image
of God made he man.
7 But be fruitefull, and multiplie you, breede in the earth, and increase
therein.
8 God spake also vnto Noah, & to his sonnes with hym, saying:
9 Beholde, I, euen I establishe my couenaunt with you, and with your seede after
you:
10 And with euery liuing creature that is with you, in foule, in cattell, in
euery beast of the earth whiche is with you, of all that go out of the arke,
whatsoeuer liuing thyng of the earth it be.
11 And my couenaunt I make with you, that from hencefoorth euery fleshe be not
rooted out with the waters of a fludde, neither shall there be a fludde to
destroy the earth any more.
12 And God sayde: this is the token of the couenaut which I make betweene me and
you, and euery lyuyng creature that is with you, for euer.
13 I do set my bowe in the cloude, and it shall be for a token betweene me and
the earth.
14 And it shall come to passe, that when I bryng a cloude vpon the earth, the
bowe also shalbe seene in ye same cloude.
15 And I wyll thinke vpon my couenaunt whiche is betweene me and you, and euery
liuing creature in all fleshe: and it shall no more come to passe, that waters
make a fludde to destroy all fleshe.
16 And the bowe shalbe in the cloude, and I wyll loke vpon it, that I may thinke
vpon the euerlasting couenaunt, betweene god and euery liuing creature in all
fleshe that is vpon the earth.
17 And God sayd vnto Noah, This is the token of the couenaunt which I haue made
betweene me and all fleshe that is vpon earth.
18 The sonnes of Noah goyng foorth of the arke, were Sem, Ham, & Iapheth: and
Ham is the father of Chanaan.
19 These are the three sonnes of Noah, & of them was the whole earth ouerspread.
20 Noah also began to be an husbandman, and planted a vineyarde.
21 And he drynkyng of the wyne, was dronken, and vncouered within his tent.
22 And Ham the father of Chanaan, seeyng the nakednesse of his father, tolde his
two brethren without.
23 And Sem and Iapheth takyng a garment, layde it vpon their shoulders, and
commyng backwarde, couered the nakednesse of their father, namely their faces
beyng turned away, lest they should see their fathers nakednesse.
24 And Noah awoke from his wine, and knewe what his younger sonne had done vnto
him.
25 And he sayde: cursed be Chanaan, a seruaunt of seruauntes shall he be vnto
his brethren.
26 He sayde moreouer: blessed be the Lord God of Sem, and Chanaan shalbe his
seruaunt.
27 God shall enlarge Iapheth: and he shall dwell in the tentes of Sem, and
Chanaan shalbe his seruaunt.
28 Noah liued after the fludde three hundred and fiftie yeres.
29 And all the dayes of Noah, were nine hundred and fiftie yeres, and he dyed.

Chapter 10

1 These are the generations of the sonnes of Noah, Sem, Ham, and Iapheth: and
vnto them were chyldren borne after the fludde.
2 The children of Iapheth: Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Iauan, and Thubal,
Mesech, and Thiras.
3 The children of Gomer: Askenas, and Ripath, and Thogarma.
4 The children of Iauan: Elisa, & Tharsis, Kitthim, and Donanim.
5 Of these were the Iles of the gentiles deuided in their landes, euery one
after his tongue, and after his kinrede, in their nations.
6 The children of Ham, Chus: and Mizraim, and Phut, and Chanaan.
7 And the children of Chus: Seba, and Hauilah, and Sabthah, and Raamah, and
Sabtheca.
8 The children of Raamah: Seba, and Dedan, Chus also begat Nimrod.
9 The same began to be mightie in the earth, for he was a mightie hunter before
the Lorde: Wherfore it is sayde, Euen as Nimrod the mightie hunter before the
Lorde.
10 The begynnyng of his kingdome was Babel, and Erech, & Arab, and Calueh, in
the lande of Sinar.
11 Out of that lande came Assur, and builded Niniue, and the citie Rehoboth, and
Calah,
12 Resen also betweene Niniue & Chalah, and it is a great citie.
13 Mizraim begat Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Nephthuim,
14 Pathrusim also, and Casluhim, (out of whom came Philisthiim) & Capthorim.
15 Chanaan begat Sidon his first borne sonne, and Heth,
16 And Iebusi, and Emori, and Girgasi,
17 And Hiui also, and Arki, and Sini,
18 And Aruadi, and Semari, and Hamathi: and afterwarde were the kinredes of the
Chanaanites spread abrode.
19 The border of the Chanaanites was from Sidon as thou commest to Gerar vnto
Azah, and as thou goest vnto Sodoma and Gomorra, and Adama, and Seboim, euen
vnto Lesa.
20 These are the children of Ham in their kinredes, in their tongues, countreys,
and in their nations.
21 Unto Sem also the father of all the children of Heber, and elder brother of
Iapheth, there were chyldren borne.
22 The chyldren of Sem: Elam, and Assur, Arpharad, and Lud, and Aram.
23 The chyldren of Aram: Us, and Hul, Gether, and Mas.
24 Arphaxad begat Selah, and Selah begat Heber.
25 Unto Heber also were borne two sonnes: the name of the one was Peleg, for in
his dayes was the earth deuided, and his brothers name was Iactan.
26 Iactan begat Almodad, and Saleph, Hazarmaueth, and Ierah,
27 And Hadoram, and Uzal, and Dicla,
28 Obal also, and Abimael, and Seba,
29 And Ophir, and Hauilah, and Iobab, all these were the chyldren of Iactan.
30 And their dwelling was from Mesa, as thou goest vnto Sapher, a mount of the
east.
31 These are the chyldren of Sem after their kinredes and tongues, in their
landes and nations.
32 And so these are the kinredes of the chyldren of Noah after their generations
in their peoples: and of these were the nations deuided in the earth after the
flood.

Chapter 11

1 And all the whole earth was of one language and lyke speache.
2 And when they went foorth from the east, they founde a playne in the lande of
Sinar, and there they abode.
3 And one sayd to another: Come, let vs prepare brycke, and burne them in the
fire. And they had brycke for stones, and slyme had they in steade of morter.
4 And they sayd: Go to, let vs buylde vs a citie and a towre, whose toppe may
reache vnto heauen, and let vs make vs a name, lest peraduenture we be scattered
abrode into the vpper face of the whole earth.
5 But the Lorde came downe to see the citie and towre whiche the chyldren of men
buylded.
6 And the Lorde sayd: Beholde, the people is one, and they haue all one
language, and this they begin to do: neither is there any let to them from all
those thinges whiche they haue imagined to do.
7 Come on, let vs go downe, and there confounde their language, that euerye one
perceaue not his neighbours speache.
8 And so the Lorde scattered them from that place into the vpper face of all the
earth, and they left of to buylde that citie.
9 And therfore is the name of it called Babel, because the Lord dyd there
confounde the language of all the earth: and from thence dyd the Lorde scatter
them abrode vpon the face of all the earth.
10 
11 And Sem liued after he begat Arphaxad fiue hundreth yeres, and begat sonnes
and daughters.
12 Arphaxad liued fiue and thirtie yeres, and begat Selah.
13 And Arphaxad liued after he begat Selah, foure hundreth and three yeres: and
begat sonnes and daughters.
14 Selah liued thirtie yeres, and begat Heber.
15 And Selah liued after he begat Heber, foure hundreth and three yeres, and
begat sonnes and daughters.
16 And Heber liued thirtie and foure yeres, and begat Peleg.
17 And Heber liued after he begat Peleg, foure hundreth and thirtie yeres: and
begat sonnes and daughters.
18 And Peleg liued thirtie yeres, and begat Reu.
19 And Peleg lyued after he begat Reu two hundreth and nyne yeres: and begat
sonnes and daughters.
20 And Reu liued two and thirtie yeres, and begat Serug.
21 And Reu lyued after he begat Serug two hundreth and seuen yeres: and begat
sonnes and daughters.
22 And Serug liued thirtie yere, and begat Nachor.
23 And Serug liued after he begat Nachor, two hundreth yeres: and begat sonnes
and daughters.
24 And Nachor lyued nyne and twentie yeres, and begat Tarah.
25 And Nachor liued after he begat Tarah an hundreth and nineteene yeres: and
begat sonnes and daughters.
26 Tarah liued seuentie yeres, and begat Abram, Nachor, and Haran.
27 These are the generations of Tarah: Tarah begat Abram, Nachor, and Haran:
Haron begat Lot.
28 And Haran dyed in the presence of his father Tarah, in the lande of his
natiuitie, euen in Ur of the Chaldees.
29 Abram & Nachor toke them wiues: the name of Abrams wife was Sarai, and the
name of Nachors wyfe, was Milcha, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milcha, &
the father of Iischa.
30 But Sarai was baren, and had no chylde.
31 And Tarah toke Abram his sonne, and Lot the sonne of Haran his sonnes sonne,
and Sarai his daughter in lawe his sonne Abrams wyfe, and they departed together
from Ur of the Chaldees, that they myght go into the land of Chanaan: and they
came vnto Haran, and dwelt there.
32 And the dayes of Tarah, were two hundreth and fiue yeres, and Tarah died in
Haran.

Chapter 12

1 And the Lord had sayde vnto Abram: get thee out of thy coutrey, and out of thy
nation, and from thy fathers house, vnto a lande that I wyll shewe thee:
2 And I will make of thee a great people, and wyll blesse thee, and make thy
name great, that thou shalt be euen a blessyng.
3 I wyll also blesse them that blesse thee, and curse the that curseth thee: and
in thee shall all kinredes of the earth be blessed.
4 And so Abram departed, euen as the Lorde had spoken vnto hym, and Lot went
with him: and Abram was seuentie and fiue yeres old when he departed out of
Haran.
5 And Abram toke Sarai his wyfe, and Lot his brothers sonne, & all their
substaunce that they had in possession, and the soules that they had begotten in
Haran, and they departed, that they might come into the lande of Chanaan: and
into the lande of Chanaan they came.
6 Abram passed through the lande, vnto the place of Sichem, vnto the plaine of
Moreh. And the Chanaanite was then in the lande.
7 And the Lorde appearyng vnto Abram, sayd, Unto thy seede wyl I geue this
lande: And there buylded he an aulter vnto the Lorde whiche appeared vnto hym.
8 And remouyng thence vnto a mountayne that was eastwarde from Bethel, he
pitched his tent, hauyng Bethel on the west syde, & Hai on the east: and there
he buyldyng an aulter vnto the Lorde, dyd call vpon the name of the Lorde.
9 And Abram toke his iourney, goyng and iourneying towarde the south.
10 And the there was a famine in that lande, and therfore went Abram downe into
Egypt, that he myght soiourne there, for there was a greeuons famine in the
lande.
11 And when he was come neare to enter into Egypt, he sayde vnto Sarai his wife:
beholde, I knowe that thou art a fayre woman to loke vpon:
12 Therfore shall it come to passe, that when the Egyptians see thee, they shall
say, she is his wyfe, and they wyll kyll me, but they wyll saue thee aliue:
13 Say I pray thee, that thou art my sister, that I may fare well for thy sake,
and that my soule may liue through thy occasion.
14 And so when Abram was come into Egypt, the Egyptians behelde the woman, for
she was very fayre.
15 The princes also of Pharao sawe her, and comended her before Pharao, and the
woman was taken into Pharaos house.
16 And he entreated Abram well for her sake: and he had sheepe and oxen, and he
asses, menseruauntes, & maydeseruauntes, she asses and camelles.
17 But the Lorde plagued Pharao and his house with great plagues, because of
Sarai Abrams wyfe.
18 And Pharao callyng Abram, sayde: why hast thou done this vnto me?
19 Why diddest thou not tel me, that she was thy wyfe? why saydest thou, she is
my sister? and so I might haue taken her to be my wyfe? Nowe therfore beholde,
there is thy wyfe, take her, and go thy way.
20 And Pharao gaue his men commaundement concerning him: and they conuayed him
foorth, and his wyfe, and all that he had.

Chapter 13

1 And so Abram gat hym vp out of Egypt, he and his wife, and al that he had, and
Lot with hym, toward the South.
2 And Abram was very ryche in cattell, in siluer, and in golde.
3 And he went foorth on his iourney, from the south towarde Bethel, vnto the
place where his tent had ben at the begynnyng, betwene Bethel and Hai:
4 Euen vnto the place of the aulter whiche he had made there at the first, and
there Abram called on the name of the Lorde.
5 Lot also whiche went with Abram, had sheepe, cattell, and tentes.
6 And the lande was not able to beare them, that they might dwell together: for
theyr substaunce was great, so that they coulde not dwell together.
7 And there fell a stryfe betwene the heardmen of Abrams cattell, and the
heardmen of Lottes cattell: Moreouer, the Chanaanites, and Pherisites dwelled at
that tyme in the lande.
8 Then sayde Abram vnto Lot: let there be no strife I pray thee betweene thee
and me, and betweene my heardmen and thyne, for we be brethren.
9 Is not the whole lande before thee? Seperate thy selfe I pray thee from me: yf
thou wilt take the left hande, I wyll go to the ryght: or yf thou depart to the
ryght hande, I wyll go to the left.
10 And so Lot lyftyng vp his eyes, behelde all the countrey of Iordane, whiche
was well watred euery where before the Lorde destroyed Sodome and Gomorrh, euen
as the garden of the Lorde, lyke the lande of Egypt as thou commest vnto Soar.
11 Then Lot chose all the playne of Iordane, and toke his iourney from the east,
and so departed the one brother from the other.
12 Abram dwelled in the lande of Chanaan, and Lot abode in the cities of the
playne, and pitched his tent vntill Sodome.
13 But the men of Sodome were wicked, and exceedyng sinners agaynst the Lorde.
14 And the Lorde saide vnto Abram, after that Lot was departed fro hym: Lyft vp
thyne eyes nowe, and loke fro the place where thou art, northwarde, southward,
eastwarde, and westward:
15 For all the lande whiche thou seest, wyll I geue vnto thee, and to thy seede
for euer.
16 And I wyl make thy seede as the dust of the earth: so that yf a man can
number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seede also be numbred.
17 Arise, and walke about in the lande, after the length of it, & after the
breadth of it: for I wyll geue it vnto thee.
18 Then Abram taking downe his tent, came and dwelled in the playne of Mamre,
which is in Hebron, & buylded there an aulter vnto the Lorde.

Chapter 14

1 And it came to passe in the dayes of Amraphel kyng of Sinar, Arioch kyng of
Elasar, Chodorlaomer kyng of Elam, and Thidai kyng of the nations:
2 These made warre with Bera kyng of Sodome, and with Birsa kyng of Gomorrhe,
and with Sinab kyng of Adma, and with Semeber kyng of Seboiim, and with the kyng
of Bela, the same is Soar.
3 All these were ioyned together in the vale of Siddim, where nowe the salt sea
is.
4 For twelue yere were they subiecte to kyng Chodorlaomer, and in the thirteenth
yere rebelled.
5 And in the fourteenth yere came Chodorlaomer and the kynges that were with
hym, and smote the Giauntes in Astaroth-carnaim, and the Lusimes in Ham, and the
Emims in the playne of Cariathaim.
6 And the Horites in their mount Seir, vnto the playne of Paran, which bordereth
vpon the wyldernesse.
7 And they returnyng, came to En-mispat, which is Cades, and smote all the
countrey of the Amalecites, and also the Amorites that dwelt in Hazezon-thamar.
8 And there went out the kyng of Sodome, and the kyng of Gomorrhe, and the kyng
of Adma, and the kyng of Seboiim, and the kyng of Bela, whiche is Soar.
9 And they ioyned battell with them in the vale of Siddim: that is to saye, with
Chodorlaomer the kyng of Elam, and with Thidal kyng of nations, and with
Amraphel kyng of Sinar, and with Arioch kyng of Elasar, foure kynges agaynst
fyue.
10 And the vale of Siddim was full of slyme pyttes: and the kynges of Sodome and
Gomorrhe fledde, and fell there, and they that remayned, fledde to the
mountayne.
11 And they takyng all the goodes of Sodome and Gomorrhe, and all their
vittayles, went their way.
12 And they caryed awaye Lot also Abrams brothers sonne, & his goodes, (for he
dwelled in Sodome) and departed.
13 And there came one that had escaped, and tolde Abram the Hebrewe, whiche
dwelled in the playne of Mamre the Amorite, brother of Eschol, and brother of
Aner, whiche were confederate with Abram.
14 When Abram hearde that his brother was taken, he armed his exercised
seruauntes whiche were borne in his owne house, three hundreth & eyghteen, and
folowed on them vntyll Dan.
15 And he and his seruauntes were parted in companies agaynst the by nyght, and
smote them, and pursued them vnto Hoba, which lyeth on the left hand of
Damascus.
16 And recouered all the goodes, and also brought agayne his brother Lot, & his
goodes, the wome also, & the people.
17 After that he returned agayne from the slaughter of Chodorlaomer, and of the
kynges that were with hym, came the kyng of Sodome foorth to meete hym in the
valey Sauch, which is the kynges dale.
18 And Melchisedech kyng of Salem brought foorth breade and wine: & he was the
priest of the most highest God,
19 And blessed hym, saying: Blessed be Abram vnto the hygh God possessour of
heauen and earth.
20 And blessed be the high God, which hath deliuered thyne enemies vnto thy
hande: and Abram gaue him tithes of all.
21 And the kyng of Sodome sayde vnto Abram: geue me the soules, and take the
goodes to thy selfe.
22 And Abram aunswered the kyng of Sodome: I haue lyft vp my hande vnto the Lord
the hye God, possessour of heauen and earth,
23 That I wyll not take of all that is thyne so muche as a threede or shoe
latchet, lest thou shouldest saye, I haue made Abram ryche:
24 Saue onlye that which the young men haue eaten, and the portions of the men
which went with Aner, Eschol, & Mamre, which shal take their portios.

Chapter 15

1 After these thynges, the worde of the Lorde came vnto Abram in a vision,
saying: feare not Abram I am thy shielde and thy exceedyng great rewarde.
2 And Abram sayde: Lorde God what wylt thou geue me when I go chyldelesse, the
chylde of the stewardship of my house is this Eleazer of Damasco?
3 And Abram saide: See, to me thou hast geuen no seede: lo borne in my house is
myne heire.
4 And beholde, the worde of the Lorde came vnto hym, saying, he shall not be
thine heire: but one that shall come out of thine own bowels shalbe thine heire.
5 And he brought hym out, and sayde: loke vp vnto heauen, and tell the starres,
if thou be able to number them. And he sayde vnto hym: euen so shall thy seede
be.
6 And Abram beleued the Lord, & that counted he to hym for righteousnesse.
7 And agayne he saide vnto him: I am the Lorde that brought thee out of Ur of
the Chaldees, to geue thee this lande, & that thou myghtest inherite it.
8 And he sayde: Lorde God wherby shall I knowe that I shall inherite it?
9 He aunswered vnto hym: Take an Heyfer of three yere olde, & a she Goate of
three yere olde, and a three yere olde Ramme, a turtle Doue also, & a young
Pigeon.
10 He toke therefore all these vnto hym, and deuided them in the middes, and
layde euery peece one ouer agaynst another: but the birdes deuided he not.
11 And when the foules fell on the carkases, Abram droue them away.
12 And whe the sunne was downe, there fell a deepe sleepe vpon Abram: and lo, an
horrour of great darknesse fell vpon hym.
13 And he sayde vnto Abram: Knowe this of a suertie, that thy seede shalbe a
straunger in a lande that is not theirs, and shall serue them, and they shall
entreate them euyll foure hundreth yeres.
14 But the nation whom they shall serue wyll I iudge: and afterward shall they
come out with great substaunce.
15 And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace, and shalt be buried in a good olde
age.
16 But in the fourth generation they shal come hyther agayne: for the
wickednesse of the Amorites is not yet full.
17 And so it was, that when the sonne went downe, and it was twylyght, beholde a
smokyng furnesse and a fire brande goyng betweene the said peeces.
18 In that same day the Lorde made a couenaunt with Abram, saying: vnto thy
seede haue I geuen this lande, fro the ryuer of Egypt, euen vnto the great
ryuer, the ryuer of Euphrates.
19 The Kenites and the Kenizites, and the Cadmonites,
20 And the Hethites, and the Perizites, and the Giauntes,
21 The Amorites also, and the Chanaanites, and Girgasites, & the Iebusites.

Chapter 16

1 Sarai Abrams wyfe bare hym no chyldren: but she had an handemayde an Egyptian,
Hagar by name.
2 And Sarai sayde vnto Abram: beholde, nowe the Lorde hath restrayned me, that I
can not beare, I pray thee go in to my mayde, it may be that I may be builded by
her: and Abram obeyed the voyce of Sarai.
3 And Sarai Abrams wyfe toke Hagar her mayde the Egyptian, after Abram hadde
dwelled ten yeres in the lande of Chanaan, and gaue her to her husbande Abram to
be his wyfe.
4 And he went in vnto Hagar, and she conceaued. And when she sawe that she had
conceaued, her mistresse was despised in her eyes.
5 And Sarai sayde vnto Abram: there is wrong done vnto me by thee: I haue geuen
my mayde into thy bosome, whiche seyng that she hath conceaued, I am despised in
her eyes, the Lorde be iudge betweene thee & me.
6 But Abram sayde to Sarai: beholde thy mayde is in thy hande, do with her as it
pleaseth thee. And when Sarai dealt hardly with her, she fledde from the face of
her.
7 And the angel of the Lord founde her beside a fountaine in ye wildernes, euen
by the well that is in the way to Sur,
8 And he said: Hagar Sarais mayde, whence camest thou? and whither wylt thou go?
She sayde: I flee fro the face of my mistresse Sarai.
9 And the angell of the Lorde sayde vnto her: Returne to thy mistresse agayne,
and submit thy selfe vnder her handes.
10 And agayne the angell of the Lord sayde vnto her: I wyll multiplie thy seede
in such sort, that it shal not be numbred for multitude.
11 And the Lordes angell said vnto her: See, thou art with chylde, and shalt
beare a sonne, and shalt cal his name Ismael: because the Lorde hath hearde thy
tribulation.
12 He also wyll be a wylde man, and his hande wyll be agaynst euery man, and
euery mans hande against hym: and he shall dwell in the presence of all his
brethren.
13 And she called the name of the Lorde that spake vnto her, Thou God lokest on
me: for she sayde, haue I not also heare loked after hym that seeth mee?
14 Wherfore ye well was called the well of hym that lyueth and seeth me: and it
is betweene Cades and Bared.
15 And Hagar bare Abram a sonne, and Abram called his sonnes name which Hagar
bare vnto hym, Ismael.
16 And Abram was foure score and sixe yeres olde, when Hagar bare Ismael to hym.

Chapter 17

1 When Abram was ninetie yere olde and nine, the Lorde appeared to hym, and
sayde vnto hym: I am the almightie God, walke before me, and be thou perfect.
2 And I wyll make my couenaunt betweene me and thee, and wyll multiplie thee
exceedyngly.
3 And Abram fell on his face, & God talked with hym, saying:
4 It is I, behold my couenaut is with thee, and thou shalt be a father of many
nations.
5 Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name shalbe called
Abraham: for a father of many nations haue I made thee.
6 I wyll make thee exceedyng fruitefull, and wyll make nations of thee, yea and
kynges shall spryng out of thee.
7 Moreouer I wyll make my couenaunt betweene me and thee, & thy seede after
thee, in their generations, by an euerlasting couenaut, yt I may be God vnto
thee, and to thy seede after thee.
8 And I wyll geue vnto thee and to thy seede after thee, the lande wherein thou
art a strauger euen al the lande of Chanaan, for an euerlastyng possession, and
wyll be their God.
9 And God said agayne vnto Abraham: thou shalt kepe my couenaunt therfore, both
thou & thy seede after thee in their generations.
10 This is my couenaunt which ye shall kepe betweene me & you, and thy seede
after thee: euery man chylde among you shalbe circumcised.
11 Ye shal circumcise the fleshe of your foreskyn, and it shalbe a token of the
couenaunt betwixt me and you.
12 And euery man chylde of eyght dayes olde shalbe circumcised amongst you in
your generations, both he that is borne in thy house, as he that is bought with
money of any straunger, whiche is not of thy seede.
13 He that is borne in thy house, and he also that is bought with money, must
needes be circumcised: & my couenaut shalbe in your fleshe for an euerlastyng
couenaunt.
14 And the vncircumcised manchylde, in whose fleshe the foreskyn is not
circumcised, that soule shalbe cut of from his people, because he hath broken my
couenaunt.
15 And God sayde vnto Abraham: Sarai thy wyfe shalt thou not call Sarai, but
Sara shall her name be.
16 And I wyll blesse her, and geue thee a sonne of her: yea, I wyll blesse her,
and she shalbe a mother of nations, yea & kynges of people shall sprynge of her.
17 But Abraham fell vppon his face, and laughed, and sayde in his heart: shall a
chylde be borne vnto hym that is an hundreth yere olde? And shall Sara that is
ninetie yere olde beare?
18 And Abraham sayde vnto God: O that Ismael myght lyue in thy syght.
19 Unto who God sayd: Sara thy wife shall beare thee a sonne in deede, & thou
shalt call his name Isahac: and I wyll establishe my couenaunt with hym for an
euerlastyng couenaunt and with his seede after hym.
20 And as concernyng Ismael also I haue hearde thee: for I haue blessed him, and
wyll make him fruitefull, and wyl multiplie him excedingly: Twelue princes shall
he beget, and I wyll make a great nation of hym.
21 But my couenaunt wyl I make with Isahac whiche Sara shall beare vnto thee,
euen this tyme twelue moneth.
22 And he left of talkyng with hym, and departed vp from Abraham.
23 Abraham toke Ismael his sonne, and such as were borne in his house, & al that
was bought with money, as many as were men chyldren, whiche were amongst the men
of Abrahams house, & circumcised the fleshe of their foreskinne euen in the
selfe same day, as God had sayde vnto hym.
24 Abraham also hym selfe was ninetie yere olde and nine when the fleshe of his
foreskynne was circumcised.
25 Ismael his sonne was thirtie yere old when he was circumcised in the fleshe
of his foreskynne.
26 The selfe same day was Abraham circumcised and Ismael his sonne.
27 And all the men of his house, borne in his house, or bought with money of
straungers were circumcised with him.

Chapter 18

1 And the Lorde appeared vnto hym in the playne of Mamre, and he sate in his
tent doore in the heate of the day.
2 And he lift vp his eyes and loked, and loe, three men stoode by hym: And when
he sawe them, he ranne to meete them from the tent doore, and bowed hym selfe
towarde the grounde,
3 And sayde: Lorde, yf I haue nowe founde fauour in thy sight, passe not away I
praye thee from thy seruaunt.
4 Let a litle water, I pray you, be fet, and washe your feete, and refreshe your
selues vnder the tree.
5 And I wyll fet a morsell of bread to comfort your heartes withall, and then
shall you go your wayes: for euen therefore are ye come to your seruaunt. And
they sayde: do euen so as thou hast sayde.
6 And Abraham went apace into the tent vnto Sara, & sayde: Make redy at once
three peckes of fine meale, kneade it and make cakes vpon the hearth.
7 And Abraham runnyng vnto his beastes, fet a calfe tender and good, and gaue it
vnto a young man, and he hasted to make it redy at once.
8 And he toke butter and mylke, and the calfe which he had prepared, and set it
before them, and stoode hym selfe by them vnder the tree: & they dyd eate.
9 And they sayde vnto hym: where is Sara thy wife? He aunswered, behold, in the
tent.
10 And he sayde: I wyll certaynely returne vnto thee according to the time of
lyfe: and lo, Sara thy wyfe shall haue a sonne. That heard Sara in the tent
doore, which was behynde hym.
11 Abraham and Sara were both olde, and well stryken in age: and it ceassed to
be with Sara after the maner as it is with women.
12 Therefore Sara laughed within her selfe, saying: Nowe I am waxed olde shal I
geue my selfe to lust, and my Lorde olde also?
13 And God said vnto Abraham: wherfore dyd Sara laugh, saying, shall I of a
suertie beare a chylde, which am olde?
14 Is any thing vnpossible to God? Accordyng to the tyme appoynted wyll I
returne vnto thee euen according to the time of life: & Sara shall haue a sonne.
15 The Sara denied it, saying: I laughed not: for she was afrayde. And he sayde:
it is not so, but thou laughedst.
16 And the men rysyng vp from thence, loked toward Sodome: and Abraham went with
them to bryng them on the way.
17 And the Lorde sayde: shall I hyde from Abraham that thing which I do.
18 Seyng that Abraham shall surely be a great and a myghtie nation, and all the
nations of the earth shalbe blessed in hym?
19 I knowe this also, that he wyll commaunde his chyldren and his householde
after him, that they kepe the way of the Lord, and to do iustice and iudgement,
that the Lorde may bryng vppon Abraha that he hath spoken vnto him.
20 And the lorde saide: because the crye of Sodome and Gomorrhe is great, and
because their sinne is exceding greeuous:
21 I wyll go downe nowe, and see whether they haue done altogether accordyng to
that crye whiche is come vnto me: and yf not, I wyll knowe.
22 And the men departed thence, & went to Sodomeward: but Abraham stoode yet
before the Lorde.
23 And Abraham drewe neare, and said: Wylt thou also destroye the righteous with
the wicked?
24 If there be fiftie ryghteous within the citie, wylt thou destroye and not
spare the place for the sake of fiftie ryghteous that are therein?
25 That be farre from thee that thou shouldest do after this maner, and slaye
the ryghteous with the wicked, & that the ryghteous should be as the wicked,
that be farre from thee: Shall not the iudge of all the worlde do accordyng to
ryght?
26 And the Lorde sayde: If I fynde in Sodome fiftie ryghteous within the citie,
I wyll spare all the place for their sakes.
27 And Abraham aunsweryng, sayde: beholde I haue taken vppon me to speake vnto
the Lorde, whiche am but dust and asshes.
28 If there shall lacke fiue of fiftie ryghteous, wylt thou destroy all the
citie for lacke of fiue? And he saide: If I fynde there fourtie and fiue I wyl
not destroy them.
29 And he proceaded to speake vnto hym agayne, and sayde: What yf there shall be
fourtie founde there? He aunswered: I wyll not do it for fourties sake.
30 He sayde vnto hym agayne: O let not my lord be angry that I speake: What yf
there shall thirtie be founde there? And he sayde: I wyll do nothyng yf I fynde
thirtie there.
31 He sayde agayne: O see I haue taken vppon me to speake nowe also vnto my
Lord: What if there shalbe twentie founde there? He aunswered, I wyll not
destroy them for twenties sake.
32 And he sayde: O let not my Lorde be angry, and I wyll speake yet but this
once: What if ten shalbe found there? He aunswered, I wil not destroy them for
tennes sake.
33 And the Lorde went his way assoone as he had left communyng with Abraham, and
Abraham also turned vnto his place.

Chapter 19

1 And there came two angels to Sodome at euen, and Lot sate at the gate of
Sodome: and Lot seing them rose vp to meete them, and he bowed hym selfe with
his face towarde the grounde.
2 And he sayde: Oh my Lordes, turne in I praye you, into your seruauntes house,
and tary all nyght, and washe your feete, and ye shall ryse vp early to go in
your wayes. Whiche sayde, nay: but we wyll byde in the streates all nyght.
3 And he preassed vpon them exceedinglye: and they returnyng in vnto hym, entred
into his house, & he made them a feast, and did bake vnleuened bread, and they
did eate.
4 And before they went to rest, the men of the citie euen the men of Sodome
compassed the house rounde about, both olde and young, all people fro all
quarters.
5 And they callyng vnto Lot, sayde vnto hym: Where are the men whiche came in to
thee this nyght? bryng them out vnto vs, that we may knowe them.
6 And Lot went out at the doore vnto them, and shut the doores after hym.
7 And sayde: Nay, for Gods sake brethren, do not so wickedly.
8 Behold, I haue two daughters whiche haue knowen no man, them wyll I bryng out
nowe vnto you, and do with them as it seemeth good in your eyes: only vnto these
men do nothyng, for therefore came they vnder the shadowe of my roofe.
9 And they sayde, stande backe: And they said agayne, he came in as one to
soiourne, and wyll he be nowe a iudge? we wyll surely deale worse with thee then
with them. And they preassed sore vpon the man euen Lot, and came to breake vp
the doore.
10 But the men put foorth their hande, and pulled Lot into the house to them,
and shut to the doore.
11 And the men that were at the doore of the house they smoke with blyndenesse
both small and great, so that they were weryed in sekyng the doore.
12 And the men sayde vnto Lot: Hast thou here any besides? sonne in lawe, and
thy sonnes, and thy daughters, and whatsoeuer thou hast in the citie, bryng them
out of this place:
13 For we wyl destroy this place, because the crye of them is great before the
face of God: for the Lorde hath sent vs to destroy it.
14 And Lot went out, and spake vnto his sonnes in lawe which maried his
daughters, saying: Stande vp, get ye out of this place, for the Lorde wyll
ouerthrowe this citie. But he seemed as though he had mocked, vnto his sonnes in
lawe.
15 And when the mornyng arose, the angels caused Lot to speede him, saying:
Stande vp, take thy wyfe, and thy two daughters which be at hande, lest thou
perishe in the sinne of the citie.
16 And as he prolonged the tyme, the men caught both him, his wife, and his two
daughters by the handes, the Lorde beyng mercyfull vnto hym: and they brought
hym foorth, and set hym without the citie.
17 And when he had brought them out, he sayde: Saue thy selfe, and loke not
behynde thee, neither tary thou in all this playne countrey Saue thy selfe in
the mountaine, lest thou perishe.
18 And Lot sayde vnto them: Oh not so my Lordes.
19 Beholde thy seruaunt hath founde grace in thy syght, and thou hast magnified
thy mercy which thou hast shewed vnto me in sauyng my lyfe: Beholde I can not be
saued in the mountayne, lest some harme fall vppon me, and I dye.
20 Beholde here is a citie by to flee vnto, euen yonder litle one: Oh let me
escape thyther: Is it not a litle one, and my soule shall lyue?
21 And he sayde to hym: See, I haue receaued thy request as concernyng this
thing, that I wyll not ouerthrowe this citie for the whiche thou hast spoken.
22 Haste thee, and be saued there: for I can do nothyng tyl thou be come
thyther, and therfore the name of the citie is Soar.
23 And the sonne was nowe rysen vpon the earth, and Lot was entred into Soar.
24 Then the Lorde rayned vpon Sodome and Gomorrhe brymstone and fire, from the
Lorde out of heauen:
25 And ouerthrewe those cities, and all that plaine region, and all that dwelled
in the cities, and that that grewe vpon the earth.
26 But Lots wyfe folowyng him, loked behynde her, & was turned into a piller of
salt.
27 Abraham rysyng vp early, gote hym to the place where he stoode before the
presence of God, and loked towarde Sodome and Gomorrhe, and towarde all the
lande of that playne countrey,
28 And behelde, and lo the smoke of the countrey arose, as the smoke of a
furnesse.
29 And it came to passe, that when God destroyed the cities of that region, he
thought vpon Abraham, and sent Lot out from the middest of the ouerthrow, when
he ouerthrewe the cities, in one of the whiche Lot dwelled.
30 And Lot departed out of Soar, and dwelled in the mountayne with his two
daughters: for he feared to tary in Soar, but dwelled in a caue, he and his two
daughters.
31 And the elder said vnto the younger: our father is olde, and there is not a
man in the earth to come in vnto vs after the maner of all the worlde.
32 Come, let vs geue our father wine to drynke, and lye with hym, that we may
saue seede of our father.
33 And so they gaue their father wine to drinke that night: and the elder
daughter went and lay with her father, and he perceaued it not neither when she
laye downe, neyther when she rose vp.
34 And on the morowe the elder sayde vnto the younger: beholde, yesternight lay
I with my father: let vs make hym drynke wyne this nyght also, & go thou and lye
with hym, that thou mayest rayse vp seede of our father. And they made their
father drynke wyne that nyght also.
35 And the younger arose, and laye with hym: & he perceaued it not, neither whe
she lay downe, neither whe she rose vp.
36 Thus were both the daughters of Lot with chylde by their father.
37 And the elder bare a sonne, and called his name Moab: the same is the father
of the Moabites vnto this day.
38 And the younger bare a sonne also, & called his name Benammi: the same is the
father of the chyldren of Ammon vnto this day.

Chapter 20

1 And Abraham departed thence towarde the south countrey, & dwelled betweene
Cades and Sur, and soiourned in Gerar.
2 And Abraham sayde of Sara his wyfe, she is my syster: And Abimelech kyng of
Gerar sent, and fet Sara away.
3 But God came to Abimelech by night in a dreame, and saide to hym: See, thou
art but a dead man for the womans sake whiche thou hast taken away, for she is a
mans wyfe.
4 But Abimelech had not yet touched her: and he sayde, Lorde wylt thou slay
ryghteous people?
5 Saide not he vnto me, she is my sister? yea and she her selfe sayde, he is my
brother: with a single heart, and innocent handes haue I done this.
6 And God sayde vnto him in a dreame: I wote well that thou dyddest it in the
singlenesse of thy heart: I kept thee also that thou shuldest not sinne against
me, and therefore suffred I thee not to touche her.
7 Nowe therefore delyuer the man his wyfe agayne, for he is a prophete, and he
shall pray for thee, that thou mayest lyue: But and yf thou delyuer her not
agayne, be sure that thou shalt dye the death, both thou and all that thou hast.
8 Therefore, Abimelech rysyng vp betimes in the mornyng, called all his
seruauntes, and tolde all these sayinges in their eares: and the men were sore
afrayde.
9 Then Abimelech called Abraham, & sayde vnto hym: What hast thou done vnto vs?
& what haue I offended thee, that thou hast brought on me & on my kingdome so
great a sinne? thou hast done deedes vnto me that ought not to be done.
10 And Abimelech saide vnto Abraham: what sawest thou that thou hast done this
thyng?
11 Abraha aunswered: For I thought thus surely the feare of God is not in this
place, and they shal slaye me for my wyues sake.
12 Yet in very deede she is my sister, for she is ye daughter of my father,
though she be not the daughter of my mother, and she became my wyfe.
13 And after God caused me to wander out of my fathers house, I sayde vnto her:
this kyndnesse shalt thou shewe vnto me, in all places where we come, that thou
say of me, he is my brother.
14 Then toke Abimelech sheepe and oxen, men seruauntes and women seruauntes, &
gaue them vnto Abraham, and delyuered hym Sara his wyfe agayne.
15 And Abimelech sayde: beholde my lande lyeth before thee, dwell where it
pleaseth thee best.
16 But vnto Sara he saide: See I haue geuen thy brother a thousand peeces of
syluer: beholde, it is as a coueryng of thyne eyes vnto all that are with thee,
and to all other: and thus she was reproued.
17 And so Abraham prayed vnto God, & God healed Abimelech, and his wife, and his
maydens, & they bare chyldren.
18 For the Lorde had closed vp all the wombes of the house of Abimelech, because
of Abrahams wyfe.

Chapter 21

1 The Lord visited Sara as he had promised, and did vnto her accordyng as he had
spoke.
2 For Sara conceaued, and bare Abraham a sonne in his olde age, euen the same
season whiche the Lorde had appoynted.
3 And Abraham called his sonnes name that was borne vnto him, whiche Sara bare
hym, Isahac.
4 And Abraham circumcised his sonne Isahac, when he was eyght dayes olde, as God
commaunded him.
5 And Abraham was an hundreth yere olde, when his sonne Isahac was borne vnto
him.
6 But Sara sayde: God hath made me to reioyce, so that all that heare, wyll ioy
with me.
7 She sayd also: who would haue sayde vnto Abraham, that Sara shoulde haue geuen
chyldren sucke? for I haue borne him a sonne in his olde age.
8 The chylde grewe, and was weaned, and Abraham made a great feast the same day
that Isahac was weaned.
9 Sara saw also the sonne of Hagar the Egyptian, whiche she had borne vnto
Abraham, to be a mocker.
10 Wherfore she sayd vnto Abraham: cast out this bond woman, & her sonne: for
the sonne of this bonde woman, shal not be heyre with my sonne Isahac.
11 And this saying was very greeuous in Abrahams sight, because of his sonne.
12 And God sayde vnto Abraham, let it not be greeuous in thy sight, because of
the lad and of thy bonde woman: In al that Sara hath said vnto thee, heare her
voyce, for in Isahac shall thy seede be called.
13 Moreouer, of the sonne of the bonde woman wyll I make a nation, because he is
thy seede.
14 And so Abraham rose vp early in the mornyng, and tooke bread, and a bottel of
water, and gaue it vnto Hagar, puttyng it on her shoulder, and the lad also, and
sent her away: who departing, wandered vp and downe in the wildernesse of Beer
seba.
15 And the water was spent in the bottell, and she cast the lad vnder some one
of the trees:
16 And went, and sate on the other syde a great way, as it were a bowe shote of:
for she sayd, I wyll not see the death of the chylde. And she sitting downe on
the other side, lyft vp her voyce & wept.
17 And God hearde the voyce of the lad, and the angell of God called to Hagar
out of heauen, and said vnto her, what ayleth thee Hagar? feare not: for God
hath hearde the voyce of the lad where he lyeth.
18 Aryse and lyft vp the lad, and take him in thyne hande, for I wyll make of
hym a great people.
19 And God opened her eyes, and she sawe a well of water, and she went and
filled the bottell with water, and gaue the lad drinke.
20 And God was with the lad, and he grewe, and dwelt in the wyldernesse, and
became a principall archer.
21 And he dwelt in the wyldernesse of Paran, and his mother got hym a wyfe out
of the lande of Egypt.
22 And at the same season, Abimelech and Phicol his chiefe captayne spake vnto
Abraham, saying, God is with thee in all that thou doest:
23 And nowe therefore, sweare vnto me euen here by God, that thou wylt not hurt
me, nor my chyldren, nor my chyldrens children: but that thou shalt deale with
me and the countrey where thou hast ben a straunger, accordyng vnto the
kyndnesse that I haue shewed thee.
24 And Abraham saide, I will sweare.
25 And Abraham rebuked Abimelech for a wel of water, which Abimeleches
seruauntes had violently taken away.
26 And Abimelech said, I wote not who hath done this thing: also thou toldest me
not, neyther hearde I of it but this day.
27 And Abraham toke sheepe and Oxen, and gaue them vnto Abimelech: & they made
both of them a leage together.
28 And Abraham set seuen ewe lambes by them selues.
29 And Abimelech sayd vnto Abraham: what meane these seuen ewe lambes whiche
thou hast set by them selues?
30 He aunswered: for these seuen ewe lambes shalt thou take of my hande, that
they may be a wytnesse vnto me, that I haue digged this well.
31 Wherefore the place is called Beer seba, because that there they sware both
of them.
32 Thus made they a leage together at Beer seba: and Abimelech and Phicol his
chiefe captayne rose vp, and turned agayne into the lande of the Philistines.
33 And Abraham planted a wood in Beer seba, and called there on the name of the
Lorde the euerlasting God.
34 And Abraham soiourned in the Philistines lande a long season.

Chapter 22

1 After these sayinges, god did tempt Abraham, and sayde vnto him Abraham. Which
answered, here I am.
2 And he saide: take thy sonne, thyne onlye sonne Isahac whom thou louest, & get
thee vnto the lande Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt offering vpon one of
the mountaines which I wyl shewe thee.
3 Then Abraham rose vp early in the mornyng, and sadled his Asse, and toke two
of his young men with hym, and Isahac his sonne, and cloue wood for the burnt
offering, and rose vp, and got hym to the place whiche God had appointed hym.
4 The thirde day Abraham lyft vp his eyes, and sawe the place a farre of:
5 And sayde vnto his young men, byde here with the Asse, I and the lad will go
yonder & worship, and come agayne to you.
6 And Abraham toke the wood of the burnt offeryng, and layde it vpon Isahac his
sonne: but he him selfe toke fire in his hande and a knyfe, and they went both
of them together.
7 Then spake Isahac vnto Abraham his father, and sayd, my father. And he
aunswered, here am I, my sonne. He sayde, see here is fyre and wood, but where
is the beast for burnt sacrifice?
8 Abraham aunswered: My God wyll prouide a beast for burnt sacrifice: and so
they went both together.
9 And when they came to ye place which God had shewed him, Abraham buylt an
aulter there, and dressed the wood, and bound Isahac his sonne, and layde him on
the aulter aboue vpo the wood.
10 And Abraham stretchyng foorth his hande, toke the knyfe to haue killed his
sonne.
11 And the angell of the Lord called vnto him from heauen, saying: Abraham,
Abraham. And he sayd, here am I:
12 And he sayde: lay not thy hande vpon the chylde, neyther do any thyng vnto
hym, for nowe I knowe that thou fearest God, & hast for my sake not spared yea
thine onlye sonne.
13 And Abraham lifting vp his eyes, looked: and beholde, behynde hym there was a
Ramme caught by the hornes in a thicket: and Abraham went & tooke the Ramme, and
offered hym vp for a burnt offering in the steade of his sonne.
14 And Abraham called ye name of the place, the Lorde wyll see. As it is sayde
this day, in the mounte will the Lorde be seene.
15 And the angell of the Lorde cryed vnto Abraham from heauen the seconde tyme,
16 And sayd: by my selfe haue I sworne, sayeth the Lorde, because thou hast done
this thyng, and hast not spared yea thyne onlye sonne,
17 That in blessing I wyll blesse thee, and in multiplying I wyll multiplie thy
seede as the starres of heauen, and as the sande which is vpon the sea side, and
thy seede shall possesse the gates of his enemies.
18 And in thy seede shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, because thou
hast hearde my voyce.
19 So turned Abraham againe vnto his young men: and they rose vp, and went
together to Beer seba, and Abraham dwelt at Beer seba.
20 And after these thynges, one tolde Abraham, saying: beholde Milcha, she hath
also borne chyldren vnto thy brother Nachor,
21 Hus his eldest sonne, and Buz his brother, and Camuel the father of the
Syrians,
22 And Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash, and Iidlaph, and Bethuel.
23 And Bethuel begat Rebecca. These eyght did Milcha beare to Nachor Abrahams
brother.
24 And his concubine called Reumah, she bare also Tebah, & Gaham, Thahas, and
Maacha.

Chapter 23

1 Sara was an hudreth and seuen and twentie yere olde (so long liued she.)
2 And Sara dyed in Ciriath arba, the same is Hebron, in the lande of Canaan: and
Abraham came to mourne for Sara, and to weepe for her.
3 And Abraham stoode vp fro the sight of his corse, and talked with the sonnes
of Heth, saying:
4 I am a straunger and a foriner amongest you: geue me a possession to bury in
with you, that I may bury my corse out of my sight.
5 And the chyldren of Heth aunswered Abraham, saying vnto hym:
6 Heare vs my Lorde, thou art a prince of God amongest vs, in the chiefest of
our sepulchres bury thy dead: none of vs shall forbyd thee his sepulchre, but
thou mayest bury thy dead therin.
7 Abraham stoode vp and bowed hym selfe before the people of the lande, that is,
the chyldren of Heth.
8 And he communed with them, saying: If it be your mynde that I shal bury my
dead out of my sight, heare me, and speake for me to Ephron the sonne of Sohar,
9 That he may geue me the caue of Machpelah, whiche he hath in the ende of his
fielde: but for as much money as it is worth shall he geue it me, for a
possession to bury in amongest you.
10 (For Ephron dwelleth amongest the chyldren of Heth) and Ephron the Hethite
aunswered Abraham in the audience of the chyldren of Heth, and of all that went
in at the gates of his citie, saying:
11 Not so my Lord, heare me: the fielde geue I thee, and the caue that therin is
geue I thee also, in the presence of the sonnes of my people geue I it thee,
burye thy dead.
12 And Abraham bowed him selfe before the people of the lande.
13 And spake vnto Ephron in the audience of the people of the countrey, saying:
yf thou wylt geue it then I pray thee heare me, I wyll geue syluer for the
fielde, take it of me, and I will bury my dead therin.
14 Ephron aunswered Abraham, saying vnto hym:
15 My Lord, hearken vnto me, the lande is worth foure hundred sicles of siluer,
what is that betwixt thee and me? bury therfore thy dead.
16 And Abraham hearkened vnto Ephron, and wayed him the siluer which he had
sayde in the aundience of the sonnes of Heth, euen foure hundred syluer sicles
of currant money amongest marchauntes.
17 And the fielde of Ephron in Machpelah, which was before Mamre, eue the fielde
and the caue that was therein, and all the trees that were in the fielde, and
that were in al the borders rounde about, was made sure
18 Unto Abraham for a possession in the sight of the chyldren of Heth, before
all that went in at the gates of the citie.
19 After this dyd Abraham bury Sara his wyfe in the double caue of the fielde
that lyeth before Mamre, the same is Hebron in the land of Chanaan.
20 And so both the fielde & the caue that is therein, was made vnto Abraham a
sure possession to bury in, by the sonnes of Heth.

Chapter 24

1 And Abraham was old & stricken in dayes, and the Lorde had blessed Abraham in
all thinges.
2 And Abraham saide vnto his eldest seruaut of his house, whiche had the rule
ouer all that he had: put thy hande vnder my thigh:
3 And I wyll make thee sweare by the Lorde God of heauen, and God of the earth,
that thou shalt not take a wyfe vnto my sonne of the daughters of the
Chanaanites, amongest which I dwel:
4 But thou shalt go vnto my countrey, and to my kinred, and take a wife vnto my
sonne Isahac.
5 But the seruaunt sayd vnto hym: peraduenture the woman wyll not agree to come
with me vnto this lande, shall I bryng thy sonne againe vnto the land whiche
thou cammest out of?
6 To whom Abraham aunswered: beware that thou bring not my sonne thyther agayne.
7 The Lorde God of heauen whiche toke me from my fathers house, & from the land
of my kinred, and which spake vnto me, and that sware vnto me, saying, vnto thy
seede wyll I geue this lande: he shall sende his angell before thee, and thou
shalt take a wyfe vnto my sonne from thence.
8 Neuerthelesse, if the woman wyl not folowe thee, then shalt thou be cleare
from this my othe: onlye bring not my sonne thyther agayne.
9 And the seruaunt put his hand vnder the thigh of Abraham his maister, and
sware to hym as concernyng yt matter.
10 And the seruaunt toke ten Camelles of the Camelles of his maister, & departed
(& had of al maner of goods of his maister with him) and so he arose & went to
Mesopotamia, vnto ye citie of Nachor.
11 And made his Camelles to lye downe without the citie by a welles side of
water at euen, about the time that women come out to drawe water.
12 And he saide: Lord God of my maister Abraham, I pray thee sende me good
speede this day, and shewe mercy vnto my maister Abraham.
13 Lo, I stande here by the well of water, and the daughters of the me of this
citie come out to drawe water:
14 Nowe let the damsel to whom I say, stoupe downe thy pitcher I pray thee, that
I may drinke: If she say also, drinke, and I wyll geue thy Camelles drinke also:
let the same be she that thou hast ordeyned for thy seruaunt Isahac, and thereby
shall I knowe that thou hast shewed mercy on my maister.
15 And it came to passe yer he had lefte speakyng, beholde, Rebecca came out,
the daughter of Bethuel, sonne to Milcha, the wyfe of Nachor Abrahams brother,
and her pytcher vpon her shoulder:
16 The damsel was very fayre to looke vpon, and yet a mayde, and vnknowen of
man: and she went downe to the wel, and filled her pitcher, and came vp.
17 And the seruaunt runnyng to meete her, sayde: let me I pray thee drinke a
litle water of thy pitcher.
18 And she sayd: drinke my Lorde. And she hasted, and let downe her pytcher vpon
her arme, and gaue him drinke.
19 And when she had geuen him drinke, she sayde: I wyll drawe water for thy
Camelles also, vntyl they haue dronke ynough.
20 And she poured out her pytcher into the trough hastyly, and ranne agayne vnto
the well to draw water and drew for all his Camelles.
21 And the man wondred at her, but held his peace, to witte whether the Lorde
had made his iourney prosperous, or not.
22 And as the Camelles had left drinking, the man tooke a golden earring of
halfe a sickle wayght, and two bracelettes for her handes, of ten sickles wayght
of golde,
23 And sayde: whose daughter art thou? tell me I pray thee: is there rowme in
thy fathers house for vs to lodge in?
24 She aunswered hym: I am the daughter of Bethuel the sonne of Milcha whiche
she bare vnto Nachor.
25 And said moreouer vnto him, we haue litter and prouender ynough, and also
rowme to lodge in.
26 And the man bowed hymselfe, and worshipped the Lorde,
27 And sayde: blessed be the Lorde God of my maister Abraham, whiche hath not
left destitute my maister of his mercye and trueth: for when I was on my
iourney, the Lorde brought me to my maisters brothers house.
28 And the damsell ranne, and told them of her mothers house these thinges.
29 And Rebecca had a brother called Laban: and he ranne out vnto the man, euen
to the well.
30 For assoone as he had seene the earerynges, and the bracelettes in his
sisters hande, and hearde the wordes of Rebecca his sister, saying, thus sayde
the man vnto me: he went out vnto the man, and lo, he stoode with the Camelles
by the well syde,
31 And he sayde: come thou blessed of the Lord, wherfore standest thou without?
I haue dressed the house, & rowme for thy Camelles.
32 And then the ma came into the house, and he vnharnessed the Camelles, and
brought lytter and prouender for the Camelles, and water to wash his feete, &
the mens feete that were with him.
33 And there was set meate before hym to eate: but he sayd, I wyll not eate
vntyll I haue sayde myne arande. And he sayd: say on.
34 And he sayde: I am Abrahams seruaunt,
35 And God blessed my maister merueylously, that he is become great, and hath
geuen him sheepe and oxen, siluer and golde, men seruauntes, and
maydeseruauntes, camelles and asses.
36 And Sara my maisters wyfe bare hym a sonne when she was olde, and vnto him
hath he geue all that he hath.
37 And my maister made me sweare, saying: thou shalt not take a wyfe to my sonne
amongest the daughters of the Chanaanites, in whose lande I dwell:
38 But thou shalt go vnto my fathers house, and to my kinred, and take a wife
vnto my sonne.
39 And I sayde vnto my maister: peraduenture the woman wyll not folowe me.
40 And he answered me: the Lord before whom I walke, wyll sende his angell with
thee, and prosper thy iourney, and thou shalt take a wyfe for my sonne of my
kinred, and of my fathers house.
41 Then shalt thou be free from this othe made to me, when thou commest to my
kinred: and yf they geue not thee one thou shalt be free from this othe made to
me.
42 And so I came this day vnto the wel, and sayde: O Lorde the God of my maister
Abraham, if it be so nowe that thou makest my iourney whiche I go prosperous,
43 Beholde, I stande by the well of water: and when a virgin commeth foorth to
drawe water, and I say to her, Geue me I pray thee a little water of thy pitcher
to drinke:
44 And she say to me, Drinke thou, and I wyll also drawe for thy Camelles: let
the same be the woman whom the Lorde hath prepared for my maisters sonne.
45 And before I had made an ende of speakyng in myne heart, beholde, Rebecca
came foorth, and her pitcher on her shoulder, and she went downe vnto the well,
and drewe water, and I sayde vnto her, Geue me drinke I pray thee.
46 And she made haste, and toke downe her pitcher from her shoulder and said:
Drinke, and I wyll geue thy Camelles drinke also. So I dranke, and she gaue the
Camelles drinke also.
47 And I asked her, saying: whose daughter art thou? She answered: the daughter
of Bethuel Nachors sonne, whom Milcha bare vnto hym: and I put the earring vpon
her face, and the bracelettes vpon her handes.
48 And I bowed my selfe, and worshipped the Lorde, and blessed the Lorde God of
my maister Abraham, whiche had brought me the ryght way, to take my maisters
brothers daughter vnto his sonne.
49 Nowe also if he wyll consent to deale mercyfully and truely with my maister,
tel me: and if not, tel me also, that I may turne me to the ryght hande, or to
the left.
50 Then aunswered Laban and Bethuel, saying: This saying is proceeded euen of
the Lorde, we can not therefore say vnto thee eyther good or bad.
51 Beholde, Rebecca is before thee, take her, and go, that she may be thy
maisters sonnes wife, euen as god hath sayde.
52 And when Abrahams seruaunt heard theyr wordes, he worshipped the Lord, bowyng
hym selfe towarde the earth.
53 And the seruaunt toke foorth iewelles of syluer, and iewelles of golde, and
rayment, and gaue them to Rebecca: and to her brother, and to her mother he gaue
costly gyftes
54 And they did eate and drinke, both he and the men that were with hym, and
taried all night: and when they rose vp in the mornyng, he said: let me depart
vnto my maister.
55 Her brother and her mother aunswered: let the damsell abyde with vs, and it
be but euen ten dayes, and then shall she go.
56 He sayde vnto them: hynder me not, beholde, the Lorde hath prospered my
iourney, sende me away therefore, that I may go to my maister.
57 And they sayde: we wyll call the damsell, and enquire at her mouth.
58 And they called foorth Rebecca, and sayde vnto her: wylt thou go with this
man? And she aunswered, I wyll go.
59 So they let Rebecca theyr sister go, and her nurse, & Abrahams seruaunt, and
his men.
60 And they blessed Rebecca, and sayde vnto her: thou art our sister, growe into
thousande thousandes, and thy seede possesse the gate of his enemies.
61 And Rebecca arose and her damselles, and gat them vp vpon the Camelles, and
folowed the man: and the seruaunt toke Rebecca, and went his waye.
62 And Isahac was commyng from the waye of the well of the lyuyng and seeyng me:
for he dwelt in the South countrey.
63 And Isahac was gone out to pray in the fielde at the euentide, and he lift vp
his eyes, and saw the Camelles commyng.
64 And Rebecca lyft vp her eyes, & when she sawe Isahac, she lyghted of the
Camell,
65 (For she said vnto the seruaunt: what man is this, that commeth walkyng
against vs in the fielde? And the seruaunt sayd, it is my maister): therfore she
toke her vayle and couered her.
66 And the seruaunt tolde Isahac all thinges that he had done.
67 And Isahac brought her into his mother Saraes tent, and toke Rebecca, and she
became his wife, and he loued her: and so Isahac receaued comfort after his
mother.

Chapter 25

1 Abraham proceeded further, and toke hym another wyfe, called Cetura.
2 Whiche bare hym Zimram, and Iocsan, and Medan, and Midian, and Iesbac, and
Suah.
3 Iocsan begat Seba and Dedan, and the sonnes of Dedan were Assurim, and
Letusim, and Leummim.
4 And the sonnes of Midian, Ephah, & Epher, & Hanoch, & Abida, & Eldaah: all
these were the children of Cetura.
5 And Abraham gaue al his goodes vnto Isahac:
6 But vnto the sonnes of the concubines whiche Abraham had, he gaue gyftes, and
sent them away from Isahac his sonne (whyle he yet lyued) eastwarde vnto the
east countrey.
7 And these are the dayes of the yeres of Abrahams lyfe which he liued, an
hundred threscore and fifteene yeres.
8 And then Abraham waxyng away, dyed in a lustie age, beyng an olde man, when he
had liued ynough, and was gathered to his people.
9 And his sonnes Isahac and Ismael buryed hym in the double caue in the fielde
of Ephron sonne of Soar the Hethite, before Mamre.
10 Whiche fielde Abraham bought of the sonnes of Heth: there was Abraham buryed,
and Sara his wyfe.
11 And it came to passe after the death of Abraham, that God blessed his sonne
Isahac, and Isahac dwelled by the well of liuing and seeing me.
12 These are the generations of Ismael Abrahams sonne, whiche Hagar the Egyptian
Saraes handmayde bare vnto Abraham.
13 And these are the names of the sonnes of Ismael, accordyng to the names of
their kindred: the eldest sonne of Ismael, Nabaioth, and Cedar, and Adbeel, and
Mibsam,
14 And Misma, and Duma, and Massa, Hadar, and Thema,
15 Ietur, Naphis, and Cedina.
16 These are the sonnes of Ismael, and these are their names by theyr townes and
castles, twelue princes of their housholdes.
17 And these are the yeres of the lyfe of Ismael, an hundred and thirtie and
seuen yere: and he waxing away, dyed, and was layed vnto his people.
18 And they dwelled from Hauilah vnto Sur, that is by the border of Egypt as
thou goest toward Assur, and he died in the presence of all his brethren.
19 And these are the generations of Isahac, Abrahams sonne: Abraham begat
Isahac.
20 And Isahac was fourtie yere olde when he toke Rebecca to wyfe, the daughter
of Bethuel the Syrian of Mesopotamia, and sister to Laban the Syrian.
21 And Isahac made intercession vnto the Lorde for his wyfe, because she was
barren: and the Lord was intreated of hym, and Rebecca his wyfe conceaued.
22 And the childre stroue together within her wombe: therfore she said, if it be
so, why am I thus? wherefore she went to aske the Lorde.
23 And the Lorde sayde vnto her: there are two maner of people in thy wombe, and
two nations shalbe deuided out of thy bowelles, and the one nation shalbe
mightier then the other, and the elder shalbe seruaunt vnto the younger.
24 Therefore when her tyme was come to be deliuered, behold, there were two
twynnes in her wombe.
25 And he that came out fyrst, was red, and he was all ouer as it were a hearie
garment, and they called his name Esau.
26 And after hym came his brother out, and his hande holdyng Esau by the heele,
and his name was called Iacob: and Isahac was threscore yere olde when they were
borne.
27 And the boyes grewe, and Esau became a cunnyng hunter, and a wylde man: but
Iacob was a perfect man, and dwelled in tentes.
28 Isahac loued Esau, because he dyd eate of his venison, but Rebecca loued
Iacob.
29 Iacob sodde pottage, and Esau came from the fielde, and was fayntie:
30 And Esau sayd to Iacob: feede me I pray thee, with that same red pottage, for
I am fayntie: and therfore was his name called Edom.
31 And Iacob saide: sell me this day thy byrthryght.
32 Esau sayde: lo, I am at the poynt to dye, and what profite shall this
byrthryght do me?
33 Iacob aunswered: sweare to me then this day. And he sware to him, & solde his
byrthryght vnto Iacob.
34 Then Iacob gaue Esau bread and pottage of ryse, and he dyd eate and drinke,
and rose vp, and went his way: and Esau little regarded his byrthright.

Chapter 26

1 And there fell a famine in the land, besides the first that was in the dayes
of Abraham: And Isahac went vnto Abimelech, king of the Philistines, vnto Gerar.
2 And the Lorde appeared vnto hym, and sayde: Go not downe into Egypt, but abyde
in the lande whiche I shall shewe vnto thee.
3 Soiourne in this lande, and I wyl be with thee, and wyll blesse thee: for vnto
thee and vnto thy seede I wyll geue all these countreys, and I wyll perfourme
the othe whiche I sware vnto Abraham thy father.
4 And wyl make thy seede to multiplie as the starres of heauen, and wyll geue
vnto thy seede al these countreys: and in thy seede shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed:
5 Because that Abraham hearkened vnto my voyce, & kept my ordinaunce, my
commaundementes, my statutes, and my lawes.
6 And Isahac dwelled in Gerar.
7 And the men of the place asked him of his wyfe. And he sayde, she is my
sister: for he feared to say, she is my wyfe, lest the men of the place shoulde
haue kylled hym, because of Rebecca, whiche was beautifull to the eye.
8 And after he had ben there a long time, Abimelech king of the Philistines
loked out at a windowe, & sawe Isahac sportyng with Rebecca his wyfe.
9 And Abimelech called Isahac, and said: beholde, she is of a suretie thy wife,
and why saydest thou, she is my sister? To whom Isahac aunswered: because I
thought that I might peraduenture haue dyed for her sake.
10 Abimelech said: why hast thou done this vnto vs? one of the people myght
lyghtly haue lyne by thy wyfe, and so shouldest thou haue brought sinne vpon vs.
11 And so Abimelech charged al his people, saying: He that toucheth this man or
his wyfe, shall dye the death.
12 Then Isahac sowed in that lande, and receaued in the same yere an hundred
folde: and the Lorde blessed hym.
13 And the man waxed myghtie, & went foorth, and grewe tyll he was exceeding
great.
14 For he had possessio of sheepe, of oxen, and a myghtie housholde: and
therfore the Philistines had enuie at hym.
15 For the Philistines stopped and fylled vp with earth all the welles which his
seruauntes had digged in his father Abrahams tyme.
16 And Abimelech sayde vnto Isahac: Get thee from vs, for thou art mightier then
we a great deale.
17 Therefore Isahac departed thence, and abode in the valley of Gerar, and dwelt
there.
18 And Isahac returning, digged againe the welles of water which they digged in
the dayes of Abraham his father, which the Philistines had stopped after the
death of Abraham, & named them after the same names by the which his father had
named them.
19 Isahacs seruauntes digged in the valley, and founde a well of springyng
water.
20 And the heardmen of Gerar did striue with Isahacs heardmen, saying: the water
is ours. Then called he the well contention, because they stroue with hym.
21 And they digged another well, and stroue for that also: and he called the
name of it enmitie.
22 And then he departed thence, & digged another well, for the which they stroue
not. Therfore called he it roomth, saying: the Lorde hath made vs nowe roome
that we may encrease vpon the earth.
23 And he went vp thence to Beer-seba.
24 And the Lorde appeared vnto hym the same night, and sayde: I am the God of
Abraham thy father, feare not, for I am with thee, and wyl blesse thee and
multiple thy seede for my seruaunt Abrahams sake.
25 And he builded an aulter there, and called vpon the name of the Lorde, and
pitched his tent: and there Isahacs seruauntes dygged a well.
26 Then came Abimelech to him from Gerar, and Ahuzath his friende, and Phicol
the captaine of his armie.
27 And Isahac sayde vnto them: wherfore come ye to me, seyng ye hate me, and
haue put me away from you?
28 Whiche aunswered: We sawe most certainly that the Lord was with thee, and we
sayde: let there be nowe an oth betwixt vs, euen betwixt vs and thee, and let vs
make a league with thee:
29 That thou shouldest do vs no hurt, as we haue not touched thee, and as we
haue done vnto thee nothyng but good, & sent thee away in peace: for thou art
nowe the blessed of the Lorde.
30 And he made them a feast, and they dyd eate and drynke.
31 And they rose vp betymes in the mornyng, and sware one to another: And Isahac
sent them away, and they departed from hym in peace.
32 And the same daye Isahacs seruauntes came and tolde hym of a well which they
had dygged, and sayde vnto hym, we haue founde water.
33 And he called it Sebah: and the name of the citie is called Beer-seba vnto
this day.
34 Esau was fourtie yere olde, & he toke a wyfe called Iudith, the daughter of
Beeri an Hethite, and Basemath the daughter of Elon, an Hethite also.
35 Which were disobedient vnto Isahac and Rebecca.

Chapter 27

1 And it came to passe, that whe Isahac waxed olde, & his eyes were dimme, so
that he could not see, he called Esau his eldest sonne, & saide vnto hym, my
sonne? And he sayde vnto hym: here am I.
2 And he sayde: Beholde, I am nowe olde, and knowe not the daye of my death.
3 Nowe therefore take I pray thee thy weapons, thy quyuer and thy bowe, and get
thee to the fielde, that thou mayest take me some venison.
4 And make me well tastyng meates, such as I loue, and bryng it to me, that I
may eate, that my soule may blesse thee before that I dye.
5 But Rebecca hearde when Isahac spake to Esau his sonne: And Esau wet into the
fielde to hunt venison, and to bryng it.
6 And Rebecca spake vnto Iacob her sonne, saying: Beholde, I haue hearde thy
father talkyng with Esau thy brother, and saying:
7 Bring me venison, and make me daintie meate, that I may eate, and blesse thee
before the Lorde, afore my death.
8 Nowe therfore my sonne heare my voyce in that which I comaunde thee.
9 Get thee to the flocke, and bryng me thence two good kyddes fro the goates,
and I wyll make of them pleasaunt meates for thy father, such as he loueth.
10 And thou shalt bryng it to thy father that he may eate, and that he may
blesse thee before his death.
11 Then said Iacob to Rebecca his mother: Beholde, Esau my brother is a heary
man, and I am smoothe:
12 My father shall peraduenture feele mee, and I shall seeme vnto hym as though
I went about to begyle hym, and so shall I bryng a curse vpon me, and not a
blessyng.
13 And his mother sayde vnto him, Upon me be the curse my sonne: only heare my
voyce, and go and fetche me them.
14 And Iacob went, and fet them, and brought them to his mother: and his mother
made pleasaunt meate, such as she knewe his father loued.
15 And Rebecca fet goodly rayment of her eldest sonne Esau, whiche were in the
house with her, and put them vpon Iacob her younger sonne:
16 And she put the skynnes of the kiddes vpon his handes, and vpon the smoothe
of his necke.
17 And she put that pleasaunt meate and bread, whiche she had prepared, in the
hande of her sonne Iacob.
18 When he came to his father, he sayde: my father? And he aunswered, here am I:
who art thou, my sonne?
19 And Iacob sayde vnto his father: I am Esau thy eldest sonne, I haue done
accordyng as thou baddest me: aryse I pray thee, syt, and eate of my venison,
that thy soule may blesse me.
20 And Isahac said vnto his sonne: how commeth it that thou hast founde it so
quickly my sonne? He aunswered: the lorde thy God brought it to my handes.
21 Then sayde Isahac vnto Iacob: Come neare, and I wyll feele thee my sonne,
whether thou be my very sonne Esau, or not.
22 Then went Iacob to Isahac his father, and he felt hym, and sayde: The voyce
is Iacobs voyce, but the handes are the handes of Esau.
23 And he knewe him not, because his handes were heary as his brother Esaus
handes: and so he blessed hym.
24 And he asked him: art thou my sonne Esau? And he sayde: that I am.
25 Then sayde he: Bryng me, & let me eate of my sonnes venison, that my soule
may blesse thee. And he brought hym, and he ate: and he brought hym wine also,
and he dranke.
26 And his father Isahac said vnto him: Come neare, and kysse me, my sonne.
27 And he went vnto him, & kyssed him, and he smelled the sauour of his rayment,
and blessed hym, & saide: See, the smell of my sonne, is as the smell of a
fielde which the Lorde hath blessed.
28 God geue thee of the deawe of heauen, and of the fatnesse of the earth, and
plentie of corne and wine.
29 People be thy seruauntes, and nations bowe to thee: be lorde ouer thy
brethren, and thy mothers children stowpe with reuerence vnto thee: cursed be he
that curseth thee, and blessed be he that blesseth thee.
30 Assoone as Isahac had made an ende of blessyng Iacob, & Iacob was scarse gone
out from the presence of Isahac his father, then came Esau his brother from his
huntyng.
31 And he also had made a pleasaunt meate, and brought it vnto his father, and
saide vnto his father: let my father aryse, and eate of his sonnes venison, that
thy soule may blesse me.
32 Then his father Isahac sayde vnto hym: who art thou? He aunswered: I am thy
sonne, thy first borne Esau.
33 And Isahac was greatly astonied out of measure, and sayde: which is he and
where is he then that hath hunted venison and brought it me, and I haue eaten of
al before thou camest? and haue blessed hym, yea & he shalbe blessed.
34 When Esau hearde the wordes of his father, he cryed aloude & bitterly, aboue
measure, and sayde vnto his father: blesse me, I also am thy sonne O my father.
35 Who aunswered. Thy brother came with subtiltie, and hath taken awaye thy
blessyng.
36 And he said agayne: Is not he rightly named Iacob? for he hath vndermyned me
nowe two tymes. First he toke away my birthright: and see, nowe hath he taken
away my blessyng also. And he sayde: hast thou kept neuer a blessyng for me?
37 Isahac aunswered, and sayde vnto Esau: Beholde, I haue made hym thy Lorde, &
all his brethren haue I made his seruauntes: Moreouer, with corne and wine haue
I stablished him, what shall I do vnto thee nowe my sonne?
38 And Esau sayde vnto his father: hast thou but that one blessyng my father?
blesse me, I am also thy sonne O my father. So lyfted vp Esau his voyce, and
wept.
39 Then Isahac his father aunswered, and sayde vnto hym: beholde, thy dwellyng
place shalbe the fatnesse of the earth, and of the deawe of heauen from aboue.
40 And through thy sworde shalt thou liue, and shalt be thy brothers seruaunt:
and it shal come to passe, that thou shalt get the maisterie, & thou shalt loose
his yoke from of thy necke.
41 And Esau hated Iacob, because of the blessyng that his father blessed hym
withall. And Esau sayde in his heart: The dayes of sorowyng for my father are at
hande, then wyll I slaye my brother Iacob.
42 And these wordes of Esau her elder sonne were tolde to Rebecca: And she sent,
& called Iacob her younger sonne, & saide vnto him: Beholde, thy brother Esau as
touchyng thee doth comforte hym selfe full purposyng to kyll thee.
43 Nowe therefore my sonne heare my voyce: make thee redy, and flee to Laban my
brother at Haran,
44 And tary with him awhyle vntyl thy brothers fiercenesse be swaged,
45 And vntyll thy brothers wrath turne away from thee, & he forget the thinges
which thou hast done to hym: then wyll I sende and fet thee away from thence:
why should I be desolate of you both in one day?
46 And Rebecca spake to Isahac: I am weery of my lyfe for the daughters of Heth.
Yf Iacob take a wyfe of the daughters of Heth, such as these which are of the
daughters of the lande, what good shall my lyfe do me?

Chapter 28

1 And so Isahac called Iacob, and blessed him, and charged him, and sayde vnto
hym: See thou take not a wyfe of the daughters of Chanaan:
2 Arise, and get thee to Mesopotamia, to the house of Bethuel thy mothers
father, and there take thee a wyfe of the daughters of Laban thy mothers
brother.
3 And God almyghtie blesse thee, and make thee to encrease, & multiplie thee,
that thou mayest be a number of people:
4 And geue the blessing of Abraham vnto thee, and to thy seede with thee, that
thou mayest receaue to inherite ye lande wherein thou art a straunger, whiche
God gaue vnto Abraham.
5 Thus Isahac sent foorth Iacob: and he went towarde Mesopotamia, vnto Laban,
sonne of Bethuel the Syrian, and brother to Rebecca Iacob and Esaus mother.
6 When Esau sawe that Isahac had blessed Iacob, and sent hym to Mesopotamia to
fet hym a wyfe from thence, and that as he blessed him, he gaue him a charge,
saying, thou shalt not take a wyfe of the daughters of Chanaan:
7 And that Iacob had obeyed his father and mother, and was gone to Mesopotamia:
8 And Esau seyng also that the daughters of Chanaan pleased not Isahac his
father:
9 Then went Esau vnto Ismael, and toke vnto the wyues which he had Mahalah the
daughter of Ismael Abrahams sonne, the sister of Nebaioth to be his wyfe.
10 Iacob departed from Beer-seba, and went towarde Haran.
11 And he came vnto a certayne place, & taryed there all night, because the
sunne was downe: and toke of the stones of the place, and put vnder his head,
and layde hym downe in the same place to sleepe.
12 And he dreamed, and beholde there stoode a lather vpo the earth, and the
toppe of it reached vp to heauen: and see, the angels of God went vp & downe
vpon it.
13 Yea, and God from aboue leaned vpon it, and sayde: I am the Lord God of
Abraham thy father, and the God of Isahac, the land which thou sleepest vpon,
wyll I geue thee and thy seede.
14 And thy seede shalbe as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spreade abrode
to the west, to the east, to the north, and to the south: and in thee, and in
thy seede, shall all the kynredes of the earth be blessed.
15 And see, I am with thee, and wyll be thy keper in all places whyther thou
goest, and wyll bryng thee agayne into this lande: For I wyl not leaue thee,
vntyll I haue made good that whiche I haue promised thee.
16 When Iacob was awaked out of his sleepe, he sayde: Surely the Lorde is in
this place, and I knewe it not.
17 And he was a frayde, and saide: howe dreadefull is this place? it is none
other but euen the house of God, & it is the gate of heauen.
18 And Iacob rose vp early in the mornyng, and toke the stone that he hadde
layed vnder his head, and pitched it vpon an ende, and powred oyle in the toppe
of it.
19 And he called the name of the place Bethel: but the name of the citie was
called Luz, before tyme.
20 And Iacob vowed a vowe, saying: Yf God wyll be with me, and wyll kepe me in
this iourney in which I go, and wyll geue me bread to eate, and clothes to put
on:
21 So that I come agayne vnto my fathers house in saftie: then shal the Lord be
my God.
22 And this stone whiche I haue set vp on an ende, shalbe Gods house: and of all
that thou shalt geue me, I wyl surely geue the tenth vnto thee.

Chapter 29

1 Then Iacob went on his iourney, & came into the lande of the people of the
east.
2 And as he loked about, beholde, there was a wel in the field, and loe, three
flockes of sheepe lay there by, for at that well were the flockes watered: and
there was a great stone vpon the well mouth.
3 And thyther were all the flockes brought, and they roulled the stone fro the
welles mouth, & watred the sheepe, & put the stone agayne vpon the welles mouth
vnto his place.
4 And Iacob saide vnto them: My brethren, whence be ye? And they sayde: of Haran
are we.
5 And he sayde vnto them: Knowe ye Laban the sonne of Nachor? They sayde: we
knowe hym.
6 And he sayde vnto them: is he in good health? And they sayde: he is in good
health, and beholde his daughter Rachel commeth with the sheepe.
7 And he sayde: loe it is yet a great whyle to nyght, neither is it tyme that
the cattell should be gathered together: water ye the sheepe, and go and feede
them.
8 And they sayde: we may not vntyll all the flockes be brought together, and tyl
they roule the stone from the welles mouth, and so we water our sheepe.
9 Whyle he yet talked with them, Rachel came with her fathers sheepe: for she
kept them.
10 Assoone as Iacob sawe Rachel the daughter of Laban his mothers brother, & the
sheepe of Laban his mothers brother, Iacob went & rouled the stone from the
welles mouth, & watered the flocke of Laban his mothers brother.
11 And Iacob kyssed Rachel, and lift vp his voyce and wept.
12 And Iacob tolde Rachel that he was her fathers brother, and that he was
Rebeccaes sonne: Therefore ranne she and tolde her father.
13 And when Laban hearde certaynely tell of Iacob his sisters sonne, he ranne to
meete hym, and imbraced hym, and kyssed hym, and brought hym to his house: And
he tolde Laban all these thynges.
14 To whom Laban sayde: Well, thou art my bone & my fleshe. And he abode with
hym the space of a moneth.
15 And Laban said vnto Iacob: Though thou be my brother, shouldest thou therfore
serue me for naught? Tell me what shall thy wages be?
16 Laban had two daughters, the elder called Lea, and the younger Rachel.
17 Lea was tender eyed: but Rachel was beautifull and well fauoured.
18 And Iacob loued Rachel, and sayde: I wyll serue thee seuen yere for Rachel
thy younger daughter.
19 Laban aunswered: It is better that I geue her vnto thee, then that I shoulde
geue her to another man: abide with me.
20 And Iacob serued seuen yere for Rachel: and they seemed vnto hym but a fewe
dayes, for the loue he hadde to her.
21 And Iacob said vnto Laban: geue me my wife that I may lye with her, for my
dayes are fulfylled.
22 Then Laban gathered together all the men of that place, and made a feast.
23 And when euen was come, he toke Lea his daughter, and brought her to hym, and
he went in to her.
24 And Laban gaue vnto his daughter Lea Zilpha his mayde to be her seruaunt.
25 And when the mornyng was come, beholde it was Lea. Then sayde he to Laban:
Wherefore hast thou played thus with me? dyd not I serue thee for Rachel?
wherfore then hast thou begyled me?
26 Laban aunswered: It is not the maner of this place, to marry ye younger
before the first borne.
27 Passe out this weeke, & then we wyll geue thee this also for the seruice
whiche thou shalt serue me yet seuen yeres more.
28 And Iacob dyd euen so, and passed out the weeke: and then he gaue hym Rachel
his daughter to wyfe also.
29 And Laban gaue to Rachel his daughter Bilha his handmayde, to be her
seruaunt.
30 So lay he by Rachel also, and loued Rachel more then Lea, and serued hym yet
seuen yeres more.
31 When the Lorde sawe that Lea was despised, he made her fruitfull, and Rachel
remayned baren.
32 And Lea conceaued and bare a sonne, and she called his name Ruben: for she
sayde, the Lord hath loked vpon my tribulation: nowe therfore my husband wyll
loue me.
33 And she conceaued agayne, and bare a sonne, & sayde: The Lorde hath hearde
that I am despised, and hath therefore geuen me this sonne also: and she called
his name Simeon.
34 And she conceaued yet, & bare a sonne, and sayde: Nowe this once wyll my
husbande kepe me company, because I haue borne him three sonnes: and therfore
was his name called Leui.
35 And she conceaued yet agayne, and bare hym a sonne, saying: Nowe wyll I
prayse the Lorde. Therefore she called his name Iuda, & left bearyng.

Chapter 30

1 Rachel when she sawe that she bare Iacob no children, she enuied her sister,
and sayde vnto Iacob: Geue me children, or els I am but dead.
2 And Iacobs anger was kyndled agaynst Rachel, and sayde: Am I in Gods steade,
whiche kepeth from thee the fruite of thy wombe?
3 Then she sayde: Here is my mayde Bilha, go in vnto her, & she shall beare vpon
my knees, that I also may haue chyldren by her.
4 And she gaue him Bilha her handmayde to wyfe: and Iacob went in vnto her.
5 And Bilha conceaued, and bare Iacob a sonne.
6 Then saide Rachel: God hath geuen sentence on my side, and hath also heard my
voyce, and hath geuen me a sonne: therfore called she hym Dan.
7 And Bilha Rachels seruant conceaued againe, & bare Iacob another sonne.
8 And Rachel said: With godly wrastlynges haue I wrastled with my sister, & haue
gotten the vpper hande: and she called his name Nephthali.
9 When Lea sawe that she had left bearyng chyldren she toke Zilpha her mayde,
and gaue her Iacob to wyfe.
10 And Zilpha Leas mayde bare Iacob a sonne.
11 Then sayde Lea, Good lucke: and called his name Gad.
12 And Zilpha Leas seruaunt bare Iacob an other sonne.
13 Then saide Lea: happy am I, for the daughters wyll call me blessed: and
called his name Aser.
14 And Ruben went out in the dayes of the wheate haruest, & founde Mandragoras
in the fielde, and brought them vnto his mother Lea. Then said Rachel to Lea:
Geue me I praye thee of thy sonnes Mandragoras.
15 To whom Lea aunswered: Is it not enough that thou hast taken away my husband,
but wouldest take away my sonnes Mandragoras also? Then saide Rachel: well, let
hym sleepe with thee this night for thy sonnes Mandragoras.
16 And Iacob came from the fielde at euen, and Lea went out to meete hym, and
sayde: thou shalt come in to me, for I haue bought thee in deede with my sonne
Mandragoras. And he slept with her that same nyght.
17 And God hearde Lea, that she conceaued, and bare Iacob the fift sonne.
18 Then sayde Lea: God hath geuen me a rewarde, because I gaue my mayden to my
husbande: and she called him Isachar.
19 And Lea conceaued yet agayne, and bare Iacob the sixt sonne.
20 And Lea sayde: God hath endued me with a good dowrie, nowe wyll my husbande
dwell with me, because I haue borne hym sixe sonnes: and called his name
Zabulon.
21 After that, she bare a daughter, and called her name Dina.
22 And God remembred Rachel, & God hearde her, and made her fruitefull,
23 So that she conceaued & bare a sonne: and sayde, God hath taken awaye my
rebuke.
24 And she called his name Ioseph, saying: the Lorde geue me yet another sonne.
25 Assoone as Rachel had borne Ioseph, Iacob sayde to Laban: Send me away, that
I maye go vnto my owne place, and to my countrey.
26 Geue me my wyues and my chyldren for whom I haue serued thee, and let me go:
for thou knowest what seruice I haue done thee.
27 To whom Laban aunswered: I pray thee, yf I haue founde fauour in thy syght
tary: for I haue proued that the Lorde blessed me for thy sake.
28 Also he sayde: Appoynt what thy rewarde shalbe, and I wyll geue it thee.
29 But he saide vnto him: Thou knowest what seruice I haue done thee, and in
what takyng thy cattell haue ben vnder me:
30 For that litle which thou haddest before I came, is nowe increased into a
multitude, and the Lord hath blessed thee through my trauell: but nowe when
shall I make prouision for myne owne house also?
31 And he sayde: What shall I then geue thee? And Iacob aunswered, Thou shalt
geue me nothyng at all: yf thou wylt do this thyng for me, then wyll I turne
agayne, feede thy sheepe, and kepe them.
32 I wyll go about all thy flockes this day, and seperate from them all the
cattell that are spotted & of diuers colours: and all the blacke among the
sheepe, & the partie & spotted amongst the kiddes the same shalbe my rewarde.
33 So shall my ryghteousnes aunswere for me in time to come: for it shal come
for my rewarde before thy face. And euery one that is not specked and partie
amongst the goates, & blacke amongst the sheepe, let it be compted theft in me.
34 And Laban sayde: go to, would God it myght be accordyng to thy saying.
35 Therfore he toke out the same day the hee goates that were ryngstraked and of
diuers colours, & all the shee goates that were spotted and coloured, and all
that had whyte in them, & all the blacke amongst the sheepe, and put them in the
kepyng of his sonnes.
36 And set three dayes iourney betwixte himselfe and Iacob: and so Iacob kept
the rest of Labans sheepe.
37 Iacob toke roddes of greene populer, hasell, and chesse nut trees, and pilled
whyte strakes in them, and made the whyte appeare in the roddes.
38 And put the roddes which he had pilled, euen before the sheepe, in the
gutters and watryng throughes when the sheepe came to drynke, that they should
conceaue when they came to drynke.
39 And the sheepe conceaued before the roddes, & brought foorth lambes
ryngstraked, spotted, and partie.
40 And Iacob did seperate these lambes, and turned the faces of the sheepe
whiche were in the flocke of Laban, towarde these ryngstraked, and al maner of
blacke: and so put his owne flockes by them selues, and put them not with Labans
cattell.
41 And in euery conceauyng tyme of the stronger cattel, Iacob layed the roddes
before the eyes of the cattell in the gutters, namely that they myght conceaue
before the roddes.
42 But when the cattell were feeble, he put them not in: and so the feebler were
Labans, and the stronger Iacobs.
43 And the man increased exceedingly, and had much cattell, and mayde
seruauntes, and man seruauntes, and camels, and asses.

Chapter 31

1 And he heard the wordes of Labans sonnes saying, Iacob hath take away all that
was our fathers, and of our fathers goodes hath he gotten all his glorie.
2 And Iacob behelde the countenaunce of Laban, and beholde, it was not towardes
hym as it was wont to be.
3 And the Lorde sayde vnto Iacob: turne agayne into the lande of thy fathers,
and to thy kynrede, and I wyll be with thee.
4 Therfore Iacob sent, & called Rachel and Lea to the fielde vnto his flocke,
5 And sayde vnto them: I see your fathers countenauce that it is not toward me
as it was wont to be: but the God of my father hath ben with me.
6 And ye knowe howe I haue serued your father to the best of my power.
7 But your father hath deceaued me, and chaunged my wages ten tymes: but God
suffred hym not to hurt me.
8 When he sayde, the spotted shalbe thy wages: then al the sheepe bare spotted.
And when he sayd, the ringstraked shalbe thy rewarde: then bare all the sheepe
ringstraked.
9 Thus hath God taken away the increase of your fathers flocke, and geuen it to
me.
10 But in rammyng tyme, I lifted vp myne eyes, and sawe in a dreame, and
beholde, the Rammes leaped vpon the sheepe that were ringstraked, spotted, and
partie.
11 And the angell of God spake vnto me in a dreame, saying: Iacob? And I
aunswered: here am I.
12 And he sayd: lift vp nowe thyne eyes, and see all the Rammes leapyng vpon the
sheepe that are ringstraked, spotted, and partie: for I haue seene all that
Laban doth vnto thee.
13 I am the God of Bethel, where thou annoyntedst the stone set vp on an ende,
and where thou vowedst a vowe vnto me: nowe therefore aryse, and get thee out of
this countrey, and returne vnto the lande where thou wast borne.
14 Then aunswered Rachel, and Lea, and said vnto him: haue we had as yet any
portion or inheritaunce in our fathers house?
15 Doth not he count vs euen as straungers? for he hath solde vs, & hath quite
deuoured also our money.
16 Therfore all the ryches whiche God hath taken from our father, that is ours
and our chyldrens: nowe then whatsoeuer God hath sayde vnto thee, that do.
17 Then Iacob rose vp, & set his sonnes and wyues vp vpon camelles:
18 And caryed away all his flockes, and all his substaunce whiche he had
procured, the increase of his cattell which he had gotten in Mesopotamia, for to
go to Isahac his father vnto the lande of Chanaan.
19 But Laban was gone to sheare his sheepe: and Rachel had stolen her fathers
images.
20 And Iacob stale away the heart of Laban the Syrian, in that he tolde him not
that he fled.
21 So fled he, and all that he had, and made hym selfe redy, and passed ouer the
ryuer, and set his face strayght towarde the mounte Gilead.
22 Upon the thirde day after, was it told Laban that Iacob fled.
23 Then he toke his brethren with him, and folowed after him seuen daies
iourney, & ouertoke him at the mounte Gilead.
24 And God came to Laban the Syrian in a dreame by nyght, and sayd vnto him:
take heede that thou speake not to Iacob ought saue good.
25 And Laban ouertoke Iacob, and Iacob had pitched his tent in the mounte: And
Laban with his brethren, pitched also vpon the mounte Gilead.
26 And Laban said to Iacob: what hast thou done? for thou hast stollen away my
heart, and caryed away my daughters as though they had ben taken captiue with
the sworde.
27 Wherfore wentest thou away secretly vnknowen to me, and dyddest not tell me,
that I myght haue let thee go thy way with mirth and songues, with tymbrell and
harpe?
28 And hast not suffred me to kysse my chyldren and my daughters? thou wast a
foole nowe in so doyng.
29 For it is in my hand through God to do you hurt: But the God of your father
spake vnto me yesternight, saying: Take heede that thou speake not to Iacob
ought saue good.
30 And nowe though thou wouldest nedes be gone away, because thou sore longest
after thy fathers house, yet wherfore hast thou stollen my gods?
31 Iacob aunswered and sayde to Laban: because I was afrayde, & thought that
peraduenture thou wouldest take away thy daughters from me.
32 But with whomsoeuer thou findest thy gods, let hym dye. Here before our
brethren, seeke that thyne is by me, and take it to thee: But Iacob wyst not
that Rachel had stolen them.
33 Then went Laban into Iacobs tent, and into Leas tent, and into the two
maydseruaunts tentes: but found them not. Then went he out of Leas tent, and
entred into Rachels tent:
34 And Rachel had taken the images, and put them in the camelles strawe, & sate
downe vpon them: And Laban tossed vp all ye tent, but found them not.
35 Then sayde she to her father: my Lord, be not angry that I can not ryse vp
before thee, for the custome of women is come vpon me. So searched he, but
founde not those images.
36 And Iacob was wroth, and chode with Laban. Iacob also aunswered and sayd to
him: what haue I trespassed? or what haue I offended thee, that thou doest sore
pursue after me?
37 Thou hast tossed vp all my stuffe, and what hast thou founde of all thy
householde stuffe? put it here before thy brethren and my brethren, that they
may iudge betwixt vs both.
38 Behold, this twentie yere haue I ben with thee, thy sheepe and thy goates
haue not ben barren, and the rammes of thy flocke haue I not eaten.
39 Whatsoeuer was torne of beastes I brought it not vnto thee, but made it good
my selfe: of my hande diddest thou require it that was stolen by day or nyght.
40 I was in suche case, that by day the heate consumed me, and the frost by
nyght, and my slepe departed from mine eyes.
41 Thus haue I ben twentie yere in thy house, and serued thee fourteene yeres
for thy two daughters, and sixe yere for thy sheepe, and thou hast chaunged my
rewarde ten tymes.
42 And except the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the feare of Isahac
had ben with me, surely thou haddest sent me away nowe all emptie: but God
behelde my tribulation and the labour of my handes, and rebuked thee
yesternyght.
43 And Laban aunswered and sayd vnto Iacob: these daughters are my daughters,
and these chyldren are my chyldren, & these sheepe are my sheepe, and all that
thou seest is myne: and what can I do this day vnto these my daughters, or vnto
their children which they haue borne?
44 Nowe therfore come on, and let vs make a league I and thou, which may be a
wytnesse betwene me and thee.
45 Then toke Iacob a stone, and set it vp on ende.
46 And Iacob sayde vnto his brethren: gather stones. And they toke stones, and
made an heape: and they dyd eate there vpon the heape.
47 And Laban called it Iegar Sahadutha: but Iacob called it Galeed.
48 Then saide Laban: this heape is witnesse betwene thee and me this day,
therfore it is called Galeed,
49 And Mispah: for he said, the Lord loke betwene thee and me when we are
departed one from another,
50 If thou shalt vexe my daughters, or shalt take other wyues beside my
daughters: here is no man with vs, beholde, God is wytnesse betwixt me and thee.
51 And Laban sayde moreouer to Iacob: beholde this heape, and this stone set vp
on ende, whiche I haue layde betwixt me and thee,
52 This heape be witnesse, and also this stone set vp on ende, that I wyll not
come ouer this heape to thee, and thou shalt not come ouer this heape and this
stone set vp on ende vnto me, to do any harme.
53 The God of Abraham, and the God of Nachor, and the God of theyr father, be
iudge betwixt vs. And Iacob sware by the feare of his father Isahac.
54 Then Iacob dyd sacrifice vpon the mounte, and called his brethren to eate
bread: and they did eate bread, and taryed all nyght in the hyll.
55 And early in the mornyng Laban rose vp, and kyssed his sonnes and his
daughters, and blessed them: and Laban departyng, went into his place agayne.

Chapter 32

1 But Iacob went foorth on his iourney, and the angelles of God came and met
him.
2 And when Iacob saw them, he sayde: this is gods hoste, & called the name of
the same place, Mahanaim.
3 And Iacob sent messengers before him to Esau his brother, vnto the lande of
Seir, the fielde of Edom:
4 And he commaunded them, saying: Thus shall ye speake to my Lorde Esau, thy
seruaunt Iacob sayeth thus: I haue ben a straunger with Laban, and haue stayed
there vnto this time.
5 And haue oxen, asses, and sheepe, menseruauntes, and womenseruauntes: and haue
sent to shewe it my Lord, that I may finde grace in thy sight.
6 And the messengers came agayne to Iacob, saying: we came to thy brother Esau,
and he commeth to meete thee, and hath foure hundred men with him.
7 But Iacob was greatly afrayde, and wist not whiche way to turne him selfe: and
deuided the people that was with him, and the sheepe, and oxen, and camelles,
into two companies:
8 And sayd, if Esau come to the one part and smite it, the other shall saue it
selfe.
9 And Iacob said agayne: O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father
Isahac, Lorde whiche saydest vnto me, returne vnto thy countrey, and to thy
kindred, & I will do well with thee:
10 I am not worthy of the least of all the mercyes and trueth whiche thou hast
shewed vnto thy seruaunt: for with my staffe came I ouer this Iordane, & nowe
haue I gotten two companies.
11 Deliuer me from the hand of my brother Esau, for I feare hym, lest he wyll
come and smyte me, yea the mother with the chyldren.
12 Thou saydest, I wyll surely do thee good, and make thy seede as the sande of
the sea, whiche can not be numbred for multitude.
13 And he taryed there that same nyght, and toke of that whiche came to hande, a
present for Esau his brother:
14 Two hundred shee gotes, and twentie hee gotes, two hundred sheepe, & twentie
rammes,
15 Thirtie milche camelles with theyr coltes, fourtie kine, and ten bulles,
twentie shee asses, and ten foales:
16 And deliuered them into the handes of his seruauntes, euery droue by them
selues, and sayde vnto his seruauntes: go foorth before me, and put a space
betwixt droue and droue.
17 And he commaunded the formost, saying: If Esau my brother meete thee, and
aske thee, saying, whose art thou? and whyther goest thou? and whose are these
that go before thee?
18 Thou shalt say, they be thy seruaunt Iacobs, and it is a present sent vnto my
Lorde Esau, and beholde, he him selfe commeth after vs.
19 And so commaunded he the seconde, and the thirde, and all that folowed the
droues, saying: on this maner see that you speake vnto Esau when ye meete hym.
20 And say moreouer: beholde, thy seruaunt Iacob also commeth after vs: for he
sayde, I wyll appeace his wrath with the present that goeth before me, and
afterward I will see him my selfe, peraduenture he wyll receaue me to grace.
21 So went the present before hym: and he taryed al that night in the company.
22 And he rose vp the same nyght, and toke his two wyues, & his two
maydeseruauntes, and his eleuen sonnes, and went ouer the forde Iaboc.
23 And he toke them, and sent them ouer the ryuer, and sent ouer that he had.
24 And Iacob was left hym selfe alone: and there wrasteled a man with hym, vnto
the breakyng of the day.
25 And when he sawe that he coulde not preuayle agaynst hym, he smote hym vpon
the hucklebone of his thigh, and the hucklebone of Iacobs thigh loosed out of
ioynt as he wrastled with him.
26 And he said: let me go, for the day breaketh. Whiche aunswered: I will not
let thee go, except thou blesse me.
27 And he sayde vnto hym: what is thy name? He aunswered: Iacob.
28 He sayde: thy name shalbe called no more Iacob, but Israel: For as a prince
hast thou wrasteled with God, and with men, and hast preuayled.
29 And Iacob asked him, saying: tell me thy name. And he sayde: wherefore doest
thou aske after my name? And he blessed hym there.
30 And Iacob called the name of the place Peniel: for I haue seene God face to
face, and my life is preserued.
31 And as he went ouer Peniel, the sunne rose vpon hym, and he halted vpon his
thigh.
32 And therefore it is that the chyldren of Israel eate not of the sinnowe that
shranke in that place of the thigh, vnto this day: because that he touched the
hucklebone of Iacobs thigh, about the sinnowe that shranke.

Chapter 33

1 Iacob lyftyng vp his eyes, looked, and beholde Esau came, hauyng with hym
foure hundred men: and he deuided the childre vnto Lea, and vnto Rachel, and
vnto the two handmaydens.
2 And he put the handmaydens & theyr chyldren formost, and Lea and her children
after, and Rachel and Ioseph hindermost.
3 And he went before them, and bowed him selfe to the grounde seuen tymes,
vntill he came to his brother.
4 Esau ranne to meete hym, and imbraced him, and fel on his necke, and kissed
him, and they wept.
5 And he lyft vp his eyes, and sawe the women & the children, and said: whence
hast thou these? And he aunswered: they are the children which god hath geuen
thy seruaunt.
6 Then came the handmaydens foorth, and their chyldren, and dyd their
obeysaunce.
7 Lea also with her children, came and dyd their obeysaunce? And last of all
came Ioseph and Rachel, and dyd theyr obeysaunce.
8 And he sayde: what is all the droue whiche I met? He aunswered: that I may
finde grace in the sight of my lorde.
9 And Esau saide: I haue inough my brother, kepe that thou hast vnto thy selfe.
10 And Iacob answered: Nay I pray thee, but if I haue founde grace in thy sight,
receaue I pray thee my present of my hande: for I haue seene thy face, as though
I had seene the face of God, and so thou hast receaued me to grace.
11 Oh take my blessyng that is brought thee: for God hath had mercy on me, and I
haue inough. And so he compelled him, and he toke it,
12 And he saide: let vs take our iourney, and go, I wyll go before thee.
13 Iacob aunswered him: my lord, thou knowest that the chyldren are tender, and
the small and great cattell with young vnder my handes, which if men should
ouerdryue but euen one day, all the flocke wyll dye.
14 Oh let my Lorde go before his seruaunt, and I wyll dryue fayre and softly,
according as the cattell that goeth before me, and the chyldren be able to
endure, vntill I come vnto my Lord vnto Seir.
15 And Esau sayd: I will leaue some of my folke with thee. And he aunswered:
what needeth it? I shall finde grace in the sight of my Lorde.
16 So Esau went his way agayne that same day vnto Seir.
17 And Iacob toke his iourney towarde Suchoth, and buylt him an house, and made
boothes for his cattell: and therefore is it, that the name of the place is
called Suchoth.
18 And Iacob came to Sale, a citie of Sichem, whiche is in the lande of Chanaan,
after that he was come from Mesopotamia, and pitched before the citie.
19 And bought a parcell of grounde, where he pitched his tent, of the chyldren
of Hemor Sichems father, for an hundreth peeces of money.
20 And he made there an aulter, and called it, the mightie God of Israel.

Chapter 34

1 Dina the daughter of Lea, whiche she bare vnto Iacob, went out to see the
daughters of the lande.
2 Whom whe Sichem the sonne of Hemor the Heuite Lorde of the countrey sawe, he
toke her, & lay with her, and forced her.
3 And his heart laye vnto Dina the daughter of Iacob, and he loued that damsell,
and spake kyndly vnto her.
4 And Sichem spake vnto his father Hemor, saying: get me this mayden vnto my
wyfe.
5 And Iacob heard that he had defiled Dina his daughter, (his sonnes beyng with
their cattell in the fielde and Iacob helde his peace vntill they were come.
6 And Hemor the father of Sichem, went out vnto Iacob to common with hym.
7 And when the sonnes of Iacob (comming out of the fielde) hearde it, it greeued
them, and they were not a little wroth, because he had wrought folly in Israel,
in that he had lien with Iacobs daughter, which thing ought not to be done.
8 And Hemor communed with them, saying: the soule of my sonne Sichem, longeth
for your daughter, I pray you geue her him to wyfe.
9 And make maryages with vs, and geue your daughters vnto vs, and take our
daughters vnto you.
10 And ye shall dwell with vs, and the lande shalbe before you: dwell, and do
your busines therein, and haue possessions therin.
11 And Sichem said, vnto her father and vnto her brethren: let me finde grace in
your eyes, and whatsoeuer ye appoint me, that wyll I geue.
12 Aske freely of me both dowry and gyftes, and I wyll geue accordyng as ye say
vnto me, so that ye geue me the damsell to wyfe.
13 But the sonnes of Iacob aunswered to Sichem and Hemor his father, talking
amongest themselues deceiptfully, because he had defiled Diua their sister.
14 And they sayde vnto them: we can not do this thing, that we shoulde geue our
sister to one that is vncircumcised, for that were an abomination vnto vs.
15 But in this will we consent vnto you: if ye wyll be as we be, & all the males
amongest you be circumcised:
16 Then wyll we geue our daughters vnto you, and take your daughters to vs, and
will dwell with you, and be one people.
17 But and if ye wyll not hearken vnto vs to be circumcised, then wyll we take
our daughter, and go our wayes.
18 Theyr wordes pleased Hemor, and Sichem his sonne.
19 And the young man deferde not for to do the thing, because he had a lust to
Iacobs daughter: he was also most set by, of all that was in his fathers house.
20 Then Hemor and Sichem his sonne went vnto the gate of their citie, and
communed with the men of their citie, saying:
21 These men lyue peaceably among vs, and dwell in the lande, and do theyr
occupation therein: and beholde, the lande is large inough for them, we will
take their daughters to wiues, & geue them our daughters.
22 Only herein will they consent vnto vs for to dwell with vs, and to be one
people: if all the males that are among vs be circumcised, as they are
circumcised?
23 Shall not their goodes and their substaunce, and all their cattell be ours?
let vs only consent vnto them, and they will dwell with vs.
24 And vnto Hemor & Sichem his sonne, hearkened all that went out at the gate of
his citie: and all the males were circumcised, whatsoeuer went out at the gate
of his citie.
25 And the thirde day, whyles they were sore, two of the sonnes of Iacob, Simeon
& Leui Dinas brethren, toke eyther of them his sworde, and went into the citie
boldely, and slue all that was male,
26 And slue also Hemor and Sithem his sonne with the edge of the sworde, and
toke Dina out of Sichems house, and went theyr way.
27 And the sonnes of Iacob commyng vpon the dead, spoyled the citie, because
they had defiled their sister.
28 And toke their sheepe, oxen, and their asses, and whatsoeuer was in the
citie, and also in the fieldes.
29 And all their goodes, and all their children, and their wiues, toke they
captiue, and made hauocke of all that was in the house.
30 But Iacob sayde to Simeon & Leui: ye haue troubled me, and made me to be
abhorred of the inhabitours of the land of the Chanaanite and the Pherezite: and
I beyng fewe in number, they shall gather the selues together against me, and
slay me, and so shall I and my house be destroyed.
31 And they aunswered: shoulde he deale with our sister, as with an harlot?

Chapter 35

1 And God sayd vnto Iacob: aryse, and get thee vp to Bethel, and dwell there,
and make there an aulter vnto God that appeared vnto thee when thou fleddest
from the face of Esau thy brother.
2 Then sayde Iacob vnto his householde, and to all that were with hym: put away
the straunge gods that are among you, and be cleane, and chaunge your garmentes.
3 For we wyll aryse and go vp to Bethel, and I wyll make an aulter there vnto
God, whiche hearde me in the day of my affliction, and was with me in the way
whiche I went.
4 And they gaue vnto Iacob all the straunge gods whiche they had in their hand,
and al their earinges which were in theyr eares, and Iacob hyd them vnder an oke
whiche was by Sichem.
5 And when they departed, the feare of God fel vpon the cities that were round
about them, and they did not pursue the sonnes of Iacob.
6 So came Iacob to Luz, whiche is in the lande of Chanaan (the same is Bethel)
he and all the people that was with him.
7 And he builded there an aulter, and called the place, the God of Bethel,
because that god appeared vnto him there when he fled fro the face of his
brother.
8 But Debora Rebeccas nurse died, and was buryed beneath Bethel vnder an oke:
and the name of it was called, the oke of lamentation.
9 And God appeared vnto Iacob agayne, after he came out of Mesopotamia, and
blessed him.
10 And God sayd vnto him: thy name is Iacob, notwithstanding thou shalt be no
more called Iacob, but Israel shalbe thy name: & he called his name Israel.
11 And God sayd vnto him: I am God almightie, be fruitefull and multiplie: a
nation, and a multitude of nations shall spring of thee, yea and kinges shall
come out of thy loynes.
12 And the lande which I gaue Abraham and Isahac, wil I geue vnto thee, and vnto
thy seede after thee wyll I geue that lande also.
13 And so God departed from him, in the place where he had talked with him.
14 And Iacob set vp on ende in the place where he talked with him euen a stone
set he vp on ende, & powred drinke offering theron, & powred also oyle theron.
15 And Iacob called the name of the place where God spake with hym, Bethel.
16 And they departed from Bethel: and when he was but a fielde breadth from
Ephrath, Rachel began to trauell, and in trauayling, she was in perill:
17 And as she was in paynes of her labour, the midwife saide vnto her: feare
not, for this sonne is thyne also.
18 Then as her soule was a departing (for she died) she called his name Benoni,
but his father called hym Beniamin.
19 And thus died Rachel, and was buried in the way to Ephrath, whiche is
Bethlehem.
20 And Iacob set vp a stone on ende vpon her graue: whiche is called Rachels
grauestone vnto this day.
21 And Israel went thence, and pitched his tent beyonde the towre of Eder.
22 And as Israel dwelt in that land, Ruben went and lay with Bilha his fathers
concubine: And it came to Israels eare. The sonnes of Iacob were twelue in
number.
23 The sonnes of Lea: Ruben Iacobs first borne sonne, and Simeon, & Leui, and
Iuda, and Isachar, and Zabulon.
24 The sonnes of Rachel: Ioseph and Beniamin.
25 And the sonnes of Bilha Rachels handmayde: Dan and Nephthali.
26 And the sonnes of Zilpha Leas handmayde: Gad and Aser: These are the sonnes
of Iacob which were borne him in Mesopotamia.
27 And so Iacob came vnto Isahac his father to Mamre, vnto Ciriath-arba, whiche
is Hebron, where Abraham and Isahac dwelt.
28 And the dayes of Isahac were an hundred and fourescore yeres.
29 And Isahac decayed away, and dyed, and was layde vnto his people, beyng olde
and full of dayes: and his sonnes Esau and Iacob buryed him.

Chapter 36

1 These are the generations of Esau, the same is Edom.
2 Esau toke his wiues of ye daughters of Chanaan: Ada ye daughter of Ebon an
Hethite, and Aholibama the daughter of Ana, the daughter of Sibeon an Heuite,
3 And Basemath Ismaels daughter, and sister of Nebaioth.
4 And Ada bore vnto Esau Eliphas: and Basemath bare Rehuel.
5 And Aholibama bare Iehus, and Ialam, and Corah. These are the sonnes of Esau,
whiche were borne hym in the lande of Chanaan.
6 And Esau toke his wyues, and his sonnes and daughters, and al the soules of
his house, his goods, and all his cattell, and al his substaunce which he had
got in the lande of Chanaan, and went into a countrey away from the face of his
brother Iacob.
7 For theyr ryches was much, and they coulde not dwell together: and the land
wherein they were straungers coulde not receaue them, because of theyr
possessions.
8 Thus dwelt Esau in mounte Seir, the same Esau, is Edom.
9 These are the generations of Esau, father of the Edomites in mount Seir.
10 And these are the names of Esaus sonnes: Eliphas the sonne of Ada, the wyfe
of Esau, and Rehuel the sonne of Basemath the wife of Esau.
11 And the sonnes of Eliphas, were Theman, Omar, Sepho, and Gatham, and Cenaz.
12 And Thimna was concubine to Eliphas Esaus sonne, and bare vnto Eliphas
Amalec: and these be the sonnes of Ada Esaus wife.
13 And these are the sonnes of Rehuel: Nahath, and Zerah, Samma, and Mizza:
these were ye sonnes of Basemath Esaus wyfe.
14 And these were the sonnes of Aholibama the daughter of Ana, daughter of
Sebeon Esaus wife: and she bare vnto Esau, Iehus, and Ialam and Corah.
15 These were dukes of the sonnes of Esau. The children of Eliphas the first
borne sonne of Esau were these.
16 Duke Theman, duke Omar, duke Sepho, duke Cenaz, and duke Corah, duke Gatham,
& duke Amalec: these are the dukes that came of Eliphas in the lande of Edom,
and these were the sonnes of Ada.
17 These also are the children of Rehuel Esaus sonne: duke Nahath, duke Serah,
duke Samma, duke Mizza. These are the dukes that came of Rehuel, in the lande of
Edom: and these are the sonnes of Basemath Esaus wyfe.
18 These were the chyldren of Aholibama Esaus wyfe: duke Iehus, duke Ialam, duke
Corah: these dukes came of Aholibama the daughter of Ana Esaus wyfe.
19 These are the chyldren of Esau, and these are the dukes of them, whiche Esau
is Edom.
20 These are the chyldren of Seir the Horite, the inhabitauntes of the lande,
Lotan, and Sobal, & Sebeon, & Ana,
21 And Dison, and Eser, and Disan: these are the dukes of the Horites the
chyldren of Seir in the lande of Edom.
22 And the chyldren of Lotan, were Hori, and Hemam: and Lotans sister was called
Thimna.
23 The chyldren of Sobal were these: Aluan, and Manahath, and Ebal, Sepho, and
Onam.
24 These are the chyldren of Sebeon, both Aia and Ana: this was that Ana that
founde mules in the wyldernesse as she fedde her father Sebeons asses.
25 The chyldren of Ana were these: Dison, & Aholibama the daughter of Ana.
26 These are the chyldren of Dison: Hemdan, and Esban, and Iethran, and Cheran.
27 The chyldren of Eser are these: Bilhan, and Saauan, and Acan.
28 The chyldren of Disan also are these: Us and Aran.
29 These are the dukes that came of the Horites: duke Laton, duke Sobal, duke
Sebeon, duke Ana,
30 Duke Dison, duke Eser, duke Disan: these be the dukes that came of Hori,
after theyr dukedoms in the lande of Seir.
31 These are the kinges that raigned in the lande of Edom, before there raigned
any king vpon the chyldren of Israel.
32 Bela the sonne of Beor raigned in Edom: and the name of his citie was
Dinhabah.
33 And when Bela dyed, Iobab the sonne of Serah out of Bosra, raigned in his
steade.
34 When Iobab also was dead, Husam of the lande of Temani, raigned in his
steade.
35 And after the death of Husam, Hadad the sonne of Bedad, which slew the
Madianites in the field of the Moabites, raigned in his steade: & the name of
his citie was Auith.
36 When Hadad was dead, Samlah of Masrecah raigned in his steade.
37 When Samlah was dead, Saul of the ryuer of Rehoboth raigned in his steade.
38 When Saul was dead, Baal-hanan the sonne of Achbor raigned in his steade.
39 And after the death of Baal-hanan the sonne of Achbor, Hadar raigned in his
steade: and ye name of his citie was Pau, & his wyfes name Mehetabel, the
daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab.
40 These are the names of the dukes that came of Esau, accordyng to their
kinredes, places, & names: duke Timna, duke Aluah, duke Ietheth.
41 Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah, duke Pinon,
42 Duke Cenaz, duke Theman, duke Mibsar,
43 Duke Magdiel, duke Iran. These be the dukes of Edom, accordyng to their
habitations in the lande of their possessions. This Esau is the father of the
Edomites.

Chapter 37

1 Iacob dwelt in the land wherin his father was long a straunger, euen in ye
lande of Chanaan.
2 These are ye generations of Iacob: when Ioseph was seuenteen yeres olde, he
kept sheepe with his brethren, and the ladde was with ye sonnes of Bilha, and
with the sonnes of Zilpha, his fathers wyues. And Ioseph brought vnto his father
their euyll report.
3 But Israel loued Ioseph more then all his chyldren, because he begate hym in
his olde age: and he made hym a coate of many colours.
4 And when his brethren saw that their father loued hym more then all his
brethren, they hated hym, and coulde not speake peaceably vnto hym.
5 Moreouer, when Ioseph had dreamed a dreame, he tolde it his brethren, which
hated hym yet the more.
6 And he said vnto them: Heare I pray you this dreame which I haue dreamed.
7 Beholde, we were byndyng sheaues in the fielde: and lo, my sheafe arose and
stoode vpright, & beholde, your sheaues stoode rounde about, and made obeysaunce
to my sheafe.
8 To whom his brethren sayde: Shalt thou be a kyng in deede on vs? or shalt thou
in deede haue dominion ouer vs? And they hated hym yet the more, because of his
dreames and of his wordes.
9 And he dreamed yet another dreame, and tolde it his brethren, saying: behold I
haue had one dreame more, and beholde, the sunne, and the moone, & 11 starres
made obeysaunce to me.
10 And when he had tolde it to his father and his brethren, his father rebuked
hym, and sayde vnto him: What is this dreame that thou hast dreamed? Shall I and
thy mother and thy brethren in deede come to bowe to thee?
11 And his brethren enuied hym: but his father noted the saying.
12 His brethren also went to kepe his fathers cattell in Sichem.
13 And Israel sayde vnto Ioseph: do not thy brethren kepe in Sichem? come, and I
wyll sende thee to them.
14 He aunswered: here am I. And he sayde vnto hym: Go I praye thee see whether
it be well with thy brethren and the cattell, and bryng me worde agayne. And so
he sent hym out of the vale of Hebron, & he came to Sichem.
15 And a certayne man founde hym, and beholde he was wandryng out of his waye in
the fielde, and the man asked hym: what sekest thou?
16 He aunswered: I seke my brethren, tell me I praye thee where they kepe
cattell
17 And the man sayde, They are departed hence: for I haue hearde them say, let
vs go vnto Dothan. Thus went Ioseph after his brethren, and founde them in
Dothan.
18 And when they sawe hym a farre of, before he came at them, they toke councell
agaynst hym for to slea hym.
19 For one sayde to another: behold, this notable dreamer commeth.
20 Come nowe therefore and let vs slaye hym, and cast hym into some pit, and we
wyll say, some naughtie beast hath deuoured hym: and we shall see what wyll come
of his dreames.
21 When Ruben hearde that, he ryd hym out of their handes, and sayde: let vs not
kyll hym.
22 And Ruben sayde moreouer vnto the: shed no blood but cast hym into this pit
that is in the wyldernesse, and laye no hande vppon hym: this he sayde namely
that he myght ryd hym out of their handes, and delyuer hym to his father agayne.
23 And when Ioseph was come vnto his brethren, they strypt hym out of his coate,
his partie coloured coate that was vpon hym.
24 And they toke hym, and cast hym into an emptie pit, wherein was no water.
25 And they sate them downe to eate bread: and as they lyft vp their eyes and
loked about, and behold there came a company of Ismaelites from Gilead, and
their camelles laden with spicerie, bawlme, and mirrhe, and were goyng downe ta
cary it to Egypt.
26 And Iuda sayde vnto his brethren: What auayleth it yf we slay our brother,
and kepe his blood secrete?
27 Come on, and let vs sell hym to the Ismaelites, and let not our hande be vpon
him: for he is our brother and our fleshe. And his brethren were content.
28 Then as the Madianites marchaunt men passed by, they drewe and lyft Ioseph
out of the pit, and solde him vnto the Ismaelites for twentie peeces of syluer.
And they brought Ioseph into Egypt.
29 Then Ruben came agayne vnto the pit, and beholde, Ioseph was not in the pit:
then he rent his clothes,
30 And went agayne vnto his brethren, saying: the lad is not yonder wo is me,
whyther shall I go?
31 And they toke Iosephes coate, and kylled a kyd, and dipped the coate in the
blood.
32 And they sent that partie coloured coate, and caused it to be brought vnto
their father, and sayde: This haue we founde, see whether it be thy sonnes
coate, or no.
33 And he knewe it, saying: It is my sonnes coate, a naughtie beast hath
deuoured hym, Ioseph is without doubt rent in peeces.
34 And Iacob rent his clothes, & put sackcloth about his loynes, and mourned for
his sonne a long season.
35 But all his sonnes & all his daughters rose vp to comfort hym: neuerthelesse
he woulde not be comforted, but sayde, I wyll go downe into the graue vnto my
sonne, mournyng: And thus his father wept for hym.
36 And the Madianites solde hym in Egypt vnto Putiphar, chiefe officer of
Pharaos, and his chiefe stewarde.

Chapter 38

1 About that tyme Iudas went downe from his brethren, and gate him to a man
called Hirah of Adulam.
2 And there he saw ye daughter of a man called Sua, a Chanaanite: and he toke
her, and went in to her.
3 And she conceaued, and bare a sonne, and called his name Er.
4 And she conceaued agayne, and bare a sonne, and called hym Onan.
5 And she conceaued agayne, and bare yet a sonne, whom she called Selah: & he
was at Chezib whe she bare him.
6 And Iudas gaue Er his first borne sonne a wyfe, whose name was Thamar.
7 And Er Iudas first borne sonne was wicked in the syght of the Lorde, and the
Lorde slewe hym.
8 And Iudas sayde vnto Onan: Go in to thy brothers wyfe, and marrie her, that
thou mayest stirre vp seede vnto thy brother.
9 And when Onan perceaued that the seede shoulde not be his, therfore when he
wet in to his brothers wyfe, he spylled it on the grounde, & gaue not seede vnto
his brother.
10 And the thyng which he dyd, displeased the Lorde: wherfore he slewe hym also.
11 Then sayde Iudas to Thamar his daughter in lawe: Remayne a wydowe at thy
fathers house, tyll Selah my sonne be growen. (For he sayde, lest peraduenture
he dye also as his brethren dyd.) And Thamar went & dwelt in her fathers house.
12 And in processe of tyme, the daughter of Sua Iudas wyfe dyed: Then Iudas when
he had left mournyng, went vnto his sheepe shearers to Thinmath, he and his
friende Hirah of Adulam.
13 And one tolde Thamar, saying: beholde, thy father in lawe goeth vp to
Thimnath to sheare his sheepe.
14 And she put her widowes garmentes of from her, and couered her with a vayle,
and disguysed her selfe, and sate her downe in an open place, whiche is by the
way syde to Thimnath, for because that she sawe Selah was growen, and she was
not geuen vnto hym to wyfe.
15 When Iuda sawe her, he thought it had ben an harlot, because she had couered
her face.
16 And he turned to her vnto the way, & sayde, Come I praye thee, let me lye
with thee. (For he knewe not that it was his daughter in law.) And she answered:
What wylt thou geue me for to lye with thee?
17 Then sayde he: I wyll sende thee a kyd from the flocke. She sayde: Then geue
me a pledge tyll thou sende it.
18 He sayde: What pledge shall I geue thee? She sayde: Thy signet, thy bracelet,
and thy staffe that is in thyne hande. And he gaue it her, and laye by her: and
she was with chylde by hym.
19 And she gate her vp, and went, and put her vayle from her, and put on her
wydowes rayment.
20 And Iudas sent the kyd by his friende Adulam, for to receaue his pledge
againe from the womans hand: but he founde her not.
21 Then asked he the men of the same place, saying: where is the harlot that
sate openly by ye wayes syde? They aunswered: There is no harlot here.
22 He came therfore to Iuda againe, and sayde vnto hym, I can not fynde her: and
also the men of the place sayde, that there was no harlot there.
23 And Iuda sayde: Let her take it to her, lest we be shamed: beholde, I sent
the kyd, & thou hast not found her.
24 And it came to passe, after three monethes one tolde Iuda, saying: Thamar thy
daughter in lawe hath played the harlot, and with playing the harlot is become
great with chylde. And Iuda sayde: Bryng her foorth, that she may be brent.
25 And when they brought her foorth, she sent to her father in lawe, saying: By
the man vnto whom these thynges pertaine am I with chylde: And saide also, Loke
I pray thee whose are these, this seale, and this bracelet, and this staffe.
26 And Iuda acknowledged them, and saide: She hath ben more righteous then I,
because I gaue her not Selah my sonne. And he lay with her no more.
27 But when the tyme was come that she shoulde be deliuered, beholde there was
two twynnes in her wombe.
28 And when she trauayled, the one put out his hande, & the mydwyfe toke &
bounde a red threede about it, saying: this is come out first.
29 And he plucked his hand backe againe, and beholde, his brother came out. And
she sayde: Wherefore hast thou rent a rent vppon thee? and called his name
Phares.
30 Afterward came out his brother, that had the red threede about his hande: and
his name was called Zarah.

Chapter 39

1 Ioseph was brought vnto Egypt, and Putiphar, a Lorde of Pharaos, and his
chiefe stewarde, an Egyptian, bought hym of the Ismaelites, whiche had brought
hym thyther.
2 And God was with Ioseph, and he became a luckie man, continuyng in the house
of his maister the Egyptian.
3 And his maister saw that God was with hym, and that God made all that he dyd
to prosper in his hande.
4 And Ioseph founde grace in his maisters syght, and serued hym: And he made hym
ouerseer of his house, & put all that he had in his hande.
5 And it came to passe from the tyme that he had made hym ouerseer of his house,
and ouer all that he had, the Lorde blessed the Egyptians house for Iosephes
sake: and the blessyng of the Lorde was vpon all that he had in the house and in
the fielde.
6 And therfore he left all that he had in Iosephes hande: and he knewe nothyng
with hym, saue onlye the breade which he dyd eate. And Ioseph was a goodly
person, and a well fauoured.
7 And after this, his maisters wyfe cast her eyes vpon Ioseph, and saide: come
lye with me.
8 But he refused, and sayde vnto his maisters wyfe: Beholde, my maister woteth
not what he hath in the house with me, and hath committed all that he hath to my
hande.
9 There is no man greater in the house then I, neither hath he kept any thyng
from me but only thee, because thou art his wyfe: how then can I do euen this so
great a wickednes, & sinne against God?
10 And after this maner spake she to Ioseph day by day: but he hearkened not
vnto her to sleepe neare her, or to be in her company.
11 And on a certaine conuenient day, Ioseph entred into the house to do his
businesse, and there was none of the housholde by, in the house.
12 Then she caught him by the garment, saying: lye with me. And he left his
garment in her hande, and fledde, and got hym out.
13 And when she sawe that he had lefte his garment in her hande, and was fled
out:
14 She called vnto the men of her house, and tolde them, saying: See, he hath
brought in an Hebrue vnto vs, to do vs shame: for he came in to me to haue lyen
with me, and I began to crie with a loude voyce:
15 And when he hearde that I lyft vp my voyce and cryed, he left his garment
with me, & fled away, and got hym out.
16 And she layed vp his garment by her, vntyll her Lorde came home.
17 And she tolde him with these wordes, saying: This Hebrue seruaunt whiche thou
hast brought vnto vs, came vnto me to do me shame.
18 But assoone as I lyft vp my voyce and cryed, he left his garment with me, and
fledde out.
19 When his maister hearde the wordes of his wyfe whiche she tolde hym, saying,
after this maner dyd thy seruaunt to me: he waxed wroth.
20 And Iosephes maister toke hym, and put hym in pryson, euen into the place
where the kynges prysoners laye bounde: and there continued he in prison.
21 But the Lord was with Ioseph, and shewed hym mercie, and got hym fauour in
the sight of the lord of the prison.
22 And the keper of the prison committed to Iosephes hande all the prisoners
that were in the prison house, and what so euer was done there, that dyd he.
23 And the keper of the prison loked vnto nothyng that was vnder his hande,
seyng that the Lord was with hym: For whatsoeuer he dyd, the Lorde made it to
prosper.

Chapter 40

1 And it came to passe after these thynges, that the butler of ye king of Egypt
and his baker, had offended their lorde the kyng of Egypt.
2 And Pharao was angry agaynst his two officers, agaynst the chiefe butler and
the chiefe baker.
3 And put them in warde in his chiefe stewardes house, euen in the prison and
place where Ioseph was bounde.
4 And the chiefe steward gaue Ioseph a charge with them, & he serued them: and
they continued a season in warde.
5 And they dreamed eyther of them in one night, both the butler and the baker of
the kyng of Egypt, whiche were bounde in the pryson house, eyther of them his
dreame, & eche mans dreame of a sundry interpretation.
6 When Ioseph came in vnto them in the mornyng, and loked vpon them, beholde
they were sadde.
7 And he asked Pharaos chiefe officers that were with hym in his maisters warde,
saying: Wherfore loke ye so sadlye to day?
8 They aunswered him: We haue dreamed a dreame, and haue no man to declare it.
And Ioseph sayde vnto them: do not interpretinges belong to God? tell me I pray
you.
9 And the chiefe butler tolde his dreame to Ioseph, and saide vnto him: In my
dreame, me thought there stoode a vine before me,
10 And in the vine were three braunches, and it was as though it budded, & her
blossomes shot foorth: and the clusters therof brought foorth rype grapes.
11 And I had Pharaos cup in my hand, and toke of the grapes and pressed them in
Pharaos cuppe, and deliuered Pharaos cuppe into his hande.
12 And Ioseph sayde vnto hym, this is the interpretatio of it. The three
braunches are three dayes.
13 For within three dayes shall Pharao lyft vp thine head, and restore thee into
thine office agayne, and thou shalt deliuer Pharaos cup into his hande after the
olde maner when thou wast his butler.
14 But thynke on me when thou art in good case, and shewe mercy I praye thee
vnto me, and make mention of me to Pharao, & bring me out of this house:
15 For I was priuily by stealth taken away out of the lande of the Hebrewes: and
here also haue I done nothyng at all wherfore they shoulde haue put me into this
dungeon.
16 When the chiefe baker sawe that the interpretatio was good, he sayd vnto
Ioseph: me thought also in my dreame that I had three whyte wycker baskettes on
my head,
17 And in the vppermost basket there was of all maner bake meates for Pharao,
and the birdes dyd eate them out of the basket that was vpon my head.
18 And Ioseph aunswered and saide: this is the interpretation thereof. The three
baskettes, are three dayes:
19 For within three dayes shall Pharao take thy head from thee, and shall hang
thee on a tree, and the birdes shall eate thy fleshe from of thee.
20 And it came to passe the thirde day, which was Pharaos birth day, that he
made a feast vnto all his seruauntes: and he lyfted vp the head of the chiefe
butler, and of the chiefe baker among his seruauntes:
21 And restored the chiefe butler vnto his butlership agayne, whiche also
reached the cuppe into Pharaos hande.
22 But he hanged the chiefe baker, euen as Ioseph had interpreted vnto him.
23 Neither dyd the chiefe butler remember Ioseph, but forgat hym.

Chapter 41

1 And after two yeres Pharao dreamed, and beholde, he thought that he stoode by
a ryuers syde.
2 And there came out of the ryuer seuen goodly kyne, and fat fleshed, and fedde
in a medowe.
3 And seuen other kyne came vp after them out of the ryuer, euyll fauoured, and
leane fleshed, & stoode by the other kyne vpon the brynke of the ryuer.
4 And the euyll fauoured & leane fleshed kyne dyd eate vp the seuen well
fauoured and fat kyne: and Pharao awoke.
5 And he slept agayne, and dreamed the seconde tyme: and beholde, seuen eares of
corne grewe vppon one stalke, ranke and goodly.
6 And agayne, seuen thinne eares, blasted with the east winde sprang vp after
them.
7 And the seuen thinne eares deuoured the seuen ranke & full eares. And Pharao
awaked, and see it was a dreame.
8 And when the mornyng came, his spirite was troubled, and he sent and called
for all the southsayers of Egypt, and all the wyse men thereof: and Pharao tolde
them his dreame, but there was none of them that coulde interprete it vnto
Pharao.
9 The spake the chiefe butler vnto Pharao, saying: I do remember my faultes this
day:
10 Pharao beyng angry with his seruauntes, put in warde in the chiefe stewardes
house both me, and the chiefe baker.
11 And we dreamed both of vs in one nyght, and eche mans dreame of a sundry
interpretation.
12 And there was with vs a young man, an Hebrue borne, seruaunt vnto the chiefe
stewarde: to whom when we tolde them, he declared our dreames to vs, accordyng
to eyther of our dreames.
13 And as he declared them to vs, euen so it came to passe: For he restored me
to myne office agayne, and hanged hym.
14 Pharao sent therfore and called Ioseph: and they brought him hastyly out of
the dungeon. And he shaued himselfe and chaunged his rayment, and came vnto
Pharao.
15 And Pharao sayde vnto Ioseph: I haue dreamed a dreame, & no man can
interprete it: & I haue heard say of thee that assoone as thou hearest a dreame,
thou canst interprete it.
16 Ioseph aunswered Pharao, saying: Not I, but God shall geue Pharao an aunswere
of peace.
17 And Pharao sayde vnto Ioseph: In my dreame me thought I stoode by a ryuers
syde,
18 And there came out of the ryuer seuen fat flesshed and well fauoured kyne,
and fedde in a medowe.
19 And then seuen other kyne came out after them, poore, and very yll fauoured
and leane flesshed, such as I neuer saw in all the lande of Egypt, they were so
yll fauoured.
20 And the seuen leane and yll fauoured kyne, did eate vp the first seuen fat
kine:
21 And when they had eaten them vp, a man coulde not perceaue that they had
eaten them, but they were styll yll fauoured as they were at the begynnyng: and
I awoke.
22 And I saw againe in my dreame, and beholde, seuen eares sprang out of one
stalke, full and fayre.
23 And beholde, seuen eares agayne withered, thinne, and blasted with the east
wynde, sprang vp after them.
24 And the thinne eares deuoured the seuen good eares: and I haue tolde the
southsayers, but there was no man that coulde tell what it meaneth.
25 And Ioseph aunswered Pharao: both Pharaos dreames are one, God hath shewed
Pharao what he is about to do.
26 The seuen good kyne, are seuen yeres, and the seuen good eares are seue yeres
also: and it is but one dreame.
27 Lykewyse the seuen thinne and euyll fauoured kine that came vp after them,
are seuen yeres, and the seuen emptie & blasted eares with the east wynde,
shalbe seuen yeres of famine.
28 This worde which I haue sayde vnto Pharao, is it that God is about to do, and
sheweth it vnto Pharao.
29 Beholde there come seuen yeres of great plenteousnes throughout all the lande
of Egypt.
30 And agayne, there shall aryse after them seuen yeres of famine, and all the
plenteousnes shalbe forgotten in the lande of Egypt: and the famine shall
consume the lande.
31 Neither shall the plenteousnes be knowen in the lande, by reason of that
famine that shall come after: for it shalbe exceedyng great.
32 And as concernyng that the dreame was doubled vnto Pharao the seconde tyme:
beholde, the thyng is certainly prepared of God, and God wyll shortly bryng it
to passe.
33 Nowe therfore let Pharao prouide for a man of vnderstandyng, and wisedome, &
set him ouer the land of Egypt.
34 And let Pharao do this also, that he make officers ouer the lande, & take vp
the fift part of the inheritaunce in ye land of Egypt in the seuen plenteous
yeres.
35 And let them gather all the foode of these good yeres that come: and laye vp
corne vnder the hande of Pharao, and let them kepe foode in the cities.
36 And so shall that foode be for store in the lande agaynst the seuen yeres of
famine, which shall come in the lande of Egypt, that ye lande perishe not
through famine.
37 And the saying seemed good in ye eyes of Pharao, and in the eyes of all his
seruauntes.
38 Then saide Pharao vnto his seruauntes: May there be founde a man suche as
this is, in whom the spirite of God is?
39 And Pharao saide vnto Ioseph: Forasmuch as God hath shewed thee all this,
there is no man of vnderstandyng or of wisedome lyke vnto thee.
40 Thou therfore shalt be ouer my house, and accordyng to thy worde shall all my
people be ruled: only in the kynges seate wyll I be aboue thee.
41 And Pharao sayde agayne vnto Ioseph: beholde, I haue set thee ouer all the
lande of Egypt.
42 And Pharao toke of his ryng from his hande, and put it vpon Iosephes hande: &
arayed him in cloth of raynes, & put a golden cheyne about his necke.
43 And set hym vpon the best charet he had saue one: and they cried before him,
tender father, and made hym ruler ouer all the lande of Egypt.
44 And moreouer Pharao said vnto Ioseph: I am Pharao, and without thee shal no
man lyft vp his hande or foote in all the lande of Egypt.
45 And Pharao called Iosephes name Zaphnath Paaneach, & he gaue hym to wyfe
Asnath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On. Then went Ioseph ouer the lande
of Egypt.
46 (And he was thirtie yere olde when he stoode before Pharao king of Egypt) And
Ioseph departyng from the presence of Pharao, went throughout all the lande of
Egypt.
47 And in the seuen plenteous yeres, the earth brought foorth great store for to
lay vp.
48 And he gathered vp all the foode of the seuen plenteous yeres which were in
the lande of Egypt, and layed vp the foode in the cities: the foode of the
fieldes that grew rounde about euery citie, layed he vp in the same.
49 And Ioseph layed vp corne in store lyke vnto the sande of the sea, in
multitude out of measure, vntyll he left numbryng: for it was without number.
50 And vnto Ioseph were borne two sonnes before the yeres of famine came: which
Asnath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On, bare vnto hym.
51 And Ioseph called the name of the first sonne, Manasse: for God sayde he hath
made me forget al my labour, and all my fathers housholde.
52 The name of the seconde called he Ephraim, for God sayd he hath caused me to
be fruitefull in the lande of my trouble.
53 And when the seuen yeres of plenteousnesse that was in the land of Egypt,
were ended,
54 Then came the seuen yeres of dearth, according as Ioseph had sayde, and the
dearth was in all landes: but in all the lande of Egypt, was there yet foode.
55 And when the lande of Egypt also began to hunger, the people cryed to Pharao
for bread. And Pharao sayde vnto al the Egyptians, go vnto Ioseph: and what he
sayeth to you, that do.
56 And the dearth was throughout all the lande: and Ioseph opened all the barnes
wherein was corne, and solde vnto the Egyptians: for the famine waxed sore in
the lande of Egypt.
57 And all countreys came into Egypt to Ioseph, for to bye corne because that
the famine was so sore in all landes.

Chapter 42

1 And Iacob seing that there was corne in Egypt, sayde vnto his sonnes: why gape
ye one vpon another?
2 And he said: behold, I haue hearde that there is corne in Egypt: get you downe
thyther, and bye vs corne from thence, that we may liue, and not dye.
3 So went Iosephes ten brethren downe to bye corne in Egypt.
4 But Beniamin Iosephes brother, woulde not Iacob sende with his other brethren:
for he saide, lest peraduenture destruction come vpon hym.
5 And the sonnes of Irael came to bye corne among other that came: for there was
dearth in the lande of Chanaan.
6 And Ioseph was gouernour in the lande, and solde to all the people of the
lande. And Iosephes brethren came and bowed them selues with theyr faces downe
to the grounde before him.
7 When Ioseph sawe his brethren, he knewe them, and made hym selfe straunge vnto
them, & spake roughly vnto them, saying: Whence come ye? They aunswered, out of
the lande of Chanaan to bye vitayle.
8 And Ioseph knewe his brethren, but they knewe not him.
9 And Ioseph remembred his dreames whiche he dreamed of them, and sayde vnto
them: ye are spyes, and to see where the lande is weake, is your commyng.
10 And they sayde vnto hym: nay my Lord, but to bye vitayle thy seruauntes are
come.
11 We are all one mans sonnes, and meane truely, and thy seruauntes are no
spyes.
12 And he sayde vnto them agayne: nay but euen to see where the lande is weake,
is your comming.
13 And they said: we thy seruauntes are twelue brethren, the sonnes of one man
in the lande of Chanaan, and beholde, the youngest is this day with our father,
& one, no man woteth where he is.
14 And Ioseph saide vnto them: that is it that I spake vnto you when I sayd, ye
are spyes.
15 Hereby ye shalbe proued: by the lyfe of Pharao, ye shall not go hence, except
your youngest brother come hither.
16 Sende out one of you, whiche may fet your brother, and ye shalbe kept in
pryson, that your wordes may be proued whether there be any trueth in you: or
els by the lyfe of Pharao, ye are but spyes.
17 And he put them altogether in warde three dayes.
18 And Ioseph said vnto them the thirde day: this do & liue, for I feare God.
19 If ye be true men, let one of your brethren be bonde in the house of your
pryson: and go ye, carry corne to put away the famine from your housholde.
20 But bryng your youngest brother vnto me, and so shal your wordes be tryed
true, and ye shall not dye: & they dyd so.
21 And one sayde to another: we haue veryly sinned agaynst our brother, in that
we sawe the anguishe of his soule, when he besought vs, and we woulde not heare
him: and therfore is this trouble come vpon vs.
22 And Ruben aunswered them, saying: sayd I not vnto you, that you shoulde not
sinne against the lad, and ye would not heare? and see, nowe his blood is
required.
23 They were not aware that Ioseph vnderstoode them: for he spake vnto them by
an interpreter.
24 And he turned from them and wept: and turned to them agayne, and communed
with them, and toke out Simeon from amongest them, and bounde him before theyr
eyes.
25 And Ioseph commaunded to fill their sackes with corne, & to put euery mans
money in his sacke, and to geue them vitayle to spende by the way? and thus dyd
he vnto them.
26 And they laded theyr asses with the corne, and departed thence.
27 And as one of them opened his sacke for to geue his asse prouender in the
Inne, he espied his money, for it was in his sackes mouth.
28 And he said vnto his brethren, my money is restored me agayne, for lo, it is
euen in my sacke. And their heart fayled them, and they were astonyed, and sayd
one to another, why hath God dealt thus with vs?
29 And they came vnto Iacob their father, vnto the lande of Chanaan, & tolde him
all that befell vnto them, saying:
30 The man, euen the Lord of the lande, spake roughly to vs, and toke vs for
spyes of the countrey.
31 And we sayd vnto him: we meane truely, we neuer were spyes.
32 We be twelue brethren, sonnes of our father: one is away, and the youngest is
this day with our father in the lande of Chanaan.
33 And the Lorde of the countrey sayde agayne vnto vs, Hereby shall I know that
ye meane truely: leaue one of your brethren here with me, and take foode to put
away the famine fro your householdes, and get you away.
34 And bring your youngest brother vnto me, that I may knowe that you are no
spyes, but meane truely: so wyll I deliuer you your brother, and ye shall
occupie in the lande.
35 And as they emptied theyr sackes, beholde, euery mans bundell of money was in
his sacke: And when both they and their father sawe the bundelles of money, they
were afrayde.
36 And Iacob theyr father sayde vnto them: Me haue ye robbed of my children,
Ioseph is away, and Simeon is away, & ye will take Beniamin away: all these
thinges are agaynst me.
37 Ruben said vnto his father: slay my two sonnes, yf I bring hym not to thee
agayne: deliuer him to my hande, and I will bring him to thee agayne.
38 And he said: My sonne shall not go downe with you, for his brother is dead,
and he is left alone: if destruction come vpon hym by the way whiche ye go, ye
shall bring my gray head with sorowe vnto the graue.

Chapter 43

1 And the dearth was great in the lande.
2 And it came to passe when they had eaten vp the corne which they had brought
out of the lande of Egypt, theyr father sayde vnto them: go agayne and bye vs a
litle foode.
3 Iuda aunswered him, and sayd, The man did solemply protest vnto vs saying: ye
shall not see my face, except your brother be with you.
4 If thou wylt sende our brother with vs, we wyll go downe, and bye thee foode.
5 But yf thou wylt not sende hym, we wyll not go downe: for the man sayde vnto
vs, ye shall not see my face, except your brother be with you.
6 And Israel sayd: wherefore dealt ye so cruelly with me, as to tell the man
that ye had yet a brother?
7 They aunswered, The man asked vs straytely of our state and of our kinrede,
saying: Is your father yet aliue? haue ye not another brother? And we tolde hym
accordyng to the tenour of these wordes: Could we by any meane knowe, that he
would say, bryng your brother downe with you?
8 The said Iuda vnto Israel his father: send the lad with me, that we may arise
and go, and that we may liue, & not dye, yea both we & thou, & also our meany.
9 I wylbe suretie for hym, of my handes shalt thou require hym: yf I bryng hym
not to thee agayne, and set him before thine eyes, then let me beare the blame
for euer.
10 Truely except we had made this tarying, by this we had returned the seconde
tyme.
11 And their father Israel sayde vnto them: if it must nedes be so, nowe then do
thus. Take of the best fruites of the lande in your vesselles, and bryng ye man
a present, a curtsie of bawme, and a curtsie of hony, spyces and mirre, nuttes
and almondes.
12 And take double money in your hande, & the money that was brought agayne in
your sackes, take it agayne with you, peraduenture it was some ouersight.
13 Take also your brother with you, and arise and go agayne vnto the man.
14 And God almightie geue you mercye in the sight of the man, that he may
deliuer you your other brother, & this Beniamin: and thus I am as one that is
quite robbed of his chyldren.
15 Thus toke they the present, and twyse so muche more money in their hande,
with Beniamin, and rose vp, and went downe to Egypt, & stode before Ioseph.
16 When Ioseph sawe Beniamin with them, he sayd to the ruler of his house: bryng
these men home, and slay, and make redy, for these men shall dyne with me at
noone.
17 And the man did as Ioseph bad, and brought them into Iosephes house.
18 When the men were brought into Iosephes house, they were afrayde, and said:
because of the money that came in our sackes mouthes at the first tyme, are we
brought in, that he may seeke occasion agaynst vs, and violently lay handes vpon
vs, to bryng vs in bondage, and our asses also.
19 Therefore came they to the man that was the ruler ouer Iosephes house, and
communed with him at the doore of the house,
20 And sayde: oh sir, we came downe hyther at the fyrst tyme to bye foode.
21 And as we came to an Inne, we opened our sackes, and behold, euery mans money
was in the mouth of his sacke, euen our money in ful wayght, and we haue brought
it againe in our hande.
22 And other money haue we brought also in our handes to bye foode: but we can
not tell who put our money in our sackes.
23 And he sayd: peace be vnto you, feare not: your God, and the God of your
father, hath geuen you that treasure in your sackes: I had your money. And he
brought Simeon out to them.
24 And the man led them into Iosephes house, and gaue them water to washe their
feete, & gaue their asses prouender.
25 And they made redy their present agaynst Ioseph came at noone: for they
hearde say that they should eate bread there.
26 When Ioseph came home, they brought the present into the house to hym, whiche
was in their handes, and bowed them selues to the grounde before him.
27 And he asked them of their welfare, and sayd: Is your father, that old man
whiche ye tolde me of, in good health? and is he yet aliue?
28 They aunswered: Thy seruaunt our father is in good health, & is yet alyue.
And they bowing them selues, made theyr obeysaunce.
29 And he lifting vp his eyes, behelde his brother Beniamin his mothers sonne,
and sayd: is this your younger brother of whom ye spake vnto me? And he said:
God be mercyfull vnto thee my sonne.
30 And Ioseph made haste (for his heart did melt vpon his brother) and sought
where to weepe, and entred into his chaumber and wept there.
31 And he washed his face, and came out, and refrayned hym selfe, and sayde: set
bread on the table.
32 And they prepared for hym by hym selfe, and for them by them selues, and for
the Egyptians which dyd eate with him, by them selues, because the Egyptians may
not eate bread with the Hebrewes: for that is an abhomination to the Egyptians.
33 And they satte before hym the first borne, according to his age, & the
youngest according to his youth: and the men merueyled among them selues.
34 And he sent rewardes vnto them from before him selfe: but Beniamins part was
fiue times so muche as any of theirs: and they dronke, and were made mery with
him.

Chapter 44

1 And he commaunded the ruler of his house, saying: fill the mens sackes with
foode, as much as they can cary, & put euery mans mony in his sackesmouth:
2 And put my cup, my siluer cup in the sackes mouth of the youngest, and his
corne money also. And he did according to the worde that Ioseph had saide.
3 And in the morning assoone as it was lyght, the men were let go, they, and
their asses.
4 And when they were out of the citie, and not yet farre away, Ioseph sayde vnto
the ruler of his house: vp, and folowe after the men, & when thou doest ouertake
them, thou shalt say vnto them: wherfore haue ye rewarded euyl for good?
5 Is not that the cuppe in the whiche my Lord drinketh? and for the which he
consulteth with the propheciers? Ye haue euill done that ye haue done.
6 And when he ouertoke them, he sayd the same wordes vnto them.
7 And they aunswered him: wherfore sayeth my Lorde suche wordes? God forbid that
thy seruauntes should do so.
8 Beholde the money which we founde in our sackes mouthes, we brought agayne
vnto thee, out of the land of Chanaan: howe then shoulde we steale out of thy
Lordes house eyther siluer or golde?
9 With whomsoeuer of thy seruauntes it be founde, let him dye, and we also wyll
be my Lordes bondmen.
10 And he said, Nowe also let it be according vnto your wordes: he with whom it
is founde, shalbe my seruaunt, and ye shalbe blamelesse.
11 And at once euery man toke downe his sacke to the ground, and euery man
opened his sacke.
12 And he searched, and began at the eldest, and left at the youngest: and the
cuppe was founde in Beniamins sacke.
13 Then they rent theyr clothes, and laded euery ma his asse, and went againe
vnto the citie.
14 And Iuda and his brethren came to Iosephes house (for he was yet there) and
they fell before him on the ground.
15 And Ioseph sayde vnto them: what deede is this that ye haue done? Wote ye not
that suche a man as I do consult with propheciers?
16 Then saide Iuda: what shall we say vnto my lorde? What shall we speake? or
howe shall we cleare our selues? God hath founde out the wickednes of thy
seruauntes: beholde, we are my lordes seruauntes, both we, yea, and he also with
whom the cup is founde.
17 And he aunswered, God forbid that I shoulde do so: but the man with who the
cup is found, he shalbe my seruaunt, and get ye hence vp in peace vnto your
father.
18 Then Iuda went vnto him, and said: Oh my lorde, let thy seruaunt I pray thee
speake a worde in my lordes eares, and be not inflamed with wrath agaynst thy
seruaunt, for thou art euen as Pharao.
19 My lorde asked his seruauntes, saying: haue ye a father, or a brother?
20 And we aunswered my lorde: we haue a father that is olde, and a young lad,
which he begat in his age: and the brother of the sayd lad is dead, and he is
all that is left of his mother, and his father loueth him.
21 And thou saidest vnto thy seruauntes: bryng him vnto me, that I may set my
eyes vpon him.
22 And we aunswered my Lorde, that the lad could not go from his father, for if
he shoulde leaue his father, he were but dead.
23 Then saydest thou vnto thy seruauntes: except your youngest brother come with
you, loke that ye see my face no more.
24 And when we came vnto thy seruaunt our father, we shewed hym the wordes of my
Lorde.
25 And our father sayde vnto vs: go agayne, and bye vs a litle foode.
26 And we aunswered, we can not go downe: neuerthelesse, if our youngest brother
be with vs, then wyll we go downe, for we may not see the mans face, except our
youngest brother be with vs.
27 And thy seruaunt our father sayd vnto vs: ye knowe that my wyfe bare me two
sonnes.
28 And the one went out from me, and I sayd, of a suretie he is torne in peeces,
and I sawe him not since.
29 And if ye take this also away from me, and destruction come vnto him, ye
shall bryng my gray head with sorowe vnto the graue.
30 Nowe therefore when I come to thy seruaunt my father, and the lad be not with
vs (seing that his life hangeth by the laddes life.)
31 Then shall it come to passe, that assoone as he seeth that the lad is not
come, he wyll dye: so shall we thy seruauntes bryng the gray head of thy
seruaunt our father with sorowe vnto the graue.
32 For I thy seruaunt became suretie for the lad before my father, and saide: If
I bryng hym not vnto thee agayne, I shal beare the blame vnto my father all my
lyfe long.
33 Nowe therefore I pray thee, let me thy seruaunt byde here for the lad, and be
my lordes bondman, and let the lad go vp with his brethren.
34 For howe can I go vp to my father, if the ladde be not with me? vnlesse I
woulde see the wretchednesse that shall come on my father.

Chapter 45

1 Ioseph coulde no longer refrayne before all the that stoode by hym, wherefore
he cryed: cause euery man to auoyde. And there remayned no man with him, whyle
Ioseph vttered hym selfe vnto his brethren.
2 And he wept aloude, and the Egyptians, and the house of Pharao heard.
3 And Ioseph sayde vnto his brethren: I am Ioseph, doth my father yet lyue? And
his brethren could not aunswere him, they were so abashed at his presence.
4 And Ioseph sayde vnto his brethren, come neare to me I pray you. And they came
neare. And he said, I am Ioseph your brother who ye solde into Egypt.
5 Nowe therefore be not greeued herewith, neither let it seeme a cruel thing in
your eyes, that ye solde me hyther: for God did sende me before you to preserue
lyfe.
6 For this is the seconde yere of dearth in the lande, and fiue more are
behinde, in the whiche there shall neyther be earyng nor haruest.
7 Wherfore God sent me before you, to preserue you a posteritie in the earth,
and to saue your liues by a great deliueraunce.
8 So nowe, it was not ye that sent me hyther, but God whiche hath made me a
father to Pharao, and lorde of all his house, and ruler throughout all the lande
of Egypt.
9 Haste you, and go vp to my father, and tell him: thus saieth thy sonne Ioseph,
God hath made me lord of all Egypt, come downe therfore vnto me, tary not.
10 And thou shalt dwell in the land of Gosen and be a neyghbour vnto me, thou, &
thy chyldren, and thy chyldrens children, thy sheepe, and thy beastes, and all
that thou hast.
11 And there wyll I prouide thee sustenaunce (for there remaine yet fiue yeres
of dearth) lest thou and thy housholde, & all that thou hast come to pouertie.
12 And beholde your eyes do see, and the eyes also of my brother Beniamin, that
mine own mouth speaketh vnto you.
13 Therfore tell my father of all my glorie in Egypt, and of all that you haue
seene, and make hast, and bryng my father hyther.
14 And he fel on his brother Beniamins necke, and wept: and Beniamin wept on his
necke.
15 Moreouer he kissed al his brethren, and wept vpon them: and after that, his
brethren talked with him.
16 And the fame thereof was hearde in Pharaos house, so that they sayde:
Iosephes brethre are come. And it pleased Pharao well, and all his seruauntes.
17 And Pharao spake vnto Ioseph: say vnto thy brethren, this do ye: lade your
beastes, and go and returne vnto the lande of Chanaan:
18 Take your father, and your housesholdes, and come vnto me, and I wyll geue
you the good of the land of Egypt, and ye shall eate the fat of the lande.
19 And thou also shalt comaunde them this do ye: take charets with you out of
the lande of Egypt for your chyldren, and for your wyues, and bryng your father,
and come.
20 Also regarde not your stuffe, for the good of all the lande of Egypt is
yours.
21 And the children of Israel dyd euen so: and Ioseph gaue them charettes,
accordyng to the commaundement of Pharao, and gaue them vitayle also to spende
by the way.
22 And he gaue vnto eche of the chaunge of raiment: but vnto Beniamin he gaue
three hundred peeces of siluer, and fiue chaunge of rayment.
23 And vnto his father he sent after the same maner ten asses laden with good
out of Egypt, and ten she asses laden with corne, & bread, and meate, for his
father by the way.
24 So sent he his brethren away, and they departed: and he sayd vnto them, see
that ye fall to no stryfe on the way.
25 They departed therfore from Egypt, and came into the lande of Chanaan, vnto
Iacob theyr father.
26 And tolde him, saying: Ioseph is yet aliue, and is gouernour ouer al the land
of Egypt. And Iacobs heart wauered, for he beleued them not.
27 And they tolde hym all the wordes of Ioseph, whiche he had said vnto them:
And when he sawe the charets whiche Ioseph had sent to cary him, the spirite of
Iacob their father reuiued.
28 And Israel saide: I haue inough, that Ioseph my sonne is yet alyue: I will
go, and see him, yer that I dye.

Chapter 46

1 Israel toke his iourney with all that he had, and came to Beer seba, and
offred offeringes vnto the God of his father Isahac.
2 And God spake vnto Israel in a vision by nyght, saying: Iacab, Iacob? And he
aunswered: here am I.
3 And he sayde: I am God, the God of thy father, feare not to go downe into
Egypt: for I wyll there make of thee a great people.
4 I wyll go downe with thee into Egypt: and I wyll surely make thee come vp
agayne, and Ioseph shall put his hande vpon thyne eyes.
5 And Iacob rose vp from Beer-seba: and the sonnes of Israel caryed Iacob their
father, and their childre, and their wyues, in the charettes whiche Pharao had
sent to cary him.
6 And they toke their cattell, and the goodes whiche they had gotten in the
lande of Chanaan, & came into Egypt, both Icob and all his seede with him,
7 His sonnes, & his sonnes sonnes with him, his daughters, and his sonnes
daughters, and all his seede brought he with him into Egypt.
8 These are the names of the chyldren of Israel which came into Egypt, both
Iacob and his sonnes. Ruben Iacobs first borne.
9 
10 The children of Simeon: Iemuel, & Iamin, and Ohad, and Iachin, and Sohar, and
Saul the sonne of a Chanaanitishe woman.
11 The chyldren of Leui: Gerson, Cehath, and Merari.
12 The children of Iuda: Er, & Onan, Selah, & Phares, and Zarah: but Er and Onan
dyed in the lande of Chanaan. The children of Phares also were Hesron and Hamul.
13 And the children of Isachar: Thola, Puuah, and Iob, and Simron.
14 The chyldren of Zabulon: Sered, and Elon, and Iahelel.
15 These be the children of Lea, whiche she bare vnto Iacob in Mesopotamia, with
his daughter Dina. All the soules of his sonnes and daughters, make thirtie and
three.
16 The children of Gad: Siphion, and Haggi, Suni, and Esbon, Eri, & Arodi, and
Areli.
17 The children of Aser: Imnah, and Iisuah, and Iisui, and Beriah, and Serah
their sister. And the chyldren of Beriah: Heber, and Malchiel.
18 These are the sonnes of Zilpha, who Laban gaue to Lea his daughter: and these
she bare vnto Iacob, euen sixteene soules.
19 The chyldren of Rachel Iacobs wife: Ioseph and Beniamin.
20 And vnto Ioseph in the lande of Egypt, were borne Manasses, and Ephraim,
which Asenath the daughter of Potipera priest of On bare vnto him.
21 The children of Beniamin: Bela, and Becher, and Asbel, Gera, & Naaman, Ehi,
and Ros, Muppim, and Huppim, and Arde.
22 These are the chyldren of Rachel which she bare vnto Iacob, foureteene soules
altogether.
23 And the children of Dan: Husim.
24 The children of Naphthali: Iahseel, and Guni, Ieser, and Sillem.
25 These are the sonnes of Bilha, which Laban gaue vnto Rachel his daughter, and
she bare these vnto Iacob altogether seuen soules.
26 And so the soules that came with Iacob into Egypt, whiche came out of his
loynes, besides Iacobs sonnes wyues, were altogether threscore & sixe soules.
27 And the sonnes of Ioseph whiche were borne hym in Egypt, were two soules: so
that all the soules of the house of Iacob whiche came into Egypt, were threscore
and ten. />
28 And he sent Iuda before hym vnto Ioseph, to direct his face vnto Gosen, and
they came into the lande of Gosen.
29 And Ioseph made redy his charet, and went vp to meete Israel his father vnto
Gosen, and presented him self vnto him, and he fell on his necke, and wept on
his necke a good whyle.
30 And Israel sayd vnto Ioseph: nowe am I content to dye, insomuche as I haue
seene thy face, and because thou art yet aliue.
31 And Ioseph sayde vnto his brethren, and vnto his fathers house: I wyll go vp,
and shewe Pharao, and tell him: my brethren, and my fathers house, whiche were
in the lande of Chanaan, are come vnto me.
32 And they are shepheardes, for theyr trade hath ben to feede cattell: and they
haue brought theyr sheepe and theyr cattell, and all that they haue.
33 And if that Pharao call you, and aske you, what your occupation is?
34 Ye shal annswere: thy seruauntes haue ben occupied about cattell from our
childhood vnto this tyme, we and our fathers: that ye may dwell in the lande of
Gosen. For euery one that kepeth cattell, is an abhomination vnto the Egyptians.

Chapter 47

1 Ioseph came therfore & tolde Pharao, and said: My father & my brethre, theyr
sheepe, and theyr cattell, and all that they haue, are come out of ye lande of
Chanaan: and beholde, they are in the lande of Gosen.
2 And Ioseph toke of the company of his brethren euen fiue men, and presented
them vnto Pharao.
3 And Pharao sayd vnto his brethren: what is your occupation? And they aunswered
Pharao: thy seruauntes are kepers of cattell, both we, and also our fathers.
4 They said moreouer vnto Pharao, for to soiourne in the land are we come, for
thy seruaunts haue no pasture for their cattell, so sore is the famishment in
the lande of Chanaan: Nowe therefore let thy seruauntes dwell in the lande of
Gosen.
5 And Pharao sayde vnto Ioseph: thy father & thy brethre are come vnto thee.
6 The lande of Egypt is before thee: In the best place of the lande make both
thy father and thy brethren dwell, eue in the land of Gosen let them dwel.
Moreouer, if thou knowest any man of actiuitie amongest them, make them rulers
ouer my cattell.
7 And Ioseph brought in Iacob his father, and set hym before Pharao: and Iacob
blessed Pharao.
8 And Pharao said vnto Iacob: howe olde art thou?
9 Iacob sayd vnto Pharao, The dayes of my pilgrimage are an hundred and thirtie
yeres: Fewe and euill haue the dayes of my life ben, and haue not attayned vnto
the yeres of ye lyfe of my fathers, in the dayes of theyr pilgrimage.
10 And Iacob blessed Pharao, and went out of his presence.
11 And Ioseph prepared dwellinges for his father, and his brethren, and gaue
them possessions in the lande of Egypt, in the best of the land, euen the land
of Rameses, as Pharao had comaunded.
12 And Ioseph made prouision for his father and his brethren, and all his
fathers housholde with bread: euen to the mouthes of the young chyldren.
13 There was no bread in all the lande, for the dearth was exceedyng sore, so
that the lande of Egypt, and the land of Chanaan were famished by reason of the
dearth.
14 And Ioseph brought together all the money that was founde in the lande of
Egypt and of Chanaan, for the corne which they bought: and he layed vp the money
in Pharaos house.
15 When money fayled in the lande of Egypt and of Chanaan, all the Egyptians
came vnto Ioseph, and saide, Geue vs bread: wherefore suffrest thou vs to dye
before thee whe our money is spent?
16 Then sayde Ioseph, Bryng your cattell: and I wyll geue you for your cattell
yf money fayle.
17 And they brought their cattell vnto Ioseph: and Ioseph gaue them bread for
horses and sheepe, and oxen, & asses, and fedde them with bread for all their
cattell that yere.
18 But when that yere was ended, they came vnto hym the next yere, and sayde
vnto hym: We wyl not hyde it from my lorde, howe that our money is spent: my
lorde also had our heardes of cattel, nether is ther ought left in ye sight of
my lorde but euen our bodies & our landes.
19 Wherefore lettest thou vs dye before thine eyes, both we and our lande? bye
vs and our land for bread, and both we and our lande wyll be bounde vnto Pharao:
onlye geue vs seede, that we may lyue, and not dye, & that the lande go not to
waste.
20 And so Ioseph bought all the lande of Egypt for Pharao: For the Egyptians
solde euery man his possessions, because the dearth was so sore vpon them: and
so the lande became Pharaos.
21 And he caused the people to moue from citie to citie, fro one syde of Egypt
into the other.
22 Only the lande of the priestes bought he not: for the priestes had a portion
assigned them of Pharao, and dyd eate their portio which Pharao gaue them:
wherfore they solde not their landes.
23 Then Ioseph sayde vnto the folke: beholde, I haue bought you this daye and
your lande for Pharao: Lo, here is seede for you, & ye shall sowe the land.
24 And of the increase you shall geue the fyfth part vnto Pharao, and foure
partes shalbe your owne for seede of the fielde, and for you & them of your
householdes, and for your chyldren to eate.
25 And they aunswered: Thou hast saued our lyues, let vs fynde grace in the
syght of my lorde, and we wylbe Pharaos seruauntes.
26 And Ioseph made it a lawe ouer the lande of Egypt vnto this daye, that Pharao
shoulde haue the fyft part, except ye lande of the priestes only, which was not
Pharaos.
27 And Israel dwelt in Egypt, euen in they countrey of Gosen, and they had their
possessions therin, and grewe and multiplied exceedyngly.
28 Moreouer Iacob lyued in the lande of Egypt seuenteene yeres, so that ye whole
age of Iacob was an hundred and fourtie and seuen yeres.
29 When the tyme drewe nye that Israel must dye, he sent for his sonne Ioseph
and sayde vnto him: If I haue founde grace in thy syght, oh put thy hande vnder
my thygh, and deale mercifully and truly with me, that thou bury me not in
Egypt.
30 But I shall sleepe with my fathers, and thou shalt cary me out of Egypt, &
bury me in their buryall. And he aunswered: I wyll do as thou hast sayde.
31 And he sayde: Sweare vnto me. And he sware vnto him. And Israel worshipped
towarde the beddes head.

Chapter 48

1 After these deedes, one tolde Ioseph: beholde, thy father is sicke. And he
toke with hym his two sonnes, Manasses and Ephraim.
2 Then this message was declared vnto Iacob: beholde, thy sonne Ioseph cometh
vnto thee. And Israel toke his strength vnto hym, and sate vpon the bedde.
3 And Iacob sayd vnto Ioseph: God almyghtie appeared vnto me at Luz in the lande
of Chanaan, and blessed me, and sayde vnto me:
4 Beholde, I wyll make thee fruiteful, and cause thee to multiplie, and wyll
make a great number of people of thee, and wyll geue this lande vnto thy seede
after thee vnto an euerlastyng possession.
5 And nowe thy two sonnes Manasses and Ephraim, whiche were borne vnto thee in
the land of Egypt before I came vnto thee into Egypt, are myne, euen as Ruben
and Simeon are mine.
6 And the children which thou hast gotten after them, shalbe thyne owne, and
shalbe called after the names of their brethren in their inheritaunce.
7 And when I came from Mesopotamia, Rachel dyed vpon my hande in the land of
Chanaan, by the way, when there was but a fieldes breadth to come vnto Ephratha:
and I buried her there in the waye to Ephratha, the same is Beth-lehem.
8 And Israel beheld Iosephes sonnes, and sayde: What are these?
9 Ioseph sayde vnto his father: They are my sonnes whiche God hath geuen me
here. And he sayde: Oh bring them to me, and let me blesse them.
10 (And the eyes of Israel were dymme for age, so that he coulde not well see)
And he brought them to hym, and he kyssed them, and imbraced them.
11 And Israel sayde vnto Ioseph, I had not thought to haue seene thy face: and
yet loe, God hath shewed me also thy seede.
12 And Ioseph toke them away fro his lappe, and he bowed hym selfe with his face
towarde the earth.
13 Then toke Ioseph them both, Ephraim with his ryght hande towarde Israels left
hande, and Manasses with his left hande towarde Israels ryght hande, and brought
them vnto hym.
14 And Israel stretched out his ryght hande, and layed it vppon Ephraims head,
which was the younger: and his left hande vpon Manasses head, guydyng his hande
wyttyngly, for Manasses was the first borne.
15 And he blessed Ioseph, and sayde: God in whose syght my fathers Abraham &
Isahac dyd walke, God which hath fedde me al my lyfe long vnto this day,
16 And the angell which hath deliuered me from al euyl, blesse these laddes, and
let my name be named in them, and the name of my fathers Abraham & Isahac, &
that they may growe into a multitude in the middes of the earth.
17 When Ioseph sawe that his father layed his ryght hande vpon the head of
Ephraim, it displeased hym: and he lift vp his fathers hande, to haue remoued it
from Ephraims head vnto Manasses head.
18 And Ioseph sayde vnto his father, Not so my father, for this is the first
borne: put thy right hande vpon his head.
19 And his father would not, but sayde: I knowe it well my sonne, I knowe it
well, he shalbe also a people, and shalbe great: But his younger brother shalbe
greater then he, and his seede shall become a great people.
20 And he blessed them that day, & saide: In thee let Israel blesse & saye, God
make thee as Ephraim, & as Manasses. And he set Ephraim before Manasses.
21 And Israel said vnto Ioseph: behold I dye, & God shalbe with you, & bryng you
againe vnto ye land of your fathers.
22 Moreouer, I haue geuen vnto thee a portion of lande aboue thy brethren, which
I gat out of the hand of the Amorite in my sworde, and in my bowe.

Chapter 49

1 And Iacob called for his sonnes, and sayde: Come together, that I may tell you
what shall come on you in the last dayes.
2 Gather ye together, & heare ye sonnes of Iacob, hearken vnto Israel your
father.
3 Ruben my first borne, thou art my myght, & the beginning of my strength, the
noblenesse of dignitie, and the noblenesse of power.
4 Unstable as water, thou shalt not be the chiefest, because thou wentest vp to
thy fathers bedde: for then defiledst thou my couche with goyng vp.
5 Simeon and Leui brethren, are cruell instrumentes in their habitations.
6 O my soule, come not thou into their secretes, neither into their
congregations let mine honour be vnited: for in their wrath they slewe a man,
and in their selfe wyll, they dygge downe a wall.
7 Cursed be their wrath, for it was shamelesse, and their fiercenesse, for it
was cruell: I wyll deuide them in Iacob, and scatter them in Israel.
8 Iuda, thou art he whom thy brethren shall prayse: Thy hande shalbe in the
necke of thine enemies, thy fathers children shall stowpe before thee.
9 Iuda is a lions whelpe: fro thy spoyle my sonne thou art come on hye. He layed
him downe, and couched himselfe as a lion, and as a lionesse: who wyll stirre
hym vp?
10 The scepter shal not depart from Iuda, and a law geuer from betweene his
feete, vntyll Silo come: And vnto hym shall the gatheryng of the people be.
11 He shall bynde his foale vnto ye vine, and his asses colt vnto the braunche:
He wasshed his garment in wine, and his clothes in the blood of grapes.
12 His eyes shalbe redde with wine, and his teeth whyte with mylke.
13 Zabulon shall dwell besyde the hauen of the sea, & nye the haue of shippes,
his border shalbe vnto Sidon.
14 Isachar is a strong asse, couchyng hym downe betweene two burthens.
15 And sawe that rest was good, and the lande that it was pleasaunt: and bowed
his shoulder to beare, and became a seruaunt vnto tribute.
16 Dan shall iudge his people, and one of the tribes of Israel.
17 Dan shalbe a serpent in the way, an adder in the path, bytyng ye horse
heeles, and his ryder fell backewarde.
18 I haue wayted for thy saluation O Lorde.
19 Gad, an hoast of men shall ouercome hym: but he shall ouercome him at the
last.
20 Out of the fat lande of Aser shalbe his bread, and he shall geue pleasures
for a kyng.
21 Nephthalim is a hynde sent for a present geuyng goodly wordes.
22 Ioseph is lyke a floryshyng bough, a bough floryshyng by a well syde whose
small boughes ran vpon the wall.
23 The archers haue greeuously prouoked hym, and shot him through with dartes,
they haue hated him to his hinderaunce.
24 But his bowe abode fast, and the armes of his handes were made strong by the
handes of the myghtie God of Iacob: Out of him shal come an heardman, a stone in
Israel.
25 From thy fathers God which hath helped thee, and from the almyghtie which
hath blessed thee with blessinges from heauen aboue, with blessynges of the
deepe that lyeth vnder, & with blessynges of the brestes and of the wombe.
26 The blessynges of thy fathers shall be stronger then the blessinges of my
elders: vnto the vtmost of the hylles of the worlde, they shalbe on the head of
Ioseph, and on the toppe of the head of hym that was seperate from his brethren.
27 Beniamin shall rauishe as a wolfe: In the mornyng he shall deuour the pray,
and at nyght he shall deuide the spoyle.
28 All these are the twelue tribes of Israel: and this their father spake vnto
them, and blessed them, euery one of them blessed he with a seueral blessing.
29 And he charged them, and sayde vnto them: When I shalbe gathered vnto my
people, bury me with my fathers in the caue that is in the field of Ephron the
Hethite,
30 In the caue that is in the fielde of Machpelah, which is before Mamre in the
lande of Chanaan, which Abraham bought with the fielde of Ephron the Hethite for
a possession to bury in.
31 Where as were buried Abraham and Sara his wyfe, and where as were buried
Isahac and Rebecca his wife: & there I buried Lea.
32 The fielde and the caue that is therin was bought of the chyldren of Heth.
33 And when Iacob had made an ende of commaundyng all that he would vnto his
sonnes, he plucked vp his feete vnto the bedde, and dyed: and was put vnto his
people.

Chapter 50

1 And Ioseph fell vpon his fathers face, and wept vpon him, and kyssed hym.
2 And Ioseph comaunded his seruauntes the phisitians to imbawme his father. And
the phisitians enbawmed Israel.
3 And fourtie dayes were continued (for so long doth the imbawmyng last) and the
Egyptians mourned for him thre score and ten dayes.
4 And when the dayes of mournyng were ended, Ioseph spake vnto ye house of
Pharao, saying: If I haue founde fauour in your eyes, speake I pray you in the
eares of Pharao, saying:
5 My father made me sweare, & sayde, Lo I dye, bury me in the graue which I haue
made me in the lande of Chanaan. Nowe therfore let me go vp I pray thee, and
bury my father, and then wyl I come agayne.
6 And Pharao sayde: Go vp, and bury thy father, accordyng as he made thee
sweare.
7 And Ioseph went vp to bury his father, and with hym went all the seruautes of
Pharao that were the elders of his house, and all the elders of the lande of
Egypt:
8 And all the house of Ioseph and his brethren, and his fathers house: onlye
their chyldren, and their sheepe, & their cattell, left they behynde in the
lande of Gosen.
9 And there went with hym also charrettes and horsemen: and it was an exceedyng
great companie.
10 And they came to the corne floore of Atad, which is beyonde Iordane, and
there they made a great and exceedyng sore lamentation: and he mourned for his
father seuen dayes.
11 And when the inhabiters of the lande euen the Chananites, sawe the mournyng
in the corne floore of Atad, they sayde: This is a great mournyng vnto the
Egyptians. Wherefore the name of the place is called, The mournyng of the
Egyptians, & it is beyond Iordane.
12 And his sonnes dyd vnto hym accordyng as he had commaunded them.
13 For his sonnes caryed hym into the lande of Chanaan, & buryed hym in the caue
of the fielde Machpelah, whiche fielde Abraham bought to be a place to bury in
of Ephron the Hethite, before Mamre.
14 And Ioseph returned into Egypt agayne, he and his brethren, and all that went
vp with hym to bury his father, assoone as he had buryed hym.
15 And when Iosephes brethren sawe that their father was dead, they saide:
Ioseph may peraduenture hate vs, & rewarde vs againe all the euyll whiche we dyd
vnto hym.
16 And they dyd sende a message vnto Ioseph, saying: Thy father dyd commaunde
before he dyed, saying:
17 This wyse shall ye say vnto Ioseph, Forgeue I pray thee the trespasse of thy
brethren, and their sinne: for they rewarded thee euyll. And nowe we praye thee
forgeue the trespasse of the seruauntes of the God of thy father. And Ioseph
wept when they spake vnto hym.
18 Also his brethren came vnto hym, and fell flat before his face, saying:
beholde, we be thy seruauntes.
19 To whom Ioseph sayde: Feare not, am I God?
20 Ye thought euil against me, but God turned it vnto good, to bryng to passe as
it is this day, and to saue muche people alyue.
21 Feare not therefore, nowe I wyll noryshe you and your chyldren. And he
comforted them, and spake kyndly vnto them.
22 Ioseph dwelt in Egypt, he and his fathers house: and Ioseph lyued an hundred
and ten yeres.
23 And Ioseph sawe Ephraims children euen vnto the thirde generation: and vnto
Machir the sonne of Manasses, were chyldren borne on Iosephes knees.
24 And Ioseph sayde vnto his brethren, I dye, & God wyll surely visite you, and
bryng you out of this lande, vnto the lande whiche he sware vnto Abraham,
Isahac, and Iacob.
25 And Ioseph toke an othe of the chyldren of Israel, saying: God wyll not fayle
but visite you, and ye shall cary my bones hence.
26 And so Ioseph dyed when he was an hundred and ten yeres olde: And they
imbawmed hym with spyces, puttyng hym in a chest in Egypt.


Exodus

Chapter 1

1 These are the names of the children of Israel, whiche came into Egypt with
Iacob, euery ma came with his housholde:
2 Ruben, Simeon, Leui, and Iuda:
3 Isachar, Zabulon, and Beniamin,
4 Dan and Nephthali, Gad & Aser.
5 All the soules that came out of the line of Iacob, were seuentie:
6 But Ioseph was in Egypt alredy, & Ioseph dyed, and all his brethren, and all
that generation.
7 And the children of Israel were fruitfull, encreased, multiplied, & waxed
exceedyng myghtie, and the lande was full of them.
8 But there arose vp a newe kyng in Egypt, which knewe not Ioseph:
9 And he sayde vnto his folke, Beholde, the people of the chyldren of Israel are
greater and myghtier then we.
10 Come on, let vs deale wyttyly with the, lest they multiplie, & lest it come
to passe, that if there be any warre, they ioyne them selues vnto our enemies, &
fight agaynst vs, & so get them vp out of ye land.
11 Therfore dyd they set taske maisters ouer them, to kepe the vnder with
burthens: And they buylt vnto Pharao treasure cities, Pithom & Raamses.
12 But the more they vexed them, the more they multiplied and grewe: so that
they abhorred at the syght of the chyldren of Israel.
13 And the Egyptians helde the children of Israel in bondage without mercie,
14 And they made their lyues bytter vnto them in that cruell bondage, in claye,
and bricke, and all maner of worke in the fielde: for all their bondage wherein
they serued them was ful of tirannie.
15 And the kyng of Egypt spake vnto the mydwyfes of the Hebrues women: (of which
the one was named Siphrah and the other Puah) and sayde:
16 When ye do the office of a mydwyfe to the women of the Hebrues, and see in
the birth tyme that it is a boy, ye shall kyl it: but if it be a daughter, it
shal liue.
17 Notwithstanding, the mydwifes feared God, and dyd not as the kyng of Egypt
commaunded them, but saued the men chyldren.
18 And the kyng of Egypt called for the mydwyfes, and sayde vnto them: why haue
ye dealt on this maner, and haue saued the men chyldren?
19 And the mydwyfes aunswered Pharao: that ye Hebrues women are not as the women
of Egypt: for they are more liuely women, and are deliuered yer the mydwyfes
come at them.
20 And God dealt well therefore with the mydwyfes: and the people multiplied and
waxed very myghtie.
21 And it came to passe, that because the midwifes feared God, he made them
houses.
22 And Pharao charged all his people, saying: All the men chyldren that are
borne, cast into the ryuer, and saue the mayde chyldren alyue.

Chapter 2

1 And there went a man out of the house of Leui, and toke to wyfe a daughter of
Leui.
2 And the wyfe conceaued and bare a sonne: and when she sawe that it was a
proper childe, she hyd him three monethes.
3 And when she coulde no longer hyde hym, she toke a basket made of bull
russhes, and dawbed it with slyme and pitche, and layed the chylde therein, and
put it in the flagges by the riuers brinke
4 And his sister stoode a farre of, to wit what woulde come of it.
5 And the daughter of Pharao came downe to wasshe her selfe in the ryuer, and
her maydens walked along by the ryuers syde: And when she sawe the basket among
the flagges, she sent her mayde to fetch it.
6 And when she had opened it, she sawe it was a chylde: and beholde, the babe
wept. And she had compassion on it, and sayde: it is one of the Hebrues
chyldren.
7 Then sayde his sister to Pharaos daughter: shall I go and call to thee a nurse
of the Hebrues women, to nurse thee the chylde?
8 Pharaos daughter aunswered her: go. And the mayde ranne and called the chyldes
mother.
9 To whom Pharaos daughter sayde: Take this chylde away, and nurse it for me,
and I wyll rewarde thee. And the woman toke the chylde, & nursed it vp.
10 The chylde grewe, and she brought it vnto Pharaos daughter, and it was made
her sonne. And she called ye name of it Moyses: because sayde she I toke hym out
of the water.
11 And in those dayes, when Moyses was waxed great, he went out vnto his
brethren, & loked on their burdens, and spyed an Egyptian smytyng an Hebrue
which was one of his brethren.
12 And he loked rounde about, and when he sawe no man by, he slewe the Egyptian,
and hyd hym in the sande.
13 And when he was gone out another day, beholde, two men of the Hebrues stroue
together: And he saide vnto him that dyd the wrong, Wherefore smytest thou thy
felowe?
14 He aunswered: Who made thee a man of aucthoritie and a iudge ouer vs?
intendest thou to kyll me, as thou kylledst the Egyptian? And Moyses feared and
sayde: Of a suretie this thyng is knowen.
15 And Pharao heard of it, and went about to slaye Moyses. And Moyses fleyng
from the face of Pharao, dwelt in the lande of Madian: and he sate downe by the
welles syde.
16 The priest of Madian had vij. daughters, which came and drewe water and
filled the troughes for to water their fathers sheepe.
17 And the shepheardes came and droue them away: but Moyses stoode vp and helped
them, and watred their sheepe.
18 And when they came to Raguel their father, he sayde: Howe came it to passe
that ye are come so soone to day?
19 And they aunswered: A man of Egypt deliuered vs from the handes of the
shepheardes, and so drewe vs water, and watered the sheepe.
20 He saide vnto his daughters: & where is he? why haue ye so left the man? Call
hym, that he may eate bread.
21 And Moyses was content to dwell with the man: & he gaue Moyses Sephora his
daughter:
22 Which bare him a sonne, and he called his name Gershom: For he saide, I haue
ben a straunger in a straunge land.
23 And in processe of tyme the kyng of Egypt dyed, and the chyldren of Israel
syghed by the reason of bondage, and cryed.
24 And their complaynt came vp vnto God from the bondage: and God heard their
mone, and God remembred his couenaunt with Abraham, Isahac, and Iacob.
25 And God loked vpon the chyldren of Israel, and God had respecte vnto them.

Chapter 3

1 Moyses kept the sheepe of Iethro his father in lawe, priest of Madian: and he
droue the flocke to the backesyde of the desert, aud came to the mountayne of
God Horeb.
2 And the angell of the Lorde appeared vnto hym in a flambe of fire out of the
middes of a busshe: And he loked, and beholde the busshe burned with fire, and
the busshe was not consumed.
3 Therfore Moyses sayde: I wyll go nowe and see this great syght, howe it
commeth that the busshe burneth not.
4 And when ye Lorde sawe that he came for to see, God called vnto him out of the
middes of the busshe, & sayde: Moyses, Moyses? And he answered, here am I.
5 And he said: Draw not nigh hither, put thy shoes of thy feete, for the place
whereon thou standest, is holy ground.
6 And he sayde: I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of
Isahac, and the God of Iacob. And Moyses hid his face, for he was afrayde to
loke vpon God.
7 And the Lorde saide: I haue surely seene the trouble of my people which are in
Egypt, and haue heard their crie from the face of their taske maisters: for I
knowe their sorowes,
8 And am come downe to deliuer the out of the hande of the Egyptians, and to
bryng them out of that lande, vnto a good lande & a large, vnto a lande that
floweth with mylke and hony, euen vnto the place of the Chanaanites, and
Hethites, and Amorites, and Pherizites, and Heuites, and of the Iebusites.
9 Nowe therfore beholde the complaint of the chyldren of Israel is come vnto me:
and I haue also seene the oppressio wherwith ye Egyptians oppressed them.
10 Come thou therfore, and I wyll sende thee vnto Pharao, that thou mayest bryng
my people the chyldren of Israel out of Egypt.
11 And Moyses saide vnto God: what am I to go vnto Pharao, and to bryng the
chyldren of Israel out of Egypt?
12 And he aunswered. For I wyll be with thee: and this shalbe a token vnto thee
that I haue sent thee, After that thou hast brought the people out of Egypt, ye
shall serue God vpon this moutayne.
13 And Moyses sayde vnto God: behold when I come vnto the chyldren of Israel,
and shall say vnto them: the God of your fathers hath sent me vnto you. And if
they saye vnto me, what is thy name? what answere shall I geue the?
14 And God aunswered Moyses: I am that I am. And he said: This shalt thou say
vnto the chyldren of Israel, I am, hath sent me vnto you.
15 And God spake further vnto Moyses, Thus shalt thou say vnto the chyldren of
Israel: The Lorde God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isahac,
and the God of Iacob hath sent me vnto you: This is my name for euer, and this
is my memoriall into generation and generation.
16 Go, and gather the elders of Israel together, and thou shalt saye vnto them,
The Lorde God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isahac, and the
God of Iacob appeared vnto me, and sayde: In visityng, haue I visited you, and
know that which is done to you in Egypt.
17 And I haue sayde: I wyll bryng you out of the tribulation of Egypt, vnto the
land of the Chanaanites, and Hethites, and Amorites, and Pherizites, and
Heuites, and Iebusites, euen into a land which floweth with milke & hony.
18 And they shall heare thy voyce: Then both thou and the elders of Israel shall
go vnto the kyng of Egypt, and say vnto him: The Lord God of the Hebrues hath
met with vs, and nowe let vs go we beseche thee three dayes iourney into the
wyldernesse, and do sacrifice vnto the Lorde our God.
19 And I am sure that the king of Egypt wyl not let you go, no not in a mightie
hande.
20 And I wyll stretche out my hande, & smyte Egypt with al my wonders whiche I
wyll do in the middes therof, and after that he wyll let you go.
21 And I wyll get this people fauour in the syght of the Egyptians, so that when
ye go, ye shall not go emptie:
22 But a wyfe shall borowe of her neighbour, and of her that soiourneth in her
house, iewels of syluer, and iewels of golde, and rayment: and ye shall put them
on your sonnes and daughters, & shall robbe the Egyptians.

Chapter 4

1 Moyses aunswered, and said: See, they wyll not beleue me, nor harken vnto my
voyce: but wyll saye, The Lorde hath not appeared vnto thee.
2 And the Lorde sayde vnto him: What is that which is in thine hande? He
aunswered: a rodde.
3 And he sayde: Cast it on the grounde. And he cast it on the grounde, and it
became a serpent: and Moyses fled fro the syght of it.
4 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Put foorth thy hande, and take it by the
tayle. And therefore he put foorth his hande, and caught it: and it became a
rodde in his hande.
5 By this thing shall they beleue, that the Lord God of their fathers, the God
of Abraham, the God of Isahac, & the God of Iacob hath appeared vnto thee.
6 And the Lorde sayde furthermore vnto hym: Thrust thyne hande into thy bosome.
And he thruste his hande into his bosome: and when he toke it out agayne,
beholde his hande was leprous, euen as snowe.
7 And he sayde: Put thine hande into thy bosome againe. And he put his hand into
his bosome agayne: and plucked it out of his bosome, and behold, it was turned
agayne as his other fleshe.
8 Therfore yf they wyll not beleue thee, neither heare ye voyce of the first
signes, yet wyll they beleue for the voyce of the seconde signes.
9 But & if they wyl not beleue these two signes, neither hearken vnto thy voyce:
thou shalt take of the water of the riuer and powre it vpon the drye lande, and
the water which thou takest out of the riuer shalbe turned into blood vpon the
drye lande.
10 Moyses sayd vnto the Lorde: Oh my Lord, I am neither yesterday nor yer
yesterday a man eloquet, neither sence thou hast spoken vnto thy seruaunt: but I
am slowe mouthed, & slowe tounged.
11 And the Lorde sayd vnto hym: who hath made mans mouth? or who maketh the
dumbe, or deafe, the seyng, or the blynde? Haue not I the Lorde?
12 And nowe go, and I wyll be with thy mouth, and teache thee what thou shalt
say.
13 He said: oh my Lorde, sende I pray thee, by the hande of hym whom thou wylt
sende.
14 And the Lorde was angry with Moyses, and sayde: Do not I knowe Aaron thy
brother the Leuite, that he can speake? For lo, he commeth foorth to meete thee:
and when he seeth thee, he wyll be glad in his heart.
15 Therfore thou shalt speake vnto him, and put these wordes in his mouth, and I
wilbe with thy mouth, and with his mouth: and wyll teache you what you ought to
do.
16 And he shalbe thy spokesman vnto the people, and he shalbe euen he shalbe to
thee in steade of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him, in steade of God.
17 And thou shalt take this rodde in thy hande, wherewith thou shalt do
miracles.
18 Therfore Moyses went and returned to Iethro his father in law againe, and
said vnto him: Let me go I pray thee nowe, and turne agayne vnto my brethren
which are in Egypt, and see whether they be yet aliue. And Iethro said to
Moyses: go in peace.
19 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses in Madian, Go and returne agayne into Egypt:
for all the men are dead whiche went about to kill thee.
20 And Moyses toke his wyfe, and his sonnes, and put them on an asse, and went
agayne to Egypt: And Moyses toke the rodde of God in his hande.
21 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: When thou art entred and come into Egypt
agayne, see that thou do all the wonders before Pharao whiche I haue put in thy
hand: but I wyll hold his heart, & he shal not let the people go.
22 And thou shalt saye vnto Pharao: Thus sayeth the Lorde, Israel is my sonne
euen my first borne sonne.
23 And I sayde vnto thee, that thou let my sonne go, that he may serue me. And
if thou refuse to let him go: beholde, I do slay thy sonne euen thy first borne.
24 And it came to passe by the way in the Inne that the Lorde met hym, and
woulde haue kylled hym.
25 And Sephora toke a stone, and cut away the foreskin of her sonne, and cast it
at his feete, and sayd: a blooddy husbande art thou vnto me.
26 Then he let him go, and she sayde: a blooddy husbande, because of her
circumcision.
27 Then said the Lorde vnto Aaron: go meete Moyses in the wyldernesse. And he
went and met him in the mounte of God, and kissed him.
28 And Moyses tolde Aaron all the wordes of the Lorde whiche had sent him, and
all the signes whiche he had charged him withall.
29 So went Moyses and Aaron, and gathered all the elders of the chyldren of
Israel.
30 And Aaron told all the wordes which the Lord had spoken vnto Moyses: and did
ye miracles in the sight of the people.
31 And the people beleued. And when they hearde that the Lorde had visited the
children of Israel, and had looked vpon their tribulation, they bowed the
selues, and worshipped.

Chapter 5

1 Moyses and Aaron went in afterward and told Pharao, Thus sayeth the Lorde God
of Israel: let my people go, that they maye holde a feast vnto me in the
wyldernesse.
2 And Pharao sayde: who is the Lorde that I shoulde heare his voyce, and let
Israel go? I knowe not the Lorde, neyther wyll I let Israel go.
3 And they sayde, The God of the Hebrewes is called ouer vs: let vs go we pray
thee three dayes iourney into the desert, and do sacrifice vnto the Lorde our
God: lest he smyte vs with pestilence or with the sworde.
4 Then saide the kyng of Egypt vnto them: wherfore do ye, Moyses and Aaron let
the people from their workes? get you vnto your burthens.
5 And Pharao sayde furthermore: beholde, there is much people nowe in the lande,
and you make them leaue theyr burthens.
6 And Pharao comaunded the same day, ye taskmaisters which were amongest the
people and the officers, saying:
7 Ye shall geue the people no more strawe to make brycke withal, as ye did in
tyme passed: let them go and gather them strawe them selues.
8 And the number of bricke which they were wont to make in tyme passed, lay vnto
their charges also, and minishe nothing therof: for they be idell, and therfore
crye, saying: we wyll go, and do sacrifice vnto our God.
9 They must haue more worke layed vpon them, that they may labour therin, and
not regarde vayne wordes.
10 Then went the taskemaisters of the people, and the officers out, and tolde
the people, saying: Thus sayeth Pharao, I wyll geue you no more strawe.
11 Go your selues and gather you straw where ye can finde it: yet shall none of
your labour be minished.
12 And so were the people scattered abrode throughout all ye land of Egypt, for
to gather stubble in steade of strawe.
13 And the taskemaisters hasted them forwarde, saying: fulfyll your worke, your
dayly taskes in their due tyme, as if you had strawe.
14 And the officers of the children of Israel which Pharaos taskemasters had set
ouer them, were beaten. And they sayde vnto them: wherfore haue ye not fulfilled
your taske in makyng of brycke both yesterday and to day, as well as in tymes
past?
15 The officers also of the children of Israel, came & complayned vnto Pharao,
saying: Wherfore dealest thou thus with thy seruauntes?
16 There is no strawe geuen vnto thy seruauntes, and they say vnto vs, make
brycke: and thy seruauntes are beaten, and the fault is thyne owne people.
17 He sayde: you are idle, idle are you: and therfore you say, we will go, and
do sacrifice vnto the Lorde.
18 Go therfore nowe, & worke, and there shall no strawe be geuen you, & yet
shall ye deliuer the whole tale of bricke.
19 And the officers of the children of Israel did see that they were in worse
case, after it was sayde, ye shall minishe nothyng of your brycke, of your dayly
taske in due tyme:
20 And they met Moyses and Aaron, which stoode in their way as they came out
from Pharao.
21 And saide vnto them: The Lorde looke vpon you & iudge you, which hath made
the sauour of vs to be abhorred in the eyes of Pharao, and in the eyes of his
seruauntes, and haue put a sworde in their hande to slay vs.
22 Moyses returned vnto the Lorde, and sayd: Lorde, wherfore hast thou so euyll
intreated this people? And wherfore hast thou sent me?
23 For since I came to Pharao to speake in thy name, he hath fared foule with
this folke, and yet thou hast not deliuered thy people at all.

Chapter 6

1 Then the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Nowe shalt thou see what I wyll do vnto
Pharao: for in a mightie hande shal he let them go, and in a mightie hande shall
he dryue them out of his lande.
2 And God spake vnto Moyses, and said vnto him: I am Iehouah.
3 I appeared vnto Abraham, Isahac, and Iacob as an almightie God: but in my name
Iehouah was I not knowen vnto them.
4 Moreouer I made a couenaunt with them, to geue them the lande of Chanaan, the
land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were straungers.
5 And therefore I haue also heard the groning of the childre of Israel, whom the
Egyptians kepe in bondage, and haue remembred my couenaunt.
6 Wherfore say vnto the children of Israel: I am Iehouah, I wil bryng you out
from the burthens of the Egyptians, and will ryd you out of their bondage, and
will deliuer you in a stretched out arme, and in great iudgementes.
7 And I will take you for my people, and wilbe to you a God: And ye shall knowe
that I am the Lord your God which bring you out from the burthens of the
Egyptians.
8 And I will bryng you into the lande, concerning the whiche I did lift vp my
hand to geue it vnto Abraham, Isahac, and Iacob, and wyll geue it vnto you for a
possession: for I am Iehouah.
9 And Moyses tolde the children of Israel euen so: but they hearkened not vnto
Moyses for anguishe of spirite and for cruell bondage.
10 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
11 Go in, and speake vnto Pharao king of Egypt, that he let the children of
Israel go out of his lande.
12 And Moyses spake before the Lorde, saying: beholde, the children of Israel
hearken not vnto me: howe then shall Pharao heare me, whiche am of vncircumcized
lippes?
13 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses and vnto Aaron, & gaue them a charge
concerning the chyldren of Israel, and concerning Pharao king of Egypt, that
they shoulde bring the children of Israel out of the lande of Egypt.
14 
15 The chyldren of Simeon: Iemuel, and Iamin, Ohad, & Iachin, Sohar, and Saul
the sonne of the Chanaanitishe woman: these are the kinredes of Simeon.
16 These also are the names of the chyldren of Leui in their generations:
Gerson, and Cehath, and Merari: Leui liued an hundred thirtie and seuen yere.
17 The sonnes of Gerson: Libni, and Simi by their kinredes.
18 The chyldren of Cehath: Amram, & Ishar, and Hebron, and Uziel. And Cehath
liued an hundred thirtie and three yere.
19 The children of Merari: Mahli, and Musi: these are the kinredes of Leui by
their geuerations.
20 Amram toke Iochebed his fathers sister to wyfe, and she bare hym Aaron and
Moyses: and Amram liued an hundred and thirtie and seuen yeres.
21 And the chyldren of Ishar: Corah, Nepheg, and Sichri.
22 The chyldren of Usiel: Misael, Elzaphan, and Zithri.
23 And Aaron toke Eliseba, daughter of Aminadab, and sister of Nahason to wyfe,
whiche bare hym Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
24 The chyldren of Corah: Assir, and Elcanah, and Abiasaph: these are the
kinredes of the Corahites.
25 Eleazar Aarons sonne, toke him one of the daughters of Putiel to wyfe, whiche
bare hym Phinces: and these are the principal fathers of the Leuites throughout
their kinredes.
26 This is that Aaron and Moyses to whom the Lorde sayd: Leade the children of
Israel out of the lande of Egypt, according to theyr armies.
27 These are that Moyses and Aaron, which spake to Pharao king of Egypt, that
they might bryng the chyldren of Israel out of Egypt.
28 And in the day when the Lorde spake vnto Moyses in the lande of Egypt,
29 He spake vnto hym, saying: I am the Lorde: speake thou vnto Pharao the king
of Egypt all that I say vnto thee.
30 And Moyses sayde before the Lorde: beholde, I am of vncircumcized lippes, &
how shall Pharao geue me audience?

Chapter 7

1 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: behold, I haue made thee Pharaos God: and
Aaron thy brother shalbe thy prophete.
2 Thou shalt speake all that I commaunde thee, and Aaron thy brother shall
speake vnto Pharao, that he sende the children of Israel out of his lande.
3 And I will harden Pharaos heart, and multiplie my miracles & my wonders in the
lande of Egypt.
4 But Pharao shall not hearken vnto you, that I may set my hande vpon Egypt, and
bryng out myne armies, and my people the chyldren of Israel out of the land of
Egypt in great iudgmentes.
5 And the Egyptians shall knowe that I am the Lord, when I stretch foorth my
hande vpon Egypt, and bryng out the children of Israel fro among them.
6 Moyses and Aaron did as the Lord commaunded them, euen so did they.
7 Moyses was fourescore yere olde, and Aaron fourescore and three, when they
spake vnto Pharao.
8 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses and Aaron, saying:
9 If Pharao speake vnto you, saying, shewe a miracle for you: thou shalt say
vnto Aaron, Take thy rod, and cast it before Pharao, that it may be a serpent.
10 Then went Moyses and Aaron in vnto Pharao, and dyd euen as the Lorde had
commaunded: and Aaron caste foorth his rodde before Pharao, and before his
seruauntes, and it turned to a serpent.
11 Then Pharao called for the wyse men, and enchaunters: and those sorcerers of
Egypt dyd in like maner with their sorcerie.
12 For they cast downe euery man his rod, and they turned to serpentes: but
Aarons rodde did eate vp their roddes.
13 And he helde Pharaos heart that he hearkened not vnto them, euen as the Lorde
had sayde.
14 The Lorde also sayde vnto Moyses: Pharaos heart is hardened, he refuseth to
let the people go.
15 Get thee vnto Pharao in the morning, loe, he wyll come vnto the water, and
thou shalt stand vpo the ryuers brincke agaynst he come: and the rodde whiche
was turned to a serpent, shalt thou take in thyne hande:
16 And thou shalt say vnto hym: the Lorde God of the Hebrewes hath sent me vnto
thee, saying: Let my people go, that they may serue me in the wyldernesse: and
beholde, hytherto thou wouldest not heare.
17 Thus sayeth the Lord, In this thou shalt knowe that I am the Lorde: beholde,
I wyll smyte with the rodde that is in my hande, the waters whiche are in the
ryuers, and they shalbe turned to blood.
18 And the fishe that is in the riuer, shall dye: and the ryuer shall corrupt,
and it shall greeue the Egyptians to drinke of the water of the ryuer.
19 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses: say vnto Aaron, Take thy rodde, and stretche
out thyne hand ouer the waters of Egypt, ouer their streames, ouer their riuers
and pondes, and all pooles of water whiche they haue, that they may be blood,
and that there may be blood throughout all ye lande of Egypt, both in vesselles
of wood, & also of stone.
20 And Moyses and Aaron did euen as the Lorde commaunded: and he lyfte vp the
rodde, and smote the waters that were in the ryuer in the sight of Pharao, and
in the sight of his seruauntes: and all the water that was in the ryuer, turned
into blood.
21 And the fishe that was in the ryuer dyed: and the ryuer corrupted, and the
Egyptians coulde not drinke of the waters of the ryuer, and there was blood
throughout all the lande of Egypt.
22 And the enchaunters of Egypt dyd lykewyse with their sorceries, and he
heardened Pharaos heart, neyther did he hearken vnto them, as the Lorde had
sayde.
23 And Pharao turned him selfe, and went agayne into his house, and set not his
heart thervnto.
24 And the Egyptians dygged rounde about the ryuer for water to drinke: for they
coulde not drinke of the water of the ryuer.
25 And it continued seuen dayes after that the Lorde had smyten the ryuer.

Chapter 8

1 The Lorde spake vnto Moyses, go vnto Pharao & tell hym, Thus sayeth the Lord:
Let my people go, that they may serue me.
2 And if thou refuse to let them go, beholde, I wyll smyte all thy borders with
frogges:
3 And the riuer shall scraule with frogges, whiche shall go vp and come into
thine house, and into thy priuie chaumber where thou slepest, and vpon thy bed,
& into the house of thy seruauntes, and vpon thy people, and into thyne ouens,
and vpon al thy vitayles in store:
4 And the frogges shall come vp vpon thee, and on thy people, and vpon all thy
seruauntes.
5 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses: say vnto Aaron, stretch foorth thyne hande
with thy rod ouer the streames, ouer the ryuers, and ouer the pondes: and cause
frogges to come vp vpon the lande of Egypt.
6 And Aaron stretched his hande ouer ye waters of Egypt, & the frogges came vp
and couered the lande of Egypt.
7 And the sorcerers did likewise with their sorcerie, and brought frogges vp
vpon the lande of Egypt.
8 Then Pharao called for Moyses and Aaron, and sayde: pray ye vnto the Lorde
that he maye take away the frogges from me, and from my people: and I will let
the people go, that they may do sacrifice vnto the Lorde.
9 And Moyses sayde vnto Pharao: glory herein because of me, and appoynt when I
shall pray for thee, and for thy seruauntes, and for thy people to dryue away
the frogges from thee and thy houses: and they may remayne but in the ryuer
onlye.
10 He sayd: to morowe. And he sayde, euen as thou hast said: that thou mayest
knowe that there is none like vnto the Lorde our God.
11 And so the frogges shall depart from thee, and from thy houses, from thy
seruauntes, and from thy people: and shall remayne in the ryuer onlye.
12 Moyses and Aaron went out from Pharao, and Moyses cryed vnto the Lorde, as
touching the frogges whiche he had brought against Pharao.
13 And the Lorde dyd accordyng to the saying of Moyses: and the frogges dyed out
of the houses, out of the courtes and fieldes.
14 And they gathered them together vpon heapes, and the lande had an euill smell
through them.
15 But when Pharao sawe that he had rest geuen him, he hardened his heart, and
hearkened not vnto them, as the Lorde had sayde.
16 And the Lord sayd vnto Moses, Say vnto Aaron: Stretche out thy rod, and smyte
the dust of the lande, that it may be turned to lyce throughout all the lande of
Egypt.
17 And they did so: for Aaron stretched out his hande with his rodde, and smote
the dust of the earth, whiche turned to lyce in man and beast: so that all the
dust of the lande turned to lyce throughout all the lande of Egypt.
18 And the enchaunters assayed likewise with their enchauntmetes to bring foorth
lyce, but they coulde not: and the lyce were both vpon men & beastes.
19 Then said the enchaunters vnto Pharao: this is the finger of God. And Pharaos
heart remayned obstinate, and he hearkened not vnto them, euen as the Lorde had
sayde.
20 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: ryse vp early in the mornyng, and stand
before Pharao, lo, he wyll come foorth vnto the water, and thou shalt say vnto
him, Thus sayeth the Lorde: Let my people go that they may serue me.
21 Els if thou wylt not let my people go, behold, I will send all maner of flyes
both vpon thee and thy seruauntes, and thy people, & into thy houses: and the
houses of the Egyptians shalbe full of flyes, and the ground wheron they are.
22 And the land of Gosen where my people are, will I cause to be wonderfull in
that day, so that there shal no flyes be there: wherby thou shalt know that I am
the Lorde in the myddest of the earth.
23 And I will put a diuision betweene my people and thine: and euen to morowe
shall this miracle be done.
24 And the Lord dyd euen so, & there came an intollerable swarme of flyes into
the house of Pharao, and into his seruauntes houses, and into all the land of
Egypt: and the land was corrupt with these flyes.
25 And Pharao called for Moyses and Aaron, and sayd: Go, and do sacrifice vnto
your God in this lande.
26 And Moyses aunswered, It is not meete that we so do: for we must offer vnto
the Lorde our God, that which is an abhomination vnto the Egyptians. Lo, if we
sacrifice that which is an abhomination vnto the Egyptians before theyr eyes,
wyl they not stone vs?
27 We wyll go three dayes iourney into the desert, and sacrifice vnto the Lorde
our God, as he hath comaunded vs.
28 And Pharao sayd: I will let you go, that ye may sacrifice vnto the Lorde your
God in the wyldernesse, but go not farre away: pray for me.
29 And Moyses sayd, beholde, I will go out from thee, and pray vnto the Lord,
that the flyes may depart from Pharao, and from his seruauntes, and from his
people to morowe: but let Pharao from hence foorth deale deceiptfully no more,
that he wyll not let the people go, to sacrifice vnto the Lorde:
30 And Moyses went out from Pharao, and prayed vnto the Lorde.
31 And the Lorde did accordyng to the saying of Moyses: and the flyes departed
from Pharao, and from his seruauntes, and from his people: and there remayned
not one.
32 And Pharao hardened his heart once more at this time, and dyd not let the
people go.

Chapter 9

1 The Lorde said vnto Moyses, go in vnto Pharao, and thou shalt tell hym, Thus
sayeth the Lorde God of the Hebrues: Let my people go, that they may serue me.
2 If thou refuse to let them go, and wylt holde them styll,
3 Beholde, the hande of the Lorde is vpon thy flocke which is in the fielde, for
vpon Horses, vpon asses, vpon camelles, vpon oxen, and vpon sheepe, there shalbe
a mightie great morayne.
4 And the Lorde shall do wonderfully betweene the beastes of Israel, and the
beastes of Egypt, so that there shall nothyng dye of all that pertayneth to the
children of Israel.
5 And the Lorde appoynted a tyme, saying: to morowe the Lorde shall finishe this
worde in the lande.
6 And the Lorde dyd that thyng on the morowe, and all the cattell of Egypt dyed:
but of the cattell of the children of Israel, dyed not one.
7 And Pharao sent, and beholde, there was not one of the cattell of the
Israelites dead: And the heart of Pharao hardened, and he did not let the people
go.
8 And the Lord said vnto Moyses and Aaron: take your handes full of asshes out
of ye furnace, & Moyses shal sprinckle it vp into the ayre in ye sight of
Pharao:
9 And it shalbe dust in all the lande of Egypt, and shalbe swelling sores with
blaynes both on man & beast throughout all the lande of Egypt.
10 And they toke asshes out of the furnace, and stoode before Pharao: and Moyses
sprinkled it vp into the ayre, and there were swellyng sores with blaynes, both
in men and in beastes:
11 And the sorcerers could not stande before Moyses because of the blaynes: for
there were botches vpon the enchaunters, and vpon al the Egyptians.
12 And the Lorde hardened the heart of Pharao, and he hearkened not vnto them,
as ye Lord had said vnto Moyses.
13 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: rise vp early in the morning, and stande
before Pharao, and thou shalt tell him, Thus sayeth the Lorde God of the
Hebrues: Let my people go, that they may serue me:
14 Or els I wyll at this tyme sende all my plagues vpon thine heart, and vpon
thy seruauntes, and on thy people, that thou mayest knowe that there is none
lyke me in all the earth.
15 For now I will stretch out my hand, that I may smyte thee and thy people with
pestilence, and thou shalt peryshe from the earth.
16 And in very deede for this cause haue I kept thee, for to shewe thee my
power, and that my name may be declared throughout all the worlde.
17 Yet exaltest thou thy selfe agaynst my people, that thou wylt not let them
go?
18 Beholde, to morowe this time I wyl sende downe a mightie great hayle, euen
suche a one as was not in Egypt since the foundation thereof was layde, vnto
this tyme.
19 Sende therfore nowe, and gather thy beastes, & all that thou hast in the
fielde: For vpon all the men and the beastes whiche are founde in the fielde,
and not brought home, shall the hayle fall, and they shall dye.
20 And as many as feared the worde of the Lorde amongest the seruauntes of
Pharao, made their seruauntes and their beastes flee into the houses.
21 But he that regarded not the worde of the Lord, left his seruauntes and his
beastes in the fielde.
22 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: stretche foorth thyne hande vnto heauen,
that there may be hayle in all the lande of Egypt, vpon man, and vpon beastes,
and vpon all the hearbes of the fielde throughout the lande of Egypt.
23 And Moyses stretched foorth his rod vnto heauen, and the Lord thundred and
hayled, and the fire ranne a long vpon the grounde, and the Lorde hayled in the
lande of Egypt.
24 So there was hayle, and fire mingled with the hayle, so greeuous, and such as
there was none throughout al the land of Egypt since people inhabited it.
25 And the hayle smote throughout all the lande of Egypt all that was in the
fielde, both man & beast: and the hayle smote all the hearbes of the fielde, and
broke all the trees of the fielde.
26 Only in the lande of Gosen where the chyldren of Israel were, was there no
hayle.
27 And Pharao sent and called for Moyses and Aaron, and sayde vnto them, I haue
nowe sinned: the Lorde is righteous, and I & my people are vngodly.
28 Pray ye vnto the Lorde, that these thundringes of God and hayle may be
sufficient, and I will let you go, and ye shall tary no longer.
29 Moyses sayd vnto him: Assoone as I am out of the citie, I wyll spreade abrode
my handes vnto the Lorde, and the thunder shall ceasse, neyther shall there be
any more hayle: that thou mayest knowe howe that the earth is the Lordes.
30 But I knowe that thou and thy seruauntes yet feare not the face of the Lorde
God.
31 And so the flaxe and the barlye were smytten, for the barly was shot vp, and
the flaxe was boulled:
32 But the wheate and the rye were not smytten, for they were late sowen.
33 And Moyses went out of the citie fro Pharao, and spread abrode his handes
vnto the Lorde: and the thunder and hayle ceassed, neyther rayned it vpon the
earth.
34 And when Pharao sawe that the rayne, and the hayle, and thunder were ceassed,
he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his seruauntes:
35 And the heart of Pharao was hardened, neyther woulde he let the chyldren of
Israel go, as the Lorde had sayd by the hande of Moyses,

Chapter 10

1 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses, go in vnto Pharao: for I haue hardened his
heart, & the heart of his seruauntes, that I might shewe these my signes before
hym,
2 And that thou tell in the audience of thy sonne, & of thy sonnes sonne what
thinges I haue done in Egypt, and the miracles which I haue done amongest them:
that they may know howe that I am the Lorde.
3 And so Moyses and Aaron came vnto Pharao, and said vnto him, Thus sayeth the
Lord God of the Hebrues: How long wilt thou refuse to submit thy selfe vnto me?
Let my people go, that they may serue me.
4 Or els if thou refuse to let my people go, beholde, to morowe wyll I bryng
greshoppers into thy coastes:
5 And they shall couer the face of the earth, that it can not be seene: and they
shall eate the residue which remayneth vnto you and is escaped from the hayle,
and they shall eate euery greene tree that beareth you fruite in the fielde.
6 And they shall fill thy houses, and all thy seruauntes houses, and the houses
of all the Egyptians, after suche a maner, as neyther thy fathers, nor thy
fathers fathers haue seene since the tyme they were vpon the earth vnto this
day. And he turned him selfe about, and went out from Pharao.
7 And Pharaos seruauntes sayde vnto him: howe long shall he be hurtfull vnto vs?
Let the men go, that they may serue the Lorde their God: knowest thou not yet
that Egypt is destroyed?
8 And Moyses & Aaron were brought againe vnto Pharao, and he sayde vnto them, Go
and serue the Lorde your God: but who are they that shall go?
9 And Moyses aunswered: we will go with our young, and with our olde, yea, and
with our sonnes, & with our daughters, and with our sheepe, and with our oxen we
must go: for we must holde a feast vnto the Lorde.
10 And he said vnto them: Let the Lord be so with you, as I will let you go, and
your chyldren: take heede, for ye haue some mischiefe in hande.
11 Nay not so, but go they that are men, and serue the Lorde: for that was your
desire. And they were thrust out of Pharaos presence.
12 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Stretch out thyne hand ouer the lande of
Egypt for greshoppers, that they may come vpon the land of Egypt, and eate all
the hearbes of the lande, and all that the hayle left behynde.
13 And Moyses stretched foorth his rod ouer the lande of Egypt, and the Lorde
brought an east winde vpon the lande all that day, and all that nyght: and in
the morning the east winde brought the greshoppers.
14 And the greshoppers went vp ouer all the lande of Egypt, and remayned in all
quarters of Egypt very greeuouslye: before them were there no suche greshoppers,
neither after them shalbe.
15 For they couered all the face of the earth, so that the lande was darke, and
they did eate al the hearbes of the land, and all the fruites of the trees
whatsoeuer the hayle had lefte: there was no greene thyng left in the trees &
hearbes of the fielde through al ye land of Egypt.
16 Therefore Pharao called for Moyses and Aaron in haste, and sayde: I haue
sinned agaynst the Lord your God, and agaynst you:
17 And nowe forgeue me my sinne only this once, and pray vnto the Lord your God
that he may take awaye from me this death only.
18 And Moyses went out from Pharao, and prayed vnto the Lorde.
19 And the Lorde turned a myghtie strong west wynde, and it toke awaye the
grashoppers, and cast them into the red sea: so that there was not one
grashopper in all the coastes of Egypt.
20 And the Lorde hardened Pharaos heart, so that he woulde not let the children
of Israel go.
21 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Stretche out thy hande vnto heauen, that
there may be vpon the lande of Egypt darknesse which may be felt.
22 And Moyses stretched foorth his hand vnto heauen: and there was a thicke
darkenesse vpon all the lande of Egypt three dayes long.
23 No man sawe another, neither rose vp from the place where he was by the space
of three dayes: But al the children of Israel had light where thei dwelled.
24 And Pharao called for Moyses, and sayde, Go, and serue the Lorde: onlye let
your sheepe & your oxen abyde, and let your chyldren go with you.
25 And Moyses sayde: Thou must geue vs also offeringes and burnt offeringes, for
to do sacrifice vnto the Lorde our God.
26 Our cattell also shall go with vs, and there shall not one hoofe be left
behynd, for therof must we take to serue ye Lorde our God: neither do we knowe
with what we must do seruice vnto the Lord vntyll we come thyther.
27 But the Lorde hardened Pharaos heart, and he woulde not let them go.
28 And Pharao sayde vnto hym: Get thee from me, and take heede vnto thy selfe
that thou seest my face no more: for whensoeuer thou commest in my syght, thou
shalt dye.
29 And Moyses sayde: Let it be as thou hast sayde, I wyll see thy face no more.

Chapter 11

1 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Yet wyl I brynge one plague more vpo Pharao,
and vpon Egypt, and after that, he wyll let you go hence: when he shal let you
go quite, he shall vtterly dryue you hence.
2 Speake thou therfore in the eares of the people, that euery man borowe of his
neighbour, and euery woman of her neighbour, iewels of syluer, and iewels of
golde.
3 And the Lorde shall geue the people fauour in the syght of the Egyptians:
Moreouer, Moyses was a very great man in the lande of Egypt in the syght of
Pharaos seruauntes, and in the syght of the people.
4 And Moyses sayde, Thus sayth the Lorde: At mydnyght, wyll I go out into the
myddest of Egypt,
5 And all the first borne in all the land of Egypt shall dye, euen fro the first
borne of Pharao that sytteth on his seate, vnto the first borne of the mayde
seruaunt that is behynde the myll, and all the first gendred of the cattell.
6 And there shalbe a great crye throughout all the lande of Egypt, such as there
was neuer none lyke, nor shalbe.
7 But amongst the chyldren of Israel shal not a dogge moue his tounge, from a
man vnto a beast: that ye may knowe how that the Lord putteth a difference
betweene the Egyptians and Israel.
8 And these thy seruauntes shal al come downe vnto me, and fall before me, and
say: Get thee out, and all the people that are vnder thee, and then wyll I
depart. And he went out from Pharao with an angry countenaunce.
9 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Pharao shall not heare you, that my wonders
may be multiplied in the land of Egypt.
10 And Moyses and Aaron dyd all these wonders before Pharao: And the Lord
hardened Pharaos heart, so that he woulde not let the chyldren of Israel go out
of his lande.

Chapter 12

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses and Aaron in the lande of Egypt, saying:
2 This moneth shalbe vnto you ye begynnyng of monethes, and the first moneth of
the yere shall it be vnto you.
3 Speake ye vnto all the congregation of Israel, saying: In the tenth daye of
this moneth, euery man take vnto hym a lambe according to ye house of the
fathers, a lambe throughout euery house.
4 If the houshold be to litle for ye lambe, let hym take his neyghbour whiche is
next vnto his house, accordyng to the number of the soules, euery one of you
accordyng to his eatyng shal make your compt for a lambe.
5 And let the lambe of yours be without blemishe, a male of a yere olde whiche
ye shal take out from among the sheepe, and from among the goates.
6 And ye shall kepe hym in vntyll the fourteenth day of the same moneth: and
euery assemble of the congregation of Israel shall kyll hym about euen.
7 And they shall take of the blood and stryke it on the two syde postes, and on
the vpper doore post, euen in the houses where they shall eate hym.
8 And they shall eate the fleshe the same nyght, rost with fire, and with
vnleauened bread: and with sowre hearbes they shall eate it.
9 See that ye eate not therof rawe, nor sodden with water, but roste with fire:
the head, feete, and purtenaunce therof.
10 And ye shall let nothyng of it remayne vnto the morning: That which remayneth
of it vntyll the morowe, shall ye burne with fire.
11 Of this maner shall ye eate it: with your loynes girded, and your shooes on
your feete, and your staffe in your hand, and ye shall eate it in haste: for it
is the Lordes passouer.
12 For I wyll passe through the lande of Egypt this same nyght, and wyll smyte
all the first borne of Egypt from man to beast, and vpon all the gods of Egypt I
wyll execute iudgement: I am the Lorde.
13 And the blood shalbe vnto you a token in the houses wherin you are: and whe I
see the blood, I wyll passe ouer you, and the plague shall not be vpon you to
destroy you when I smyte the lande of Egypt.
14 And this day shalbe vnto you a remebraunce: and you shall kepe it an holy
feast vnto the Lorde throughout your generations, ye shall kepe it holy for an
ordinaunce for euer.
15 Seuen dayes shal ye eate vnleauened bread, so that euen the first day ye put
away leauen out of your house: For who so euer eateth leauened bread from the
first daye vntyll the seuenth daye, that soule shalbe rooted out of Israel.
16 The first day shalbe a holy conuocation, and the seuenth day shalbe an holy
conuocation vnto you: there shalbe no maner of worke done in the, saue about
that only which euery man must eate, that only may ye do.
17 And ye shal obserue the feast of vnleauened bread: for this same day haue I
brought your armies out of the lande of Egypt, therefore ye shall obserue this
day and all your chyldren after you, by an euerlastyng decree.
18 The first moneth, and the fourteenth daye of the moneth, at euen ye shall
eate vnleauened bread, vnto the 21 day of the same moneth at euen againe.
19 Seuen dayes shal ther be no leauened bread founde in your houses: and
whosoeuer eateth leauened bread, that soule shalbe rooted out from the
congregatio of Israel, whether he be straunger or borne in the lande.
20 Ye shall eate nothyng leauened: but in all your habitations shall ye eate
vnleauened bread.
21 Moyses called for the elders of Israel, and sayde vnto them: Choose out, and
take you to euery housholde of you a lambe, and kyll the passouer.
22 And take a bunche of Isope and dip it in the blood that is in the bason, &
strike the vpper post of the doore, and the two syde postes, with the blood that
is in the bason: & none of you go out at the doore of his house vntyll the
mornyng.
23 For the Lord wyll passe ouer to smyte the Egyptians: and when he seeth the
blood vpon the vpper doore post and the two syde postes, he wyll passe ouer the
doore, and wyll not suffer the destroyer to come into your house to plague you.
24 Therfore shall ye obserue this thyng for an ordinaunce to thee & thy sonnes
for euer.
25 And when ye be come to the lande whiche the Lorde wyll geue you, accordyng as
he hath promised, ye shall kepe this seruice.
26 And when your chyldren aske you, what maner of seruice is this ye do?
27 Ye shall saye, it is the sacrifice of the Lordes passouer, whiche passed ouer
the houses of the chyldren of Israel in Egypt, and he smote the Egyptians, and
saued our houses. And the people bowed them selues, and worshipped.
28 And the chyldren of Israel went and dyd as the Lorde hadde commaunded Moyses
and Aaron, euen so dyd they.
29 And at mydnyght the Lorde smote the first borne in the lande of Egypt, fro
the first borne of Pharao that sate on his seate, vntyl the first borne of the
captiue that was in prison, and all the firste gendred of cattell.
30 And Pharao rose in the nyght, he and his seruauntes, and all the Egyptians,
and there was a great crye in Egypt: for there was not a house where there was
not one dead.
31 And he called vnto Moyses and Aaro by nyght, saying: Ryse vp, and get you out
from amongst my people, both you and also the chyldren of Israel: and go, and
serue the Lorde as ye haue sayde.
32 And take your sheepe and your droues with you as ye haue sayde: and depart,
and blesse me.
33 And the Egyptians were fierce vpon the people, that they myght sende them out
of the lande in haste: for they sayde, we be all but dead men.
34 And the people toke there dowgh before it was sowred, whiche they had in
store, being bounde in clothes vpon their shoulders.
35 And the chyldren of Israel dyd accordyng to the saying of Moyses: and they
borowed of the Egyptians iewels of siluer, and iewels of golde, and rayment.
36 And the Lord gaue the people fauour in the syght of the Egyptians, so that
they graunted such thynges as they required: And they robbed the Egyptians.
37 And the children of Israel toke their iourney from Rameses to Suchoth, sixe
hundred thousand men of foote, besyde chyldren.
38 And a great multitude of sundry other nations wet also with them, and sheepe
and oxen, and exceedyng much cattell.
39 And they baked vnleauened cakes of the dowgh whiche they brought out of
Egypt, for it was not sowred: For they were thrust out of Egypt, and could not
tary, nether had they prepared for them selues any prouision of meate.
40 The dwellyng of the chyldren of Israel which they dwelled in Egypt, was foure
hundred and thirtie yeres.
41 And when the foure hundred & thirtie yeres were expired, euen the selfe same
day departed al the hoastes of the Lord out of the lande of Egypt.
42 It is a nyght to be obserued vnto the Lorde, in the whiche he brought them
out of the lande of Egypt: This is that nyght of the Lorde, whiche all the
chyldren of Israel must kepe throughout their generations.
43 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses and Aaron, This is the lawe of passouer:
there shall no straunger eate thereof.
44 But euery seruaunt that is bought for money, after that thou hast circumcised
hym, shall eate therof.
45 A straunger & an hired seruaunt shall not eate therof.
46 In one house shall it be eaten, thou shalt carry none of the flesshe out of
the house, neither shall ye breake a bone therof.
47 All the congregation of Israel shall obserue it.
48 If a straunger also dwell among you, and wyl holde passouer vnto the Lord,
let him circumcise all that be males, and then let him come and obserue it, and
he shalbe as one that is borne in the lande: for no vncircumcised person shall
eate therof.
49 One maner of lawe shalbe vnto hym that is borne in the lande, and vnto the
straunger that dwelleth among you.
50 And all the chyldren of Israel dyd as the Lorde commaunded Moyses and Aaron,
euen so dyd they.
51 And the selfe same day, dyd the Lorde bryng the chyldren of Israel out of the
lande of Egypt with their armies.

Chapter 13

1 And the Lord spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Sanctifie vnto me al the first borne, what so euer openeth the wombe among ye
chyldren of Israel, aswell of man as of beast, for it is mine.
3 And Moyses saide vnto the people: ye ought to remember this day in whiche ye
came out of Egypt out of ye house of bondage: for through a myghtie hande the
Lorde brought you from thence: there shall no leauened bread be eaten.
4 This daye came ye out, in the month Abib
5 When the Lorde hath brought thee into the lande of the Chanaanites, Hethites,
Amorites, Heuites, and Iebusites, which he sware vnto thy fathers that he would
geue thee, a lande wherin mylke and hony floweth: thou shalt kepe this seruice
in this same month.
6 Seuen dayes thou shalt eate vnleauened bread, and in the seuenth daye it is
the feast of the Lorde.
7 Unleauened bread shalbe eaten seuen dayes, and there shal no leauened bread be
seene nor yet eaten with thee in al thy quarters.
8 And thou shalt shewe thy sonne in that day, saying: This is done because of
that whiche the Lorde dyd vnto me when I came out of Egypt.
9 And it shalbe as a signe vnto thee vppon thyne hande, and as a remembraunce
betweene thyne eyes, that the Lordes lawe may be in thy mouth: for in a strong
hande the Lorde brought thee out of Egypt.
10 Kepe therfore this ordinaunce in his season from yere to yere.
11 And it wyll come to passe that ye Lord shal bryng the land of the
Chanaanites, which he sware vnto thee and to thy fathers, and shall geue it
thee.
12 And then thou shalt appoynt vnto the Lorde all that openeth the matrice, and
euery firstlyng that commeth of a beast which thou hast, yf it be a male, it
shalbe the Lordes.
13 And euery firstlyng of an asse, thou shalt redeeme with a lambe: yf thou
redeeme hym not, thou shalt breake his necke: All the first borne amongst thy
chyldren also shalt thou bye out.
14 And when thy sonne aske thee in time to come, saying: what is this? Thou
shalt saye vnto hym: With a myghtie hande the Lorde brought vs out of Egypt, out
of the house of bondage.
15 And when Pharao was very loth to let vs go, the Lorde slewe all the first
borne in the lande of Egypt, aswell the first borne of man, as the firstlyng of
beast: Therefore I sacrifice vnto the Lorde all the males that open the matrice:
but all the first borne of my chyldren I redeeme.
16 This shalbe as a token vppon thyne hande, & as a remembraunce betweene thyne
eyes, that the Lorde brought vs out of Egypt through a myghtie hande.
17 It came to passe, that when Pharao had let the people go, God caryed them not
through the way of the lande of the Philistines, which was the more nygh way.
But God saide: lest peraduenture the people repent whe they see warre, and so
turne agayne to Egypt.
18 But God led the people about through the way of the wyldernesse of the redde
sea, and the chyldren of Israel went vp harnessed out of the lande of Egypt.
19 And Moyses toke the bones of Ioseph with him: for he made the children of
Israel sweare, saying: God wyl surely visite you, and ye shall take my bones
away hence with you.
20 And they toke their iourney from Sucoth, and abode in Etham in the edge of
the wyldernesse.
21 And the Lorde went before them by day in a pyller of a cloude to leade them
the way, and by nyght in a pyller of fire to geue them lyght, that they myght go
both by day and nyght.
22 The piller of the cloude departed not by daye, nor the pyller of fire by
nyght, out of the syght of the people.

Chapter 14

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Speake to the chyldre of Israel, that they turne & pitch their tentes before
Pi-hahiroth betweene Migdol and the sea, ouer agaynst Baal-sephon, and before
that shall they pitche by the sea.
3 For Pharao wyll say of the chyldren of Israel: they are tangled in the lande,
the wyldernesse hath shut them in.
4 And I wyll harden Pharaos heart, that he shall folowe after you, and I wyll
get me honour vpon Pharao, and vpon al his hoast: The Egyptians also shall knowe
that I am the Lorde. And they dyd euen so.
5 And it was tolde the kyng of Egypt that the people fledde. And the heart of
Pharao and of his seruauntes turned agaynst the people, and they said: Why haue
we done this, that we haue let Israel go out of our seruice?
6 And he made redy his charette, and toke his people with hym.
7 And toke sixe hundred chosen charets, and all the charets of Egypt, and
capitaynes vpon euery one of them.
8 And the Lorde hardened the heart of Pharao kyng of Egypt, and he folowed after
ye children of Israel: but the childre of Israel went out with an hye hande.
9 And the Egyptians folowed after the, and al the horses and charettes of
Pharao, and his horsemen, and his hoast ouertoke them pitchyng of their tent by
the sea beside Pi-hahiroth before Baal-sephon.
10 And when Pharao drewe nygh, the chyldren of Israel lift vp their eyes, and
beholde, the Egyptians folowed after them, and they were sore afrayde: and the
chyldren of Israel cryed out vnto the Lorde.
11 But they sayde vnto Moyses: because there were no graues in Egypt, hast thou
therfore brought vs away for to dye in the wildernesse? Wherfore hast thou
serued vs thus, for to carry vs out of Egypt?
12 Dyd not we tell thee this in Egypt, saying, let vs be in rest, that we maye
serue the Egyptians? For it had ben better for vs to haue serued the Egyptians,
then for to dye in the wyldernesse.
13 And Moyses saide vnto the people: Feare ye not, stande styll, and beholde the
saluation of the Lorde whiche he wyll shewe to you this day: For ye that haue
seene the Egyptians this day, shal see them no more for euer.
14 The Lorde shall fyght for you, and ye shall holde your peace.
15 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Wherfore cryest thou vnto me? speake vnto
the children of Israel that they go forwarde.
16 But lyft thou vp thy rod, and stretche out thy hande ouer the sea, and deuide
it a sunder, and let the children of Israel go on drye grounde through the
middes of the sea.
17 And beholde I euen I wyll harden the heart of the Egyptians, and they shall
folowe after them: and I wyll get me honour vpon Pharao, and vpon all his hoast,
and vpon his charettes, and vpon his horsemen.
18 And the Egyptians shal know that I am the Lorde, when I haue gotten me honour
vpo Pharao, vpon his charets, and vpon his horsemen.
19 And the angell of God which went before the hoast of Israel, remoued and went
behynde them: and the pyller of the cloude went from before their face, and
stoode behynde them,
20 And came betweene the tentes of the Egyptians, and the tentes of Israel, and
it was a cloude and darknesse, and gaue lyght by nyght: and all the nyght long
the one came not at the other.
21 And Moyses stretched out his hande ouer the sea, & the Lorde caused the sea
to go backe by a very strong east wynde all that nyght, and made the sea drye
lande and the waters were deuided.
22 And the children of Israel went into the middest of the sea vppon the drye
grounde, and the waters were a wall vnto them on their ryght hande and on their
left hande.
23 And the Egyptians folowed, & went in after them to the myddest of the sea,
euen all Pharaos horses, his charettes, and his horsemen.
24 And in the mornyng watche, the Lord loked vnto the hoast of the Egyptians out
of the pyller of the fire and of the cloude, and troubled the hoast of the
Egyptians.
25 And toke of his charet wheeles, and caryed them away violently: So that the
Egyptians sayde, Let vs flee fro the face of Israel, for the Lord fighteth for
them agaynst the Egyptians.
26 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Stretche out thyne hande ouer the sea, that
the waters may come againe vpon the Egyptians, vpon their charets, and vpon
their horsemen.
27 And Moyses stretched foorth his hand ouer the sea, and it came agayne to his
course early in the mornyng, and the Egyptians fled agaynst it: and the Lorde
ouerthrewe the Egyptians in the middest of the sea.
28 And the water returned, and couered the charettes, and the horsemen, and all
the hoast of Pharao that came into the sea after them, so that there remayned
not one of them.
29 But the children of Israel walked vppon drye lande through the middest of the
sea, and the waters were a wall vnto them on the right hande of them, and on the
left.
30 Thus the Lorde deliuered Israel the selfe same daye out of the hande of the
Egyptians: and Israel sawe the Egyptians dead vpon the sea syde.
31 And Israel sawe that myghtie power which the Lorde shewed vpon the Egyptians:
and the people feared the Lorde, and beleued the Lorde and his seruaunt Moyses.

Chapter 15

1 Then Moyses & the children of Israel sange this sounge vnto the Lorde, and
sayde on this maner: I wil sing vnto the Lorde, for he hath triumphed
gloriouslie, the horse and hym that rode vpon hym hath he ouerthrowen in the
sea.
2 The Lorde is my strength and praise, and he is become my saluation: he is my
God, and I wyll glorifie hym, my fathers God, and I wyll exalt hym.
3 The Lorde is a man of warre, the Lorde is his name.
4 Pharaos charets and his hoast hath he cast into the sea, his chosen captaynes
also are drowned in the red sea.
5 The deepe waters hath couered them, they sunke to the bottome as a stone.
6 Thy ryght hande Lorde is become glorious in power, thy ryght hande Lorde hath
all to dasshed the enemie.
7 And in thy great glorie thou hast ouerthrowe them that rose vp agaynst thee:
thou sendest foorth thy wrath, whiche consumed them euen as stubble.
8 Through the wynde of thy nosethrils the water gathered together, ye fluddes
stoode styll as an heape, and the deepe water congeled together in the heart of
the sea.
9 The enemie sayde, I wyll folowe on the I wyll ouertake them I wyll deuide the
spoyle, and my lust shalbe satisfied vppon them: I wyll drawe my sworde, myne
hande shall destroy them.
10 Thou diddest blowe with thy wynde, the sea couered the, they sanke as leade
in the myghtie waters.
11 Who is like vnto thee O Lord amongst gods? Who is like thee, so glorious in
holynesse, fearefull in prayses, shewyng wonders?
12 Thou stretchedst out thy right hande, the earth swalowed them.
13 Thou in thy mercie hast caryed this people which thou hast redeemed, and hast
brought them in thy strength vnto thy holy habitation.
14 The nations shal heare, & be afraide, sorowe shall come vpon Palestina.
15 Then the dukes of the Edomites shalbe amazed, and the myghtyest of the
Moabites tremblyng shall come vpon them, al the inhabiters of Chanaan shal waxe
faynt hearted.
16 Feare & dreade shal fall vpon them, in the greatnesse of thine arme they
shalbe as styll as a stone, tyll thy people passe through, O Lorde, whyle this
people passe through which thou hast gotten.
17 Thou shalt bryng them in, and plant them in the mountayne of thine
inheritaunce, the place Lord which thou hast made for to dwell in, the
sanctuarie, O Lord, which thy handes haue prepared
18 The Lorde shall raigne for euer and euer.
19 For Pharao on horsebacke went in with his charettes and horsemen into the
sea, and the Lorde brought the waters of the sea vpon them: But the chyldren of
Israel went on drye land in the middest of the sea.
20 And Miriam a prophetisse, the sister of Aaron, toke a tymbrell in her hande,
and all the women came out after her with tymbrelles and daunces.
21 And Miriam sang before them: Sing ye vnto the Lorde, for he hath triumphed
gloriously: the horse and his rider hath he ouerthrowen in the sea.
22 And so Moyses brought Israel from the redde sea, and they went out into the
wyldernesse of Sur: and they went three dayes long in the wildernesse, and
founde no waters.
23 And when they came to Marah, they coulde not drynke of the waters of Marah,
for they were bytter: therefore the name of the place was called Marah.
24 And the people murmured agaynst Moyses, saying: What shall we drinke?
25 And he cryed vnto the Lorde, and the Lorde shewed hym a tree, whiche when he
had cast into the waters, the waters were made sweete: There he made them an
ordinaunce and a lawe, and there he proued hym,
26 And sayde: If thou wylt hearken vnto the voyce of the Lorde thy God, & wylt
do that which is right in his sight, and wylt geue eare vnto his
commaundementes, and kepe all his ordinaunces: then wyll I put none of these
diseases vpon thee, which I haue brought vpon the Egyptians: for I am the Lord
that healeth thee.
27 And the children of Israel came to Elim, where were twelue welles of water,
and threescore and ten palme trees: and they pitched their tentes there by the
waters.

Chapter 16

1 And they toke theyr iourney from Elim, & all the congregation of the chyldren
of Israel came to the wildernes of Sin, whiche is betweene Elim & Sinai, the
fyfteenth day of the seconde moneth after their departyng out of the lande of
Egypt.
2 And the whole congregation of the chyldren of Israel murmured agaynst Moyses
and Aaron in the wyldernesse.
3 And the chyldren of Israel sayde vnto them: Woulde to God we had dyed by the
hande of the Lorde in the lande of Egypt, whe we sate by the fleshe pottes, and
when we dyd eate bread our bellies full: for ye haue brought vs out into this
wildernesse, to kyl this whole multitude with hunger.
4 Then sayde the Lorde vnto Moyses: Beholde, I wyll rayne bread from heauen to
you, and the people shall go out & gather a certaine rate euery day, that I may
proue them whether they wyll walke in my lawe, or no.
5 The sixt day they shall prepare for themselues that which they will bring in,
and let it be twyse as muche as they gather in dayly.
6 And Moyses and Aaron sayde vnto the chyldren of Israel: At euen ye shall know
that it is the Lord which brought you out of the lande of Egypt.
7 And in the morning ye shal see the glorye of the Lorde, because he hath heard
your grudgynges agaynst the Lorde: And what are we, that ye haue murmured
agaynst vs?
8 And Moyses sayde: At euen shall the Lord geue you fleshe to eate, and in the
mornyng bread inough, for the Lorde hath heard your murmuringes which ye murmure
agaynst him: for what are we? Your murmurings are not against vs, but agaynst
the Lorde.
9 And Moyses spake vnto Aaron: say vnto al the congregation of the children of
Israel, come foorth before the Lord: for he hath hearde your grudgynges.
10 And as Aaron spake vnto the whole congregation of the chyldren of Israel,
they looked towarde the wyldernesse, and beholde, the glory of the Lorde
appeared in the cloude.
11 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
12 I haue hearde the murmuringes of the children of Israel, tell them therfore
and say: at euen ye shall eate fleshe, and in the mornyng ye shalbe fylled with
bread, and ye shall knowe that I am the Lorde your God.
13 And at euen the quailes came vp and couered the tentes, and in the mornyng
the deawe lay rounde about them.
14 And when the deawe was gone, beholde, vpon the grounde in the wyldernesse
there lay a small rounde thyng, as small as the hoare frost on the ground.
15 And when the children of Israel saw it, they said euery one to his neighbour,
it is Manna: for they wist not what it was. And Moyses said vnto the: This is
the bread whiche the Lorde hath geuen you to eate.
16 This is the worde whiche the Lorde hath commaunded: gather of it euerye man
for him selfe for to eate, a gomer full for euery man, according to the number
of your soules, and take euery man for them whiche are in his tentes.
17 And the children of Israel did euen so, and gathered some more, some lesse.
18 And when they did meate it with a gomer, vnto him that gathered much,
remayned nothyng ouer, and vnto hym that had gathered litle, was there no lacke:
euery man gathered sufficient for his eatyng.
19 And Moyses sayde vnto them: see that no man let ought remayne to the mornyng.
20 Notwithstanding, they hearkened not vnto Moyses: but some of them left of it
vntill the mornyng, and it waxed full of wormes, & corrupted: and Moyses was
angry with them.
21 And they gathered all mornynges euery man as muche as sufficed for his
eatyng: and assoone as the heate of the sunne came, it moult.
22 And the sixt day they gathered twise as muche bread, two gomers for one man:
and all the rulers of the congregation came and tolde Moyses.
23 He sayd vnto them, This is that whiche the Lorde hath sayd: To morowe is the
rest of the holy sabboth vnto the Lorde, bake that whiche you will bake to day,
and sethe that ye will sethe, and that whiche remayneth, lay vp tyll the
mornyng.
24 And they layed it vp till the morning as Moyses bad: and it did not corrupt,
neyther bred there any worme therein.
25 And Moyses sayde: eate that to day, for it is the sabboth vnto the Lorde, to
day ye shall not finde it in the fielde.
26 Sixe dayes ye shall gather it, and in the seuenth day whiche is the sabboth,
in it there shalbe none.
27 Notwithstandyng, there went out some of the people in the seuenth day for to
gather, and they founde none.
28 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Howe long refuse ye to kepe my
commaundementes and my lawes?
29 See, the Lorde hath geuen you a sabboth, therfore he geueth you the sixt day
bread for two dayes: byde therfore euerye man at home, and let no man go out of
his place the seuenth day.
30 And the people rested the seuenth day.
31 And the house of Israel called the name therof Manna: and it was like
coriander seede, but yet whyte, and the taste of it was lyke wafers made with
honye.
32 And Moyses sayd: this is that which the Lorde commaundeth, fill a gomer of
it, whiche may be kept for your chyldren after you, that they may see the bread
wherwith I haue fed you in the wyldernesse when I brought you out of the lande
of Egypt.
33 And Moyses spake vnto Aaron: Take a pot, and put a gomer full of Manna
therein, and lay it vp before the Lorde, to be kept for your children after you.
34 As the Lorde commaunded Moyses, so Aaron layde it vp before the testimonie to
be kept.
35 And the chyldren of Israel dyd eate Manna fourtie yeres, vntil thei came to a
land inhabited, and so they did eate Manna, euen vntill they came vnto the
borders of the lande of Chanaan.
36 A gomer, is the tenth part of an epha.

Chapter 17

1 And all the congregation of the children of Israel went on theyr iourneys fro
the wyldernesse of Sin, after the commaundement of the Lorde, and pitched in
Raphidim, there was no water for the people to drinke.
2 And ye people dyd chyde with Moyses, and sayde: geue vs water to drinke.
Moyses said vnto them: why chyde you with me? wherfore do ye tempt ye Lord?
3 There the people thirsted for water, and ye people murmured agaynst Moyses,
and saide: wherefore hast thou thus brought vs vp out of Egypt, to kil me, & my
children, and my cattell with thyrst?
4 And Moyses cryed vnto the Lorde, saying: What shall I do vnto this people,
they be almost redy to stone me?
5 And the Lorde said vnto Moyses: Go before the people, and take with thee of
the elders of Israel: & thy rod wherewith thou smotest the ryuer take in thine
hande, and go.
6 Beholde, I stande before thee vpon the rocke that is in Horeb, & thou shalt
smyte the rocke, and there shall come water out thereof, that the people may
drinke. And Moyses dyd euen so before the eyes of the elders of Israel.
7 And he called the name of the place Massah, and Meribah, because of the
chiding of the children of Israel, and because they tempted the Lorde, saying:
Is the Lorde amongest vs, or not?
8 Then came Amelec and fought with Israel in Raphidim.
9 And Moyses sayde vnto Iosua: Chose vs out men, and go fight with Amelec, and
to morowe I will stande on the toppe of the hill, and the rodde of God shalbe in
my hande.
10 Iosua did as Moyses bad hym, and fought with Amelec: and Moyses and Aaron,
and Hur, went vp to the toppe of the hyll.
11 And it came to passe, that when Moyses helde vp his hande, Israel had the
better: and when he let his hande downe, Amelec had the better.
12 But Moyses hands were heauie, and therfore they toke a stone and put it vnder
him, and he sat downe theron: and Aaron and Hur stayed vp his handes, the one on
the one side, and the other on the other side: And his handes remayned stedye,
vntill the goyng downe of the sunne.
13 And Iosua discomforted Amelec and his people with the edge of the sworde.
14 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Wryte this for a remembraunce in a booke,
and commit it into the eares of Iosua, for I will vtterly put out the
remembraunce of Amelec from vnder heauen.
15 And Moyses made an aulter, and called the name of it: The Lorde is he that
worketh miracles for me.
16 For he said: the hande is on the seate of God, the Lord wil haue warre with
Amalec fro generation to generation.

Chapter 18

1 Iethro ye priest of Madian Moyses father in lawe, heard of all that god had
donefor Moyses, and for Israel his people, and that the Lord had brought Israel
out of Egypt.
2 Therefore he toke Sephora Moyses wyfe, after he had sent her backe,
3 And her two sonnes, of which the one was called Gershom: for he sayde, I haue
ben an aliaunt in a straunge land:
4 The name of the other was Eliezer: for the God of my father sayde he was mine
helpe, and deliuered me from the sworde of Pharao.
5 And Iethro Moyses father in lawe, came with his two sonnes, & his wife, vnto
Moyses into ye wildernesse, where he abode by the mounte of God.
6 And he saide vnto Moyses: I thy father in lawe Iethro am come to thee, and thy
wyfe also, and her two sonnes with her.
7 And Moyses went out to meete his father in lawe, and did obeysaunce, and
kyssed hym: and eche asked other of his health, and they came into the tent.
8 And Moyses tolde his father in lawe all that the Lorde had done vnto Pharao
and to the Egyptians for Israels sake, and al the trauaile that had come vpon
them by the way, and howe the Lorde deliuered them.
9 And Iethro reioyced ouer al the goodnesse which the Lorde had done to Israel,
and because he had deliuered them out of the handes of the Egyptians.
10 And Iethro sayd: blessed be the Lord which hath deliuered you out of ye hand
of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of Pharao, which hath also deliuered his
people from ye captiuitie of ye Egyptians.
11 Nowe I knowe that the Lorde is greater then all gods: for in the thyng
whereby they dealt cruelly with them, were they destroyed them selues.
12 And Iethro Moyses father in lawe toke burnt offeringes and sacrifices, to
offer to God: And Aaron and all the elders of Israel came to eate bread with
Moyses father in lawe before God.
13 And on the morowe Moyses sate to iudge the people: and the people stoode
about Moyses from morning vnto eue.
14 And when Moyses father in lawe sawe all that he dyd vnto the people, he sayd:
what is this that thou doest vnto the people? Why sittest thou thy selfe alone,
and all the people stande about thee from morning vnto euen?
15 And Moyses sayde to his father in lawe: because the people come vnto me to
seeke counsayle of God.
16 When they haue a matter, they come vnto me, and I iudge betweene euery man &
his neyghbour, & shew them the ordinaunces of God and his lawes.
17 And Moyses father in lawe sayde vnto hym: It is not well that thou doest.
18 Thou both weryest thy selfe, and this people that is with thee: For this
thing is of more wayght, then thou art able to perfourme thy selfe alone.
19 Heare therfore nowe my voyce, and I wyll geue thee councell, and God shalbe
with thee: Be thou vnto the people to Godwarde, that thou mayest bring the
causes vnto God:
20 And thou shalt teache them ordinaunces and lawes, and shew them the way
wherein they must walke, & the worke that they must do.
21 Moreouer, thou shalt seeke out among all the people, men of actiuitie and
such as feare God, true men hating couetousnes, and place of these ouer the
people rulers of thousandes, rulers of hundrethes, rulers of fiftithes, and
rulers of tennes,
22 And let them iudge the people at all seasons: and euery great matter that
commeth, let them bryng vnto thee, but let them iudge all small causes them
selues, and so shall it be easier for thy selfe, and they shall beare a burthen
with thee.
23 If thou shalt do this thing, and God charge thee withall, thou shalt be able
to endure, and yet the people shall come to their place in peace.
24 And so Moyses obeyed the voyce of his father in lawe, and dyd all that he had
sayde.
25 And Moyses chose actiue men out of all Israel, and made them as heades ouer
the people, namely rulers of thousandes, rulers of hundrethes, rulers of
fiftithes, and rulers of tennes,
26 And they iudged the people at all seasons: but brought the harde causes vnto
Moyses, and iudged all small matters them selues.
27 And Moyses let his father in lawe depart: and he went into his owne lande.

Chapter 19

1 In the thirde moneth when the chyldren of Israel were gone out of the lande of
Egypt, the same day came they into the wyldernesse of Sinai.
2 For they were departed from Raphidim, and were come to the desert of Sinai,
and had pitched their tentes in the wyldernesse, and there Israel campped before
the mounte.
3 But Moyses went vp vnto God, and the Lorde called vnto hym out of the
mountayne, saying: Thus shalt thou say vnto the house of Iacob, and tell the
chyldren of Israel,
4 Ye haue seene what I did vnto the Egyptians, and toke you vp vpon Eagles
wynges, and haue brought you vnto my selfe.
5 Nowe therefore yf ye wyll heare my voyce in deede, and kepe my couenaunt, ye
shall be as a deare treasure vnto me aboue all nations: for al the earth is
myne.
6 Ye shalbe vnto me also a kingdome of priestes, & an holy people: And these are
the wordes whiche thou shalt say vnto the children of Israel.
7 Moyses came and called for the elders of the people, and layde before theyr
faces all these wordes whiche the Lorde commaunded hym.
8 And the people aunswered altogether, and sayde: All that the Lorde hath sayd,
we will do. And Moyses brought the wordes of the people vnto ye Lord.
9 And the Lorde sayd vnto Moyses: lo, I come vnto thee in a thicke cloude, that
the people may heare me talkyng with thee, and beleue thee for euer. Moyses
shewed the wordes of the people vnto the Lorde.
10 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Go vnto the people, and sanctifie the to day
and to morowe, and let them washe theyr clothes.
11 And be redy against the thirde day, for the thirde day the Lorde wyll come
downe in the sight of all the people vppon mount Sinai.
12 And thou shalt set boundes vnto the people rounde about, & say: take heede to
your selues that ye go not vp into the mount, or touche the border of it:
whosoeuer toucheth the mounte, shall surelye dye.
13 There shall not an hande touche it, els he shalbe stoned, or shot through:
whether it be beast, or man, it shall not liue: when the trumpet bloweth long,
then may they come vp into the mountayne.
14 And Moyses went downe from the mount vnto the people, and sanctified them,
and they washed their clothes.
15 And he sayd vnto the people: be redy agaynst the thirde day, and come not at
your wyues.
16 And the thirde day in the mornyng there was thunder and lyghtnyng, and a
thicke cloude vpon the mount, and the voyce of the trumpet exceedyng loude, so
that all the people that was in the hoast was afrayde.
17 And Moyses brought the people out of the tentes to meete with God, and thei
stoode at the neather part of the hil.
18 And mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lorde descended downe
vpon it in fire, and the smoke thereof, ascended vp as the smoke of a furnace,
and all the mount quaked exceedyngly.
19 And when the voyce of the trumpet blewe long, and waxed louder and louder,
Moyses spake, and God aunswered hym by a voyce.
20 And the Lorde came downe vpon mount Sinai, euen in the toppe of the hill: &
when the Lord called Moyses vp into the top of the hil, Moyses went vp.
21 And the Lorde sayd vnto Moyses: Go downe, charge the people, lest they breake
out from their boundes to see the Lorde, and so many of them perishe.
22 And let the priestes also whiche come to the Lorde sanctifie them selues,
lest the Lorde destroy them.
23 And Moyses said vnto the Lord: The people can not come vp into the mount
Sinai, for thou chargest vs, saying: set boundes about the hill, and sanctifie
it.
24 And the Lord sayd vnto him: Away, and get thee downe, & thou shalt come vp,
thou and Aaron with thee: but let not the priestes and the people presume for to
come vp vnto the Lord, lest he destroy them.
25 And so Moyses went downe vnto the people, and tolde them.

Chapter 20

1 And God spake all these wordes, and said.
2 I am the Lord thy GOD, whiche haue brought thee out of the lande of Egypt, out
of ye house of bondage.
3 Thou shalt haue none other Gods in my sight.
4 Thou shalt make thee no grauen image, neyther any similitude that is in heauen
aboue, eyther in the earth beneath, or in the waters vnder the earth.
5 Thou shalt not bowe downe to them, neyther serue them: for I the Lord thy God,
am a gelous God, and visite the sinne of the fathers vpon the chyldren, vnto the
thirde and fourth generation of them that hate me:
6 And shewe mercy vnto thousandes in them that loue me, and kepe my
commaundementes.
7 Thou shalt not take the name of the Lorde thy God in vayne: for the Lorde will
not holde him giltlesse that taketh his name in vayne.
8 Remember the sabboth day that thou sanctifie it.
9 Sixe dayes shalt thou labour, and do all that thou hast to do.
10 But the seuenth day is the sabboth of the Lorde thy God: in it thou shalt do
no maner of worke, thou and thy sonne, and thy daughter, thy man seruaunt, and
thy mayde seruaunt, thy cattel, and the straunger that is within thy gates.
11 For in sixe dayes the Lorde made heauen and earth, the sea, and all that in
them is, and rested the seuenth day: wherfore the Lorde blessed the seuenth day,
and halowed it.
12 Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy dayes may be long in the lande
whiche the Lorde thy God geueth thee.
13 Thou shalt not kyll.
14 Thou shalt not commit adulterie.
15 Thou shalt not steale.
16 Thou shalt not beare false witnesse agaynst thy neyghbour.
17 Thou shalt not couet thy neyghbours house, neyther shalt thou couet thy
neyghbours wyfe, nor his man seruaut, nor his mayde, nor his oxe, nor his asse,
or whatsoeuer thy neighbour hath.
18 And all the people saw the thunder and lightning, and the noyse of the
trumpet, and the mountayne smoking: And when the people sawe it, they remoued,
and stoode a farre of:
19 And said vnto Moyses, Talke thou with vs, and we wyll heart: But let not God
talke with vs, lest we dye.
20 And Moyses sayde vnto the people: feare not, for God is come to proue you,
and that his feare may be before your eyes, that ye sinne not.
21 And the people stoode a farre of: and Moyses went into the thicke cloude
where God was.
22 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses, Thus thou shalt say vnto the chyldren of
Israel: Ye haue seene that I haue talked with you from out of heauen.
23 Ye shall not make therfore with me gods of siluer, neyther shall ye make ye
gods of golde.
24 An aulter of earth thou shalt make vnto me, and theron offer thy burnt
offeringes, and thy peace offeringes, thy sheepe, and thyne oxen: In all places
where I shall put the remembraunce of my name, thyther I wyll come vnto thee,
and blesse thee.
25 And if thou wylt make me an aulter of stone, see thou make it not of hewen
stone: els if thou lyft vp thy toole vpon it, thou hast poluted it.
26 Neyther shalt thou go vp by steppes vnto myne aulter, that thy shame be not
shewed theron.

Chapter 21

1 These art the lawes whiche thou shalt set before them.
2 If thou bye a seruaunt that is an Hebrue, sixe yeres he shall serue, & in the
seuenth, he shall go out free paying nothyng.
3 If he came alone, he shall go out alone: and yf he came maryed, his wyfe shall
go out with hym.
4 And if his maister haue geuen hym a wyfe, and she haue borne him sonnes or
daughters: then the wyfe and her chyldren shalbe her maisters, and he shall go
out alone.
5 And yf the seruaunt say: I loue my maister, my wyfe, and my chyldren, I wyll
not go out free:
6 His maister shall bryng hym vnto the iudges, and set hym to the doore or the
doorepost, and his maister shal bore his eare through with a naule, and he
shalbe his seruaunt for euer.
7 And if a man sell his daughter to be a seruaunt, she shal not go out as the
men seruauntes do.
8 If she please not her maister, who hath nowe promised her mariage, then shall
he let her redeeme her selfe: To sell her vnto a straunge nation shall he haue
no power, seyng he despised her.
9 If he haue promysed her vnto his sonne to wyfe, he shall deale with her as men
do with their daughters.
10 And if he take hym another wyfe: yet her foode, her rayment, and duetie of
maryage shall he not minishe.
11 And if he do not these three vnto her, the shal she go out free & pay no
money.
12 He that smyteth a man, that he dye, shalbe slayne for it.
13 If a man lay not awayte, but God deliuer him into his hande, then I wyll
poynt thee a place whither he shal flee.
14 If a man come presumpteously vpon his neyghbour to slay hym with guyle, thou
shalt take him from myne aulter that he dye.
15 He that smyteth his father or his mother, let hym be slayne for it.
16 He that stealeth a man, and selleth him, if he be proued vppon hym, shalbe
slayne for it.
17 And he that curseth his father or mother, shalbe put to death for it.
18 If men stryue together, and one smite another with a stone, or with his
fyste, and he dye not, but lyeth in his bed:
19 If he rise agayne, and walke without vpon his staffe, then shall he that
smote hym go quite, saue only he shall beare his charges for leesyng his tyme,
and shall paye for his healyng.
20 And if a man smyte his seruaunt or his mayde with a rod, & they dye vnder his
hande, he shalbe greeuously punished.
21 And if he continue a day or two, it shal not be reueged, for he is his money.
22 If men striue, & hurt a woman with chylde, so that her fruite depart from
her, and yet no destruction folow: then he shalbe sore punished according as the
womans husbande wyll laye to his charge, and he shall pay as the dayes men wyll
appoynt hym.
23 And if any destruction folowe, then he shall geue life for life,
24 Eye for eye, tothe for tothe, hande for hande, foote for foote,
25 Burnyng for burnyng, wounde for wounde, strype for strype.
26 And if a man smyte his seruaunt or his mayde in the eye, that it perishe, he
shall let them go free for the eyes sake.
27 Also if he smyte out his seruaunt or his maydes tothe, he shall let them go
out free for the tothes sake.
28 If an oxe gore a man or a woman, that they dye, then the oxe shalbe stoned,
and his fleshe shall not be eaten: but the owner of the oxe shall go quite.
29 If the oxe were wont to pushe with his horne in time past, and it hath ben
tolde his maister, and he hath not kept him, but that he hath killed a man or a
woman: then the oxe shalbe stoned, and his owner shall dye also.
30 If there be set to hym a sume of money, then he shal geue for the redeeming
of his life whatsoeuer is layde vpo him.
31 And whether he haue gored a sonne or a daughter, accordyng to the same
iudgement shall it be done vnto him.
32 But if it be a seruaunt or a mayde that the oxe hath gored, then he shall
geue vnto their maister thirtie sicles, and the oxe shalbe stoned.
33 If a man open a well, or digge a pitte, and couer it not, and an oxe or an
asse fall therein:
34 The owner of the pitte shall make it good, & geue money vnto their maister,
and the dead beast shall be his.
35 If one mans oxe hurt another, that he dye: then they shall sell the lyue oxe,
and deuide the money, and the dead oxe also they shall deuide.
36 Or if it be knowen that the oxe hath vsed to pushe in tyme past, & his
maister hath not kept hym: he shall paye oxe for oxe, and the dead shalbe his
owne.

Chapter 22

1 If a man steale an oxe or a sheepe, and kill it, or sell it: he shall restore
fiue oxen for an oxe, foure sheepe for a sheepe.
2 If a theefe be found breaking vp, and be smitten that he dye: there shall no
blood be shed for hym.
3 But if the sunne be vp vpon him, then there shalbe blood shed for hym, for he
should make restitution: if he haue not wherwith, he shalbe solde for his theft.
4 If the theft be founde in his hande, aliue, whether it be oxe, asse, or
sheepe, he shall restore double.
5 If a man do hurt fielde or vineyarde, and put in his beast to feede in another
mans fielde: of the best of his owne fielde, and of the best of his owne
vineyarde, shall he make restitution.
6 If fire breake out and catche in the thornes and the stackes of corne, or the
standyng corne, or fielde be consumed therewith: he that kyndeled the fyre,
shall make restitution.
7 If a man deliuer his neyghbour money or stuffe to kepe, and it be stolen out
of his house: if the theefe be founde, let hym pay double:
8 And if the theefe be not founde, then the good man of ye house shalbe brought
vnto the Iudges, that it may be knowen whether he haue put his hande vnto his
neyghbours good.
9 And in al maner of trespasse, whether it be for oxe, asse, or sheepe, rayment,
or any maner of lost thing, which another chalengeth to be his: the cause of
both parties shall come before the Iudges, and whom the Iudges condemne, let him
pay double vnto his neyghbour.
10 If a man delyuer vnto his neyghbour to kepe, asse, oxe, sheepe, or whatsoeuer
beast it be: and it dye, or be hurt, or taken away by enemies, & no man see it:
11 Then shall an oth of the Lorde be betweene them, that he hath not put his
hande vnto his neyghbours good: and the owner of it shall take the oth, and the
other shall not make it good.
12 And if it be stollen from hym, then he shall make restitution vnto the owner
therof.
13 If it be torne in peeces, then let him bryng recorde of the tearing, and he
shall not make it good.
14 And if a man borowe ought of his neighbour, and it be hurt, or els dye, and
the owner therof be not by: he shall surely make it good.
15 But if the owner therof be by, he shall not make it good: if it be an hired
thing, it came for his hire.
16 If a man entice a mayde that is not betrouthed, and lye with her, he shall
endowe her, and take her to his wyfe.
17 And if her father refuse to geue her vnto him, he shal pay money, according
to the dowrie of virgins.
18 Thou shalt not suffer a witche to lyue.
19 Whosoeuer lyeth with a beast, shall be slayne for it.
20 He that offereth vnto any gods, saue vnto ye Lord only, he shalbe killed.
21 Uexe not a straunger, neither oppresse him: for ye were straungers in the
land of Egypt.
22 Ye shall trouble no wydowe nor fatherlesse chylde.
23 If ye shall euyll entreate them, and they crye out vnto me, I wyll surelye
heare theyr crye.
24 And then wyl my wrath waxe hotte, and I wyll kyll you with the sworde, & your
wyues shalbe widowes, and your chyldren fatherlesse.
25 If thou lende money to any of my people that is poore by thee, thou shalt not
be as a tiraunt vnto him, neither shalt thou lay vpon him vsurie.
26 If thou take thy neyghbours rayment to pledge, thou shalt deliuer it vnto him
by that the sunne go downe.
27 For that is his couering only, euen the rayment for his skinne, wherein he
slepeth: and when he cryeth vnto me, I wyll heare him, for I am mercyfull.
28 Thou shalt not rayle vpon ye gods, neither blaspheme ye ruler of the people.
29 Thy fruites, whether they be drie or moyst, see thou kepe the not backe: thy
first borne sonne thou shalt geue me.
30 Likewise also shalt thou do with thine oxen, and with thy sheepe: seuen dayes
it shalbe with the damme, & the eyght day thou shalt geue it me.
31 Ye shalbe an holy people vnto me, neither shall ye eate any fleshe that is
torne of beastes in the fielde, but shall cast it to a dogge.

Chapter 23

1 Thou shalt not haue to do with any false report, neither shalt thou put thine
hand with the wicked, to be an vnrighteous witnesse.
2 Thou shalt not folow a multitude to do euill, neither shalt thou speake in a
matter of iustice according to the greater number, for to peruert iudgement.
3 Neither shalt thou esteeme a poore man in his cause.
4 If thou meete thyne enemies oxe or asse goyng astray, thou shalt bryng them to
him agayne.
5 If thou see the asse of him that hateth thee sincke vnder his burthen, thou
shalt not passe by and let him alone, but shalt helpe hym to lyft hym vp agayne.
6 Thou shalt not hinder the right of thy poore in his suite.
7 Kepe thee farre from a false matter, and the innocent and righteous see thou
slay not: for I wyll not iustifie the wicked.
8 Thou shalt take no gyftes: for gyftes blinde the seyng, and peruert the wordes
of the righteous.
9 Thou shalt not oppresse a straunger: for ye know the heart of a straunger,
seyng ye were straungers in the lande of Egypt.
10 Sixe yeres thou shalt sowe thy lande, and gather in the fruites therof.
11 And the seuenth yere thou shalt let it rest and lie styll, that the poore of
thy people may eate: And what they leaue, the beastes of the fielde shall eate.
In lyke maner thou shalt deale with thy vineyarde and thyne oliue tree.
12 Sixe daies thou shalt do thy worke, and in the seuenth day thou shalt rest:
that thyne oxe and thyne asse may rest, and the sonne of thy mayde and the
straunger may be refreshed.
13 In all thinges that I haue saide vnto you, be circumspect: and make no
rehearsall of the names of straunge gods, neither let it be hearde out of thy
mouth.
14 Three feastes thou shalt holde vnto me in a yere.
15 Thou shalt kepe the feast of vnleauened bread: thou shalt eate vnleauened
bread seuen daies long, as I commaunded thee, in the tyme appoynted of the
moneth Abib: for in that moneth ye came out of Egypt, and see that no man
appeare before me emptie.
16 And the feast of haruest when thou reapest the first fruites of thy laboures,
whiche thou hast sowen in the fielde: And the feast of ingathering, whiche is in
the end of the yere, when thou hast gathered in thy labours out of the field.
17 These three times in the yere, shall all thy men chyldren appeare before the
Lorde God.
18 Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice vpon leauened bread, neither
shall the fat of my feast remayne vntyll the mornyng.
19 The first of the first fruites of thy land, thou shalt bryng into the house
of the Lorde thy God: thou shalt not seethe a kydde in his mothers mylke.
20 Behold I sende an angell before thee, to kepe thee in the way, and to bryng
thee into the place whiche I haue prepared.
21 Beware of hym, and heare his voyce, and resist him not: for he wyll not spare
your misdeedes, and my name is in him.
22 But and if thou shalt in deede hearken vnto his voyce, & do al that I speake,
I wylbe an enemie vnto thyne enemies, & an aduersarie vnto thine aduersaries.
23 For myne angell shall go before thee, and bryng thee in vnto the Amorites,
and Hethites, and Pharezites, & Chanaanites, Heuites, and Iebusites, and I shall
destroy them.
24 Thou shalt not bowe downe to their gods, neither serue the, neither do after
ye workes of them: but ouerthrowe the, and breake downe the images of them.
25 And ye shall serue the Lord your God, and he shall blesse thy bread and thy
water: and I wyll take all sicknesses away from the middest of thee.
26 There shall no woman haue any vntymely byrth, nor be vnfruitefull in thy
lande: the number of thy dayes I wyll fulfill.
27 I will sende my feare before thee, and wyll destroy all the people whyther
thou shalt go: & I wyll make all thine enemies turne theyr backes vnto thee.
28 And I wyll sende hornettes before thee, which shall driue out the Heuites,
the Chanaanites, and the Hethites, before thee.
29 Neuerthelesse, I wyll not cast them out before thee in one yere, lest the
land growe to a wyldernesse, and the beast of the fielde multiplie agaynst thee.
30 By litle and litle I wyll dryue them out before thee, vntyl thou be
increased, and inherite the lande.
31 And I wyll make thy coastes from the red sea, vnto the sea of the
Philistines, and from the desert vnto the riuer: For I wyll deliuer the
inhabitours of the lande into thyne hand, and thou shalt driue them out before
thee.
32 Thou shalt make no couenaunt with them, nor with theyr gods.
33 Neither let them dwell in thy lande, lest they make thee sinne against me:
for if thou serue their gods, it wyll surely be thy decay.

Chapter 24

1 And he said vnto Moyses: Come vp vnto the Lorde, thou and Aaron, Nadab and
Abihu, & the threscore and ten elders of Israel, and ye shall worship a farre
of.
2 And Moyses hym selfe alone shall go vnto the Lorde: but they shall not come
nygh, neither shall the people go vp with hym.
3 And Moyses came and tolde the people all the wordes of the Lorde, and all the
iudgementes: And all the people aunswered with one voyce, and sayde: All the
wordes whiche the Lorde hath sayde wyll we do.
4 And Moyses wrote all the wordes of the Lord, and rose vp early, and set him an
aulter vnder the hill, and 12 stones, according to the 12 tribes of Israel.
5 And sent young men of the children of Israel, whiche brought burnt offeringes,
and offered peace offeringes of oxen vnto the Lorde.
6 And Moyses toke halfe of the blood, and put it in basins, and the other halfe
he spinckled on the aulter.
7 And he toke the booke of the couenaut, & read it in the audience of the
people: And they sayd, All that the Lord hath sayd, wyll we do, and be obedient.
8 And Moyses toke the blood, & sprinckled it on the people, and sayd: Beholde,
this is the blood of the couenaut which the Lorde hath made with you vpon all
these wordes.
9 Then went Moyses and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and the threscore and ten elders
of Israel vp.
10 And they saw the God of Israel: and there was vnder his feete as it were a
worke of a Saphire stone, & as it were the heauen when it is cleare.
11 And he layde not his hande vpon the nobles of the children of Israel: and
they saw God, and did eate and drinke.
12 And the Lord said vnto Moyses: Come vp to me into the hill, and be there, and
I wyll geue thee tables of stone, and a law & comaundementes which I haue
written, that thou mayest teache them.
13 And Moyses rose vp, and his minister Iosuah: and Moyses went vp into the hill
of God,
14 And said vnto the elders, Tary ye here vntill we come agayne vnto you:
Behold, here is Aaron and Hur with you. If any man haue any matters to do, let
hym come to them.
15 And Moyses went vp into the mount, aud a cloude couered the hyll.
16 And the glory of the Lord abode vpon the mout Sinai, & the cloude couered it
six days: & the seuenth day he called vnto Moses out of ye middes of the cloude.
17 And the sight of the glory of the Lord, was like consumyng fire on ye top of
the hill, in the eyes of ye children of Israel.
18 And Moyses went into the middes of the cloude, and gate hym vp into the
moutaine: & Moyses was in the mount fourtie dayes and fourtie nyghtes.

Chapter 25

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Speake vnto the childre of Israel, that thei bring me an offering: ye shall
take it of euery man that geueth it willingly with his heart.
3 This is the offering whiche ye shall take of them, golde, and siluer, &
brasse,
4 And blewe silke, and purple, and scarlet, and white silke, and goates heere.
5 And Rammes skynnes that are red, & the skynnes of Tarus, & Sittim wood.
6 Oyle for lyght, spyces for annoyntyng oyle and for sweete sence:
7 Onix stones, and stones to be set in the Ephod, and in the brest plate.
8 And let them make me a sanctuarie, that I may dwell amongst them.
9 And accordyng to all that I shewe thee, both after the fashion of the
tabernacle, and after the fashion of the ornamentes therof, euen so shall ye
make it.
10 And they shall make an arke of Sittim wood, two cubites and a halfe long, a
cubite and a halfe brode, and a cubite and a halfe high.
11 And thou shalt ouerlay it with pure golde, within and without shalt thou
ouerlay it, and shalt make an hye vpon it a crowne of golde rounde about.
12 And thou shalt caste foure ringes of golde for it, and put them in the foure
corners therof: two ringes shalbe in the one corner, and two in the other.
13 And thou shalt make barres of Sittim wood, and couer them with golde,
14 And put the barres in the ringes along by the sydes of the arke, that the
arke may be borne with them.
15 And the barres shalbe in the ringes of the arke, and shall not be taken from
it.
16 And thou shalt put in the arke, the testimonie whiche I shall geue thee.
17 And thou shalt make a mercy seate of pure golde: two cubites and a halfe
long, and a cubite and a halfe brode.
18 And thou shalt make two Cherubims of golde: euen of a whole worke shalt thou
make them, in the two endes of the mercy seate.
19 And the one Cherubim shalt thou make on the one ende, and the other on the
other ende: euen of the same mercy seate shall ye make Cherubims in the two
endes thereof.
20 And the Cherubins shal stretch foorth theyr winges abrode ouer an hye,
couering the mercy seate with their winges, and their faces shall loke one to
another: euen to the mercy seateward shall the faces of the Cherubins be.
21 And thou shalt put the mercy seate aboue vpon the arke, and in the arke thou
shalt put the witnesse that I shall geue thee.
22 And from thence I wyll testifie vnto thee, and I wyll common with thee from
vpon the mercy seate, from betweene the two Cherubins whiche are vpon the arke
of witnesse, of all thinges whiche I wyll geue thee in commaundement vnto the
chyldren of Israel.
23 Thou shalt also make a table of Sittim wood, of two cubites long, and one
cubite brode, and a cubite & an halfe hye.
24 And thou shalt couer it with pure golde, and make thereto a crowne of golde
rounde about.
25 And make vnto that an hoope of foure fingers brode rounde about, and make a
golden crowne also to the hoope rounde about.
26 And make for it foure ringes of golde, and put the rynges in the corners that
are on the foure feete thereof.
27 Euen ouer against the hoope shall the ringes be, to put in barres to beare
the table withall.
28 And thou shalt make ye barres of Sittim wood, & ouerlay them with golde, that
the table may be borne with them.
29 And thou shalt make his dishes, and spones, coueringes, & bowles to powre out
with all: euen of fine golde shalt thou make them.
30 And thou shalt set vpon the table shewe bread before me alway.
31 And thou shalt make a candelsticke of pure golde, euen of a whole worke shall
the candelsticke be made, with his shaft, his braunches, his bolles, his
knoppes, and his flowres proceeding therout.
32 Sixe braunches also shall proceede out of the sides of it: three braunches of
the candelsticke out of the one side, and three out of the other.
33 Three bolles like vnto almondes, with a knop and a flowre in one braunche:
And three bolles like almondes in the other braunche, with a knop & a flowre,
according to the sixe braunches that proceede out of the candelsticke.
34 And in the candelsticke it selfe there shalbe foure bolles like vnto
almondes, with their knoppes and flowres.
35 And there shalbe a knop vnder two braunches of the same in three places,
according to the sixe braunches that proceede out of the candelsticke.
36 Their knoppes and their braunches shalbe of it: and it shalbe one whole
worke, euen of pure golde.
37 And thou shalt make the seuen lampes of it, and the seuen lampes therof shalt
thou put on hye theron, to geue light vnto the other syde that is ouer agaynst
it.
38 The snuffers and the vessels of the snuffe, shalbe of pure golde.
39 Of a talent of fine gold shall he make it, with all these vessels.
40 Loke therefore that thou make them after the fashion that was shewed thee in
the mount.

Chapter 26

1 Thou shalt make the tabernacle with ten curtaines of whyte twyned sylke, and
blewe sylke, and purple, and scarlet: and in them thou shalt make Cherubins of
brodered worke.
2 The length of one curtayne shalbe eight & twentie cubites, and the breadth of
one curtayne, foure cubites: and euerye one of the curtaynes shall haue one
measure.
3 Fiue curtaynes shalbe coupled together one to another, and other fiue
curtaynes shalbe coupled one to another.
4 And thou shalt make loupes of blewe sylke a long by the edge of the one
curtaine which is in the seluedge of the coupling curtayne: and likewise shalt
thou make in the edge of the vttermost curtayne, in the seconde couplyng.
5 Fiftie loupes shalt thou make in the one curtayne, & fiftie loupes shalt thou
make in the edge of the curtayne that is to be coupled therewith on the other
syde, that the loupes may take holde one of another.
6 And yu shalt make fiftie taches of gold, and couple the curtaines together
with the taches: and it shalbe one tabernacle.
7 And thou shalt make curtaynes of goates heere, to be a coueryng vpon the
tabernacle, a leuen curtaines shalt thou make.
8 The length of one curtaine shalbe thirtie cubites, and the breadth of one
curtayne foure cubites: & the eleuen shalbe all of one measure.
9 And thou shalt couple fiue curtaynes by them selues, and sixe curtaynes by
them selues, & shalt double the sixt curtayne in the forefront of the
tabernacle.
10 And thou shalt make fiftie loupes in the edge of the vttermost curtayne on
the one side, euen in the edge of the couplyng curtayne and fiftie loupes in the
other certayne of the seconde coupling.
11 And thou shalt make fiftie taches of brasse, and put them on the loupes, and
couple the coueryng together, that it may be one.
12 And the remnaunt that resteth in the curtaines of the couering, euen the
halfe curtaine that resteth, shalbe left on the backe sydes of the tabernacle.
13 That a cubite on the one syde, and a cubite on the other syde, which may
remayne in the length of the curtaines of the coueryng, may remayne on eyther
syde of the tabernacle to couer it withal.
14 And vppon the tabernacle, thou shalt make a coueryng of Rammes skynnes dyed
red, and yet a coueryng aboue all of Taxus skynnes.
15 And thou shalt make boordes for the tabernacle of Sittim wood, to stande
vpryght.
16 Ten cubites long shall euery boorde be, and a cubite and a halfe brode.
17 Two tenons shall there be in one boorde, set in order, as ladder staues one
from another: and thus shalt thou make for all the boordes of the tabernacle.
18 And thou shalt make boordes for the tabernacle euen twentie boordes on the
south side, euen full south.
19 And thou shalt make fourtie sockettes of siluer vnder the twentie boordes:
two sockettes vnder one boorde for his two tenons, and two sockettes vnder
another boorde for his two tenons.
20 In lyke maner, in the seconde syde of the tabernacle towarde the north, there
shalbe twentie boordes.
21 And fourtie sockettes of syluer: two sockettes vnder one boorde, and two
sockettes vnder another boorde.
22 And in the west ende of the tabernacle, thou shalt make sixe boordes.
23 And two boordes shalt thou make in the corners of the tabernacle, in the
meetyng together of the two sydes:
24 And they shalbe coupled together beneathe, and lykewyse shalbe coupled aboue
to a rynge: and thus shall it be for the two boordes that are in the corners.
25 And they shalbe eyght boordes, hauing sockettes of siluer, euen sixteene
sockets: that there may be two sockets vnder one boorde, & two vnder another
boorde.
26 And thou shalt make barres of Sittim wood, fiue for the boordes of the
tabernacle in one syde,
27 And fiue barres for the boordes of the tabernacle on the other syde, and fiue
barres for the boordes of the tabernacle in the west ende.
28 And the middle barre shall go alonge through the middest of the boordes fro
the one ende to the other.
29 And thou shalt couer the boordes with golde, and make their ringes of golde
to put the barres through, and thou shalt couer the barres with golde also.
30 And thou shalt reare vp the tabernacle, accordyng to the fassion therof, as
it was shewed thee in the mount.
31 And thou shalt make a vayle of blewe silke, of purple, skarlet, and whyte
twyned silke: of brodered worke with Cherubims shall ye make it.
32 And hang it vpon foure pillers of Sittim wood couered with golde (whose head
shalbe of golde) standing vpon foure sockets of siluer.
33 And thou shalt hang vp the vayle on the taches, that thou mayest bryng in
within the vayle the arke of witnesse, and the vayle shall deuide vnto you the
holy place from the most holy place.
34 And thou shalt put the mercy seate vpon the arke of witnesse, in the holyest
place.
35 And thou shalt put the table without the vayle, and the candelsticke ouer
against the table on the south side of the tabernacle, and put the table on the
north syde.
36 And thou shalt make an hanging for the doore of the tabernacle of blew silke,
purple, scarlet, and whyte twyned silke wrought with needle worke.
37 And thou shalt make for the hanging fiue pillers of Sittim wood, and couer
them with golde, and their knoppes shalbe of golde, and thou shalt cast fiue
sockets of brasse for them.

Chapter 27

1 And thou shalt make an aulter of Sittim wood, fiue cubites long & fiue cubites
broade, it shalbe foure square, and three cubites hye.
2 And thou shalt make vnto it hornes in his foure corners: his hornes shalbe of
the same as it is of, and thou shalt couer it with brasse.
3 And make his ashpannes for his ashes, his beesomes, his basons, his
fleshehookes, his firepannes: and all the vessels thereof thou shalt make of
brasse.
4 And thou shalt make vnto it a grediren also like a net of brasse, and vpon
that net shalt thou make foure brasen ringes in the foure corners therof.
5 And thou shalt put it vnder the compasse of the aulter beneath, that the net
may be in the middest of the aulter.
6 And thou shalt make two barres for the aulter of Sittim wood, and couer them
with brasse,
7 And let them be put in the ringes along by the sides of the aulter, to beare
it with all.
8 And make the aulter holowe with boordes: euen as it was shewed thee in the
mount, so shalt thou make it.
9 And thou shalt make the court of the tabernacle on the south side, euen full
south: the curtaines for the court shalbe of whyte twined silke of an hundreth
cubites long for one side.
10 And twentie pillers therof, with their twentie sockets of brasse: but the
knops of the pillers and their whopes shalbe siluer.
11 In likewise on the north syde there shalbe curtaynes of an hundred cubites
long, and twentie pillers, with their twentie sockets of brasse, and the knops
and the whopes of siluer.
12 And the breadth of the court whiche is westwarde, shall haue curtaynes of
fiftie cubites, and the pillers of them shalbe ten, and the sockets of them ten.
13 Fiftie cubites shalbe in the court eastwarde, euen full east.
14 The curtaynes of one syde shalbe of fifteene cubites, the pillers of them
three, and the sockets three.
15 And likewise on the other side shalbe curtaines of fifteene cubites, with
their three pillers and three sockets.
16 And in the gate of the court shalbe a vayle of twentie cubites of blewe
silke, purple, and scarlet, and white twyned silke wrought with needle worke,
and foure pillers with their foure sockets.
17 All the pillers rounde about the court shalbe whoped with siluer, and their
knoppes shalbe of siluer, and their sockets of brasse.
18 The length of the court shalbe an hundred cubites, and the breadth fiftie on
euery side, and the heyght of the curtaynes shalbe fiue cubites of whyte twyned
silke, and their sockettes of brasse.
19 All the vessels of the tabernacle in all maner of seruice, and the pinnes
therof, yea and all the pinnes also of the court, shalbe of brasse.
20 And thou shalt commaunde the chyldren of Israel that they geue thee pure oyle
oliue beaten for the light, that they may make the lampes to borne alwayes.
21 In the tabernacle of the congregation without the vayle whiche is before the
witnesse, shall Aaron & his sonnes dresse the lampes both euening and morning
before the Lorde: and it shalbe a statute for euer vnto the generations of the
chyldren of Israel.

Chapter 28

1 And take thou vnto thee Aaron thy brother, and his sonnes with him from among
the children of Israel, that Aaron may minister vnto me in the priestes office,
Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aarons sonnes.
2 And thou shalt make holy rayment for Aaron thy brother, glorious and
beautifull.
3 And thou shalt speake vnto all that are wise hearted, whom I haue filled with
the spirite of wisdome, that they make Aarons rayment to consecrate him, that he
may minister vnto me in the priestes office.
4 These are the garmentes which they shall make, a brestlap and an ephod, a
tunicle, a brodered coate, a miter, and a girdle, these holy garmentes shall
they make for Aaron thy brother and his sonnes, that they may minister vnto me
in the priestes office.
5 And let them take golde, blewe silke, purple, scarlet, and whyte twined silke,
6 They shall make the ephod of golde, blewe silke, purple, scarlet, and whyte
twined silke, with brodered worke.
7 The two sides shall come together, and be closed vp in the two edges therof.
8 And the girdle of the ephod shalbe of the same workmanship, and of the same
stuffe, euen of golde, blewe silke, purple, scarlet, and whyte twined silke.
9 And thou shalt take two Onyx stones, and graue in them the names of the
children of Israel.
10 Sixe names of them in the one stone, and the other sixe in the other stone,
accordyng to their birth.
11 After the worke of a stone grauer and of him that graueth signettes, shalt
thou graue the two stones, with the names of the children of Israel, and shalt
make them to be set in ouches of golde.
12 And thou shalt put the two stones vpon the two shoulders of the ephod that
they may be stones of remembraunce vnto the children of Israel: and Aaron shal
beare their names before the Lord vpon his two shoulders for a remembraunce.
13 And thou shalt make ouches of golde:
14 And two chaynes of fine golde of a certayne length, linke worke & wreathed,
and fasten the wreathed chaynes to the ouches.
15 And thou shalt make the brestlap of iudgement with brodered worke: euen after
the worke of the ephod thou shalt make it namely of golde, blewe silke, purple,
scarlet, and whyte twined silke.
16 Foure square it shalbe and double, an hande bredth long, and an hande bredth
brode.
17 And thou shalt fill it with foure rowes of stones: in the first rowe shalbe a
Sardius, a Topas, and Smaragdus.
18 In the seconde rowe, a Rubi, Saphir, and Diamonde.
19 In the thirde a Lyncurius, an Achat, and an Ametyst.
20 In the fourth a Turcas, an Onyx, and a Iaspis: and they shalbe set in golde
in their inclosers.
21 And the stones shalbe grauen, as signettes be grauen with the names of the
children of Israel, euen with twelue names, euery one with his name accordyng to
the twelue tribes.
22 And thou shalt make vpon the brestlap two fastenyng chaynes of pure golde and
wreathen worke.
23 And thou shalt make likewise vpon the brestlap two ringes of golde, and put
them on the edges of the brestlap.
24 And put the two wreathen chaynes of golde in the two ringes which are in the
edges of the brestlap.
25 And the other two endes of the chaines thou shalt fasten in two close ouches,
and put them vpon the shoulders of the ephod on the foreside of it.
26 And thou shalt yet make two ringes of golde, which thou shalt put in the two
edges of the brestlap euen in the borders therof, towarde the inside of the
ephod ouer agaynst it.
27 And yet two other ringes of gold thou shalt make, and put them on the two
sides of ye Ephod beneath ouer agaynst the brestlap, alowe where the sides are
ioyned together vpon the brodered gyrdle of the Ephod.
28 And they shall bynde the brestlap by his ringes, vnto ye ringes of the Ephod,
with a lase of blewe silke, that it may lye close aboue the brodered gyrdle of
the Ephod, and that the brestlap be not loosed from the Ephod.
29 And Aaron shall beare the names of the children of Israel in the brestlap of
iudgement vpon his heart, when he goeth into the holy place, for a remembraunce
before the Lorde alway.
30 And thou shalt put in the brestlap of iudgment the Urim & the Thummim, and
they shalbe euen vpo Aarons heart whe he goeth in before the Lord: and Aaron
shall beare the iudgement of the children of Israel vpon his heart before the
Lorde alway.
31 And thou shalt make the tunicle vnto the Ephod, altogether of blewe silke.
32 And there shalbe an hole for the head in the middest of it, hauyng a bonde of
wouen worke rounde about the coller of it, as it were the coller of a partlet,
that it rent not.
33 And beneath vpon the hem, thou shalt make pomgranates of blewe sylke, and of
purple, and of scarlet, rounde about the hem, and belles of gold betweene them
rounde about.
34 And let there be euer a golden bell and a pomgranate: a golden bell and a
pomgranate rounde about vpon the hem of the tunicle.
35 And Aaron shall haue it vpon hym when he ministreth, and the sound shalbe
hearde when he goeth into the holy place before the Lorde, & when he commeth
out: and he shall not dye.
36 And thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, and graue theron as signettes are
grauen, the holynes of the Lorde.
37 And put it on a blewe sylke lase to be vpon the mytre, euen vpon the
forefront of it.
38 And it shalbe vpon Aarons forehead, that Aaron may beare the sinne of the
holy thinges, whiche the children of Israel halowe in all their holy gyftes: and
it shalbe alwayes vpon his forehead, for the reconciling of them before the
Lorde.
39 And thou shalt make a coate of white sylke, embrodered with knottes, & thou
shalt make a mytre of whyte sylke, and a gyrdle of needle worke.
40 And thou shalt make for Aarons sonnes also coates, and thou shalt make for
them gyrdles, & bonettes shalt thou make for them, glorious and bewtiful.
41 And thou shalt put them vpon Aaron thy brother, & on his sonnes with hym, and
shalt annoynt them, and fill their handes, & sanctifie them, that they may
minister vnto me in the priestes office.
42 And thou shalt make them lynnen sloppes to couer their priuities: fro the
loynes vnto ye thighes they shal reache.
43 And they shalbe vpon Aaron and his sonnes when they come into the tabercle of
the congregatio, or whe they come vnto the aulter to minister in holines: that
they beare no sinne, & so dye. And it shalbe a lawe for euer vnto Aaron, and his
seede after him.

Chapter 29

1 This thyng also shalt thou do vnto them, when thou halowest the to be my
priestes. Thou shalt take one young calfe, and two rammes yt are without
blemyshe:
2 And vnleauened bread, and cakes vnleauened tempered with oyle, and wafers
vnleauened annoynted with oyle: of wheaten floure shalt thou make the.
3 And thou shalt put them in a maunde, and bryng them in the maunde with the
calfe and the two rammes.
4 And bryng Aaron and his sonnes vnto the doore of the tabernacle of the
congregation, & washe the with water.
5 And take the garmentes, and put vppon Aaron, the coate, the tunicle of the
Ephod, and the Ephod it selfe, and the brestlap, & gyrde them to hym with the
brodered gyrdle which is in the Ephod.
6 And put the mytre vpon his head: and put the holy crowne vpon the mytre.
7 Then shalt thou take the anoyntyng oyle, and powre it vpon his head, and
anoynt hym,
8 And bryng his sonnes, and put coates vpon them:
9 And gyrde them with gyrdels, aswell Aaron as his sonnes, and put the bonnettes
on them, and the priestes office shalbe theirs for a perpetuall lawe, and thou
shalt fill the handes of Aaron, and the handes of his sonnes.
10 And thou shalt cause a calfe to be brought before the tabernacle of witnesse:
and Aaron and his sonnes shall put theyr handes vpon the head of the calfe.
11 And thou shalt kyll hym before the Lord, by the doore of the tabernacle of
witnesse.
12 And take of the blood of the calfe, and put it vpon the hornes of the aulter
with thy finger: and powre all the rest of the blood beside the bottome of the
aulter.
13 And take all the fat that couereth the inwardes, and the kall that is on the
lyuer, and the two kydneys, and the fat that is vpon them, and burne them vpon
the aulter.
14 But the flesh of the calfe, and his skin, and his doung, shalt thou burne
with fire without the hoast: it is a synne offeryng.
15 Thou shalt also take one Ramme, and Aaron and his sonnes shall put theyr
handes vpon the head of the Ramme.
16 And when thou hast slaine the Rame, thou shalt take his blood, and sprinckle
it rounde about vpon the aulter:
17 And cut the Ramme in peeces, and washe the inwardes of hym, and his legges,
and put them vnto the peeces, and vnto his head.
18 And then burne the whole Ramme vpo the aulter: for it is a burnt offering
vnto the Lorde for a sweete sauour, a sacrifice made by fire vnto the Lord.
19 And take the other Ramme, and Aaron & his sonnes shall put theyr handes vpon
his head.
20 Then shalt thou kyll hym, and take of his blood and put it vpon the tip of
the right eare of Aaron, and vpon the tip of the right eare of his sonnes, and
vpon the thombe of theyr right handes, and vpon the great toe of theyr right
foot, and sprinckle the blood vpon the aulter rounde about.
21 And thou shalt take of the blood that is vpon the aulter, & of the anoyntyng
oyle, and sprinckle it vpon Aaron & his vestmentes, and vpon his sonnes and vpon
theyr garmentes, with hym, and he shalbe halowed and his clothes, and his sonnes
and theyr clothes, with him.
22 And thou shalt take the fat of the Ramme, & his rumpe, and the fat that
couereth the inwardes, and the kall of the lyuer, and the two kydneys, and the
fat that is vpon them, and the right shoulder, for that Ramme is a ful offeryng:
23 And a synmell of bread, and a cake of oyled bread, and a wafer out of the
basket of vnleauened bread that is before the Lord.
24 And put all vpo the handes of Aaron, and on the handes of his sonnes, and
waue them for a waue offeryng before the Lord.
25 And agayne thou shalt take it from of their handes, and burne it vpon the
aulter for a burnt offeryng, to be a sauour of sweetnes before the Lorde: for it
is a sacrifice by fire vnto the Lord.
26 And thou shalt take the brest of the Ramme of Aarons consecration, and waue
it for a waue offeryng before the Lord, and it shalbe thy part.
27 And thou shalt sanctifie the brest of the waue offeryng, and the shoulder of
the heaue offeryng, which is waued & heaued vp of the Ramme of the consecration
for Aaron and for his sonnes.
28 And it shalbe Aarons and his sonnes by a statute for euer from the childre of
Israel, for it is an heaue offeryng: & it shalbe an heaue offeryng fro the
children of Israel of the sacrifice of theyr peace offerynges, euen theyr heaue
offeryng shall it be vnto the Lord.
29 And the holy garmentes of Aaron shalbe his sonnes after him, to be anoynted
therein, and to fyll theyr handes therein.
30 And that sonne that is priest in his steede after hym, shall put them on
seuen dayes, when he cometh into the tabernacle of wytnesse to minister in the
holy place.
31 And thou shalt take the Ramme of the consecration, & seethe his flesh in the
holy place.
32 And Aaron and his sonnes shall eate the fleshe of the Ramme, and the bread
that is in the basket, euen by the doore of the tabernacle of wytnesse.
33 And they shall eate them, because the attonement was made therwith to fyll
theyr handes and to consecrate them: but a straunger shall not eate therof,
because they are holy.
34 And yf ought of the flesh of the consecration, or of the bread, remayne vnto
the mornyng, thou shalt burne it with fire: and it shall not be eaten, because
it is holy.
35 Therfore shalt thou do vnto Aaron and his sonnes euen so, accordyng to all
thynges which I haue commaunded thee: seuen dayes shalt thou fyll theyr handes.
36 And thou shalt offer euery day a calfe for a sinne offeryng for to recosile
withall: and thou shalt clense the aulter whe thou reconsilest vpon it, and thou
shalt annoynt it, to sanctifie it.
37 Seuen dayes thou shalt reconsile vpo the aulter, and sanctifie it, & it
shalbe an aulter most holy: and whatsoeuer toucheth the aulter, shalbe holy.
38 This is that which thou shalt offer vpon the aulter, euen two Lambes of one
yere old day by day continually:
39 The one thou shalt offer in the mornyng, and the other at euen.
40 And with the one Lambe, a tenth deale of flowre mingled with the fourth part
of an hyn of beaten oyle: and the fourth part of an hyn of wyne for a drynk
offeryng.
41 And the other Lambe thou shalt offer at euen, and shalt do thereto accordyng
to the meate offeryng & drinke offeryng in the morning, to be an odour of a
sweet sauour, and a sacrifice by fire vnto the Lorde.
42 And let this be a continuall burnt offering amongst your children after you,
before the doore of ye tabernacle of witnesse before the Lord, where I will
meete you, to speake there vnto thee.
43 There I will meete with the children of Israel, and the place shall be
sanctified in my glorie.
44 And I will sanctifie the tabernacle of witnesse and the aulter: and I will
sanctifie also both Aaron & his sonnes, to be my priestes.
45 And I will dwell amongst the chyldren of Israel, and will be their God:
46 And they shall knowe that I am the Lord theyr God, that brought them out of
the lande of Egypt, for to dwell amongst them euen I the Lord their God.

Chapter 30

1 And thou shalt make an aulter for sweete incense: of Sittim wood shalte thou
make it.
2 A cubite long, and a cubite brode, eue foure square shall it be, and two
cubites hye: the hornes therof shall proceede out of it.
3 And thou shalt ouerlaye it with fine gold, both the ruffe & the walles round
about, and his hornes also: and shalt make vnto it a crowne of gold round about.
4 And two golden ringes shalt thou make to it on either side, euen vnder the
crowne, that they maye be as places for the barres to beare it withall.
5 And thou shalt make the barres of Sittim wood, & couer them with gold.
6 And thou shalt put it before the vayle that is by the arke of testimonie
before the mercie seate, that is, vpon the testimonie where I wyll meete with
thee.
7 And Aaron shall burne theron sweete incense euery mornyng when he dresseth the
lampes, euen then shall he burne it.
8 And lykewise at euen when he setteth vp the lampes he shall burne incense, &
this incensing shall be perpetually before the Lord throughout your generations.
9 Ye shall offer no straunge incense thereon nor burnt sacrifice nor meate
offeryng, neither powre any drinke offeryng thereon.
10 And Aaron shall reconsile vppon the hornes of it once in a yere, with the
blood of the sinne offeryng of reconsiling, euen once in the yere shal he
reconsile vpon it through your generations: it is most holy vnto the Lorde.
11 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
12 If thou takest the sume of the childre of Israel after theyr number, they
shal geue euery man a recosiling of his soule vnto the Lorde when thou numbrest
them, that there be no plague amongst them when thou nubrest them.
13 And thus much shall euery man geue that goeth into the number: halfe a sicle
after the sicle of the sanctuarie. A sicle is twentie halfpence: an halfe sicle
shalbe the heaue offeryng of the Lorde.
14 All that are numbred from twentie yere olde and aboue, shall geue a heaue
offeryng vnto the Lorde.
15 The riche shall not passe, and the poore shall not go vnder halfe a sicle,
but ye shall geue an heaue offeryng vnto the Lorde, that he may haue mercie on
your soules.
16 And thou shalt take the reconsilyng monye of the children of Israel, and
shalt put it vnto the vse of the tabernacle of the congregation, that it may be
a memoriall vnto the chyldren of Israel before the Lord, that he may haue mercie
vpon your soules.
17 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
18 Thou shalt make a lauer of brasse, & his foot also of brasse, to washe
withall, and shalt put it betwene the tabernacle of the congregation and the
aulter, and put water therin.
19 For Aaron and his sonnes shall washe their handes and their feete therin.
20 Euen when they go into the tabernacle of the congregation, or when they go in
to the aulter to minister and to burne the Lordes offeryng, they shall washe
them selues with water, lest they dye.
21 Likewise they shal washe their handes & their feete, lest they dye: and it
shalbe an ordinaunce vnto them for euer, both vnto hym & his seede, throughout
their generations.
22 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
23 Take vnto thee principal spices, of the most pure Mirrhe fiue hudreth sicles,
of sweete Synamond halfe so much, euen two hundreth and fiftie sicles, of sweete
Calamus two hundreth and fiftie sicles.
24 Of Cassia fiue hundreth sicles, after the waight of the sanctuarie, and of
oyle Olyue an hyn:
25 And thou shalt make of the oyle an holy oyntment, euen an oyntment compound
after the craft of the apoticarie:
26 It shalbe the oyle of holy oyntment, and thou shalt annoynt the tabernacle of
the congregation therwith, and the arke of the testimonie,
27 And the table and al his apparell, and the candlesticke and all his vessels,
and the aulter of incense,
28 And the aulter of burnt sacrifice with all his vessels, and the lauer & his
foote.
29 And thou shalt sanctifie them, that they may be most holye: whatsoeuer
toucheth them, shalbe sanctified.
30 And thou shalt anoynt Aaron and his sonnes, and consecrate them, that they
may minister vnto me in the priestes office.
31 And thou shalt speake vnto the children of Israel, saying: This shalbe an
holy oynting oyle vnto me, throughout your generations.
32 Upon mans fleshe shall it not be powred, neither shal ye make any other after
the makyng of it: for it is holy, and shalbe holy vnto you.
33 Whosoeuer maketh lyke that, or whosoeuer putteth any of it vpon a strauger,
shall perishe from amongst his people.
34 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Take vnto thee sweete spices, Starte,
Onycha, sweete Galbanum: these spices with pure Frankensence, of eche a lyke
wayght.
35 And make of them sweete smellyng incense, after the craft of the apoticarie,
mingled together, pure and holy.
36 And beate it to powder, and put of it before the arke of the testimonie in
the tabernacle of the congregation, where I wyll meete with thee: it shalbe vnto
you most holy.
37 And you shal not make to your selues, after the makyng of that incense which
thou shalt make: it shalbe vnto you holy for the Lorde.
38 Whosoeuer shall make lyke vnto that to smell thereto, shall perishe from
amongst his people.

Chapter 31

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Beholde, I haue called by name Besaleel the sonne of Uri, the sonne of Hur, of
the tribe of Iuda,
3 And I haue fylled hym with the spirite of God, in wisedome and vnderstandyng,
in knowledge, and in all maner worke,
4 To fynde out wittie deuises, and to worke in golde, siluer, and in brasse,
5 And in the craft to set stones, and to carue in tymber, and to worke in all
maner workmanship.
6 And beholde, I haue geuen hym to be his companion Ooliab the sonne of
Achisamec, of the tribe of Dan: and in the heartes of all that are wise hearted
I haue put wisedome, to make all that I haue commaunded thee:
7 The tabernacle of the congregation, the arke of the testimonie, & the mercie
seate that is thervpon, and all the furniture of the tabernacle:
8 And the table and his furniture, and the pure candlesticke with all his
furniture, and the aulter of incense,
9 And the aulter of burnt offeryng and all his furniture, and the lauer with his
foote,
10 The vestmentes to minister in, and the holy garmentes for Aaron the priest,
and the garmentes of his sonnes to minister in:
11 And the annoyntyng oyle, and sweete incense for the sanctuarie: accordyng to
all that I haue commaunded thee, shal they do.
12 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
13 Speake vnto the children of Israel, and say, In any wyse see that ye kepe my
Sabbothes: for it is a signe betweene me & you in your generations, for to knowe
that I the Lorde am he that doth sanctifie you.
14 Kepe my Sabboth therefore, for it is holy vnto you. He that defileth it
shalbe put to death: for whosoeuer worketh therin, the same soule shalbe rooted
out from amongst his people.
15 Six dayes shall men worke, and in the seuenth day is the Sabboth of the holy
rest of the Lorde: whosoeuer doth any worke in the Sabboth day shall dye the
death.
16 Wherefore let the children of Israel kepe the Sabboth, that they obserue the
Sabboth throughout their generations: it is a perpetuall couenaunt.
17 For it is a signe betweene me and the children of Israel for euer: for in six
dayes the Lorde made heauen and earth, and in the seuenth day he rested and was
refreshed.
18 And when the Lorde had made an end of commnuyng with Moyses vpon the mount
Sinai, he gaue hym two tables of witnesse, euen tables of stone, writen with the
finger of God.

Chapter 32

1 And when ye people sawe that it was log or Moyses came downe out of the
mountaine, they gathered them selues together vnto Aaron, and sayd vnto hym, Up,
make vs Gods to go before vs: for we wote not what is become of this Moyses, the
man that brought vs out of the lande of Egypt.
2 And Aaron sayd vnto them: Plucke of the golden earynges which are in the eares
of your wiues, of your sonnes, & of your daughters, & bring them vnto me.
3 And all the people plucked of the golden earinges which they had in their
eares, and brought them vnto Aaron.
4 And he receaued them of their handes, & fashioned it with a grauer, & made of
it a calfe of molten mettel: and they said, These be thy gods O Israel, which
brought thee out of the lande of Egypt.
5 And when Aaron sawe that, he made an aulter before it, and Aaron made
proclamation, saying: To morowe is the holy day of the Lorde.
6 And they rose vp in the mornyng, and offered burnt offeringes, and brought
peace offeringes also: and the people sat them downe to eate and drinke, and
rose vp agayne to play.
7 And the Lord sayd vnto Moyses: Go get thee downe, thy people which thou
broughtest out of the lande of Egypt, hath marred all.
8 They are turned quickly out of the way whiche I commaunded them: for they haue
made them a calfe of moulten mettall, and haue worshipped it, and haue offred
thervnto, saying: These be thy goddes O Israel, whiche haue brought thee out of
the lande of Egypt.
9 And the Lorde sayd vnto Moyses, I haue seene this people: and beholde, it is a
styfnecked people.
10 And nowe suffer me, that my wrath may waxe whot against them, and consume
them: and I wyll make of thee a mightie people.
11 And Moyses besought the Lorde his God, and sayd: O Lord, why doth thy wrath
waxe whot agaynst thy people whiche thou hast brought out of the lande of Egypt
with great power, and with a mightie hande?
12 Wherfore should the Egyptians speake and say: For a mischiefe dyd he bryng
them out, euen for to slay them in the mountaynes, & to consume them from the
face of the earth? Turne from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this euyll deuise
agaynst thy people.
13 Remember Abraham, Isahac, and Israel thy seruauntes, to whom thou swarest by
thy owne selfe, and saydest vnto them: I wyll multiplie your seede as the
starres of heauen, and all this lande that I haue spoken of wyll I geue vnto
your seede, and they shall inherite it for euer.
14 And the Lorde refrayned hym selfe from the euill whiche he sayd he would do
vnto his people.
15 And Moyses turned his backe, & went downe from the hyll, & the two tables of
the testimonie were in his hande.
16 And the same tables were written in both the leaues, euen on the one side, &
on the other, were they written: And these tables were the worke of God, and the
writing was the writing of God, grauen in the tables.
17 And when Iosuah hearde the noyse of the people as they showted, he sayde vnto
Moyses: there is a noyse of warre in the hoast.
18 And he aunswered: It is not the crie of them that haue the masterie, nor of
the that haue the worse: but I do heare the noyse of them that sing.
19 And assoone as he came nigh vnto the hoast, he sawe the calfe, and the
daunsing: and Moyses wrath waxed whot, and he cast the tables out of his handes,
and brake them beneath the hyll.
20 And he toke the calfe whiche they had made, and burned it in the fire, &
stampt it into pouder, & strawed it in the water, & made the childre of Israel
drinke of it.
21 And Moyses said vnto Aaron: What did this people vnto thee, that thou hast
brought so great a sinne vpon them?
22 And Aaron aunswered, Let not the wrath of my Lorde waxe fierce: thou knowest
the people that they are euen set on mischiefe.
23 For they sayde vnto me: Make vs goddes to go before vs, for we wote not what
is become of Moyses, the man that brought vs out of ye land of Egypt.
24 And I said vnto them: Let them that haue gold, plucke it of: And thei brought
it vnto me, and I did cast it into the fire, and therof came out this calfe.
25 Moyses therfore sawe that the people were naked (and that Aaron had made them
naked vnto their shame, amongest their enemies)
26 And Moyses stode in the gate of the hoast, and sayd: Who pertayneth to the
Lorde, let hym come vnto me. And all the sonnes of Leui gathered theselues
together vnto hym.
27 And he said vnto them, Thus sayeth the Lord God of Israel: Put euery ma his
sworde by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate throughout the hoast,
and slay euery man his brother, & euery man his companion, and euery man his
neighbour.
28 And the chyldre of Leui dyd as Moyses had said: And there fel of the people
ye same day about three thousande men.
29 And Moyses sayd: Fill your handes vnto the Lord this day, euery man vpo his
sonne, & vpo his brother, & that there may be geuen you a blessing this day.
30 And on the morowe Moyses said vnto ye people, Ye haue sinned a great sinne:
And nowe I will go vp vnto the Lord, peraduenture I may purchase an attonement
for your sinne.
31 Moyses therefore went agayne vnto the Lorde, and sayde: Oh, this people haue
sinned a great sinne, and haue made them gods of golde.
32 And nowe forgeue them their sinne: or if thou wylt not, wype me I pray thee
out of thy booke whiche thou hast written.
33 And the Lorde sayd vnto Moyses: I wyll put hym out of my booke that hath
sinned agaynst me.
34 And nowe go thou, bryng the people vnto the place whiche I said vnto thee,
behold, mine angell shal go before thee: Neuerthelater, in that day when I
visite, I wyl visite their sinne vpo them.
35 And the Lorde plagued the people, because they made the calfe whiche Aaron
made.

Chapter 33

1 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Depart and go vp hence, thou and the people
whiche thou hast brought out of the lande of Egypt, vnto the lande which I sware
vnto Abraham, Isahac, & Iacob, saying, vnto thy seede wyll I geue it.
2 And I will send an angell before thee, and I wyll cast out the Chanaanites,
the Amorites, & the Hethites, the Pherezites, the Heuites, and the Iebusites:
3 Unto a lande that floweth with mylke and hony. For I wyll not go amongest you
my selfe: for ye are a styfnecked people, lest I consume thee in the way.
4 And when the people hearde this euil tidinges, they sorowed: and no man dyd
put on his best rayment.
5 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses: Say vnto the chyldren of Israel, ye are a
styfnecked people: I must come once sodaynly vpon you, and make an ende of you:
therefore nowe put thy goodly rayment from thee, that I may wyt what to do vnto
thee.
6 And the children of Israel layde their goodly rayment from them, euen by the
mount Horeb.
7 And Moyses toke the tabernacle, and pitched it without the hoast a farre of
from the hoast, and called it the tabernacle of the congregation: And so it came
to passe that euery one whiche woulde pray vnto the Lorde, went out vnto the
tabernacle of the congregation whiche was without the hoast.
8 And when Moyses went out vnto the tabernacle, all the people rose vp, and
stode euery man at his tent doore, and loked after Moyses, vntill he was gone
into the tabernacle.
9 And assoone as Moyses was entred into the tabernacle, the cloudie piller
descended, and stode at the doore of the tabernacle, and he talked with Moyses.
10 And all the people sawe the cloudie piller stand at the tabernacle doore, and
they rose vp and worshipped euery man in his tent doore.
11 And the Lord spake vnto Moyses face to face, as a man speaketh vnto his
freende. And he turued agayne into the hoast: but the young man Iosuah his
seruaunt the sonne of Nun, departed not out of the tabernacle.
12 And Moyses said vnto the Lord: See, thou sayest vnto me, Leade this people
foorth: & thou hast not shewed me who thou wylt send with me. And thou hast sayd
moreouer, I knowe thee by name, & thou hast also found grace in my sight.
13 Nowe therfore, if I haue founde fauour in thy sight, then I pray thee shew me
thy way, that I may know thee, and that I may finde grace in thy sight, and
consider also that this nation is thy people.
14 And he said: My presence shall go with thee, and I wyll geue thee rest.
15 He sayd vnto hym: If thy presence go not with me, cary vs not hence.
16 For howe shall it be knowen here, that I and thy people haue founde fauour in
thy sight, but in that thou goest with vs? If thou goest with vs, shall not I
and thy people haue preeminence before all the people that are vpon the face of
the earth?
17 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: I wyll do this also that thou hast sayd, for
thou hast founde grace in my sight, and I knowe thee by name.
18 And he sayde: I beseche thee shewe me thy glorie.
19 Who aunswered: I wyll make all my good go before thee, & I wyll call in the
name of Iehouah before thee: and wyl shewe mercy to whom I wyll shewe mercy, and
wyll haue compassion, on whom I wyll haue compassion.
20 And he said furthermore, Thou mayest not see my face: for there shall no man
see me, and lyue.
21 And the Lorde sayd: Beholde, there is a place by me, and thou shalt stande
vpon a rocke.
22 And whyle my glory goeth foorth, I wyll put thee in a clyft of the rocke, and
will put my hand vpon thee, while I passe by.
23 And I wyll take away myne hande, and thou shalt see my backe partes: but my
face shall not be seene.

Chapter 34

1 And the Lord saide vnto Moyses: hewe thee two tables of stone like vnto the
first, and I wyll wryte vpon these tables, ye wordes that were in the first
tables whiche thou brakest.
2 And be redy in the morning, and come vp early vnto the mount of Sinai, and
thou shalt stande there for me in the top of the mount.
3 There shall no man come vp with thee, neither let any man be seene thorowout
al the mount, neither let sheepe nor oxen feede before the hyll.
4 And Moyses hewed two tables of stone like vnto the first, and rose vp earlye
in the mornyng, and went vp vnto the mount Sinai as the Lorde had commaunded
hym, & toke in his hande the two tables of stone.
5 And the Lord descended in the cloude, and stode with him there: and he called
vpon the name of the Lorde.
6 And the Lorde passed by before hym, and cryed, Lorde, Lorde, God, strong,
mercyfull and gracious, long suffering, and aboundaunt in goodnes & trueth,
7 And kepyng mercy in store for thousandes, forgeuing wickednes, vngodlynes and
sinne, and not leauing one innocent, visiting the wickednes of the fathers vpon
the chyldren, and vpon the chyldrens chyldren, euen vnto the third and fourth
generation.
8 And Moyses made haste, and bowed hym selfe to the earth, and worshipped,
9 And sayd: If I haue founde grace in thy sight, O Lorde, then let my Lorde I
pray thee go in the middest of vs, for it is a styfnecked people: and thou shalt
haue mercy vpon our wickednes and our sinne, and shalt take vs for thine
inheritaunce.
10 And he said: Beholde, I make a couenaunt before all thy people, & I will do
meruayles, such as haue not ben done in all the worlde, neither in all nations:
& all the people amongest whiche thou art, shall see the worke of the Lorde: for
it is a terrible thyng that I wyll do with thee.
11 Kepe diligently those thinges that I commaunde thee this day: Beholde, I cast
out before thee, the Amorites, Chanaanites, Hethites, Pherezites, Heuites and
Iebusites.
12 Take heede to thy self, lest thou make any compact with the inhabitours of
the lande whyther thou goest, lest they be cause of ruine amongest you:
13 But ouerthrowe their aulters, and breake their images, and cut downe their
groues.
14 Thou shalt worship no straunge God: for the Lorde is called ielous, because
he is a ielous God.
15 Lest if thou make any agreement with the inhabitours of the lande, and they
go a whoring after their gods, and do sacrifice vnto their gods: they call thee,
and thou eate of theyr sacrifice.
16 And thou take of their daughters vnto thy sonnes, and their daughters go a
whoryng after their gods, and make thy sonnes go a whoryng after their gods
also.
17 Thou shalt make thee no gods of mettall.
18 The feast of vnleauened bread shalt thou kepe: Seuen daies thou shalt eate
vnleauened bread, as I commaunded thee in the tyme of the moneth Abib: for in
the moneth Abib thou camest out of Egypt.
19 All that openeth the matrice is myne, and al that breaketh the matrice
amongest thy cattell if it be male, whether it be oxe or sheepe.
20 But the firstling of the asse thou shalt bye out with a lambe: and if thou
redeeme hym not, thou shalt breake his necke. All the first borne of thy sonnes
thou shalt redeeme: & see that no man appeare before me emptie.
21 Sixe dayes thou shalt worke, and in the seuenth day thou shalt rest, both
from earyng and reapyng.
22 Thou shalt obserue the feast of weekes with thy first fruites of wheate
haruest: and the feast of ingatheryng at the yeres ende.
23 Thryse in a yere shall all your men chyldren appeare before the Lorde Iehouah
God of Israel.
24 For I wyll cast out the nations before thee, and enlarge thy coastes: neyther
shall any man desyre thy lande, when thou shalt go vp to appeare before the
Lorde thy God thryse in a yere.
25 Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice vpon leauen, neither shal
ought of the sacrifice of the feast of Passouer be left vnto the mornyng.
26 The first rype fruites of thy lande, thou shalt bryng vnto the house of the
Lorde thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a kyd in his mothers mylke.
27 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Write these wordes, for after the tenour of
these wordes, I haue made a couenaunt with thee and with Israel.
28 And he was there with the Lorde fourtie dayes and fourtie nyghtes, and dyd
neither eate bread, nor drinke water: and he wrote vpon the tables the wordes of
the couenaunt, euen ten commaundementes.
29 And when Moyses came downe from mount Sinai, the two tables of testimonie
were in Moyses hande: when he came downe from the mount, Moyses wyste not that
the skynne of his face shone, whyle he talked with hym.
30 And Aaron and all the chyldren of Israel looked vpon Moyses: and beholde, the
skynne of his face shone, and they were afrayde to come nye hym.
31 And when Moyses had called them, Aaron and all the chiefe of the congregation
came vnto him: and Moyses talked with them.
32 And afterwarde all the chyldren of Israel came nye: and he commaunded them
all that the Lorde had sayde vnto hym in mount Sinai.
33 And when Moyses had made an ende of communyng with them, he put a coueryng
vpon his face.
34 And agayne when Moyses went in before the Lorde to speake with hym, he toke
the coueryng of, vntyll he came out: And he came out and spake vnto the chyldren
of Israel, that whiche he was commaunded.
35 And the chyldren of Israel sawe the face of Moyses: that the skynne of Moyses
face shone, and Moyses put the coueryng vpon his face agayne, vntyll he went in
to commune with hym.

Chapter 35

1 And Moyses gathered al the congregation of the children of Israel together,
and sayd vnto the: These are the wordes whiche the Lord hath commaunded, that ye
shoulde do them.
2 Sixe dayes ye shall worke: but the seuenth day shalbe vnto you the holy
Sabboth of the lordes rest, whosoeuer doth any worke therin, shall dye.
3 Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitation vpo the Sabboth day.
4 And Moyses spake vnto all the congration of the childre of Israel, saying:
This is the thyng whiche the Lorde commaunded, saying:
5 Take from amongest you an heaue offering vnto the Lorde: Whosoeuer is of a
wyllyng heart, let hym bryng that heaue offeryng to the Lorde, namely golde,
syluer, and brasse,
6 And blewe silke, purple, scarlet, white sylke, goates heere,
7 And Rammes skynnes red, & Taxus skynnes, with Sittim wood,
8 Oyle for light, and spyces, for annoyntyng oyle, and for the sweete incense.
9 And Onyx stones, and stones to be set in the Ephod, and in the brestlap.
10 And let all them that are wise hearted among you, come and make all that the
Lorde hath commaunded.
11 The tabernacle, and the tent therof, & his couering, & his ringes, his
boordes, his barres, his pillers and his sockets.
12 The arke & the staues therof, with the mercy seate, & the vaile that couereth
it:
13 The table and his barres, and all his vessels, and the shew bread:
14 The candelsticke of light and his furniture, and his lampes with the oyle for
the lyght:
15 The incense aulter and his barres, the annoyntyng oyle, and the sweete
incense, and the hangyng of the doore at the entryng in of the tabernacle:
16 The aulter of burnt sacrifice, with his brasen grediron, his staues, and all
his vessels, the lauer and his foote:
17 And the hangynges of the court, with his pyllers, and their sockettes, and
the hangyng in the doore of the court,
18 The pinnes of the tabernacle, and the pinnes of the court with their cordes:
19 The ministring garmentes to minister in the holy place, and the holy
vestmentes for Aaron the priest, and the vestmentes of his sonnes, that thei may
minister in the priestes office.
20 And all the congregation of the chyldren of Israel, departed from the
presence of Moyses:
21 And euery one came, as many as their heartes couraged them, & as many as
their spirites made them wyllyng, and brought an heaue offering for the Lord, to
the makyng of the tabernacle of the congregation, and for all his vses, & for
the holy vestmentes.
22 And they came both men and women, euen as many as were wyllyng hearted, and
brought bracelettes and earinges, ringes and chaynes, whiche iewelles were all
of golde: & all the men brought a waue offeryng of golde vnto the Lorde.
23 And euery man with whom was found blewe silke, purple, scarlet, whyte silke,
and Goates heere, & red skynnes of Rammes, and Taxus skynnes, brought them.
24 All that dyd heaue vp an oblation of golde and brasse, brought an heaue
offering vnto the Lorde: and all men with whom was founde Sittim wood for any
maner worke of the ministration, brought it.
25 And all the women that were wyse hearted, dyd spinne with their handes, and
brought the spun worke, both of blewe silke, purple, scarlet, & white silke.
26 And all the women that excelled in wisdome of heart, spun Goates heere.
27 And the lordes brought Onyx stones, and stones to be set in the Ephod, and in
the brestlap.
28 And spyce, and oyle for lyght, & for the anoynting oyle, & for the sweete
incense.
29 And the chyldren of Israel brought a willing offeryng vnto the Lorde, both
men & women, as many as had willing heartes, to bryng for all maner workes,
whiche the Lorde had commaunded to be made by the handes of Moyses.
30 And Moyses sayde vnto the chyldren of Israel: beholde, the Lord hath called
by name Besaleel ye sonne of Uri, the sonne of Hur, of the tribe of Iuda.
31 And hath filled hym with the spirite of God, in wisdome and vnderstanding, in
knowledge, and in all maner worke,
32 To finde out curious workes, which are made in golde, siluer, and brasse:
33 In the crafte of stones to set them, and in caruing of wood to make any maner
of subtile worke.
34 And he hath put in his heart that he may teache, both he and Ooliab, the son
of Achisamech, of the tribe of Dan.
35 Them hath he filled with wysdome of heart, to worke al maner of grauen, and
brodered, & needle worke, in blew silke and purple, in scarlet and whyte silke,
and in weauyng, and to do all maner of worke and wittie deuises.

Chapter 36

1 And Besaleel wrought and Ooliab, and all wyse hearted men, to whom the Lord
gaue wysdome and vnderstandyng, to knowe howe to worke all maner of worke for
the seruice of the sanctuarie, and all that the Lorde had commaunded.
2 And Moyses called Besaleel, Ooliab, and all the wyse hearted men, and such as
the Lord had geuen wysdome vnto, and as many as their heartes couraged to come
vnto the worke, to worke it.
3 And they receaued of Moyses all the heaue offering whiche the chyldren of
Israel had brought for the worke of the seruice of ye sanctuarie, to make it
withall: And beside yt, they brought free offeringes vnto it euery day in ye
morning.
4 And all the wyse men that wrought all the holy worke, came euery man from his
worke whiche they made:
5 And they spake vnto Moyses, saying: The people bryng to muche, and more then
enough for the seruice and worke whiche the Lorde hath commaunded to be made:
6 And then Moyses gaue commaundement, and they caused it to be proclaymed
throughout the hoast, saying: See that neither man nor woman prepare any more
worke for the heaue offering of the sanctuarie: & so the people were forbydden
to bryng.
7 For the stuffe they had, was sufficient for all the worke to make it, & to
much.
8 
9 The length of one curtaine was twentie & eyght cubites, & the breadth foure:
and the curtaynes were all of one sise.
10 And he coupled fiue curtaines by them selues, and other fiue by them selues.
11 And he made loopes of blewe silke along by the edge of one curtayne, euen in
the seluedge of the coupling curtaine: and lykewyse he made on the syde of the
coupling curtayne on the other side.
12 Fiftie loopes made he in the one curtayne, and fiftie in the edge of the
couplyng curtayne on the other side: & the loopes helde one curtayne to another.
13 And he made fiftie taches of golde, and coupled the curtaynes one to another
with the taches: & so was it made one tabernacle.
14 And he made eleuen curtaynes of goates heere, to be a tent ouer the
tabernacle.
15 The length of one curtayne had thirtie cubites, & was foure cubites brode,
and they all eleuen of one sise.
16 And he coupled fiue curtaynes by the selues, and sixe by them selues.
17 And he made fiftie loopes along by the border of the vttermost couplyng
curtayne, and fiftie in the edge of the other couplyng curtayne.
18 And he made fiftie taches of brasse, to couple the tent together, that it
myght be one.
19 And he made a coueryng vpon the tent of Rammes skynnes red, and yet another
of Taxus skynnes aboue that.
20 And he made standyng boordes for the tabernacle, of Sittim wood.
21 The length of a boorde was ten cubites, the breadth one cubite & a halfe.
22 One boorde had two tenons, wherby they were ioyned one to another: and thus
made he for all the boordes of the tabernacle.
23 And he made twentie boordes for the south side of the tabernacle.
24 And fourtie sockettes of siluer vnder the twentie boordes: two sockettes
vnder one boorde for his two tenons, and two sockettes vnder another boorde for
his two tenons.
25 And for the other side of the tabernacle, whiche is towarde the north, he
made twentie boordes,
26 And their fourtie sockettes of siluer: two sockettes vnder one boorde, and
two sockettes vnder the other boorde.
27 And towarde the west ende of the tabernacle he made sixe bordes.
28 And two other boordes made he in the corners of the tabernacle, for either
side.
29 And they were ioyned close beneath and aboue with a ring: and thus they dyd
to both the corners.
30 And there were eyght boordes, and sixteene sockettes of siluer: vnder euery
boorde two sockettes.
31 And he made barres of Sittim wood: fiue for the boordes of the tabernacle in
the one side,
32 And fiue for the boordes of the tabernacle in the other side, and fiue barres
for the boordes of the tabernacle in the west ende.
33 And he made the myddest barre to shut through the boordes, euen from the one
ende to the other.
34 And ouerlayde the boordes with gold, and made rynges of golde to thrust the
barres through, and couered the barres with golde.
35 And he made a vayle of blewe silke, purple, scarlet, and whyte twined silke:
euen with Cherubims made he it of brodered worke.
36 And he made thervnto foure pillers of Sittim wood, and ouerlayde them with
golde: their knoppes were also of golde, and he cast for them foure sockettes of
siluer.
37 And he made an hangyng for the tabernacle doore, of blewe silke, purple,
scarlet, and whyte twined silke of needle worke,
38 And the fiue pyllers of it, with theyr knoppes: and ouerlayde the knoppes of
them, and the hoopes with golde: theyr fiue sockettes also were of brasse.

Chapter 37

1 And Besaleel made the arke of Sittim wood: two cubites & a halfe long, & a
cubite and a halfe brode, and a cubite and a halfe hygh.
2 And ouerlaide it with fine golde within & without, and made a crowne of golde
to it rounde about.
3 And cast for it foure rynges of golde for the foure corners of it: two rynges
for the one syde, and two for the other.
4 And made barres of Sittim wood, and couered them with golde.
5 And put the barres in the rynges, along by the side of the arke, to beare the
arke withall.
6 And he made the mercy seate of pure golde: two cubites and a halfe was the
length thereof, and one cubite and a halfe the breadth.
7 And he made two Cherubims of thicke gold, vpo the two endes of ye mercy seat.
8 One Cherub on the one end, and another Cherub on the other ende: euen of the
mercy seate made he the Cherubims, namely in the endes therof.
9 And the Cherubims spread out theyr wynges aboue on hye, & couered ye mercy
seate therwith: And their faces were one to another, euen to the mercy seate
warde were the faces of ye Cherubims.
10 And he made the table of Sittim wood: two cubites was the length therof, and
a cubite the breadth, and a cubite and a halfe the height of it.
11 And he ouerlayde it with fine golde, and made thervnto a crowne of golde
rounde about.
12 And made therevnto an hoope of an hande brode rounde about: and made vpon the
hoope a crowne of golde rounde about.
13 And he caste for it foure rynges of golde, and put the rynges in the foure
corners that were in the foure feete thereof.
14 Euen harde by the hoope were the ringes into the whiche the barres were put,
to beare the table withall.
15 And he made the barres of Sittim wood, and couered them with golde, to beare
the table withall.
16 And made the vessels for the table of pure gold, his dishes, his incense
cuppes, his couerynges, & his bowles to powre out with all.
17 And he made the candelsticke of pure golde, euen of a whole worke made he the
candelsticke, his staffe, his braunches, his bolles, his knoppes, and his
flowres were of one peece.
18 Sixe braunches proceeding out of the sides therof: three braunches of the
candelsticke out of the one side thereof, and three braunches of the
candelsticke out of the other side thereof.
19 And in one braunch three bolles made like vnto almondes, with a knop and a
flowre: and in another braunche three bolles made like almondes, with a knop and
a flowre: and so throughout the sixe braunches that proceede out of the
candelsticke.
20 And vpon the candelsticke selfe, were foure bolles after the fashion of
almondes, with knoppes and floures.
21 Under euery two braunches a knop of the same, and a knop vnder two braunches
of the same, and a knop vnder two brauches of the same according to the sixe
brauches yt proceede out of it.
22 And the knoppes and the braunches proceeded out of it: and it was all one
peece of pure thicke golde.
23 And he made his seuen lampes, with the snuffers, and vessels for the snuffe,
of pure golde.
24 Euen of a talent of pure golde made he it, with all the vessels therof.
25 And he made the incense aulter of Sittim wood: the length of it was a cubite,
and the breadth a cubite, for it was foure square: and two cubites hye, with
hornes proceedyng out of it.
26 And he couered it with pure golde, both the top and the sides therof round
about, and the hornes of it: and made vnto it a crowne of golde round about.
27 And he made two rynges of golde for it euen vnder the crowne therof in the
two corners of it, & in the two sides therof, to put barres in, for to beare it
withal.
28 And he made the barres of Sittim wood, & ouerlayde them with golde.
29 And he made the holy anoynting oyle, and the sweete pure incense, after the
apoticaries craft.

Chapter 38

1 And he made the burnt offering aulter of Sittim wood: fiue cubites was the
length thereof, and fiue cubites the breadth euen foure square, and three
cubites hye.
2 And he made vnto it hornes in the foure corners of it, proceedyng out of it:
and he ouerlayde it with brasse.
3 And he made all the vessels of the aulter, the ashpannes, and besomes, and
basins, fleshehokes, & fire pannes: all the vessels therof made he of brasse.
4 And he made a brasen grediron of networke vnto the aulter, rounde about alowe
beneath, vnto the middest of the aulter.
5 And cast foure ringes of brasse for the foure endes of the grediron, to put
barres in.
6 And he made the barres of Sittim wood, and couered them with brasse:
7 And put the barres into the ringes in the foure corners of the aulter to beare
it with all, and made the aulter holowe within the boordes.
8 And he made the lauer of brasse, and the foote of it also of brasse of the
glasses of the women assemblyng, whiche came together at the doore of the
tabernacle of the congregation.
9 And he made the court on the south side, full south: and the hanginges of the
court were of whyte twined silke, hauing a hundreth cubites.
10 Their pillers were twentie, and their brasen sockettes twentie: but the
knoppes of the pyllers and their hoopes were of siluer.
11 And on the northsyde the hangynges were an hundred cubites, their pillers
were twentie, and their sockettes of brasse twentie: but the knoppes and the
hoopes of the pyllers were of siluer.
12 On the west syde were hangynges of fiftie cubites, ten pillers, and their ten
sockettes: but the knoppes and the hoopes of the pyllers were of siluer.
13 And towarde the east syde full easte, were hangynges of fiftie cubites.
14 The hangynges of the one syde of the gate were fifteene cubites long, with
three pillers and three sockettes.
15 And of the other side of the court gate, were hangynges also of fifteene
cubites long, with three pillers & three sockets.
16 All the hangynges of the court rounde about, were of whyte twyned silke:
17 But the sockettes of the pillers were of brasse, and the knoppes & the hoopes
were of siluer, and the coueryng of the heades was of siluer: and all the
pillers of the court were hooped about with siluer.
18 And the hangyng of the gate of the court was needle worke, of blewe silke,
purple, scarlet, and whyte twyned silke: twentie cubites long, & fiue in
breadth, ouer against the hanginges of the court.
19 And their pillers were foure, and their foure sockettes of brasse, & the
knoppes of siluer, and the heades ouerlayde with siluer, and hooped about with
siluer.
20 And all the pynnes of the tabernacle and of the court rounde about, were of
brasse.
21 This is the sume of the tabernacle euen of the tabernacle of ye congregation,
as it was couted accordyng to the comaundement of Moyses, for the office of the
Leuites by the hande of Ithamar, sonne to Aaron the priest.
22 And Betsaleel the sonne of Uri, the sonne of Hur, of the tribe of Iuda, made
all that the Lorde commaunded Moyses:
23 And with hym was Aholiab, sonne of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, a cunnyng
workeman, an embroderer, and a worker of needle worke, in blewe silke, purple,
scarlet, and whyte twyned silke.
24 All the golde that was occupyed for all the worke of the holy place, was the
golde of the waue offeryng, twentie and nine talentes, and seuen hundred and
thirtie sicles, after the sicle of the sanctuarie.
25 And the summe of siluer of them that were numbred in the congregation, was an
hundred talentes, and a thousande seuen hundred and three score and fifteene
sicles, after the sicle of the sanctuarie.
26 For euery man an halfe weyght, euen halfe a sicle, after the sicle of the
sanctuarie, for all them that went to be numbred, from twentie yere olde and
aboue, euen for sixe hundred thousande and three thousande, and fiue hundreth
and fiftie men.
27 And of the hundred talentes of siluer were cast the sockets of the
sanctuarie, and the sockettes of the vayle: an hundred sockettes of the hundred
talentes, a talent to euery socket.
28 And of the thousande seuen hundred seuentie and fiue sicles, he made knoppes
to the pillers, and ouerlayde the heades, and hooped them.
29 And the brasse of the waue offeryng was three score & ten talentes, and two
thousande and foure hundred sicles.
30 And therwith he made the sockettes to the doore of the tabernacle of the
congregatio, and the brasen aulter, & the brasen grediron for it, with all the
vessels of the aulter,
31 And the sockettes of the court rounde about, and the sockettes for the court
gate, and all the pinnes of the tabernacle, and all the pinnes of the court
rounde about.

Chapter 39

1 And of the blewe silke, purple, & scarlet, they made vestmentes of
ministration, to do seruice in the holy place: and made the holye garmentes for
Aaron as the Lorde commaunded Moyses.
2 And he made the Ephod of golde, blewe silke, purple, scarlet, and whyte twyned
silke.
3 And they dyd beate the golde into thinne plates, and cut it into wyers to
worke it in the blewe silke, purple, scarlet, and in the fine whyte with
brodered worke.
4 And they made two sydes for it, to close them vp by the two edges.
5 And the broderyng of the girdle that was vpon it, was of the same stuffe, and
after the same worke, of golde, blewe silke, purple, scarlet, and twyned whyte
silke, as the Lord comaunded Moyses.
6 And they wrought Onyx stones closed in ouches of golde, and graued as
signettes are grauen, with the names of the chyldren of Israel.
7 And he put them on the shoulders of the Ephod, that they shoulde be stones for
a remembraunce of the children of Israel, as the Lorde commaunded Moyses.
8 And he made the brestlap of brodered worke lyke the worke of the Ephod, euen
of gold, blewe silke, purple, scarlet, and twyned whyte silke.
9 It was foure square: and they made the brestlap double, an hande breadth long,
and an hande breadth brode.
10 And they fylled it with foure rowes of stones. The first rowe, a Sardius, a
Topazius, and a Smaragdus.
11 The seconde rowe, a Rubie, a Saphire, and a Diamonde.
12 In the thirde rowe, a Lyncurius, an Achates, and an Amethyst.
13 In the fourth rowe, a Turcas, an Onyx, and a Iaspis: and they were closed in
ouches of golde in their inclosers.
14 And the twelue stones were grauen as signets, with the names of the children
of Israel, euery stone with his name, accordyng to the twelue tribes.
15 And they made vpon the brestlap two fastenyng chaynes of writhen worke and
pure golde.
16 And they made two ouches of golde, and two golde ringes: and put the two
ringes in ye two corners of the brestlap.
17 And they put the two chaynes of golde in the two ringes in the corners of the
brestlap.
18 And the two endes of the two chaynes they fastened in the two ouches, and put
them on the shoulders of the Ephod, vpon the forefront of it.
19 And they made two ringes of golde, and put them on the two corners of the
brestlap vpon the edge of it which was on the insyde by the Ephod.
20 And they made two golden ringes, and put them on the two sydes of the Ephod,
beneath on the fore syde of it, and ouer agaynst his felowe, aboue vpon the
broderyng of the Ephod.
21 And they strayned the brestlap by his ringes vnto the ringes of the Ephod
with a lase of blewe silke, that it myght be vpon the broderyng of the Ephod, &
that the brestlap shoulde not be loosed from of the Ephod, as the Lorde
commaunded Moyses.
22 And he made the tunicle vnto the Ephod of wouen worke, altogether of blewe
silke:
23 And there was a hole in the myddest of the tunicle, as the coller of a
partlet, with a bande rounde about the coller, that it shoulde not rent.
24 And in the tunicle they made hemmes with pomgranates of blewe silke, purple,
scarlet, and whyte twyned silke.
25 And they made litle belles of pure golde, and put them amongst the
pomgranates rounde about vpon the edge of the tunicle.
26 A bell and a pomgranate, a bell and a pomgranate rounde about the hemmes of
the tunicle to minister in, as the Lord commaunded Moyses.
27 And they made coates of fine whyte silke of wouen worke, for Aaron and his
sonnes.
28 And a mitre of fine whyte silke, and goodly bonettes of fine whyte silke, and
lynnen sloppes of twyned whyte silke.
29 And a girdle of twyned whyte silke, blew, purple, and scarlet, euen of needle
worke, as the Lorde commaunded Moyses.
30 And they made the plate of the holy crowne of fine golde, and wrote vpon it
with grauen worke as signets are grauen, The holynes of the Lorde.
31 And tyed vnto it a lase of blewe silk, to fasten it an hye vpon the mitre, as
the Lorde commaunded Moyses.
32 Thus was all the worke of the tabernacle euen of the tabernacle of the
congregation finished: And the children of Israel did according to al that the
lorde commaunded Moyses, euen so did they.
33 And they brought the tabernacle vnto Moyses euen the tabernacle and all his
furniture, his taches, his boordes, his barres, his pillers, & his sockettes.
34 The coueryng of Rammes skynnes redde, and the coueryng of Taxus skynnes, and
the hangyng vayle,
35 The arke of the testimonie, and the barres therof, and the mercie seate,
36 The table and all the vessels thereof, and the shewe bread,
37 The pure candlesticke with ye lampes therof, euen with the lampes to be
prepared, and al the vessels therof, and the oyle for lyght,
38 The golden aulter, and the annointing oyle, and the sweete incense, and the
hangyng of the tabernacle doore,
39 And ye brasen aulter with his grediron of brasse, his barres and all his
vessels, the lauer and his foote.
40 The curtaynes of the court with his pillers and sockettes, the hangyng to the
court gate and his pynnes and cordes, and all the vessel of the seruice of the
tabernacle, euen of the tabernacle of the congregation.
41 The ministryng vestmentes to serue in the holy place, & the holy vestmentes
for Aaron the priest, and his sonnes raymentes to minister in, in ye priestes
office:
42 Accordyng to all that the Lorde commaunded Moyses, euen so the chyldren of
Israel made all the worke.
43 And Moyses dyd loke vpon all the worke: and beholde, they had done it as the
Lorde had commaunded, euen so had they done it: and Moyses blessed them.

Chapter 40

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 In the first day of the first moneth shalt thou set vp the tabernacle, euen
the tabernacle of the congregation.
3 And put therin the arke of the testimonie, and couer the arke with the vayle:
and thou shalt bring in the table, and order it accordyng to the appoyntment
therof:
4 And thou shalt bryng in the candelsticke, and lyght his lampes,
5 And set the incense aulter of golde before the arke of the testimonie, and put
the hangyng at the doore of the tabernacle.
6 And set the burnt offeryng aulter before the doore of the tabernacle euen of
the tabernacle of the congregation.
7 And set the lauer betweene the tabernacle of the congregatio and the aulter,
and put water therein.
8 And make the court rounde about, & hang vp the hangyng at the court gate.
9 And thou shalt take the annoyntyng oyle, and annoynt the tabernacle, and all
that is therin, and halow it with all the vessels therof: and it shalbe holy.
10 And thou shalt annoynt the aulter of burnt offeryng and all his vessels, and
sanctifie the aulter: and it shalbe an aulter most holy.
11 And thou shalt also annoynt the lauer and his foote, and sanctifie it.
12 And thou shalt bryng Aaron and his sonnes vnto the doore of the tabernacle of
the congregation, and washe them with water.
13 And thou shalt put vppon Aaron the holy vestmentes, and annoynt hym, &
sanctifie hym, that he may minister vnto me in the priestes office.
14 And thou shalt bryng his sonnes, and clothe them with garmentes.
15 And annoynt them as thou diddest annoynt their father, that they may minister
vnto me in the priestes office: For their annoyntyng shalbe an euerlasting
priesthood vnto them throughout all their generations.
16 And Moyses dyd accordyng to all that the Lorde commaunded hym, euen so dyd
he.
17 Thus was the tabernacle reared vp the first day in the first moneth, in the
seconde yere.
18 And Moyses reared vp the tabernacle, and fastened his sockettes, and set vp
the boordes therof, and put in the barres of it, and reared vp his pillers.
19 And spread abrode the tent ouer the tabernacle, and put the coueryng of the
tent an hye aboue it, as the Lorde commaunded Moyses.
20 And he toke the testimonie, and put it in the arke, and set the barres to the
arke, and put the mercie seate an hye vpon the arke.
21 And he brought the arke into the tabernacle, and hanged vp the vayle, and
couered the arke of the testimonie, as the Lorde commaunded Moyses.
22 And he put the table in the tabernacle of the congregation in the north syde
of the tabernacle without the vayle,
23 And set the bread in order before the Lorde euen as the Lorde had commaunded
Moyses.
24 And he put the candlesticke in the tabernacle of the congregation, ouer
agaynst the table towarde the south syde of the tabernacle,
25 And set vp the lampes before ye Lorde: as the Lorde commaunded Moyses.
26 And he put the golden aulter in the tabernacle of the congregation before the
vayle,
27 And burnt sweete incense thereon, as the Lorde commaunded Moyses.
28 And he hanged vp the hangyng at the doore of the tabernacle:
29 And set the burnt offeryng aulter by the entryng in of the tabernacle that is
the tabernacle of the congregation, and offered burnt offerynges, and meate
offerynges theron, as the Lorde commaunded Moyses.
30 And he set the lauer betweene the tabernacle of the congregation and the
aulter, and powred water therein, to washe withall.
31 And Moyses, Aaron, and his sonnes, wasshed their handes and their feete
thereat,
32 When they went into the tabernacle of the congregation, and when they went to
the aulter they wasshed them selues, as the Lorde commaunded Moyses.
33 And he reared vp the court rounde about the tabernacle and the aulter, and
set vp an hangyng at the court gate: and so Moyses finished the worke.
34 And the cloude couered the tabernacle of the congregatio, and the glorie of
the Lorde fylled the tabernacle.
35 And Moyses coulde not enter into the tabernacle of the congregation, because
the cloude abode theron, and the glorie of the Lorde fylled the tabernacle.
36 And when the cloude was taken vp from of the tabernacle, the children of
Israel toke their iourneys throughout their armies:
37 And whe the cloude was not taken vp, they iourneyed not tyll it was taken vp.
38 For the cloude of the Lord was vpon the tabernacle by day, and fire by night,
in the sight of all the house of Israel throughout all their armies.


Leviticus

Chapter 1

1 And the Lord called vnto Moyses, and spake vnto him out of the tabernacle of
the congregation, saying:
2 Speake vnto the children of Israel, & thou shalt say vnto them: If a man of
yon bring a sacrifice vnto the Lorde, ye shall bryng your sacrifice from among
these cattell, euen fro among the beefes and the sheepe.
3 If his sacrifice be a burnt offeryng of beefes, let hym offer a male without
blemishe, and bryng hym of his owne voluntarie wyll, vnto the doore of the
tabernacle of the congregation before the Lorde.
4 And he shall put his hande vpon the head of the burnt sacrifice, and it shalbe
accepted for hym to be his attonement.
5 And he shal kill the bullocke before the Lord: And the priestes Aarons sonnes
shall bryng the blood, and sprinkle it rounde about vpon the aulter that is by
the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation.
6 And then shall he flay the burnt offeryng, and hewe hym in peeces.
7 And the sonnes of Aaron the priest shall put fire vpon the aulter, and put
wood vpon the fire.
8 And the priestes Aarons sonnes shall lay the partes, euen the head and the
fat, vpon the wood that is on the fyre in the aulter.
9 But the inwardes and the legges thereof shall he washe in water, & the priest
shall burne all in the aulter, that they may be a burnt sacrifice, an offeryng
made by fire for a sweete odour vnto the Lorde.
10 And if his sacrifice be of flockes, namely of the sheepe or goates, let hym
bryng a male without blemishe for a burnt offeryng:
11 And let hym kyll it on the north syde of the aulter, before the Lorde: And
the priestes Aarons sonnes, shall sprinckle the blood round about vpon the
aulter.
12 And he shall cut it into his peeces, euen with his head and his fat: and the
priest shall put them vpon the wood that lyeth vpon the fire in the aulter.
13 But he shall washe the inwardes and the legges with water, and the priest
shall bryng altogether, and burne it vpon the aulter for a burnt offeryng, an
oblation made by fire for a sweete sauour vnto the Lorde.
14 If the burnt offeryng for the sacrifice of the Lorde be of fowles, he shall
bring his sacrifice of turtle doues, or of the young pigeons.
15 And the priest shall bryng it vnto the aulter, and wryng the necke a sunder
of it, and burne it on the aulter: but the blood therof shalbe wroung out vpon
the syde of the aulter.
16 And he shall plucke away his croppe with his fethers, and cast them besyde
the aulter on the east part, in the place of asshes.
17 And he shall breake the wynges of it, but plucke them not asunder: And the
priest shal burne it vpon the aulter, euen vpon the wood that is vpon the fire,
that it may be a burnt offeryng, an oblation made by fire for a sweete sauour
vnto the Lorde.

Chapter 2

1 The soule that will offer a meate offeryng vnto the Lorde, his offering shalbe
of fine flowre: and he shall poure oyle vpon it, and put frankensence theron:
2 And shal bring it vnto Aarons sonnes the priestes: And he shall take therout
his handfull of the flowre, & of the oyle with all the frakensence, and the
priest shall burne it for a memoriall of hym vpon the aulter, to be an offeryng
made by fire for a sweete sauour vnto the Lorde.
3 And the remnaunt of the meate offeryng shalbe Aarons and his sonnes, a thyng
most holy of the sacrifices of the Lorde, made by fire.
4 If thou bryng also a meate offeryng that is baken in the ouen, let it be an
vnleauened cake of fine flowre myngled with oyle, or an vnleauened wafer
annoynted with oyle.
5 If thy meate offeryng be baken in the frying pan, it shalbe of vnleauened
flowre myngled with oyle.
6 And thou shalt part it in peeces, and powre oyle thereon: that it may be a
meate offeryng.
7 And yf thy meate offeryng be a thyng broyled vpon the grediron, let it be of
flowre myngled with oyle.
8 And thou shalt bryng the meate offeryng that is made of these thinges vnto the
lord, & shalt deliuer it vnto the priest, that he may offer it vpon the aulter.
9 And the priest shall take from the meate offeryng a memoriall therof, and
shall burne it vpon the aulter: that it may be a burnt offeryng for a sweete
sauour vnto the Lorde.
10 And that which is left of the meate offeryng, shalbe Aarons & his sonnes: It
is a thyng moste holye of the offerynges of the Lorde made by fire.
11 All the meate offerynges which ye shal bryng vnto the Lorde, shalbe made
without leauen: For ye shall neither burne leauen nor hony in any offering of
the Lorde made by fire.
12 In the oblation of the first fruites ye shall offer them vnto the Lorde: but
they shall not be burnt vpon the aulter for a sweete sauour.
13 All the meate offerynges also shalt thou season with salt, neither shalt thou
suffer the salt of the couenaunt of thy God to be lackyng from thy meate
offeryng: but vpon all thyne offerynges thou shalt bryng salt.
14 And yf thou offer a meate offeryng of the first fruites vnto the Lorde, thou
shalt offer for the meate offeryng of thy first fruites, eares of corne dryed by
the fire euen beaten wheate, of full eares.
15 And thou shalt put oyle vpon it, and lay frankensence theron: that it may be
a meate offeryng.
16 And the priest shall burne part of the beaten corne, and part of that oyle
with al the franckensence, for a remebraunce: and it shalbe a sacrifice vnto the
Lorde made by fire.

Chapter 3

1 And if his sacrifice be a peace offeryng, and he take it from among the
droues, whether it be a male or female, he shall bryng such as is without
blemishe before the Lorde.
2 And put his hande vpon the head of his offeryng, and kyll it at the doore of
the tabernacle of the congregation: And Aarons sonnes the priestes shal sprinkle
the blood vpon the aulter round about.
3 And he shall offer somewhat of the peace offeryng, to be a sacrifice made by
fire vnto the Lorde: euen the fat that couereth the inwardes, and all the fat
that is vpon the inwardes:
4 And the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, and vpon the flankes, & the
kall with the lyuer shall he take away with the kidneys.
5 And Aarons sonnes shall burne them on the aulter, with the burnt sacrifice
which is vpon the wood that is on the fire, to be a burnt sacrifice made by fire
for a sweete sauour vnto the Lord.
6 If he bryng a peace offeryng vnto the Lorde from of the flocke, let hym offer
male or female, but without blemishe.
7 And yf he offer a Lambe for his sacrifice, he shall bryng it before the Lorde,
8 And put his hand vpon his offeringes head, and kyll it before the doore of the
tabernacle of the congregation: and Aarons sonnes shall sprinkle the blood
therof rounde about the aulter.
9 And of the peace offeryng let hym bryng a sacrifice made by fire vnto the
Lorde, the fat thereof, and the rumpe altogether, which they shall take of harde
by the backe bone: and the fat that couereth the inwardes, and all the fat that
is vpon the inwardes,
10 And the two kidneys, and the fat that is vpon them, and vpon the flankes, and
the kall that is vpon the liuer shall he take away with the kidneys.
11 And the priest shall burne them vpon the aulter, to be the foode of a
sacrifice made by fire vnto the Lorde.
12 If his offeryng be a Goate, he shall bryng it before the Lorde,
13 And put his hande vpon the head of it, and kyll it before the tabernacle of
the congregation: and the sonnes of Aaron shall sprinkle the blood therof vpon
the aulter rounde about.
14 And he shall bring therof his offering, euen a sacrifice made by fire vnto
the Lord, the fat that couereth ye inwardes, & all the fat that is vpon the
inwardes.
15 And the two kidneys, and the fat that is vpon them, and vpon the flankes, and
the kall vpon the liuer shall he take away with the kidneys.
16 And the priest shall burne them vpon the aulter, for the foode of the
sacrifice made by fire for a sweete sauour: All the fat is the Lordes.
17 Let it be a perpetuall statute for your generations throughout your
dwellynges, yt ye eate neither fat nor blood.

Chapter 4

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, and saye, If a soule shall sinne through
ignoraunce in any of the commaundementes of the Lord which ought not to be done,
but shall do contrarie to any of them:
3 As yf the priest that is annoynted, do sinne accordyng to the sinne of the
people, let hym bryng for his sinne which he hath sinned, a young bullocke
without blemishe, vnto the Lorde for a sinne offeryng.
4 And he shall bryng the young bullocke vnto the doore of the tabernacle of the
congregation before the Lord, and shall put his hand vpon the young bullockes
head, and kill the young bullocke before the Lorde.
5 And the priest that is annoynted shall take of the young bullockes blood, and
bryng it into the tabernacle of the congregation.
6 And the priest shall dippe his finger in the blood, and sprinckle therof seuen
tymes before the Lorde, euen before the vayle of the sanctuarie.
7 And the priest shall put some of the blood before the Lord, vpon the hornes of
the aulter of sweete insence, which is in the tabernacle of the congregation, &
shall powre all the blood of the young bullocke vnto the bottome of the aulter
of burnt offeryng, which is at the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation.
8 And he shall take away all the fat of the bullocke for the sinne offeryng, the
fat that couereth the inwardes, and all the fat that is about the inwardes,
9 And the two kidneyes, and the fat that is vpon them, & vpon the flanckes, and
the kall vpon the liuer shall he take away with the kidneys,
10 As it was taken away in the bullocke of the peace offeringes: and let the
priest burne them vpon the aulter of burnt offeryng.
11 But the skinne of the young bullocke, and all his fleshe, with his head and
his legges, with his inwardes & his doung, shall he beare out
12 And cary the whole bullocke altogether out of the hoast vnto a cleane place,
euen where the asshes are powred out, & burne hym there on wood in the fire:
euen by the place where the asshes are cast out, shall he be burnt.
13 If the whole congregation of Israel sinne through ignoraunce, & the thing be
hyd from the eyes of the multitude, and haue done somewhat agaynst any of the
comaundementes of ye Lorde which shoulde not be done, and haue offended:
14 Whe the sinne which they haue sinned is knowen, the congregatio shal bring a
young bullocke for the sinne, & bring him before ye tabernacle of the
congregation,
15 And the elders of the multitude shall put their handes vpon the head of the
bullocke before the Lorde: And the bullocke shalbe slayne before the Lord.
16 And the priest that is annoynted, shall bryng of the bullockes blood into the
tabernacle of the congregation.
17 And the priest shall dippe his finger in the blood, and sprinckle it seuen
tymes before the Lorde, euen before the vayle.
18 And shall put of the blood vpon the hornes of the aulter, which is before the
Lorde in the tabernacle of the congregation, and shall powre all the blood vnto
the bottome of the aulter of burnt offeryng, which is before the doore of the
tabernacle of the congregation.
19 And he shall take his fat from hym, and burne it vpon the aulter,
20 And shall do with this bullocke as he dyd with the bullocke for sinne, euen
so shall he do with this: And the priest shal make an attonement for them, and
it shalbe forgeuen them.
21 And he shall bryng this bullocke without the hoast, & burne him as he burned
the first bullocke: For it is an oblation for the sinne of the congregation.
22 When a Lorde sinneth, and comitteth through ignorauce any of these thynges
which the Lorde his God hath forbidden to be done in his commaundementes, and
hath offended:
23 And if his sinne be shewed vnto hym which he hath done, he shall bryng his
offeryng, euen an hee goate without blemishe,
24 And lay his hande vpon ye head of the hee goate, and kyll it in the place
where the burnt offeryng is vsed to be kylled before ye Lorde: For it is a sinne
offering.
25 And let the priest take of ye blood of the sinne offeryng with his finger, &
put it vpon the hornes of the burnt offeryng aulter, and powre his blood vnto
the bottome of the burnt offeryng aulter,
26 And burne all his fat vpon ye aulter, as ye fat of the peace offeringes: And
ye priest shal make an attonement for him as cocerning his sinne, & it shalbe
forgeue him.
27 If one of the common people of the lande sinne through ignoraunce, & commit
any of the thynges which the Lord hath forbidden in his comaundementes to be
done, and so hath trespassed:
28 If his sinne which he hath sinned come to his knowledge, he shall bryng for
his offeryng a shee goate from among the flockes without blemishe for his sinne
which he hath sinned,
29 And lay his hande vpon the head of the sinne offeryng, and slay the sinne
offering in the place of burnt offerynges.
30 And the priest shall take of the blood therof with his finger, and put it
vpon the hornes of the burnt offeryng aulter, & powre all the blood vnto the
bottome of the aulter,
31 And shall take away all his fat, as the fat of the peace offeryng is taken
away: And the priest shal burne it vpon the aulter, that it may be a sweete
sauour vnto the Lorde, and the priest shal make an attonement for hym, and it
shalbe forgeuen hym.
32 And yf he bryng a sheepe for a sinne offeryng, he shall bryng a female
without blemishe,
33 And lay his hande vpon the head of the sinne offeryng, and slea it for a
sinne offering in the place where they kill the burnt offeryng.
34 And the priest shal take of the blood of the sinne offeryng with his finger,
& put it vpon the hornes of the burnt offering aulter, and shall powre the blood
thereof vnto the bottome of the aulter.
35 And he shall take away all the fat therof, as the fat of ye sheepe of the
peace offering is wont to be taken away: And the priest shall burne it vpon the
aulter, that it may be the Lordes burnt sacrifice, and the priest shall make an
attonement for his sinne that he hath committed, and it shalbe forgeuen hym.

Chapter 5

1 If a soule sinne, and heare the voyce of swearing, and is a witnesse, whether
he hath seene or knowen of it, if he do not vtter it, he shall beare his sinne.
2 Either if a soule touche any vncleane thyng, whether it be the carion of an
vncleane beast, or a carion of vncleane cattell, or a carion of vncleane
creeping thynges, and is not ware of it: beholde, he is vncleane, and hath
offended.
3 Either if he touche any vncleannesse of man, whatsoeuer vncleannesse it be
that a man is wont to be defiled withall, and is not ware of it, and commeth to
ye knowledge of it, he hath trespassed.
4 Either if a soule sweare, and pronounceth with his lippes to do euill or to do
good, whatsoeuer it be that a man shall pronounce with an othe, and the thyng be
hyd from hym, and commeth to the knowledge of it, and hath offended in one of
these:
5 When he hath sinned in one of these thinges, he shall confesse that he hath
sinned in that thyng.
6 Therfore shall he bryng his trespasse offering vnto the Lorde, for his sinne
whiche he hath sinned, a female from the flocke, a lambe or a shee goate, for a
sinne offering: And the priest shal make an attonement for hym concerning his
sinne.
7 And if he be not able to bryng a sheepe, he shall bryng for his trespasse
whiche he hath sinned, two turtle doues, or two young pigeons vnto the Lorde:
one for a sinne offering, & the other for a burnt offering.
8 And he shall bryng them vnto ye priest, which shall offer the sinne offering
first, and wryng the necke a sunder of it, but plucke it not cleane of.
9 And he shall sprinckle of the blood of the sinne offering vpon the side of the
aulter, and the rest of the blood shall he powre by the bottome of the aulter:
for it is a sinne offering.
10 And he shall offer the seconde for a burnt offering, as the maner is: and so
shall the priest make an attonement for hym for the sinne whiche he hath sinned,
and it shalbe forgeuen hym.
11 And if he be not able to bryng two turtle doues, or two young pigeons, then
he that hath sinned shall bryng for his offering the tenth part of an Epha of
fine floure for a sinne offering: but put none oyle thereto, neither put any
frankensence theron: for it is a sinne offering.
12 Then shall he bryng it to the priest, and the priest shall take his handfull
of it for a remembraunce thereof, & burne it vpon the aulter, to be a sacrifice
for the Lord made by fire: for it is a sinne offering.
13 And the priest shall make an attonement for hym as touchyng his sinne that he
hath sinned in one of these, and it shalbe forgeuen hym: And the remnaunt shalbe
the priestes, as a meate offering.
14 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
15 If a soule trespasse and sinne thorowe ignoraunce in thinges that are
consecrated vnto the Lorde, let hym bryng for his trespasse vnto the Lord, a
Ramme without blemishe out of the flockes, valued in money at two sicles, after
the sicle of the sanctuarie, that it may be for a trespasse offering.
16 And he shall make amendes for the harme that he hath done in the holy thyng,
& let hym put the fift part more thereto, and geue it vnto the priest: And the
priest shall make an attonement for hym, with the Ramme that is for the
trespasse, and it shalbe forgeuen hym.
17 If a soule sinne, and commit any of these thinges whiche are forbydden to be
done by the comaundementes of the Lorde, and wyst it not, & hath offended, and
beare his sinne:
18 Then shall he bryng a Ramme without blemishe out of the flocke, that is
esteemed to be worth a trespasse offering, vnto the priest: And the priest shall
make an attonement for hym concerning his ignoraunce, wherein he erred, and was
not ware, and it shalbe forgeuen hym.
19 This is a trespasse offering, for the trespasse committed against the Lorde.

Chapter 6

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying.
2 If a soule sinne and trespasse agaynst the Lorde, and denie vnto his neyghbour
that which was taken him to kepe, or that was put into his hands, or doth
violent robberie or wrong vnto his neyghbour,
3 Or if he haue founde that which was lost, and denieth it, and sweareth falsely
vpon whatsoeuer thing it be that a man doth, and sinneth therein:
4 If he haue so sinned and trespassed, he shall restore agayne that he toke
violently away, or the wrong which he did, or that whiche was deliuered hym to
kepe, or the lost thyng which he founde:
5 And all that about whiche he hath sworne falsely, he shall restore it agayne
in the whole summe, and shall adde the fifth part more thereto, and geue it vnto
him to whom it appertayneth, the same day that he offereth for his trespasse.
6 And let him bryng for his trespasse vnto the Lorde a Ramme without blemishe
out of the flocke, that is esteemed worth a trespasse offering vnto ye priest.
7 And the priest shall make an attonement for hym before the Lorde, and it
shalbe forgeuen hym whatsoeuer thing it be that he hath done and trespassed
therein.
8 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
9 Commaunde Aaron and his sonnes, saying: (This is the lawe of the burnt
offering. The burnt offering shalbe vpon the harth of the aulter all nyght, vnto
the mornyng, and the fire shall be kyndled on the aulter.)
10 And the priest shall put on his linnen garment, and his linnen breeches vpon
his fleshe, and take away the asshes vpon the whiche the fire consumed the burnt
sacrifice in the aulter, and he shall put them beside the aulter,
11 And put of his rayment, and put on other, and carry the asshes out without
the hoast vnto a cleane place.
12 The fire vpon the aulter shall burne styll, & neuer be put out: But the
priest shall laye wood on it euery day in the morning, and put the burnt
sacrifice vppon it, and he shall burne theron the fat of the peace offeringes.
13 The fire shall euer burne vpon the aulter, and neuer go out.
14 This is the lawe of the meate offering, which Aarons sonnes shall bryng
before the Lord, euen before the aulter:
15 And one of them shall take his handfull of the floure of the meate offering,
and of the oyle, and al the franckensence whiche is vpon the meate offering, and
shall burne it vnto a remembraunce vppon the aulter for a sweete sauour, euen a
memoriall of it vnto the Lorde.
16 And of the rest therof, shall Aaron and his sonnes eate: vnleauened shall it
be eaten in the holy place, euen in the court of the tabernacle of the
congregation they shall eate it.
17 It shall not be baken with leauen: I haue geuen it vnto them for their
portion of my sacrifices made by fire: It is most holy, as is the sinne
offering, and the trespasse offering.
18 All the males among the chyldren of Aaron shall eate of it: It shalbe a
statute for euer in your generations concerning the sacrifice of the Lorde made
by fire: let euery one that toucheth it, be holy.
19 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
20 This is the offering of Aaron, and of his sonnes, whiche they shall offer
vnto the Lord in the day when he is annoynted: The tenth part of an Epha of
floure for a meate offering perpetuall, halfe of it in the morning, and halfe
therof at nyght.
21 In the frying panne it shalbe made with oyle, and when it is fryed, thou
shalt bryng it in: and the baken peeces of the meate offeringes shalt thou offer
for a sweete sauour vnto the Lorde.
22 And the priest of his sonnes, that is annoynted in his steede, shall offer
it: It is the Lordes ordinaunce for euer, it shalbe burnt altogether.
23 For euery meate offering that is made for the priest, shalbe burnt
altogether, and shall not be eaten.
24 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
25 Speake vnto Aaron, and vnto his sonnes, and say, This is the lawe of the
sinne offering: In the place where the burnt offering is kylled, shall the sinne
offering be kylled before the Lorde, for it is most holy.
26 The priest that offereth it, shall eate it: In the holy place shall it be
eaten, euen in the court of the tabernacle of the congregation.
27 Whatsoeuer shall touche the fleshe thereof, shalbe holy: and when there
droppeth of the blood therof vpon any garment, thou shalt washe that wheron it
droppeth, in the holy place.
28 But the earthen pot that it is sodden in, shalbe broken: And yf it be sodden
in a brasen pot, it shalbe scoured, & rensed in the water.
29 All the males among the priestes shal eate therof, for it is most holy.
30 And no sinne offeryng whose blood is brought into the tabernacle of the
congregation to reconcile withall in the holy place, shalbe eaten: but shalbe
burnt in the fire.

Chapter 7

1 Likewyse this is the lawe of the trespasse offering: it is moste holy.
2 In the place where they kyll the burnt offering, shall they kyll the trespasse
offering also, & the blood thereof shall he sprinckle rounde about vpon the
aulter.
3 All the fat thereof shall he offer, the rumpe, and the fat that couereth the
inwardes,
4 And the two kydneys, and the fat that is on them, and vpon the flankes, and
the kall that is on the liuer shalt thou take away with the kydneys.
5 And the priest shall burne them vpon the aulter, to be a sacrifice made by
fire vnto the Lorde: for it is a trespasse offering.
6 All the males among the priestes shall eate thereof: it shalbe eaten in the
holy place, for it is most holy.
7 As the sinne offering is, so is the trespasse offering, one law serueth for
both: that wherwith the priest shall make attonement, shalbe his.
8 And the priest that offereth any mans burnt offering, shall haue the skynne of
ye burnt offering whiche he hath offred.
9 And all the meate offering that is baken in the ouen, and that is dressed in
the panne, and in the frying panne, shalbe the priestes that offereth it.
10 And euery meate offering that is mingled with oyle, and that is drye, shall
pertayne vnto all the sonnes of Aaron, and one shall haue as muche as another.
11 This is the law of the peace offering, whiche he shall offer vnto the Lorde.
12 If he offer it to geue thankes, he shall bryng vnto his thanke offering
vnleauened cakes mingled with oyle, and vnleauened wafers annoynted with oyle,
and cakes mingled with oyle of fine floure fryed.
13 He shall bryng his offering, with cakes of vnleauend bread for his peace
offeringes, to geue thankes:
14 And of all the sacrifice he shall offer one for an heaue offering vnto the
Lorde, and it shalbe the priestes that sprinckled the blood of the peace
offeringes.
15 And the fleshe of his peace offeringes for thankes geuing, shalbe eate the
same day that it is offred: And let hym leaue nothyng of it vntill the morowe.
16 But if the offering of his sacrifice be a vowe, or of his owne free wyll, it
shalbe eaten the same day that he offereth his sacrifice: and if ought remayne
vntill the morowe, it may be eaten.
17 But as muche of the offered fleshe as remayneth vnto the thirde day, shalbe
burnt with fire.
18 And if any of the flesh of his peace offeringes be eaten in the thirde day,
then shall he that offereth it obtayne no fauour, neither shall it be reckened
vnto him, but shalbe an abhomination: therfore the soule that eateth of it, shal
beare his sinne.
19 And the fleshe that toucheth any vncleane thing, shal not be eaten, but burnt
with fire: and of this fleshe all that be cleane, shall eate therof.
20 But if any soule eate of the fleshe of the peace offering that pertayneth
vnto the Lord, hauing his vnclennesse vpon him: the same soule shall be cut of
from among his people.
21 Moreouer, the soule that doth touche any vncleane thyng, that is of the
vncleannesse of man, or of any vncleane beast, or any abhomination that is
vncleane, and then eate of the fleshe of the peace offering whiche pertayneth
vnto the Lorde: that soule shal be cut of from his people.
22 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
23 Speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, and say: Ye shall eate no maner fat of
beeues, of sheepe, and of goates.
24 Neuerthelater, the fat of the beast that dyeth alone, and the fat of that
which is torne with wilde beastes, shalbe occupied in any maner of vse: but ye
shall in no wyse eate of it.
25 For whosoeuer eateth the fat of the beast, of which men vse to bryng an
offering made by fire vnto the Lorde: that soule that eateth it, shall be cut of
from his people.
26 Moreouer, ye shall eate no maner of blood, whether it be of foule or of
beast, in any your dwellynges.
27 Whatsoeuer soule it be that eateth any maner of blood, the same soule shall
be cut of from his people.
28 And the Lorde talked with Moyses, saying:
29 Speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, and say: He that bringeth his peace
offeryng vnto the Lorde, let hym bryng his gift vnto the Lord of his peace
offering:
30 Let his owne handes bryng the offeringes of the Lorde made by fire: euen the
fat with the brest shal he bryng, that the brest may be waued for a waue
offering before the Lorde.
31 And the priest shall burne the fat vpon the aulter, and the brest shalbe
Aarons and his sonnes.
32 And the ryght shoulder shall ye geue vnto the priest for an heaue offeryng of
your peace offerynges.
33 The same that offereth the blood of the peace offeringes and the fat among
the sonnes of Aaron, shall haue the right shoulder for his part:
34 For the waue brest and the heaue shoulder haue I taken of the chyldren of
Israel, eue of their peace offeringes, and haue geuen them vnto Aaron the
priest, & vnto his sonnes, by a statute for euer fro among the chyldren of
Israel.
35 This is the annoynting of Aaron, and the annoynting of his sonnes cocerning
the sacrifices of the Lorde made by fire, in the day when he offred them to be
priestes vnto the Lorde.
36 And these be the portions whiche the Lorde commaunded to be geuen them in the
day of their annoynting from among the chyldren of Israel, by a statute for euer
in their generations.
37 This is the law of the burnt offering, and of the meate offering, and of the
sacrifice for sinne and trespasse, for consecrations, and for the peace
offering:
38 Whiche the Lord commaunded Moyses in the mount of Sinai, whe he commaunded
the children of Israel to offer their sacrifices vnto the Lorde in the
wyldernesse of Sinai.

Chapter 8

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Take Aaron and his sonnes with hym, and the vestures, and the annoynting oyle,
and a bullocke for a sinne offering, and two Rammes, and a basket of vnleauened
bread:
3 And gather thou all the congregation together vnto the doore of the tabernacle
of the congregation.
4 And Moyses dyd as the Lorde commaunded him: and the people were gathered
together vnto the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation.
5 And Moyses sayd vnto the congregation: This is the thing which the Lord
commaunded to be done.
6 And Moyses brought Aaron and his sonnes, and washed them with water:
7 And put vpon him the coate, and gyrded hym with a gyrdle, and put vpon hym the
robe, and put the Ephod theron, whiche he gyrded with the brodered garde that
was in the Ephod, and bounde it vnto him therewith.
8 And he put the brestplate theron, and put in the brestplate the Urim and the
Thummim.
9 And he put the cap of estate vpon his head, and put vpon the cap, euen vpon
the forefront, the golden plate, the holy crowne, as the Lorde commaunded
Moyses.
10 And Moyses toke the annoyntyng oyle, and annoynted the tabernacle and al that
was therin, and sanctified them.
11 And sprinckled therof vpon the aulter seuen tymes, and annoynted the aulter
and all his vesselles, the lauer and his foote, to sanctifie them.
12 And he powred of the annoynting oyle vpon Aarons head, & annoynted hym, to
sanctifie hym.
13 And Moyses brought Aarons sonnes, and put coates vpon them, and gyrded them
with gyrdles, and put bonettes vpon their heades, as the Lorde commaunded
Moyses.
14 And he brought the Bullocke for the sinne offering: and Aaron & his sonnes
put their handes vpon the head of the Bullocke for the sinne offering.
15 And Moyses slewe hym, and toke the blood, which he put vpon the hornes of the
aulter rounde about with his finger, and purified the aulter, and powred the
blood at the bottome of the aulter, & sanctified it, to make reconciliatio vpo
it.
16 And he toke all the fat that was vpon the inwardes, and the kall of the
liuer, and the two kydneys and their fat, and Moyses burned it vpon the aulter.
17 But the Bullocke, & his hide, his flesh, and his dounge, he burnt with fyre
without the hoast, as the Lorde commaunded Moyses.
18 And he brought the Ramme for the burnt offering, and Aaron & his sonnes put
their handes vpon the head of the Ramme,
19 Whiche Moyses killed, and sprinckled the blood vpo the aulter rounde about.
20 And Moyses cut the Ramme into his peeces, and burnt the head, the peeces, and
the fat.
21 And washed ye inwardes & the legges in water, & Moyses burnt the Ramme
euerywhyt vpon the aulter: for it was a burnt sacrifice for a sweete sauour, and
an offering made by fire vnto the Lord, as the Lorde commaunded Moyses.
22 And he brought the other Ramme, namely the Ramme of consecrations: and Aaron
and his sonnes put their handes vpon the head of the Ramme,
23 Which Moyses slewe, and toke of the blood of it, and put it vpon the tip of
Aarons right eare, and vpon the thumbe of his ryght hande, and vpon the great
toe of his ryght foote.
24 And Moyses brought Aarons sonnes, and put of the blood on the tippe of the
right eare of them, & vpon the thumbes of theyr right handes, & vpon the great
toes of their ryght feete: and Moyses sprinckled the blood vpon the aulter
rounde about.
25 And he toke the fat, and the rumpe, and all the fat that was vpon the
inwardes, and the kall of the liuer, and the two kydneys with their fat, and the
ryght shoulder.
26 And out of the basket of vnleauened bread that was before the Lorde, he toke
one vnleauened cake, and a cake of oyled bread, and one wafer, & put them on the
fat, and vpon the right shoulder:
27 And put altogether vpon Aarons handes, & vpon his sonnes handes, and waued it
a waue offering before the Lord.
28 And Moyses toke them from of their handes, and burnt them vpon the aulter for
a burnt offering: These were consecrations for a sweete sauour and sacrifice
made by fire vnto the Lorde.
29 And Moyses toke the brest, and waued it for a waue offering before the Lorde:
for of the Ramme of consecrations, it was Moyses part, as the Lorde commaunded
Moyses.
30 And Moyses toke of the annoynting oyle, and of the blood which was vpon the
aulter, & sprinckled it vpon Aaron and vpon his garmentes, and vpon his sonnes
and on his sonnes garmentes with him: and sanctified Aaron and his vestures, and
his sonnes and his sonnes vestures with hym.
31 And Moyses sayde vnto Aaron and his sonnes: Boyle the fleshe at the doore of
the tabernacle of the congregation, and there eate it with the bread that is in
the basket of consecration, and as I commaunded, saying, Aaron and his sonnes
shall eate it.
32 And that whiche remayneth of the fleshe and of the bread, shall ye burne with
fyre.
33 And ye shall not depart from the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation
seuen dayes, vntyll the dayes of your consecrations be at an ende: for seuen
dayes shall he fill your hande.
34 As he did this day: euen so the Lorde hath commaunded to do, to make an
attonement for you.
35 Therefore shall ye abyde at the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation
day and nyght seuen dayes long, and kepe the watch of the Lord, and ye shal not
dye: for so I am commaunded.
36 And so Aaron and his sonnes, dyd all thinges whiche the Lorde commaunded by
the hande of Moyses.

Chapter 9

1 And in the eyght day, Moyses called Aaron and his sonnes, and the elders of
Israel.
2 And he sayd vnto Aaro: Take thee a young Calfe for a sin offering, and a Ramme
for a burnt offering, both without blemishe, and bryng them before the Lorde.
3 And vnto the chyldren of Israel thou shalt speake, saying: Take ye an hee
Goate for a sinne offering, and a Calfe & a Lambe both of a yere olde, without
blemishe, for a burnt sacrifice.
4 Also a Bullocke & a Ramme for peace offeringes, to offer before the Lord, and
a meate offering mingled with oyle: for to day the Lord will appeare vnto you.
5 And they brought that whiche Moyses commaunded, before the tabernacle of the
congregation: and all the congregation came and stode before the Lord.
6 And Moyses sayd: This is the thyng whiche the Lord commaunded that ye should
do, & the glory of the Lorde shall appeare vnto you.
7 And Moyses sayde vnto Aaron: Go vnto the aulter, and offer the sacrifice for
thy sinne, & thy burnt offering, and make an attonement for thee and for the
people: & thou shalt offer the offering of the people, and make an attonement
for them, as ye Lord comaunded.
8 Aaron therfore went vnto the aulter, and slewe the Calfe of the sinne
offering, whiche was for him selfe.
9 And the sonnes of Aaron brought the blood vnto him, and he dypt his finger in
the blood, and put it vpon the hornes of the aulter, and powred the blood at the
bottome of the aulter.
10 But the fat and the two kydneys, and the kall of the liuer of the sinne
offering he burnt vpon the aulter, as the Lorde commaunded Moyses.
11 The flesh and the hyde he burnt with fyre without the hoast.
12 And he slewe the burnt offering, and Aarons sonnes brought vnto hym the
blood, whiche he sprinckled rounde about vpon the aulter.
13 And they brought the burnt offering vnto hym with the peeces therof, & the
head: and he burnt them vpo the aulter.
14 And he dyd washe the inwardes and the legges, and burnt them vpon the burnt
offeryng in the aulter.
15 And then he brought the peoples offering, taking the Goate whiche was the
sinne offering for the people, & slewe it, & offered it for sinne, as he dyd the
first.
16 And brought the burnt offering, and offered it as the maner was.
17 And he brought the meate offering, and filled his hande therof, and burnt it
vpon the aulter, beside the burnt sacrifice of the mornyng.
18 He slewe also the Bullocke and the Ramme for the peace offering, whiche was
for the people: and Aarons sonnes brought vnto hym the blood, which he
sprinckled vpon the aulter round about:
19 And the fat of the Bullocke, and of the Ramme, the rumpe, and that couereth
the inwardes, and the kidneyes, and the kall of the liuer.
20 And they put the fat vpon the breastes, and he burnt the fat vpon the aulter:
21 But the breastes and the ryght shoulder, Aaron waued for a waue offering
before the Lorde, as the Lorde commaunded Moyses.
22 And Aaron lift vp his hande ouer the people, and blessed them, & came downe
fro offering of the sinne offering, burnt offering, and peace offeringes.
23 And Moyses and Aaron went into the tabernacle of the congregation, & came
out, and blessed the people: and the glorie of the Lorde appeared vnto all the
people.
24 And there came a fire out from before the Lorde, and consumed vpon the aulter
the burnt offering & the fat: Whiche when all the people sawe, they gaue
thankes, and fell on their faces.

Chapter 10

1 And Nadab and Abihu, the sonnes of Aaron, toke eyther of the his censar, and
put fire therein, and put cense therevpon, and offred straunge fire before the
Lorde, whiche he commaunded them not.
2 And there went a fire from the Lord, and consumed them, and they dyed before
the Lorde.
3 Then Moyses sayde vnto Aaron: This is it that the Lorde spake, saying: I wyll
be sanctified in them that come nye me, and before all the people I wylbe
glorified. And Aaron helde his peace.
4 And Moyses called Misael and Elsaphan the sonnes of Oziel, the vncle of Aaron,
& sayd vnto them: Come neare, cary your brethren from before the sanctuarie, out
of the hoast.
5 And they went to them, & caryed them in their coates out of the hoast, as
Moyses had sayde.
6 And Moyses sayde vnto Aaron, and vnto Eleazar & Ithamar his sonnes: Uncouer
not your heades, neither rent your clothes, lest ye dye, and lest wrath come
vpon all the people: But let your brethren the whole house of Israel, bewayle
the burnyng whiche the Lorde hath kyndled.
7 And go not ye out from the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation, lest
ye dye: for the annonynting oyle of God is vpon you. And they dyd as Moyses
sayde.
8 And the Lorde spake vnto Aaron, saying:
9 Thou shalt not drinke wine nor strong drinke, thou nor thy sonnes that are
with thee, when ye go into the tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye dye: Let
it be a lawe for euer throughout your generations.
10 And that ye may put difference betweene holy and vnholy, betweene vncleane
and cleane:
11 And that ye may teache the chyldren of Israel all the statutes whiche the
Lorde hath spoken vnto them by the handes of Moyses.
12 And Moyses sayde vnto Aaron, and vnto Eleazar, and Ithamar his sonnes that
were left: Take the meate offering that remayneth of the sacrifices of the Lord
made by fire, and eate it without leauen beside the aulter: for it is most holy.
13 Ye shall eate it in the holy place, because it is thy duetie, & thy sonnes
duetie, of the sacrifices of the Lord made by fire: for so I am commaunded.
14 And the waue brest and heaue shoulder shall ye eate in a cleane place, thou
and thy sonnes and thy daughters with thee: For they be thy duetie, and thy
sonnes duetie, geuen out of the peace offeringes of the children of Israel.
15 The heaue shoulder & the waue brest shall they bryng in with the sacrifices
made by fire of the fat, to waue it for a waue offering before the Lorde: and it
shalbe thyne and thy sonnes with thee by a lawe for euer, as the Lorde hath
commaunded.
16 And Moyses sought the goate that was offred for sinne, & see, it was burnt.
And he was angry with Eleazar and Ithamar the sonnes of Aaron whiche were left
aliue, saying:
17 Wherefore haue ye not eaten the sinne offering in the holy place? seing it is
most holy, & God hath geuen it yon, to beare the sinne of the congregation, to
make agreement for them before the Lorde.
18 Beholde, ye blood of it was not brought in within the holy place: Ye shoulde
haue eaten it in the holy place, as I commaunded.
19 And Aaron sayde vnto Moyses: Beholde, this day haue they offered their sinne
offering, and their burnt offering before the Lorde: and suche thinges are come
vnto me, if I had eaten the sinne offering to day, shoulde it haue ben accepted
in the sight of the Lorde?
20 And when Moyses hearde that, he was content.

Chapter 11

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses and Aaron, and sayde vnto them:
2 Speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, and say: These are the beastes whiche ye
shall eate, among all the beastes that are on the earth.
3 Whatsoeuer parteth the hoofe, and is clouen footed, and chaweth cud among the
beastes, that shall ye eate.
4 Neuerthelesse, these shall ye not eate, of them that chawe cud, and deuideth
the hoofe: onlye as is the Camell, whiche chaweth cud, but he deuideth not the
hoofe, therefore is he vncleane vnto you.
5 Euen so the Connie whiche chaweth the cud, but deuideth not the hoofe, he is
vncleane to you.
6 And the Hare, though he chaweth the cud, yet because he deuideth not ye hoofe,
he is therefore vncleane to you.
7 And agayne the Swyne, though he deuide the hoofe, and is clouen footed, yet he
chaweth not the cud, he is vncleane to you.
8 Of their fleshe shall ye not eate, and their carkasses shall ye not touche:
but let them be vncleane to you.
9 These shall ye eate, of all that are in the waters: whatsoeuer hath finnes and
skales in the waters, seas, and riuers, that shall ye eate.
10 And all that haue not finnes nor skales in the sea and riuers, of all that
moue and liue in the waters, let them be abhomination vnto you.
11 They I say, shalbe an abhomination vnto you: ye shall not eate of their
flesh, but abhorre their carkasses.
12 Let all that haue no finnes nor skales in the waters, be abhominable vnto
you.
13 These are they whiche ye shall abhorre among the foules, and that ought not
to be eaten, for they are an abhomination: The Egle, the Goshauke, and the
Ospray,
14 The Uultur, and the Kyte after his kinde,
15 And all Rauens after their kinde,
16 The Estrich, the nyght Crowe, the Coockowe, and the Hauke after his kynde,
17 The Falcon, the Cormorant, the great Owle,
18 The Backe, the Pellicane, the Pye,
19 The Storke, the Iay after his kinde, the Lapwyng, and the Swalowe.
20 Let all foules that creepe and go vpon all foure, be an abhomination vnto
you.
21 Yet these may ye eate, of euery creepyng thyng that hath wynges, and go vpon
foure feete: euen those that haue not bowynges aboue vpon their feete, to leape
withall vpon the earth.
22 Euen these of them ye may eate: the Arbe after his kinde, the Selaam after
his kinde, the Hargol after his kinde, and the Hagab after his kinde.
23 All other foules that creepe and haue foure feete, shalbe abhomination vnto
you.
24 In such ye be vncleane: and whosoeuer toucheth the carkasse of them, shalbe
vncleane vntyll the euen:
25 And whosoeuer beareth the carkasse of them, shall washe his clothes, and be
vncleane vntyll the euen.
26 And euery beast that hath hoofe, and is not clouen footed, nor chaweth cud,
such are vncleane vnto you: euery one that toucheth them, shalbe vncleane.
27 And whatsoeuer goeth vppon his pawes, among all maner beastes that go on all
foure feete such are vncleane vnto you: and who so doth touche their carkasse
shalbe vncleane vntyll the euen.
28 And he that beareth the carkasse of them, shall washe his clothes, and be
vncleane vntyll the euen: for such are vncleane vnto you.
29 And let these also be vncleane to you, among the thynges that creepe vpon the
earth: the Weasel, and the Mouse, and the Toade after ther kinde:
30 The Hedhogge, the Stellio, the Lacert, the Snayle, and the Moole.
31 These are vncleane to you among all that creepe: whosoeuer doth touche them
when they be dead, shalbe vncleane vntyll the euen.
32 And whatsoeuer any of the dead carkasses of them doth fall vpon, shalbe
vncleane, whether it be vessell of wood, or rayment, or skinne, or sacke, or
whatsoeuer vessell it be that any worke is wrought in: and it must be plunged in
the water, and it shalbe vncleane vntyll the euen, and so shall it be cleansed.
33 All maner of earthen vessell wherinto any of them falleth, shalbe vncleane,
with all that therein is, and it shalbe broken.
34 All maner meate also that is vsed to be eaten, yf any such water come vpo it,
shalbe vncleane: And all maner drynke that is vsed to be drunke in all maner
such vessels, shalbe vncleane.
35 And euery thyng that their carkasse falleth vpon, shalbe vncleane, whether it
be ouen or kettle, let it be broken: For they are vncleane, and shalbe vncleane
vnto you.
36 Neuerthelater, yet the fountaynes, and welles, and collection of waters,
shalbe cleane styll: but that which toucheth their carkasses, shalbe vncleane.
37 If the dead carkasse of any such fall vpon any seede vsed to sowe, it shall
yet be cleane styll:
38 But and yf any water be powred vpon the seede, and a dead carkasse fall
theron, it shalbe vncleane vnto you.
39 If any beast of which ye may eate, dye, and any man touche the dead carkasse
thereof, he shalbe vncleane vntyll the euen.
40 He that eateth of the dead carkasse of it, shall washe his clothes, and be
vncleane vntyll the euen: And he also that beareth the carkasse of it, shall
washe his clothes, and be vncleane vntyll the euen.
41 Let euery creepyng thyng that creepeth vpon the earth be an abhomination, and
not be eaten.
42 Whatsoeuer goeth vpon the brest, and whatsoeuer goeth vpon foure, or that
hath mo feete among all creepyng thynges that creepe vpon the earth: of that see
ye eate not, for they are abhominable.
43 Ye shall not make your soules abhominable with nothyng that creepeth, neither
make your selues vncleane with them, that ye shoulde be defyled therby.
44 For I am the Lorde your God: Be sanctified therfore, and ye shalbe holy, for
I am holy: and ye shall not defyle your soules with any maner of creeping thyng
that creepeth vpon the earth:
45 For I am the Lorde that brought you out of the lande of Egypt, to be your
God: ye shalbe holy therfore, for I am holy.
46 This is the lawe of beastes & foules, and of euery lyuyng creature that
moueth in the waters, and of euery creature that creepeth vpon the earth,
47 That there may be a difference betweene the vncleane and cleane, and betweene
the beast that may be eaten, and the beast that ought not to be eaten.

Chapter 12

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Speake vnto the children of Israel, and say: yf a woman hath conceaued seede,
and borne a man chylde, she shalbe vncleane seuen dayes: euen according to the
dayes of the seperation of her infirmitie shall she be vncleane.
3 And in the eyght day, the fleshe of the childes foreskinne shalbe cut away.
4 And she shall then continue in ye blood of her purifiyng three and thirtie
dayes: She shall touche no halowed thyng, nor come into the sanctuarie, vntyll
the tyme of her purifiyng be out.
5 If she beare a mayde chylde, she shalbe vncleane two weekes, accordyng as in
her seperation: and she shall continue in the blood of her purifiyng three score
and sixe dayes.
6 And when the dayes of her purifiyng are out, whether it be for a sonne or for
a daughter, she shall bryng a lambe of one yere olde for a burnt offeryng, and a
young pigeon or a turtle doue for a sinne offeryng, vnto the doore of the
tabernacle of the congregation, vnto the priest:
7 Which shall offer them before the Lord, and make an attonement for her, and
she shalbe purged of the issue of her blood. And this is the lawe for her that
hath borne a male or female.
8 But and yf she be not able to bryng a lambe, she shall bryng two turtles or
two young pigeons, the one for ye burnt offering, & the other for a sinne
offering: And the priest shall make an attonemet for her, and she shalbe cleane.

Chapter 13

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses & Aaron saying:
2 The man that shall haue in the skinne of his fleshe, a swellyng, either a
scabbe, or a glistryng whyte, and the plague of leprosie be in the skinne of his
fleshe, he shalbe brought vnto Aaron the priest, or vnto one of his sonnes the
priestes.
3 And the priest shall loke on the sore in the skinne of his fleshe: and when
the heere in the sore is turned to whyte, and the sore also seeme to be lower
then the skinne of his fleshe, it is a plague of leprosie: and the priestes
shall loke on hym, and iudge hym vncleane.
4 If there be a whyte plecke in ye skinne of his fleshe, and seeme not to be
lower then the skinne, nor the heere thereof is turned vnto whyte, the priest
shall shut vp hym that hath the plague seue dayes.
5 And ye priest shall loke vpon him againe the seuenth day: and if the plague
seeme to him to abide styll, & the plague growe not in the skinne, the priest
shall shut vp hym that hath ye plague, seuen dayes mo.
6 And the priest shal loke on him agayne the seuenth day: Then yf the plague be
darker, and not growen in the skynne, the priest shall iudge hym cleane, for it
is but a scabbe: And he shall washe his clothes and be cleane.
7 But yf the scabbe growe in the skynne after that he is seene of the priest and
iudged cleane, he shalbe seene of the priest agayne.
8 If the priest see that the scabbe be growen abrode in the skinne, the priest
shall make hym vncleane: for it is a leprosie.
9 When the plague of the leprosie is in a man, he shalbe brought vnto the
priest.
10 And the priest shall see hym: And yf the swellyng be whyte in the skynne, and
haue made the heere whyte, and there be rawe fleshe in the swellyng,
11 It wilbe an olde leprosie in the skynne of his fleshe, and the priest shall
make hym vncleane, and shall not shut hym vp, seyng he is vncleane.
12 If a leprosie breake out abrode in the skynne, and couer all the skynne from
his head to his foote wheresoeuer the priest loketh,
13 Then the priest shall consider: and yf the leprosie haue couered all his
fleshe, he shall iudge the plague to be cleane, because it is all turned into
whytenesse, and he shalbe cleane.
14 But and if there be rawe fleshe on him when he is seene, he shalbe vncleane.
15 And the priest shal see the rawe fleshe, and declare hym to be vncleane: for
the rawe fleshe is vncleane, seyng it is a leprosie.
16 Or yf the rawe fleshe turne agayne and chaunge vnto whyte, he shall come to
the priest:
17 And the priest shall see him: & behold, yf the sore be chaunged vnto whyte,
the priest shall iudge the plague cleane, and he shalbe cleane.
18 The fleshe also in whose skinne there is a byle, and is healed,
19 And in the place of the byle there appeare a whyte rysyng, either a shynyng
whyte and somewhat reddishe, it shall be seene of the priest.
20 And yf when the priest seeth hym, it appeare lower then the skynne, and the
heere therof be chaunged vnto whyte, the priest shall iudge hym vncleane: for it
is a plagne of leprosie, broken out of the byle.
21 But and yf the priest loke on it, and there be no whyte heeres therin, and yf
it be not lower then the skynne, but be darker, the priest shall shut hym vp
seuen dayes.
22 And yf it spreade abrode in the skynne, the priest shall make hym vncleane,
seyng it is a sore.
23 But and yf the spot stande styll and growe not, it is a scarre of a byle, and
therfore the priest shall declare hym to be cleane.
24 If there be any fleshe in whose skynne there is a hotte burnyng, and the
quicke fleshe that burneth haue a whyte spot, somewhat reddishe or whyte,
25 The priest shall loke vpon it: and yf the heere in that bright spot be
chauged to whyte, and it appeare lower then the skynne, it is a leprosie broken
out of the burnyng, and therfore the priest shall iudge hym vncleane, seyng it
is ye plague of leprosie.
26 But yf the priest loke on it, and there be no whyte heere in the bryght spot,
and be no lower then the other skynne, but be darker, the priest shall shut hym
vp seuen dayes.
27 And the priest shall loke on hym the seuenth day: and yf it be growen abrode
in the skynne, the priest shall iudge hym vncleane, seyng it is ye plague of
leprosie.
28 And yf the spot stande styll in it, and growe not in the skynne, but is
darke, it is a risyng of the burnyng, and the priest shall therfore declare hym
cleane, seyng it is a scarre of the burnyng.
29 If man or woman hath a sore vpon the head or the bearde,
30 The priest shall see the sore: and yf it appeare lower then the skynne, and
there be in it a yelowe heere and thinne, the priest shall iudge him vncleane,
seing that the same frettyng is a token of leprosie vpon the head or bearde.
31 And yf the priest loke on the sore of the fret, and it seeme not lower then
the skynne, and that the heere is not blacke, the priest shall shut vp the
frettyng sore seuen dayes.
32 And in the seuenth day the priest shall loke on the sore: and yf the fret be
not growen, and there be in it no yelowe heere, and the fret seeme not lower
then the skynne,
33 He shalbe shauen, but the fret shall he not shaue: and the priest shall shut
vp the fret seuen dayes mo.
34 And in the seuenth day the priest shall loke on the fret: and yf the fret be
not growen in the skynne, nor seeme lower then the other skynne, the priest
shall clense him: & he shall washe his clothes, and be cleane.
35 But if the fret growe in the skynne after his clensyng,
36 The priest shall loke on hym: and yf the fret be growen in the skynne, the
priest shall not seeke for yelowe heere, for he is vncleane.
37 But if he see the fret stande still, & that there is blacke heere growen vp
therein, the fret is healed, & he shalbe cleane, & the priest shal declare him
to be cleane.
38 If there be many white spottes in the skinne of the fleshe of man or woman,
39 The priest shall loke vpon it: and yf the spottes in the skynne of their
fleshe be somewhat darke and whyte withal, it is a frekell growyng in the
skynne: therfore he is cleane.
40 And the man whose heere is fallen of his head, he is baulde, yet cleane.
41 And he that hath his heere fallen of on the part of his head towarde his
face, is forehead baulde, yet cleane.
42 If there be in ye baulde head or baulde forehead a whyte reddishe sore, there
is leprosie sprong vp in his baulde head or baulde forehead.
43 And the priest shall loke vpon hym: & yf the rysyng of the sore be whyte
reddishe in his baulde head or baulde forehead, after the maner of leprosie
which is in the skynne of the fleshe,
44 Then he is a leprous man & vncleane: And the priest shal make him vncleane,
for the plague therof is in his head.
45 The leper in whom the plague is, shal haue his clothes rent, & his head bare,
& shall put a coueryng vpon his lippes, and shall crye: vncleane, vncleane.
46 And as long as the disease lasteth vpon hym, he shalbe defiled and vncleane:
he shall dwell alone, euen without the campe shall his habitation be.
47 The garment also that the plague of leprosie is in, whether it be a woollen
garment or a lynnen garment,
48 Whether it be in the warpe or woofe of lynnen or of woollen, either in a
skin, or any thyng made of skynne:
49 If the disease be light greene, or somewhat reddishe in the garmet or skinne,
whether it be in the warpe or woofe, or any thyng that is made of skinne: then
it is a plague of leprosie, & shalbe shewed vnto the priest.
50 The priest therfore shal see the plague, and shut it vp seuen dayes.
51 And he shall loke on the plague the seuenth day: which, yf it be increased in
the garment, whether it be in ye warpe or woofe, or in a skinne, or in any thyng
that is made of skinne, it is the leprosie of a frettyng sore, it is vncleane.
52 And he shall burne that garment, eyther warpe or woofe, whether it be woollen
or lynnen, or any thyng that is made of skinne wherin the plague is, for it is a
frettyng leprosie, it shalbe burnt in the fire.
53 If the priest see that the plague is not growen in the garment, either in the
warpe or woofe, or in whatsoeuer thing of skinne it be,
54 The priest shall commaunde them to washe the thyng wherin the plague is, and
he shall shut it vp seuen dayes mo.
55 And the priest shall loke on the plague agayne after that it is wasshed: and
yf the plague haue not chaunged his colour, and is spread no further abrode, it
is vncleane, thou shalt burne it in the fire: for it is fret inwarde, whether it
be bauld behynd in the head or before.
56 And yf the priest see that the plague is darker after that is is wasshed, he
shall cut it out of the garment or out of the skinne, or out of the warpe, or
out of the woofe.
57 And yf it appeare styll in the garment, either in the warpe, or in the woofe,
or in any thyng made of skinne: it is a spreadyng plague, thou shalt burne that
wherin the plague is, with fire.
58 Moreouer the garment, either warpe or woofe, or whatsoeuer thing of skinne it
be which thou hast wasshed, yf the plague be departed therfrom, it shalbe
wasshed once agayne, and then it shalbe cleane.
59 This is the lawe of the plague of leprosie in a garment whether it be woolen
or lynnen, either in the warpe or woofe, or in any thyng of skinnes, to make it
cleane or vncleane.

Chapter 14

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 This is the lawe of the leper in the day of his clensyng: He shalbe brought
vnto the priest,
3 And the priest shal go out without the campe, and the priest shall loke vpon
hym, and yf the plague of leprosie be healed in the leper,
4 Then shall the priest commaunde to take for hym that is clensed, two lyue
birdes and cleane, and ceder wood, and a scarlet lase and ysope.
5 And the priest shall commaunde that one of the birdes be killed in an earthen
vessell, and vpon runnyng water.
6 And he shall take the lyuyng birde, with the ceder wood, the scarlet lase and
the ysope, and shall dippe them, and the liuing birde in the blood of the slaine
birde vpon the runnyng water.
7 And he shall sprinckle vpon hym that must be clensed of his leprosie seuen
tymes, and clense hym, and shall let the lyuyng birde go free into the fielde.
8 And he that is clensed shall washe his clothes, and shaue of all his heere,
and washe hym selfe in water, that he may be cleane: And after that shall he
come into the hoast, and shall tary without his tent seuen dayes:
9 But in the seuenth day, he shall shaue of all his heere, namely his head, his
bearde, and his browes, euen all his heere shalbe shauen of: And he shall washe
his clothes, and also washe his fleshe in water, and he shalbe cleane.
10 In the eyght day he shall take two hee lambes without blemishe, and an ewe
lambe of a yere olde without blemishe, and three tenth deales of fine flowre for
a meate offeryng myngled with oyle, and a logge of oyle.
11 And the priest that maketh him cleane, shall bryng the man that is to be made
cleane, & those thynges, before the Lord at the doore of the tabernacle of the
congregation.
12 And the priest shall take one lambe, and offer hym for a trespasse offeryng,
& the logge of oyle, and waue them for a waue offeryng before the Lorde.
13 And he shal slea the lambe in the place where the sinne offeryng and the
burnt offeryng are slayne, euen in the holy place: for as the sinne offeryng is
the priestes, euen so is the trespasse offering, seyng it is most holy.
14 And the priest shall take of the blood of the trespasse offering, and put it
vpon the tippe of the ryght eare of hym that is to be clensed, and vpon the
thumbe of his right hande, and vpon the great toe of his ryght foote.
15 The priest shall take of the logge of oyle, and powre it into the paulme of
his left hande:
16 And he shall dippe his ryght finger in the oyle that is in his left hande,
and sprinckle of the oyle with his finger seuen tymes before the Lorde.
17 And of the rest of the oyle that is in his hande, shall the priest put vpon
the tippe of the ryght eare of hym that is for to be clensed, and vpon the
thumbe of his ryght hande, and vpon the great toe of his ryght foote, euen vpon
the blood of the trespasse offeryng.
18 And the remnaunt of the oyle that is in the priestes hande, he shal powre vpo
the head of hym that is for to be clensed: and the priest shall make an
attonement for hym before the Lorde.
19 And the priest shall offer the sinne offeryng, and make an attonement for hym
that is to be clensed from his vncleannesse, and then shall he kyll the burnt
offeryng.
20 And the priest shall offer the burnt offeryng and the meate offeryng vpon the
aulter: and the priest shall make an attonement for hym, & he shalbe cleane.
21 If he be poore and can not get so much, he shall take one lambe for a
trespasse offering, to waue it for his attonement, and a tenth deale of fine
flowre mingled with oyle for a meate offeryng, and a logge of oyle,
22 And two turtle doues, or two young pigeons, such as he is able to get: wherof
the one shalbe for a sinne offeryng, and the other for a burnt offeryng.
23 And he shall bryng them the eyght day for his clensyng vnto the priest before
the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation before the Lorde.
24 And the priest shall take the lambe that is for the trespasse offeryng, & the
logge of oyle, and waue them for a waue offeryng before the Lorde.
25 And he shal kill the lambe for the trespasse offeryng, and the priest shall
take of the blood of the trespasse offeryng, and put it vpon the tippe of his
right eare that is to be clensed, and vpon the thombe of his right hande, and
vpon the great toe of his right foote.
26 And the priest shall powre of the oyle into the paulme of his owne left
hande:
27 And the priest shall with his right finger, sprinckle of the oyle that is in
his left hand, seuen tymes before the Lord.
28 And the priest shal put of the oyle that is in his hande, vpon ye tippe of
the right eare of hym that is to be clensed, & vpon the thombe of his right
hande, and vpon the great toe of his right foote, euen in the place where the
blood of the trespasse offeryng was put.
29 And ye rest of the oyle yt is in the priestes hande, he shal put vpon the
head of him that is to be clensed, that he may make an attonement for him before
the Lord.
30 And he shall offer one of the turtle doues, or of the young pigeons, such as
he can get:
31 Such I say as he is able to get: the one for a sinne offering, & the other
for a burnt offeryng, with ye meate offeryng: And ye priest shall make an
attonement for hym yt is to be clensed before ye Lord.
32 This is the lawe of hym in whom is the plague of leprosie, and whose hande is
not able to get that which pertaineth to his clensyng.
33 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses and Aaron, saying:
34 When ye be come vnto the lande of Chanaan, which I geue you in possession,
and yf I put the plague of leprosie in a house of the land of your possession:
35 He that oweth the house shall come, & tell the priest, saying: Me thinke that
there is as it were a plague in ye house.
36 Then the priest shall comaunde them to emptie the house, before the priest go
into it to see the plague, that all that is in the house be not made vncleane:
and the must the priest go in, to see the house.
37 And he shall see the plague: and yf the plague be in the walles of the house,
& that there be hollowe strakes, greenish or reddishe, which seeme to be lower
then the wall it selfe:
38 Then the priest shall go out of ye house, to the doore of the house, and shut
vp the house seuen dayes.
39 And the priest shall come agayne the seuenth day, & yf he see that the plague
be increased in the walles of the house,
40 Then the priest shall comaunde them to take away ye stones in which ye plague
is, and let them cast them into a foule place without the citie,
41 And he shall commaunde the house to be scraped within rounde about, and powre
out the dust that they scrape of, without the citie into a foule place.
42 And they shall take other stones, and put the in the place of those stones,
and other morter to plaster ye house withall.
43 And if the plague come againe, & breake out in the house after that he hath
taken away the stones and scraped the house, & after that he hath plastered the
house,
44 Then the priest shall come and see it: & yf that the plague hath growen
further in the house, it is a frettyng leprosie in the house, it is therfore
vncleane.
45 And he shall breake downe the house, and the stones of it, and the timber
therof, and all the morter of the house: and he shall cary them out of the citie
into a foule place.
46 Moreouer, he that goeth into ye house all the whyle that it is shut vp,
shalbe vncleane vntyll the euen.
47 He also that sleepeth in the house, shal washe his clothes: he lykewyse that
eateth in ye house, shall washe his clothes.
48 And yf the priest come and see that the plague hath spread no further in ye
house after that it is newe plastered: the priest shall iudge that house cleane,
because the plague is healed.
49 And let hym take to clense the house withall, two birdes, ceder wood, and a
scarlet lase and ysope.
50 And he shal kill one of the birdes in an earthen vessell, & vpon runnyng
water:
51 And take the ceder wood, and the ysope, and the scarlet lase with the lyuyng
birde, and dippe them in the blood of the slayne birde, and in the runnyng
water, & sprinckle the house seue tymes.
52 And he shall clense the house with the blood of ye birde, & with the running
water, with the liuing birde, with the ceder wood, & the ysope, and the scarlet
lase.
53 But he shall let the lyuyng birde flee out of the towne into the brode
fieldes, & so make an attonement for the house, and it shalbe cleane.
54 This is the lawe for all maner plague of leprosie and fret,
55 And of the leprosie of garment & house,
56 For a swellyng, for a scabbe, and for a shynyng whyte,
57 To teache when it must be made vncleane, and cleane: this is the lawe of
leprosie.

Chapter 15

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses and Aaron, saying:
2 Speake vnto the children of Israel, and say vnto them: Whosoeuer hath a
runnyng issue out of his fleshe, is vncleane by reason of that issue.
3 And this shalbe his vncleannesse in his issue: if his fleshe runne, or yf his
fleshe be stopped from his issue, then it is vncleannesse.
4 Euery bed wheron he lyeth that hath the issue, is vncleane: and euery thyng
wheron he sitteth, is vncleane.
5 Whosoeuer toucheth his bed, shall washe his clothes and bath hymselfe in
water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen.
6 And he that sitteth on any thing wheron he sat that hath the issue, shal washe
his clothes, and bath him selfe in water, and be vncleane vntyll the euenyng.
7 He that toucheth the fleshe of him that hath the issue, shall washe his
clothes, and bathe hym selfe in water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen.
8 If he also that hath the issue, spyt vpon hym that is cleane, he shall washe
his clothes, and bath himselfe in water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen.
9 And what saddle soeuer he rydeth vpon that hath ye issue, shalbe vncleane.
10 And whosoeuer toucheth any thyng that was vnder hym, shalbe vncleane vnto the
euen: And he that beareth any such thynges shall washe his clothes, and bathe
hym selfe in water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen.
11 And whosoeuer he toucheth that hath the issue, and haue not wasshed his
handes in water, shall washe his clothes and bathe hym selfe in water, and be
vncleane vntyll the euen.
12 The vessell of earth that he toucheth which hath the issue, shalbe broken:
and all vessels of wood shalbe rensed in water.
13 When he also that hath any issue, is clensed of his issue, he shall number
him seuen dayes for his clensyng, and washe his clothes, and bathe his fleshe in
runnyng water, and so shall he be cleane.
14 And the eyght day he shall take to hym two turtle doues, or two young
pigeons, and come before the Lorde vnto the doore of the tabernacle of the
congregation, & geue them vnto the priest.
15 And the priest shall offer them, the one for a sinne offeryng, and the other
for a burnt offeryng: and the priest shall make an attonement for hym before the
Lorde, as concernyng his issue.
16 If any mans seede depart fro hym in his sleepe, he shall washe all his fleshe
in water, and be vncleane vntyll ye euen.
17 And euery garment, and euery skinne wherin is such seede of sleepe, shalbe
wasshed with water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen.
18 And if he yt hath such an issue of seede, do lye with a woman, they shall
both washe them selues with water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen.
19 Also yf a woman shall haue an issue, and her issue in her fleshe shalbe
blood, she shalbe put apart seuen dayes: whosoeuer toucheth her, shalbe vncleane
vntyll the euen.
20 And all that she lyeth vpon in ye tyme of her seperation, shalbe vncleane:
lyke as euery thing also that she sitteth vpon, is vncleane.
21 Whosoeuer toucheth her bed, shall washe his clothes, and bathe hym selfe with
water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen.
22 And whosoeuer toucheth any thyng that she sat vpon, shall washe his clothes,
and bathe hym selfe in water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen.
23 So that whether he touche her bed, or any vessell wheron she hath sytten, he
shalbe vncleane vntyll the euenyng.
24 And yf a man lye with her, and her seperation come vpon hym, he shalbe
vncleane seuen dayes: and all the bedde wheron he lyeth shalbe vncleane.
25 Also if a woman haue an issue of her blood many dayes, out of the tyme of her
seperation, or if it runne beyond her seperation, let all the dayes of the issue
of her vncleanenesse, be euen as ye dayes of her seperation, for she is
vncleane.
26 Euery bedde whereon she lyeth as long as her issue lasteth, shalbe vnto her
as the bedde of her seperation: and whatsoeuer she sitteth vpon shalbe vncleane,
as the vncleanenesse of her seperation.
27 And whosoeuer toucheth any of these shalbe vncleane, and shall washe his
clothes, and bathe hym selfe in water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen.
28 But if she be cleansed of her issue, she shall count her seuen dayes: and
after that, she shalbe cleane.
29 And in the eyght day, she shall take vnto her two turtles, or two young
pigeons, and bryng them vnto the priest, before the doore of the tabernacle of
the congregation.
30 And the priest shall offer the one for a sinne offeryng, and the other for a
burnt offeryng, and make an attonement for her before the Lord, as concernyng
the issue of her vncleanenesse.
31 Thus shall ye syft the chyldren of Israel from their vncleanenesse, that they
dye not in their vncleanenesse: if they defyle my tabernacle that is among the.
32 This is the lawe of hym that hath an issue, and of hym whose seede runneth
from hym in his sleepe, and is defyled therin:
33 Also of her that for her seperation is put apart, & of whosoeuer hath a
runnyng issue, whether it be man or woman, and of hym that lyeth with her which
is vncleane.

Chapter 16

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses after the death of ye two sonnes of Aaron,
when they offered before ye Lorde, and dyed.
2 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Speake vnto Aaron thy brother, that he come
not at all tymes into the holy place within the vayle, before the mercie seate
which is vpon the arke, that he dye not: For I wyll appeare in the cloude vpon
ye mercie seate.
3 But with this thyng shal Aaron come into the holy place: euen with a young
bullocke for a sinne offeryng, and with a ramme for a burnt offeryng.
4 He shall put the holy lynnen coate vpon hym, and shall haue lynnen breeches
vpon his fleshe, and shalbe girded with a lynnen girdle, and with a lynnen cap
shall he be attired. These are holy garmentes: therfore shall he washe his
fleshe in water when he doth put them on.
5 And he shall take of the congregation of the childre of Israel, two hee goates
for a sinne offeryng, and a ramme for a burnt offeryng.
6 And Aaron shall offer his bullocke for his sinne offering, and make an
attonement for hym and for his house.
7 And he shall take the two hee goates, and present them before the Lorde at the
doore of the tabernacle of the congregation.
8 And Aaron shall cast lottes ouer the two goates: one lot shalbe for the Lord,
and the other for the scape goate.
9 And Aaron shall bryng the goate vpon which the Lordes lot fell, and offer hym
for a sinne offeryng.
10 But the goate on which the lot fell to be the scape goate, shalbe set aliue
before the Lorde to reconcile with, and to let hym go as a scape goate into the
wildernesse.
11 And Aaron shall bryng the bullocke for his sinne offeryng, and reconcile for
hym selfe and for his house, and shall kyll the bullocke for his sinne offeryng.
12 And he shall take a censer full of burning coales from of the aulter before
the Lorde, and shall fill his hand full of sweete incense beaten small, and
bryng them within the vayle.
13 And put the incense vpon the fire before the Lorde, that the cloude of the
incense may couer the mercy seate that is vpon the witnesse, and he shall not
dye.
14 And he shall take of the blood of the bullocke, and sprinckle it with his
finger vpon the mercy seate eastward: and before the mercy seate shall he
sprinckle of the blood with his finger seuen tymes.
15 Then shall he kyll the goate that is the peoples sinne offering, & bryng his
blood within the vayle, & do with that blood as he dyd with the blood of the
bullocke, sprinklyng it vpon the mercy seate, and before the mercy seate.
16 And he shall reconcile the holy place from the vncleannesses of the chyldren
of Israel, and from their trespasses in all their sinnes: And so shal he do for
the tabernacle of the congregation that is set among them, euen among their
vncleannesses.
17 And let there be no body in the tabernacle of the cogregation when he goeth
in to make an attonement in the holy place, vntyll he come out, and haue made an
attonement for hym selfe, and for his housholde, and for all the congregation of
Israel.
18 And he shall go out vnto the aulter that is before the Lorde, and reconcile
vpon it, and shal take of the blood of the bullocke, and of the blood of the
goate, and put it vpon the hornes of the aulter rounde about.
19 So shall he sprinckle of the blood vpon it with his finger seuen tymes, and
cleanse it, & halowe it from the vncleannesse of the chyldren of Israel.
20 And when he hath made an end of reconciling the holy place, and the
tabernacle of the congregation, and the aulter, he shall bryng the liue goate.
21 And Aaron shall put both his handes vpon the head of the liue goate, and
confesse ouer hym all the misdeedes of the chyldren of Israel, and all their
trespasses in all their sinnes, puttyng them vppon the head of the goate, and
send him away by the hand of a conuenient man, into the wyldernesse.
22 And the goate shall beare vpon hym all theyr misdeedes vnto the lande of
seperation, and he shall let the goate go into the wyldernesse.
23 After Aaron shall come into the tabernacle of the congregation, and put of
the linnen clothes whiche he put on when he went in into the holy place, and
leaue them there.
24 And let hym washe his fleshe with water in the holy place, and put on his
owne rayment, and then come out, and offer his burnt offering, and the burnt
offering of the people, and make an attonement for hym selfe, and for the
people.
25 And the fat of the sinne offering shall he burne vpon the aulter.
26 And he that caryed foorth the goate for the scape goate, shall washe his
clothes, and bathe his fleshe in water, and then come into the hoast.
27 And the bullocke for the sinne offering, & the goate for the sinne offering,
whose blood was brought in to clense the holy place, shall one cary out without
the hoast to be burnt in the fire, with their skinnes, their fleshe, and their
dounge.
28 And he that burneth them, shall wash his clothes, and bathe his fleshe in
water, and then come into the hoast.
29 And this shalbe an ordinaunce for euer vnto you: that in the tenth day of the
seuenth moneth ye humble your soules, and do no worke at all, whether it be one
of your owne countrey, or a straunger that soiourneth among you.
30 For that day shall the priest make an attonement for you to cleanse you, and
that ye may be cleane from all your sinnes before the Lorde.
31 Let it be a Sabbath of rest vnto you, and ye shall humble your soules by an
ordinaunce for euer.
32 And the priest whom he shal annoynt, and whom he shall consecrate to minister
in his fathers steade, shal make the attonement, and shall put on the linnen
clothes, and holy vestmentes.
33 And shall reconcile the holy sanctuarie, and the tabernacle of the
congregation, and shall cleanse the aulter, & make an attonement, for the
priestes, and for all the people of the congregation.
34 And this shalbe an euerlastyng ordinaunce vnto you, to make an attonement for
the chyldren of Israel for all their sinnes once a yere. And he dyd as the Lorde
commaunded Moyses.

Chapter 17

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Speake vnto Aaron and vnto his sonnes, and vnto all the chyldren of Israel,
and say vnto them: This is the thing whiche the Lorde hath charged, saying:
3 What man soeuer of the house of Israel kylleth an oxe, or lambe, or goate in
the hoast, or that kylleth it out of the hoast,
4 And bryngeth it not vnto the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation, to
offer an offering vnto the Lorde before the dwelling place of the Lord, blood
shalbe imputed vnto that man, he hath shed blood, and that man shalbe cut of
from among his people.
5 Wherfore, when the chyldren of Israel bryng their offeringes that they offer
in the wylde fielde, they shall bryng them vnto the Lorde, euen vnto the doore
of the tabernacle of the congregation by the priest, to offer them for peace
offeringes vnto the Lorde.
6 And the priest shall sprinckle the blood vpon the aulter of the Lorde, whiche
is before the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation, and burne the fat for
a sweete sauour vnto the Lorde.
7 And let them no more offer their offeringes vnto deuyls, after whom they haue
gone a whoryng: This shalbe an ordinaunce for euer vnto them in their
generations.
8 And thou shalt say vnto them: Whatsoeuer man it be of the house of Israel, or
of the straungers whiche soiourne among you, that offereth a burnt offering or
sacrifice,
9 And bryngeth it not vnto the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation to
offer it vnto the Lorde: that man shalbe cut of from among his people.
10 And whatsoeuer man it be of the house of Israel, or of the straungers that
soiourne among you, that eateth any maner of blood, I wyll set my face against
that soule that eateth blood, and wyll cut hym of from among his people:
11 For the life of the fleshe is in the blood, and I haue geuen it vnto you vpon
the aulter, to make an attonement for your soules: for this blood shall make an
attonement for the soule.
12 Therfore I sayd vnto the chyldren of Israel: Let no soule of you eate blood,
neither let any straunger that soiourneth among you, eate blood.
13 And whatsoeuer man it be of the chyldren of Israel, or of the straungers that
soiourne among you, whiche hunteth and catcheth any beast or foule that may be
eaten, let hym powre out the blood thereof, and couer it with dust.
14 For the lyfe of the fleshe is the blood of it ioyned with his lyfe: therefore
I sayde vnto the chyldren of Israel, ye shal eate the blood of no maner of
flesh, for the life of all fleshe is the blood therof: whosoeuer eateth it,
shalbe cut of.
15 And euery soule that eateth it whiche dyed alone, or that whiche was torne
with wylde beastes, whether it be one of your owne countrey, or a straunger, he
shall washe his clothes, and bathe hym selfe in water, and be vncleane vnto the
euen: and then shall he be cleane.
16 If he washe them not, nor bathe his fleshe, he shall beare his sinne.

Chapter 18

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, and say vnto them: I am the Lorde your
God.
3 After the doynges of the lande of Egypt wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not do: and
after the doinges of the lande of Chanaan whyther I wyll bryng you, shall ye not
do: neither walke in their ordinaunces.
4 But do after my iudgementes, and kepe mine ordinaunces, to walke therin: I am
the Lorde your God.
5 Ye shall kepe therfore mine ordinaunces, and my iudgementes: which if a man do
he shall lyue in them: I am the Lorde.
6 None shall approche to any kinred of his fleshe, for to vncouer their
nakednesse: I am the Lorde.
7 The nakednesse of thy father, & the nakednesse of thy mother shalt thou not
vncouer, for she is thy mother: therfore shalt thou not discouer her nakednesse.
8 The nakednesse of thy fathers wife shalt thou not discouer: for it is thy
fathers nakednesse.
9 Thou shalt not discouer the nakednesse of thy sister, the daughter of thy
father, or daughter of thy mother, whether she be borne at home, or without.
10 Thou shalt not vncouer the nakednesse of thy sonnes daughter, or thy
daughters daughter, for that is thyne owne nakednesse.
11 The nakednesse of thy fathers wiues daughter begotten of thy father, which is
thy sister: thou shalt not discouer her nakednesse.
12 Thou shalt not vncouer the nakednesse of thy fathers sister: for she is thy
fathers kinswoman.
13 Thou shalt not discouer the nakednesse of thy mothers sister: for she is thy
mothers kinswoman.
14 Thou shalt not vncouer the nakednesse of thy fathers brother, that is, thou
shalt not go in vnto his wyfe, whiche is thyne aunt.
15 Thou shalt not discouer ye nakednesse of thy daughter in lawe, for she is thy
sonnes wyfe: therefore shalt thou not vncouer her nakednesse.
16 Thou shalt not vncouer the nakednesse of thy brothers wife, for that is thy
brothers nakednesse.
17 Thou shalt not discouer the nakednesse of the wyfe and her daughter, neither
shalt thou take her sonnes daughter, or her daughters daughter, to vncouer their
nakednesse: For they are her kinswomen, and it were wickednesse.
18 Thou shalt not take a wyfe and her sister also, to vexe her, that thou
wouldest vncouer her nakednesse vpon her in her lyfe tyme.
19 Thou shalt also not go vnto a woman to vncouer her nakednesse, as long as she
is put apart for her vncleannesse.
20 Moreouer, thou shalt not lye with thy neighbours wyfe, to defile her with
seede.
21 Thou shalt also not geue of thy seede to offer it vnto Moloch, neither shalt
thou defile the name of thy God: I am the Lorde.
22 Thou shalt not lye with mankynde as with womankynde, for it is abhomination.
23 Thou shalt lye with no maner of beast to defile thy selfe therwith: neither
shall any woman stande before a beast to lye downe therto, for it is vnnaturall
confusion.
24 Ye shall not defile your selues in any of these thinges: for in all these,
the nations are defiled whiche I cast out before you.
25 Wherthrough the lande is defiled, and I wyll visite the wyckednesse thereof
vpon it, yea and the lande it selfe hath vomited out her inhabitauntes.
26 Ye shall kepe therfore mine ordinaunces and my iudgementes, and commit none
of these abhominations, neither any of your owne nation, nor any strauger that
soiourneth among you:
27 (For all these abhominations, haue the men of the lande done whiche were
before you, and the lande is defiled.)
28 Shall not the lande spewe you out also if ye defile it, as it spewed out the
nations that were before you?
29 For whosoeuer shall commit any of these abhominations, the same soules that
commit them shall be cut of from among their people.
30 Therefore shall ye kepe myne ordinaunces, that ye commit not one of these
abhominable customes whiche were committed before you, and that ye defile not
your selues therein: I am the Lorde your God.

Chapter 19

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Speake vnto all the congregation of ye chyldren of Israel, and say vnto them:
Ye shalbe holy, for I the Lorde your God am holy.
3 Ye shall feare euery man his mother and his father, & kepe my Sabbathes: I am
the Lorde your God.
4 Ye shal not looke vnto idols, nor make you moulten goddes: I am the Lorde your
God.
5 If ye offer a peace offering vnto the Lorde, ye shall offer it at your
pleasure.
6 It shalbe eaten the same day ye offer it, and on the morowe: And if ought
remayne vntyll the thirde day, it shalbe burnt in the fire.
7 And if it be eaten the thirde day, it is vncleane, and not accepted.
8 Therfore he that eateth it, shall beare his sinne, because he hath defiled the
halowed thing of the Lord, and that soule shalbe cut of from among his people.
9 When ye reape the haruest of your land, thou shalt not thorowly reape the
corners of the fielde, neither shalt thou gather the gleaninges of thy haruest.
10 Thou shalt not dishonest thy vineyarde, neither gather in thorowly the grapes
of thy vineyarde, but thou shalt leaue them for the poore and straunger: I am
the Lorde your God.
11 Ye shall not steale, neither deale falselye, neither lye one to another.
12 Ye shall not sweare by my name falsely, neither shalt thou defile the name of
thy God: I am the Lorde.
13 Thou shalt not do thy neighbour wrong, neither rob hym, neither shall the
workmans hyre abyde with thee vntyll the mornyng.
14 Thou shalt not despise the deafe, neither put a stumblyng blocke before the
blynde, but shalt feare thy God: I am the Lorde.
15 Ye shall do no vnrighteousnesse in iudgement, thou shalt not fauour the
person poore, nor honour the person mightie, but in righteousnes shalt thou
iudge thy neighbour.
16 Thou shalt not go vp and downe with tales among thy people, neither shalt
thou stande agaynst the blood of thy neighbour: I am the Lorde.
17 Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thyne heart, but shalt in any wyse rebuke
thy neighbour, & suffer not sinne vpon hym.
18 Thou shalt not auenge nor wayte to do displeasure agaynst the chyldren of thy
people, but shalt loue thy neighbour euen as thy selfe: I am the Lorde.
19 Ye shal kepe mine ordinaunces. Thou shalt not let cattell gender with a
contrary kinde, neither sow thy fielde with mingled seede, neither shalt thou
put on any mingled garment of linnen and wollen.
20 Whosoeuer lieth and medleth with a woman that is a bondmayde betrothed to a
husbande, but not redeemed, nor freedome geue her, she shalbe scourged, but they
shall not dye, because she was not free.
21 And he shall bryng for his trespasse vnto the Lorde, before the doore of the
tabernacle of ye congregation, a Ramme for a trespasse offering.
22 And the priest shall make an attonement for hym with the Ramme which is for
the trespasse before the Lord, concernyng his sinne whiche he hath done: and the
sinne which he hath done, shalbe forgeuen him.
23 When ye come to the lande, and haue planted all maner of trees conuenient to
be eaten of, ye shall counte the fruite thereof as vncircumcized: euen three
yere shall they be vncircumcized vnto you, and shall not be eaten of.
24 But in the fourth yere, all the fruite of them shalbe holy and commendable to
the Lorde.
25 In the fifth yere shall ye eate of the fruite thereof, that it may yeelde
vnto you the encrease thereof: I am the Lorde your God.
26 Ye shall not eate vpon blood, neither shall ye vse witchcraft, nor obserue
tymes.
27 Ye shall not rounde the corners of your heades, neither shalt thou marre the
tuftes of thy bearde.
28 Ye shall not rent your fleshe for any soules sake, nor print any markes vpon
you: I am the Lorde.
29 Thou shalt not make thy daughter common, that thou wouldest cause her to be
an whore, lest the lande also fall to whoredome, and become ful of wickednesse.
30 Ye shall kepe my Sabbathes, & feare my sanctuarie: I am the Lorde.
31 Ye shall not regarde them that worke with spirites, neither seeke after
soothsayers to be defiled by them: I am the Lorde your God.
32 Thou shalt ryse vp before the hore head, and reuerence the face of the olde
man, and dreade thy God: I am the Lorde.
33 If a straunger soiourne with thee in your lande, ye shall not vexe hym.
34 But the straunger that dwelleth with you, shalbe as one of your owne nation,
and thou shalt loue hym as thy selfe, for ye were straungers in the lande of
Egypt: I am the Lorde your God.
35 Ye shall do no vnrighteousnesse in iudgement, in metyarde, in wayght, or in
measure.
36 True balaunces, true wayghtes, a true Epha, and a true Hin shal ye haue: I am
the Lorde your GOD whiche brought you out of the lande of Egypt.
37 Therfore shall ye obserue all my ordinaunces, and al my iudgementes, and do
them: I am the Lorde.

Chapter 20

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 This shalt thou say to the chyldren of Israel: whosoeuer he be of the chyldren
of Israel, or of the straungers that dwell in Israel, that geueth of his
chyldren vnto Moloch, let hym be slayne: the people of the lande shall
ouerwhelme hym with stones.
3 And I wyl set my face agaynst that man, and wyll cut hym of from among his
people, because he hath geuen his chyldren vnto Moloch, for to defile my
sanctuarie, & to pollute my holy name.
4 And though that the people of the lande hyde their eyes from the man that
geueth his chyldren vnto Moloch, and kyll hym not:
5 I wyll put my face agaynst that man, and agaynst his kynred, and wyll cut hym
of, and all that go a whoring after hym to commit whordome with Moloch, from
among their people.
6 If a soule turne hym selfe after suche as worke with spirites, and after
soothsayers, to go a whoring after them, I wyll put my face agaynst that soule,
and wyll cut hym of fro among his people.
7 Sanctifie your selues therefore and be holy: for I am the Lorde your God.
8 Kepe ye myne ordinaunces, and do them: I am the Lorde whiche sanctifie you.
9 Whosoeuer he be that despiseth his father or his mother, let hym dye: for he
hath deminished the estimation of his father & mother, his blood be vpon him.
10 And the man that breaketh wedlocke with another mans wyfe, euen he that
breaketh wedlocke with his neyghbours wyfe, let be slayne both the adulterer and
the adultresse.
11 And the man that lyeth with his fathers wyfe, and vncouereth his fathers
nakednes, let them both die, their blood be vpon them.
12 If a man lye with his daughter in lawe, let them dye both of them: they haue
wrought abhomination, their blood be vpon them.
13 If a man also lye with mankinde after the maner as with women kynde, they
haue both committed an abhomination: let them dye, their blood be vpon them.
14 And if a man take a wyfe, and her mother also, it is wickednesse: They shall
burne with fire both hym & them, that there be no wickednesse among you.
15 And if a man lye with a beast, let hym dye, and ye shall slea the beast also.
16 If a woman go vnto any beast, and lye downe thereto, thou shalt kyll the
woman and the beast also: let them dye, their blood be vpon them.
17 If a man take his sister, his fathers daughter, or his mothers daughter, &
see her nakednesse, and she his nakednesse, it is a wicked thing, they shalbe
cut of in the sight of their people: he hath vncouered his sisters nakednesse,
he shall beare his sinne.
18 If a man lye with a woman hauing her natural disease, and vncouer her
nakednesse, and open her fountayne, and she also open the foutayne of her blood,
they shall both be cut of from among their people.
19 Thou shalt not vncouer the nakednesse of thy mothers sister, nor of thy
fathers sister: for he that doth so, hath vncouered his next kyn, they shal
beare their misdoyng.
20 If a man lye with his vncles wyfe, and vncouer his vncles nakednesse, they
shall beare their sinne, and shall dye chyldlesse.
21 If a man take his brothers wyfe, it is an vncleane thyng: he hath vncouered
his brothers nakednesse, they shalbe chyldlesse.
22 Ye shall kepe therefore all myne ordinaunces, and all my iudgementes, and do
them: that the lande whyther I bryng you to dwell therein, spewe you not out.
23 Ye shall not walke in the maners of this nation, whiche I caste out before
you: For they committed all these thinges, and therfore I abhorred the.
24 But I haue sayde vnto you, ye shall enherite their lande, and I wyll geue it
vnto you to possesse it, euen a lande that floweth with mylke and hony: I am the
Lorde your God, whiche haue seperated you from other nations.
25 And therefore shall ye put difference betweene cleane beastes and vncleane,
betweene vncleane foules and cleane: Ye shal not defile your soules in beastes
and foules, and in all maner creeping thinges that the grounde bryngeth foorth,
whiche I haue seperated from you as vncleane.
26 Therfore shall ye be holy vnto me, for I the Lorde am holy, and haue seuered
you from other nations, that ye shoulde be myne.
27 If there be a man or woman that worketh with a spirit, or that is a
soothsayer, let them dye: Men shall ouerwhelme them with stones, their blood be
vpon them.

Chapter 21

1 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses, Speake vnto the priestes the sonnes of Aaron,
& say vnto them: Let none be defiled by a corse among his people:
2 But by his kynsman that is nye vnto him, that is by his mother and his father,
by his sonne, and his daughter, and his brother,
3 And by his sister a mayde that is nye vnto hym, whom no man hath knowe: for
her shall he be defiled.
4 But he shall not be defiled vpon hym that hath aucthoritie among his people,
to pollute him selfe.
5 Let them not make baldnesse vpon their head, nor shaue of ye lockes of their
bearde, nor make any cuttinges in their fleshe.
6 They shalbe holy vnto their God, and not pollute the name of their God, for
the sacrifices of the Lorde made by fire, and the bread of their God they do
offer, therfore they shall be holy.
7 Let them not take a wyfe that is an whore, or polluted, nor put from her
husband: for such a one is holy vnto his god.
8 Thou shalt sanctifie hym therfore, for he offereth vp the bread of thy God: he
shall therefore be holy vnto thee, for I the Lorde which sanctifie you, am holy.
9 If a priestes daughter fall to play the whore, she polluteth her father,
therefore must she be burnt with fire.
10 He that is the hie priest among his brethren, vpon whose head the annoynting
oyle was powred, and that consecrated his hand to put on ye vestments, shal not
vncouer his head, nor rent his clothes:
11 Neither go to any dead body, nor make hymselfe vncleane by his father or his
mother.
12 Neither shall go out of the sanctuarie, nor pollute the holy place of his
God, for the crowne of the annoynting oyle of his God, is vpon him: I am the
Lord.
13 He shall take a mayde vnto his wife.
14 But a wydowe, a deuorsed woman, or a polluted, or a harlot, these shall he
not marrie: but shall take a mayde of his owne people to wyfe.
15 Neither shal he defile his seede among his people: for I am the Lorde whiche
sanctifie hym.
16 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
17 Speake vnto Aaron, and say: Whosoeuer of thy seede in their generations hath
any deformitie, let hym not prease for to offer bread vnto his God:
18 For whosoeuer hath any blemishe, shall not come neare: as if he be blynde or
lame, or that hath a brused nose, or that hath any misshapen member:
19 Or is broken footed, or broken handed,
20 Or is crooke backt, or bleare eyed, or haue a webbe or other blemishe in his
eyes, or be skuruie, or skabbed, or hath his stones broken:
21 No man that hath a blemishe, & is of the seede of Aaron the priest, shall
come nye to offer the sacrifices of the Lorde made by fire: When he hath a
deformitie, let him not prease to offer the bread of his God.
22 Let him eate the bread of his God, euen of the most holy, and of the holy:
23 Only let him not go in vnto ye vayle, nor come nye the aulter, because he is
deformed, that he pollute not my sanctuarie: for I am the Lorde that sanctifie
them.
24 And Moyses tolde it vnto Aaron and to his sonnes, and vnto all the chyldren
of Israel.

Chapter 22

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Speake vnto Aaron and his sonnes, that they be seperated from the holy thinges
of the children of Israel, and that they pollute not my holy name in those
thinges whiche they halowe vnto me: I am the Lorde.
3 Say vnto them: Whosoeuer he be of all your seede among your generations after
you, that goeth vnto the holy thinges whiche the chyldren of Israel halowe vnto
the Lorde, hauing his vncleannes vpon hym, that soule shall be cut of from out
of my sight: I am the Lorde.
4 What man soeuer of the seede of Aaron is a leper, or hath a running issue, he
shall not eate of the holy thinges, vntyll he be cleane: And who so toucheth any
man that is vncleane by reason of a dead body, or a man whose seede runneth from
hym in his sleepe,
5 Or whosoeuer toucheth any creeping thyng, whereby he may be made vncleane, or
a man, of whom he may take vncleannes, whatsoeuer vncleannes he hath:
6 The same soule that hath touched any suche, shalbe vncleane vntyll euen, and
shall not eate of the holy thynges, vntyll he haue washed his fleshe with water.
7 And when the sunne is downe, he shalbe cleane, and shall afterwarde eate of
the holy thynges, forasmuche as it is his foode.
8 Of a beast that dyeth alone, or is rent with wylde beastes, wherby he may be
defiled, he shall not eate: I am the Lorde.
9 Let them kepe therefore myne ordinaunce, lest they for the same lade sinne
vpon them, and dye for it, if they defile it: I the Lorde sanctifie them.
10 There shall no straunger eate of the holy thing, neither a ghest of ye
priestes, neither shall an hyred seruaunt eate of the holy thyng.
11 But if the priest bye any soule with money, he shall eate of it, like as he
that is borne in his house: they shall eate of his meate.
12 If the priestes daughter also be maried vnto a staunger, she may not eate of
the halowed heaue offeringes:
13 Notwithstanding, if ye priestes daughter be a wydowe or deuorsed, and haue no
chylde, but is returned vnto her fathers house agayne, she shall eate of her
fathers meate, aswell as she dyd it in her youth: But there shall no straunger
eate therof.
14 If a man eate of the holy thyng vnwittingly, he shal put the fifth part
thervnto, and geue it vnto the priest with the halowed thyng.
15 And the priestes shall not defile the holy thynges of the chyldren of Israel,
whiche they offer vnto the Lorde:
16 To lade them selues with misdoyng and trespasse while they eate their holy
thinges: for I the Lorde do halowe them.
17 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
18 Speake vnto Aaron and his sonnes, and vnto all the children of Israel, and
say vnto them: Whatsoeuer he be of the house of Israel, or straunger in Israel,
that wyll offer his sacrifice for all his vowes, and for all his freewyll
offeringes whiche they wyll offer vnto the Lorde for a burnt offering:
19 Ye shall offer at your pleasure, a male without blemishe, of the beefes, of
the sheepe, or of the goates.
20 But whatsoeuer hath a blemishe, that shall ye not offer: for it shal not be
acceptable for you.
21 And whosoeuer bryngeth a peace offering vnto the Lorde, to accomplyshe his
vowe, or a freewyll offering in beefes or sheepe, it shalbe perfite to be
accepted, there shalbe also no blemishe therein.
22 Blynde, or broken, or lame, or hauyng a wen, or skuruie, or scabbed, ye shall
not offer suche vnto the Lorde, nor put a burnt offering of any suche vpon the
aulter vnto the Lorde.
23 A bullocke or a sheepe that hath any member superfluous or lackyng, mayest
thou offer for a freewyll offering: but for a vowe it shall not be accepted.
24 Ye shall not offer vnto the Lord that which is brused, or crusshed, or
broken, or cut away, neither shal you make any offeryng therof in your lande.
25 Neither of a straungers hande shall ye offer the bread of your God of any
such, because their corruption is in the, and they haue deformitie in the
selues: and therfore shall they not be accepted for you.
26 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
27 When a bullocke, or a sheepe, or a goate is brought foorth, it shalbe seuen
dayes vnder the damme: And from the eyght day and thencefoorth, it shalbe
accepted for a burnt sacrifice vnto the Lorde.
28 And whether it be cowe or ewe, ye shall not kyll it and her young both in one
day.
29 When ye wyll offer a thanke offeryng vnto the Lorde, offer it wyllyngly:
30 And the same day it must be eaten vp, so that ye leaue none of it vntyll the
morowe: I am the Lorde.
31 Therfore shall ye kepe my comaundementes and do them: I am the Lorde.
32 Neither shal ye pollute my holy name, but I wyll be halowed among the
children of Israel: I am the Lorde which halowe you,
33 And that brought you out of the lande of Egypt to be your God: I am the
Lorde.

Chapter 23

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Speake vnto the children of Israel, and say vnto the: The feastes of the Lorde
which ye shall call holy conuocations, euen these are my feastes.
3 Sixe dayes ye shall worke: but the seuenth day is the Sabboth of rest, an holy
couocation, so that ye do no worke therin: it is the Sabboth of the Lorde in all
your dwellynges.
4 These are the feastes of the Lorde, euen holy conuocations, which ye shall
proclayme in their seasons.
5 In the fourteenth day of the first moneth at euen, is the Lordes Passouer:
6 And on the fifteenth day of the same moneth, is the feast of vnleauened bread
vnto the Lorde: seuen dayes ye must eate vnleauened bread.
7 In the first day ye shall haue an holy conuocation: ye shal do no seruile
worke therin.
8 But ye shall offer sacrifices made by fire vnto the Lorde throughout these
seuen dayes: and in the seuenth day is an holy conuocation, ye shall do no
seruile worke therin.
9 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
10 Speake vnto the children of Israel, and say vnto them: When ye be come into
the lande which I geue vnto you, and reape downe the haruest therof, ye shall
bryng a sheafe of the first fruites of your haruest vnto the priest:
11 Which shall waue the sheafe before the Lorde, to be accepted for you: and
euen the morowe after the Sabboth the priest shall waue it.
12 And ye shall offer that day when ye waue the sheafe, an hee lambe without
blemishe of a yere olde, for a burnt offeryng vnto the Lorde:
13 And the meate offeryng therof, shalbe made of two tenth deales of fine floure
myngled with oyle, to be a sacrifice made by fire vnto the Lord for a sweete
sauour: and the drynke offeryng therof shalbe of wine, euen the fourth deale of
an hyn.
14 And ye shal eate neither bread nor parched corne, nor greene eares, vntyl ye
selfe same day that ye haue brought an offering vnto your God: Let this be a
lawe for euer in your generations, and in all your dwellynges.
15 And ye shall count vnto you from the morowe after the Sabboth, euen from the
day that ye brought the sheafe of the waue offeryng, seuen Sabbothes they shalbe
complet:
16 Euen vnto the morowe after ye seuenth Sabboth shall ye number fiftie dayes,
and ye shall bryng a newe meate offeryng vnto the Lorde.
17 And ye shall bryng out of your habitations two waue loaues made of two tenth
deales of fine flowre, and that are made with leauen, for first fruites vnto the
Lorde.
18 And ye shall bryng with the bread seuen lambes without deformitie, of one
yere of age, and one young bullocke, and two rammes, which shall serue for a
burnt offeryng vnto the Lorde, with their meate offeringes and their drinke
offeringes, to be a sacrifice made by fire for a sweete sauour vnto the Lorde.
19 Then ye shall prepare an hee goate for a sinne offeryng, and two lambes of
one yere olde for peace offerynges.
20 And the priest shall waue them with the bread of the first fruites for a waue
offering before the Lorde, and with the two lambes: they shalbe holy to the
Lorde for the priestes.
21 And ye shall proclayme the same day, that it may be an holy conuocation vnto
you: ye shall do no seruile worke therin, let it be a lawe for euer in all your
dwellynges throughout your generations.
22 And whe ye reape downe the haruest of your lande, thou shalt not make cleane
riddaunce of the corners of thy fielde when thou reapest, neither shalt thou
make any after gatheryng of thy haruest, but shalt leaue them vnto the poore and
the straunger: I am the Lorde your God.
23 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
24 Speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, and say: In the seuenth moneth, in the
first day of the moneth shall ye haue Sabbath, euen the remembraunce of blowyng
of trumpettes, an holy conuocation.
25 Ye shall do no seruile worke therein, but offer sacrifice made by fire vnto
the Lorde.
26 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
27 The tenth day also of the selfe seuenth moneth is a day of reconcilyng,
therfore shal it be an holy conuocation vnto you, & ye shall humble your soules,
and offer sacrifice made by fire vnto the Lord.
28 Ye shall do no worke ye same day, for it is a day of recociling, to make an
attonement for you before the Lord your God.
29 For whatsoeuer soule it be that humbleth not hym selfe that day, he shalbe
cut of from among his people.
30 And whatsoeuer soule do any worke that day, the same soule wyll I destroy
from among his people.
31 Ye shall do no maner worke therfore: let it be a lawe for euer in your
generations, and in all your dwellynges.
32 Let it be vnto you a Sabbath of rest, and ye shall humble your soules in the
ninth day of the moneth at euen: from euen to euen shall ye celebrate your
Sabbath.
33 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
34 Speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, & say: The fifteenth day of the same
seuenth moneth is the feast of tabernacles seuen dayes vnto the Lorde.
35 The first day is an holy conuocation: ye shall do no seruile worke.
36 Seuen dayes ye shall offer sacrifice made by fire vnto the Lorde, and in the
eyght day shalbe an holy conuocation vnto you, and ye shall offer sacrifices
made by fire vnto the Lorde: It is the solempne assemblie, and ye shall do no
seruile worke therin.
37 These are the feastes of the Lorde which ye shall call holy conuocations, for
to offer sacrifice made by fire vnto the Lorde, burnt offeryng, meate offeryng,
sacrifices, and drynke offerynges, euery thyng vpon his day:
38 Besyde the Sabbathes of the Lorde, and besyde your giftes, besyde all your
vowes, and all your free offerynges which ye geue vnto the Lorde.
39 Moreouer, in the fifteenth day of the seuenth moneth when ye haue gathered in
the fruite of the lande, ye shall kepe holy day vnto the Lorde seuen dayes: The
first day shalbe a Sabbath, lykewise in the eyght day shalbe a Sabbath.
40 And ye shall take you in the first day the fruites of goodly trees, braunches
of palme trees, and the bowes of thicke trees, and willowes of the brooke, and
shall reioyce before the Lord your God seuen dayes.
41 And ye shall kepe this feast vnto the Lorde seuen dayes in the yere: It
shalbe a lawe for euer in your generations, that ye kepe it in the seuenth
moneth.
42 Ye shal dwell in boothes seuen dayes: euen all that are Israelites borne
shall dwell in boothes:
43 That your children after you may knowe howe that I made the children of
Israel to dwell in boothes when I brought them out of the lande of Egipt: I am
the Lorde your God.
44 And Moyses declared vnto the children of Israel the feastes of the Lorde.

Chapter 24

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Commaunde the children of Israel that they bryng vnto thee pure oyle oliue
beaten for the lyght, to cause the lampes to burne continually,
3 Without the vayle of witnesse in the tabernacle of the congregation shall
Aaron dresse them both euenyng and mornyng before the Lorde alwayes: Let it be a
lawe for euer in your generations.
4 He shall dresse the lampes vpon ye pure candlesticke before ye Lord
perpetually.
5 And thou shalt take fine floure, and bake twelue cakes therof, two tenth
deales shalbe in one cake.
6 And thou shalt set the in two rowes, sixe on a rowe, vpon the pure table
before the Lorde.
7 And put pure frankensence vpon the rowes, that they may be bread of
remembraunce, and an offeryng made by fire vnto the Lorde.
8 Euery Sabbath he shall put them in rowes before the Lorde euermore, of the
chyldren of Israel shall they be offered for an euerlastyng couenaunt.
9 And they shalbe Aarons and his sonnes, which shall eate them in the holy
place: For they are most holy vnto hym of the offerynges of the Lorde made by
fire, by a perpetuall statute.
10 And the sonne of an Israelitishe wife, whose father was an Egyptian, went out
among the children of Israel: And this sonne of the Israelitishe wyfe and a man
of Israel stroue together in the hoast.
11 And the Israelitishe womans sonne blasphemed the name of the Lorde, and
cursed, and they brought hym vnto Moyses: His mothers name was Selomith, which
was the daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan.
12 And they put hym in warde, that the minde of ye Lorde might be shewed the.
13 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
14 Bryng the cursed speaker without the hoast, and let all that hearde hym, put
their handes vpon his head, and let all the multitude stone hym.
15 And thou shalt speake vnto ye children of Israel, saying: Whosoeuer curseth
his God, shall beare his sinne.
16 And he that blasphemeth the name of the Lorde, let him be slayne, and all the
multitude shall stone hym to death: Whether he be borne in the lande, or a
straunger, when he blasphemeth the name of the Lorde, let hym be slayne.
17 And he that kylleth any man, let hym dye the death.
18 And he that kylleth a beast, let hym make hym good, beast for beast.
19 And yf a man cause a blemishe in his neighbour: as he hath done, so shall it
be done to hym.
20 Broke for broke, eye for eye, and tooth for tooth: euen as he hath blemisshed
a man, so shall he be blemisshed agayne.
21 And he that kylleth a beast, let hym restore it: and he that kylleth a man,
let hym dye.
22 Ye shall haue one maner of lawe, euen for the straunger as well as for one of
your owne countrey: for I am the Lorde your God.
23 And Moyses tolde the childre of Israel, & they brought hym that had cursed
out of the hoast, and stoned hym with stones: And the children of Israel dyd as
the Lorde commaunded Moyses.

Chapter 25

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses in mout Sinai, saying:
2 Speake vnto the children of Israel, and say vnto them: When ye be come into ye
lande which I geue you, the lande shall rest and kepe Sabbath vnto the Lorde.
3 Sixe yeres thou shalt sowe thy fielde, and sixe yeres thou shalt cut thy
vineyarde, and gather in the fruite therof.
4 But the seuenth yere shalbe a Sabbath of rest vnto the lande, the Lordes
Sabbath it shalbe: thou shalt neither sowe thy fielde, nor cut thy vineyarde.
5 That which groweth of the owne accorde of thy haruest, thou shalt not reape,
neither gather the grapes that thou hast left behynde: for it is a yere of rest
vnto the lande.
6 And the rest of the lande shalbe meate for you, euen for thee, for thy
seruaunt, & for thy mayde, for thy hired seruaunt, and for the straunger that
soiourneth with thee:
7 And for thy cattell, and for the beastes that are in thy lande, shall all the
encrease therof be meate.
8 And thou shalt number seuen Sabbathes of yeres vnto thee, euen seuen tymes
seuen yere, and the space of the seuen Sabbathes of yeres wylbe vnto thee nine
and fourtie yeres.
9 And then thou shalt cause to blowe the trumpet of the Iubilee in the tenth day
of the seuenth moneth, euen in ye day of attonement shal ye make the trumpe
blowe throughout all your lande.
10 And ye shall halowe that yere, euen the fiftieth yere, and proclayme libertie
throughout all the lande vnto all the inhabiters thereof: for it shalbe a
Iubilee vnto you, and ye shall returne euery man vnto his possession, and euery
man vnto his kinred agayne.
11 A yere of Iubilee shal that fiftieth yere be vnto you: Ye shall not sowe,
neither reape that which groweth of it selfe, neither gather the grapes that are
left:
12 For that yere of Iubilee shalbe holy vnto you: but ye shall eate of the
encrease therof out of the fielde.
13 In the yere of this Iubilee ye shall returne euery man vnto his possession
agayne.
14 If thou sellest ought vnto thy neyghbour, or byest ought of thy neyghbours
hande, ye shal not oppresse one another.
15 But according to the number of yeres after the Iubilee yere thou shalt bye of
thy neighbour: and accordyng vnto the number of yeres of the fruites he shall
sell vnto thee.
16 According vnto the multitude of yeres he shall encrease the price therof, and
according to the fewnesse of yeres, he shal minishe the price of it: for the
number of fruites doth he sell vnto thee.
17 Oppresse not ye therfore euery man his neighbour, but thou shalt feare thy
God: For I am the Lorde your God.
18 Wherfore ye shall do after myne ordinaunces, and kepe my lawes, and do them,
and ye shall dwell in the lande in safetie.
19 And the lande shall geue her fruite, and ye shall eate your fyll, and dwell
therin in safetie.
20 And yf ye shall say, what shall we eate the seuenth yere? for we shall not
sowe, nor gather in our increase:
21 I wyll sende my blessyng vpon you in the sixt yere, and it shall bryng foorth
fruite for three yeres.
22 And ye shall sowe the eyght yere, and eate yet of olde fruite vntyll the
ninth yere: euen vntill her fruites come ye shall eate of olde store.
23 The lande shall not be solde to waste: for the lande is myne, & ye be but
staungers and soiourners with me.
24 In all the lande of your possession, ye shal graunt a redemption for ye
lande.
25 If thy brother be waxed poore, and hath solde away of his possession, and yf
any of his kinne come to redeeme it, let hym bye out that which his brother
solde.
26 And yf he haue no man to redeeme it, and his hande hath gotten and founde as
much as may be sufficient to bye it out agayne:
27 The let hym count howe long it hath ben solde, and delyuer the rest vnto the
man to whom he solde it, that he may returne to his possession agayne.
28 But and yf his hande can not get sufficient to restore to the other agayne,
the that which is solde shal remayne in the hande of hym that hath bought it,
vntyll the yere of Iubilee: and in the Iubilee it shall come out, and he shall
returne vnto his possession agayne.
29 And yf a man sell a dwellyng house in a walled citie, he may bye it out
agayne within a whole yere after it is solde: within a yere may he redeeme it.
30 But and yf he bye it not out agayne within the space of a full yere, then the
house that is in the walled citie, shalbe stablished, as translated to hym that
bought it and his successours after hym, & shall not go out in the Iubilee.
31 But the houses of vyllages, which haue no walles rounde about them, are
counted as the fielde of the coutrey: and therefore they may be bought out
agayne, and shal go out in the Iubilee.
32 Notwithstandyng, the cities of the Leuites, and the houses of the cities of
their possession, may the Leuites redeeme at all seasons.
33 And yf a man purchase of the Leuites, the house that was solde, and the citie
of their possession, shall go out in the yere of Iubilee: for the houses of the
cities of the Leuites, are their possession among the children of Israel.
34 But the fielde of the suburbes of their cities may not be solde: for it is
their perpetuall possession.
35 If thy brother be waxen poore and fallen in decay with thee, thou shalt
relieue hym as a straunger or soiourner, that he may lyue with thee.
36 And thou shalt take none vsurie of hym, or vantage: but thou shalt feare thy
God, that thy brother may lyue with thee.
37 Thou shalt not geue hym thy money vpon vsurie, nor lende him thy victuels for
encrease.
38 I am the Lorde your God, which brought you out of the lande of Egypt, to geue
you the lande of Chanaan, and to be your God.
39 If thy brother that dwelleth by thee be waxen poore, and be solde vnto thee,
thou shalt not compell hym to serue as a bonde seruaunt:
40 But as an hired seruaunt, and as a soiourner he shalbe with thee, and shall
serue thee vnto the yere of Iubilee.
41 And then shall he depart from thee, both he and his children with hym, and
shall returne vnto his owne kinred agayne, and vnto the possession of his
fathers shall he returne.
42 For they are my seruauntes, which I brought out of the lande of Egypt, and
shall not therfore be solde as bondmen.
43 Thou shalt not rule ouer hym cruelly, but shalt feare thy God.
44 Thy bondseruaunt and thy bondemayde which thou shalt haue, shalbe of the
heathen that are rounde about you: of them shall ye purchase seruauntes and
maydes.
45 Moreouer, of the children of ye straungers that are soiourners among you, of
them shall ye bye, & of their families that are with you, which they begat in
your lande: these shalbe your possession.
46 And ye shall take them as inheritauce for your children after yon, to
possesse them for an inheritaunce, they shalbe your bondmen for euer: but ouer
your brethren the children of Israel, ye shall not rule one ouer another
cruelly.
47 If a soiourner or straunger waxe riche by thee, and thy brother that dwelleth
by hym waxe poore, and sell hym selfe vnto the straunger or soiourner by thee,
or to the stocke of the straungers kinne:
48 After that he is solde, he may be redeemed agayne: one of his brethren may
redeeme hym:
49 Either his vncle, or his vncles sonne may bye hym out: or any that is nye of
kinne vnto hym of his kinred, may redeeme hym: either yf his hande can get so
much, he may be bought out.
50 And he shall recken with hym that bought hym, from the yere that he was solde
in, vnto the yere of Iubilee: and the price of his beyng, shalbe accordyng vnto
the number of yeres, according to the tyme of an hired seruaunt shall he be with
hym.
51 If there be yet many yeres behynde, accordyng vnto them let hym geue againe
for his deliueraunce, of the money that he was bought for.
52 If there remayne but fewe yeres vnto the yere of Iubilee, let hym count with
hym agayne: and accordyng vnto his yeres, geue hym agayne for his redemption.
53 And he shalbe with hym yere by yere as an hired seruaunt: and the other shal
not raigne cruelly ouer him in thy sight.
54 If he be not redeemed thus, he shall go out in the yere of Iubilee, both he
and his children with hym:
55 For vnto me the children of Israel are seruauntes, they are my seruauntes
which I brought out of the lande of Egypt: I am the Lorde your God.

Chapter 26

1 Ye shall make you no idols nor graue image, neither reare you vp any piller,
neither shall ye set vp any image of stone in your lande to bowe downe vnto it:
for I am the Lorde your God.
2 Ye shall kepe my Sabbathes, and reuerence my sanctuarie: for I am the Lorde.
3 If ye walke in my ordinaunces, and kepe my commaundementes, & do the:
4 I wyll sende you rayne in due season, and the lande shall yeelde her increase,
and the trees of the fielde shall geue their fruite:
5 And your thresshyng shal reache vnto the vintage, & the vintage shall reache
vnto sowyng tyme: and ye shall eate your bread in plenteousnesse, and dwell in
your lande safely.
6 And I wyll sende peace in the lande, and ye shall lye downe without any man to
make you afrayde: And I wyll ridde euyll beastes out of the lande, and there
shall no sworde go throughout your lande.
7 And ye shall chase your enemies, and they shal fall before you vpon ye sworde.
8 And fiue of you shall chase an hundred, and an hundred of you shall put ten
thousande to flight: & your enemies shall fall before you vpon the sworde.
9 For I wyll haue respect vnto you, and make you increase, and multiplie you,
and set vp my couenaunt with you.
10 And ye shall eate olde store, and cary out olde, because of the newe.
11 And I wyll make my dwellyng place among you, and my soule shal not lothe you.
12 I wyll walke among you, and wilbe your God, and ye shalbe my people.
13 I am the Lorde your God which brought you out of the lande of Egypt, that ye
shoulde not be their bondmen, and I haue broken the chaynes of your yoke, and
made you go vpright.
14 But and if ye wyll not hearken vnto me, nor wyll not do after these
commaundementes:
15 And yf ye shall dispise myne ordinaunces, either if your soule abhorre my
lawes, so that ye wyll not do all my commaundementes, but breake my couenaunt,
16 I also wyll do this vnto you: For I wyll bryng vpon you fearefulnesse,
consumption, and the burnyng ague to consume your eyes, and gender sorowe of
heart: And ye shall sowe your seede in vayne, for your enemies shall eate it.
17 And I wyll set my face agaynst you, & ye shall fall before your enemies: they
that hate you shal raigne ouer you, and ye shall flee whe no man foloweth you.
18 And yf ye wyl not yet for all this hearken vnto me, then wyll I punishe you
seuen tymes more for your sinnes:
19 And wyll breake the pride of your power, and I wyll make your heauen as iron,
and your earth as brasse.
20 And your labour shalbe spent in vayne: for your lande shall not geue her
increase, neither shall the trees of the lande geue their fruites.
21 And if ye walke contrarie vnto me, and wyll not hearken vnto me, I wyll bryng
seuen tymes mo plagues vpon you, accordyng to your sinnes.
22 I wyll also sende in wylde beastes vpon you, which shall robbe you of your
children, and destroy your cattell, and make you fewe in number, and cause your
hye wayes to be desolate.
23 And if ye may not be refourmed by these thynges, but shall walke contrary
vnto me:
24 Then wyll I also walke contrarie vnto you, and wyl punishe you yet seuen
tymes for your sinnes.
25 And I wyll sende a sworde vpon you, that shall auenge my couenaunt: And when
ye are gathered together within your cities, I wyll sende the pestilence among
you, and ye shalbe delyuered into the hande of the enemie.
26 And whe I haue broken the staffe of your bread ten wyues shall bake your
bread in one ouen, and they shall deliuer you your bread agayne by wayght, ye
shall eate, and not be satisfied.
27 And if ye wyl not yet for all this hearken vnto me, but walke agaynst me:
28 I wyll walke contrary vnto you also in indignation, and wyll chastise you
seuen tymes more for your sinnes.
29 And ye shall eate the fleshe of your sonnes, and the fleshe of your daughters
shall ye deuour.
30 I wyll destroy your hye places, and cut away your images, and cast your
carkasses vpon ye bodyes of your idols, and my soule shall abhorre you.
31 And I wyll make your cities desolate, and bring your sanctuarie vnto naught,
and wyll not smell the sauour of your sweete odours.
32 I wyll bryng the lande vnto a wildernesse, and your enemies which dwell
therin shall wonder at it.
33 And I wyll strowe you among the heathen, and wyll drawe out a sworde after
you: and your lande shalbe waste, and your cities desolate.
34 Then shall the lande enioy her Sabbathes as long as it lyeth voyde, and ye
shalbe in your enemies lande: euen then shall the lande rest and enioy her
Sabbathes.
35 As long as it lyeth voyde, it shall rest: because it dyd not rest in your
Sabbathes when ye dwelt vpon it.
36 And vpon them that are left alyue of you, I will sende a fayntnesse into
their heartes in the landes of their enemies: and the sounde of a shakyng leafe
shall chase them, and they shall flee as fleyng from a sworde: they shall fall,
no man folowyng vpon them.
37 They shall fall one vpon another as it were before a sworde, euen no man
folowyng vpon them, and ye shall haue no power to stand before your enemies.
38 And ye shall perishe among the heathen, and the lande of your enemies shall
eate you vp.
39 And they that are left of you, shal pine away in their vnrighteousnesse euen
in your enemies landes, & in the misdeedes of their fathers shall they consume
with them.
40 And they shal confesse their misdeedes and the misdeedes of their fathers,
for their trespasse which they haue trespassed agaynst me, and for that also
that they haue walked contrary vnto me.
41 Therfore, I also wyll walke contrarie vnto them, and wyl bring them into the
lande of their enemies: And then at the least way their vncircumcised heartes
shalbe tamed, and they shall willingly accept their sinne.
42 Then I wyll remember my couenaunt with Iacob, and my couenaunt with Isahac,
and my couenaunt with Abraham wyll I remember, and wyll thynke on the lande.
43 The lande also shalbe left of them, and shall enioy her Sabbathes whyle she
lyeth waste without them: And they shall willingly accept their sinne, because
they dispised my lawes, & because their soule abhorred my ordinaunces.
44 And yet for all that, when they be in the lande of their enemies, I wyll not
cast them away, neither wyll abhorre them to destroy them vtterly, and to breake
my couenaunt with them: for I am the Lorde their God.
45 I wyll for their sakes remember the couenaunt of olde, when I brought the out
of the lande of Egypt in the sight of the heathen, that I myght be their God: I
am the Lorde.
46 These are the ordinaunces, and iudgementes, and lawes, which the Lorde made
betweene hym and the children of Israel in mount Sinai by the hande of Moyses.

Chapter 27

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Speake vnto the children of Israel, and say vnto them: If any man wyl make a
singuler vowe of a person vnto the Lorde, by thy estimation,
3 Then thy estimation shalbe thus: Of the male from twentie yeres olde vnto
sixtie, shalbe by thy estimation fiftie sicles of siluer, after the sicle of the
sanctuarie:
4 And if it be a female, then thy valuation shalbe thirtie sicles.
5 And from fiue yeres to twentie, thy valuation shalbe of the male twentie
sicles, and of the female ten sicles.
6 And from a moneth vnto fiue yeres, thy estimation shalbe of the male at fiue
sicles of siluer, and the female at three sicles of siluer.
7 And from sixtie yeres olde and aboue, if he be a male, then thy price shalbe
fifteene sicles, and for the female ten sicles.
8 But if he be poorer then thou hast esteemed hym, he shall present hym selfe
before the priest, and the priest shall value hym: accordyng as the hande of hym
that vowed is able to get, euen so shall the priest value hym.
9 If it be a beast of which men bryng an offeryng vnto the Lorde, all that any
man geueth of such vnto the Lord, shalbe holy.
10 He shall not alter it, nor chaunge it, a good for a bad, or a bad for a good:
And if he chaunge beast for beast, then both the same beast and it also wherwith
it was chaunged, shalbe holy.
11 If it be any maner of vncleane beast, of which men do not offer a sacrifice
vnto the Lorde, he shall set the beast before the priest:
12 And the priest shall value it, whether it be good or bad: and as the priest
setteth it, so shall it be.
13 But if he wyll bye it agayne, he shall geue the fift part more aboue that it
was set at.
14 If any man dedicate his house to be holy vnto the Lorde, the priest shall set
it, whether it be good or bad: and as the priest hath set it, so shall it
stande.
15 And when he that sanctified it wyll redeeme his house, let hym geue the fift
part of the money that it was iudged at therto, and it shalbe his.
16 If a man halowe a peece of his inherited lande vnto the Lorde, thou shalt
value it accordyng to the seede therof: An Homer of barly seede shalbe set at
fiftie sicles of siluer.
17 If he halowe his fielde immediatly fro the yere of Iubilee, it shalbe worth
accordyng as thou doest esteeme it.
18 But and if he halowe his fielde after the Iubilee, the priest shall recken
vnto hym the money, accordyng to the number of the yeres that remayne, vnto the
yeres of Iublilee folowyng, and it shalbe abated by thy estimation.
19 If he that consecrated the fielde wyll redeeme it agayne, let hym put the
fift part of the price that thou didst value it at therunto, and it shalbe his.
20 And if he wyll not redeeme the fielde, but selleth the fielde to another man:
he that vowed may redeeme it no more.
21 But when the fielde goeth out in the yere of Iubilee, and it shalbe holy vnto
the Lord, euen as a fielde seperate from common vses, and it shalbe the priestes
possession.
22 If a man sanctifie vnto the Lorde a fielde which he hath bought, and is not
of the grounde of his inheritaunce:
23 The priest shal recken vnto him what it is worth vnto the yere of Iubilee,
and he shall geue the price that it is set at the same day, as a thyng
consecrate vnto the Lorde.
24 And in the yere of Iubilee, the fielde shall returne vnto him of whom it was
bought, to hym whose inheritaunce of lande it was.
25 And all thy valuation shalbe according to the sicle of the sanctuarie: One
sicle contayneth twentie gerahs.
26 But the first borne of the beastes that is the Lordes first borne, may no man
sanctifie, whether it be oxe or sheepe, for it is the Lordes alredie.
27 If it be an vncleane beast, he shall redeeme it as thou shalt set it at, and
geue the fift part more therto: Or if it be not redeemed, it shalbe solde
accordyng to thy estimation.
28 Notwithstandyng, nothyng seperate from the common vse that a man doth
seperate vnto the Lorde of all that he hath, whether it be man or beast, or
lande of his inheritaunce, may be solde or redeemed: for euery thyng seperate
from the common vse, is most holy vnto the Lorde.
29 Nothing seperate from the common vse, whiche shalbe seperate from man, shalbe
redeemed, but dye the death.
30 Euery tithe of the lande also, both of the seede of the lande, and of the
fruite of the trees, is the Lordes, and is sanctified vnto the Lorde.
31 And if a man wyll redeeme ought of his tithes, let hym adde the fift part
thereto.
32 And euery tythe of oxe and of sheepe, and of euery beast that goeth vnder the
rod, euen euery tenth shalbe holy vnto the Lorde.
33 He shall not looke if it be good or bad, nor chaunge it: els if he chaunge
it, both it and that it was chaunged withall, shalbe halowed, and may not be
redeemed.
34 These are the commaundementes whiche the Lorde commaunded by Moyses vnto the
chyldren of Israel in mount Sinai.


Numbers

Chapter 1

1 And the Lord spake vnto Moyses in the wildernesse of Sinai, in the tabernacle
of the congregation, the first day of the seconde moneth in the second yere
after they were come out of the lande of Egypt, saying:
2 Take ye the summe of all the multitude of the children of Israel, after their
kinredes & housholdes of their fathers, with the number of their names, all that
are males, head by head,
3 From twentie yeres olde and aboue, euen all that go foorth to the warre in
Israel: thou and Aaron shall number them throughout their armies.
4 And with you shalbe men of euery tribe, such as are the heades of the houses
of their fathers.
5 And these are the names of the men that shall stand with you: of the tribe of
Ruben, Elizur, the sonne of Sedeur.
6 Of Simeon, Selumiel the sonne of Suri Saddai.
7 Of Iuda, Nahesson, the sonne of Aminadab.
8 Of Isachar, Nathanael the sonne of Zuar.
9 Of Zabulon, Eliab the sonne of Helo.
10 Among the chyldren of Ioseph: of Ephraim, Elisama the sonne of Ammihud: of
Manasse, Gameliel the sonne of Pedazur.
11 Of Beniamin, Abidan the sonne of Gedeon.
12 Of Dan, Ahiezer the sonne of Ammi Saddai.
13 Of Aser, Pagiel the sonne of Orran.
14 Of Gad, Elisah the sonne of Duel.
15 Of Nephthali, Ahira ye sonne of Enan.
16 There were of great fame in the congregation, princes of the tribes of their
fathers, and heades ouer thousandes in Israel.
17 And Moyses & Aaron toke these men whiche are expressed by their names.
18 And they called all the congregation together the first day of the second
moneth, and they were reckened throughout their kinredes and houses of their
fathers, accordyng to the number of their names, from twentie yeres olde and
aboue, head by head.
19 As the Lorde commaunded Moyses, euen so he numbred them in the wildernesse of
Sinai.
20 So were the chyldren of Ruben, Israels eldest sonne, throughout their
generations, and their kinredes, and houses of their fathers, accordyng to the
number of their names, head by head, all males from twentie yeres old & aboue,
as many as did go foorth to the warre:
21 The number of them that were of the tribe of Ruben, was fourtie & sixe
thousande, and fiue hundred.
22 Of the chyldren of Simeon throughout their generations, & their kinredes, and
houses of their fathers, the summe of the in the number of names head by head,
all the males from twentie yeres and aboue, whosoeuer myght go foorth to the
warre:
23 The summe of them that were of the tribe of Simeon, fiftie & nine thousande
and three hundred.
24 Of the chyldren of Gad throughout their generations, and their kinredes, &
housholdes of their fathers, the number of the names from twentie yeres & aboue,
all that went foorth to ye warre:
25 The number of them that were of the tribe of Gad, was fourtie and fiue
thousand, sixe hundred and fiftie.
26 Of the chyldren of Iuda throughout their generations, and their kinredes, and
houses of their fathers, the number of names fro twentie yeres & aboue, all that
were able to go foorth to ye warre:
27 The number of them that were of the tribe of Iuda, was threscore and
fourteene thousande, and sixe hundred.
28 Of the chyldren of Isachar throughout their generations, & their kinredes, &
houses of their fathers, the number of names from twentie yeres and aboue,
whiche went all foorth to the warre:
29 The number of them that were of the tribe of Isachar, was fiftie and foure
thousande and foure hundred.
30 Of the chyldren of Zabulon, throughout their generations, & their kinredes,
and houses of their fathers, the number of names from twentie yeres and aboue,
all whiche were able to go foorth in the hoast:
31 The number of them that were of the tribe of Zabulon, was fiftie and seuen
thousande and foure hundred.
32 Of the chyldren of Ioseph namely of the chyldren of Ephraim throughout their
generations, and their kinredes and houses of their fathers, the number of names
from twentie yeres & aboue, all that went out to the warre:
33 The number of them that were of the tribe of Ephraim, was fourtie thousand
and fiue hundred.
34 Of the chyldren of Manasse throughout their generations, & their kinredes,
and houses of their fathers, the number of names from twentie yeres olde and
aboue, all that went out to the warre:
35 The number of them that were of the tribe of Manasse, was thirtie and two
thousande and two hundred.
36 Of the chyldren of Beniamin throughout their generations, & their kinredes
and houses of their fathers, the number of names from twentie yeres and aboue,
all that went foorth to the warre:
37 The number of them that were of the tribe of Beniamin, was thirtie and fiue
thousande, and foure hundred.
38 Of the chyldren of Dan throughout their generations, and kinredes, and houses
of their fathers, the number of names from twentie yeres olde and aboue, all
that went foorth to the warre:
39 The number of them that were of the tribe of Dan, was threscore and two
thousande and seuen hundred.
40 Of the chyldren of Asar throughout their generations, and their kinredes, and
houses of their fathers, the number of the names from twentie yeres and aboue,
all that went out to the warre:
41 The number of them that were of the tribe of Aser, was fourtie and one
thousande and fiue hundred.
42 Of the children of Nephthali throughout their generations, and their
kinredes, and houses of their fathers, the number of names from twentie yeres
and aboue, all that myght go foorth to the warre:
43 The number of them that were of the tribe of Nephthali, was fiftie and three
thousande and foure hundred.
44 These are the summes whiche Moyses and Aaron numbred, and the princes of
Israel, those twelue men which were euery one for the house of their fathers.
45 So were all the numbers of the chyldren of Israel throughout the houses of
their fathers, from twentie yeres and aboue, all that went foorth to the warre
in Israel:
46 All they I say, were in number sixe hundred thousand, and three thousand,
fiue hundred and fiftie.
47 But the Leuites after the tribes of their fathers, were not numbred among
them.
48 For the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
49 Only thou shalt not number the tribe of Leui, neither take the summe of them
among the chyldren of Israel.
50 But thou shalt appoynt the Leuites ouer the tabernacle of wytnesse, & ouer
all the vessels therof, and ouer all thinges that are in it: Yea, they shall
beare the tabernacle, and all the vessels therof, and they shall minister in it,
and shall dwell rounde about the tabernacle.
51 And whe the tabernacle goeth foorth, the Leuites shall take it downe: and
when the tabernacle is to be pitched, the Leuites shal set it vp: and if any
straunger come nye, he shall dye.
52 And the chyldren of Israel shall pitch their tentes, euery man in his owne
campe, and euery man vnder his owne standerd throughout their hoastes.
53 But the Leuites shall pitche rounde about the tabernacle of wytnesse, that
there be no wrath vpon the congregation of the chyldren of Israel: and the
Leuites shall kepe the watche of the tabernacle of wytnesse.
54 And the chyldren of Israel dyd accordyng to all that the Lorde commaunded
Moyses, euen so dyd they.

Chapter 2

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses and Aaron, saying:
2 Euery man of the chyldren of Israel shal pitche vnder his owne standerd, &
vnder the ensigne of their fathers houses: farre of about the tabernacle of the
congregation shall they pitche.
3 On the east side towarde the rising of the sunne, shall they of the standerd
of the hoast of Iuda pitche, throughout their armies: And Nahesson the sonne of
Aminadab, shalbe captayne of the sonnes of Iuda.
4 And his hoast & the number of them, threscore and fourteene thousande and sixe
hundred.
5 Next vnto hym shall they that be of the tribe of Isachar pitch: and Nathanael
the sonne of Zuar, shalbe captayne of the chyldren of Isachar.
6 His hoast and the number thereof, fiftie & foure thousand and foure hundred.
7 And then the tribe of Zabulon, and Eliab the sonne of Helon, shalbe captayne
ouer the chyldren of Zabulon.
8 And his hoast & the number of them, fiftie and seuen thousand and foure
hundred.
9 So that the whole number of the whole hoast of Iuda, are an hundred thousande,
fourscore and sixe thousand, and foure hundred, throughout their armies: and
these shall first moue.
10 On the southside shalbe the standerd of the hoast of Ruben, according to
their armyes: and the captayne ouer the sonnes of Ruben, shalbe Elizur the sonne
of Sedeur.
11 And his hoast & the number of them, fourtie and sixe thousand and fiue
hundred.
12 And fast by hym shall the tribe of Simeon pitche, and the captayne ouer the
sonnes of Simeon, shalbe Salumiel the sonne of Zuri Saddai.
13 And his hoast & the number of them, fiftie and nine thousande and three
hundred.
14 And the tribe of Gad also, and the captayne ouer the sonnes of Gad, shalbe
Eliasaph the sonne of Duel.
15 And his hoast & the number of them, fourtie and fiue thousande, sixe hundred
and fiftie.
16 Al that were numbred with the campe of Ruben, an hundred thousande, fiftie
and one thousande, foure hundred and fiftie, throughout their armies: and thei
shall set foorth in the seconde place.
17 And the tabernacle of the congregation shall go with the hoast of the
Leuites, in the middes of the campe: And as they lye in their tentes, euen so
shall they proceede in the iourney, euery man in his degree, and vnder their
owne standerdes.
18 On the west side shalbe the standerd of the campe of Ephraim, accordyng to
their armies, and the captaine ouer the sonnes of Ephraim, shalbe Elisama the
sonne of Amihud.
19 His hoast and the number of them, fourtie thousande and fiue hundred.
20 And fast by hym, shalbe the tribe of Manasse: and the captayne ouer the
sonnes of Manasse, shalbe Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur.
21 His hoast and the number of them, thirtie and two thousande, and two hundred.
22 And the tribe of Beniamin also: and the captayne ouer the sonnes of Beniamin,
shalbe Abidan ye sonne of Gedeon.
23 His hoast & the number of them, thirtie and fiue thousande & foure hundred.
24 All the number of the campe of Ephraim, were an hundred thousande, eyght
thousande, and an hundred, thorowout their armies: and they shall go in the
thirde place.
25 The standerd of the hoast of Dan, shal kepe the north side with their armies:
and the captayne ouer the chyldren of Dan, shalbe Ahiezer the sonne of Ammi
Saddai.
26 His hoast and the number of them, threscore and two thousande, and seuen
hundred.
27 And fast by hym shal the tribe of Aser pitch: and the captayne ouer the
sonnes of Aser, shalbe Pagiel ye sonne of Ocran.
28 His hoast & the number of them, fourtie and one thousand and fiue hundred.
29 And the tribe of Nephthali: & the captayne ouer the chyldren of Nephthali,
shalbe Ahira the sonne of Enan.
30 His hoast and the number of them, fiftie and three thousande and foure
hundred.
31 All they that were numbred with the hoast of Dan, were an hundred thousande,
fiftie and seuen thousand and sixe hundred: And they shall go hinmost with their
standerdes.
32 These are the summes of the chyldren of Israel throughout the houses of their
fathers, euen all the numbers that pitched throughout their hoastes, sixe
hundred thousande, three thousand, fiue hundred and fiftie.
33 But the Leuites were not numbred among the chyldren of Israel, as the Lorde
commaunded Moyses.
34 And the chyldren of Israel dyd accordyng to all that the Lorde commaunded
Moyses, so they pitched with their standerdes, and so they iourneyed euery one
throughout their kinredes, according to the housholdes of their fathers.

Chapter 3

1 These also are the generations of Aaron and Moyses, in ye day that the Lorde
spake with Moyses in mount Sinai.
2 And these are the names of the sonnes of Aaron: Nadab the eldest sonne, and
Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
3 These are the names of the sonnes of Aaron whiche were priestes annoynted, and
whose hande was consecrated to minister.
4 And Nadab and Abihu dyed before the Lorde, when they offred straunge fire
befor the Lorde in the wyldernesse of Sinai, and had no chyldren: And Eleazar
and Ithamar ministred in the sight of Aaron their father.
5 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
6 Bryng the tribe of Leui, and set them before Aaron the priest, that they may
serue hym:
7 And take the charge with hym, euen the charge of the whole congregation before
the tabernacle of the congregation, to do the seruice of the tabernacle.
8 They shall kepe all the instrumentes of the tabernacle of the congregation, &
haue the charge of the chyldren of Israel, to do the seruice of the tabernacle.
9 And thou shalt geue the Leuites vnto Aaron and to his sonnes: for they are
geuen and deliuered vnto hym of the chyldren of Israel.
10 And thou shalt appoynt Aaron and his sonnes to wayte on their priestes
office: and the straunger that commeth nye, shalbe slayne.
11 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
12 Beholde, I haue taken the Leuites from among the chyldren of Israel for all
the first borne that openeth the matrice among the chyldren of Israel, and the
Leuites shalbe mine.
13 Because all the first borne are myne: for the same day that I smote all the
first borne in the lande of Egypt, I halowed vnto me all the first borne in
Israel, both man and beast, and mine they shalbe: I am the Lorde.
14 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses in the wyldernesse of Sinai, saying:
15 Number the chyldren of Leui after the houses of their fathers in their
kinredes: All that are males from a moneth old and aboue, shalt thou number.
16 And Moyses numbred them, according to the worde of the Lorde, as he was
commaunded.
17 And these were the chyldren of Leui in their names: Gerson, and Caath, and
Merari.
18 And these are the names of the chyldren of Gerson in their kinredes: Libni,
and Semei.
19 The sonnes of Caath in their kinredes: Amram, Iesar, Hebron, and Oziel.
20 And the sonnes of Merari in their kinredes: Maheli, and Musi. These are the
kinredes of the Leuites, accordyng to the houses of their fathers.
21 Of Gerson came the kinred of the Libnites and the kinred of the Semeites.
These are the kinredes of the Gersonites,
22 And the summe of them after the number of all the males, from a moneth old
and aboue, was counted seuen thousande and fiue hundred.
23 And the kinredes of the Gersonites shall pitch behinde the tabernacle
westwarde.
24 The captayne and most auncient of the house of the Gersonites, shalbe
Eliasaph the sonne of Lael.
25 And the charge of the chyldren of Gerson in the tabernacle of the
congregation, shalbe the tabernacle and the pauilion, the couering thereof, and
the vayle of the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation:
26 And the hangynges of the court, and the curtayne of the doore of the court
whiche is rounde about the tabernacle, and the aulter, and the cordes of it for
all the seruice thereof.
27 And of Caath, came the kinred of the Amramites, and the kinred of the
Izecharites, the kinred of the Hebronites, and the kinred of the Ozielites:
These are the kinredes of the Caathites.
28 And the number of all the males from a moneth olde and aboue, was eyght
thousande and sixe hundred, hauing the charge of the sanctuarie.
29 And the kinred of the chyldren of Caath, shall pitche on the south syde of
the tabernacle.
30 The captayne and most auncient of the house of the kinred of the Caathites,
shalbe Elisaphan the sonne of Oziel.
31 And their charge shalbe the arke, the table, the candelsticke, and the
aulters, & the vessels of the sanctuarie that they minister in, and the vayle, &
whatsoeuer belongeth to the ministration therof.
32 And Eleazar the sonne of Aaron the priest, shalbe captayne ouer all the
captaines of the Leuites, and hath the ouersight of them that wayte vpon the
sanctuarie.
33 And of Merari came the kinred of the Mahelites, and the kinred of the
Musites: These are ye kinredes of Merari.
34 And the summe of them accordyng to the number of al the males, from a moneth
olde and aboue, was sixe thousand and two hundred.
35 The captayne and the most auncient of their house that were of the kinred of
Merari, was Zuriel the sonne of Abihael: and these shall pitche on the north
syde of the tabernacle.
36 And vnder the custodie and charge of the sonnes of Merari, shalbe ye boordes
of the tabernacle, & the barres pyllers, and sockettes therof, and all the
vessels therof, and all that serueth therto:
37 And the pillers of the court rounde about, with their sockets, their pinnes,
and their cordes.
38 But on the forefront of the tabernacle towarde the east, before the
tabernacle of the congregation eastwarde, shall Moyses & Aaron and his sonnes,
pitche and wayte to kepe the sanctuarie, and to kepe the chyldren of Israel: And
the strannger that commeth nye, shalbe slayne.
39 And the whole summe of the Leuites whiche Moyses and Aaron numbred at the
commaundement of the Lorde throughout their kinredes, euen all the males from a
moneth olde and aboue, was twentie and two thousande.
40 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Number all ye first borne that are males
among the chyldren of Israel, from a moneth olde and aboue, and take the number
of their names.
41 And thou shalt appoynt the Leuites to me (for I am the Lorde) for all the
first borne of the children of Israel, and the cattell of the Leuites for all
the first gendred of the cattell of the chyldren of Israel.
42 And Moyses numbred, as the Lorde commaunded hym, all the first borne of the
chyldren of Israel.
43 And all the first borne males, rehearsed by their names, from a moneth olde
and aboue, accordyng to their number, were twentie and two thousande, two
hundred and threscore and thirteene.
44 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
45 Take the Leuites for al the first borne of the chyldren of Israel, and the
cattell of the Leuites for their cattell, & the Leuites shalbe myne: I am the
Lorde.
46 And for the redeeming of the two hundred and threscore and thirteene, which
are mo then the Leuites in the first borne of the chyldren of Israel.
47 Take fiue sicles of euery head, after the wayght of the sanctuarie, the sicle
contaynyng twentie gerahs.
48 And geue the money wherewith the odde number of them is redeemed, vnto Aaron
and his sonnes.
49 And Moyses toke the redemption money of them that were redeemed, beyng mo
then the Leuites:
50 Of the first borne of the children of Israel toke he this money: euen a
thousande three hundred and three score and fiue sicles, after ye sicle of the
sanctuarie.
51 And Moyses gaue the money of them that were redeemed, vnto Aaron and his
sonnes, according to the word of the Lorde, euen as the Lorde commaunded Moyses.

Chapter 4

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses and Aaron, saying:
2 Take the summe of the chyldren of Caath fro among the sonnes of Leui, after
their kinredes and houses of their fathers:
3 From thirtie yeres and aboue, vntill fiftie, all that enter into the hoast for
to do the worke in the tabernacle of the congregation.
4 This shalbe the office of the chyldren of Caath in the tabernacle of the
congregation, about the most holy.
5 And when the hoast remoueth, Aaron and his sonnes shall come and take downe
the couering vayle, and wrap the arke of wytnesse in it:
6 And shall put thereon a coueryng of Badgers skinnes, and shall spreade vppon
it a cloth that is altogether of blew silke, and put in the barres therof.
7 And vpon the shewe table, they shall spreade abrode a cloth of blew silke, and
put thereon the dishes, incense cuppes, and goblets, and pottes to powre with:
and there shalbe bread thereon continually.
8 And they shall spreade vpon them a couering of skarlet, and couer the same
with a couering of Badgers skinnes, and put in the barres thereof.
9 And they shall take a cloth of blewe silke, and couer the candelsticke of
light, with his lampes, snuffers, and censars, and all the oyle vessels whiche
they occupie about it.
10 And they shall put both it and all the vessels thereof, within a coueryng of
Badgers skinnes, and put it vpon a barre.
11 And vpon the golden aulter, they shall spreade a cloth of blewe silke, and
couer it with a couering of Badgers skinnes, and put to the barres therof.
12 And they shall take all the instrumentes wherewith they minister in the
sanctuarie, and put a cloth of blew silke vpon them, and couer them with a
couering of Badgers skynnes, and put them on a barre.
13 And they shall take away the asshes from the aulter, and spreade a purple
cloth thereon.
14 And put vpon it all the vessels thereof that they minister withall, euen the
cole pannes, the fleshe hookes, the fire shouels, the basens, & the other
vessels of the aulter: and they shall spreade vppon it a couering of Badgers
skinnes, and put to the barres of it.
15 And when Aaron & his sonnes haue made an ende of couering the sanctuarie, and
all the vessels of the sanctuarie, agaynst that the hoast remoue, then the
sonnes of Caath shall come in for to beare: but they shall not touche any holye
thyng, lest they dye. And this is the charge of the sonnes of Caath, in the
tabernacle of the congregation.
16 And to the office of Eleasar the sonne of Aaron the priest, pertayneth the
oyle for the light, the sweete incense, the daylye meate offering, and the
annoyntyng oyle, and the ouersight of all the tabernacle, and of all that
therein is, both in the sanctuarie, and in all the vessels thereof.
17 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses and Aaron, saying:
18 Ye shall not cut of the tribe of the kinred of the Caathites, from among the
Leuites:
19 But thus do vnto them, that they may lyue and not dye: when they go vnto the
most holy thinges: let Aaron and his sonnes go in, and appoint them euerye one
to his office, and to his charge.
20 But let them not go in, to see when the holy thinges are folden vp, lest they
dye.
21 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
22 Take also the summe of the chyldren of Gerson, throughout the houses of their
fathers, and throughout their kinredes.
23 From thirtie yeres olde, and aboue, vntill fiftie yeres, shalt thou number
them, al that enter into the assemblie for to do seruice in the tabernacle of
the congregation.
24 And this is the seruice of the kinred of the Gersonites, to serue and to
beare.
25 They shall beare the curtaynes of the tabernacle, and the tabernacle of the
congregation, his couering, and the couering of Badgers skinnes that is an hye
vpon it, and the vayle of the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation:
26 And the curtaynes of the court, and the vayle that is in the entring in of
the gate of the court, whiche is neare the tabernacle, and neare the aulter
rounde about, with the cordes, and al the instrumentes that serue vnto them, &
all that is made for them, and so shal they serue.
27 At the mouth of Aaron & his sonnes, shal all the seruice of the chyldren of
the Gersonites be done, in all their charges and in all their seruice: and ye
shall appoynt vnto them all their burdens to kepe.
28 And this is the seruice of the kinred of the chyldren of Gerson in the
tabernacle of the cogregation, and their watche shalbe vnder the hand of Ithamar
the sonne of Aaron the priest.
29 And thou shalt number the sonnes of Merari after their kinredes, and after
the houses of their fathers:
30 From thirtie yeres olde and aboue, vnto fiftie yeres shalt thou number them,
euery one that enter into the assemblie, to do the seruice of the tabernacle of
the congregation.
31 And this is their office and charge, according to all their seruice in the
tabernacle of the congregation: The borders of the tabernacle, with the barres,
pyllers, and sockettes therof.
32 And the pyllers that are round about the court, with their sockettes, pinnes,
and cordes, & with all the instrumentes of it, for all their seruice: And by
name ye shal recken the instrumentes of their office and charge.
33 This is the seruice of the kinredes of the sonnes of Merari, accordyng to all
their office in the tabernacle of the congregation, vnder the hand of Ithamar
the sonne of Aaron the priest.
34 And Moyses and Aaron and the princes of the multitude, numbred ye sonnes of
the Caathites, after their kinredes and houses of their fathers,
35 From thirtie yeres olde, and aboue, vnto fiftie yeres, all that enter into
the assemblie, to do seruice in the tabernacle of the congregation.
36 And the numbers of them throughout their kinredes, were two thousande, seuen
hundred, and fiftie.
37 This is the number of the kinredes of Caath, namely all that might do seruice
in the tabernacle of the congregation, which Moyses and Aaron did number,
accordyng to the commaundement of the Lorde by the hande of Moyses.
38 Also the numbers of the sonnes of Gerson throughout their kinredes and houses
of their fathers:
39 From thirtie yeres olde, & aboue, vnto fiftie yeres, all that enter into the
assemblie for to do seruice in the tabernacle of the congregation.
40 And the numbers of them throughout their kinredes, and houses of their
fathers, were two thousande, sixe hundred, and thirtie.
41 This is the number of the kinredes of the sonnes of Gerson, of all that dyd
seruice in the tabernacle of the congregation, whiche Moyses and Aaron dyd
number, accordyng to the commaundement of the Lorde.
42 And the numbers of the kinredes of the sonnes of Merari throughout their
kinredes and houses of their fathers:
43 From thirtie yeres olde, and vp, vnto fiftie yeres, all that enter into the
assemblie for the seruice of the tabernacle of the congregation.
44 And the numbers of them after their kinredes, were three thousand and two
hundred.
45 These be the summes of the kinredes of the sonnes of Merari, which Moyses &
Aaro numbred, according to the word of the Lorde, by the handes of Moyses.
46 And so al the numbers of the Leuites, which Moyses, Aaron, and the Lordes of
Israel numbred after their kinredes and housholdes of their fathers:
47 From thirtie yeres olde and vp, vnto fiftie yeres, euery one that came to do
his duetie, office, seruice, and charge in the tabernacle of the congregation.
48 So the numbers of them were seuen thousande, fiue hundred, and fourescore.
49 Accordyng to the worde of the Lorde dyd Aaron number them by the hande of
Moyses, euery one according to their seruice and charge: Thus were they of that
tribe numbred, as the Lorde commaunded Moyses.

Chapter 5

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Commaunde the children of Israel that they put out of the hoast euery leper,
and euery one that hath an issue, & whosoeuer is defiled by the dead:
3 Both male and female shal ye put out, euen out of the hoast shall ye put them,
that they defile not their tentes, among which I dwell.
4 And the children of Israel dyd so, and put them out of the hoast: euen as the
Lorde spake vnto Moyses, so dyd the children of Israel.
5 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
6 Speake vnto the children of Israel: When a man or woman shall commit any sinne
that men comit, and trespasse agaynst the Lorde: when that person shall
trespasse,
7 Then they shall knowledge their sinne which they haue done, and let hym
restore againe the hurt that he hath done, with his principall, and put the fift
part of it more therto, and geue it vnto hym whom he hath trespassed agaynst.
8 But and if the man haue no kinseman to restore the hurt vnto, let the
trespasse be made good vnto the Lorde, and it shalbe the priestes, beside the
Ramme of the attonement, wherby an attonement shalbe made for hym.
9 And euery heaue offering that is made of the holy thynges of the children of
Israel which they bring vnto the priest, shalbe his.
10 And euery mans halowed thynges shalbe his: whatsoeuer any man geueth the
priest, it shalbe his.
11 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
12 Speake vnto the children of Israel, and say vnto them: If any mans wyfe go
aside, and trespasse agaynst hym,
13 So that another man lye with her fleshly, and it be hid from the eyes of her
husbande, and is kept close that she is defyled, and there is no witnesse
against her, neither she taken with the maner,
14 And the spirite of gelousie commeth vpon hym, so that he is gelous ouer his
wyfe which is defyled: or if the spirite of gelousie come vpon hym, so that he
is gelous ouer his wyfe which is yet vndefyled:
15 Then let the man bring his wyfe vnto the priest, and bring her offeryng with
her, the tenth part of an Epha of barly meale: but let hym put no oyle vpon it,
nor put frankensence theron, for it is an offeryng of gelousie, an offeryng for
a remembraunce, causyng the sinne to be thought vpon.
16 And the priest shall bryng her, and set her before the Lorde.
17 And the priest shall take holy water in an earthen vessel, and of the dust
that is in the floore of the tabernacle, the priest shal take it, and put it
into ye water.
18 And let the priest set the woman before the Lorde, and vncouer the womans
head, and put the offering of memoriall in her handes, which is the gelousie
offeryng: and the priest shall haue bytter and cursed water in his hande.
19 And the priest shall charge her by an othe, and say vnto the woman: If no man
haue lyen with thee, neither hast gone aside to vncleannesse without thy
husbande, then haue thou no harme of this bitter and cursed waters.
20 But and if thou hast gone aside from thyne husbande, and art defiled, and
some man hath lyen with thee beside thyne husbande:
21 (Then ye priest shal charge the woman with an othe of cursing, & the priest
shall say vnto the woman) the Lorde make thee accursed and detestable for the
othe among the people, when the Lord doth make thy thigh to rot, & thy belly
swell.
22 These cursed waters go into the bowels of thee, that they may make thy belly
swell, and thy thigh to rotte. And let the woman say, Amen amen.
23 And let the priest write these curses in a booke, and shall blot them out
with the bitter waters:
24 And geue the woman those bitter and cursed waters to drinke, yt those cursed
and bitter waters may enter into her.
25 And then the priest shall take the gelousie offeryng out of the womans hande,
and waue it before the Lorde, and bryng it vnto the aulter.
26 And the priest shall take an handfull of the offeryng for a memoriall, &
burne it vpon the aulter, and then make the woman drynke the waters:
27 And when he hath made the woman drynke the waters, if she be defiled and haue
trespassed agaynst her husbande, then shall the cursed and bytter waters go into
her, and her belly shal swell, and her thigh shall rotte: and the woman shalbe a
curse among her people.
28 And yf the woman be not defiled, but is cleane, she shall haue no harme, but
shall conceaue and beare.
29 This is the lawe of gelousie, when a wyfe goeth aside from her husbande, and
is defiled:
30 Or when the spirit of gelousie cometh vpon a man, and he beyng gelous ouer
his wyfe, doth bryng her before ye Lord: And the priest shall do to her
accordyng vnto all this lawe,
31 And the man shalbe giltlesse, and this woman shall beare her sinne.

Chapter 6

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Speake vnto the children of Israel, and say vnto them: Whe either man or woman
doth seperate them selues to vowe a vowe of a Nazarite, to seperate them selues
vnto the Lorde:
3 He shall seperate him selfe from wine and strong drynke, and shall drynke no
vineger of wine or of strong drinke, nor shall drinke whatsoeuer is pressed out
of grapes, and shall eate no freshe grapes, neither yet dried.
4 As long as his abstinence endureth, shall he eate nothyng that is made of the
vine tree, or of the cornels, or of the huske of the grape.
5 And as long as he voweth and is seperated, there shall not rasure come vpon
his head, vntyll his dayes be out in the which he seperateth hym selfe vnto the
Lorde, he shalbe holy, and shall let the lockes of his heere growe.
6 As long as he seperateth hym selfe vnto the Lorde, he shall come at no dead
body.
7 He shall not make hym selfe vncleane at the death of his father, mother,
brother, or sister: because that the consecration of his God is vpon his head,
8 All the dayes of his seperation, he is holy vnto the Lorde.
9 And if any man dye sodenly before him, or he be ware, the head of his
consecration shalbe defiled: and he shall shaue his head the day of his
cleansyng, euen the seuenth day shall he shaue it.
10 And the eyght day he shall bryng two turtles, or two young pigeons, to the
priest, before the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation.
11 And the priest shall offer the one for a sinne offeryng, and the other for a
burnt offeryng: and make an attonement for hym as concernyng that he sinned by
the dead, and shall halowe his head the same day.
12 And he shall consecrate vnto the Lord the tyme of his seperation, & shall
bring a lambe of a yere olde for a trespasse offeryng: but the dayes that were
before are lost, because his consecration was defiled.
13 This is the lawe of the Nazarite: when the tyme of his consecration is out,
he shalbe brought vnto the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation:
14 And he shall bryng his offeryng vnto the Lorde, an hee lambe of a yere olde
without blemishe for a burnt offeryng, and a shee lambe of a yere olde without
blemishe for a sinne offering, & a ramme without blemishe also for peace
offerynges,
15 And a basket of vnleauened bread, euen cakes of fine floure mingled with
oyle, and wafers of vnleauened bread annoynted with oyle, with their meate
offerynges and drynke offerynges.
16 And the priest shall bryng them before the Lorde, and offer his sinne
offeryng and his burnt offeryng.
17 And shall prepare the ramme for a peace offering vnto the Lorde, with the
basket of vnleauened bread: and the priest shall make also his meat offeryng and
his drynke offeryng.
18 And the Nazarite shal shaue the head of his consecration at the doore of the
tabernacle of the congregation, and shal take the heere of the head of his
consecration, and put it in the fire which is vnder the peace offeryng.
19 And the priest shall take the sodden shoulder of the ramme, and one
vnleauened cake out of the basket, and one vnleauened wafer also, and put them
vpon the handes of the Nazarite, after he hath shauen his consecration.
20 And the priest shall waue them before the Lorde: And these holy thynges
shalbe the priestes, with the waue brest and the heaue shoulder: and then the
Nazarite may drynke wine.
21 This is the lawe of the Nazarite which hath vowed his offeryng vnto the Lorde
for his consecration, besides those thynges that his hande can get: according to
the vowe which he vowed, euen so he must do after the lawe of his consecration.
22 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
23 Speake vnto Aaron and his sonnes, saying: On this wyse ye shall blesse the
chyldren of Israel, and say vnto them:
24 The Lorde blesse thee, and kepe thee:
25 The Lorde make his face shine vpon thee, and be mercyfull vnto thee:
26 The Lorde lyft vp his countenaunce vpon thee, and geue thee peace.
27 And they shall put my name vpon the chyldren of Israel, and I wyll blesse
them.

Chapter 7

1 And when Moyses had full set vp the tabernacle, & annoynted and sanctified it,
and all the instrumentes therof, the aulter also & all the vessels therof: and
had annoynted them & sanctified them.
2 Then the princes of Israel, heades ouer the houses of their fathers (which
were the lordes of the tribes, and ouer them that were numbred) offered,
3 And brought their sacrifice before the Lorde, sixe couered charettes, & twelue
oxen: one charet for two lordes, and for one an oxe, and they brought them
before the tabernacle.
4 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
5 Take it of them, that they may be to do the seruice of the tabernacle of the
congregation, and thou shalt geue them vnto the Leuites, to euery man accordyng
vnto his office.
6 And Moyses toke the charettes and the oxen, & gaue them vnto the Leuites.
7 Two charettes and foure oxen he gaue vnto the sonnes of Gerson, accordyng vnto
their office.
8 And foure charettes & eyght oxen he gaue vnto the sonnes of Merari, according
vnto their offices, vnder ye hande of Ithamar the sonne of Aaron the priest.
9 But vnto the sonnes of Caath he gaue none: because the charge of the
sanctuarie belonged vnto them, which they dyd beare vpon shoulders.
10 And the princes offered for the dedicatyng of the aulter in the day that it
was annoynted, and brought their sacrifices before the aulter.
11 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: The princes shal bring their offeringes,
euery day one prince, for the dedicating of the aulter.
12 And so on the first day dyd Nahesson the sonne of Aminadab, of the tribe of
Iuda, offer his sacrifice.
13 And his offeryng was a siluer charger of an hundred and thirtie sicles, a
siluer boule of seuentie sicles, after the waight of the sanctuarie, and they
were both full of fine floure, mingled with oyle, for a meate offeryng:
14 An incense cup of ten sicles of golde, full of incense:
15 A young bullocke, a ramme, a lambe of a yere olde, for a burnt offeryng:
16 An hee goate for a sinne offeryng:
17 And for a peace offering, two oxen, fiue rammes, fiue hee goates, & fiue
lambes of a yere olde. This was the gift of Nahesson the sonne of Aminadab.
18 The seconde day Nathaniel the sonne of Zuar, captayne ouer Isachar, did
offer:
19 And he offered for his gyft, a siluer charger of an hundred and thirtie
sicles, a siluer boule of seuentie sicles, after the sicle of the sanctuarie,
both full of fine floure mingled with oyle, for a meate offeryng:
20 An incense cup of golde of ten sicles, full of incense:
21 One youg bullocke, a ramme, a lambe of a yere olde, for a burnt offeryng:
22 And an hee goate for a sinne offeryng:
23 And for a peace offering, two oxen, fiue rammes, fiue hee goates, fiue lambes
of one yere olde. This was the offering of Nathanael the sonne of Zuar.
24 The thirde day, Eliab the sonne of Helon, captayne of the children of
Zabulon, did offer:
25 And his gyft was, a siluer charger of an hundred and thirtie sicles, a siluer
boule of seuentie sicles, after the sicle of the sanctuarie, and both were full
of fine floure mingled with oyle, for a meate offeryng:
26 A golden incense cup of ten sicles full of incense:
27 A young bullocke, a ramme, a lambe of a yere olde, for a burnt offeryng:
28 An hee goate for a sinne offeryng:
29 And for a peace offering, two oxen, fiue rammes, fiue hee goates, fiue lambes
of one yere olde. This was the offeryng of Eliab the sonne of Helon.
30 The fourth day, Elizur the sonne of Sedeur, captayne of the children of
Ruben, dyd offer.
31 And his gyft was, a siluer charger of an hundred and thirtie sicles, a siluer
boule of seuentie sicles, after the sicle of the sanctuarie, and they were both
full of fine floure mingled with oyle, for a meate offeryng:
32 A golden incense cup of ten sicles, full of incense:
33 A young bullocke, a ramme, a lambe of a yere olde, for a burnt offeryng:
34 An hee goate for a sinne offeryng:
35 And for a peace offeryng, two oxen, fiue rammes, fiue hee goates, & fiue
lambes of one yere olde. This was the offering of Elizur the sonne of Sedeur.
36 The fifth day, Selumiel the sonne of Zuri Saddai, captayne of the children of
Simeon, offered:
37 His gyft was, a siluer charger of an hundred and thirtie sicles, a siluer
boule of seuentie sicles, after the sicle of the sanctuarie, and they were both
full of fine floure mingled with oyle, for a meate offeryng:
38 A golden incense cup of ten sicles, full of incense:
39 A young bullocke, a ramme, a lambe of a yere olde, for a burnt offeryng:
40 An hee goate for a sinne offeryng:
41 And for a peace offeryng, two oxen, fiue rammes, fiue hee goates, fiue lambes
of a yere olde. This was the offeryng of Selumiel the sonne of Zuri Saddai.
42 The sixt day, Eliasaph the sonne of Duel, captayne of the children of Gad,
offered:
43 His gyft was, a siluer charger of an hundred and thirtie sicles, a siluer
boule of seuentie sicles, after the sicle of the sanctuarie, both full of fine
floure mingled with oyle for a meate offeryng:
44 A golden incense cup of ten sicles, full of incense:
45 A young bullocke, a ramme, a lambe of a yere olde, for a burnt offeryng:
46 An hee goate for a sinne offeryng:
47 And for a peace offeryng, two oxen, fiue rammes, fiue hee goates, fiue lambes
of one yere olde. This was the offeryng of Eliasaph, the sonne of Duel.
48 The seuenth day, Elisama the sonne of Amiud, captayne of the children of
Ephraim, offered:
49 And his sacrifice was, a siluer charger of an hundred and thirtie sicles, a
siluer boule of seuentie sicles, after the sicle of the sanctuarie, both full of
fine floure mingled with oyle for a meat offeryng:
50 A golden incense cup of ten sicles, ful of incense.
51 A young bullocke, a ramme, a lambe of a yere olde, for a burnt offeryng:
52 An hee goate for a sinne offeryng:
53 And for a peace offeryng, two oxen, fiue rammes, fiue hee goates, fiue lambes
of a yere olde. This was the offeryng of Elisama, the sonne of Amiud.
54 The eyght day, offered Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur, the captayne of the
children of Manasses.
55 And his offering was, a siluer charger of an hundred and thirtie sicles, a
siluer boule of seuentie sicles, after ye sicle of the sanctuarie, both full of
fine floure mingled with oyle for a meate offeryng:
56 A golden incense cup of ten sicles, full of incense
57 A young bullocke, a ramme, a lambe of a yere olde for a burnt offeryng,
58 An hee goate for a sinne offeryng:
59 And for a peace offeryng two oxen, fiue rammes, fiue hee goates, fiue lambes
of a yere olde. This was the offeryng of Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur.
60 The ninth day, Abidan the sonne of Gedeon captayne of the children of
Beniamin, offered.
61 And his gift was a siluer charger of an hundred and thirtie sicles, a siluer
boule of seuentie sicles, after the sicle of the sanctuarie, both full of fine
floure mingled with oyle for a meate offeryng:
62 A golden insence cup of ten sicles, full of insence:
63 A young bullocke, a ramme, a lambe of one yere olde for a burnt offeryng:
64 An hee goate for a sinne offeryng:
65 And for a peace offeryng, two oxen, fiue rammes, fiue hee goates, fiue lambes
of one yere olde. This was the offeryng of Abidan the sonne of Gedeon.
66 The tenth day, Ahiezer the sonne of Ammi Saddai, captayne of the childre of
Dan offered.
67 And his offeryng was, a siluer charger of an hundred and thirtie sicles, a
siluer boule of seuentie sicles, after the sicle of ye sanctuarie, both full of
fine floure mingled with oyle for a meate offeryng:
68 A golden incense cup of ten sicles, full of insence:
69 A young bullocke, a ramme, a lambe of a yere olde for a burnt offeryng:
70 An hee goate for a sinne offeryng:
71 And for a peace offering, two oxen, fiue rammes, fiue hee goates, fiue
lambes, of a yere olde. This was the offeryng of Ahiezer the sonne of Ammi
Saddai.
72 The eleuenth day, Pagiel the sonne of Ocran, captayne of the children of
Aser, offered.
73 And his offeryng was, a siluer charger of an hundred and thirtie sicles, a
siluer boule of seuentie sicles, after the sicle of the sanctuarie, both full of
fine floure mingled with oyle for a meat offeryng:
74 A golden incense cup of ten sicles, full of incense:
75 A young bullock, a ramme, a lambe of a yere olde for a burnt offeryng:
76 An hee goate for a sinne offeryng:
77 And for a peace offering, two oxen, fiue rammes, fiue hee goates, fiue lambes
of one yere olde. This was the offeryng of Pagiel the sonne of Ocran.
78 The twelfth daye, Ahira the sonne of Enan, captaine of the children of
Nephthali, offered.
79 And his offering was, a siluer charger of an hundred and thirtie sicles, a
siluer boule of seuentie sicles, after the sicle of the sanctuarie, both full of
fine floure mingled with oyle for a meate offeryng:
80 A golden incense cup of ten sicles, full of incense:
81 A young bullocke, a ramme, a lambe of one yere olde for a burnt offeryng:
82 An hee goate for a sinne offeryng:
83 And for a peace offering, two oxen, fiue rammes, fiue hee goates, fiue lambes
of one yere olde. This was the offeryng of Ahira the sonne of Enan.
84 This was the dedication of the aulter in the day when it was annoynted by the
princes of Israel: twelue chargers of siluer, twelue siluer boules, twelue
incense cuppes of golde.
85 Euery charger conteynyng an hundred and thirtie sicles of siluer, euery boule
seuentie: And all the siluer vessels conteyned two thousande & foure hundred
sicles, after the sicle of the sanctuarie.
86 And the golden incense cuppes were twelue, full of incense, conteynyng ten
sicles a peece after ye sicle of the sanctuarie: so that all ye golde of the
incense cuppes was an hundred and twentie sicles.
87 All the bullockes for the burnt offeryng were twelue, the rammes twelue, the
lambes of a yere olde twelue, with their meate offerynges: and the hee goates
for sinne offeryng, twelue.
88 And all the oxen for the peace offerynges were twentie and foure, the rammes
sixtie, the hee goates sixtie, the lambes of a yere olde sixtie. This was the
dedication of the aulter, after that it was annoynted.
89 And when Moyses was gone into the tabernacle of the congregatio to speake
with hym, he hearde the voyce of one speakyng vnto hym from of the mercie seate
that was vpon the arke of witnesse betweene the two Cherubims, and he talked
with hym.

Chapter 8

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Speake vnto Aaron, and say vnto hym: When thou settest vp the lampes, the
seuen lampes shal geue light towarde ye forefront of the candlesticke.
3 And Aaron dyd euen so, and lyghted the lampes thereof towarde the forefront of
the candlesticke, as the Lorde commaunded Moyses.
4 And this was the worke of the candlesticke, euen of golde beaten out with the
hammer, both the shaft and the flowres therof was beaten out with ye hammer:
accordyng vnto the paterne which the Lorde had shewed Moyses, euen so he made
the candlesticke.
5 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
6 Take the Leuites from among the children of Israel, and cleanse them.
7 And thus shalt thou do vnto them, when thou cleansest them: Sprinckle water of
purifiyng vpon them, and let them shaue all their fleshe, and let them washe
their clothes, and so make them selues cleane.
8 Then let them take a young bullocke with his meate offeryng euen fine floure
minged with oyle, and another young bullocke shalt thou take for a sinne
offeryng.
9 And thou shalt bryng the Leuites before the tabernacle of the congregation,
thou shalt gather the whole multitude of the children of Israel together,
10 And bryng the Leuites before the Lorde, and the children of Israel shall put
their handes vpon the Leuites.
11 And Aaron shall waue the Leuites before the Lorde for a waue offeryng of the
children of Israel, that they may execute the ministration of the seruice of the
Lorde.
12 And the Leuites shal put their handes vpon the heades of the bullockes: and
thou shalt offer the one for a sinne offeryng, and the other for a burnt
offeryng vnto the Lorde, that thou mayest make an attonement for the Leuites.
13 And thou shalt set the Leuites before Aaron and his sonnes, and waue them for
a waue offeryng vnto the Lorde.
14 And thus thou shalt seperate the Leuites from among the children of Israel,
and the Leuites shalbe myne.
15 After that, shall the Leuites go in, to do the seruice of the tabernacle of
the congregation: And thou shalt cleanse them, & waue them for a waue offering:
16 For they are geuen and deliuered vnto me from among the children of Israel
for such as open euery wombe, euen for the first borne of all the children of
Israel haue I taken them vnto me.
17 For all the first borne of the children of Israel are mine, both man and
beast: since the day that I smote euery first borne in the lande of Egypt, I
sanctified them for my selfe.
18 And I haue taken the Leuites for all the first borne of the children of
Israel.
19 And haue geuen the Leuites as a gift to Aaron and his sonnes from among the
children of Israel, to do the seruice of the children of Israel in the
tabernacle of the congregation, and to make an attonement for the children of
Israel: that there be no plague among the children of Israel, if the children of
Israel come nye vnto the sanctuarie.
20 And Moyses, and Aaron, and all the congregation of the children of Israel,
dyd with the Leuites: accordyng vnto all that the Lorde comaunded Moyses
concernyng the Leuites, euen so did the children of Israel vnto them.
21 And the Leuites were purified, and wasshed their clothes: And Aaron waued
them as a waue offeryng before the Lorde, and made an attonement for them, to
cleanse them.
22 After that, went the Leuites in, to do their seruice in the tabernacle of the
congregation before Aaron and his sonnes: as the Lorde had comaunded Moyses
concernyng the Leuites, euen so they dyd vnto them.
23 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
24 This is it that belongeth vnto the Leuites: From twentie and fiue yeres olde
and vpwarde, they shall go in to wayte vpon the seruice of the tabernacle of the
congregation.
25 And from the age of fiftie yeres, they shall ceasse waytyng vpon the seruice
therof, and shall serue no more:
26 But shall minister with their brethren in the tabernacle of the congregation,
to kepe thynges committed to their charge: but shall do no more seruice. Thus
therfore shalt thou do vnto the Leuites touchyng their charge,

Chapter 9

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses in the wildernesse of Sinai, in the first
moneth of the seconde yere, after they were come out of the lande of Egypt,
saying:
2 Let the children of Israel celebrate the Passouer at the tyme appoynted
thervnto:
3 Euen ye fourteenth day of this moneth at euen: ye shall kepe it in his season
accordyng to all the ceremonies of it, and according to all the maners therof,
shall ye kepe it.
4 And Moyses spake vnto the children of Israel, that they should celebrate the
Passouer.
5 And they kept the Passouer the foureteenth day of the first moneth at euen in
the wildernesse of Sinai: according to all that the Lorde comaunded Moyses, euen
so dyd the children of Israel.
6 And certayne men were defiled by a dead man, that they myght not kepe the
Passouer the same day, and they came before Moyses & Aaron the same day.
7 And those men sayde vnto hym, we are defiled by a dead man: wherfore are we
kept backe, that we may not offer an offeryng vnto the Lorde in due season,
among the children of Israel?
8 And Moyses sayd vnto them: Stande styll, and I wyll heare what the Lorde wyll
commaunde concernyng you.
9 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
10 Speake vnto the children of Israel, and say: If any man be vncleane by the
reason of a coarse, or be in a way farre distaunt from you and from your
generations, he shall kepe the Passouer vnto the Lorde.
11 The fourteenth day of the seconde moneth at euen let them kepe it: and eate
it with vnleauened bread, & sowre hearbes.
12 Let them leaue none of it vnto the morning, nor breake any bone of it: But
accordyng to all the ordinaunce of the Passouer, let them kepe it.
13 But the man that is cleane, and is not in a iourney, and yet was negligent to
kepe the Passouer: the same soule shalbe cut of from his people, because he
brought not the offeryng of the Lorde in his due season, that man shall beare
his sinne.
14 And if a straunger dwell among you, and wyll kepe the Passouer vnto the
Lorde: accordyng to the ordinance of the Passouer and maner therof, so shall he
do. Ye shall haue one lawe both for the straunger, and for hym that was borne in
the same lande.
15 And the same day that the tabernacle was reared vp, a cloude couered the
tabernacle, namely the tabernacle of the testimonie: and at euen, there was vpon
the tabernacle, as it were the appearaunce of fire, vntyll the mornyng.
16 So it was alway: the cloude couered it by day, and the appearaunce of fire by
nyght.
17 And when the cloude was taken vp from the tabernacle, then the children of,
Israel iourneyed: and in the place where the cloude abode, there the children of
Israel pitched their tentes.
18 At the mouth of the Lorde the childre of Israel iourneyed, and at the mouth
of the Lorde they pitched: And as long as the cloude abode vpon the tabernacle,
they lay styll:
19 And when the cloude taryed styll vpon the tabernacle long tyme, the children
of Israel kept the watche of the Lorde, and iourneyed not.
20 And when the cloude abode a fewe dayes vpon the tabernacle, they abode in
their tentes, accordyng to the commaundement of the Lorde: and they iourneyed
also at the commaundement of the Lorde.
21 And when the cloude abode vpon the tabernacle from euen vnto the mornyng, &
was taken vp in the mornyng, then they iourneyed: Whether it was by day or by
nyght that the cloude was taken vp, they iourneyed.
22 Or if the cloude taryed two dayes, or a moneth, or a yere vpon the tabernacle
and remayned theron, the children of Israel remayned styll and iourneyed not:
And assoone as the cloude was taken vp, they iourneyed.
23 At the mouth of the Lord they rested in the tentes, and at the comaundement
of the Lorde they iourneyed, kepyng the watche of the Lorde at the commaundement
of the Lord by the hande of Moyses.

Chapter 10

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Make thee two trumpettes of siluer: of an whole peece shalt thou make them,
that thou mayest vse them to call the congregation together, and when the campe
shall iourney.
3 And when they shal blowe with them, all the multitude shall resort to thee
before the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation.
4 And if they blowe but one trumpet, then the princes which are heades ouer the
thousandes of Israel shall come vnto thee.
5 But if ye blowe an alarme, the hoastes that lye on the east partes shall go
forwarde.
6 And if ye blowe the alarme the second tyme, the hoast that lyeth on the south
side shall take their iourney: for they shall blowe an alarme when they take
their iourneyes.
7 But when the congregation is to be gathered together, they shall blowe without
an alarme.
8 And the sonnes of Aaron the priestes shall blowe with their trumpettes, and ye
shall haue them as a lawe for euer in your generations.
9 And if ye go to warre in your lande agaynst your enemies that vexe you, ye
shall blowe an alarme with the trumpettes, and ye shalbe remembred before the
Lorde your God, to be saued from your enemies.
10 Also in the day of your gladnesse, and in your feast dayes, & in the
begynnyng of your monethes, ye shall blowe the trumpettes ouer your burnt
sacrifices and peace offerynges, that they may be a remembraunce for you before
your God: I am the Lorde your God.
11 And it came to passe the twentith day of the seconde moneth in the seconde
yere, that the cloude was taken vp from of the tabernacle of the testimonie.
12 And the children of Israel toke their iourney out of the desert of Sinai, and
the cloude rested in the wildernesse of Pharan.
13 And they first toke their iourney at the mouth of the Lorde by the hande of
Moyses.
14 In the first place went the standerde of the hoast of the children of Iuda
accordyng to their armies: whose captayne was Nahasson the sonne of Aminadab.
15 And ouer the hoast of the tribe of the children of Isachar, was Nathanael the
sonne of Zuar.
16 And ouer the hoast of the tribe of the chyldren of Zabulon, was Eliab the
sonne of Helon.
17 And the tabernacle was take downe, and the sonnes of Gerson and Merari went
foorth bearing the tabernacle.
18 And the hoast of Ruben went foorth with their standerd and armies, whose
captaine was Elizur ye sonne of Sedeur.
19 And ouer the hoast of the tribe of the chyldren of Simeon, was Salamiel the
sonne of Suri Saddai.
20 And ouer the hoast of the tribe of the chyldren of Gad, was Eliasaph the
sonne of Duel.
21 The Caathites also went forwarde and bare the sanctuarie, & the other dyd set
vp the tabernacle against they came.
22 And the standerd of the hoast of the chyldren of Ephraim went foorth
accordyng to their armies, whose captayne was Elisama the sonne of Ammiud.
23 And ouer the hoast of the tribe of the sonnes of Manasse, was Gamaliel the
sonne of Pedazur.
24 And ouer the hoast of the tribe of the sonnes of Beniamin, was Abidan the
sonne of Gedeon.
25 And the standerd of the hoast of the children of Dan came foorth (gathering
all the hoastes together) throughout their armies, whose captaine was Ahiezer
the sonne of Ammi Saddai.
26 And ouer the hoast of the tribe of the chyldren of Aser, was Pagiel the sonne
of Ochran.
27 And ouer the hoast of the tribe of the chyldren of Nephthali, was Ahira the
sonne of Enan.
28 These are the iourneys of the chyldren of Israel throughout their armies, and
thus the hoastes remoued.
29 And Moyses sayde vnto Hobab the sonne of Raguel the Madiamte, which was
Moyses father in lawe: We go vnto the place of whiche the Lorde sayde, I wyll
geue it you. Come thou therefore with vs, and we wyll do thee good: for the
Lorde hath promised good vnto Israel.
30 And he aunswered hym: I wyll not go, but wyl depart to mine owne lande, and
to my kinred.
31 He said: Oh nay, leaue vs not, for thou knowest our mansions in the
wyldernesse, and thou mayest be to vs in steade of eyes.
32 And if thou go with vs, looke what goodnesse the Lorde sheweth vnto vs, the
same wyll we shewe vnto thee.
33 And they departed from the mount of the Lorde three dayes iourney, and the
arke of the couenaunt of the Lorde went before them in ye three dayes iourney,
to search out a resting place for the.
34 And the cloude of the Lorde was vppon them by day, when they went out of the
campe.
35 And when ye arke went foorth, Moyses sayde: Rise vp Lorde, and let thine
enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee, flee before thee.
36 And when the arke rested, he sayde: Returne O Lord, vnto the many thousandes
of Israel.

Chapter 11

1 And when the people dyd wickedly, it was a displeasure in the eares of the
Lorde: And when the Lorde hearde it, his countenaunce was prouoked to wrath, and
the fire of the Lord burnt among them, and consumed them that were the vttermost
of the hoast.
2 And the people cryed vnto Moyses: And when Moyses made intercession vnto the
Lorde, the fire quenched.
3 And he called the name of the place Taberah, because the fire of the Lorde
burnt among them.
4 And a number of people that was among them fell a lustyng, and turned them
selues, and wept (euen as dyd also the chyldren of Israel) and sayd: who shall
geue vs fleshe to eate?
5 We remember the fishe which we did eate in Egypt for naught, & the cucumbers,
& melons, leekes, onions & garleck.
6 But now our soule is dryed away: for we can see nothing els, saue Manna.
7 The Manna was as coriander seede, and to see to lyke Bedellion.
8 And the people went about and gathered it, & grounde it in milles, or beat it
in morters, and baked it in pannes, and made cakes of it: And the taste of it,
was lyke vnto the taste of freshe oyle.
9 And when the deawe fell downe vpon the hoast in the nyght, the Manna fell vpon
it.
10 And when Moyses hearde the people weepe throughout their housholdes, euery
man in the doore of his tent, the wrath of the Lord was kindeled exceedingly,
and it greeued Moyses also.
11 And Moyses sayde vnto the Lorde: Wherefore hast thou dealt cruelly with thy
seruaunt? And wherefore haue I not founde fauour in thy sight, seyng that thou
puttest the wayght of all this people vpon me?
12 Haue I conceaued all this people? Or haue I begotten them, that thou
shouldest say vnto me, Cary them in thy bosome as a nurse beareth the suckyng
chylde, vnto the lande which thou swarest vnto their fathers?
13 Where shoulde I haue fleshe to geue vnto all this people, whiche weepe before
me, saying: Geue vs fleshe that we may eate.
14 I am not able to beare all this people alone, seyng it is to heauie for me.
15 If thou deale thus with me, kyll me I pray thee, if I haue founde fauour in
thy sight, yt I see not my wretchednesse.
16 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Gather vnto me threscore and ten men of the
elders of Israel, which thou knowest that they are the elders of the people &
officers ouer them: and thou shalt bryng them vnto the tabernacle of the
congregation, that they may stande there with thee:
17 And I wyll come downe, and talke with thee there, and take of the spirite
which is vpon thee, and put vpon them, and they shall beare the burthen of the
people with thee, lest thou be constrayned to beare it alone.
18 And say thou vnto the people, Be halowed agaynst to morowe, and ye shall eate
fleshe: for your whyning is in the eares of the Lorde, seyng ye sayd, Who shall
geue vs fleshe to eate? we were happy in Egypt: Therefore the Lorde wyll geue
you fleshe, and ye shall eate.
19 Ye shall not eate one day nor two, nor fiue dayes, neither ten, nor twentie
dayes:
20 But euen a moneth long, vntill it come out at the nostrels of you, and it
shalbe lothsome vnto you, because that ye haue cast the Lorde aside whiche is
among you, and haue wept before hym, saying: Why came we thus out of Egypt?
21 And Moyses sayde: Sixe hundred thousand footemen are there of the people,
among which I am: And thou hast sayd, I wyll geue them flesh, that they may eate
a moneth long.
22 Shall the sheepe & the oxen be slayne for them, to finde them? either shall
all the fishe of the sea be gathered together for them, to suffise them?
23 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Shall the Lordes hande be waxed short? Thou
shalt see now whether my word shal come to passe vnto thee or not.
24 And Moyses went out, and tolde the people the saying of the Lorde: and
gathered the threscore and ten elders of the people, and set them rounde about
the tabernacle.
25 And the Lord came downe in a cloude, and spake vnto him, and toke of the
spirite that was vpon him, and gaue it vnto the threscore & ten elders: And when
the spirite rested vpon them, they prophesied, and dyd not ceasse.
26 But there remayned two of the men in the hoast, the name of the one was
Eldad, and the name of the other Medad: And the spirite rested vpon them, (and
thei were of them that were written, and went not out vnto the tabernacle) and
they prophesied in the hoast.
27 And there ran a young man, and tolde Moyses, and sayd: Eldad and Medad do
prophesie in the hoast.
28 And Iosuah the sonne of Nun the seruaunt of Moyses, one of his young men
aunswered, and sayde: My lorde Moyses, forbyd them.
29 And Moyses sayd vnto hym: Enuiest thou for my sake? woulde God that all the
Lordes people could prophesie, and that the Lorde woulde put his spirite vpon
them.
30 And Moyses gate hym into the hoast, he and the elders of Israel.
31 And there went foorth a wynde from the Lorde, and brought quayles from the
sea, & let them fall about the hoast, euen a dayes iourney rounde about on euery
side of the hoast, and they did flee in the ayre as it were two cubites hye ouer
the earth.
32 And the people stoode vp all that day, and all that nyght, and all the next
day, and they gathered quayles: And he that gathered litle, gathered ten homers
ful: And they spread them abrode for their vse, rounde about the hoast.
33 And whyle the fleshe was yet betweene their teeth, & yer it was chewed vp,
the wrath of the Lorde was kindled against the people, & the Lorde smote the
people with an exceedyng great plague.
34 And he called the name of the place, The graues of lust: because the buried
the people that lusted there.
35 And the people toke their iourney from the graues of lust vnto Hazeroth, and
abode at Hazeroth.

Chapter 12

1 And Miriam and Aaron spake agaynst Moyses, because of the women of Ethiopia
whiche he had taken: for he had take to wife one of Ethiopia.
2 And they sayde: Hath the Lorde in deede spoken onlye through Moyses? Hath he
not spoken also by vs? And the Lorde hearde it.
3 (But Moyses was a very meeke man, aboue all the men of the earth.)
4 And the Lorde spake at once vnto Moyses, vnto Aaron, and to Miriam: Come out
ye three vnto the tabernacle of the congregation. And they came out all three.
5 And the Lorde came downe in the pyller of the cloude, and stoode in the doore
of the tabernacle, and called Aaron and Miriam. And they went out both of them.
6 And he sayde, Heare my wordes: If there be a prophete of the Lordes among you,
I wyll be knowen of him in a vision, and wyll speake vnto hym in a dreame.
7 My seruaunt Moyses is not so, which is faythfull in all myne house.
8 Unto hym wyll I speake mouth to mouth in a vision, not in darke speaches and
similitudes of the Lord shall he see: Wherfore then were ye not afrayde to
speake against my seruaunt Moyses?
9 And the Lord was moued vnto wrath agaynst them, and he went his way.
10 And the cloude departed from the tabernacle, and beholde Miriam was become
leprous, as it were snowe: And Aaron looked vpon Miriam, and beholde, she was
leprous.
11 And Aaron saide vnto Moyses: Alas my Lorde, I beseche thee put not the sinne
vpon vs whiche we haue foolishlye committed and sinned.
12 Oh, let her not be as one dead, of who the fleshe is halfe consumed when he
commeth out of his mothers whom.
13 And Moyses cryed vnto the Lorde, saying: Heale her nowe, O God, I beseche
thee.
14 And ye Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: If her father had spit in her face, should
she not be ashamed seue dayes? Let her be shut out of the hoast seuen dayes, and
after that, let her be receaued in againe.
15 And Miriam was shut out of the hoast seuen dayes: and the people remoued not,
tyll she was brought in agayne.
16 And afterwarde the people remoued from Hazeroth, and pitched in the
wyldernesse of Pharan.

Chapter 13

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses saying:
2 Sende men out to searche the lande of Chanaan, whiche I geue vnto the chyldren
of Israel: of euery tribe of their fathers shall ye sende a man, and let them
all be suche as are rulers among them.
3 And Moyses at the commaundement of the Lorde, sent foorth out of the
wyldernesse of Pharan, suche men as were all heades of the chyldren of Israel.
4 Their names are these. Of the tribe of Ruben, Sammua the sonne of Zacur.
5 Of the tribe of Simeon, Saphat the sonne of Hori.
6 Of the tribe of Iuda, Caleb the sonne of Iephune.
7 Of the tribe of Isachar, Igal the sonne of Ioseph.
8 Of the tribe of Ephraim, Osea the sonne of Nun.
9 Of the tribe of Beniamin, Palti the sonne of Raphu.
10 Of the tribe of Zabulon, Gaddiel the sonne of Sodi.
11 Of the tribe of Ioseph, namely of the tribe of Manasse, Gaddi the sonne of
Susi.
12 Of the tribe of Dan, Amiel the sonne of Gemalli.
13 Of the tribe of Aser, Sethur the sonne of Michael.
14 Of the tribe of Nephthali, Nahabi the sonne of Uaphsi.
15 Of the tribe of Gad, Guel the sonne of Machi.
16 These are the names of the men which Moyses sent to spie out the land: And
Moyses called the name of Osea the sonne of Nun, Iosuah.
17 And Moyses sent them foorth to spie out the lande of Chanaan, and said vnto
them: Get you vp this way southward, that ye may go vp into the hie countrey,
18 And see the lande what maner thing it is, and the people that dwelleth
therin, whether they be strong or weake, eyther fewe or many:
19 And what the land is that they dwell in, whether it be good or bad, and what
maner of cities they be that they dwell in, whether they dwell in tentes or
walled townes:
20 And what maner of lande that is, whether it be fat or leane, and whether
there be trees therin or not. Be of good courage, and bryng of the fruite of the
lande: And it was about the tyme that grapes are first rype.
21 And so they went vp, and searched out the lande from the wildernesse of Zin,
vnto Rehob, as men come to Hemath.
22 And they ascended vnto the south, and come vnto Hebron, where Ahiman was and
Sesai, and Thalmai, the sonnes of Anac. Hebron was buylt seuen yeres before Zoan
in Egypt.
23 And they came vnto the ryuer of Escol, and cut downe there a braunch with one
clouster of grapes, and twayne bare it vpon a staffe: and they brought also of
the pomgranates, and of the figges.
24 And the place was called the riuer Escol, because of ye cluster of grapes
whiche the children of Israel cut downe thence.
25 And they turned backe agayne from searching of ye lande after fourtie dayes.
26 And they went, and came to Moyses and Aaron, and vnto all the multitude of
the chyldren of Israel in the wyldernesse Pharan to Cades, and brought them
worde, and also vnto all the congregation, and shewed them the fruite of the
lande.
27 And they tolde hym, and sayde: we came vnto the lande whyther thou sendedst
vs & surely it floweth with milke and hony, and here is of the fruite of it.
28 Neuerthelesse, the people be strong that dwell in the lande, and the cities
are walled and exceedyng great: and moreouer, we sawe the chyldren of Anac
there.
29 The Amalechites dwell in the south countrey: and the Hethites, and the
Iebusites, and the Amorites dwell in the mountaynes: & the Chanaanites dwell by
the sea, and by the coast of Iordane.
30 And Caleb stylled the people before Moyses, saying: Let vs go vp at once, and
possesse it, for we be able to ouercome it.
31 But the men that went vp with him, sayde: We be not able to go vp agaynst the
people, for they are stronger then we.
32 And they brought vp an euyll report of the lande whiche they had searched,
saying vnto the children of Israel: The lande whiche we haue gone through to
searche it out, is a lande that eateth vp the inhabitours therof, and the people
that we sawe in it, are men of a great stature.
33 And there we sawe also giauntes the chyldren of Anac whiche come of the
giauntes: And we seemed in our sight as it were grashoppers, and so we dyd in
their sight.

Chapter 14

1 And all the multitude of the people cried out, and wept throughout that nyght.
2 And all the chyldren of Israel murmured agaynst Moyses and Aaron, and the
whole congregation sayde vnto them: Woulde God that we had dyed in the lande of
Egypt, either that we had dyed in this wyldernesse.
3 Wherfore hath the Lorde brought vs vnto this lande to fall vpon the sworde,
and that our wyues and our chyldren should be a pray? Were it not better that we
returne vnto Egypt agayne?
4 And they sayd one to another: Let vs make a captayne, and returne vnto Egypt
agayne.
5 Then Moyses & Aaron fell on their faces before all the assemblie of the
congregation of the chyldren of Israel.
6 And Iosuah the sonne of Nun, and Caleb the sonne of Iephune whiche were of
them that searched the lande, rent their clothes:
7 And spake vnto al the companie of the chyldren of Israel, saying: The lande
whiche we walked through to searche it, is a very good lande.
8 If the Lord haue a loue to vs, he will bryng vs into this lande and geue it
vs, whiche is such a lande as floweth with mylke and hony.
9 But in any wyse rebell not ye agaynst the Lorde, neither feare the people of
the lande, for they are but bread for vs: Their shielde is departed from them,
and the Lorde is with vs, feare them not therfore.
10 But all the congregation bade stone them with stones: And the glory of the
Lorde appeared in the tabernacle of the congregation before all the chyldren of
Israel.
11 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Howe long do this people prouoke me, and how
long wyll it be yer they beleue me, for all the signes which I haue shewed among
them?
12 I will smyte them with the pestilence and destroy them, and wyll make of thee
a greater nation and mightier then they.
13 And Moyses sayde vnto the Lorde: Then the Egyptians shall heare it, (for thou
broughtest this people in thy might from among them.)
14 And it wylbe tolde to the inhabiters of this lande also: for they haue hearde
lykewyse, that thou Lorde art among this people, and that thou Lorde art seene
face to face, and that thy cloude standeth ouer them, & that thou goest before
them by day tyme in a pyller of a cloude, and in a pyller of fire by nyght.
15 If thou shalt kyll all this people as they were but one man: then the nations
whiche haue hearde the fame of thee, wyll say:
16 Because the Lord is not able to bryng in this people into the lande whiche he
sware vnto them, therefore he hath slaine them in the wyldernesse.
17 And nowe I beseche thee, let the power of my Lord be great, accordyng as thou
hast spoken, saying:
18 The Lorde is long yer he be angrie, and of great mercy, and suffreth
iniquitie and sinne, and leaueth no man innocent, and visiteth the
vnrighteousnesse of the fathers vpon the chyldren, in the thirde and fourth
generations.
19 Be mercyfull I beseche thee vnto the sinne of this people accordyng vnto thy
great mercy, as thou hast forgeuen this people from Egypt, euen vntyll nowe.
20 And the Lorde sayde: I haue forgeuen it, according to thy request.
21 But as truely as I liue, all the earth shalbe filled with the glory of the
Lord.
22 But all those men whiche haue seene my glory, and my miracles whiche I did in
Egypt and in the wildernesse, and haue tempted me nowe this ten tymes, and haue
not hearkened vnto my voyce:
23 Shall not see the lande whiche I sware vnto their fathers, neither shall any
of them that prouoked me see it.
24 But my seruaunt Caleb, because he had another maner of spirite, (and because
he hath folowed me vnto the vtmost) hym wyll I bryng into the lande which he
hath walked in, and his seede shall inherite it.
25 And also the Amalechites and Chanaanites, remayne in the valley: To morowe
turne you, and get you into the wyldernesse, euen by the way of the red sea.
26 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses and Aaron, saying:
27 Howe long doth this euyll multitude murmure agaynst me? I haue hearde the
murmuringes of the children of Israel with the whiche they murmure agaynst me.
28 Tell them therefore: As truely as I liue sayeth the Lorde, I wyll do vnto you
euen as ye haue spoken in myne eares:
29 Your carkasses shall fall in the wyldernesse: And all you that were tolde
throughout your numbers from twentie yeres and aboue, whiche haue murmured
against me,
30 Shall not come into the lande ouer which I lifted vp myne hand to make you
dwell therin, saue Caleb the sonne of Iephune, and Iosuah the sonne of Nun.
31 But your chyldren whiche ye sayde shoulde be a pray, them I wyll bryng in,
and they shall knowe the lande whiche ye haue refused.
32 And your carkasses shall fall in this wyldernesse.
33 And your chyldren shall wander in the wildernesse fourtie yeres, and suffer
for your whordome, vntyll your carkasses be wasted in the wyldernesse.
34 After the number of the dayes in whiche ye searched out the lande, euen
fourtie dayes, euery day for a yere shal ye beare your vnrighteousnesse, euen
fourtie yeres, and ye shall knowe my breache of promise.
35 I the Lorde haue sayde, that I wyll do it vnto all this euyll congregation
that are gathered together against me: For in this wildernesse they shalbe
consumed, and there they shall dye.
36 And the men whiche Moyses sent to searche the lande, and whiche (when they
came agayne) made all the people to murmure against hym, and brought vp a
sclaunder vpon the lande:
37 Euen those men that dyd bryng vp that sclaunder vpon it as though it had ben
euill, dyed in a great plague before the Lorde.
38 But Iosuah the sonne of Nun, and Caleb the sonne of Iephune, whiche were of
the men that went to searche the lande, liued styll.
39 And Moyses tolde these sayinges vnto all the chyldren of Israel, and the
people toke great sorowe.
40 And they rose vp early in the morning, and gate them vp into the toppe of the
mountayne, saying: lo, we be here, and wyll go vp vnto the place of which the
Lorde sayde: For we haue sinned.
41 And Moyses sayde: Wherfore transgresse ye thus the worde of the Lorde? it
wyll not come well to passe.
42 Go not vp therefore, for the Lorde is not among you: that ye be not slayne
before your enemies.
43 For the Amalechites and the Chanaanites are there before you, & ye wyll fall
vpon the sworde, because ye are turned away from the Lorde, & the Lorde wyll not
be with you.
44 But they presumed obstinatly to go vp into the hyll top: Neuerthelater, the
arke of the couenaunt of the Lorde and Moyses, departed not out of the hoast.
45 Then the Amalechites and the Chanaanites which dwelt in that hill, came
downe, and smote them, and consumed them euen anto Horma.

Chapter 15

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Speake vnto the children of Israel, and say vnto them: when ye be come into
the lande of your habitations, whiche I geue vnto you:
3 And will make an offering by fire vnto the Lorde, namely a burnt offering, or
a sacrifice to fulfill a vowe, or a free offering, or in your principall
feastes, to make a sweete sauour vnto the Lorde, of the heard, or of the flocke:
4 Then let hym that offereth his offering vnto the Lord, bryng also a meate
offering of a tenth deale of floure, mingled with the fourth part of an hin of
oyle.
5 And the fourth part of an hin of wine for a drinke offering shalt thou prepare
with the burnt offering, or any other offering, for one lambe.
6 Or if it be a ramme, thou shalt prepare for a meate offering two tenth deales
of floure, mingled with the thirde part of an hin of oyle.
7 And for a drinke offering, thou shalt offer the thirde part of an hin of wine,
for a sweete sauour vnto the Lorde.
8 And when thou preparest a bullocke for a burnt offering, or for a sacrifice to
fulfill a vowe or peace offering vnto the Lorde:
9 Let him bring with a bullocke a meate offering of three tenth deales of
floure, mingled with halfe an hin of oyle.
10 And thou shalt bryng for a drinke offering, euen halfe an hin of wine, for an
offering made by fire of a sweete sauour vnto the Lorde.
11 After this maner shall it be done for a bullocke, or for a ramme, or for a
lambe, or a kid,
12 According to the number that ye shall prepare, so shall ye do to euery one,
accordyng to their number.
13 All that are borne of the countrey, shal do these thynges after this maner,
to offer an offering made by fire of a sweete sauour vnto the Lorde.
14 And if a straunger soiourne with you, or whosoeuer be among you in your
generations, and wyll offer an offering made by fire of a sweete sauour vnto the
Lorde: euen as ye do, so he shall do.
15 One ordinaunce shalbe both for you of the cogregation, and also for the
straunger that dwelleth with you: It shalbe an ordinaunce for euer in your
generations: as ye are, so shall the straunger be before the Lorde.
16 One lawe and one maner shall serue, both for you, and for the straunger that
soiourneth with you.
17 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
18 Speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, and say vnto them: When ye be come into
the land to the which I bring you,
19 Then when ye wyll eate of the bread of the lande, ye shall offer vp an heaue
offering vnto the Lorde.
20 Ye shall offer vp a cake of the first of your dowe for an heaue offering: as
ye do the heaue offering of the barne, euen so ye shall heaue it.
21 Of the first of your dowe ye shall geue vnto the Lorde an heaue offering in
your generations.
22 And if ye haue erred, and obserue not all these commaundementes which the
Lorde hath spoken vnto Moyses,
23 Euen all that the Lorde hath commaunded you by the hande of Moyses, from the
first day that the Lorde commaunded Moyses, and hence forwarde among your
generations.
24 Yf ought be committed ignorauntly of the congregation, al the multitude shall
offer a bullocke for a burnt offering, to be a sweete sauour vnto the Lord, with
the meate offering and drinke offering therto accordyng to the maner, and an hee
goate for a sinne offering.
25 And the priest shall make an attonement for all the multitude of the chyldren
of Israel, and it shalbe forgeuen them, for it is ignoraunce: And they shal
bryng their offering, a sacrifice made by fire vnto the Lord, & their sinne
offering before the Lorde for their ignoraunce.
26 And it shalbe forgeuen vnto all the congregation of the chyldren of Israel,
and vnto the straunger that dwelleth among you, seyng all the people were in
ignoraunce.
27 If any one soule sinne through ignoraunce, he shall bryng a shee goate of a
yere olde for a sinne offering.
28 And the priest shall make an attonement for the soule that sinneth
ignorauntly, when he sinneth by ignoraunce before the Lorde to reconcile hym,
and that it may be forgeuen hym.
29 And both thou that art borne of the chyldren of Israel, and the strannger
that dwelleth among you, shall haue one lawe who so doth sinne thorowe
ignoraunce.
30 But the soule that doth ought presumptuously, whether he be borne in the
lande or a straunger, the same blasphemeth the Lorde: and that soule shalbe cut
of from among his people.
31 Because he hath despised the worde of the Lorde, and hath broken his
commaundement, that soule therefore shalbe vtterly cut of, and his sinne shalbe
vppon hym.
32 And whyle the chyldre of Israel were in the wyldernesse, they founde a man
that gathered stickes vpon the Sabbath day.
33 And they that founde hym gathering stickes, brought hym vnto Moyses and
Aaron, and vnto all the congregation.
34 And they put hym in warde, seyng it was not declared what shoulde be done to
hym.
35 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Let the man dye, & let all the multitude
stone him with stones without ye hoast.
36 And all the multitude brought hym without the hoast, and stoned hym with
stones, and he dyed, as the Lorde commaunded Moyses.
37 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
38 Speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, and byd them, that they make them fringes
in the borders of their garmentes throughout their generations, and put vpon the
fringe of the borders a ribande of blewe silke.
39 And the fringe shalbe vnto you to loke vpon, that ye may remember all the
comaundementes of the Lorde, and do them: and that ye seeke not after your owne
heart, or your owne eyes, after the which ye vse to go a whoryng.
40 But ye shall remember rather, and do all my commaundementes, and be holy vnto
your God.
41 I am the Lorde your God, which brought you out of the lande of Egypt, for to
be your God: I am the Lorde your God. The rebellion of Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram. 31 They perishe with their companie.

Chapter 16

1 And Corah the sonne of Isaar, the sonne of Caath, the sonne of Leui, went a
part with Dathan and Abiram, the sonnes of Eliab, & On the sonne of Peleth, the
sonne of Ruben:
2 And they rose vp before Moyses, with certayne of the children of Israel, two
hundred & fiftie, which were captaynes of the multitude, famous in the
congregation, and men of renoune.
3 And they gathered them selues together agaynst Moyses and Aaron, and sayde
vnto them: Ye take much vpon you, seyng all the multitude are holy euery one of
them, and the Lorde is among them: Why lyft you your selues vp aboue the
congregation of the Lord?
4 And when Moyses hearde it, he fell vpon his face,
5 And spake vnto Corah and vnto all his company, saying: Tomorowe the Lord wyll
shewe who are his, who is holy, and who ought to approche nye vnto hym: and whom
he hath chosen, he will cause to come neare vnto hym.
6 This do therfore: Take you firepannes, both Corah & all his companie,
7 And do fire therin, and put incense in them before the Lorde to morowe: And
the man whom the Lorde doth chose, the same shalbe holy: Ye take much vpon you
ye sonnes of Leui.
8 And Moyses sayd vnto Corah: Heare I pray you, ye sonnes of Leui,
9 Seemeth it but a small thyng vnto you, that the God of Israel hath seperated
you from the multitude of Israel, and brought you to hym selfe, to do the
seruice of the tabernacle of the Lorde, and to stande before the multitude, and
to minister vnto them?
10 He hath taken thee to hym, and all thy brethren the sonnes of Leui with thee:
and seeke ye the office of the priest also?
11 For which cause both thou and all thy companie are gathered together against
the Lorde: And what is Aaron, that ye murmure agaynst hym?
12 And Moyses sent, and called Dathan and Abiram the sonnes of Eliab: which
sayde, We wyll not come vp.
13 Is it a small thyng, that thou hast brought vs out of the land that floweth
with mylke and honie, to kyll vs in the wildernesse: except thou make thy selfe
lorde and ruler ouer vs also?
14 Moreouer, thou hast not brought vs vnto a lande that floweth with mylke &
honie, neither geuen vs inheritaunce of fieldes and vineyardes: Wylt thou put
out the eyes of these men? We wyll not come vp.
15 And Moyses waxed very angry, and sayde vnto the Lorde, Turne not thou vnto
their offeryng: I haue not taken so much as an asse from them, neither haue I
hurt any of them.
16 And Moyses sayde vnto Corah: Be thou & al thy company before the Lord, both
thou, they, and Aaron, to morowe.
17 And take euery man his censer, and put incense in them, and bryng ye before
the Lorde euery man his censer, euen two hundreth and fiftie censers: thou also
and Aaron, euery one his censer.
18 And they toke euery man his censer, and put fire in them, and layde incense
theron, and stoode in the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation with
Moyses and Aaron.
19 And Corah gathered all the congregation agaynst them, vnto the doore of the
tabernacle of the congregation: And the glorie of the Lorde appeared vnto all
the congregation.
20 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses and Aaron, saying:
21 Seperate your selues from among this congregation, that I may consume them at
once.
22 And they fell vpon their faces, and sayde: O God, the God of spirites of all
fleshe, hath not one man sinned? Wilt thou be wroth with all the multitude?
23 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
24 Speake vnto the congregation, and say: Get you away from about the tabernacle
of Corah, Dathan, & Abiram.
25 And Moyses rose vp, and went vnto Dathan and Abiram: and the elders of Israel
folowed hym.
26 And he spake vnto the congregation, saying: Depart I pray you from the tentes
of these wicked men, and touche nothyng of theirs, lest ye perishe in all their
sinnes.
27 And so they gate them from the tabernacle of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, on
euery syde: And Dathan & Abiram came out, & stoode in the doore of their tentes,
with their wiues, their sonnes, and their litle children.
28 And Moyses sayde: Hereby ye shall knowe that the Lorde hath sent me to do all
these workes, for I haue not done them of myne owne mynde.
29 If these men dye the common death of all men, or if they be visited after the
visitation of all men, then the Lorde hath not sent me:
30 But and if the Lorde make a newe thyng, and the earth open her mouth, and
swallowe them vp with all that they haue, and they go downe quicke into the pit:
then ye shall vnderstande that these men haue prouoked ye Lorde.
31 And assoone as he had made an ende of speaking al these wordes, the ground
cloue asunder that was vnder them:
32 And the earth opened her mouth, and swalowed them vp, and their houses, and
all the men that were with Corah, and all their goodes.
33 And they and all that they had went downe alyue vnto the pit, and the earth
closed vpon them: and they perished from among the congregation.
34 And all Israel that were about them, fled at the crye of them: And they
sayde, lest the earth swalowe vs vp also.
35 And there came out a fire from the Lorde, and consumed the two hundred and
fiftie men that offered incense.
36 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
37 Speake vnto Eleazar the sonne of Aaron the priest, that he take vp the
censers out of the burnyng, and scatter the fire here and there, for they are
halowed,
38 The censers of these sinners agaynst their owne soules: let them make of them
brode plates for a coueryng of the aulter: For they offered them before the
Lorde, and therfore they are halowed, and they shalbe a signe vnto the children
of Israel.
39 And Eleazar the priest toke the brasen censers, which they that were burnt
had offered, and made brode plates for a coueryng of the aulter,
40 To be a remembraunce vnto the children of Israel, that no straunger which is
not of the seede of Aaron, come neare to offer incense before the Lorde, that he
be not lyke vnto Corah and his companie, as the Lorde sayde to hym by the hande
of Moyses.
41 But on the morowe, all the multitude of the children of Israel murmured
agaynst Moyses and Aaron, saying: Ye haue kylled the people of the Lorde.
42 And whe the multitude was gathered agaynst Moyses and Aaron, they loked
towarde the tabernacle of the congregation: And beholde, the cloude couered it,
and the glorie of the Lorde appeared.
43 And Moyses and Aaron came before the tabernacle of the congregation.
44 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
45 Get you from among this congregation, that I may consume the quickly. And
they fell vpon their faces.
46 And Moyses sayd vnto Aaron: Take a censer, and put fire therin out of the
aulter, and powre on incense, and go quickly vnto the congregation, & make an
attonement for them: For there is wrath gone out from the Lorde, and there is a
plague begunne.
47 And Aaron toke as Moyses comaunded hym, and ranne into the middes of ye
congregation: and beholde, the plague was begunne among the people, and he put
on incense, and made an atonement for the people.
48 And whe he stoode betweene the dead and them that were alyue, the plague was
stayed.
49 They that dyed in the plague, were fourteene thousand and seuen hundred,
besyde them that dyed about the conspiracie of Corah.
50 And Aaron went againe vnto Moyses before the doore of the tabernacle of the
congregation, and the plague was stayed.

Chapter 17

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Speake vnto the children of Israel, and take of euery one of them a rodde,
after the houses of their fathers, of all their princes accordyng to the familie
of their fathers, euen twelue roddes: and write euery mans name vpon his rodde.
3 And write Aarons name vpon the rodde of Leui: for euery rodde shalbe for ye
head of the house of their fathers.
4 And put them in the tabernacle of the congregation, before the arke of the
testimonie, where I wyll declare my selfe vnto you.
5 And the mans rodde whom I chose, shall blossome: And I wyll make ceasse from
me the grudgynges of the children of Israel, wherby they grudge agaynst you.
6 And Moyses spake vnto the children of Israel, and all the princes gaue hym a
rodde, one rodde for euery prince, accordyng to their fathers houses, euen
twelue roddes: and the rodde of Aaron was among their roddes.
7 And Moyses put the roddes before the Lorde in the tabernacle of witnesse.
8 And on the morowe, Moyses went into the tabernacle of witnesse: and beholde,
the rodde of Aaron for the house of Leui was budded, and brought foorth buddes,
bare blossomes, and rype almondes.
9 And Moyses brought out all ye roddes from before the Lorde, vnto all the
children of Israel: and they loked vpon them, and toke euery man his rodde.
10 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Bryng Aarons rodde agayne before the
witnesse, to be kept for a token to the rebellious children, and that their
murmuryng may cease from me, and that they dye not.
11 And Moyses dyd as the Lorde commaunded hym, euen so dyd he.
12 And the children of Israel spake vnto Moyses, saying: Beholde, we are wasted
away and perished, we all come to naught.
13 Whosoeuer cometh nye, or approcheth to the tabernacle of the Lord, shall dye:
Shall we vtterly consume away, and dye?

Chapter 18

1 And the Lorde sayde vnto Aaron: Thou & thy sonnes, and thy fathers house with
thee, shal beare the iniquitie of the sanctuarie: And thou and thy sonnes with
thee, shall beare the iniquitie of your priestes office.
2 And thy brethren of the tribe of Leui, & of thy fathers householde thou shalt
bryng with thee, that they may be ioyned vnto thee, and minister vnto thee: but
thou and thy sonnes with thee shal minister before the tabernacle of witnesse.
3 They shall kepe thy charge, euen the charge of all the tabernacle: only let
them not come nye the vessels of the sanctuarie and the aulter, that they and ye
also dye not.
4 And they shalbe ioyned with thee, and kepe the charge of the tabernacle of the
congregation for all the seruice of the tabernacle: and let no straunger come
nye vnto you.
5 Therfore shall ye kepe the charge of the sanctuarie, and the charge of the
aulter, that there fall no more wrath vpon the children of Israel:
6 Beholde, I haue taken your brethren the Leuites from among the children of
Israel, which as a gyft of yours are geuen vnto the Lorde, to do the seruice of
the tabernacle of the congregation.
7 Therfore shalt thou & thy sonnes with thee kepe your priestes office for all
thynges that pertayne vnto the aulter and within the vayle: And ye shal serue,
for I haue geue your priestes office vnto you as a gift, and therfore ye
straunger that commeth nye, must be slayne.
8 And the Lorde spake vnto Aaron: Beholde, I haue geuen thee the keping of myne
heaue offerynges, of all the halowed thynges of the children of Israel euen vnto
thee I haue geuen the for the annoyntyng, and to thy sonnes for an ordinaunce
for euer.
9 This shalbe thyne of the most holy thynges reserued from the fire of the
aulter. All their sacrifices for all their meate offerynges, sinne offerynges,
or trespasse offerynges, which they bryng vnto me, that shalbe most holy vnto
thee, and to thy sonnes.
10 In the most holy place shalt thou eate it, and all that are males shall eate
of it, let it be holy vnto thee.
11 And this also is thyne: the heaue offerynges of their gyftes, throughout all
the waue offerynges of the children of Israel: I haue geuen them vnto thee, &
thy sonnes and thy daughters with thee, to be a dutie for euer: and all that are
cleane in thy house, shall eate of it.
12 Al the fat of the oyle, & al the fat of the wine, & of the wheate, which they
shall offer vnto the Lorde for first fruites, the same haue I geuen vnto thee.
13 And whatsoeuer is first rype in their lande which they bryng vnto the Lord,
shalbe thyne, and all that are cleane in thyne house, shall eate of it.
14 All thinges seperate from the common vse in Israel, shalbe thyne.
15 All that breaketh the matrice in all fleshe that men bryng vnto the Lorde,
whether it be of men or beastes, shalbe thyne: Neuerthelater, the first borne of
man shalt thou redeeme, & the first borne of vncleane beastes shalt thou
redeeme.
16 Those that are to be redeemed, shalt thou redeeme from ye age of a moneth,
accordyng to thyne estimation, for the money of fiue sicles, after the sicle of
the sanctuarie, which is twentie gerahs.
17 But the first borne of a cowe, sheepe, & goate, shalt thou not redeeme, for
they are holy: therfore thou shalt sprinckle their blood vpon the aulter, and
shalt burne their fat as a sacrifice made by fire, for a sweete sauour vnto the
Lord.
18 And the fleshe of them is thyne, as the waue brest and the right shoulder:
these are thyne.
19 All the heaue offerynges of holy thynges which the children of Israel offer
vnto the Lord, haue I geuen thee & thy sonnes and thy daughters with thee, to be
a duetie for euer: let it be a salted couenaut for euer before ye Lord, both
vnto thee, & to thy seede with thee.
20 And ye Lord spake vnto Aaron: Thou shalt haue no inheritauce in their lande,
neither shalt thou haue any part amog them: I am thy part & thy inheritaunce
among the children of Israel.
21 Beholde, I haue geuen the children of Leui all the tenth in Israel to
inherite, for the seruice which they serue in the tabernacle of the
congregation.
22 Neither must the children of Israel hencefoorth come nie ye tabernacle of the
congregation, lest they beare sinne, & die.
23 But the Leuites shal do ye seruice in the tabernacle of the congregation, &
beare their sinne: It shalbe a lawe for euer in your generations, that among ye
childre of Israel they possesse no inheritaunce.
24 But the tithes of the childre of Israel which they pay as an heaue offeryng
vnto the Lord, I haue geuen ye Leuites to inherite: and therfore I haue sayde
vnto them, Among the children of Israel ye shall possesse no inheritaunce.
25 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
26 Speake vnto the Leuites, and say vnto them: When ye take of the children of
Israel the tithes which I haue geuen you of the for your inheritaunce, ye shal
take an heaue offering of ye same for the Lorde, euen the tenth part of that
tithe.
27 And this your heaue offeryng shalbe reckened vnto you, euen as though it were
of the corne of the barne, or as the fulnesse of the wine presse.
28 Of this maner ye shall therfore offer an heaue offeryng vnto the Lorde, of
all your tithes which ye receaue of the children of Israel, and ye shall geue
therof the Lordes heaue offeryng to Aaron the priest.
29 Of all your giftes ye shall offer all the Lordes heaue offeryng, euen all the
fat of the same, to wit the holy thynges therof.
30 Therfore thou shalt say vnto them: when ye haue taken away the fat of it from
it, it shalbe counted vnto the Leuites, as if it were ye increase of the corne
floore, or the increase of the winepresse.
31 And ye shall eate it in all places, both ye and your householdes, for it is
your rewarde for your seruice in the tabernacle of the congregation.
32 And ye shall beare no sinne by the reason of it, when ye haue offered from it
the fat of it: neither shall ye pollute the holy thynges of the children of
Israel, lest ye dye.

Chapter 19

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses & Aaron, saying:
2 This is the ordinaunce of the lawe which the Lord hath commaunded, saying:
Speake vnto the children of Israel that they bring thee a redde cowe without
spot, and wherin is no blemishe, and vpon which neuer came yoke.
3 And ye shall geue her vnto Eleazar the priest, that he may bryng her without
the hoast, and cause her to be slayne before his face:
4 And let Eleazar the priest take of her blood with his finger, and sprinckle it
directly before the tabernacle of the congregation seuen tymes.
5 And cause the cowe to be burnt in his sight, with her skinne, fleshe, & blood:
and the doung of her shal he burne also.
6 And let the priest take Cedar wood, and hysope, and scarlet lase and cast it
in the middes of the burnyng of the cowe.
7 Then let the priest washe his clothes, and he shall bathe his fleshe in water,
and then come into the hoast, and the priest shalbe vncleane vntyll the euen.
8 And he that burneth her shall washe his clothes in water, & bathe his fleshe
in water, and be vncleane vntyll euen.
9 And a man that is cleane, shall gather vp the asshes of the cowe, and lay them
without the hoast in a cleane place, and it shalbe kept for the multitude of the
children of Israel for a water of seperation: It is a sinne offeryng.
10 Therfore he that gathereth the asshes of the cowe, shall washe his clothes,
and remayne vncleane vntill euen: And it shalbe vnto the children of Israel, and
vnto the strauger that dwelleth among them, a statute for euer.
11 He that toucheth the dead body of any man, shalbe vncleane seuen dayes.
12 And he shall purifie hym selfe with this water the thirde day, & the seuenth
day he shalbe cleane: But if he purifie not hym selfe the thirde day, then the
seuenth day he shall not be cleane.
13 Whosoeuer toucheth the dead coarse of any man that is dead, & purgeth not hym
selfe, defileth the tabernacle of the Lorde, and that soule shalbe cut of from
Israel, because the water of seperation was not sprinckled vpon hym: he shalbe
therfore vncleane, his vncleanesse is yet vpon hym.
14 This is the lawe of a man that dyeth in a tent: All that come into the tent,
and all that is in the tent, shalbe vncleane seuen dayes.
15 And all the vessels that be open, which haue no coueryng bounde vpon them,
shalbe vncleane.
16 And whosoeuer toucheth one that is slayne with a sworde in the fieldes, or a
dead person, or a bone of a dead man, or a graue, shalbe vncleane seuen dayes.
17 Therfore, for an vncleane person they shal take of the burnt asshes of the
sinne offeryng, and runnyng water shalbe put therto in a vessell.
18 And let a cleane person take hysope, & dippe it in the water, and sprinckle
it vpon the tent, and vpon all the vessels, and on the persons that were therin,
and vpon hym that touched a bone, or a slaine person, or a dead body, or a
graue.
19 And the cleane person shall sprinckle vpon the vncleane the thirde day and
the seuenth day: And the seuenth day he shall purifie hym selfe, and washe his
clothes, & bathe hym selfe in water, and shalbe cleane at euen.
20 But the man that is vncleane, and purifieth not him selfe, the same soule
shalbe cut of from among the congregation: because he hath defiled the
sanctuarie of the Lorde, and the water of seperation hath not ben sprinckled
vpon hym, therfore shall he remayne vncleane.
21 And it shalbe a perpetuall lawe vnto them, that he that sprinckleth the water
of seperation, shall washe his clothes: and he that toucheth the water of
seperation, shalbe vncleane vntyll euen.
22 And whatsoeuer the vncleane person toucheth, shalbe vncleane: And the soule
that toucheth the thyng that was touched of the vncleane person shalbe vncleane
vntyll euen.

Chapter 20

1 And the children of Israel came with the whole multitude into the desert of
Zin in the first moneth, and the people abode at Cades: And there died Miriam,
and was buryed there.
2 But there was no water for the multitude: and they gathered them selues
together agaynst Moyses and Aaron.
3 And the people chode with Moyses, and spake, saying: Woulde God that we had
perished when our brethren dyed before the Lorde.
4 Why haue ye brought the congregation of the Lorde into this wildernesse, that
both we and our cattell shoulde dye in it?
5 Wherfore haue ye made vs to come vp out of Egypt, to bryng vs into this euyll
place, which is no place of seede, nor of fygges, nor vines, nor pomgranates,
neither is there any water to drynke?
6 And Moyses and Aaron went from the presence of the congregation, vnto the
doore of the tabernacle of the congregation, and fel vpon their faces, and the
glorie of the Lorde appeared vnto them.
7 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
8 Take the rodde, and gather thou and thy brother Aaron the congregation
together, and speake vnto the rocke before their eyes, and it shall geue foorth
his water: And thou shalt bryng them water out of the rocke, to geue the
companie drynke, and their beastes also.
9 And Moyses toke the rodde from before the Lord, as he commaunded hym.
10 And Moyses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before the rocke, and
Moyses sayde vnto them: Heare ye rebelles, must we fetch you water out of this
rocke?
11 And Moyses lyft vp his hande, and with his rodde he smote the rocke two
tymes, and the water came out aboundauntly, and the multitude dranke, and their
beastes also.
12 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses and Aaron: Because ye beleued me not, to
sanctifie me in the eyes of the children of Israel, therfore ye shall not bryng
this congregation into the lande which I haue geuen them.
13 This is the water of strife, because the children of Israel stroue with ye
Lorde, and he was sanctified in them.
14 And Moyses sent messengers from Cades vnto the kyng of Edom, thus sayeth thy
brother Israel: Thou knowest all the trauayle that we haue had.
15 Our fathers went downe into Egypt, & we haue dwelt in Egypt a long tyme: and
the Egyptians vexed vs and our fathers.
16 And when we cryed vnto the Lorde, he hearde our voyce, and sent an angell,
and hath set vs vp out of Egypt: And beholde, we are in Cades, euen in the
vttermost citie of thy border.
17 Let vs passe I pray thee through thy countrey: but we wyll not go through the
fieldes or vineyardes, neither wyll we drynke of the water of the fountaynes: we
wyll go by the kynges hye way, and neither turne vnto the ryght hande nor to the
left, vntyll we be past thy borders.
18 And Edom aunswered hym: Thou shalt not go by me, lest I come out agaynst thee
with the sworde.
19 The children of Israel sayd vnto him, we wyll go by the beaten way: and if I
and my cattell drynke of thy water, I wyll pay for it: I wyll but only (without
any harme) go through on my feete.
20 He aunswered: Thou shalt not go through. And Edom came out agaynst hym with
much people, and with a mightie power.
21 And thus Edom denied to geue Israel passage through his countrey: wherfore
Israel turned away from hym.
22 And the children of Israel departed from Cades, and came vnto mount Hor, with
all the congregation.
23 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses and Aaron in mount Hor, harde by the coast of
the lande of Edom, saying.
24 Aaron shalbe gathered vnto his people: for he shall not come into the lande
which I haue geuen vnto the children of Israel, because ye disobeyed my mouth at
the water of strife.
25 Take Aaron and Eleazar his sonne, and bryng them vp into mount Hor.
26 And cause Aaron to put of his garmentes, and put them vpon Eleazar his sonne:
and Aaron shalbe gathered vnto his people, and shall dye there.
27 And Moyses dyd as the Lorde commaunded: and they went vp into mount Hor, in
the sight of all the multitude.
28 And Moyses toke of Aarons clothes, and put them vpon Eleazar his sonne, and
Aaron dyed there in the toppe of the mount: And Moyses and Eleazar came downe
out of the mount.
29 When all ye multitude sawe that Aaron was dead, they mourned for Aaro thirtie
dayes, all the housholde of Israel.

Chapter 21

1 And when kyng Arad the Chananite which dwelt towarde the south, hearde tell
that Israel came by the way that the spyes had founde out, he fought agaynst
Israel, and toke some of them prisoners.
2 And Israel vowed a vowe vnto the Lorde, and sayde: If thou wylt deliuer this
people into my hande, I wyll vtterly destroy their cities.
3 And the Lorde hearde the voyce of Israel, and deliuered them the Chanaanites:
And they destroyed them and their cities, and called the name of the place
Horma.
4 And they departed fro mount Hor, by the way of the red sea, to compasse the
lande of Edom: and the soule of the people was sore greeued, because of ye way.
5 And the people spake agaynst God and agaynst Moyses: wherefore haue ye brought
vs out of Egypt, for to dye in the wildernesse? for here is neither bread nor
water, and our soule lotheth this lyght bread.
6 Wherfore the Lorde sent fierie serpentes among the people, which stong them:
and much people of Israel dyed.
7 Therfore the people came to Moyses, & sayd: We haue sinned, for we haue spoken
agaynst the Lord and agaynst thee: make intercession to the Lord that he take
away the serpentes from vs. And Moyses made intercession for ye people:
8 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Make thee a fierie serpent, and set it vp
vpon a pole: that as many as are bitten may loke vpon it, and lyue.
9 And Moyses made a serpent of brasse, and set it vpon a pole: and when the
serpent had bitten any man, he behelde the serpent of brasse, and lyued.
10 And the children of Israel departed thence, and pitched in Oboth.
11 And they departed from Oboth, and pitched at the heapes of Abarim, euen in
the wildernesse which is before Moab, on the east syde.
12 And they remoued thence, and pitched vpon the riuer of Zared.
13 And they departed thence, and pitched on the other syde of Arnon, which is in
the wildernesse, and commeth out of the coastes of the Amorites: for Arnon is
the border of Moab, betweene Moab and the Amorites.
14 Wherfore, it shalbe spoken in the booke of the warres of the Lord, what thyng
he dyd in the red sea, and in the riuers of Arnon,
15 And at the streame of the riuers, that goeth downe to the dwellyng of Ar, and
lyeth vpon the border of Moab.
16 From thence they returned vnto Beer: The same is the well wherof the Lord
spake vnto Moyses: Gather the people together, and I will geue them water.
17 Then Israel sang this song: Spryng vp well, syng ye vnto it:
18 The princes digged this well, the captaynes of the people digged it with the
lawe geuer, and with their staues. And from the wildernesse they went to
Mathana:
19 And from Mathana to Nahaliel, and from Nahaliel to Bamoth,
20 And from Bamoth of the valley that is in the fielde of Moab, vnto the top of
the hyll that loketh towarde Iesimon.
21 And Israel sent messengers vnto Sehon kyng of the Amorites, saying:
22 Let me passe through thy lande, we wyll not turne into the fieldes or
vineyardes, neither drynke of the waters of the well: but we wyll go along by
the kynges hye way, vntyll we be past thy countrey.
23 But Sehon woulde geue Israel no lisence to passe through his countrey: but
gathered all his people together, & went out agaynst Israel into the
wildernesse: And he came to Iaza, and fought agaynst Israel.
24 And Israel smote him in the edge of the sworde, & conquered his lande from
Arnon vnto Iabok, vnto the children of Ammon: For the border of the children of
Ammon was strong.
25 And Israel toke all these cities, and dwelt in all the cities of the Amorites
in Hesbon, and in all the townes that long therto.
26 For Hesbon was the citie of Sehon the kyng of the Amorites, which fought
before agaynst ye kyng of the Moabites, and toke all his lande out of his hande,
euen vnto Arnon.
27 Wherfore they that speake in prouerbes, say: Come to Hesbon, and let the
citie of Sehon be built and repayred.
28 For there is a fire gone out of Hesbon, and a flambe from the citie of Sehon,
and hath consumed Ar in Moab, and the lordes of Bamoth in Arnon.
29 Wo to thee Moab, O people of Chamos ye are vndone: he hath suffered his
sonnes to be pursued, & his daughters to be in captiuitie vnto Sehon the kyng of
the Amorites.
30 Their empire is lost from Hesbon vnto Dibon, and we made a wildernesse euen
vnto Nopha, which reacheth vnto Medaba.
31 And thus Israel dwelt in the lande of the Amorites.
32 And Moyses sent to searche out Iaezer, and they toke the townes belonging
therto, & rooted out the Amorites that were therein.
33 And they turned, and went vp towarde Basan: And Og the kyng of Basan came out
agaynst them, he and all his people to fight at Edrai.
34 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: feare hym not, for I haue deliuered hym into
thy hande, and all his people and his lande, and thou shalt do to him as thou
diddest vnto Schon the king of the Amorites whiche dwelt at Hesbon.
35 They smote hym therefore, and his sonnes, and all his people, vntyll there
was nothyng left hym, and they conquered his lande.

Chapter 22

1 And the children of Israel departed and pitched in the fieldes of Moab, on the
other side of Iordane from Iericho.
2 And Balac the sonne of Ziphor, sawe all that Israel had done to ye Amorites.
3 And the Moabites were sore afrayde of the people, because they were many, and
they were stroken with feare of the chyldren of Israel.
4 And Moab sayde vnto the elders of Madian: Nowe shall this companie lycke vp
all that are rounde about vs, as an oxe licketh vp the grasse of ye fielde. And
Balac the sonne of Ziphor, was kyng of the Moabites at that tyme.
5 He sent messengers therefore vnto Balaam the sonne of Beor to Pethor, which is
by the riuer of the lande of the chyldren of his folke, to call him, saying:
Beholde, there is a people come out of Egypt, and beholde they couer the face of
the earth, & dwell ouer against me.
6 Come nowe therfore I pray thee, and curse me this people, for they are to
mightie for me, so peraduenture I myght be able to smyte them, & to driue them
out of the lande: For I wote that he whom thou blessest, is blessed, and whom
thou cursest is cursed.
7 And the elders of Moab, and the elders of Madian departed, hauyng the rewarde
of the southsaying in their hande: And they came vnto Balaam, and tolde hym the
wordes of Balac.
8 He aunswered them: Tary here this nyght, and I wyll bryng you worde, euen as
the Lorde shall say vnto me. And the lordes of Moab abode with Balaam.
9 And God came vnto Balaam, and sayd: What men are these with thee?
10 And Balaam sayd vnto God: Balac the sonne of Ziphor kyng of Moab hath sent
vnto me saying:
11 Beholde, there is a people come out of Egypt, and couereth the face of the
earth: Come nowe therefore, and curse them for my sake, if so peraduenture I may
be able to ouercome them in battayle, and to dryue them out.
12 And God said vnto Balaam: Go not thou with them, neither curse the people:
for they are blessed.
13 And Balaam rose vp in the mornyng, and sayd vnto the lordes of Balac, Get you
vnto your lande: for the Lord wyll not suffer me to go with you.
14 And the lordes of Moab rose vp, and went vnto Balac and sayde: Balaam would
not come with vs.
15 And Balac sent againe a greater companie of lordes, and more honourable then
they.
16 Whiche came to Balaam, and tolde hym, Thus sayeth Balac the sonne of Ziphor:
Oh let nothyng let thee, but come vnto me:
17 For I wyll greatly promote thee vnto great honour, and wyll do whatsoeuer
thou sayest vnto me: come I pray thee, curse this people for my sake.
18 And Balaam aunswered and said vnto the seruauntes of Balac: If Balac woulde
geue me his house full of syluer and golde, I can not go beyonde the worde of
the Lorde my God, to do lesse or more:
19 Nowe therefore I pray thee, tarie ye here this nyght, that I may wit what the
Lorde wyll say vnto me more.
20 And God came vnto Balaam by night, and sayde vnto hym: If the men come to
call thee, ryse vp and go with them: but loke what I say vnto thee, that shalt
thou do.
21 And Balaam rose vp early, and sadled his asse, & went with the lordes of
Moab.
22 And the wrath of God was kindled, because he went: And the angell of the
Lorde stoode in the way to be agaynst hym, as he rode vpon his asse, and his two
seruauntes were with hym.
23 And when the asse sawe the angell of the Lord stand in the way, and hauyng
his sworde drawen in his hand, the asse turned aside out of the way, and went
out into the fielde: And Balaam smote the asse, to turne her into the way.
24 But the angell of the Lorde stoode in a path betweene the vineyardes, and
there was a wall on the one syde, and another on the other.
25 And when the asse sawe the angell of the Lorde, she thrust her selfe vnto the
wall, & crusht Balaams foote agaynst the wall: and he smote her agayne.
26 And the angell of the Lord went further, & stoode in a narowe place, where
was no way to turne either to the right hande, or to the left.
27 And when the asse sawe the angell of the Lorde, she fell downe vnder Balaam:
and Balaam was wroth, & smote the asse with a staffe.
28 And the Lorde opened the mouth of the asse, and she sayde vnto Balaam: What
haue I done vnto thee, that thou hast smytten me nowe three tymes?
29 And Balaam sayd vnto the asse, Because thou hast mocked me: I would also
there were a sworde in myne hande, for euen nowe woulde I kyll thee.
30 And the asse sayd vnto Balaam: Am not I thine asse, whiche thou hast rydden
vpon since the first tyme vnto this day? Was I euer wont to do so vnto thee? He
sayde, nay.
31 And the Lord opened the eyes of Balaam, and he saw the angel of the Lord
standing in the way, hauing his sworde drawen in his hande: He bowed hym selfe
therefore, and fell flat on his face.
32 And the angell of the Lorde said vnto him: Wherfore hast thou smytten thine
asse these three times? Beholde, I came out to withstande thee, because thyne
heart hath declined out of the way before me.
33 And the asse saw me, and turned from me now three times: or els if she had
not turned fro me, I had surely slayne thee, and saued her aliue.
34 Balaam sayde vnto the angell of the Lorde: I haue sinned, for I wyst not that
thou stoodest in the way agaynst me: Nowe therefore if it displease thee, I wyll
turne home agayne.
35 The angell of the Lorde sayde vnto Balaam, Go with the men: but what I say
vnto thee, that shalt thou speake. And so Balaam went with the lordes of Balac.
36 And when Balac heard that Balaam was come, he went out to meete hym, vnto a
citie of Moab, whiche is in the border of Arnon, eue in the vtmost coast.
37 And Balac sayd vnto Balaam: Dyd I not sende for thee to call thee? And
wherfore camest thou not vnto me: Am I not able in deede to promote thee vnto
honour?
38 And Balaam made aunswere vnto Balac, Lo, I am come vnto thee, and can I nowe
say any thyng at all? The worde that God putteth in my mouth, that shall I
speake.
39 And Balaam went with Balac, and they came vnto a citie of streates.
40 And Balac offered oxen and sheepe, and sent thereof to Balaam, and to the
lordes that were with hym.
41 And on the morowe Balac toke Balaam, and brought hym vp into the hye places
of Baal, that thence he might see the vtmost part of the people.

Chapter 23

1 And Balaam said vnto Balac: Buylde me here seuen aulters, & prepare me here
seuen oxen & seuen rammes.
2 And Balac dyd as Balaam sayde: And Balac and Balaam offred on euery aulter an
oxe and a ramme.
3 And Balaam said vnto Balac: Stand by thy sacrifice, and I will go, if happly
the Lorde will meete me: and whatsoeuer he sheweth me, I wyll tell thee. And he
went vp hyer.
4 But God met Balaam, & Balaam sayd vnto hym: I haue prepared seuen aulters, and
haue offred vpon euery aulter an oxe and a ramme.
5 And the Lorde put a saying in Balaams mouth, and sayde: Go agayne to Balac,
and say on this wyse.
6 And when he went agayne vnto him, lo, he stoode by his burnt sacrifice, he and
all the lordes of Moab.
7 And he toke vp his parable, and sayd: Balac the king of Moab hath brought me
fro Mesopotamia, out of the mountaynes of the east, saying Come, curse Iacob for
my sake, come and defie Israel.
8 Howe shall I curse hym, whom God hath not cursed? or howe shall I defie hym,
whom God hath not defied?
9 For from the toppe of the rockes I see hym, and from the hylles I beholde hym:
lo, the people shall dwell by them selues, and shal not be reckened among the
nations.
10 Who can tell the dust of Iacob, and the number of the fourth part of Israel?
I pray God that my soule may dye the death of the righteous, and that my last
ende may be like his.
11 And Balac sayd vnto Balaam: What hast thou done vnto me? I toke thee to curse
myne enemies, and beholde thou hast blessed them altogether.
12 He aunswered and sayd: Must I not take heede to speake that whiche the lorde
hath put in my mouth?
13 And Balac sayde vnto hym: Come I pray thee with me vnto another place, whence
thou mayest see them, and thou shalt see but the vtmost part of them, and shalt
not see them all: curse them out of that place for my sake.
14 And he brought hym into a fielde, where men myght see farre of, euen to the
toppe of an hyll, and buylt seuen aulters, and offred an oxe and a ramme on
euery aulter.
15 And he said vnto Balac: Stande here by thy burnt sacrifice, whyle I meete the
Lorde yonder.
16 And the Lord met Balaam, and put a worde in his mouth, and sayd: Go agayne
vnto Balac, and say thus.
17 And when he came to hym, beholde he stoode by his burnt sacrifice, and the
lordes of Moab with hym. And Balac saide vnto hym: What hath the Lorde sayde?
18 And he toke vp his parable, and aunswered: Rise vp Balac, and heare, and
hearke vnto me thou sonne of Ziphor.
19 God is not a man that he should lye, neither the sonne of a ma that he should
repent: should he say & not do? or should he speake, and not make it good?
20 Beholde, I haue taken vpon me to blesse: for he hath blessed, and it is not
in my power to aulter it.
21 He behelde no vanitie in Iacob, nor saw transgression in Israel: The Lord his
God is with hym, and the ioyfull shout of a king is among them.
22 God brought them out of Egypt, they haue strength as an Unicorne.
23 For there is no sorcerie in Iacob, nor soothsaying in Israel, according to
this time it shalbe sayde of Iacob and Israel: What hath God wrought?
24 Beholde, the people shall ryse vp as a Lion, and heaue vp him self as a young
Lion: He shall not lye downe, vntyll he eate of the pray, and drinke the blood
of them that are slayne.
25 And Balac sayde vnto Balaam: Neither curse them, nor blesse them at all.
26 But Balaam aunswered and said vnto Balac: Tolde not I thee, saying, All that
ye Lorde speaketh, that I must do?
27 And Balac said vnto Balaam: Come I pray thee, and I wyll bryng thee yet vnto
another place, if at all it will please God, that thou mayst thence curse them
for my sake.
28 And Balac brought Balaam vnto the toppe of Peor, that looketh towarde
Iesimon.
29 And Balaam said vnto Balac: Make me here seuen aulters, and prepare me here
seuen oxen, and seuen rammes.
30 And Balac dyd as Balaam had sayd, and offered an oxe and a ramme on euerie
aulter.

Chapter 24

1 And when Balaam saw that it pleased the Lorde that he should blesse Israel, he
went not as he dyd twise before to meete a soothsaying: but set his face towarde
the wyldernesse.
2 And Balaam lift vp his eyes, and loked vpon Israel as he lay accordyng to his
tribes, and the spirite of God came vpon hym.
3 And he toke vp his parable and sayd: Balaam the sonne of Beor hath sayde, and
the man whose eyes is open hath sayde:
4 He hath sayde whiche heareth the wordes of God, and seeth the visions of the
almightie, and falleth downe with open eyes.
5 Howe goodly are thy tentes O Iacob, and thyne habitations O Israel?
6 Euen as the valleys are they layde abrode, & as gardens by the riuers side, as
the tentes whiche the Lorde hath pitched, and as cypres trees beside the waters.
7 The water droppeth out of his bucket, & his seede shalbe in many waters, and
his king shalbe hier then Agag, and his kingdome shalbe exalted.
8 God brought hym out of Egypt, his strength is as the Unicorne: He shall eate
the nations his enemies, & gnawe their bones, and pearce them through with his
arrowes.
9 He couched hym selfe, and lay downe as a Lion, and as an elder Lion: who shall
stirre hym vp? Blessed is he that blesseth thee, and cursed is he that curseth
thee.
10 And Balac was wroth with Balaam, and smote his handes together, and Balac
said vnto Balaam: I sent for thee to curse mine enemies, and behold thou hast
blessed them this three tymes.
11 Therfore nowe get thee quickly vnto thy place: I thought that I would promote
thee vnto honour, but lo the Lord hath kept thee backe from worship.
12 Balaam aunswered vnto Balac: Tolde I not thy messengers whiche thou sendedst
vnto me, saying:
13 If Balac woulde geue me his house full of siluer and golde, I can not passe
the word of the Lord, to do either good or bad of mine owne minde: But what the
Lorde sayeth, that wyll I speake.
14 And nowe behold, I go vnto my people: Come therfore, and I wyll aduertise
thee what this people shall do to thy folke in the latter dayes.
15 And he toke vp his parable and sayd: Balaam the sonne of Beor hath sayde, the
man whose eye is open, hath sayde:
16 He hath said that heareth the wordes of God, and hath the knowledge of the
most hygh, and beholdeth the vision of the almightie, and that falleth and his
eyes are opened.
17 I shall see him, but not nowe, I shall beholde him, but not nigh: There shall
come a starre of Iacob, and ryse a scepter of Israel, & shall smyte the coastes
of Moab, and vndermine all the chyldren of Seth.
18 And Edom shalbe possessed, & Seir shall fall to the possession of their
enemies, and Israel shall do manfully.
19 Out of Iacob shall come he that shall haue dominion, and shall destroy the
remnaunt of the citie.
20 And when he loked on Amaleck, he toke vp his parable, and said: Amaleck is
the first of the nations, but his latter ende shall perishe vtterly.
21 And he loked on the Kenites, and toke vp his parable, and sayde: Strong is
thy dwelling place, and thou puttest thy nest in a rocke.
22 Neuerthelesse, the Kenite shalbe rooted out, vntyll Assur take thee prisoner.
23 And he toke vp his parable, and sayd: Alas, who shall lyue when God doth
this?
24 The shippes also shall come out of the coast of Chittim, and subdue Assur,
and subdue Eber, and he hym selfe shall perishe at the last.
25 And Balaam rose vp, and went and returned to his place: and Balac also went
his way.

Chapter 25

1 And Israel abode in Sittim, and the people began to commit whoredome with the
daughters of Moab.
2 Whiche called the people vnto the sacrifice of their gods: And the people dyd
eate, and bowed downe to their gods.
3 And Israel coupled hym selfe vnto Baal Peor, and the indignation of the Lorde
was kindeled against Israel.
4 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Take all the heades of the people, and hang
them vp before the Lorde against the sunne, that the wrath of the Lordes
countenaunce may be turned away from Israel.
5 And Moyses sayde vnto the Iudges of Israel: Euery one slay his men that were
ioyned vnto Baal Peor.
6 And behold, one of the chyldren of Israel came & brought vnto his brethren a
Madianitishe woman, euen in the sight of Moyses, and in the sight of all the
multitude of the children of Israel, that wept before the doore of the
tabernacle of the congregation.
7 And when Phinehes the sonne of Eleazar the sonne of Aaron the priest, saw it,
he rose vp out of the myddes of the companie, & toke a iauelin in his hande,
8 And went after the man of Israel into the tent, & thrust them through both the
man of Israel & also the woman, euen thorowe the belly of her: And the plague
ceassed fro the chyldre of Israel.
9 And there dyed in the plague twentie and foure thousande.
10 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
11 Phinehes the sonne of Eleazar the sonne of Aaron the priest, hath turned myne
anger away from the chyldren of Israel, whyle he was zelous for my sake among
the, that I had not consumed the childre of Israel in my ielousie.
12 Wherfore say: beholde, I geue vnto hym my couenaunt of peace.
13 And he shall haue it, and his seede after hym, euen the couenaunt of the
priestes office for euer, because he was zelous for his Gods sake, and made an
attonement for the chyldren of Israel.
14 The name of the Israelite thus kylled, which was slayne with the Madianitishe
woman, was Zamri the sonne of Salu, a Lorde of an house and kinred of Simeon.
15 And the name of the Madianitishe woma that was slayne, was Cozbi, the
daughter of Zur, a head ouer the people of his fathers house in Madian.
16 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
17 Uexe the Madianites, & smyte them:
18 For they trouble you with their wyles, whiche haue begyled you by deceyte in
the cause of Peor, & in the cause of their sister Cozbi, the daughter of a Lorde
of the Madianites, whiche was slayne in the day of the plague for Peors sake.

Chapter 26

1 And after the plague, the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, and vnto Eleazar the sonne
of Aaron the priest, saying:
2 Take the number of al the multitude of the chyldren of Israel, from twentie
yeres old and aboue, throughout their fathers houses, all that are able to go to
warre in Israel.
3 And Moyses and Eleazar the priest spake vnto them in the fieldes of Moab, by
Iordan ouer against Iericho, saying:
4 Ye shall number the people From twentie yeres & aboue, as the Lorde commaunded
Moyses and the children of Israel, when they were come out of Egypt.
5 Ruben the eldest sonne of Israel. The chyldren of Ruben: Hanoch, of whom
commeth the kinred of the Hanochites: and Pallu, of whom commeth the kinred of
the Palluites.
6 Of Hesron, commeth the kinred of the Hesronites: of Charmi, commeth the kinred
of the Charmites.
7 These are the kinredes of the Rubenites, and they were in number fourtie and
three thousand, seuen hundred and thirtie.
8 And the sonnes of Pallu, Eliab.
9 And the sonnes of Eliab, Nemuel, Dathan, & Abiram. This is that Dathan and
Abiram, which were famous in the congregation, and stroue against Moyses and
Aaron in the company of Corah, when they stroue agaynst the Lorde.
10 And the earth opened her mouth, & swalowed them vp: Corah also was in the
death of that multitude, what tyme the fire consumed two hundred and fiftie men:
and they became a signe.
11 Notwithstanding, the chyldren of Corah dyed not.
12 And the chyldren of Simeon after their kinredes, were Nemuel, of whom cometh
the kinred of the Nemuelites: Iamin, of whom commeth the kinred of the
Iaminites: Iachin, of whom commeth the kinred of the Iachinites.
13 Of Zareh, commeth the kinred of the Zarehites: And of Saul, commeth the
kinred of the Saulites.
14 These are the kinredes of Simeon, euen twentie and two thousande and two
hundred.
15 The chyldren of Gad after their kinredes, were Zephon, of whom cometh the
kinred of the Zephonites: Haggi, of whom commeth the kinred of the Haggites:
Suni, of whom commeth the kinred of the Sunites.
16 Of Ozui, commeth the kinred of the Oznites: and of Eri, commeth the kinred of
the Erites.
17 Of Arod, commeth the kinred of the Arodites: Of Ariel, commeth the kinred of
the Arielites.
18 These are the kinredes of the children of Gad, according to their numbers,
fourtie thousande and fiue hundred.
19 The children of Iuda, Er and Onan, and Er and Onan dyed in the lande of
Chanaan.
20 But the chyldren of Iuda after their kinredes, were Sela, of whom cometh the
kinred of the Selanites: Phares, of whom commeth the kinred of the Pharezites:
Zareh, of whom cometh the kinred of the Zarehites.
21 And the children of Phares, were Hesron, of whom commeth the kinred of the
Hesronites: Hamul, of whom commeth the kinred of the Hamulites.
22 These are the kinredes of Iuda after their numbers, threscore and sixteene
thousande and fiue hundred.
23 The chyldren of Isachar after their kinredes, were Thola, of whom commeth the
kinred of the Tholaites: Phuua, of whom commeth the kinred of the Phuuaites.
24 Of Iasub, commeth the kinred of the Iasubites: of Simron, commeth the kinred
of the Simronites.
25 These are the kinredes of Isachar after their numbers, threscore and foure
thousande and three hundred.
26 The chyldren of Zabulon after their kinredes, were Sered, of whom commeth ye
kinred of the Seredites: Elon, of whom commeth the kinred of the Elonites:
Iaheliel, of whom commeth the kinred of the Iahelelites.
27 These are the kinredes of the Zabulonites after their numbers, threscore
thousande and fiue hundred.
28 The chyldren of Ioseph throughout their kinredes, were Manasse and Ephraim.
29 The chyldren of Manasse, Machir, of whom commeth the kinred of the
Machirites: And Machir begat Gilead, and of Gilead commeth the kinred of the
Giliadites.
30 And these are the chyldren of Gilead, Hiezer, of whom commeth the kinred of
the Hiezerites: Helech, of whom commeth the kinred of the Helechites.
31 And Asriel, of whom commeth the kinred of the Asrielites: and Sechem, of whom
commeth the kinred of the Sechemites.
32 Semida, of whom commeth the kinred of the Senudites: and Hepher, of whom
commeth the kinred of the Hepherites.
33 And Zalphaad the sonne of Hepher had no sonnes, but daughters: And the names
of the daughters of Zalphaad, were Mahela, Noa, Hagla, Milcha, and Thirza.
34 These are the kinredes of Manasse, and the number of them fiftie and two
thousande and seuen hundred.
35 These are the chyldren of Ephraim after their kinredes: Suthelah, of whom
commeth the kinred of the Suthelahites: Becher, of whom commeth the kinred of
the Becherites: Thahen, of whom commeth the kinred of the Thahenites.
36 And these are the chyldren of Suthelah: Eran, of whom commeth the kinred of
the Eranites.
37 These are the kinredes of the children of Ephraim after their numbers,
thirtie and two thousande and fiue hundred. And these are the chyldren of Ioseph
after their kinredes.
38 These are the chyldren of Beniamin after their kinredes: Bela, of whom
commeth the kinred of the Belaites: Asbel, of whom commeth the kinred of the
Asbelites: Ahiram, of whom commeth the kinred of the Ahiramites:
39 Supham, of whom commeth the kinred of the Suphamites: Hupham, of who came the
kinred of ye Huphamites.
40 And the chyldren of Bela, were Ard and Naaman, from whence commeth the kinred
of the Ardites, and of Naaman the kinred of the Naamites.
41 These are the chyldre of Beniamin after their kinredes, & after their numbers
fourtie & fiue thousande & sixe hundred.
42 These are the chyldren of Dan after their kinredes: Suham, of whom commeth
the kinred of the Suhamites. These are the housholdes of Dan after their
kinredes.
43 All the kinredes of the Suhamites were after their numbers threscore and
foure thousande, and foure hundred.
44 The chyldren of Aser after their kinredes, were Iemna, of whom cometh the
kinred of the Iemnites: Iesui, of whom commeth the kinred of the Iesuites: Bria,
of whom cometh the kinred of the Brites.
45 The chyldren of Bria, were Heber, of whom commeth the kinred of the
Heberites: Malchiel, of whom came the kinred of the Malchielites.
46 And the daughter of Aser, was called Sarah.
47 These are the kinredes of Aser after their numbers, fiftie and three thousand
and foure hundred.
48 The children of Nephthali, after their kinredes, were Iaheziel, of whom came
the kinred of the Iahezielites: Guni, of whom came the kinred of the Gunites.
49 Iezer, of whom came the kinred of the Iezerites: Sellem, of whom came the
kinred of the Sellemites.
50 These are the kinredes of Nephthali accordyng to their housholdes, whose
numbers is fourtie and fiue thousande, and foure hundred.
51 These are the numbers of the children of Israel, sixe hundred thousande, and
a thousande, seuen hundred and thirtie.
52 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
53 Unto these the lande shalbe deuided to inherite, accordyng to the number of
names.
54 To many thou shalt geue the more inheritaunce, and to fewe the lesse: to
euerie tribe shall the inheritaunce be geuen, according to the number therof.
55 Notwithstanding, the lande shalbe deuided by lot, & according to the names of
the tribes of their fathers, they shall inherite.
56 According to the lot shall the possession thereof be deuided betweene many
and fewe.
57 These are the numbers of the Leuites after their kinredes: Gerson, of whom
came the kinred of the Gersonites: Caath, of whom came the kinred of the
Caathites: Merari, of whom came the kinred of the Merarites.
58 These are the kinredes of the Leuites, the kinred of the Libnites, the kinred
of the Hebronites, the kinred of the Mahelites, the kinred of the Musites, the
kinred of the Corathites, and Caath begat Amram.
59 And Amrams wyfe was called Iochebed a daughter of Leui, which was borne vnto
Leui in Egypt: And she bare vnto Amram, Aaron, Moyses, and Miriam their sister.
60 And vnto Aaron were borne Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
61 And Nadab and Abihu dyed when they offered straunge fire before the Lorde.
62 And after their numbers, they were twentie and three thousande, all males
from a moneth olde and aboue: For they were not numbred among the children of
Israel, because there was no inheritaunce geuen them among the children of
Israel.
63 These are the numbers when Moyses and Eleazar the priest numbred the chyldren
of Israel in the playne of Moab, fast by Iordane ouer agaynst Iericho.
64 And among these there was not a man of them whom Moyses & Aaron numbred, when
they tolde the chyldren of Israel in the wyldernesse of Sinai.
65 For the Lorde sayde of them: They shall dye in the wyldernesse. And there was
not left a man of them, saue Caleb the sonne of Iephune, and Iosuah the sonne of
Nun.

Chapter 27

1 Then came the daughters of Zalphaad the sonne of Hepher, the sonne of Gilead,
the sonne of Machir, the sonne of Manasse, of the kinred of Manasse the sonne of
Ioseph: whose names were Maala, Noha, Hagla, Melcha and Thirza.
2 And stode before Moyses and Eleazar the priest, and before the lordes, and all
the multitude by the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation, saying:
3 Our father dyed in the wyldernesse, and was not in the company of them that
gathered them selues together agaynst the Lorde in the congregation of Corah:
but dyed in his owne sinne, and had no sonnes.
4 Wherefore then is the name of our father taken away from among his kinred,
because he hath no sonne? Geue vnto vs therefore a possession among the brethren
of our father.
5 And Moyses brought their cause before the Lorde.
6 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying.
7 The daughters of Zalphaad speake ryght: thou shalt geue them a possession to
inherite among their fathers brethren, and shalt turne the inheritaunce of their
father vnto them.
8 And thou shalt speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, saying: If a man dye and
haue no sonne, ye shall turne his inheritaunce vnto his daughter.
9 If he haue no daughter, ye shall geue his inheritaunce vnto his brethren.
10 If he haue also no brethren, ye shall geue his inheritaunce vnto his fathers
brethren.
11 And if his father haue no brethren, ye shall geue his inheritaunce vnto hym
that is next to him of his kinred, and he shall possesse it: And this shalbe
vnto the chyldren of Israel a lawe of iudgement, as the Lorde hath commaunded
Moyses.
12 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Get thee vp into this mount Abarim, and
beholde the lande whiche I haue geuen vnto the chyldren of Israel:
13 And whe thou hast seene it, thou shalt be gathered vnto thy people also, as
Aaron thy brother was gathered.
14 For ye were disobedient vnto my mouth in the desert of Zin, in the stryfe of
the congregation, neither dyd ye sanctifie me in the waters before their eyes:
That is, the water of stryfe in Cades in the wyldernesse of Zin.
15 And Moyses spake vnto the Lorde, saying:
16 Let the Lord God of the spirites of all fleshe set a man ouer ye
congregation,
17 Which may go out & in before them, and leade them out and in, that the
congregation of the Lord be not as sheepe which haue not a sheephearde.
18 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Take thee Iosuah the sonne of Nun, a man in
whom is the spirite, and put thyne handes vpon hym,
19 And set hym before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation: and
geue hym a charge in their sight.
20 And put of thy prayse vpon him, that all the companie of the children of
Israel may be obedient.
21 And he shall stande before Eleazar the priest, which shall aske counsell for
hym after the iudgement of Urim, before the Lorde: And accordyng vnto his worde,
shall they go out and in, both he and all the children of Israel with him, and
all the congregation.
22 And Moyses dyd as the Lorde commaunded him: and he toke Iosuah, and set hym
before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation:
23 And put his handes vpon hym, and gaue hym a charge, as the Lorde commaunded
through the hand of Moyses.

Chapter 28

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Commaunde the children of Israel, and say vnto them: My offeryng and my bread
for my sacrifices which are made by fire for a sweete sauour, shal ye obserue to
offer vnto me in their due season.
3 And thou shalt say vnto them: This is the offeryng made by fire, which ye
shall offer vnto the Lord: two lambes of a yere olde without spot, day by day
for a continuall burnt offeryng.
4 One lambe shalt thou prepare in the mornyng, and the other at euen.
5 And therto the tenth part of an Epha of floure for a meate offeryng, mingled
with the fourth part of an Hin of beaten oyle.
6 It is a dayly burnt offeryng, such as was ordayned in the mount Sinai for a
sweete sauour, a sacrifice made by fire vnto the Lorde.
7 And let the drinke offering of the same be the fourth part of an Hin for one
lambe, and in the holy place shalt thou commaunde the wine to be powred vnto the
Lorde:
8 And the other lambe thou shalt offer at euen, after the maner of the meate
offeryng and the drynke offeryng of the mornyng, a sacrifice made by fire, shalt
thou offer for a sweete sauour vnto the Lorde.
9 And on the Sabbath day, two lambes of a yere olde without spot, and two tenth
deales of floure for a meate offeryng mingled with oyle, and the drynke offeryng
therto.
10 This is the burnt offeryng of euery Sabbath, beside the dayly burnt offeryng,
and his drynke offeryng.
11 And in the begynnyng of your monethes, ye shall offer a burnt offeryng vnto
the Lorde: two young bullockes, and a ramme, and seuen lambes of a yere olde
without spot,
12 And three tenth deales of floure for a meate offeryng mingled with oyle for
one bullocke, and two tenth deales of floure for a meate offeryng mingled with
oyle for one ramme.
13 And a tenth deale of floure mingled with oyle for a meate offeryng vnto one
lambe, for a burnt offeryng of a sweete sauour, and a sacrifice made by fire
vnto the Lorde.
14 And their drynke offerynges shalbe halfe an Hin of wine vnto one bullocke,
and the thirde part of an Hin of wine vnto a ramme, and the fourth part of an
Hin vnto a lambe: This is the burnt offeryng of euery moneth throughout the
monethes of the yere:
15 And one hee goate for a sinne offeryng vnto the Lorde shalbe offered, besides
the dayly burnt offering, and his drinke offeryng.
16 And the fourteenth day of the first moneth, is the Passouer of the Lorde.
17 And in the fifteenth day of the same moneth is the feast: seuen dayes long
shall vnleauened bread be eaten.
18 In the first day shalbe an holy conuocation, ye shall do no maner of seruile
worke therin.
19 But ye shall offer a sacrifice made by fire, for a burnt offering vnto the
Lord, two young bullockes, one ramme, and seuen lambes of a yere olde, let them
be without spot.
20 And let their meate offeryng be of floure mingled with oyle: three tenth
deales also shall ye offer for a bullocke, and two tenth deales for a ramme.
21 One tenth deale shalt thou offer for euery lambe of the seuen lambes.
22 And a hee goate for a sinne offeryng, to make attonement for you.
23 Ye shall offer these beside the burnt offeryng in the mornyng, which is a
continuall burnt sacrifice.
24 After this maner ye shall offer throughout the seuen dayes, the fleshe of the
sacrifice made by fire, for a sweete sauour vnto the Lorde: And it shalbe done
beside the dayly burnt offeryng and his drynke offeryng.
25 And in the seuenth day ye shall haue an holy conuocation, wherin ye shall do
no seruile worke.
26 Also in the day of your first fruites, when ye bryng a newe meate offeryng
vnto the Lorde accordyng to your weekes, ye shall haue an holy couocation, and
ye shal do no seruile worke in it.
27 But offer a burnt offering for a sweete sauour vnto the Lorde, two young
bullockes, a ramme, and seuen lambes of a yere olde,
28 With their meate offerynges of floure mingled with oyle, three tenth deales
vnto a bullocke, two tenth deales to a ramme,
29 And one tenth deale vnto a lambe throughout the seuen lambes,
30 And an hee goate to make an attonement for you.
31 This ye shall do, besides the continual burnt offeryng and his meate
offeryng, (and they shalbe vnto you without spot) with their drinke offerynges.

Chapter 29

1 And in the first day of the seuenth moneth ye shall haue an holy couocation,
ye shal do then no seruile worke: For it is a day of blowyng the trumpettes vnto
you.
2 And ye shall offer a burnt offeryng for a sweet sauour vnto the Lorde, one
young bullocke, one ramme, and seuen lambes of a yere olde, without blemishe:
3 And their meate offering shalbe made of floure mingled with oyle, three tenth
deales vnto the bullocke, and two tenth deales vnto the ramme,
4 And one tenth deale vnto one lambe, throughout the seuen lambes:
5 And an hee goate for a sinne offeryng, to make an attonement for you:
6 Beside the burnt offeryng of the moneth and his meate offeryng, and beside the
dayly burnt offeryng and his meate offeryng, and the drynke offerynges of the
same, which must be done accordyng vnto the maner of them, for a sauour of
sweetnesse, it is a sacrifice made by fire vnto the Lorde.
7 And ye shall haue the tenth day of that moneth an holy conuocation, and ye
shall humble your soules, and shall do no maner worke therin.
8 But ye shall offer a burnt offeryng vnto the Lorde for a sweete sauour, one
young bullocke, a ramme, and seuen lambes of a yere olde, which shalbe vnto you
without blemishe.
9 Their meate offeryng shalbe of floure mingled with oyle, three tenth deales to
a bullocke, and two tenth deales to a ramme:
10 And a tenth deale vnto euery lambe, throughout the seuen lambes:
11 And an hee goate for a sinne offeryng, beside the sinne offeryng of
attonement & dayly burnt offeryng, and the meate and drynke offerynges that long
to the same.
12 And in the fifteenth day of the seueth moneth, ye shall haue an holy
conuocation, and do then no seruile worke, and ye shall kepe a feast vnto the
Lorde seuen dayes long.
13 And ye shall offer a burnt offeryng for a sacrifice made by fire for a sweete
sauour vnto the Lorde, thirteene young bullockes, two rammes, and fourteene
lambes of a yere olde, which shalbe without blemishe.
14 And their meate offeryng shalbe of floure mingled with oyle, three tenth
deales vnto euery one of the thirteene bullockes, two tenth deales to either of
the two rammes,
15 And one tenth deale vnto eche of the fourteene lambes:
16 And one hee goate for a sinne offering, beside the dayly burnt offeryng, with
his meate and drynke offeryng.
17 And the seconde day ye shall offer twelue young bullockes, two rammes,
fourteene yerelyng lambes without spot.
18 And let their meate offerynges and drynke offerynges, vnto the bullockes,
rammes, and lambes, be accordyng to the number of them, & after the maner.
19 And an hee goate for a sinne offeryng, beside the dayly burnt offeryng and
his meate and drynke offeryng.
20 And the thirde day ye shall offer a leuen bullockes, two rammes, & foureteene
yerelyng lambes without spot:
21 And let their meate and drynke offerynges vnto the bullockes, rammes, and
lambes, be after the number of them, and accordyng to the maner.
22 And there shalbe offered an hee goate for a sinne offeryng, beside the dayly
burnt offeryng, and his meate & drynke offeryng.
23 In the fourth day, ye shall offer ten bullockes, two rammes, and fourteene
yerelyng lambes without blemishe.
24 Let their meate & drynke offeringes vnto the bullockes, rammes, & lambes, be
accordyng to the number of them, and after the maner:
25 And an hee goate for a sinne offeryng, beside the dayly burnt offeryng, & his
meate and drynke offeryng.
26 In the fifth day ye shall offer nine bullockes, two rammes, and fourteene
lambes of one yere olde without spot:
27 And let their meate and drynke offeringes vnto the bullockes, rammes, and
lambes, be accordyng to the number of them, and after the maner:
28 And an hee goate for a sinne offeryng, beside the dayly burnt offeryng, and
his meate and drynke offeryng.
29 And in the first day, ye shall offer eyght bullockes, two rammes, and
fourteene yerelyng lambes without spot.
30 And let their meate and drynke offeringes vnto the bullockes, rammes, and
lambes, be accordyng to the number of them, after the maner:
31 And an hee goate for a sinne offeryng, beside the dayly burnt offeryng, and
his meate and drynke offeryng.
32 In the seuenth day, ye shal offer seuen bullockes, two rammes, and fourteene
lambes that are yerelynges withont blemishe.
33 And let their meate and drynke offeringes vnto the bullockes, rammes, and
lambes, be accordyng to their number, and after the maner:
34 And an he goate for a sinne offeryng, beside the dayly burnt offeryng, and
his meate and drynke offeryng.
35 In the eyght day, ye shall haue a solempne assemblie, and ye shall do no
seruile worke therin:
36 But ye shall offer a burnt offeryng, a sacrifice made by fire for a sweet
sauour vnto ye Lorde, one bullocke, one ramme, & seuen yerelyng lambes without
spot.
37 Let their meate and drinke offeringes vnto the bullocke, ramme, and lambes,
be accordyng to the number, and accordyng to the maner:
38 And an hee goate for a sinne offeryng, beside the dayly burnt offeryng, and
his meate and drynke offeryng.
39 These thynges ye shall do vnto the Lorde in your feastes, beside your vowes &
freewil offeringes, your burnt offerynges, meate offerynges, drynke offerynges,
and peace offerynges.
40 And Moyses tolde the children of Israel, all that the Lord comaunded him.

Chapter 30

1 And Moyses spake vnto the heades of the tribes concernyng the children of
Israel, saying: This is the thyng which the Lorde hath commaunded.
2 If a man vowe vnto the Lorde, or sweare an othe to bynde his soule: he shall
not go backe with his worde, but shall fulfyll all that is proceeded out of his
mouth.
3 If a woman also vowe a vowe vnto the Lorde, & bynde her selfe being in her
fathers house in the tyme of her youth:
4 And her father heare her vowe and bonde which she hath made vpon her soule, &
holde his peace therto: then all her vowes and bondes which she hath made vpo
her soule, shal stande in effect.
5 But and if her father disalowe her the same day that he heareth al her vowes
and bondes which she hath made vpon her soule: they shall not be of value, and
the Lorde shall forgeue her, because her father disalowed her.
6 If she had an husbande, when she vowed or pronounced ought out of her lippes,
wherwith she bounde her soule:
7 And her husbande hearde it, and helde his peace therat the same day he hearde
it: then her vowes shall stande, and her bondes wherwith she bounde her soule,
shall stande in effect.
8 And if her husbande disalowe her the same day that he hearde it, then he shall
make her vowe which she hath vpon her, and the openyng of her lippes wherwith
she bounde her soule, of none effect, and the Lorde shall forgeue her.
9 But euery vowe of a widowe, and of her that is deuorsed, that they haue bounde
their soule withall, shall stande in effect with them.
10 If she vowed in her husbandes house, or bounde her soule with an othe:
11 And her husbande hearde it, and helde his peace concernyng her, & disalowed
her not: then all her vowes shal stande, and euery bonde wherwith she bounde her
soule, shall stande.
12 But if her husbande disanulled them the same day yt he hearde them: then
nothyng that proceedeth out of her lippes in vowes and bondes wherwith she
bounde her soule, shall stande in effect: for her husbande hath disanulled them,
and the Lorde shall forgeue her.
13 All vowes and othes that binde to humble the soule, may her husbande
stablishe or breake.
14 But if her husbande holde his peace from one day to another, then he
stablissheth all her vowes & bondes which she had vpon her: he confirmeth them,
because he helde his peace concernyng her the same day that he hearde them.
15 But if he breake them, after that he hath hearde them, he shall beare her
sinne hym selfe.
16 These are the ordinaunces which the Lord commaunded Moyses betweene a man and
his wyfe, and betweene the father and his daughter, beyng yet a damsell in her
fathers house.

Chapter 31

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Auenge the children of Israel of the Madianites, & afterwarde shalt thou be
gathered vnto thy people.
3 And Moyses spake vnto the folke, saying: Harnesse some of you vnto warre, and
let them go vpon the Madianites, & auenge the Lorde of the Madianites.
4 Of euery tribe a thousande, throughout all the tribes of Israel, shal ye sende
to the warre.
5 And there were deliuered out of the thousandes of Israel, twelue thousand
prepared vnto warre, of euery tribe a thousande.
6 And Moyses sent the to ye warre, euen a thousande of euery tribe, & with them
Phinees the sonne of Eleazar the priest to the warre, and the holy vessels, &
the trumpets to blowe were in his hande.
7 And they warred agaynst the Madianites as the Lord comaunded Moyses, and slue
all the males.
8 And they slue the kynges of Madian among other that were slayne: Namelye, Eui,
and Rekem, Zur, & Hur, and Reba: fiue kynges of Madian, with Balaam the sonne of
Beor, whom they slue with the sworde.
9 And the children of Israel toke all the women of Madian prisoners, and their
children, and spoyled all their cattel, and all their flockes, and all their
goodes.
10 And they burnt all their cities wherin they dwelt, and all their goodly
dwellynges, with fire:
11 And they toke all the spoyle, and all the bootie, both of men and beastes.
12 And they brought the captiues, and that which they had taken, and the spoyle,
vnto Moyses and Eleazar the priest, and vnto the companie of the children of
Israel, euen vnto the hoast that were in the fieldes of Moab by Iordane, ouer
agaynst Iericho:
13 And Moyses and Eleazar the priest, and all the lordes of the congregation,
went out of the hoast to meete them.
14 And Moyses was angrie with the officers of the hoast, with the captaynes ouer
thousandes, and ouer hundredes, which came from the warre & battayle.
15 And Moyses sayde vnto them: Haue ye saued all the women alyue?
16 Beholde, these caused the children of Israel through the councel of Balaam,
to commit trespasse agaynst the Lorde in the businesse of Peor, and there
folowed a plague among the congregation of the Lorde.
17 Nowe therfore, slay all the men children, and kyl the women that haue lien
with men fleshly.
18 But all the women children that haue not lien with men carnally, kepe alyue
for your selues.
19 And ye shall remayne without the hoast seuen dayes, all that haue kylled any
person, and all that haue touched any dead body, and purifie both your selues
and your prisoners the thirde day and the seuenth.
20 And purifie all your raymentes, and that is made of skinnes, and all worke of
goates heere, and all thinges made of wood.
21 And Eleazar the priest sayde vnto the men of warre which went to the
battayle: This is the ordinauce of the lawe which the Lorde comaunded Moyses:
22 As for golde, siluer, brasse, and iron, tinne, and lead,
23 And all that may abide the fire, ye shal make it go through the fire, and it
shalbe cleane: Neuerthelesse, it shalbe purified with water of seperation: And
all that suffereth not the fire, ye shall make go through the water:
24 And washe your clothes the seuenth day, and ye shalbe cleane, and afterwarde
come into the hoast.
25 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
26 Take the summe of the pray that was taken, both of the persons and of
cattell, thou and Eleazar the priest, and the chiefe fathers of the
congregation:
27 And deuide the pray into two partes, betweene them that toke the warre vpon
them and went out to battayle, and all the congregation.
28 And take a tribute vnto the Lorde of the men of warre which went out to
battayle: one soule of fiue hundred, both of the persons, and of the beefes, and
of the asses, and of the sheepe.
29 And ye shall take it of their halfe, and geue it vnto Eleazar the priest, as
an heaue offeryng of the Lorde.
30 And of the halfe of the children of Israel, thou shalt take one portion of
fiftie, of the persons, and of the beefes, of the asses, and of the sheepe, and
of al maner of beastes, and geue them vnto the Leuites which wayte vpon the
charge of the tabernacle of the Lorde.
31 And Moyses and Eleazar the priest, dyd as the Lorde comaunded Moyses.
32 And the bootie, and the rest of the pray which the men of warre had caught,
was sixe hundred thousande, and three sore and fifteene thousande sheepe,
33 And three score and twelue thousande of beefes,
34 And three score & one thousande asses,
35 And thirtie & two thousande persons in all, of women that had lyen by no man.
36 And the halfe, which was the part of them that went out to warre, was in
number three hundred thousande, and seuen and thirtie thousande, & fiue hundred,
sheepe.
37 And the Lordes part of the sheepe, was sixe hundred & threescore & fifteene.
38 And the beefes were thirtie and sixe thousande, of which the Lordes part was
threescore and twelue.
39 And the asses were thirtie thousande and fiue hundred, of which the Lordes
part was threescore and one.
40 And the persons were sixteene thousande, of which the Lordes part was thirtie
and two persons.
41 And Moyses gaue the tribute, which was the Lordes heaue offeryng, vnto
Eleazar the priest, as the Lorde commaunded Moyses:
42 And the other halfe of the children of Israel which Moyses deuided from the
men of warre,
43 That is to wit the halfe that pertayned vnto the congregation, was three
hundred thousande, and thirtie & seuen thousande, and fiue hundred, sheepe:
44 And thirtie and sixe thousande beefes:
45 And thirtie thousande asses, and fiue hundred:
46 And sixteene thousande persons.
47 And Moyses toke of the halfe that pertayned vnto the children of Israel, one
portion of fiftie, both of the persons and of the cattell, and gaue them vnto
the Leuites which wayted vpon the charge of the tabernacle of the Lorde, as the
Lorde commaundded Moyses.
48 And the officers of thousandes of the hoast, ye captaynes ouer the
thousandes, and the captaynes ouer the hundredes, came foorth,
49 And sayde vnto Moyses: Thy seruauntes haue taken the summe of the men of
warre which are vnder our aucthoritie, and there lacketh not one man of vs:
50 We haue therfore brought a present vnto the Lord what euery man found, of
iewels of golde, bracelets, chaynes, rynges, eare rynges, and spangles, to make
an attonement for our soules before the Lorde.
51 And Moyses and Eleazar the priest, toke the golde of them, all the wrought
iewels.
52 And all the golde of the heaue offering that they heaued vp to the Lorde, of
the captaynes ouer thousandes & hundredes, was sixteene thousande, seuen hundred
and fiftie sicles.
53 (For the men of warre had spoyled, euery man for hym selfe.)
54 And Moyses and Eleazar the priest toke the golde of the captaynes ouer the
thousandes & hundredes, and brought it into the tabernacle of the congregation,
for a memoriall of the children of Israel before the Lorde.

Chapter 32

1 The childre of Ruben & the chidren of Gad had an exeeding great multitude of
cattell: And when they sawe the lande of Iazer, & the lande of Gilead, that it
was an apt place for cattell,
2 The children of Ruben, and the children of Gad, came & spake vnto Moyses and
Eleazar the priest, and vnto the lordes of the congregation, saying:
3 The lande of Ataroth & Dibon, Iazer and Nenrah, Hesbon and Elealeh, Sabam, and
Nebo, and Beon:
4 Which countrey the Lorde smote before the congregation of Israel, is a lande
meete for cattell, and we thy seruauntes haue cattell.
5 Wherfore said they: If we haue found grace in thy sight, let this lande be
geue vnto thy seruauntes to possesse, & bryng vs not ouer Iordane.
6 And Moyses sayde vnto the children of Gad and of Ruben: Shall your brethren go
to warre, and ye shall sit here?
7 Wherfore discourage ye the heart of the children of Israel, that they shoulde
not go ouer into the lande which the Lorde hath geuen them?
8 Thus dyd your fathers when I sent them from Cades Brnea to see ye lande.
9 For when they went vp euen vnto the riuer of Eschol, and sawe the lande, they
discouraged the heart of the children of Israel, that they should not go into
the lande which the Lord hath geue them.
10 And the Lordes wrath was kindled the same tyme, and he sware, saying:
11 None of the men that came out of Egypt, fro twentie yeres olde & aboue, shall
see the lande which I sware vnto Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, because they haue
not wholly folowed me:
12 Saue Caleb the sonne of Iephune the Kenesite, and Iosuah the sonne of Nun:
for they haue constantly folowed the Lorde.
13 And the Lorde was verie angry with Israel, and made them wander in the
wildernesse fourtie yeres, vntyll all the generation that had done euyll in the
sight of the Lorde, were consumed.
14 And beholde, ye are rysen vp in your fathers steade, as an increase of
sinfull men, to augment the fierce wrath of the Lorde towarde Israel:
15 For if ye turne away from after hym, he wyll yet agayne leaue the people in
the wildernesse, and ye shall destroy all this folke.
16 And they went neare hym, and sayde: We wyll builde sheepe foldes here for our
sheepe & for our cattell, and walled cities for our children:
17 But we our selues wyl go redy armed before the children of Israel, vntyll we
haue brought them vnto their place: And our children shall dwell in the fensed
cities, because of the inhabiters of the lande.
18 We wyll not returne vnto our houses, vntyll the children of Israel haue
inherited, euery man his inheritaunce:
19 Neither wyll we inherite with them on yonder side Iordane forwarde, because
our inheritaunce is fallen to vs on this side Iordane eastwarde.
20 And Moyses sayde vnto them: If ye wyll do this thyng, and go harnessed before
the Lorde to warre,
21 And will go all of you in harnesse ouer Iordane before the Lord, vntil he
haue cast out his enemies from his sight,
22 And vntyll the lande be subdued before the Lorde: then ye shall returne, and
be without sinne before the Lorde and before Israel, and this lande shalbe your
possession before the Lorde.
23 But and if ye wyll not do so, beholde, ye haue sinned agaynst the Lorde: and
be sure your sinne wyll finde you out.
24 Nowe therfore, builde cities for your children, and foldes for your sheepe,
and do that ye haue spoken.
25 The children of Gad, and the children of Ruben, spake vnto Moyses, saying:
Thy seruauntes wyll do as my Lorde commaundeth.
26 Our children, our wyues, our sheepe, and our cattell, shall remayne here in
the cities of Gilead:
27 But thy seruauntes wyll go all harnessed for the warre, and vnto battayle
before the Lorde, as my Lorde sayth.
28 And for their sakes, Moyses commaunded Eleazar the priest, & Iosuah the sonne
of Nun, and the chiefe fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel,
29 And Moyses sayde vnto them: If the children of Gad, and the children of Ruben
wyl go with you ouer Iordane, all armed, to fyght before the Lorde, then when
the lande is subdued before you, ye shall geue them the lande of Gilead to
possesse:
30 But and if they wyll not go ouer with you in harnesse, they shall haue their
possessions among you in the lande of Chanaan.
31 And the children of Gad, and the children of Ruben, aunswered, saying: As the
Lorde hath sayde vnto thy seruauntes, so wyll we do:
32 We wyll go harnessed before ye Lorde into the lande of Chanaan, that the
possession of our inheritaunce may be geuen vs on this side Iordane.
33 And Moyses gaue vnto the children of Gad, and to the children of Ruben, and
vnto halfe the tribe of Manasse the sonne of Ioseph, the kyngdome of Sehon kyng
of the Amorites, and the kyngdome of Og kyng of Basan, the lande with the cities
therof, in ye coastes and cities of the countrey rounde about.
34 And the children of Gad built Dibon, and Ataroth, and Aroer,
35 And Atoth, Sophan, Iaaser, and Iogbea,
36 Bethnimra, and Betharan, fensed cities: & they built foldes for the sheepe.
37 And the children of Ruben built Hesbon, Eleale, Kiriathaim,
38 Nebo, Baalmeon, and turned their names, and Sibama also: and gaue other names
vnto the cities which they builded.
39 And the children of Machir the sonne of Manasse went to Gilead and toke it,
and put out the Amorites that dwelt therin.
40 And Moyses gaue Gilead vnto Mathir the sonne of Manasse, and he dwelt therin.
41 And Iair the sonne of Manasse went and toke the smal townes therof, and
called them Hauoth Iair.
42 And Nobah went and toke Kenath, and the townes longyng therto, and called it
Nobah, after his owne name.

Chapter 33

1 These are the iourneis of the children of Israel, which went out of the land
of Egypt with their armies, vnder the hand of Moyses and Aaron.
2 And Moyses wrote their goyng out by their iourneis, accordyng to the
commaundement of the Lorde: euen these are the iourneis of their goyng out.
3 They departed from Rameses the fifteene day of the first moneth, on the morowe
after the Passouer: and the childre of Israel went out with an hie hande in the
sight of the Egyptians.
4 (For the Egyptians buryed all their first borne which the Lord had smitten
among them, and vpon their gods also the Lorde dyd execution.)
5 And the children of Israel remoued from Rameses, and pitched in Sucoth.
6 And they departed from Sucoth, and pitched their tentes in Etham, which is in
the edge of the wildernesse.
7 And they remoued from Etham, and turned agayne vnto Pihairoth, which is before
Baal Zephon: and they pitched before Migdol.
8 And they departed from Pihairoth: and went through the middes of the sea into
the wildernesse, and went three dayes iourney in the wildernesse of Etham, and
pitched in Marah.
9 And they remoued from Marah, and came vnto Elim, where were twelue fountaynes
of water, and threescore & ten Palme trees, & they pitched there.
10 And they remoued from Elim, and camped fast by the red sea.
11 And they remoued from the red sea, and camped in the wildernesse of Zin.
12 And they toke their iourney out of the wildernesse of Zin, and set vp their
tentes in Daphka.
13 And they departed from Daphka, and lay in Alus.
14 And they remoued from Alus, and lay at Raphidim, where was no water for the
people to drynke.
15 And they departed from Raphidim, & pitched in the wildernesse of Sinai.
16 And they remoued from the desert of Sinai, & pitched at the graues of lust.
17 And they departed from ye sepulchres of lust, and lay at Hazeroth.
18 And they departed from Hazeroth, and pitched in Rithma.
19 And they departed from Rithma, and pitched at Rimon Pharez.
20 And thei departed from Rimon Pharez, and pitched in Libna.
21 And they remoued from Libna, and pitched at Rissa.
22 And they iourneyed from Rissa, and pitched in Kehelatha.
23 And they went from Kehelatha, and pitched in mount Sepher.
24 And they remoued from mount Sepher, and lay in Harada.
25 And they remoued from Harada, and pitched in Makeloth.
26 And they remoued from Makeloth, and lay at Thahath.
27 And they departed from Thahath, and pitched at Tharath.
28 And they remoued from Tharath, and pitched in Mithca.
29 And they went from Mithca, and pitched in Hasinona.
30 And they departed from Hasmona, and lay at Moseroth.
31 And they departed from Moseroth, and pitched in Bene Iaakan.
32 And they remoued fro Bene Iaakan, and lay at Horgadgad.
33 And they went from Horgadgad, and pitched in Iethebatha.
34 And they remoued from Iethebatha, and lay at Abrona.
35 And they departed from Abrona, and lay at Ezeon gaber.
36 And they remoued from Ezeon gaber, and pitched in the wyldernesse of Sin,
whiche is Cades.
37 And they remoued from Cades, and pitched in mount Hor, whiche is in the edge
of the lande of Edom.
38 And Aaron the priest went vp into mount Hor at the commaundement of the
Lorde, and dyed there, euen in the fourteeth yere after the chyldren of Israel
were come out of ye lande of Egypt, and in the first day of the fifth moneth.
39 And Aaron was an hundred and twentie and three yeres olde when he dyed in
mount Hor.
40 And king Erad the Chanaanite (which dwelt in the south in the lande of
Chanaan) heard of the comming of the children of Israel:
41 And they departed from mount Hor, and pitched in Zalmona.
42 And they departed from Zalmona, and pitched in Phunon.
43 And they departed from Phunon, and pitched in Oboth.
44 And they departed from Oboth, and pitched in Iim abarim, in the border of
Moab.
45 And they departed from Iim abarim, and pitched in Dibon Gad.
46 And they remoued from Dibon Gad, and lay in Almon Diblathaim.
47 And they remoued from Almon Diblathaim, and pitched in the mountaines of
Abarim before Nabo.
48 And they departed from the mountaynes of Abarim, and pitched in the fieldes
of Moab, fast by Iordane ouer against Iericho.
49 And they pitched by Iordane, from Beth Iesimoth, vnto the playne of Sittim in
the fieldes of Moab.
50 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses in the fielde of Moab by Iordane ouer agaynst
Iericho, saying:
51 Speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, and say vnto them: When ye are come ouer
Iordane to enter into the lande of Chanaan,
52 Ye shall dryue out all the inhabiters of the lande before you, and destroy
all their pictures, & breake a sunder al their images of mettall, and plucke
downe all their hye places.
53 And possesse the lande, and dwell therin: for I haue geuen you the lande to
enioy it.
54 And ye shall deuide the inheritaunce of the land by lot among your kinredes,
and geue to the moe, the more inheritounce, and to the fewer, the lesse
inheritaunce: And your inheritaunce shalbe in the tribes of your fathers, euery
mans inheritaunce in the place where his lot falleth.
55 But and if ye wyll not dryue out the inhabiters of the lande before you, then
those whiche ye let remayne of them, shalbe prickes in your eyes, and dartes in
your sides, and shall vexe you in the lande wherein ye dwell.
56 Moreouer, it wyll come to passe, that I shall do vnto you, as I thought to do
vnto them.

Chapter 34

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
2 Commaunde the children of Israel, and say vnto them: When ye come into the
lande of Chanaan, this is the lande that shall fall vnto your inheritaunce, euen
the lande of Chanaan with her coastes.
3 And your south quarter shalbe from the wyldernesse Zin, along by the coast of
Edom, so that your south quarter reache vpon the syde of the salt sea eastwarde.
4 And fet a compasse from the south vp to Acrabim, and Recahe to Zinna: And go
out fro the south to Cades Barnea, and go out also to Hazar Adar, and go along
to Azmon.
5 And fet a compasse agayne from Azmon, vnto the riuer of Egypt, and shall go
out at the sea.
6 And let your west quarter be the great sea, let the same sea be your west
coast.
7 And this shalbe your north quarter: ye shall compasse your border from the
great sea, vnto mount Hor.
8 And from mount Hor, ye shall describe your border, tyll it come vnto Hemath, &
the end of the coast shalbe at Zedada.
9 And the coast shall reache out to Ziphron, and go out at Hazar Enan: This
shalbe your north quarter.
10 And ye shall describe your east quarter from Hazar Enan to Sepham.
11 And the coast shall go downe from Sepham to Ribla on the east syde of Ain:
And the same border shall descend and go out at the side of the sea of Cenereth
eastwarde.
12 And then go downe along by Iordane, and leaue at the salt sea: And this
shalbe your land, with the coastes therof rounde about.
13 And Moyses commaunded the chyldren of Israel, saying: This is the land which
ye shal inherite by lot, and which the Lorde commaunded to geue vnto nine tribes
and an halfe.
14 For the tribe of the chyldren of Ruben, according to the housholdes of their
fathers, and the tribe of the chyldren of Gad accordyng to their fathers
householdes, and halfe the tribe of Manasse, haue receaued their inheritaunce.
15 Two tribes and an halfe haue receaued their inheritaunce on the other side of
Iordane, ouer agaynst Iericho eastwarde.
16 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
17 These are the names of the men which shall deuide the lande vnto you: Eleazar
the priest, and Iosuah the sonne of Nun.
18 And ye shall take also a Lorde of euery tribe, when ye deuide the lande.
19 The names of the men are these: Of the tribe of Iuda, Caleb the sonne of
Iephune.
20 Of the tribe of the chyldren of Simeon, Semuel the sonne of Amiud.
21 Of the tribe of Beniamin, Elidad the sonne of Cislon.
22 Of the tribe of the chyldren of Dan, the lorde Bucki, the sonne of Iogli.
23 From among the chyldren of Ioseph, for the tribe of the chyldren of Manasse,
the lorde Haniel, the sonne of Ephod.
24 Of the tribe of the childre of Ephraim, the lorde Camuel the sonne of
Siphtan.
25 Of the tribe of the sonnes of Zabulon, the lorde Elisaphan the sonne of
Pharnach.
26 Of the tribe of the chyldren of Isachar, the lorde Palthiel the sonne of
Asan.
27 Of the tribe of the sonnes of Aser, the lorde Ahihud the sonne of Salomi.
28 Of the tribe of the chyldren of Nephthali, the lorde Pedael, the sonne of
Ammihud.
29 These are they whom the Lord commaunded to deuide the inheritaunce vnthe
chyldren of Israel in the lande of Chanaan.

Chapter 35

1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses in the fieldes of Moab by Iordane ouer against
Iericho, saying:
2 Commaunde ye chyldren of Israel, that they geue vnto the Leuites of the
inheritaunce of their possession, cities to dwell in: And ye shal geue also vnto
the cities of the Leuites, suburbes harde by their cities rounde about them.
3 The cities shall they haue to dwell in, and the suburbes for their cattell,
and for their possession, & al maner of beastes of theirs.
4 And the suburbes of the cities whiche ye shall geue vnto the Leuites, shall
reache from the wall of the citie outwarde, a thousande cubites rounde about.
5 And ye shall measure without the citie of the east syde, two thousande
cubites: and of the south syde, two thousande cubites: and of the west side, two
thousand cubites: and of the north side, two thousande cubites also, and the
citie shalbe in the middes: and these shalbe the suburbes of their cities.
6 And from among the cities whiche ye shall geue vnto the Leuites, there shal be
sixe cities for refuge, whiche ye shall appoynt to that intent that he whiche
kylleth, may flee thyther: And to them ye shall adde fourtie and two cities mo.
7 So that all the cities whiche ye shall geue the Leuites, may be fourtie and
eyght, them shall ye geue with their suburbes.
8 And these cities whiche ye shall geue, shalbe out of the possession of the
chyldren of Israel. They that haue many, shall geue many: but of them that haue
fewe, ye shall take fewe. Euery one shal geue of his cities vnto the Leuites,
accordyng to the inheritaunce whiche he inheriteth.
9 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying:
10 Speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, and say vnto them: When ye be come ouer
Iordane into the lande of Chanaan:
11 Ye shall appoint you cities, to be cities of refuge for you: that he whiche
sleeth a person vnwares, may flee thyther.
12 And these cities shalbe vnto you a refuge from the auenger of blood: that he
which killeth, dye not, vntill he stand before the congregation in iudgement.
13 And of these cities which ye shal geue, sixe cities shall ye haue for refuge.
14 Ye shal geue three on this side Iordane, and three in the land of Chanaan,
whiche shalbe cities of refuge.
15 And these sixe cities shalbe a refuge, both for the chyldren of Israel, and
for the straunger, & for hym that dwelleth among you: that all they whiche kyll
any person vnwares, may flee thyther.
16 And if any man smyte another with an instrument of iron that he dye, then is
he a murtherer, and the murtherer shall dye for it.
17 If he smyte hym with throwyng a stone, that a man may dye with, and if he
dye, he that smote hym is a murtherer: let the same murtherer be slayne
therefore.
18 Or if he smyte hym with a handweapon of wood that a man may dye with, then if
he dye, he is a murtherer: let the same murtherer be slaine therfore.
19 The reuenger of blood him selfe shal slay the murtherer: when he meeteth hym,
he shall slay hym.
20 But if he thrust hym of hate, or hurle at hym by laying of wayte, that he
dye,
21 Or smyte hym with his hande of enmitie that he dye: he that smote hym shall
dye the death, for he is a murtherer: the reuenger of the blood shall slay the
murtherer when he meeteth hym.
22 But if he pusshed hym vnaduisedly, and not of hate, or cast vpon hym any
thing, and not in laying of wayte,
23 Or any maner of stone that a man may dye with, and saw him not, and he caused
it to fall vpon hym, and he dye, and was not his enemie, neither sought hym any
harme:
24 Then the congregation shal iudge betweene the slayer and the reuenger of
blood, according to these lawes.
25 And the congregation shall deliuer the slayer out of the hande of the
reuenger of blood, and the congregation shall restore hym to the citie of his
refuge, whyther he was fled: and he shal abide there vnto the death of the hye
priest, whiche was annoynted with the holy oyle.
26 But if the slayer come without the borders of his citie of refuge, whyther he
was fled:
27 And the reuenger of blood finde hym without the borders of the citie of his
refuge, and the reuenger of blood kyll the slayer, he shalbe gyltlesse:
28 Because he shoulde haue bydden in the towne of his refuge vntill the death of
the hye priest; and after the death of the hye priest, the slayer should returne
vnto the lande of his possession.
29 So these thynges shalbe a lawe of iudgement vnto you, throughout your
generations, in al your dwellinges.
30 Whoso kylleth any person, the Iudge shall put the murtherer to death thorowe
wytnesses: but one wytnesse shall not testifie agaynst any person, to cause hym
to dye.
31 Moreouer, ye shal take no recompence for the lyfe of the murtherer whiche is
worthy to dye: but he shalbe put to death.
32 And ye shall take no recompence for him that is fled to the citie of his
refuge, that he shoulde come againe and dwell in the lande before the death of
the hye priest.
33 So ye shall not pollute the lande whiche ye shall dwell in, for blood
defileth the lande: and the lande can not be clensed of the blood that is shed
therin, but by the blood of hym that shed blood.
34 Defile not therefore the lande whiche ye shal inhabite, for I am in the
middes therof: euen I the Lord dwell among the chyldren of Israel.

Chapter 36

1 And the chiefe fathers of the families of the chyldren of Geliad, the sonne of
Machir, the sonne of Manasse, of the kinred of the sonnes of Ioseph, came foorth
and spake before Moyses, and before the princes the chiefe fathers of the
chyldren of Israel,
2 And sayd: The Lorde commaunded my Lorde to geue the land to inherite by lot to
the chyldren of Israel: and my Lorde was commaunded by the Lord, to geue the
inheritaunce of Zelaphead our brother, vnto his daughters.
3 If they be maryed to any of ye sonnes of the other tribes of the chyldren of
Israel, then shall their inheritaunce be taken from the inheritaunce of our
fathers, and shalbe put to the inheritaunce of the tribe which they are receaued
into, and so shal it be taken from the lot of our inheritaunce.
4 And when the Iubilee of the children of Israel commeth, then shall their
inheritaunce be put vnto the inheritaunce of the tribe wherinto they are
receaued, and so shall their inheritaunce be taken away from the inheritaunce of
the tribe of our fathers.
5 And Moyses commaunded the chyldren of Israel, according to the worde of the
Lorde, saying: The tribe of the sonnes of Ioseph haue sayd well.
6 This therefore doth the Lorde commaunde the daughters of Zelaphead, saying:
Let them be wyues, to whom they them selues thinke best: only to the familie of
the tribe of their father shall they marry.
7 So shall not the inheritaunce of the children of Israel remoue from tribe to
tribe: for euery one of the chyldren of Israel shall ioyne hym selfe to the
inheritaunce of the tribe of his fathers.
8 And euery daughter that possesseth any inheritaunce in any tribe of the
chyldre of Israel, shalbe wyfe vnto one of the kinred of the tribe of her
father, that the chyldren of Israel may enioy euery man the inheritaunce of his
father.
9 Neither ought the inheritaunce to go from one tribe to another: but euery one
of the tribes of the chyldren of Israel shalbe ioyned to his owne inheritaunce.
10 And as the Lord commaunded Moyses, euen so dyd the daughters of Zelaphead:
11 For Mahela, Thirza, Hagla, Milcha, and Noa the daughters of Zelaphead, were
maryed vnto their fathers brothers sonnes.
12 They were wyues vnto the families of the sonnes of Manasse the sonne of
Ioseph, and so their inheritaunce remayned in the tribe of the kinred of their
father.
13 These are the comaundementes and lawes whiche the Lorde commaunded by the
hande of Moyses vnto the chyldren of Israel, in the fieldes of Moab, by Iordane
towarde Iericho.


Deuteronomy

Chapter 1

1 These be the wordes whiche Moyses spake vnto all Israel on the other side
Iordan in the wyldernesse, in ye playne ouer agaynst the red sea, betweene
Pharan & Thophel, Laban, Hazeroth, and Disahab.
2 There are eleuen dayes iourney from Horeb, by the way of mount Seir, vnto
Cades Barnea.
3 And it came to passe in the first day of the eleuenth moneth, in the fourtie
yere, that Moyses spake vnto the chyldren of Israel, accordyng vnto all that the
Lord had geuen hym in commaundement vnto them:
4 After he had slayne Sehon the king of the Amorites whiche dwelt in Hesbon, &
Og king of Basan whiche dwelt at Astaroth in Edrai.
5 On the other side Iordane in the land of Moab, began Moyses to declare this
lawe, saying:
6 The Lorde our God spake vnto vs in Horeb, saying: Ye haue dwelt long inough in
this mount.
7 Turne you and take your iourney, and go to the mount of the Amorites, and vnto
all the places nye therevnto, both vnto the playne, and hilles, and dales, to
the south, to the seas side, to the lande of Chanaan, and vnto Libanon, euen
vnto the great riuer, the riuer Euphrates.
8 Beholde, I haue set the lande before you: Go in and possesse the land which
the Lord sware vnto your fathers, Abraham, Isahac, and Iacob, to geue vnto them,
& to their seede after them.
9 And I spake vnto you in the same time, saying: I am not able to beare you my
selfe alone.
10 For the Lorde your God hath multiplied you: so that you be this day as the
starres of heauen in number.
11 (The Lord God of your fathers make you a thousand times so many mo as ye are,
and blesse you as he hath promised you.)
12 Howe can I my selfe alone, beare your cumbraunce, your charge, & your stryfe
that is among you?
13 Bryng you men of wysdome, and of vnderstanding, and expert, accordyng to your
tribes, and I wyll make them rulers ouer you.
14 And ye aunswered me, & sayde: That which yu hast spoken, is good for vs to
do.
15 And so out of your tribes I toke the chiefe men of wysdome, and that were
expert, and made them rulers ouer you, captaynes ouer thousandes, & captaines
ouer hundredes, captaines ouer fiftie, and captaines ouer ten, and officers
among your tribes.
16 And I charged your Iudges that same tyme, saying: Heare the cause of your
brethren, and iudge righteously betweene euery man and his brother, and the
straunger that is with hym.
17 Ye shall haue no respect of any person in iudgement, but you shall heare the
small aswell as the great: You shall not feare the face of any man, for the
iudgement is Gods. And the cause that is to harde for you, referre it vnto me,
and I wyll heare it.
18 And I comaunded you the same season, all the thinges which ye should do.
19 And when we departed from Horeb, we went thorow all that great and terrible
wyldernesse, as ye haue seene by the way of the mountayne of the Amorites, as
the Lorde our God commaunded vs: and we came to Cades Barnea.
20 And I sayd vnto you: Ye are come vnto ye mountaine of ye Amorites, which the
Lorde our God doth geue vnto vs.
21 Beholde, the Lorde thy God hath set the lande before thee: go vp and possesse
it, as the Lord God of thy fathers hath sayd vnto thee: feare not, neither be
discouraged.
22 And ye came vnto me euery one, and sayde: we wyll sende men before vs, to
searche vs out the land, and to bryng vs worde agayne what way we must go vp by,
& vnto what cities we shall come.
23 And the saying pleased me well: and I toke twelue men of you, of euery tribe
one.
24 Whiche departed, & went vp into that mountayne, and came vnto the valley
Eschol, and searched it out,
25 And toke of the lande in their handes, and brought it vnto vs, and brought vs
word agayne, and sayd: It is a good lande whiche the Lorde our God doth geue vs.
26 Notwithstandyng, ye woulde not go vp, but were disobedient vnto the word of
the Lorde your God,
27 And murmured in your tentes, and said: Because ye Lord hateth vs, therfore
hath he brought vs out of the lande of Egypt, to deliuer vs into the hande of
the Amorites, and to destroy vs.
28 Whyther shal we go vp? Our brethren haue discouraged our heart, saying: the
people is greater and taller then we, the cities are great, and walled euen vp
to heauen, and moreouer we haue seene the sonnes of the Anakims there.
29 Then I sayde vnto you: Dreade not, nor be afraide of them.
30 The Lorde your God which goeth before you, he shall fight for you, accordyng
to all that he dyd vnto you in Egypt before your eyes:
31 And in the wyldernesse, where thou hast seene howe that the Lord thy God bare
thee, euen as a man doth beare his sonne, in al the way which ye haue gone by,
vntill ye came vnto this place:
32 And yet in this thing ye did not beleue the Lorde your God.
33 He went in the way before you, to searche you out a place to pitche your
tentes in, in fyre by nyght, yt ye myght see what way to go, & in a cloude by
day.
34 And the Lorde hearde the voyce of your wordes, & was wroth, and sware,
saying:
35 There shall not one of these men, and of this frowarde generation, see that
good lande whiche I sware to geue vnto your fathers:
36 Saue Caleb the sonne of Iephune, he shall see it, and to him wyll I geue the
lande that he hath troden vpon, and to his chyldren, because he hath folowed the
Lorde.
37 Also the Lorde was angry with me for your sakes, saying: Thou also shalt not
go in thyther.
38 But Iosuah the sonne of Nun which standeth before thee, he shal go in
thyther. Encourage hym therfore: for he shall cause Israel to inherite the
lande.
39 Moreouer, your chyldren, which ye sayde should be a pray, and your sonnes
whiche in that day had no knowledge betweene good and euyll, they shall go in
thyther, and vnto them wyll I geue it, and they shall enioy it.
40 But as for you, turne your face, and take your iourney into the wildernesse,
euen by the way of the red sea.
41 Then ye aunswered and sayde vnto me, We haue sinned agaynst the Lord: we wyll
go vp and fight, according to all that the Lorde our God commaunded vs. And when
ye had gyrde on euery man his weapons of warre, ye were redie to go vp into the
hyll.
42 And the Lord sayd vnto me: Say vnto them, go not vp, neither fight, for I am
not among you: lest ye fall before your enemies.
43 And I tolde you these thynges, & you woulde not heare, but disobayed the
worde of the Lord, and went presumptuously vp into the hyll.
44 And the Amorites whiche dwelt in that mountayne, came out against you, and
chased you as bees vse to do, and destroyed you in Seir, euen vnto Horma.
45 And ye came agayne, and wept before the Lorde: but the Lorde would not heare
your voyce, nor hearken vnto you.
46 And so ye abode in Cades a long season, according vnto the tyme that ye
remayned before. That whiche was done from the tyme they departed from Cades
Barnea, vnto the battayle agaynst the kynges, Sehon and Og.

Chapter 2

1 Then we turned our face, & toke our iourney into the wyldernesse, euen by the
way of the red sea, as the Lorde spake vnto me: And we compassed mount Seir a
long tyme.
2 And the Lord spake vnto me, saying:
3 Ye haue compassed this mountayne long inough, turne you northwarde.
4 Aud warne thou ye people, saying: Ye shall go through the coast of your
brethren the chyldren of Esau which dwelt in Seir, and they shalbe afraide of
you.
5 Take ye good heede vnto your selues therfore: Ye shall not prouoke them, for I
wyll not geue you of their lande, no not so much as a foote breadth, because I
haue geuen mount Seir vnto Esau to possesse.
6 Ye shall bye meate of them for money, to eate, and ye shall procure water of
them for money, to drinke.
7 For the Lorde thy God hath blessed thee in all the workes of thy hande, and
knoweth thy walkyng through this great wyldernesse this fourtie yeres, and the
Lorde thy God hath ben with thee, so that thou hast lacked nothing.
8 And when we were departed from our brethren the children of Esau which dwelt
in Seir, through the way of the wyldernesse from Elath, & from Ezion Gaber, we
turned and went by the way of the wyldernesse of Moab.
9 And the Lorde sayd vnto me: Thou shalt not fight agaynst the Moabites, neither
prouoke them to battayle: for I wyll not geue thee of their lande to possesse,
because I haue geuen Ar vnto the chyldren of Loth to possesse.
10 The Emims dwelt therin in tymes past, a people great, many, and tall, as the
Anakims,
11 Whiche also were taken for giauntes as the Anakims, whom the Moabites call
Emims.
12 The Horims also dwelt in Seir before tyme, whom the chyldren of Esau chased
out, & destroyed them before them, and dwelt in their steade, as Israel did vnto
the lande of his possession, whiche the Lorde gaue them.
13 Nowe ryse vp sayde and get you ouer the riuer Zared: and we went ouer the
riuer Zared.
14 The space in whiche we came from Cades Barnea, vntill we were come ouer the
riuer Zared, was thirtie and eyght yeres, vntyll all the generation of the men
of warre were wasted out from a mong the hoast, as the Lorde sware vnto them.
15 For in deede the hande of the Lorde was against them to destroy them fro
among ye hoast, til they were cosumed.
16 And so it came to passe, that all the men of warre were consumed and dead
from among the people.
17 And the Lord spake vnto me, saying:
18 Thou shalt go thorowe Ar, the coast of Moab, this day:
19 And when thou commest nye vnto the chyldren of Ammon, thou shalt not lay
siege vnto the, nor moue warre against them: For I wyll not geue thee of the
lande of the chyldren of Ammon any possession, but I haue geuen it vnto the
chyldren of Loth to possesse.
20 That also was taken for a lande of giauntes, and giauntes dwelt therin in
olde tyme, whom the Ammonites call Zamzummims.
21 A people that was great, many, and tall, as the Anakims: But the Lorde
destroyed them before them, and they succeeded them in their inheritaunce, and
dwelt in their steade:
22 As he dyd for the chyldren of Esau, whiche dwell in Seir, for whom he
destroyed the Horims before them, and they possessed them, and dwelt in their
steade vnto this day.
23 And the Auims which dwelt in Hazarim, euen vnto Azza, the Caphthorims whiche
came out of Caphthor, destroyed them, and dwelt in their steade.
24 Rise ye vp therefore, & take your iourney ouer the ryuer Arnon: Beholde, I
haue geuen into thy hande Sehon the Amorite, king of Hesbon and his lande: begin
to possesse it, and prouoke hym to battayle.
25 This day will I beginne to sende the feare and dread of thee vpon al nations
that are vnder all the heauen, so that they whiche heare speake of thee, shall
tremble and quake before thee.
26 And so I sent messengers out of ye wildernes of Kedemoth, vnto Sehon king of
Hesbo, with wordes of peace, saying:
27 Let me passe through thy lande, I wyll go along by the hye way, I wyll
neither turne vnto the ryght hande, nor to the left.
28 Thou shalt sell me meate for money, for to eate, & geue me water for money,
for to drinke: Only I wyll go through on my feete,
29 As the children of Esau, which dwel in Seir, and the Moabites which dwel in
Ar, dyd vnto me, vntyll I be come ouer Iordane, into the lande which the Lorde
our God geueth vs.
30 But Sehon ye kyng of Hesbon woulde not let vs passe by hym: for the Lorde thy
God hardened his spirite, and made his heart obstinate, because he woulde
deliuer him into thy hande, as it is come to passe this day.
31 And the Lord said vnto me: Beholde, I haue begunne to geue Sehon & his lande
before thee: begynne to possesse and inherite his lande.
32 Then both Sehon and all his people came out agaynst vs to fight at Iaza.
33 And the Lorde set hym before vs, and we smote hym, and his sonnes, and all
his people.
34 And we toke all his cities the same season, and slue the men, women, and
children of all the cities, and let nothyng remayne,
35 Saue the cattell onely we caught vnto our selues, and the spoyle of the
cities which we toke.
36 From Aroer which is by the brinke of the riuer of Arnon, and from the citie
that is in the riuer, vnto Gilead, there was not one citie to strong for vs: The
Lorde our God deliuered all vnto vs.
37 Only vnto the lande of the children of Ammon thou camest not, nor vnto euery
place of the riuer Iabock, nor vnto the cities in the mountaynes, nor vnto
whatsoeuer the Lorde our God forbad vs.

Chapter 3

1 Then we turned, and went vp the way to Basan: And Og the kyng of Basan came
out agaynst vs, he and all his people, to fyght at Edrai.
2 And the Lorde sayde vnto me: Feare hym not, for I wyll deliuer hym, and all
his people, and his lande, into thy hande, and thou shalt do vnto hym, as thou
diddest vnto Sehon kyng of the Amorites, which dwelt at Hesbon.
3 And so the Lorde our God deliuered into our handes Og also the kyng of Basan,
and all his folke: And we smote hym vntyll none was left hym alyue.
4 And we toke all his cities the same season, neither was there a citie which we
toke not from them, euen threescore cities throughout the region of Argob, of
the kyngdome of Og in Basan.
5 All these cities also were made strong with hye walles, gates, & barres,
beside vnwalled townes a great meany,
6 And we vtterly destroyed them, as we dyd vnto Sehon kyng of Hesbon, bryngyng
to naught all the cities, with men, women, and children:
7 But all the cattell and the spoyle of the cities, we toke for our selues.
8 And thus we toke the same season out of the hande of two kynges of the
Amorites, the land that was on the other side Iordane, from the riuer of Arnon,
vnto mount Hermon:
9 (Which Hermon the Sidons call Sirion, and the Amorites call it Senir)
10 All the cities that lay in the playne, and all Gilead, and all Basan vnto
Selcha and Edrai, cities of the kyngdome of Og in Basan:
11 For only Og kyng of Basan, remayned of the remnaunt of the giauntes, whose
bed was a bed of iron: And is it not yet at Rabbath among ye children of Ammon?
Nine cubites doth the length therof contayne, and foure cubites the breadth of
it, after the cubite of a man.
12 And so we conquered this lande the same tyme, from Aroer which is by the
riuer of Arnon, vnto halfe mount Gilead, and the cities therof gaue I vnto the
Rubenites and Gadites.
13 And the rest of Gilead, and all Basan of the kyngdome of Og, gaue I vnto the
halfe tribe of Manasse: euen all the region of Argob, with all Basan, which is
called the lande of giauntes.
14 Iair the sonne of Manasse, toke all the countrey of Argob, vnto the coastes
of Gessuri & Maachati, and called them after his owne name, Basan Hauoth Iair,
vnto this day.
15 And I gaue Gilead vnto Machir.
16 And vnto the Rubenites and Gadites I gaue Gilead vnto the riuer of Arnon,
halfe the valley and beyonde, euen vnto the riuer Iabock, which is the border of
the children of Ammon:
17 The playne also, and Iordane, and the coast therof, from Cenereth, euen vnto
the sea which is in the playne, euen the salt sea vnder the springes of the
hyll, eastwarde.
18 And I commaunded you the same tyme, saying: The Lorde your God hath geuen you
this lande to enioy it: ye shall go harnessed before your brethren the children
of Israel, all that are meete for the warre.
19 Your wyues only, your children, and your cattell (for I knowe that ye haue
much cattell) shall abyde in your cities which I haue geuen you,
20 Untyll the Lorde haue geuen rest vnto your brethren as well as vnto you, and
vntyll they also possesse the lande which the Lorde your God hath geuen them
beyonde Iordane: and then shall ye returne agayne, euery man vnto his possession
which I haue geuen you.
21 And I commaunded Iosuah hym selfe the same tyme, saying: Thyne eyes haue
seene all that the Lorde your God hath done vnto these two kynges: euen so shall
he do vnto all kyngdomes whither thou goest.
22 Ye shall not feare them: for the Lorde your God he shall fyght for you.
23 And I besought the Lorde the same tyme, saying:
24 O Lorde God, thou hast begunne to shewe thy seruaunt thy greatnesse and thy
mightie hande: for where is there a God in heauen or in earth, that can do after
thy workes, and like to thy power?
25 I pray thee let me go ouer, and see the good lande that is beyonde Iordane,
that goodly mountayne, & Libanon.
26 But the Lorde was angry with me for your sakes, and woulde not heare me. And
the Lorde sayde vnto me: Be content, speake no more vnto me of this matter.
27 Get thee vp into the top of the hyll, & lift vp thyne eyes westwarde,
northwarde, southwarde, and eastwarde, and beholde it with thyne eyes: for thou
shalt not go ouer this Iordane.
28 But charge Iosuah, and encourage hym, and bolden hym: For he shall go before
this people, and he shall deuide vnto the the lande which thou shalt see.
29 And so we abode in the valley ouer agaynst the house of Peor.

Chapter 4

1 Nowe therfore harken O Israel, vnto the ordinaunces and lawes which I teache
you, for to do them, that so ye may lyue, and go in, & possesse the lande which
the Lorde God of your fathers geueth you.
2 Ye shall put nothyng vnto the word which I commaunde you, neither shall you
take ought from it, that ye may kepe the comaundementes of the Lord your God
which I commaunde you.
3 Your eyes haue seene what ye Lorde dyd agaynst Baal Peor: for all the men that
folowed Baall Peor, the Lorde thy God hath destroyed from among you.
4 But ye that cleaue vnto the Lord your god, are aliue euery one of you this
day.
5 Beholde I haue taught you ordinaunces and lawes, such as the Lorde my God
comaunded me, that ye should do euen so in the lande whither ye go to possesse
it.
6 Kepe them therfore and do them, for that is your wisdome and vnderstandyng in
the syght of the people, that they may heare all these ordinaunces, and say:
Surely it is a wise and vnderstandyng people, it is a great nation.
7 For what other nation is so great that gods come so nye vnto, as the Lorde our
God is nye vnto vs in all thinges as oft as we call vnto hym?
8 Yea, and what nation is so great, that hath ordinaunces & lawes so righteous,
as all this lawe which I set before you this day?
9 Take heede to thy selfe therefore, and kepe thy soule diligently, that thou
forget not the thynges which thyne eyes haue seene, and that they depart not out
of thy heart all the dayes of thy life: but teache them thy sonnes, & thy sonnes
sonnes.
10 Specially the day that thou stoodest before the Lorde thy God in Horeb, when
the Lorde sayd vnto me: Gather me the people together, & I wyll make them heare
my wordes, that they may learne to feare me all the dayes that they shall lyue
vpon the earth, and that they may teache their children.
11 Ye came and stoode also vnder the mountayne, and the mountayne burnt with
fire euen vnto the middes of heauen, and there was darknesse, cloudes, and mist.
12 And the Lorde spake vnto you out of the middes of the fire, and ye hearde the
voyce of the wordes: but sawe no similitude, saue hearde a voyce only.
13 And he declared vnto you his couenaunt which he commaunded you to do euen ten
commaundementes, which he wrote vpon two tables of stone.
14 And the Lorde commaunded me that same season that I shoulde teache you
ordinaunces & lawes, which ye ought to do in the lande whyther ye go to possesse
it.
15 Take therfore good heede vnto your selues as pertaynyng vnto your soules,
(for ye sawe no maner of image in the day that the Lorde spake vnto you in
Horeb, out of the middes of fire)
16 Lest ye marre your selues, & make you a grauen image, & picture of any maner
of figure, whether it be the likenesse of man or woman.
17 The likenesse of any maner of beast that is on the earth, or the likenesse of
any maner fethered foule that fleeth in the ayre,
18 Or the likenesse of any maner worme that creepeth on the earth, or the
likenesse of any maner fishe that is in the waters beneath the earth:
19 Yea, and lest thou lift vp thyne eyes vnto heauen, and when thou seest the
sunne, the moone, and the starres, with all the hoast of heauen, shouldest be
driuen to worship them, & serue them, and shouldest worship and serue the
thynges, which the Lorde thy God hath made to serue all nations vnder the whole
heauen.
20 But the Lorde hath taken you, and brought you out of the iron furnace, euen
out of Egypt, to be vnto hym a people & inheritaunce, as ye be this day.
21 Furthermore, the Lorde was angry with me for your wordes, and sware that I
shoulde not go ouer Iordane, and that I shoulde not go in vnto that good lande
which the Lorde thy God geueth thee to inheritaunce.
22 But I must dye in this lande, and shal not go ouer Iordane: But ye shall go
ouer, and possesse that good lande.
23 Take heede vnto your selues, that ye forget not ye appoyntment of the Lorde
your God which he made with you, & that ye make you no grauen image or likenesse
that the Lorde thy God hath forbidden thee.
24 For the Lorde thy God, is a consumyng fire, and a ielous God.
25 When thou shalt beget children, and thy children beget children, and shalt
haue remayned long in the lande, ye do wickedly, & make any maner of grauen
image, and worke euyll in the sight of the Lorde thy God, to prouoke hym to
anger:
26 I call heauen and earth to recorde agaynst you this day, that ye shall
shortly perishe from of ye lande whervnto you go ouer Iordane to possesse it: Ye
shall not prolong your dayes therin, but shall vtterly be destroyed:
27 And the Lord shall scatter you among the people, and ye shalbe left fewe in
number among the nations whyther the Lorde shall bryng you.
28 And there ye shall serue gods which are the worke of mans hande, wood and
stone, which neither see, nor heare, nor eate, nor smell.
29 If from thence thou shalt seke the Lorde thy God, thou shalt finde hym, if
thou seke hym with all thy heart, and with all thy soule.
30 When thou art in tribulation, & when all these thynges that be here spoken
of, are come vpon thee, euen in the latter dayes yf thou turne to the Lorde thy
God, & shalt be obedient vnto his voyce:
31 (For the Lorde thy God is a mercifull God) he wyll not forsake thee, neither
destroy thee, nor forget the appoyntment of thy fathers, which he sware vnto
them.
32 For aske of the dayes that are past, which were before & since the day that
God created man vpon the earth, and aske from the one side of heauen vnto the
other, if euer there came to passe such a great thyng, or whether any such lyke
thyng hath ben hearde as this.
33 Dyd euer any people heare the voyce of God speakyng out of the middes of a
fire, as thou hast hearde, and yet lyued?
34 Or hath God assayed to go and take hym a people from among nations, by
temptations, by signes, by wonders, by warre, by a mightie hand, by a stretched
out arme, & by great sightes, accordyng vnto all that the Lorde your God dyd
vnto you in Egypt before your eyes?
35 Unto thee it was shewed, that thou mightest knowe that the Lord is God, and
that there is none other but he.
36 Out of heauen he made thee heare his voyce, that he might instruct thee: &
vpon earth he shewed thee his great fire, and thou heardest his worde out of the
middes of the fire.
37 And because he loued thy fathers, he chose their seede after them, & brought
thee out in his sight with his mightie power out of Egypt,
38 To thrust out nations great and mightier then thou before thee, and to bryng
thee in, and to geue thee their lande to inheritaunce, as it is come to passe
this day.
39 Understande therfore this day, and consider it in thine heart, that the Lorde
he is God in heauen aboue, and vpon the earth beneath, neither is there any
other.
40 Thou shalt kepe therefore his ordinaunces and his commaundementes which I
commaunde thee this day, that it may go well with thee, and with thy children
after thee, and that thou mayest prolong thy dayes vpon ye earth, which the
Lorde thy God geueth thee for euer.
41 Then Moyses seuered three cities on the other side Iordane towarde the sunne
rysyng:
42 That he shoulde flee thyther which had kylled his neyghbour vnwares, & hated
hym not in tyme past, and therfore shoulde flee vnto one of the same cities, and
lyue:
43 Namely Bezer in the wildernesse, euen in the playne countrey of the tribe of
Ruben, and Ramoth in Gilead, of the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Basan, of the
tribe of Manasse.
44 And so this is the lawe which Moyses set before the children of Israel:
45 These are the witnesse, statutes, and ordinaunces, which Moyses tolde the
children of Israel after they came out of Egypt,
46 On the other side Iordane, in the valley ouer agaynst the house of Peor, in
the lande of Sehon king of the Amorites, which dwelt at Hesbon, whom Moyses &
the children of Israel smote, after they were come out of Egypt,
47 And possessed his lande, and the lande of Og kyng of Basan, two kynges of the
Amorites, which were on the other side Iordane towarde the sunne rising,
48 From Aroer which is by the bancke of the riuer Arnon, vnto mount Sion which
is Hermon,
49 And all the playne on the other side Iordane eastwarde, euen vnto the sea
which is in the playne vnder ye springes of the hyll.

Chapter 5

1 And Moyses called all Israel, and sayde vnto them: Heare O Israel the
ordinauces and lawes which I speake in your eares this day, that ye may learne
them, and fulfill them in deede.
2 The Lord our God made a couenaunt with vs in Horeb.
3 The Lorde made not this couenaunt with our fathers, but with vs: euen with vs,
which are all here alyue this day.
4 The Lorde talked with you face to face in the mount, out of the middes of the
fire:
5 And I stoode betweene the Lorde and you the same tyme, and shewed you the
worde of the Lord: For ye were afrayde at the sight of the fire, and went not vp
into the mount, and he sayde:
6 I am the Lorde thy God, which brought thee out of the lande of Egypt, from the
house of bondage.
7 Thou shalt haue none other Gods in my presence.
8 Thou shalt make thee no grauen image, or any likenesse of that which is in
heauen aboue, and that is in earth beneath, and that is in the waters beneath
the earth.
9 Thou shalt neither bowe thy selfe vnto them, nor serue them: for I the Lord
thy God, am a ielouse God, visityng the wickednesse of the fathers vpon the
children, euen vnto the third and fourth generation among them that hate me:
10 And shewe mercie vpon thousandes, among them that loue me, and kepe my
commaundementes.
11 Thou shalt not take the name of the Lorde thy God in vayne: for the Lorde
wyll not holde him giltlesse that taketh his name in vayne.
12 Kepe the Sabbath day, that thou sanctifie it as the Lorde thy God hath
commaunded thee.
13 Sixe dayes thou shalt labour, and do all that thou hast to do:
14 But the seuenth day is the Sabbath of the Lorde thy God: thou shalt not do
any worke, thou nor thy sonne, nor thy daughter, nor thy man seruaunt, nor thy
mayde, nor thine oxe, nor thine asse, nor any of thy cattell, nor the straunger
that is within thy gates: that thy man seruaunt, and thy mayde, may rest as well
as thou.
15 Remember that thou wast a seruaunt in the lande of Egypt, and howe that the
Lorde thy God brought thee out thence, through a mightie hande and a stretched
out arme: For which cause the Lorde thy God commaunded thee to kepe the Sabbath
day.
16 Honour thy father & thy mother, as the Lorde thy God hath commaunded thee:
that thy dayes may be prolonged, and that it may go well with thee in the lande
which the Lorde thy God geueth thee.
17 Thou shalt not slay.
18 Thou shalt not commit adulterie.
19 Thou shalt not steale.
20 Thou shalt not beare false witnesse agaynst thy neyghbour.
21 Thou shalt not lust after thy neyghbours wyfe, thou shalt not couet thy
neyghbours house, his fielde, his seruaunt, or his mayde, his oxe, his asse, or
ought that thy neyghbour hath.
22 These wordes the Lorde spake vnto all your multitude in the mount, out of the
middes of the fire, of the cloude, and of the darkenesse, with a great voyce,
and added nothyng: and wrote them in two tables of stone, and deliuered them
vnto me.
23 And it came to passe, that when ye hearde the voyce out of the middes of the
darkenesse (for the mountayne dyd burne with fire) then ye came vnto me, with
the captaynes of your tribes, and your elders,
24 And ye sayde: Beholde, the Lorde our God hath shewed vs his glorie and his
greatnesse, and we haue hearde his voyce out of the middes of the fire: we haue
seene this day that God doth talke with man, and he yet lyueth.
25 Nowe therfore why shoulde we dye? that this great fire shoulde consume vs: If
we heare the voyce of the Lord our God any more, we shall dye:
26 For what fleshe hath it ben that euer hearde the voyce of the lyuyng God
speakyng out of the middes of the fire (as we haue done) and yet dyd lyue?
27 Go thou and heare all that the Lorde our God sayth, and tell thou vnto vs all
that the Lord our God sayth vnto thee, and we wyll heare it, and do it.
28 And the Lorde hearde the voyce of your wordes when ye spake vnto me, and the
Lorde sayde vnto me: I haue hearde the voyce of the wordes of this people, which
they haue spoken vnto thee: they haue well sayde all that they haue spoken.
29 Oh that there were such an heart in them that they woulde feare me, & kepe
all my comaundementes alway, that it myght go well with them, and with their
childen for euer?
30 Go, and say vnto them, Get you into your tentes agayne:
31 But stande thou here by me, and I wyll tell thee all the comaundementes,
ordinaunces, & lawes, which thou shalt teache them, that they may do them in the
lande which I geue the to possesse.
32 Take heede therfore that ye do in deede as the Lord your God hath commaunded
you, and turne not aside, either to the right hande, or to the left:
33 But walke in all the wayes which the Lorde your God hath comaunded you, that
ye may lyue, and that it may go well with you, and that ye may prolong your
dayes in the lande which ye shall possesse.

Chapter 6

1 These are the comaundemetes, ordinaunces, and lawes, which the Lorde your God
commaunded me to teache you, that ye might do them in the lande whither ye go to
possesse it:
2 Namely, that thou mightest feare the Lord thy God, & kepe all his ordinaunces
and his commaundementes which I commaunde thee, thou & thy sonne, & thy sonnes
sonne all the dayes of thy lyfe: that thy dayes may be prolonged.
3 Heare therfore O Israel, and take heede that thou do it, that it may go well
with thee, & that ye may encrease mightily, euen as the Lorde God of thy fathers
hath promised thee, a lande that floweth with mylke and honie.
4 Heare O Israel, the Lorde our God is Lorde only.
5 And thou shalt loue the Lorde thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy
soule, and with all thy myght.
6 And these wordes which I commaunde thee this day, shalbe in thine heart:
7 And thou shalt shewe them vnto thy children, and shalt talke of them when thou
art at home in thine house, and as thou walkest by the way, & when thou lyest
downe, and when thou risest vp.
8 And thou shalt binde them for a signe vpon thine hande, and they shalbe as
frontlettes betweene thine eyes,
9 And thou shalt write them vpon the postes of thy house, & vpon thy gates.
10 And when the Lorde thy God hath brought thee into the lande which he sware
vnto thy fathers, Abraham, Isahac, and Iacob, and shall geue to thee great &
goodly cities which thou buildedst not,
11 Houses full of all maner of goodes which thou filledst not, & welles digged
which thou diggedst not, vineyardes and oliue trees which thou plantedst not,
and when thou hast eaten & art full:
12 Then beware lest thou forget ye Lorde which brought thee out of the lande of
Egypt from the house of bondage.
13 Thou shalt feare the Lorde thy God and serue hym, and shalt sweare by his
name.
14 See that ye walke not after straunge gods, the gods of the nations which are
about you:
15 (For the Lorde thy God is a ielous God among you) lest the countenaunce of
the Lorde thy God be moued to wrath agaynst thee, and destroy thee from the face
of the earth.
16 Ye shall not tempt the Lorde your God, as ye dyd in the place of temptation.
17 But you shall diligently kepe the commaundementes of the Lord your God, & his
testimonies, and his ordinaunces which he hath commaunded thee:
18 And thou shalt do that which is right & good in the sight of the Lorde: that
thou mayst prosper, and that thou mayst go in, & possesse that good lande which
the Lorde sware vnto thy fathers,
19 To cast out all thine enemies before thee, as the Lorde hath sayde.
20 And when thy sonne asketh thee in tyme to come, saying: What meaneth these
testimonies, ordinaunces, and lawes, which the Lorde our God hath commaunded
you?
21 Then thou shalt say vnto thy sonne: We were Pharaos bondmen in Egypt, and the
Lorde brought vs out of Egypt with a mightie hande:
22 And the Lorde shewed signes, and wonders, great and euyll vpon Egypt, vpon
Pharao, and vpon all his householde, before our eyes:
23 And brought vs out from thence, to bryng vs in and to geue vs the lande which
he sware vnto our fathers.
24 And he hath commaunded vs to do all these ordinaunces, & to feare the Lorde
our God for our wealth all the dayes of our lyfe, as it is come to passe this
day.
25 Moreouer, this shalbe our righteousnesse before the Lorde our God, if we take
heede, & kepe all these commaundementes, as he hath commaunded vs.

Chapter 7

1 When the Lord thy God shall bryng thee into ye lande whither thou goest to
possesse it, and hath cast out many nations before thee: Namely the Hethites,
the Gergesites, the Amorites, the Chanaanites, the Pherezites, the Heuites, &
the Iebusites, seuen nations, greater and mightier then thou:
2 And when the Lorde thy God hath set them before thee, thou shalt smyte them,
and vtterly destroy them, & make no couenaunt with them, nor haue compassion on
them.
3 Thou shalt make no mariages with them: neither geue thy daughter vnto his
sonne, nor take his daughter vnto thy sonne.
4 For they wyll deceaue thy sonne, that he shoulde not folowe me, and they shal
serue straunge gods: and then wyll the wrath of the Lorde waxe hot agaynst thee,
and destroy thee sodenly.
5 But thus ye shall deale with them: Ye shall ouerthrowe their aulters, & breake
downe their pillers, cut downe their groues, and burne their grauen images with
fire:
6 For thou art an holy people vnto the Lorde thy God, the Lorde thy God hath
chosen thee, to be a speciall people vnto hym selfe, aboue all nations that are
vpon the earth.
7 The Lorde dyd not set his loue vpon you, nor chose you because ye were mo in
number then any people (for ye were the fewest of all people)
8 But because the Lorde loued you, and because he would kepe the othe which he
had sworne vnto your fathers, therfore hath the Lorde brought you out through a
mightie hande, and deliuered you out of the house of bondage, euen from the
hande of Pharao kyng of Egypt.
9 Understande therfore, that the Lorde thy God he is God, and that a true God,
which kepeth appoyntment and mercie vnto them that loue hym and kepe his
commaundementes, euen throughout a thousande generations:
10 And rewardeth them that hate hym to their face, so that he bryngeth them to
naught, and doth not deferre the tyme, but rewardeth hym that hateth hym before
his face.
11 Kepe thou therfore the commaundementes, and ordinaunces, and lawes, which I
commaunde thee this day, that thou do them.
12 If ye hearken vnto these lawes, and obserue & do them: the Lord thy God also
shall kepe vnto thee the appoyntment and the mercie which he sware vnto thy
fathers.
13 He wyll loue thee, and blesse thee, and multiplie thee: he wyll also blesse
the fruite of thy wombe, and the fruite of thy lande, thy corne, thy wine, and
thine oyle, and the increase of thy kine, and the flockes of thy sheepe, in the
lande which he sware vnto thy fathers to geue thee.
14 Thou shalt be blessed aboue all nations: there shalbe neither man nor woman
vnfruitfull among you, nor any of your cattell shalbe barren.
15 Moreouer the Lorde wyll take away from thee all maner infirmities, & wyll put
none of the euyll diseases of Egypt (which thou knowest) vpon thee: but wil
sende them vpon all them that hate thee.
16 Thou shalt consume all the nations which the Lorde thy God shall deliuer
thee: thine eye shall haue no pitie vpon them, neither shalt thou serue their
gods, for that shalbe thy decay.
17 If thou say in thine heart: these nations are mo then I, howe can I cast them
out?
18 Thou shalt not feare them: but remember what the Lorde thy God dyd vnto
Pharao and vnto all Egypt.
19 The great temptations which thine eyes sawe, and the signes, & wonders, and
the mightie hande, and stretched out arme, wherby the Lorde thy God brought thee
out: euen so shall the Lord thy God do vnto all nations of whom thou art
afrayde.
20 Moreouer the Lorde thy God wyll sende hornets among them, vntil they that are
left, and hide them selues from thee, be destroyed.
21 Thou shalt not feare the: for the Lord thy God is among you, a mightie God
and a terrible.
22 For the Lorde thy God wyll put out these nations before thee by a litle and a
litle: thou mayest not consume them at once, lest the beastes of the fielde
increase vpon thee.
23 But the Lorde thy God shall geue them ouer before thee, and shall destroy
them with a mightie destruction, vntyll he haue brought them to naught.
24 And he shall deliuer their kynges into thine hande, and thou shalt destroye
their name from vnder heauen: There shall no man be able to stande before thee,
vntyll thou haue destroyed them.
25 The graue images of their gods shalt thou burne with fire: and couet not the
golde and siluer that is on them, nor take it vnto thee, lest thou be snared
therin: for it is an abhomination before the Lorde thy God.
26 Bryng not therfore abomination into thine house, lest thou be a cursed thyng
as it is: but vtterly defie it and abhorre it, for it is a cursed thyng.

Chapter 8

1 All the commaundementes which I commaunde thee this day, shal ye kepe for to
do the, that ye may liue, and multiplie, and go in and possesse the lande which
the Lorde sware vnto your fathers.
2 And thou shalt remember all the way which the Lorde thy God led thee this
fourtie yeres in the wildernesse, for to humble thee, & to proue thee, and to
knowe what was in thine heart, whether thou wouldest kepe his comaundementes, or
no.
3 He humbled thee, and suffered thee to hunger, & fed thee with Manna, which
neither thou nor thy fathers knewe of, to make thee knowe that a man doth not
lyue by bread only: but by euery worde that proceedeth out of the mouth of the
Lorde, doth a man lyue.
4 Thy rayment waxed not olde vpon thee, neither dyd thy foote swell these
fourtie yeres.
5 This also shalt thou consider in thine heart: that as a man chastiseth his
sonne, euen so the Lord thy God chasteneth thee.
6 Therefore shalt thou kepe the commaundementes of the Lorde thy God, that thou
walke in his wayes, and feare hym.
7 For the Lorde thy God bryngeth thee into a good lande, a lande in the whiche
are riuers of water, and fountaines and deapthes that spring out of valleys and
hylles:
8 A lande wherin is wheate and barlie, vineyardes, fightrees, & pomgranates, a
lande wherein is oyle oliue and honie:
9 A lande wherin thou shalt eate bread without scarcenes, neither shalt thou
lacke any thyng: a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hylles thou
shalt digge brasse.
10 When thou hast eaten therfore & filled thy selfe, thou shalt blesse the Lorde
thy God for the good lande whiche he hath geuen thee.
11 Beware that thou forget not the Lorde thy God, that thou wouldest not kepe
his comaundementes, his lawes, and his ordinaunces, whiche I commaunde thee this
day:
12 Yea, and when thou hast eaten and filled thy selfe, and hast buylt goodly
houses and dwelt therein:
13 And when thy beastes and thy sheepe are waxen many, and thy siluer and golde
is multiplied, and all that thou hast is encreased:
14 Then beware lest thyne heart ryse, and thou forget the Lorde thy God, whiche
brought thee out of the lande of Egypt, and from the house of bondage:
15 And whiche was thy guyde in the great and terrible wyldernesse wherein were
firie serpentes, scorpions, and drouth without any water: But he brought out
water for thee, euen out of the rocke of flint.
16 He fed thee in the wyldernesse with Manna, which thy fathers knewe not, euen
for to humble thee, and to proue thee, and that he might so do thee good at thy
latter ende,
17 Lest thou shouldest say in thine heart, my power and the myght of myne owne
hande hath prepared me this aboundaunce:
18 But remember the Lorde thy God, for it is he whiche geueth thee power to get
substaunce, for to make good the promise whiche he sware vnto thy fathers, as
appeareth this day.
19 And if thou forget the Lord thy God, and walke after straunge gods, and serue
them, and worship them: I testifie vnto you this day, that ye shal surely
perishe.
20 As the nations whiche the Lorde destroyed before your face, euen so ye shall
perishe, because ye woulde not be obedient vnto the voyce of ye Lord your God.

Chapter 9

1 Heare O Israel, thou passest ouer Iordane this day, to go in and possesse
nations great and mightier then thy selfe, cities great and walled vp to heauen:
2 A people great & tall, euen the children of the Anakims, whiche thou knowest
of, & of whom thou hast heard say, who wyll stand before the children of Anac?
3 Understande therefore this day, that the Lorde thy God is euen he whiche goeth
ouer before thee as a consuming fire, he shall destroy them, and he shall bryng
them downe before thy face: So thou shalt caste them out, and bryng them to
naught quickly, as the Lorde hath sayde vnto thee.
4 Speake not thou in thyne heart, after that the Lorde thy God hath cast them
out before thee, saying, for my ryghteousnesse the Lorde hath brought me in, to
possesse this lande: but for the wickednesse of these nations the Lord hath cast
them out before thee.
5 It is not for thy righteousnesse sake, or for thy right heart, that thou goest
to possesse their lande: But for the wickednesse of these nations, the Lord thy
God doth cast them out before thee, eue to perfourme the worde whiche the Lord
thy God sware vnto thy fathers. Abraham, Isahac, and Iacob.
6 Understand therfore that it is not for thy righteousnes sake, that the Lorde
thy God doth geue thee this good lande to possesse it, seyng thou art a
stifnecked people.
7 Remember & forget not, howe thou prouokedst the Lorde thy God in the
wildernesse, since the day that thou diddest depart out of the lande of Egypt,
vntyll ye came vnto this place, ye haue rebelled agaynst the Lorde.
8 Also in Horeb ye prouoked the Lord to anger, so that the Lorde was wroth with
you, euen to haue destroyed you.
9 When I was gone vp into the mount, to receaue the tables of stone, the tables
of the couenaunt which the Lord made with you, and I abode in the mount fourtie
dayes & fourtie nightes, whe I neither did eate bread nor drinke water.
10 And the Lorde deliuered me two tables of stone, written with the finger of
God, and in them was contayned all the wordes whiche the Lorde saide vnto you in
the mount out of ye middes of fire, in the day when ye came together.
11 And when the fourtie dayes and fourtie nightes were ended, the Lorde gaue me
the two tables of stone, the tables of the couenaunt.
12 And the Lord sayde vnto me: Arise, and get thee downe quickly from hence, for
thy people which thou hast brought out of Egypt, haue marred all: They are
turned at once out of the waye which I commaunded them, and haue made them a
moulten image.
13 Furthermore, the Lorde spake vnto me, saying: I haue seene this people, and
beholde it is a stifnecked people.
14 Let me alone, that I may destroy them, & put out the name of them from vnder
heauen, and I wyll make of thee a mightie nation, & greater then they be.
15 And I turned me, and came downe from the hyll, euen from the hyll that burnt
with fire, and the two tables of the couenaunt were in my handes.
16 And I loked, and beholde ye had sinned against the Lorde your God, and had
made you a moulten calfe, and had turned at once out of the way whiche the Lorde
had commaunded you.
17 And I toke the two tables, and cast them out of my two handes, and brake them
before your eyes.
18 And I fell downe flat before the Lord euen as at the first time, & fourtie
dayes and fourtie nightes I did neither eate bread nor drinke water, because of
all your sinnes which ye sinned, in doyng wyckedly in the sight of the Lorde in
that ye prouoked hym vnto wrath.
19 (For I was afrayde, that for the wrath and fiercenes wherwith the Lord was
moued agaynst you, he would haue destroyed you) But the Lorde heard me at that
tyme also.
20 The Lorde was very angry with Aaron also, euen to haue destroyed hym: and I
made intercession for Aaron also the same tyme.
21 And I toke your sinne, the calfe which ye had made, and burnt hym with fire,
and stamped hym, and grounde hym very small, euen to dust: and I cast the dust
therof into the brooke that descended out of the mount.
22 Also at the burnyng place, at the place of temptyng, and at the sepulchres of
lust, ye prouoked the Lorde to anger.
23 Likewise when the Lorde sent you from Cades Barnea, saying, go vp and
possesse the lande which I haue geuen you: you rebelled against the worde of the
Lorde your God, and neither beleued him, nor hearkened vnto his voyce.
24 You haue ben rebellious vnto the Lorde since the day that I knewe you.
25 And I fell downe flat before the Lorde fourtie dayes & fourtie nightes, as I
fell downe before: for the Lorde sayde, he woulde destroy you.
26 I made intercession therfore vnto the Lord, and sayd: O Lord God, destroy not
thy people and thyne inheritaunce whiche thou hast deliuered through thy great
goodnesse, and whiche thou hast brought out of Egypt thorowe a myghtie hande.
27 Remember thy seruauntes, Abraham, Asahac, and Iacob, and looke not vnto the
stubbernesse of this people, nor to their wickednesse and sinne:
28 Lest the lande whence thou broughtest them, say, The Lorde is not able to
bryng them into the land which he promised them, and because he hated them,
therefore hath he caryed them out to slay them in the wyldernesse.
29 Beholde, they are thy people, & thyne inheritaunce, whiche thou broughtest
out in thy myghtie power, and in thy stretched out arme.

Chapter 10

1 In the same season the Lorde sayde vnto me: hewe thee two tables of stone lyke
vnto the first, and come vp vnto me into the mount, and make thee an arke of
wood.
2 And I wyll wryte in the tables, the wordes that were in the first tables
whiche thou brakest, and thou shalt put them in the arke.
3 And I made an arke of Sittim wood, and hewed two tables of stone lyke vnto the
first, and went vp into the mountayne, hauyng the two tables in myne hande.
4 And he wrote in the tables according to the first wrytyng, the ten
commaundementes whiche the Lord spake vnto you in the mount out of the myddes of
the fire, in the day when you were gathered together: and the Lorde gaue them
vnto me.
5 And I departed, and came downe from the hyll, and put the tables in the arke
whiche I had made, and there they be, as the Lorde commaunded me.
6 And the chyldren of Israel toke their iourney from Beroth of the chyldren of
Iakan to Mosera, where Aaron dyed and was buryed, and Eleazer his sonne became
priest in his steade.
7 From thence they departed vnto Gudgodah: and from Gudgodah to Iethebath, a
lande whiche hath riuers of waters.
8 The same season the Lorde seperated the tribe of Leui, to beare the arke of
the couenaunt of the Lorde, and to stande before the Lorde, and to minister vnto
hym, and to blesse in his name vnto this day.
9 Wherefore the Leuites haue no part nor inheritaunce with their brethren: but
the Lorde is their inheritaunce, as the Lorde thy God hath promised them.
10 And I taryed in the mount, euen as at the first time, fourtie dayes and
fourtie nyghtes: and the Lorde hearde me at that tyme also, and the Lorde would
not destroy thee.
11 And the Lorde sayde vnto me: Arise, and go foorth in the iourneys before the
people, that they may go in and possesse the lande whiche I sware vnto their
fathers to geue vnto them.
12 And now Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to feare the
Lorde thy God, and to walke in all his wayes, to loue hym, and to serue the Lord
thy God with all thyne heart, and with all thy soule?
13 Namely, that thou kepe the comaundementes of the Lorde, and his ordinaunces
whiche I commaunde thee this day for thy wealth.
14 Beholde, heauen and the heauen of heauens, is the Lordes thy God, and the
earth with all that therin is.
15 Notwithstandyng, the Lorde had a delight in thy fathers to loue them, and
chose their seede after them, euen you aboue all nations, as thou seest this
day.
16 Circumcise therefore the foreskinne of your heart, and be no more stifnecked.
17 For the Lorde your God, is God of Gods, and Lorde of Lordes, a great God, a
mightie and a terrible, whiche regardeth no mans person, nor taketh rewarde.
18 He doth right vnto the fatherlesse and wydowe, and loueth the straunger, to
geue hym foode and rayment.
19 Loue ye therfore the straunger also: for ye were straungers your selues in
the lande of Egypt.
20 Thou shalt feare the Lord thy God, and hym only shalt thou serue, to hym
shalt thou cleaue, and sweare by his name.
21 He is thy prayse, & thy God that hath done for thee these great and terrible
thinges whiche thyne eyes haue seene.
22 Thy fathers went downe into Egypt with threscore and ten persons: and nowe
the Lorde thy God hath made thee & multiplied thee as the starres of heauen.

Chapter 11

1 Therefore thou shalt loue ye Lord thy God, & kepe his obseruannces, his
ordinaunces, his lawes, & his commaudementes alway.
2 Know you this day, (for I speake not to your chyldren which haue neither
knowen nor seene) the chastisement of the Lord your God, his greatnesse, his
mightie hande, and his stretched out arme,
3 His miracles and his actes whiche he dyd in the middes of Egypt, euen vnto
Pharao the king of Egypt, and vnto all his lande:
4 And what he dyd vnto the hoast of Egypt, vnto their horses and charets: howe
he brought the water of the red sea vpon them as they pursued you behinde, and
how the Lord hath brought them to naught vnto this day:
5 And what he did vnto you in the wildernesse, vntill ye came vnto this place:
6 And what he dyd vnto Dathan and Abiram the sonnes of Eliab the sonne of Ruben:
howe the earth opened her mouth and swalowed them, with their housholdes & their
tentes, and all their substaunce that was in their possession, in the middes of
Israel.
7 Doubtlesse, your eyes haue seene all the great actes of the Lorde whiche he
dyd.
8 Therefore shall ye kepe all the commaundementes whiche I commaunde thee this
day, that ye may be strong and go in and possesse the lande whyther ye go to
possesse it:
9 And that ye may prolong your dayes in the lande whiche the Lorde sware vnto
your fathers, to geue vnto them and to their seede, a lande that floweth with
mylke and honie.
10 For the lande whyther thou goest to possesse it, is not as the lande of Egypt
that ye came out of, where thou sowedst thy seede, and wateredst it with thy
feete, as a garden of hearbes.
11 But the lande whyther ye go ouer to possesse it, is a lande that hath hylles
and valleys, and drinketh water of the rayne of heauen.
12 This lande doth the Lorde thy God care for, and the eyes of the Lorde thy God
are alwayes vpon it, from the beginning of the yere, vnto the ende of the yere.
13 If you shall hearken therefore vnto my commaundementes which I commaunde you
this day, that ye loue the Lorde your God, and serue hym with all your heart,
and with all your soule:
14 I also wyll geue rayne vnto your lande in due season, the first rayne and the
latter, that thou mayest gather in thy corne, thy wine, and thyne oyle.
15 And I will sende grasse in thy fieldes for thy cattel, that thou mayest eate
and fyll thy selfe.
16 But beware that your heart deceaue you not, and ye turne asyde, and serue
straunge gods, and worship them:
17 And then the Lorde beyng wroth agaynst you, shut vp the heauen that there be
no rayne, and that your lande yelde not her fruite, and lest ye perishe quickly
from of the good lande whiche the Lorde geueth you.
18 Therefore shall ye put vp these my wordes in your heart & in your soule, and
binde them for a signe vpon your hande, that they may be as a frontlet betweene
your eyes.
19 And ye shall teache them your chyldren, that they may talke of them when thou
sittest in thyne house, and when thou walkest by the way, when thou lyest downe,
and when thou risest vp.
20 Yea, and thou shalt wryte them vpon the doore postes of thyne house, and vpon
thy gates:
21 That your dayes may be multiplied, and the dayes of your chyldren, in the
lande which the Lord sware vnto your fathers to geue them as long as the dayes
of heauen last vpon the earth.
22 For if ye kepe all these commaundementes whiche I commaunde you, so that ye
do them: namely, that ye loue the Lorde your God, and walke in all his wayes,
and cleaue vnto hym:
23 Then wyll the Lord cast out all these nations before you, and ye shalbe the
heyres of great nations, and of them that are mightier then your selues.
24 All the places whereon the soles of your feete shall treade, shalbe yours:
euen from the wyldernesse, and from Libanon, and fro the riuer Euphrates, euen
vnto the vttermost sea shal your coast be.
25 There shall no man be able to stande before you: for the Lord your God shall
cast the feare and dread of you vpon all the lande that ye shall treade vpon, as
he hath sayde vnto you.
26 Beholde, I set before you this day, a blessing and a curse:
27 A blessing, if ye obay the commaundementes of the Lord your God which I
commaunde you this day:
28 And a curse, if ye wyll not obay the commaundemeutes of the Lorde your God,
but turne out of the way whiche I commaunde you this day, to go after straunge
gods whiche ye haue not knowen.
29 When the Lorde thy God therefore hath brought thee into the lande whyther
thou goest to possesse it, thou shalt put the blessing vpon mount Garizim, and
the curse vpon mount Ebal.
30 Are not these mountaynes on the other side Iordane, on that part of the way
where the sunne goeth downe, in the lande of the Chanaanites, whiche dwell in
the playne ouer against Gilgal besyde the groue of Moreh?
31 For ye shall passe ouer Iordane, to go in and possesse the lande whiche the
Lorde your God geueth you, and ye shall possesse it, and dwell therein.
32 Take heede therfore that ye do all the commaundementes and lawes whiche I set
before you this day.

Chapter 12

1 These are the ordinaunces and lawes whiche ye shall obserue and do in the
lande, whiche the Lorde God of thy fathers geueth thee to possesse it as long as
ye liue vpon the earth.
2 Ye shall destroy all places wherin the nations whiche ye shall possesse serued
their gods, vpon hye mountaynes, on hylles, and vnder euery greene tree.
3 You shall ouerthrowe their aulters, and breake their pillers, and burne their
groues with fire, and you shall hewe downe the grauen images of the gods that
they haue, and bryng the names of them to naught out of that place.
4 Ye shall not do so vnto the Lorde your God:
5 But ye shall seeke the place which the Lorde your God shall choose out of all
your tribes, to put his name there, and there to dwell, and thyther thou shalt
come:
6 And thyther ye shal bryng your burnt sacrifices, your offeringes, your tithes,
and heaue offeringes of your hande, your vowes, your freewyll offeringes, and
the first borne of your kyne, and of your sheepe.
7 And there ye shall eate before the Lorde your God, and ye shall reioyce in all
that ye put your hande vnto, both ye and your housholdes, wherin the Lord thy
God hath blessed thee.
8 Ye shall not do after all the thinges that we do here this day, euery man what
seemeth hym good in his owne eyes.
9 For ye are not yet come to rest, and to the inheritaunce whiche the Lord your
God geueth you.
10 But when ye go ouer Iordane, and dwell in the lande whiche the Lorde your God
hath geuen you to inherite, and when he hath geuen you rest from al your enemies
rounde about, and shal dwell in safetie:
11 Then vnto the place which the Lord your God hath chosen to put his name
there, ye shall bryng all that I commaunde you: namely, your burnt sacrifices,
your offeringes, your tithes, the heaue offering of your hande, and all your
speciall vowes whiche ye vowe vnto the Lorde.
12 And ye shall reioyce before the Lorde your God, ye and your sonnes, and your
daughters, your seruauntes, and your maydens, and the Leuite that is within your
gates, forasmuche as he hah no part nor inheritauce with you.
13 Take heede that thou offer not thy burnt offeringes in euery place that thou
seest:
14 But in the place which the Lord shall choose in one of thy tribes, there thou
shalt offer thy burnt offeringes, and there thou shalt do al that I comaunde
thee.
15 Notwithstanding, thou mayest kyll and eate fleshe in all thy cities,
whatsoeuer thy soule lusteth after, accordyng to the blessing of the Lorde thy
God, whiche he hath geuen thee: both the vncleane and the cleane may eate
therof, euen of the Roe bucke, and of the Hart.
16 Only ye shall not eate the blood, but powre it vpon the earth as water.
17 Thou mayest not eate within thy gates the tithe of thy corne, of thy wine,
and of thy oyle, and the first borne of thy kine, and of thy sheepe, neither any
of thy vowes which thou vowest, nor thy freewill offeringes, or heaue offering
of thyne hande:
18 But thou must eate them before the Lorde thy God, in the place whiche the
Lorde thy God hath chosen, thou and thy sonne, & thy daughter, thy seruaunt, and
thy mayde, and the Lenite that is within thy gates: and thou shalt reioyce
before the Lorde thy God, in all that thou puttest thyne hande to.
19 Beware that thou forsake not the Leuite, as long as thou liuest vpon the
earth.
20 If when the Lorde thy God shall enlarge thy border as he hath promised thee,
thou say, I will eate flesh (because thy soule longeth to eate fleshe) thou
mayest eate fleshe whatsoeuer thy soule lusteth.
21 If the place whiche the Lorde thy God hath chosen to put his name there, be
to farre from thee, then thou shalt kil of thy oxen and of thy sheepe which the
Lord gath geuen thee, as I haue commaunded thee, and thou shalt eate in thyne
owne citie whatsoeuer thy soule lusteth.
22 And as the Roe bucke and the Hart is eaten, euen so thou shalt eate them:
both the cleane and the vncleane shall eate of them.
23 But be strong, that thou eate not the blood: for the blood is the life, and
thou mayest not eate the life with the fleshe.
24 Thou shalt not eate it, but powre it vpon the earth as water.
25 Thou shalt not eate it, that it may go well with thee, and with thy chyldren
after thee: But thou shalt do that whiche is ryght in the sight of the Lorde.
26 But thy holy thynges whiche thou hast, and thy vowes, thou shalt take, and
come vnto the place whiche the Lorde hath chosen.
27 And thou shalt offer thy burnt offeringes, both fleshe and blood vpon the
aulter of the Lorde thy God: and the blood of thyne offeringes shalbe powred out
vpon the aulter of the Lord thy God, and thou shalt eate the fleshe.
28 Take heede, & heare all these wordes which I commaunde thee, that it may go
well with thee, and with thy chyldren after thee for euer, if thou doest that
whiche is good and ryght in the sight of the Lorde thy God.
29 When the Lord thy God shall destroy the nations before thee whyther thou
goest to possesse them, and thou succeedest in their inheritaunce, and dwellest
in their lande:
30 Beware that thou be not taken in a snare after them, after that they be
destroyed before thee, and that thou aske not after their gods, saying: Howe do
these nations serue their gods? I wyll do so likewise.
31 Nay, thou shalt not do so vnto the Lorde thy God: for all abhominations, and
that whiche the Lorde hateth, the same haue they done vnto their gods.
32 For they haue burned both their sonnes and their daughters with fire before
their gods. Therefore whatsoeuer I commaunde you, take heede ye do it: and put
thou naught therto, nor take ought therefrom.

Chapter 13

1 If there aryse among you a prophete or a dreamer of dreames, and geue thee a
signe, or a wonder.
2 And that signe or wonder whiche he hath sayde come to passe, and then say: Let
vs go after straunge gods (which thou hast not knowen) and let vs serue them:
3 Hearken not thou vnto the wordes of that prophete or dreamer of dreames: For
the Lorde thy God proueth you, to knowe whether ye loue the Lorde your God with
all your heart and with all your soule.
4 Ye shall walke after the Lorde your God, and feare him, kepe his
commaundementes, and hearken vnto his voyce, you shall serue hym, & cleaue vnto
hym.
5 And that prophete or dreamer of dreames shal die ( because he hath spoken to
turne you away from the Lorde your God whiche brought you out of the lande of
Egypt, and deliuered you out of the house of bondage, to thrust thee out the way
which the Lorde thy God commaunded thee to walke in) and therefore thou shalt
put the euyll away from thee.
6 If thy brother, the sonne of thy mother, or thine owne sonne, or thy daughter,
or the wyfe that lieth in thy bosome, or thy frende whiche is as thyne owne
soule vnto thee, entice thee secretely, saying: Let vs go and serue straunge
gods (which thou hast not knowen, nor yet thy fathers)
7 And they be any of the gods of the people whiche are rounde about you: whether
they be nye vnto thee or farre of fro thee, from the one ende of the earth vnto
the other:
8 Thou shalt not consent vnto hym, nor hearken vnto hym, thyne eye shall not
pitie hym, neither shalt thou haue compassion on hym, nor kepe hym secrete:
9 But cause him to be slayne: Thine hande shalbe first vpon him to kill him, and
then the handes of all the people.
10 And thou shalt stone hym with stones that he dye: because he hath gone about
to thrust thee away from the Lord thy God, whiche brought thee out of the lande
of Egypt, and from the house of bondage.
11 And all Israel shall heare and feare, and shall do no more any suche
wickednesse, as this is among you.
12 If thou shalt heare say in one of thy cities, whiche the Lorde thy God hath
geuen thee to dwell in,
13 That certaine men beyng the children of Belial, are gone out fro among you,
and haue moued the inhabiters of their citie, saying: let vs go and serue
straunge gods, whiche ye haue not knowen:
14 Then thou must seeke, & make searche and enquire diligently: And behold, if
it be true, & the thing of a suretie, that such ahbomination is wrought among
you:
15 Then thou shalt smyte the dwellers of that citie with the edge of the sworde,
and destroy it vtterly, & all that is therin, and euen the very cattell therof,
with the edge of the sworde:
16 And gather all the spoyle of it into the middes of the streate therof, and
burne with fire both the citie and all the spoyle therof euery whyt for the
Lorde thy God: and it shalbe an heape for euer, and shall not be buylt agayne.
17 And there shal cleaue naught of the damned thyng in thyne hande, that the
Lorde may turne from the fiercenesse of his wrath, and shew thee mercy, and haue
compassion on thee, and multiplie thee, as he hath sworne vnto thy fathers.
18 Therefore shalt thou hearken vnto the voyce of the Lorde thy God, to kepe all
his commaundementes whiche I commaunde thee this day, that thou do that whiche
is ryght in the eyes of the Lorde thy God.

Chapter 14

1 Ye are the childre of the Lord your God: Ye shall not cut your selues, nor
make you any baldnes betwene your eyes for ye dead man.
2 For thou art an holye people vnto the Lorde thy God, and the Lorde hath chosen
thee to be a seuerall people vnto hym selfe, aboue all the nations that are vpon
the earth.
3 Thou shalt eate no maner of abhomination.
4 These are the beastes which ye shall eate of, Oxen, Sheepe, and Goates:
5 Roe, Bucke, and Bugle, wilde Goate, Unicorne, wylde Oxen and Camoise,
6 And all beastes that cleaue the hoofe, and cleaueth the clift into two clawes,
and chewe the cud, them ye shall eate.
7 Neuerthelesse, these ye shall not eate of them that chewe cud & of them that
deuide and cleaue the hoofe only, the Camel, the Hare, and the Conie: for they
chewe the cud, but deuide not the hoofe: therfore they are vncleane vnto you.
8 And also the Swine, though he deuide the hoofe, yet he cheweth not cud,
therefore is he vncleane vnto you: ye shall not eate of the fleshe of suche, nor
touche the dead carkasse of them.
9 These ye shall eate of all that are in the waters: All that haue finnes and
scales shall ye eate:
10 And whatsoeuer hath not finnes and scales, of that ye may not eate, but it is
vncleane vnto you.
11 Of all cleane byrdes ye shall eate.
12 But these are they of whiche ye shall not eate: the Egle, the Goshauke, and
the Ospray.
13 The Glede, the Kite, and the Uulture after their kinde.
14 And all kinde of Rauens.
15 The Estritch, the Nightcrowe, the Cockowe, and the Sparowehauke after their
kinde.
16 The litle Owle, the great Owle, nor the Redshanke.
17 The Pellicane, the Swanne, nor the Cormorant.
18 The Storke, the Heron in his kinde, the Lapwing, the Backe.
19 And let euery creeping thing that fleeth, be vncleane vnto you, and not be
eaten of.
20 But of all cleane foules ye may eate.
21 Ye shall eate of nothyng that dyeth alone: But thou shalt geue it vnto the
straunger that is in thy citie, that he eate it, or thou mayest sell it vnto a
straunger: For thou art an holy people vnto the Lorde thy God. Thou shalt not
seethe a kid in his mothers milke.
22 Thou shalt tythe all the increase of thy seede, that the fielde bringeth
foorth yere by yere.
23 And thou shalt eate before the Lorde thy God, in the place whiche he hath
chosen & where he hath put his name, the tithe of thy corne, and of thy wine,
and of thyne oyle, and the first borne of thy kine, and of thy sheepe: that thou
mayest learne to feare the Lorde thy God alwayes.
24 If the way be to long for thee, so that thou art not able to carie it, and if
the place be farre from thee, whiche the Lorde thy God hath chosen to set his
name there, and the Lorde thy God hath blessed thee:
25 Then shalt thou make it in money, and take the money in thine hande, and go
vnto the place which the Lorde thy God shall chose,
26 And thou shalt bestowe that money for whatsoeuer thy soule lusteth after, for
oxen and sheepe, wine and strong drinke, and for whatsoeuer thy soule desireth:
and thou shalt eate there before the Lorde thy God, and be merie, both thou and
thyne housholde.
27 And the Leuite that is within thy gates, shalt thou not forsake, for he hath
neither part nor inheritaunce with thee.
28 At the ende of three yeres thou shalt bryng foorth all the tythes of thyne
encrease the same yere, and lay it vp within thyne owne gates.
29 And the Leuite whiche hath no part nor inheritaunce with thee, shal come, and
the straunger, the fatherlesse, & the widowe whiche are within thy gates shall
eate and be filled, that the Lorde thy God may blesse thee in al ye workes of
thyne hande whiche thou doest.

Chapter 15

1 At the terme of seuen yeres, thou shalt make a freedome.
2 And this is the maner of the freedome: Who so euer lendeth ought with his
hande vnto his neighbour, may not aske agayne (that which he hath lent) of his
neighbour or of his brother, because it is called the Lordes free yere:
3 Yet of a straunger thou mayst call it home agayne: but he that is thy brother,
hym shall thine hande remit.
4 Neuerthelesse, there shalbe no begger among you: for the Lorde shall blesse
thee in the lande which the Lorde thy God geueth thee for an inheritaunce:
5 So that thou hearken vnto the voyce of the Lord thy God, to obserue and do all
these commaundementes which I commaunde thee this day:
6 For the Lorde thy God hath blessed thee, as he hath promised thee, and thou
shalt lende vnto many nations, but thou thy selfe shalt not borowe: And thou
shalt raigne ouer many nations, and they shall not raigne ouer thee.
7 If one of thy brethren among you be poore within any of thy gates in thy lande
which the Lorde thy God geueth thee: thou shalt not harden thine heart, nor shut
to thine hande from thy poore brother:
8 But thou shalt open thine hande vnto hym, and lende hym sufficient for his
neede which he hath.
9 Beware that there be not a wicked thought in thine heart, that thou wouldest
say, the seuenth yere, the yere of freedome is at hande: and therfore it
greeueth thee to loke on thy poore brother, and geuest hym naught, and he then
crye vnto the Lorde agaynst thee, and it be sinne vnto thee:
10 Thou shalt geue hym, and let it not greeue thine heart to geue vnto hym:
Because that for this thyng the Lorde thy God shall blesse thee in all thy
workes, and in all that thou puttest thine hande to.
11 The lande shall neuer be without poore: and therfore I comaunde thee, saying,
Thou shalt open thine hande vnto thy brother that is needy & poore in thy lande.
12 If thy brother an Hebrue sell hym selfe to thee, or an Hebrue woman, and
serue thee sixe yeres, in the seuenth yere thou shalt let hym go free from thee.
13 And when thou sendest hym out free from thee, thou shalt not let hym go away
emptie:
14 But shalt geue hym of thy sheepe, of thy corne, and of thy wine, and geue hym
of that wherwith the Lorde thy God hath blessed thee.
15 And remember that thou wast a seruaunt in the lande of Egypt, and the Lorde
thy God deliuered thee thence: and therfore I commaunde thee this thyng to day.
16 And if he say vnto thee, I wyll not go away from thee: because he loueth thee
and thine house, and is well at ease with thee:
17 Then shalt thou take an aule, & nayle his eare to the doore therwith, and let
hym be thy seruaunt for euer: And vnto thy mayde seruaunt thou shalt do
likewise.
18 And let it not greeue thine eye, when thou lettest him go out free fro thee,
for he hath ben worth a double hired seruaunt to thee in his seruice sixe yeres:
And the Lord thy God shall blesse thee in all that thou doest.
19 All the first males that come of thy cattell and of thy sheepe, thou shalt
halowe vnto the Lorde thy God: Thou shalt do no worke with the first borne
bullocke, nor sheare the first gendred of thy sheepe.
20 Thou shalt eate it before the Lorde thy God yere by yere, in the place which
the Lorde shall choose, both thou and thy housholde.
21 If there be any blemishe therin: as if it be lame, or blynde, or haue any
other euyll fauourednesse, thou shalt not offer it vnto the Lorde thy God:
22 But shalt eate it within thine owne gates, the vncleane and cleane person
shal eate it alike, as the Roe & the Hart.
23 Only eate not the blood therof: but powre it vpon the grounde as water.

Chapter 16

1 Obserue the moneth of newe corne, that thou mayest offer the Passouer vnto ye
Lord thy God: For in the moneth when corne begynneth to rype, the Lorde thy God
brought thee out of Egypt by nyght.
2 Thou shalt therfore offer the Passouer vnto the Lorde thy God (of sheepe and
oxen) in the place which the Lorde shall choose to put his name there.
3 Thou shalt eate no leauened bread with it: but seuen dayes shalt thou eate
vnleauened bread therwith, euen the bread of tribulation (for thou camest out of
the lande of Egypt in haste) that thou mayest remember the day when thou camest
out of the lande of Egypt, all the dayes of thy lyfe.
4 
5 Thou mayest not offer the Passouer within any of thy gates which ye Lorde thy
God geueth thee:
6 But in the place which the Lorde thy God shal choose to set his name in, there
thou shalt offer the Passouer at euen, about the goyng downe of the sunne, euen
in the season that thou camest out of Egypt.
7 And thou shalt roste and eate it in the place which the Lorde thy God hath
chosen, and thou shalt returne on the morowe, and go vnto thy tentes.
8 Sixe dayes thou shalt eate sweete bread, and the seuenth day shalbe a solempne
assemblie before the Lorde thy God: thou shalt do no worke therin.
9 Seuen weekes shalt thou number vnto thee, and begynne to number the seuen
weekes, when thou begynnest to put the sicle to the corne:
10 And kepe the feast of weekes vnto the Lorde thy God, with a free wyll
offeryng of thine hande, which thou shalt geue vnto the Lord thy God, according
as the Lord thy God hath blessed thee.
11 And thou shalt reioyce before the Lord thy God, thou, and thy sonne, thy
daughter, thy seruaunt, and thy mayde, & the Leuite that is within thy gates,
and the straunger, the fatherlesse, and the widdowe that are among you, in the
place which the Lorde thy God hath chosen, to put his name there.
12 And remember that thou wast a seruaunt in Egypt: and thou shalt obserue and
do these ordinaunces.
13 Thou shalt also obserue the feast of tabernacles, seuen dayes after that thou
hast gathered in thy corne & thy wine.
14 And thou shalt reioyce in thy feast, thou and thy sonne, thy daughter, thy
seruaunt, and thy mayde, the Leuite, the straunger, and the fatherlesse, & the
widdowe, that are within thy gates.
15 Seuen dayes shalt thou kepe a solempne feast vnto thy Lorde thy God, in ye
place which the Lorde shall choose: for the Lord thy God shal blesse thee in all
thy fruites, & in all ye workes of thine handes, therfore shalt thou be glad.
16 Three tymes in the yere shall all thy males appeare before the Lorde thy God,
in the place which he shall choose: In the feast of vnleauened bread, in the
feast of weekes, and in the feast of tabernacles: And they shal not appeare
before the Lorde emptie.
17 Euery man shall geue accordyng to the gift of his hande, & accordyng to the
blessyng of the Lorde thy God which he hath geuen thee.
18 Iudges and officers shalt thou make thee in all thy cities which the Lorde
thy God geueth thee throughout thy tribes, and they shall iudge the people with
iust iudgement.
19 Wrest not thou the lawe, nor knowe any person, neither take any rewarde: for
giftes do blinde the eyes of the wise, & peruert the wordes of the righteous.
20 That which is iust and ryght shalt thou folowe, that thou mayst lyue, and
enioy the lande which the Lorde thy God geueth thee.
21 Thou shalt plant no groue of any trees neare vnto the aulter of the Lord thy
God, which thou shalt make thee.
22 Thou shalt set thee vp no piller: which the Lorde thy God hateth.

Chapter 17

1 Thou shalt offer vnto the Lorde thy God no oxe nor sheepe wherin is blemishe
or any euyll fauourednesse: for that is an abhomination vnto the Lorde thy God.
2 If there be founde among you within any of thy gates which the Lorde thy God
geueth thee, man or woman that hath wrought wickednesse in the sight of the
Lorde thy God, in transgressyng his couenaunt:
3 And gone and serued straunge gods, and worshipped them, as the sunne or moone,
or any of the hoast of heauen, which I haue not commaunded:
4 And it is tolde thee, & thou hast hearde of it, then shalt thou enquire
diligently: and if it be true, & the thyng of a suretie that such abhomination
is wrought in Israel:
5 Then shalt thou bryng foorth that man or that woman (which haue committed that
wicked thyng) vnto the gates, and shalt stone them with stones tyll they dye.
6 At the mouth of two or three witnesses, shall he that is worthy of death, dye:
and at the mouth of one witnesse, let no man dye.
7 The handes of the witnesses shalbe first vpon him, to kyll him, & afterward
the handes of all the people: and thou shalt put the wicked away from thee.
8 If there rise a matter to harde for thee in iudgement betweene blood and
blood, betweene plea and plea, betweene plague and plague, and the matters come
to strife within thy gates: then shalt thou arise, and get thee vp vnto the
place whiche the Lorde thy God hath chosen,
9 And come vnto the priestes the Leuites, and vnto the iudge that shalbe in
those dayes, and aske: and they shall shewe thee the sentence of iudgement.
10 And thou must do accordyng to that which they of that place (which the Lord
had chosen) shewe thee, and thou shalt obserue to do accordyng to all that they
enfourme thee:
11 Accordyng to the sentence of the lawe which they tell thee, shalt thou do:
and bowe not from that which they shewe thee, neither to the right hande nor to
the left.
12 And that man that wyll do presumptuously, and wyll not hearken vnto the
priest (that standeth there before the Lorde thy God to minister) or vnto the
iudge: that man shall dye, and thou shalt put away euyll from Israel.
13 And all the people shall heare, & feare, and shall do no more presumptuously.
14 When thou art come vnto the lande which the Lorde thy God geueth thee, and
enioyest it, and dwellest therin, and if thou shalt say, I wyll set a king ouer
me, lyke as all the nations that are about me:
15 Then thou shalt make hym king ouer thee whom the Lorde thy God shall choose:
Euen one from among thy brethren shalt thou make kyng ouer thee, and thou mayest
not set a straunger ouer thee, which is not of thy brethren.
16 But he shall not multiplie horses to hym selfe, nor bryng the people agayne
to Egypt to increase the number of horses: forasmuch as the Lorde hath sayde
vnto you, ye shall hencefoorth go no more agayne that way.
17 Also he ought not to multiplie wyues to him selfe, lest his heart turne away,
neither shall he gather hym siluer and golde to much.
18 And when he is set vpon the seate of his kingdome, he shall write hym out a
copie of this lawe in a booke before the priestes the Leuites:
19 And it shalbe with hym, and he ought to reade therin all the dayes of his
life, that he may learne to feare the Lorde his God, and to kepe all the wordes
of this lawe and these ordinaunces, for to do them:
20 And that his heart arise not aboue his brethren, and that he turne not from
the commaundement to the right hand or to the left: but that he may prolong his
dayes in his kyngdome, he and his children in the middes of Israel.

Chapter 18

1 The priestes of the Leuites, & all the tribe of Leui, must haue no part nor
inheritaunce with Israel: but shall eate ye fierie offeringes of the Lorde, and
his inheritaunce.
2 Therfore shall they haue no inheritaunce among their brethren: but the Lorde
he is their inheritaunce, as he hath sayde vnto them.
3 And the priestes duetie of the people, and of them that offer, whether it be
oxe or sheepe, they must geue vnto the priest the shoulder, & the two chekes,
and the mawe.
4 The first fruites also of thy corne, wine, and oyle, and the first of the
fleece of thy sheepe shalt thou geue hym.
5 For the Lorde thy God hath chosen hym out of all thy tribes, to stande and to
minister in the name of the Lorde, he and his sonnes for euer.
6 If a Leuite come out of any of thy cities of all Israel, where he is a
soiourner, and come with all the lust of his heart vnto the place which the
Lorde hath chosen:
7 He shall minister in the name of the Lorde his God, as his other brethren the
Leuites do which remayne there before the Lorde.
8 And they shall haue lyke portions to eate, beside that which commeth of the
sale of his patrimonie.
9 When thou art come into the lande which the Lorde thy God geueth thee, thou
shalt not learne to do after the abhominations of those nations.
10 Let there not be founde among you any one that maketh his sonne or his
daughter to go through the fire, or that vseth witchcraft, or a regarder of
tymes, or that regardeth the fleeyng of fowles.
11 Or a sorcerer, or a charmer, or that coucelleth with spirites, or a
soothsayer, or that asketh counsayle of the dead.
12 For all that do such thynges, are abhomination vnto the Lorde: and because of
these abhominations, the Lorde thy God doth cast them out before thee.
13 Thou shalt be perfect therfore in the sight of the Lorde thy God.
14 For these nations which thou shalt possesse, hearken vnto regarders of tymes,
and vnto sorcerers: but the Lord thy God hath not suffered thee so to do.
15 The Lorde thy God wyll stirre vp vnto thee a prophete among you, euen of thy
brethren like vnto me, vnto hym ye shall hearken,
16 Accordyng to all that thou desiredst of the Lorde thy God in Horeb in the day
of the assemblie, when thou saydest: Let me heare the voyce of my Lorde God no
more, nor see this great fire any more, that I dye not.
17 And the Lorde sayde vnto me: They haue well spoken.
18 I wyll raise them vp a prophete from among their brethren lyke vnto thee, and
wyll put my wordes in his mouth, and he shall speake vnto them all that I shall
commaunde hym.
19 And whosoeuer wyll not hearken vnto my wordes, which he shall speake in my
name, I wyll require it of hym.
20 But the prophete which shall presume to speake a worde in my name, which I
haue not comaunded hym to speake, or that speaketh in the name of strauge gods,
the same prophete shall dye.
21 And if thou say in thine heart: howe shall we knowe the worde which the Lorde
hath not spoken?
22 Euen when a prophete speaketh in the name of the Lord, if the thing folowe
not, nor come to passe: that is the thyng which the Lorde hath not spoken, but
the prophete hath spoken it presumptuously: Thou shalt not therfore be afrayde
of hym.

Chapter 19

1 When the Lord thy God hath rooted out the nations whose lande the Lorde thy
God geueth thee, and thou succeedest in their inheritaunce, and dwellest in
their cities, and in their houses:
2 Thou shalt seperate three cities for thee in the middes of the lande which the
Lorde thy God geueth thee to possesse it:
3 Thou shalt prepare the way, and deuide the coastes of thy lande which the
Lorde thy God geueth thee to inherite, into three partes, that whosoeuer
committeth murther, may flee thyther.
4 For this cause must the slayer flee thyther, that he may lyue: Who so kylleth
his neighbour ignorauntly, and hated hym not in tyme passed:
5 And whe a man goeth vnto the wood with his neighbour to hewe wood, and as his
hande fetcheth a stroke with the axe to cut downe the tree, the head slippeth
from the helue, and smyteth his neighbour that he dyeth: the same shall flee
vnto one of the same cities, and lyue:
6 Lest the auenger of the blood folowe after the slayer whyle his heart is hot,
& ouertake hym because the wayes is long, and slay hym, and yet there is no
cause worthy of death in hym, in as much as he hated hym not in tyme passed.
7 Wherfore I commaunde thee, saying: Thou shalt appoynt out three cities for
thee.
8 And if the Lorde thy God enlarge thy coastes (as he hath sworne vnto thy
fathers) and geue thee all the lande which he sayde he woulde geue vnto thy
fathers:
9 Thou shalt kepe all these commaundementes to do them, which I commaunde thee
this day, that thou loue the Lorde thy God, and walke in his wayes euer: and
adde three cities mo for thee beside these three,
10 That innocent blood be not shed in thy lande, which the Lord thy God geueth
thee to inherite, and so blood come vpon thee.
11 But and if any man hate his neyghbour, and lay awayte for hym, and ryse
agaynst hym, and smyte hym that he die, & then fleeth vnto any of these cities:
12 The elders of his citie shall sende and fetch hym thence, and deliuer hym
into the handes of the auenger of blood, that he may dye.
13 Thine eye shall not spare hym, but thou shalt put away the crye of innocent
blood from Israel, that it may go well with thee.
14 Thou shalt not remoue thy neyghbours marke, which they of olde time haue set
in thine inheritaunce, that thou shalt inherite in the lande which the Lorde thy
God geueth thee to enioy it.
15 One witnesse shall not rise agaynst a man for any maner trespasse, or for any
maner sinne, or for any maner fault that he offendeth in: but at the mouth of
two witnesses or of three witnesses shall the matter be stablished.
16 If a false witnesse rise vp agaynst a man, to accuse hym of trespasse:
17 Then both the men which stryue together, shall stande before the Lorde,
before the priestes and the iudges which shalbe in those dayes:
18 And the iudges shall make diligent inquisition: and if the witnesse be founde
false, and that he hath geuen false witnesse agaynst his brother:
19 Then shall ye do vnto hym, as he had thought to do vnto his brother, & thou
shalt put euyll away from the middes of thee.
20 And other shall heare, and feare, and shall hencefoorth commit no more any
such wickednesse among you.
21 And thine eye shall haue no copassion, but lyfe for lyfe, eye for eye, toothe
for toothe, hande for hande, foote for foote.

Chapter 20

1 When thou goest out to battayle agaynst thine enemies, & seest horses, and
charettes, and people, mo then thou, be not afrayde of them: for the Lorde thy
God is with thee, which brought thee out of the lande of Egypt.
2 And when ye are come nye vnto battayle, ye priest shall come foorth to speake
vnto the people,
3 And shall say vnto them: Heare O Israel, you are come this day vnto battayle
agaynst your enemies, let not your heartes faynt, neither feare, nor be amazed,
nor a dread of them:
4 For the Lord your God goeth with you, to fyght for you agaynst your enemies,
and to saue you.
5 And let the officers speake vnto the people, saying: If any man haue built a
newe house, and haue not dedicate it: let hym go and returne to his house, lest
he dye in the battayle, and another man dedicate it.
6 And if any man haue planted a vineyarde, and haue not made it comon: let hym
go and returne agayne vnto his house, lest he dye in the battayle, and another
make it common,
7 And if any man be betrouthed vnto a wyfe, and haue not taken her: let hym go
and returne agayne vnto his house, lest he dye in the battayle, and another man
take her.
8 And let the officers speake further vnto the people, and say: If any man feare
and be faynt hearted, let hym go & returne vnto his house, lest he make his
brothers heart faynt as well as his.
9 And when the officers haue made an ende of speakyng vnto the people, they
shall make captaynes of the armie to gouerne the people.
10 When thou commest nye vnto a citie to fyght agaynst it, offer them peace.
11 And if they aunswere thee agayne peaceably, and open vnto thee, then let all
the people that is founde therin, be tributaries vnto thee, and serue thee.
12 And if they wyll make no peace with thee, but make warre agaynst thee, thou
shalt besiege it.
13 And when the Lorde thy God hath deliuered it into thine handes, thou shalt
smyte all the males therof with the edge of the sworde:
14 But the women, and the children, and the cattell, and all that is in the
citie, and all the spoyle therof shalt thou take vnto thy selfe, and eate the
spoyle of thine enemies, which the Lorde thy God hath geuen thee.
15 Thus shalt thou do vnto all the cities which are a great way of from thee,
which are not of the cities of these nations.
16 But of the cities of these nations which the Lorde thy God shall geue thee to
inherite, thou shalt saue alyue nothyng that breatheth:
17 But shalt destroy them without redemption, namely the Hethites, the Amorites,
the Chanaanites, the Pherezites, the Heuites, and the Iebusites, as the Lorde
thy God hath commaunded thee:
18 That they teache you not to do after all their abhominations which they haue
done vnto their Gods, and so ye shoulde sinne agaynst the Lorde your God.
19 When thou hast besieged a citie long tyme, and made warre agaynst it to take
it, destroy not the trees therof, that thou wouldest thrust an axe vnto them:
but eate of them, and cut them not downe to further thee in thy siege: for the
tree of the fielde is mans life.
20 Only those trees which thou knowest to be vnfruitfull, those shalt thou
destroy & cut downe, and make bulworkes agaynst the citie that maketh warre with
thee, vntyll thou subdue it.

Chapter 21

1 If one be founde slayne in the lande which the Lord thy God geueth thee to
possesse it, and lyeth in the fielde, and it is not knowen who hath slayne hym:
2 Then thine elders and thy iudges shal come foorth, and measure vnto the cities
that are rounde about hym that is slayne:
3 And let the elders of that citie which is next vnto the slayne man, take out
of the droue an heyffer that hath not ben put to labour, nor hath drawen in the
yoke:
4 And let the elders of that citie bring the heyffer vnto a harde & rough valley
which is neither eared nor sowen, and stryke of the heyffers necke there in the
valley:
5 And the priestes the sonnes of Leui (whom the Lord thy God hath chosen to
minister, and to blesse in the name of the Lorde) shall come foorth: and by
their worde shall all strife and plague be tryed.
6 And all the elders of the citie that come foorth to the slayne man, shall
washe their handes ouer the heyffer that is beheaded in the valley,
7 And shall aunswere, and say: Our handes haue not shed this blood, neither haue
our eyes seene it.
8 Be mercifull Lorde vnto thy people Israel which thou hast deliuered, and lay
no innocent blood vnto thy people of Israels charge. And the blood shalbe
forgeuen them.
9 And so shalt thou put innocent blood from thee, when thou shalt haue done that
which is ryght in the syght of the Lorde.
10 When thou goest to warre agaynst thine enemies, and the Lorde thy God hath
deliuered them into thine handes, & thou hast taken the captiue,
11 And seest among the captiues a beautifull woman, and hast a desire vnto her,
that thou wouldest haue her to thy wyfe:
12 Thou shalt bryng her home to thine house, and she shall shaue her head, and
shall pare her nayles,
13 And put her rayment that she was taken in, from her, and let her remayne in
thine house, and beweepe her father & her mother a moneth long: and after that
shalt thou go in vnto her, and mary her, and she shalbe thy wyfe.
14 And if thou haue no fauour vnto her, then let her go whither she lusteth, and
sell her not for money, nor make marchaundize of her, because thou hast humbled
her.
15 If a man haue two wyues, one beloued, and another hated, and they haue borne
hym children, both the loued and also the hated: If the first borne be the sonne
of the hated:
16 Then when the tyme commeth that he dealeth his goodes among his children, he
may not make the sonne of the beloued first borne, before the sonne of the
hated, which is in deede the first borne:
17 But he shall knowe the sonne of the hated for the first borne, and geue hym
dowble portion of all that he hath: For he is the first of his strength, and to
hym belongeth the ryght of the first borne.
18 If any man haue a sonne that is stubburne and disobedient, that he wyll not
hearken vnto the voyce of his father and voyce of his mother, and they haue
chastened hym, and he woulde not hearken vnto them:
19 Then shall his father and his mother take hym, and bryng hym out vnto the
elders of that citie, and vnto the gate of that same place,
20 And say vnto the elders of the citie: This our sonne is stubburne and
disobedient, and wyll not hearken vnto our voyce, he is a rioter & a drunkarde.
21 And all the men of that citie shall stone hym with stones vnto death: And
thou shalt put euyll away from thee, and all Israel shall heare, and feare.
22 If a man haue committed a trespasse worthy of death, and is put to death for
it, and thou hangest hym on tree.
23 His body shall not remayne all nyght vpon the tree, but thou shalt bury hym
the same day, for the curse of God is on hym that is hanged: Defile not thou thy
lande which the Lorde thy God geueth thee to inherite.

Chapter 22

1 Thou shalt not see thy brothers oxe or sheepe go astray, and withdrawe thy
selfe from them: but shalt bryng them agayne vnto thy brother.
2 And if thy brother be not nye vnto thee, or if thou knowe hym not, then bryng
it vnto thine owne house, and it shall remayne with thee vntyll thy brother aske
after them, and then deliuer hym them agayne.
3 In lyke maner shalt thou do with his asse, and so shalt thou do with his
rayment: and with all lost thynges of thy brother, which he hath lost and thou
hast found, shalt thou do likewise, and thou mayest not hide it from them.
4 Thou shalt not see thy brothers asse or oxe fall downe by the way, and
withdrawe thy selfe from them: but shalt helpe hym to heaue them vp againe.
5 The woman shall not weare that whiche parteyneth vnto the man, neither shall a
man put on womans rayment: For all that do so, are abhomination vnto the Lorde
thy God.
6 If thou chaunce vpon a birdes nest by the way, in whatsoeuer tree it be, or on
the grounde, whether they be young or egges, and the damme sittyng vpon the
young, or on the egges: thou shalt not take the damme with the young:
7 But shalt in any wyse let the damme go, & take the young to thee, that thou
mayest prosper, and prolong thy dayes.
8 When thou buyldest a newe house, thou shalt make a battlement on the roofe,
that thou lade not blood vpon thyne house if any man fal from thence.
9 Thou shalt not sowe thy vineyarde with diuers seedes: lest the fruite of the
seede which thou hast sowen, and the fruite of thy vineyarde, be defyled.
10 Thou shalt not plowe with an oxe and an asse together.
11 Thou shalt not weare a garment made of wool and linnen together.
12 Thou shalt not make thee gardes vppon the foure quarters of thy vesture
wherewith thou couerest thy selfe.
13 If a man take a wyfe, and when he hath lyen with her, hate her,
14 And lay shamefull thynges vnto her charge, and bryng vp an euyll name vpon
her, and say, I toke this wyfe, and when I came to her I founde her not a mayde:
15 Then shall the father of the damsell & the mother, bryng foorth the tokens of
the damsels virginitie vnto the elders of the citie in the gate,
16 And the damsels father shall say vnto the elders: I gaue my daughter vnto
this man to wyfe, and he hateth her,
17 And lo, he layeth shamefull thynges vnto her charge, saying, I founde not thy
daughter a mayde: and yet these are the tokens of my daughters virginitie. And
they shall spreade the vesture before the elders of the citie.
18 And the elders of that citie shall take that man, and chastise hym,
19 And mearse hym in an hundred sides of syluer, and geue them vnto the father
of the damsell, because he hath brought vp an euyl name vpon a mayde of Israel:
And she shalbe his wyfe, and he may not put her away all his dayes.
20 But and yf the thyng be of a suretie that the damsell be not founde a virgin:
21 They shall bryng the damsell to the doore of her fathers house, and the men
of that citie shall stone her with stones to death, because she hath wrought
folly in Israel to play the whore in her fathers house: And so thou shalt put
euyl from among you.
22 If a man be founde lying with a woman that hath a wedded husband, they shall
both dye, both the man that laye with the wyfe, and also the wyfe: and so thou
shalt put away euill from Israel.
23 If a mayde be betrouthed vnto an husbande, and then a man finde her in the
towne, and lye with her:
24 Ye shall bring them both out vnto the gates of the same citie, and shall
stone them with stones to death: The damsell, because she cryed not beyng in the
citie: And the man, because he hath humbled his neighbours wife: and thou shalt
put away euyll from thee.
25 But if a man finde a betrouthed damsell in the fielde, and force her, and lye
with her: then the man that lay with her, shall dye alone.
26 But vnto the damsell thou shalt do no harme, because there is in the damsell
no cause of death: For as when a man ryseth against his neyghbour and slayeth
hym: euen so is this matter.
27 For he found her in the fieldes: and the betrouthed damsell cryed, & there
was no man to succour her.
28 If a man finde a mayde that is not betrouthed, and take her, and lye with
her, and they be founde:
29 Then the man that lay with her, shall geue vnto the damsels father fiftie
sicles of siluer, and she shall be his wyfe, because he hath humbled her: and he
may not put her away all his dayes.
30 No man shall take his fathers wife, nor vnheale his fathers couering.

Chapter 23

1 None that is hurt by burstyng, or hath his priuie members cut of, shal come
into the congregation of ye Lord.
2 And a bastarde shall not come into the congregation of the Lorde: no not in
the tenth generation he shall not enter into the congregation of the Lorde.
3 The Ammonites and the Moabites shall not come into the congregation of the
Lorde, no not in the tenth generation, nor they shall neuer come into the
congregation of the Lorde:
4 Because they met you not with bread and water in the way, when ye came out of
Egypt, and because they hyred against thee Balaam the sonne of Beor of Pethor of
Mesopotamia, to curse thee.
5 Neuerthelesse, the Lorde thy God woulde not hearken vnto Balaam: but the Lord
thy God turned the curse to a blessing vnto thee, because the Lord thy God loued
thee.
6 Thou shalt not seeke their peace nor wealth all thy dayes, for euer.
7 Thou shalt not abhorre an Edomite, for he is thy brother: neither shalt thou
abhorre an Egyptian, because thou wast a straunger in his lande.
8 The children that are begotten of the, shal come into the congregation of the
Lorde in the thirde generation.
9 When thou goest out with the hoast against thyne enemies, kepe thee from all
wickednesse.
10 If there be among you any man that is vncleane, by the reason of vncleannesse
that chaunceth hym by nyght: let him go out of the hoast, and not come in agayne
into the hoast.
11 But at euen let hym washe hym selfe with water: and then when the sunne is
downe, let hym come into the hoast agayne.
12 Thou shalt haue a place also without the hoast, whyther thou shalt resort to.
13 And thou shalt haue a paddle staffe vpon thy weapon: and when thou wilt ease
thy selfe, digge therwith, and turne and couer that which is departed from thee.
14 For the Lorde thy God walketh in the middes of thyne hoast, to ryd thee, and
to set thyne enemies before thee: Therfore shall the place of thyne hoast be
pure; that he see do vncleane thyng in thee, and so turne him selfe from thee.
15 Thou shalt not deliuer vnto his maister, the seruaunt whiche is escaped from
his maister vnto thee.
16 He shall dwell with thee euen among you, in what place he hym selfe liketh
best, in one of thy cities where it is good for hym, and thou shalt not vexe
hym.
17 There shalbe no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor whore keper of the
sonnes of Israel.
18 Thou shalt neither bryng the hyre of a whore, nor the pryce of a dogge into
the house of the Lorde thy God, in any maner of bowe: for eue both of them are
abhomination vnto the Lord thy God.
19 Thou shalt not hurt thy brother by vsurie of money, nor by vsurie of corne,
nor by vsurie of any thyng that he may be hurt withall.
20 Unto a straunger thou mayest lend vpon vsurie, but not vnto thy brother: that
the Lord thy God may blesse thee in all that thou settest thyne hande to in the
lande whyther thou goest to possesse it.
21 When thou hast vowed a vowe vnto the Lorde thy God, thou shalt not flacke to
pay it: For the Lorde thy God wyll surely require it of thee, and it shalbe
sinne in thee.
22 If thou shalt leaue bowyng, it shalbe no sinne in thee.
23 But that whiche is once gone out of thy lippes, thou must kepe and do,
accordyng as thou hast vowed vnto the Lorde thy God of a freewyll, and as thou
hast spoken with thy mouth.
24 When thou commest into thy neighbours vineyarde, thou mayest eate grapes thy
belly ful at thine owne pleasure: but thou shalt put none in thy vessell.
25 Euen so, when thou commest into thy neighbours corne, thou mayest plucke the
eares with thyne hande: but thou shalt not moue a sickle vnto thy neyghbours
corne.

Chapter 24

1 When a man hath taken a wife and maried her, if she finde no fauour in his
eyes, because he hath spyed some vncleannes in her: then let hym wryte her a
byll of deuorcement, and put it in her hande, and sende her out of his house:
2 And when she is departed out of his house, let her go and be another mans
wyfe.
3 And if the seconde husbande hate her, let him write her also a letter of
deuorcement, and put it in her hande, and sende her out of his house: Or if the
seconde man dye whiche toke her to wyfe,
4 Her first man whiche sent her away, may not take her agayne to be his wyfe
after that she is defiled: For that is abhomination in the sight of the Lorde,
and thou shalt not cause the lande to sinne, whiche the Lorde thy God shall geue
thee to inherite.
5 When a man taketh a newe wyfe, he shall not go a warfare, neither shalbe
charged with any businesse: but shalbe free at home one yere, and reioyce with
his wyfe whiche he hath taken.
6 No man shall take the neather or the vpper mylstone to pledge: for then he
shall hurt a mans life.
7 If any man be founde stealing any of his brethren the chyldren of Israel, and
abuseth hym, or selleth hym: the thiefe shall dye, and thou shalt put euill away
from the middest of thee.
8 Take heede to thy selfe as concerning the plague of leprosie, that thou
obserue diligently, and ye shall do according to all that the priestes the
Leuites shall teache you: euen as I commaunded them, so ye shall obserue to do.
9 Remember what the Lorde thy God dyd vnto Miriam by the way, after that ye were
come out of Egypt.
10 When thou doest lend thy brother any thing, thou shalt not go into his house
to fetche a pledge from thence:
11 But shalt stande without, and the man that borowed it of thee, shall bring
the pledge out of the doores vnto thee.
12 Furthermore, if it be a poore body, thou shalt not sleepe with his pledge:
13 But deliuer hym the pledge agayne when the sunne goeth downe, that he may
sleepe in his owne raiment, & blesse thee: And it shalbe righteousnes vnto thee
before the Lorde thy Lorde.
14 Thou shalt not oppresse an hyred seruaunt that is needie and poore, whether
he be of thy brethre, or of the straungers that are in thy lande within thy
gates:
15 But shalt geue him his hyre the same day, & let not the sunne go downe
theron, for he is needie, and therwith sustayneth his life: lest he crye against
thee vnto the Lorde, and it be sinne vnto thee.
16 The fathers shall not be put to death for the chyldren, nor the chyldren for
the fathers: but euery man shalbe put to death for his owne sinne.
17 Thou shalt not peruert the ryght of the strauger, nor of the fatherlesse, nor
take a wydowes rayment to pledge:
18 But remember that thou wast a seruaunt in Egypt, and howe the Lorde thy God
deliuered thee thence: And therfore I commaunde thee to do this thyng.
19 When thou cuttest downe thyne haruest in thy field, and hast forgot a sheafe
in the fielde, thou shalt not go agayne to set it: But it shalbe for the
straunger, the fatherlesse, and the wydowe: that the Lorde thy God may blesse
thee in all the workes of thyne hande.
20 When thou beatest downe thine oliue tree, thou shalt not search ye boughes
agayne, to gather vp that thou leftest behinde thee: but it shalbe for the
strauger, the fatherlesse, and the wydowe.
21 When thou gatherest the grapes of thy vineyarde, thou shalt not gather the
grapes cleane after thee: but leaue them for the straunger, the fatherlesse, and
the wydowe.
22 And remember that thou also wast a seruaunt in the lande of Egypt: & therfore
I comaunde thee to do this thing.

Chapter 25

1 If there be strife betweene men, they shall come vnto the lawe, and let the
Iudges geue sentence betwene them: and iustifie the righteous, & condemne the
vngodly.
2 And if any man be vngodly, and worthy of strypes, then let the Iudge cause him
to lye downe and to be beaten before his face, accordyng to his trespasse, vnto
a certayne number.
3 Fourtie stripes he shall geue hym, and not passe: lest if he shoulde exceede,
and beate hym aboue that with many stripes, thy brother should appeare despised
and vile before thyne eyes.
4 Thou shalt not moosell the oxe that treadeth out the corne.
5 If brethren dwell together, and one of them dye, and haue no chylde, the wyfe
of the dead shall not marry without vnto a straunger: but his kinsman shall go
in vnto her, & take her to wife, and occupie the rowme of his kinsman.
6 And the eldest sonne whiche she beareth, shall succeede in the name of his
brother whiche is dead, that his name be not put out of Israel.
7 And if the man wyll not take his kinswoman, then let her go vp to the gate
vnto the elders, and say: My kinsman refuseth to stirre vp vnto his brother a
name in Israel, neither wyll he marry me.
8 Then the elders of his citie shall call hym, and commune with hym: and if he
stande and say, I wyll not take her:
9 Then shall his kinswoman come vnto hym in the presence of the elders, and
loose his shoe of his foote, and spit in his face, and aunswere, and say: So
shal it be done vnto that man, that doth not buylde vp his brothers house.
10 And his name shalbe called in Israel, the vnshodhouse.
11 If when men striue together one with another, the wife of the one drawe neare
for to ryd her husbande out of the handes of hym that smyteth hym, and put
foorth her hande and take hym by the secretes:
12 Thou shalt cut of her hande, and let not thyne eye pitie her.
13 Thou shalt not haue in thy bagge two maner of wayghtes, a great and a small:
14 Neither shalt thou haue in thine house diuers measures, a great and a small.
15 But thou shalt haue a right and iust waight, and a perfect and a iust measure
shalt thou haue: that thy dayes may be lengthed in the lande which the Lorde thy
God geueth thee.
16 For all that do such thynges, and all that do vnright, are abhomination vnto
the Lorde thy God.
17 Remember what Amalech dyd vnto thee by the way, when ye were come out of
Egypt.
18 Howe he met thee by the way, and smote the hyndmost of you, all that were
feeble and came behynde, when thou wast faynted and weerie, and he feared not
God.
19 Therfore when the Lorde thy God hath geuen thee rest from all thine enemies
rounde about, in the lande which the Lord thy God geueth thee to inherite and
possesse: see that thou put out the remembraunce of Amalech from vnder heauen,
and forget not.

Chapter 26

1 When thou art come into the lande which the Lord thy God geueth thee to
inherite, and hast enioyed it, & dwellest therin:
2 Take of the first of all the fruite of the earth, and bryng it out of the
lande that the Lorde thy God geueth thee, and put it in a basket, and go vnto
the place whiche the Lorde thy God shall chose to set his name in it.
3 And thou shalt come vnto the priest that shalbe in those dayes, and say vnto
hym: I knowledge this day vnto the Lorde thy God, that I am come vnto the
countrey whiche the Lorde sware vnto our fathers for to geue vs.
4 And the priest shall take the basket out of thyne hande, and set it downe
before the aulter of the Lorde thy God.
5 And thou shalt aunswere and say before the Lorde thy God: The Syrians went
about to destroy my father, and he went downe into Egypt, and so soiourned there
with a fewe folke, and grewe there vnto a nation great, mightie, and full of
people.
6 And the Egyptians vexed vs, and troubled vs, and laded vs with most cruel
bondage.
7 And when we cryed vnto the Lorde God of our fathers, the Lorde hearde our
voyce, and loked on our aduersitie, labour, and oppression.
8 And the Lorde brought vs out of Egypt, in a mightie hand, and a stretched out
arme, and in great terriblenesse, and signes, and wonders.
9 And he hath brought vs into this place, and hath geuen vs this lande that
floweth with mylke and hony.
10 And nowe lo, I haue brought the first fruites of the lande whiche thou O Lord
hast geuen me: And thou shalt set it before the Lorde thy God, and worship
before the Lorde thy God,
11 And reioyce in all the good thynges whiche the Lorde thy God hath geuen vnto
thee and vnto thyne house, thou and the Leuite, and the straunger that it among
you.
12 When thou hast made an ende of tithing all the tithes of thyne encrease the
thirde yere, which is the yere of tithing: thou shalt geue it vnto the Leuite,
the straunger, the fatherlesse, and the wydowe, that they may eate within thy
gates, and fill them selues:
13 And thou shalt say before the Lord thy God: I haue brought the halowed
thinges out of thine house, and haue geuen them vnto the Leuite, the straunger,
the fatherlesse, and the wydowe, according to all thy commaundementes whiche
thou hast commaunded me: I haue not transgressed thy commaundementes, nor
forgotten them.
14 I haue not eaten therof in my mournyng, nor suffred ought to perishe thorowe
vnclennesse, nor geuen ought therof for the dead: but haue hearkened vnto the
voyce of the Lorde my God, and haue done after all that thou hast commaunded me.
15 Loke downe therfore from thy holy habitation, euen from heauen, and blesse
thy people Israel, and the lande which thou hast geuen vs, as thou swarest vnto
our fathers a land that floweth with mylke and honye.
16 This day the Lord thy God hath commaunded thee to do these ordinaunces and
lawes: kepe thou them, & do them, with all thine heart, and all thy soule.
17 Thou hast set vp the Lord this day to be thy God, & to walke in his wayes,
and to kepe his ordinaunces, his commaundementes, and his lawes, and to hearken
vnto his voyce.
18 And the Lorde hath set thee vp this day, to be a seuerall people vnto hym, as
he hath promised thee, and that thou kepe his commaundementes:
19 And to make thee hye aboue all nations whiche he hath made, in prayse, in
name, and honour, and that thou mayest be an holy people vnto the Lord thy God,
as he hath sayde.

Chapter 27

1 And Moyses with the elders of Israel commaunded the people, saying: Kepe al ye
commaundements which I commaunde you this day.
2 And in that day when you shall passe ouer Iordane vnto the lande whiche the
Lord thy God geueth thee, thou shalt set thee vp great stones, and plaster them
with plaster:
3 And wryte vpon them all the wordes of this lawe when thou art come ouer,
because thou art come into the lande whiche the Lord thy God geueth thee, a
lande that floweth with mylke and honie, as the Lorde God of thy fathers hath
promised thee.
4 Therfore when ye be come ouer Iordane, ye shal set vp these stones which I
commaunde you this day in mount Ebal, and thou shalt plaster them with plaster.
5 And there shalt thou buylde vnto the Lorde thy God an aulter of stones, and
lift vp no iron vpon them.
6 Thou shalt make the aulter of the Lorde thy God of whole stones, and offer
burnt offeringes thereon vnto the Lorde thy God.
7 And thou shalt offer peace offeringes, and shalt eate there, and reioyce
before the Lorde thy God.
8 And thou shalt wryte vpon the stones all the wordes of this lawe, manifestly
and well.
9 And Moyses and the priestes the Leuites spake vnto all Israel, saying: Take
heede and heare O Israel, this day thou art become the people of the Lorde thy
God.
10 Thou shalt hearken therfore vnto the voyce of the Lorde thy God, and do his
commaundementes, and his ordinaunces which I commaunde thee this day.
11 And Moyses charged the people the same day, saying:
12 These shall stande vpon mount Garizim to blesse the people, when ye are come
ouer Iordane, Simeon, Leui, Iuda, Isachar, Ioseph, & Beniamin.
13 And these shall stande vpon mount Ebal to curse, Ruben, Gad, Aser, Zabulon,
Dan, Nephthali.
14 And the Leuites shall aunswere and say vnto all the men of Israel with a
loude voyce:
15 Cursed be the man that maketh any carued or moulten image, an abhomination
vnto the Lorde, the worke of the handes of the craftesman, and putteth it in a
secrete place: and all the people shall aunswere and say, Amen.
16 Cursed be he that curseth his father and his mother: and all the people shall
say, Amen.
17 Cursed be he that remoueth his neighbours marke: and all the people shall
say, Amen.
18 Cursed be he that maketh the blynde to go out of his way: and all the people
shall say, Amen.
19 Cursed be he that hindreth the ryght of the straunger, fatherlesse, and
widdowe: & all the people shall say, Amen.
20 Cursed be he that lyeth with his fathers wyfe, and vnhealeth his fathers
couering: and all the people shall say, Amen.
21 Cursed be he yt lieth with any maner of beast: & all the people shal say,
Amen.
22 Cursed be he that lieth with his sister, the daughter of his father, or ye
daughter of his mother: and al the people shal say, Amen.
23 Cursed be he that lieth with his mother in lawe: and al the people shall say,
Amen.
24 Cursed be he that smyteth his neighbour secretly: and all the people shall
say, Amen.
25 Cursed be he that taketh a rewarde to slay the soule of innocent blood, and
all the people shall say, Amen.
26 Cursed be he that continueth not in all the wordes of this lawe to do them,
and all the people shall say, Amen.

Chapter 28

1 If thou shalt hearken diligently vnto the voyce of the Lord thy God, and
obserue and do all his commaudementes which I commaunde thee this day: the Lorde
wyll set thee on hye aboue all nations of the earth.
2 And all these blessinges shall come on thee and ouertake thee, if thou shalt
hearken vnto the voyce of the Lord thy God.
3 Blessed shalt thou be in the citie, and blessed in the fielde
4 Blessed shalbe the fruite of thy body, and the fruite of thy grounde, and the
fruite of thy cattell, the increase of thy kine, and the flockes of thy sheepe.
5 Blessed shalbe thy basket & thy store.
6 Blessed shalt thou be when thou goest out, & blessed when thou commest in.
7 The Lord shall geue ouer thyne enemies that ryse agaynst thee, that they may
fall before thy face: They shall come out against thee one way, and flee before
thee seuen wayes.
8 The Lord shall commaunde the blessing vpon thee in thy storehouses, and in all
that thou settest thyne hande to, and wyll blesse thee in the lande whiche the
Lorde thy God geueth thee.
9 The Lorde shall make thee an holy people vnto him self, as he hath sworne vnto
thee: if thou shalt kepe the commaundementes of the Lorde thy God, and walke in
his wayes.
10 And all nations of the earth shall see that the name of the Lorde is called
vpon ouer thee, and they shalbe afraide of thee.
11 And the Lord shall make thee plenteous in goodes, in the fruite of thy body,
in the fruite of thy cattell, & in the fruite of thy grounde, in the lande
whiche the Lorde sware vnto thy fathers to geue thee.
12 The Lorde shall open vnto thee his good treasure, euen the heauen to geue
rayne vnto thy land in due season, & to blesse all thy labours of thy hande: And
thou shalt lende vnto many nations, but shalt not borowe thy selfe.
13 And the Lorde shall make thee chiefest, and not the lowest, and thou shalt be
aboue only, and not beneath: if that thou hearken vnto the commaundementes of
the Lorde thy God which I commaunde thee this day, to kepe and to do them:
14 And see that thou bow not aside from any of these wordes whiche I commaund
thee this day, either to the right hande or to the left, that thou wouldest go
after straunge gods to serue them.
15 But and if thou wilt not hearken vnto the voyce of the Lorde thy God, to kepe
and to do all his commaundementes and his ordinaunces whiche I commaunde thee
this day, all these curses shal come vpon thee and ouertake thee.
16 Cursed shalt thou be in the citie, and cursed in the fielde.
17 Cursed shalbe thy basket & thy store.
18 Cursed shalbe the fruite of thy body, and the fruite of thy lande, and the
increase of thy kine, and the flockes of thy sheepe.
19 Cursed shalt thou be when thou goest in, and cursed when thou goest out.
20 The Lorde shal sende vpon thee cursing, destruction, and rebuke, in all that
thou settest thine hand to and that thou doest, vntyll he destroy thee, and
bryng thee to naught quickly, because of the wickednesse of thyne inuentions,
and because thou hast forsaken me.
21 The Lorde shall make the pestilence cleaue vnto thee, vntyll he haue consumed
thee from of the lande whyther thou goest to enioy it.
22 The Lorde shall smyte thee with swelling, with feuers, heate, burnyng, and
with the sworde, with blasting and mildeawe: and they shall folowe thee vntyll
thou perishe.
23 And the heauen that is ouer thy head shalbe brasse, and the earth that is
vnder thee, iron.
24 The Lorde shall turne the rayne of the lande vnto powder and dust, euen from
heaue shal they come downe vpon thee, vntill thou be brought to naught.
25 And the Lorde shall cause thee to fall before thine enemies: Thou shalt come
out one way agaynst them, and flee seuen wayes before them, & shalbe scattered
among al the kingdomes of ye earth.
26 And thy carkasse shalbe meate vnto all maner foules of the ayre, and vnto the
beastes of the earth, and no man shall fray them away.
27 The Lorde wyll smyte thee with the botch of Egypt, and the emarodes, scab,
and itche, that thou mayest not be healed therof.
28 And the Lorde shall smyte thee with madnesse, and blyndnesse, and dasing of
heart.
29 Thou shalt grope at noone dayes as the blinde gropeth in darknesse, & shal
not prosper in thy wayes: Thou shalt be oppressed with wrong, & be poulled
euermore, & no man shall succour thee.
30 Thou shalt be betrouthed vnto a wyfe, and another man shall lye with her:
Thou shalt buylde an house, and not dwell therein: thou shalt also plant a
vineyarde, and shalt not gather the grapes.
31 Thine oxe shalbe slayne before thine eyes, and thou shalt not eate thereof:
Thyne asse shalbe violently taken away euen before thy face, and shall not be
restored to thee agayne: Thy sheepe shalbe geuen vnto thyne enemies, and no man
shall rescue them.
32 Thy sonnes and thy daughters shall be geuen vnto another nation, and thine
eyes shall see it, and dase vpon them all the day long: and there shalbe no
might in thyne hande.
33 The fruite of thy lande and all thy labours, shall a nation whiche thou
knowest not, eate: and thou shalt continuallye suffer violence, and be oppressed
alway:
34 So that thou shalt be cleane beside thy self, for the sight of thine eyes
which thou shalt see.
35 The Lorde shall smyte thee in the knees and legges with a mischeuous botch
that can not be healed, euen from the sole of thy foote, vnto the top of thy
head.
36 The Lord shall bryng thee and thy kyng whiche thou shalt set ouer thee, vnto
a nation whiche neither thou nor thy fathers haue knowen, that there thou mayest
serue straunge gods, euen wood and stone.
37 And thou shalt be wondred at, spoken of, and iested at among al nations
whyther the Lorde shall carry thee.
38 Thou shalt carry muche seede out into the fielde, and shalt gather but litle
in: for the grashoppers shall destroy it.
39 Thou shalt plant a vineyarde and dresse it, but shalt neither drinke of the
wine, neither gather the grapes: for the wormes shall eate it.
40 Thou shalt haue oliue trees throughout al thy coastes, but shalt not annoynt
thy selfe with the oyle, for thine oliues shall fall downe.
41 Thou shalt beget sonnes and daughters, but shalt not haue them: for they
shalbe carryed away captiue.
42 All the trees and fruite of thy lande shall wormes consume.
43 The straunger that is among you, shall clyme aboue thee vp on hye: and thou
shalt come downe beneath alowe.
44 He shall lende thee, and thou shalt not lende him: he shalbe the head, and
thou shalt be the tayle.
45 Moreouer, all these curses shall come vpon thee, and shall folowe thee, and
ouertake thee tyll thou be destroyed: because thou hearkenedst not vnto the
voyce of the Lorde thy God to kepe his commaundementes, and his ordinaunces
whiche he commaunded thee.
46 And they shalbe vpon thee for signes and wonders, & vpon thy seede for euer.
47 Because thou seruedst not the Lorde thy God with ioyfulnesse, and with a good
heart, when thou haddest aboundaunce of all thinges.
48 Therfore shalt thou serue thyne enemie whiche the Lorde shall sende vpon
thee, in hunger, and thirst, in nakednes, and in neede of all thyng: and he
shall put a yoke of iron vpon thy necke, vntyll he haue brought thee to naught.
49 And the Lorde shall bryng a nation vpon thee from a farre, and from the ende
of the worlde, as swyft as an eagle fleeth, a nation whose tongue thou shalt not
vnderstande:
50 A nation of a shamelesse and cruell countenaunce, whiche shall not regarde
the person of the olde, nor haue compassion on the young:
51 The same shall eate the fruite of thy cattell, and the fruite of thy lande,
vntill he haue destroyed thee: and shall leaue thee neither corne, wyne, nor
oyle, neither the encrease of thy kine, nor the flockes of thy sheepe, vntyll he
haue brought thee to naught:
52 And he shall kepe thee in, in all the cities, vntyll he haue cast downe thy
hye walles and strong holdes, wherin thou trustedst, throughout all the lande:
And he shall besiege thee in al thy cities thorowout all the lande whiche the
Lorde thy God hath geuen thee.
53 And thou shalt eate the fruite of thine owne body, the fleshe of thy sonnes,
and of thy daughters, which the Lord thy God hath geuen thee, in that
straitnesse and siege, wherewith thyne enemie shall inclose thee.
54 So that it shall greeue the man (that is tender and exceeding delicate among
you) to loke on his brother, and vpon his wyfe that lieth in his bosome, and on
the remnaunt of his chyldren which he hath yet left,
55 For feare of geuyng vnto any of them of the fleshe of his chyldren, whom he
shall eate: because he hath nothyng left hym in that straitnesse and siege,
wherwith thine enemie shall besiege thee in all thy cities.
56 Yea, and the woman that is so tender and delicate, that she dare not
aduenture to set the sole of her foote vpon the grounde, for softnesse and
tendernesse, shalbe greeued to loke on her husbande that lieth in her bosome, &
on her sonne, and on her daughter,
57 And on her afterbyrth that is come out from betweene her feete, and her
chyldren whiche she shall beare: For when all thinges lacke, she shall eate them
secretly, duryng the siege & straitnesse wherewith thyne enemies shall besiege
thee in thy cities.
58 If thou wylt not kepe and do all the wordes of this lawe that are written in
this booke, and feare this glorious and fearefull name, The Lorde thy God:
59 The Lord wyll sende vnto thee and thy seede, great plagues, and of long
continuaunce, euyll sicknesses, and of long duraunce:
60 Moreouer, he will bryng vpon thee all the diseases of Egypt, and those whiche
thou wast afrayde of shall cleaue vnto thee.
61 And all maner sicknesses, and all maner plagues whiche are not written in the
booke of this lawe, wyll the Lorde bryng vpon thee, vntyll he bryng thee to
naught.
62 And ye shalbe lefte fewe in number, where before ye were as the starres of
heauen in multitude: because thou wouldest not hearken vnto the voyce of the
Lorde thy God.
63 And it shall come to passe, that as the Lord reioyced ouer you, to do you
good, and to multiplie you: euen so he will reioyce ouer you, to destroy you, &
to bring you to naught, and ye shalbe wasted from of the lande whyther thou
goest to enioy it.
64 And the Lord shal scatter thee among all nations, from the one ende of the
worlde vnto the other: and there thou shalt serue straunge gods, whiche thou nor
thy fathers haue knowen, euen wood and stone.
65 And among these nations thou shalt finde no ease, neither shall the sole of
thy foote haue rest: But the Lorde shal geue thee there an vnquiet heart, and
dasing eyes, and sorowe of minde.
66 And thy life shall hang in doubt before thee, and thou shalt feare both day
and nyght, and shalt haue none assurannce of thy lyfe.
67 In the morning thou shalt say, would God it were nyght: And at nyght thou
shalt say, would God it were mornyng, for feare of thyne heart whiche thou shalt
feare, and for the sight of thyne eyes whiche thou shalt see.
68 And the Lorde shall bryng thee into Egypt agayne with shippes by the way
whiche I sayde to thee, thou shalt see it no more againe: And there ye shalbe
solde vnto your enemies for bondmen and bondwomen, and no man shall bye you.

Chapter 29

1 These are the wordes of the couenaunt which the Lorde commaunded Moyses to
make with the children of Israel in the lande of Moab, besyde the appoyntment
which he made with them in Horeb.
2 And Moyses called all Israel, & sayde vnto them: Ye haue seene all that the
Lorde did before your eyes in the lande of Egypt, vnto Pharao and vnto all his
seruauntes, and vnto all his lande,
3 The great temptations which thine eyes haue seene, those great miracles and
wonders:
4 And yet the Lorde hath not geuen you an heart to perceaue, and eyes to see,
and eares to heare, vnto this day.
5 And I haue led you fourtie yeres in the wildernesse: and your clothes are not
waxed olde vpon you, and thy shoe is not waxed olde vpon thy foote.
6 Ye haue eaten no bread, nor drunke wine or strong drynke: that ye myght knowe
howe that I am the Lorde your God.
7 And ye came vnto this place, and Sehon the kyng of Hesbon, and Og the kyng of
Basan came out agaynst vs vnto battayle, and we smote them,
8 And toke their lande, and gaue it for an inheritaunce vnto the Rubenites and
Gadites, and to the halfe tribe of Manasse.
9 Kepe therfore the wordes of this couenaunt, and do them, that ye may
vnderstande all that ye ought to do.
10 Ye stande this day euery one of you before the Lorde your God: your
captaynes, your tribes, your elders, your officers, and all the men of Israel:
11 Your childre also, your wiues, and the straunger that is in thine hoast, from
the hewer of thy wood, vnto the drawer of thy water:
12 That thou shouldest go into the couenaunt of the Lorde thy God, and into his
othe which the Lorde thy God maketh with thee this day:
13 For to make thee a people vnto hym selfe, and that he may be vnto thee a God,
as he hath sayde vnto thee, and as he hath sworne vnto thy fathers, Abraham,
Isahac, and Iacob.
14 I make not this bonde and this othe with you only:
15 But both with hym that standeth here with vs this day before the Lorde our
God, and also with hym that is not here with vs this day.
16 For ye knowe howe we haue dwelt in the lande of Egypt, and howe we came
through the myddes of the nations which ye passed by:
17 And ye haue seene their abhominations, and their idols, wood and stone,
siluer and golde, which were among them.
18 Lest there be among you man or woman, kinrede or tribe, whose heart turneth
away this day from the Lorde our God, to go and serue the gods of these nations:
and lest there be among you some roote that beareth gall and wormewood.
19 So that when he heareth the wordes of this othe, he blesse hym selfe in his
heart, saying: I shall haue peace, I wyll walke in the meanyng of myne owne
heart: to put the drunken to the thirstie.
20 And so the Lorde wyll not consent to be mercifull vnto hym, but then the
wrath of the Lorde and his gelousie shall smoke agaynst that man: and all the
curses that are written in this booke shall lyght vpon hym, and the Lorde shal
do out his name from vnder heaue.
21 And the Lorde shall seperate hym vnto euyll, out of all the tribes of Israel,
accordyng vnto all the curses of the couenaunt that are written in the booke of
this lawe.
22 So that the generatio to come of your children that shall ryse vp after you,
and the straunger that shall come from a farre lande, shall say, when they see
the plagues of that lande, and the diseases wherwith the Lorde hath smitten it:
23 Howe all the lande is burnt vp with brimstone and salt, and that it is
neither sowen, nor beareth, nor any grasse groweth therin, lyke as in the place
of ye ouerthrowyng of Sodome, Gomor, Adama, and Zeboim, which the Lorde
ouerthrewe in his wrath and anger.
24 Euen then shal all nations say: Wherfore hath the Lord done on this fashion
vnto this lande? O howe fierse is this great wrath?
25 And men shall say: Because they haue forsaken the couenaunt of the Lorde God
of their fathers, which he made with them when he brought them out of the lande
of Egypt.
26 For they went and serued straunge gods, and worshipped them, gods which they
knewe not, and which had geuen them nothyng.
27 And the wrath of the Lorde waxed hot agaynst this lande, to bryng vpon it all
the curses that are written in this booke.
28 And the Lorde cast them out of their lande in anger, wrath, and great
indignation, and cast them into a straunge lande, as this day beareth witnesse.
29 The secretes of the Lorde our God are opened vnto vs, and to our children for
euer, that we may do all the wordes of this lawe.

Chapter 30

1 When all these wordes are come vpon thee, the blessyng and the curse whiche I
haue set before thee, thou shalt turne vnto thine heart, among all the nations
whyther the Lorde thy God hath dryuen thee,
2 And come agayne vnto the Lorde thy God, and hearken vnto his voyce in all
these thynges that I commaunde thee this day, thou, and thy children, with all
thine heart, and all thy soule:
3 And the Lorde thy God wyll turne thy captiuitie and haue compassion vpon thee,
and wyll turne and fetche thee agayne from all the nations among which the Lord
thy God had scattered thee.
4 Though thou wast cast vnto the extreme partes of heauen: euen from thence wyll
the Lorde thy God gather thee, and from thence will he fetch thee:
5 And the Lorde thy God wyll bryng thee into the lande whiche thy fathers
possessed, and thou shalt enioy it: And he wyll shewe thee kindnesse, and
multiplie thee aboue thy fathers.
6 And the Lorde thy God wyll circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seede,
that thou mayest loue the Lorde thy God, with all thine heart, and all thy
soule, that thou mayest lyue.
7 And the Lorde thy God wyll put all these curses vpon thine enemies, and on
them that hate thee, and that persecute thee.
8 But thou shalt turne, and hearken vnto the voyce of the Lorde, and do all his
commaundementes which I commaunde thee this day:
9 (And the Lorde thy God wyll make thee plenteous in al the workes of thine
hande, in the fruite of thy body, and in the fruite of thy cattell, and in the
fruite of thy lande, for thy wealth: For the Lorde wyll turne agayne and reioyce
ouer thee to do thee good, as he reioyced ouer thy fathers.
10 If thou hearken only vnto the voyce of the Lorde thy God, to kepe his
commaundementes and his ordinaunces which are written in the booke of this lawe,
and if thou turne vnto the Lorde thy God with all thine heart and all thy
soule.)
11 For the commaundement which I comaunde thee this day, is not hidden from
thee, neither farre of.
12 It is not in heauen, that thou needest to say: Who shall go vp for vs to
heauen, and bryng it vnto vs, that we may heare it, and do it?
13 Neither is it beyonde the sea, that thou shouldest say: Who shall go ouer the
sea for vs, and bryng it vnto vs, that we may heare it, and do it?
14 But the worde is very nye vnto thee, euen in thy mouth, and in thine heart,
that thou do it.
15 Beholde I haue set before thee this day, lyfe and good, death and euyll:
16 For where as I commaunde thee this day, to loue the Lorde thy God, to walke
in his wayes, and to kepe his commaundementes, his ordinaunces, and his lawes,
yf thou so do thou shalt lyue and multiplie, and the Lorde thy God shall blesse
thee in the lande whyther thou goest to possesse it.
17 But and yf thine heart turne away, so that thou wylt not heare, but shalt go
astray and worship straunge gods, and serue them:
18 I pronounce vnto you also this day, that ye shall surely perishe, and that ye
shall not prolong your dayes vpon the lande whyther thou passest ouer Iordane to
go and possesse it.
19 I call heauen and earth to recorde this day agaynst you, that I haue set
before you, lyfe and death, blessyng and cursyng: Therfore choose lyfe, that
both thou and thy seede may lyue:
20 That thou mayest loue the Lord thy God, and be obedient to his voyce, and
cleaue vnto hym: For he is thy life, & the length of thy dayes, that thou mayest
dwell vpon the earth, which the Lord sware vnto thy fathers, Abraham, Isahac,
and Iacob, to geue them.

Chapter 31

1 And Moyses went and spake these wordes vnto all Israel,
2 And sayd vnto them: I am an hundred and twentie yeres olde this day, and can
no more go out and in: Also the Lorde hath sayd vnto me, Thou shalt not go ouer
this Iordane.
3 The Lorde thy God he wyll go ouer before thee, and he wyll destroy these
nations before thee, and thou shalt possesse them: And Iosuah he shall go before
thee, as the Lorde hath sayde:
4 And the Lorde shall do vnto them, as he dyd to Sehon and Og kynges of the
Amorites, and vnto the lande of them whom he destroyed.
5 And the Lorde shall geue them ouer before your face, that ye may do vnto them
accordyng vnto all the comaundementes which I haue comaunded you.
6 Plucke vp your heartes therfore, and be strong, dreade not, nor be afrayde of
them: for the Lorde thy God hym selfe doth go with thee, he shall not fayle
thee, nor forsake thee.
7 And Moyses called vnto Iosuah, and sayd vnto him in the sight of all Israel:
Be strong & of good courage, for thou must go with this people vnto the lande
which the Lord hath sworne vnto their fathers to geue them, and thou shalt geue
it them to inherite.
8 And the Lorde he doth go before thee, he shalbe with thee, he shall not fayle
thee, neither forsake thee: feare not therfore, nor be discomfyted.
9 And Moyses wrote this lawe, and deliuered it vnto the priestes the sonnes of
Leui which bare the arke of the testament of the Lorde, and vnto all the elders
of Israel.
10 And Moyses comaunded them, saying: Euery seuenth yere, in the solempnitie of
the free yere, euen in the feast of tabernacles,
11 When all Israel is come to appeare before the Lorde thy God in the place
which he hath chosen: thou shalt reade this lawe before all Israel, that they
may heare it.
12 Gather the people together, men, women, and children, and the straunger that
is within thy gates, that they may heare, and learne, and feare the Lorde your
God, and kepe and obserue all the wordes of this lawe,
13 And that their children which knowe nothyng, may heare, and learne to feare
the Lorde your God, as long as ye lyue in the lande whyther ye go ouer Iordane
to possesse it.
14 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Beholde, thy dayes are come that thou must
dye: Call Iosuah therfore, and stande ye in the tabernacle of the congregatio,
that I may geue him a charge. And Moyses and Iosuah went & stood in the
tabernacle of the congregation.
15 And the Lorde appeared in the tabernacle, euen in the piller of the cloude:
and the piller of the cloude stoode ouer the doore of the tabernacle.
16 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: Beholde, thou shalt sleepe with thy fathers,
and this people wyll ryse vp, and go a whoryng after straunge gods of the lande
whyther they go, and wyll forsake me, and breake the appoyntmet which I haue
made with them.
17 And then my wrath wyll waxe hot against them in that day, & I wil forsake
them, & wyll hide my face from them, and they shalbe consumed, and much
aduersitie and tribulations shall come vpon them, so that then they wyll say:
Are not these troubles come vpon me, because God is not with me?
18 And I also wyll surely hyde away my face in that day, for all the euyls sake
which they shall haue wrought, in that they are turned vnto straunge gods.
19 Nowe therfore write ye this song for you, and teache it the children of
Israel, and put it in their mouthes, that this song may be my witnesse agaynst
the children of Israel.
20 For I wyll bryng them into the lande which I sware vnto their fathers, that
floweth with mylke and honye: and they shall eate, and fyll them selues, and
waxe fat, and turne vnto strauge gods, and serue them, and blaspheme me, and
breake my couenaunt.
21 And when much mischiefe and tribulation is come vpon them, this song shall
aunswere them as a witnesse: For it shall not be forgotten out of the mouthes of
their seede: for I knowe their imagination, which they go about euen nowe,
before I haue brought the into the lande which I sware.
22 Moyses therfore wrote this song the same day, and taught it the children of
Israel.
23 And he gaue Iosuah the sonne of Nun a charge, and sayde: Be bolde and strong,
for thou shalt bryng the children of Israel into the lande which I sware vnto
them: & I wil be with thee.
24 And when Moyses had made an ende of writing the wordes of this lawe in a
booke, vntyll he had finished them,
25 Moyses commaunded the Luites, which bare the arke of the couenaunt of the
Lorde, saying:
26 Take ye the booke of this lawe, and put it in the syde of the arke of the
couenaunt of the Lorde your God, that it may be there for a witnesse agaynst
thee.
27 For I knowe thy rebellion and thy stiffe necke: whyle I am yet alyue with you
this day, ye haue ben disobedient vnto the Lorde, and howe much more after my
death?
28 Gather vnto me all the elders of your tribes, and your officers, that I may
speake these wordes in their eares, and call heauen and earth to recorde against
them.
29 For I am sure, that after my death ye will vtterly be corrupt, and turne from
the way which I haue commaunded you: and tribulation wyll come vpon you in the
latter dayes, because ye shall haue wrought wickednesse in the syght of the
Lorde, to prouoke hym through the workes of your handes.
30 And Moyses spake in the eares of all the congregation of Israel the wordes of
this song, vntyll he had ended them.

Chapter 32

1 Heare O ye heauens, and I shal speake, and let the earth heare the wordes of
my mouth.
2 My doctrine shal drop as doth the rayne: and my speache shall flowe as doth
the deawe, as the shoure vpon the hearbes, and as the droppes vpon the grasse.
3 For I wyll publishe the name of the Lord: Ascribe ye honour vnto our God.
4 Perfect is the worke of the most mightie God, for all his wayes are iudgement:
He is a God of trueth, without wickednesse, righteous and iust is he.
5 Frowardly haue they done agaynst hym by their vices, not beyng his owne
children, but a wicked and frowarde generation.
6 Do ye so rewarde the Lord, O foolishe nation and vnwise? Is not he thy father
that hath bought thee? Hath he nat made thee, and ordeyned thee?
7 Remember the dayes of the worlde that is past, consider the yeres of so many
generations: Aske thy father, and he wyll shewe thee, thy elders, and they wyll
tell thee.
8 When the most hyest deuided to the nations their inheritaunce, and when he
seperated the sonnes of Adam, he put the borders of the nations accordyng to the
number of the children of Israel:
9 For the Lordes part is his people, and Iacob is the portion of his
inheritauce.
10 He founde hym in a desert lande, in a voyde grounde, and in a roaryng
wildernesse: He led hym about, he gaue hym vnderstandyng, and kept hym as the
apple of his eye.
11 As an Egle that stirreth vp her nest, and flittereth ouer her young, &
spreadeth her wynges, taketh them, and beareth them on her wynges:
12 The Lorde alone was his guyde, and there was no straunge god with hym.
13 He caryed hym vp to the hygh places of the earth, that he myght eate the
encrease of the fieldes: And he fed hym with honye out of the rocke, and with
oyle out of the most harde stone:
14 With butter of kine, and mylke of the sheepe, with fat of the lambes, and fat
of rammes and hee goates, with the fat of the most plenteous wheate, and that
thou myghtest drynke the most pure blood of the grape.
15 But he that shoulde haue ben vpright, when he waxed fat, spurned with his
heele: Thou art well fed, thou art growen thicke, thou art euen laden with
fatnesse: And he forsoke God his maker, and regarded not the God of his
saluation.
16 They prouoked hym to anger with straunge gods, euen with abhominations
prouoked they hym.
17 They offered vnto deuils, and not to God: euen to gods whom they knewe not,
to newe gods that came newly vp, whom their fathers feared not.
18 Of God that begat thee thou art vnmyndfull, and hast forgotten God that made
thee.
19 The Lorde therfore sawe it, and was angry: because of the prouokyng of his
sonnes and his daughters.
20 And he sayde: I wyll hyde my face from them, and wil see what their ende
shalbe: For they are a very frowarde generation, childre in whom is no faith.
21 They haue angred me with that which is no god, and prouoked me with their
vanities: And I also wyll prouoke them with those whiche are no people, I wyll
anger them with a foolishe nation.
22 For fire is kindled in my wrath, and burneth vnto the bottome of hell, and
hath consumed the earth with her increase, and set a fire the botomes of the
mountaynes.
23 I wyll heape mischiefes vpon them, & wyll destroy them with mine arrowes.
24 They shalbe burnt with hunger, and consumed with heate, and with bitter
destruction: I wyll also sende the teeth of beastes vpon them, with the
furiousnesse of serpentes in the dust.
25 Withoutforth shall the sworde robbe them of their children, and within in the
chamber feare: both young men & young women, and the suckelynges, with the men
of gray heades.
26 I haue sayde, I wyll scatter them abrode, and make the remembraunce of them
to ceasse from among men:
27 Were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemie, lest their aduersaries
should vtterly withdrawe the selues, and lest they shoulde say: our hye hande
hath done all this, and not the Lorde.
28 For it is a nation voyde of counsayle, neither is there any vnderstandyng in
them.
29 O that they were wyse, and vnderstoode this, that they woulde consider their
latter ende.
30 Howe shoulde one chase a thousande, & two put ten thousand to flyght, except
their maker had solde them, and except the Lorde had shut them vp?
31 For their god is not as our God: our enemies also them selues are iudges.
32 For their vine is of the vineyarde of Sodome, & of the fieldes of Gomorra:
their grapes are grapes of gall, and their clusters be bitter.
33 Their vine is the poyson of dragons, and the cruell gall of aspes.
34 Is not this layde in store with me, and sealed vp among my treasures?
35 Uengeaunce is myne, and I wyll rewarde, their feete shall slyde in due tyme:
For the day of their destruction is at hande, and the thynges that shall come
vpon them, make haste.
36 For the Lord shal iudge his people, and haue compassion on his seruautes,
when he seeth that their power is gone, and that they be in a maner shut vp, or
brought to naught and forsaken.
37 And he shall say: Where are their gods, their god in whom they trusted?
38 The fat of whose sacrifices they dyd eate, & dranke the wine of their drinke
offerynges: let them ryse vp, and helpe you, and be your protection.
39 See nowe howe that I, I am God, and there is none but I: I kyll, and wyll
make alyue: I wounde, and wyll heale, neither is there any that can delyuer out
of my hande.
40 For I wyll lift vp myne hande to heauen, and wyll say: I lyue euer.
41 If I whet the edge of my sworde, and mine hande take holde to do iustice, I
wyl recompence vengeaunce on mine enemies, and wyll rewarde them that hate me.
42 I wyll make myne arrowes drunke with blood, and my sworde shal deuour fleshe,
& that for the blood of the slayne, and for their captiuitie, sence the
begynnyng of the wrath of the enemie.
43 Prayse ye heathen his people, for he wyll auenge the blood of his seruautes,
and will auenge him of his aduersaries, and wyll be mercifull vnto his lande,
and to his people.
44 And Moyses came and spake all the wordes of this song in the eares of the
people, he & Iosuah the sonne of Nun.
45 And Moyses spake all these wordes vnto the ende, to al the people of Israel,
46 And sayde vnto them: Set your heartes vnto all the wordes which I testifie
vnto you this day, and ye shall commaunde them vnto your children, that they may
obserue and do all the wordes of this lawe.
47 And let it not be a vayne worde vnto you: for in it is your lyfe, and through
this worde ye shall prolong your dayes in the lande whyther ye go ouer Iordane
to possesse it.
48 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses the same day, saying:
49 Get thee vp into this mountayne Abarim, vnto mount Nebo, which is in the
lande of Moab, ouer agaynst Iericho, and beholde the lande of Chanaan which I
geue vnto the children of Israel to possesse:
50 And dye in the mount whiche thou goest vnto, and thou shalt be gathered vnto
thy people, as Aaron thy brother dyed in mount Hor, and was gathered vnto his
people:
51 Because ye trespassed agaynst me among the children of Israel at the waters
of stryfe at Cades in the wildernesse of Zin: for ye sanctified me not among the
children of Israel.
52 Thou shalt therfore see the lande before thee, and shalt not go thyther vnto
the lande which I geue the children of Israel.

Chapter 33

1 This is the blessyng wherwith Moyses the man of God blessed the children of
Israel before his death, and sayde:
2 The Lorde came from Sinai, and rose vp from Seir vnto them, and appeared from
mount Pharan, & he came with ten thousande of saintes, and in his ryght hand a
lawe of fire for them.
3 And he loued the people, all his saintes also are in thy handes: They were
smitten to go after thy feete, and to receaue of thy wordes.
4 Moyses gaue vs a lawe for an inheritaunce of the congregation of Iacob:
5 And he was in Israel king, when the heades of the people and the tribes of
Israel were gathered together.
6 Let Ruben lyue, and not dye, and be fewe in number.
7 This same also happen to Iuda: And he sayde: Heare Lorde the voyce of Iuda, &
bryng him vnto his people: his handes shalbe good enough for hym, yf thou helpe
hym agaynst his enemies.
8 And vnto Leui he sayde: Thumim and Urim shalbe with thee, and with euery one
that is godly in thee: Thou dyddest proue hym also in the temptation, &
striuedst with hym at the waters of stryfe.
9 He that hath sayde vnto his father & to his mother (I haue not seene hym) and
he that knewe not his brethren, nor knewe his owne children, those are they that
haue obserued thy worde, and shall kepe thy couenaunt.
10 They shall teache Iacob thy iudgementes, and Israel thy lawe: They shall put
incense before thy nose, and the burnt sacrifice vpon thine aulter.
11 Blesse Lorde his first fruites, and accept the worke of his handes: smyte the
loynes of the that rise agaynst him, and of them that hate hym, that they ryse
not agayne.
12 And of Beniamin he sayde: The beloued of the Lorde shall dwell in safetie
vpon hym, and the Lorde shall couer hym all the day long, and he shall dwell
betweene his shoulders.
13 And of Ioseph he sayde: Blessed of the Lorde is his lande for the fruites of
heauen, through the deawe & springes that lye beneath,
14 And for the sweete fruites of the increase of the sunne, and rype fruites of
the moone:
15 For the first fruites of the principall mountaynes, and for the fruites that
the hylles bryng foorth for euer:
16 And for the fuites of the earth, and fulnesse therof: and for the good wyll
of hym that dwelt in the bushe, shall the blessing come vpon the head of Ioseph,
and vpon the toppe of the head of hym that was seperated from among his
brethren.
17 His first borne oxe hath beautie, and his hornes are as the hornes of an
vnicorne, and with them he shall trouble the nations together, euen vnto the
endes of the worlde: These are also ten thousandes of Ephraim, and the
thousandes of Manasses.
18 And vnto Zabulon he sayde: Reioyce Zabulon in thy goyng out, and thou Isachar
in thy tentes.
19 They shall call the people vnto the hyll, & there they shall offer offeringes
of righteousnesse: For they shall sucke of the aboundaunce of the sea, and of
treasure hyd in the sande.
20 And vnto Gad he sayde: Blessed be he that inlarged Gad: he dwelleth as a Lion
that catcheth for a pray the arme with the head.
21 He loked to hym selfe at the beginning, because there was a portion of the
lawgeuer hid, & he came with the heades of the people, and executed the
ryghteousnesse of the Lorde, and his iudgementes with Israel.
22 And vnto Dan he sayde: Dan is a Lions whelpe, he shal leape fro Basan.
23 And vnto Nephthali he sayde: O Nephthali, satisfied with Gods fauour, and
full with the blessing of the Lorde, possesse thou the west and the south.
24 And to Aser he sayde: Aser shalbe blessed with children, he shalbe acceptable
vnto his brethren, and shall dyp his foote in oyle.
25 Thy shoes shalbe iron and brasse, and thy strength shall continue as long as
thou lyuest.
26 There is none lyke vnto the God of Israel, which though he syt vpon the
heauen as vpon an horse yet is he thine helper, whose glorie is in the
celestiall places.
27 The eternall God is thy refuge, and vnder the armes of the euerlastyng God
shalt thou lyue: He shall cast out the enemie before thee, and say, destroy
them.
28 Israel then shall dwell in safetie and alone, and the fountayne of Iacob
shalbe vpon a lande of corne and wine, and his heauens shall drop the deawe.
29 Happy art thou O Israel, who is like vnto thee O people, that art saued in
the Lorde which is the shielde of thy helpe and sworde of thy glorie? Thine
enemies haue lost their strength to thee warde, and thou shalt treade vpon their
hye places.

Chapter 34

1 And Moyses went from the playne of Moab, vp into mount Nebo, and vnto the top
of the hyll that is ouer agaynst Iericho: And the Lord shewed hym all the lande
of Gilead, euen vnto Dan:
2 And all Nephthali, and the lande of Ephraim, & Manasse, and all the lande of
Iuda, euen vnto the vtmost sea:
3 And the south, and the playne of the valley of Iericho, the citie of palme
trees euen vnto Zoar.
4 And the Lorde sayd vnto hym: This is the lande which I sware vnto Abraham,
Isahac, and Iacob, saying, I wyll geue it vnto thy seede: I haue caused thee
also to see it with thine eies, but thou shalt not go ouer thyther.
5 So Moyses the seruaunt of the Lord dyed there in the lande of Moab, accordyng
to the worde of the Lorde.
6 And he buryed hym in a valley, in the lande of Moab, ouer agaynst the house of
Peor: but no man knoweth of his sepulchre vnto this day.
7 Moyses was an hundred and twentie yeres olde when he dyed: his eye was not
dymme, nor his naturall force abated.
8 And the children of Israel wept for Moyses in the playne of Moab thirtie
dayes: And the dayes of weepyng and mournyng for Moyses were ended.
9 And Iosuah the sonne of Nun was ful of the spirite of wisdome, for Moyses had
put his handes vpon hym: And the children of Israel were obedient vnto hym, and
dyd as the Lorde commaunded Moyses.
10 And there arose not a prophete since in Israel, lyke vnto Moyses whom the
Lorde knewe face to face,
11 Accordyng vnto all the miracles and wonders which the Lorde sent hym to do in
the lande of Egypt before Pharao and all his seruauntes, and before all his
lande,
12 And accordyng to all that mightie hande, and all the great feare which Moyses
shewed in the syght of all Israel.


Joshua

Chapter 1

1 After the death of Moyses the seruaunt of the Lord, it came to passe also that
the Lorde spake vnto Iosuah ye sonne of Nun, Moyses minister, saying:
2 Moyses my seruaunt is dead: Nowe therefore arise, go ouer this Iordane, thou
and all this people, vnto the lande the whiche I to them the chyldren of Israel
do geue.
3 All the places that the soles of your feete shall treade vpon, haue I geuen
you, as I sayde vnto Moyses.
4 From the wyldernesse and this Libanon, vnto the great riuer Euphrates, all the
lande of the Hethites, euen vnto the great sea towarde the goyng downe of the
sunne, shalbe your coast.
5 There shal not a man be able to withstande thee all the dayes of thy life: For
as I was with Moyses, so wyll I be with thee, and wyll not fayle thee, nor
forsake thee.
6 Be strong therfore and bolde: for vnto this people shalt thou deuide ye lande
for inheritaunce, whiche I sware vnto their fathers to geue them.
7 Only be thou strong, and of a stoute courage, that thou maiest obserue and do
according to all the law which Moses my seruaunt commaunded thee: Turne from the
same neither to the right hande, nor to the lefte, that thou maiest do wisely in
al that thou takest in hande.
8 Let not the booke of this lawe departe out of thy mouth, but occupie thy minde
therein day & night, that thou maiest obserue and doe according to all yt is
written therein: For then shalt thou make thy way prosperous, and then thou
shalt do wisely.
9 Haue not I comaunded thee, that thou shouldest be strong & hardie, and not
feare nor be faint hearted? For I the Lorde thy God am with thee, whyther soeuer
thou goest.
10 Then Iosuah commaunded the officers of the people, saying:
11 Go thorowe the middes of the hoaste, and comaunde the people, saying, Prepare
you vitailes: for after three daies ye shal passe ouer this Iordane, to go in
and enioye the lande, which the Lorde your God geueth you, to possesse it.
12 And vnto the Rubenites, Gadites, and halfe the tribe of Manasses spake Iosuah
saying:
13 Remember the worde whiche Moyses the seruaunt of the Lorde commauded you,
saying: The Lorde your God hath geuen you rest, & hath geuen you this lande.
14 Your wyues, your children, and your catell shall remaine in the lande which
Moyses gaue you on this syde Iordane: but ye shal go before your brethren armed,
all that be men of warre, and helpe them:
15 Untill the Lorde haue geuen your brethren rest as he hath you, and vntill
they also haue obtained the lande whiche the Lorde your God geueth them: And
then shal ye returne vnto the lande of your possession, and enioye it: which
lande Moyses the Lordes seruaut gaue you on this side Iordane towarde the sunne
rysyng.
16 And they aunswered Iosuah, sayinge: Al that thou hast commaunded vs we will
do, and whyther soeuer thou sendest vs, we will go.
17 According as we obeyed Moyses in al thinges, so will we obey thee: only the
Lorde thy God be with thee, as he was with Moyses.
18 And whosoeuer he be that doth disobey thy mouth, and wil not hearken vnto thy
wordes in all that thou commaudest him, let him dye: Only be strong, and of good
courage.

Chapter 2

1 And Iosuah ye sonne of Nun sent out of Sittim two men to spye secretely,
saying: Go, and viewe the land, and also Iericho. And they went, and came into a
harlotes house, named Rahab, and lodged there.
2 And it was tolde the king of Iericho, saying: Beholde, ther came men in hyther
to night, of the children of Israel, to spye out the countrey.
3 And the king of Iericho sent vnto Rahab, saying: Bring foorth the men that are
come to thee, and which are entred into thyne house: for they be come to searche
out all the lande.
4 And the woman toke the two men and hyd them, and sayd thus: In deede there
came men vnto me, but I wiste not whence they were.
5 And about the time of the shutting of the gate when it was darke, the men went
out, whyther the men went I wote not: folowe ye after them quickly, for ye shall
ouertake them.
6 But she had brought them vp to the rooffe of the house, & hyd them with the
stalkes of flare which she had lying abrode vpon the rooffe.
7 And the men pursued after them the way to Iordane vnto the fourdes: and
assoone as they whiche pursued after them were gone out, they shut the gate.
8 And or euer they were asleepe, she came vp vnto them vpon the rooffe,
9 And sayd vnto the men: I knowe that the Lorde hath geuen you the land, for the
feare of you is fallen vpo vs, and the inhabitantes of the lande faint at the
presence of you:
10 For we haue hearde howe the Lorde dried vp the water of the red sea before
you when you came out of Egypt, and what you dyd vnto the two kynges of the
Amorites that were on the other syde Iordane, Sehon and Og, whom ye vtterly
destroyed.
11 And assoone as we had hearde these thynges, our heartes dyd faynt, and there
remained no more courage in any man at the presence of you: For the Lorde your
God he is the God in heauen aboue, and in earth beneath.
12 Nowe therfore, I pray you sweare vnto me by the Lorde, that as I haue shewed
you mercie, ye shall also shewe mercie vnto my fathers house, and geue me a true
token:
13 And that ye shall saue alyue both my father and my mother, my brethren and my
sisters, and all that they haue: and that ye shall delyuer our soules from
death.
14 And the men aunswered her: Our lyues for you to dye, yf ye vtter not this our
busynesse. And when the Lorde hath geuen vs the lande, we wyll deale mercyfully
and truely with thee.
15 And then she let them downe by a corde through a wyndow: for her house was
vpon the towne wall, & she dwelt vpon the towne wall.
16 And she sayde vnto them: Get you into the mountaine leste the pursuers meete
you, and hyde your selues there three dayes vntyl the pursuers be returned, &
then shall ye go your owne way.
17 And the men sayde vnto her: We wyl be blamelesse of this thy oth which thou
hast made vs sweare:
18 Behold, when we come into the lande, thou shalt bynde this corde of red
threde in the wyndowe whiche thou dydst let vs downe by: and thou shalt bryng
thy father and thy mother, thy brethren, & all thy fathers housholde euen into
thy house.
19 And then whosoeuer doeth go out at the doores of thy house into the streate,
his blood shalbe vpon his owne head, and we wyll be gyltlesse: And who soeuer
shalbe with thee in the house, his blood shalbe on our head yf any mans hande
touche hym.
20 And if thou vtter these our wordes, we wilbe quite of thy oth which thou hast
made vs sweare.
21 And she saide: According vnto your wordes, so be it. And she sent the away,
and they departed. And she bounde the red corde in the windowe.
22 And they departed, and came into the mountaine, & there abode three dayes,
vntyl the pursuers were returned: And the pursuers sought them throughout all
the way, but founde them not.
23 And the two men returned, and descended from the mountaine, and passed ouer,
and came to Iosuah the sonne of Nun, and tolde him all that came vnto them.
24 And they saide vnto Iosuah: Truely the Lorde hath delyuered into our handes
all the lande, and all the inhabitauntes of the countrey faint at the presence
of vs.

Chapter 3

1 And Iosuah rose early and they remoued fro Sittim, and came to Iordane, he and
all the chyldren of Israel: and lodged there before they went ouer.
2 And after three dayes, the officers went throughout the hoaste,
3 And commaunded the people, saying: When ye see the arke of the testament of
the Lorde your God, and the priestes that are Leuites bearing it, ye shall
depart from your place, and go after it.
4 So yet that there shalbe a space betweene you and it, about two thousand
cubites by measure: And ye shall not come nye vnto it, that ye may know the way
by whiche ye must go: for ye haue not gone this way in times past.
5 And Iosuah sayde vnto the people: Sanctifie your selues, for to morowe the
Lord shal do wonders among you.
6 And Iosuah spake vnto the priestes, saying: Take vp the arke of the couenaunt,
and go ouer before the people. And they toke vp the arke of the testament, and
went before the people.
7 And ye Lord sayd vnto Iosuah: This day will I beginne to magnifie thee in the
sight of all Israel, that they may knowe howe that as I was with Moyses, so will
I be with thee.
8 And thou shalt comaunde ye priestes that beare the arke of the couenaunt,
saying: when ye are come to the edge of the waters of Iordane, ye shall stande
still in Iordane.
9 And Iosuah saide vnto the children of Israel: Come hyther, and heare the
wordes of the Lorde your God.
10 And Iosuah sayde: Hereby ye shall knowe that the liuing God is among you, and
that he will without fayle cast out before you the Chanaanites, and the
Hethithes, the Heuites, the Pherezites, the Gergesites, the Amorites, and the
Iebusites.
11 Beholde, the arke of the couenaunt of the Lorde of all the world, goeth
before you into Iordane.
12 Nowe therfore take from among you twelue men out of the tribes of Israel, out
of euery tribe a man.
13 And assoone as the soles of the feete of the priestes that beare the arke of
the Lorde the gouernour of all the worlde, treade in the waters of Iordane, the
waters of Iordane shalbe deuided: and the waters that come from aboue shall
stande still vpon an heape.
14 And so, when the people were departed fro their tentes to go ouer Iordane,
the priestes bearing the arke of the couenaunt, went before the people.
15 And assoone as they that bare ye arke came vnto Iordane, and the feete of the
priestes that bare the arke were dypped in the brym of the water (For Iordane
vseth to fyll all his banckes all the time of haruest)
16 The waters also that came downe fro aboue, did rise vp vpon an heape and
departed farre from ye citie of Ada, that was beside Zarthan: And the waters
that were beneath towarde ye sea of the wildernes, euen the salt sea, fayled and
were cut of: and the people went right ouer against Iericho.
17 And the priestes that bare the arke of the couenaunt of the Lorde, stoode
drie within Iordane, redy prepared, and all the Israelites went ouer thorowe the
drie, vntill all the people were gone cleane ouer thorowe Iordane.

Chapter 4

1 And so when the people were al gone ouer Iordane (after ye Lord had spoken
vnto Iosuah, saying:
2 Take you twelue men out of the people, out of euery tribe a man,
3 And commaunde you them, saying: Take you hence out of the middes of Iordane
euen out of the place where the priestes stoode in a redinesse, twelue stones,
which ye shall take away with you, and leaue them in the lodgyng where you shall
lodge this nyght)
4 Then Iosuah called the twelue men, which he had prepared of the chyldren of
Israel, out of euery tribe a man.
5 And Iosuah sayde vnto them: Get you before the arke of the Lorde your God,
euen through the middes of Iordane, and take vp euery man of you a stone vpon
his shoulder, accordyng vnto the number of the tribes of the chyldren of Israel,
6 That this may be a signe among you: That when your chyldren aske their fathers
in tyme to come, saying, What meane these stones with you?
7 Ye maye aunswere them: howe that the waters of Iordane deuided at the presence
of the arke of the couenaunt of the Lorde, (For when it went ouer Iordane, the
waters of Iordane deuided) And these stones are become a memoriall vnto the
chyldren of Israel for euer.
8 And the chyldren of Israel dyd euen so as Iosuah commaunded, and toke vp
twelue stones out of the middes of Iordane as the Lorde sayde vnto Iosuah,
accordyng to the number of the tribes of the chyldren of Israel, and caryed them
away with them vnto the place where they lodged, & layde them downe there.
9 And Iosuah set vp twelue stones in the middes of Iordane, in the place where
the feete of the priestes whiche bare the arke of the testament stoode: and
there haue they continued vnto this day.
10 For the priestes whiche bare the arke stoode in the middes of Iordane, vntyll
all was finished that the Lorde commaunded Iosuah to saye vnto the people,
accordyng to all that Moyses charged Iosuah: And the people hasted, & went ouer.
11 And when all the people were cleane passed ouer, the arke of the Lord went
ouer also, and the priestes before the people.
12 And the chyldren of Ruben, and the chyldren of Gad, and halfe the tribe of
Manasse, went before the chyldren of Israel armed, as Moyses charged the.
13 Euen fourtie thousande prepared for warre, went before the Lorde vnto
battayl, through the plaine of Iericho.
14 That day the Lorde magnified Iosuah in the syght of all Israel: and they
feared hym, as they feared Moyses all dayes of his lyfe.
15 And the Lorde spake vnto Iosuah, saying:
16 Commaunde the priestes that beare the arke of the testimonie to come vp out
of Iordane.
17 Iosuah therefore commaunded the priestes, saying: Come ye vp out of Iordane.
18 And when the priestes that bare the arke of the couenaunt of the Lorde, were
come vp out of the middes of Iordane, and assoone as the soles of the priestes
feete were set on ye drie land, the waters of Iordane returned vnto their place,
and went ouer all their bankes as they dyd before.
19 And the people came vp out of Iordane the tenth day of the first moneth, and
pitched in Gilgal, euen in the east border of the citie Iericho.
20 And the twelue stones whiche they toke out of Iordane, dyd Iosuah pitch in
Gilgal.
21 And he spake vnto the chyldren of Israel, saying: If your chyldren aske their
fathers in tyme to come, and saye: What meane these stones?
22 Ye shall shewe your chyldren, and say: Israel came ouer this Iordane on drye
lande.
23 For the Lorde your God dried vp the water of Iordane before you, vntill ye
were gone ouer, as ye Lorde your God dyd the red sea, which he dried vp before
vs, tyll we were gone ouer.
24 That all the people of ye world may knowe the hande of the Lorde howe mightie
it is, and that ye might feare the Lorde your God for euer.

Chapter 5

1 And whe al the kinges of ye Amorites which are beyonde Iordane westwarde, and
al the kynges of the Chanaanites which were by the sea, heard howe ye Lorde had
dried vp the waters of Iordane before the chyldren of Israel vntill they were
gone ouer, their heartes faynted for feare, and there was no spirite in them any
more for the presence of the children of Israel.
2 That same time the Lorde saide vnto Iosuah: Make thee sharp kniues, and go to
agayne and circumcise the children of Israel the seconde time.
3 And Iosuah made him sharpe kniues, and circumcised the children of Israel in
the hill of the foreskinnes.
4 And this is the cause why Iosuah circumcised all the people, euen the males
that came out of Egypt: because that al the men of warre died in the wildernes
by ye way, after they came out of Egypt.
5 For all the people that came out, were circumcised: but al the people that
were borne in the wildernes by the way after they came out of Egypt were not
circumcised.
6 For the chyldren of Israel walked fourtie yeres in the wildernesse, till al ye
people of ye men of warre that came out of Egypt were consumed, because they
hearkened not vnto the voyce of the Lorde: Unto whom the Lorde sware, that he
woulde not shewe them ye lande which the Lorde sware vnto their fathers that he
woulde geue vs, euen a lande that floweth with mylke & hony.
7 And their children whom he set vp in their steede, them Iosuah circumcised,
for they were vncircumcised: because they circumcised them not by the way.
8 And when they had circumcised al the people, they abode in their places in the
campe tyll they were whole.
9 And the Lorde sayde vnto Iosuah: This day haue I taken away the shame of Egypt
from you: wherefore the name of the same place is called Gilgal, vnto this day.
10 And the children of Israel abode in Gilgal, and helde the feast of Passouer
the fourteenth day of the moneth at euen, in the playne of Iericho.
11 And they did eate of the corne of the lande on the morowe after the Passouer
sweete cakes and parched corne, in the selfe same day.
12 For the Manna ceassed on the morowe after they had begun to eate of the corne
of the lande, neither had the chyldren of Israel Manna any more, but did eate of
the fruite of the lande of Chanaan that yere.
13 And when Iosuah was nye to Iericho, he lift vp his eyes and loked: and
behold, there stoode a man against him, hauing a sworde drawen in his hande: And
Iosuah went vnto him, and sayde vnto him, Art thou on our syde, or on our
aduersaries?
14 And he sayde, Naie: but as a captaine of the hoast of the Lord am I nowe
come. And Iosuah fell on his face to ye earth, and did worship, and sayde vnto
him: What saith my Lord vnto his seruaunt?
15 And the captaine of the Lordes hoast sayde vnto Iosuah: Do thy shoe of thy
foote, for the place wheron thou standest, is holy. And Iosuah did so.

Chapter 6

1 And Iericho was shut vp and closed, because of the childre of Israel, neither
myght any man go out, or in.
2 And the Lorde sayde vnto Iosuah: Behold, I haue geuen into thyne hande
Iericho, and the kyng therof, and the strong men of warre.
3 And ye shall compasse all the citie, all ye that be men of warre, and go
rounde about it once: & so shal you do sixe dayes.
4 And seuen priestes shall beare before the arke seuen trumpettes of rammes
hornes: And the seuenth day ye shall compasse the citie seuen tymes, and the
priestes shal blowe with the trumpets.
5 And when they make a long blast with the rammes horne, and ye heare the sounde
of the horne, all the people shall shout with a great shout: And then shall the
wall of the citie fall downe, and the people shall assende vp, euery man
strayght before hym.
6 And Iosuah the sonne of Nun, called the priestes, and sayde vnto them: Take vp
the arke of the couenaunt, and let seuen priestes beare seuen trumpets of rammes
hornes before the arke of the Lorde.
7 And he sayde vnto the people: Go, and compasse the citie, & let hym that is
harnessed go before ye arke of the Lord.
8 And when Iosuah had spoken vnto ye people, the seuen priestes bare the seuen
trumpets of rammes hornes, and went foorth before the arke of the Lorde, and
blewe with the trumpets: and the arke of the couenaunt of the Lorde folowed
them.
9 And the men of armes went before the priestes that blewe with the trumpets: &
the gatheryng hoast came after the arke as they went, and blewe with trumpets.
10 And Iosuah had commaunded the people, saying: Ye shall not shout, nor make
any noyse with your voyce, neither shall any worde proceede out of your mouth
vntyll the day I byd you shout, then shall ye shout.
11 And so the arke of the Lorde compassed the citie, and went about it once: and
they returned into the hoast, and lodged there.
12 And Iosuah rose early in the mornyng, and the priestes toke vp the arke of
the Lorde.
13 And seuen priestes bare seuen trumpettes of rammes hornes, and went before
the arke of the Lorde: and goyng, blewe with the trumpettes. And the men of
armes went before them: but the gatheryng hoast came after the arke of the
Lorde, whiche went before with the blowyng of the trumpettes.
14 And the seconde daye they passed the citie once, and returned againe into the
hoast: and so they dyd sixe dayes.
15 And when the seuenth day came, they rose early euen with the dawnyng of the
day, & compassed the citie after the same maner seuen tymes: only that day they
compassed the citie seue times.
16 And at the seuenth tyme when the priestes blew with the trumpettes, Iosuah
sayde vnto the people: Showt, for the Lorde hath geuen you the citie.
17 And the citie shalbe accursed and al that are therin, vnto the Lorde: onlye
Rahab the harlot shal liue, and all that are with her in the house, because she
hyd the messengers that we sent.
18 And in any wyse be ye ware of the accursed thinges, lest ye make your selues
accursed, & take of the accursed thynges, and make the hoast of Israel accursed,
and trouble it.
19 But all the syluer, golde, vesselles of brasse and iron, shalbe consecrate
vnto the Lorde, and all shall come into his treasurie.
20 And the people showted, and blewe with trumpettes: And when the people heard
the sound of the trumpe, they showted with a great showt, and the wall fell
downe flat, so that the people went vp into ye citie, euery man straight before
hym, and toke the citie:
21 And they vtterly destroyed all that was in the citie, both man and woman,
young and olde, oxe, sheepe, and asse, with the edge of the sworde.
22 But Iosuah had sayde vnto the two men that had spyed out the countrey: Go
into the harlottes house, and bryng out thence the woman and all that she hath,
as ye sware vnto her.
23 And the young men that were spyes, went in, and brought out Rahab, and her
father and mother, & her brethren, and all that she had: and they brought out
all her kynred, & put them without the hoast of Israel.
24 And they burnt the citie with fire, and all that was therin: only the syluer
and the golde, the vesselles of brasse & iron, they put vnto ye treasure of the
house of the Lorde.
25 And Iosuah saued Rahab the harlot, and her fathers household, and all that
she had: and she dwelt in Israel euen vnto this day, because she hyd the
messengers which Iosuah sent to spye out Iericho.
26 And Iosuah sware at that tyme, saying: Cursed be the man before the Lord that
ryseth vp, and buyldeth this citie Iericho: He shall lay the foundation thereof
in his eldest sonne, and in his youngest sonne shall he set vp the gates of it.
27 And so the Lorde was with Iosuah, and his fame was noysed throughout all
landes.

Chapter 7

1 But yet the chyldren of Israel trespassed in ye forbydden thyng: for Achan ye
sonne of Charmi, the sonne of Zabdi, ye sonne of Zareth, of the tribe of Iuda,
toke of the forbydden thyng: And the wrath of the Lorde waxed hot against the
chyldren of Israel.
2 And Iosuah sent men from Iericho to Ai, which is besyde Bethauen, on the east
syde of Bethel, and spake vnto them, saying: Get you vp, and viewe the countrey.
And the men went vp, & viewed Ai,
3 And returned to Iosuah, and sayde vnto him, Let not all the people go vp: but
let as it were two or three thousande men go vp, and smyte Ai: and make not all
the people to labour thyther, for they are but fewe.
4 And so there went vp thyther of the people about a three thousande men, and
they fled before the men of Ai.
5 And the men of Ai smote of them vpon a thirtie and sixe men: for they chased
them from before the gate euen vnto Sebarim, and smote them in the goyng downe:
Wherfore the heartes of the people for feare melted away lyke water.
6 And Iosuah rent his clothes, & fell to the earth vpo his face before the arke
of the Lorde vntill the euentide, he and the elders of Israel, and put earth
vpon their heades.
7 And Iosuah sayde: Alas, O Lorde God, wherfore hast thou brought this people
ouer Iordane, to deliuer vs into the hande of the Amorites, & to destroye vs?
Would to God we had ben content, and dwelt on the other side Iordane.
8 Oh Lorde what shall I say, when Israel turneth their backes before their
enemies?
9 Surely the Chanaanites, and all the inhabitauntes of the lande shal heare of
it, and shall conspire against vs, and destroy the name of vs out of the worlde:
And what wilt thou do vnto thy mightie name?
10 And the Lorde sayde vnto Iosuah: Get thee vp, wherfore liest thou thus vpon
thy face?
11 Israel hath sinned, and they haue transgressed myne appointment which I
commaunded them: for they haue taken of the excommunicate thinges, and haue also
stolen, and dissembled also, & put them vnto their owne stuffe.
12 And therfore is it that the children of Israel can not stande before their
enemies, but shal turne their backes before their enemies, because they be
excommunicate: Neither will I be with you any more, except ye destroy the
excommunicate from among you.
13 Up therfore and sanctifie the people, and say: Sanctifie your selues against
to morowe, for so sayde the Lorde God of Israel, there is a dampned thyng among
you, O Israel: and therfore ye cannot stande against your enemies, vntyll ye
haue put the dampned thing from among you.
14 To morowe morning therfore ye shalbe brought according to your tribes: And
the tribe which the Lorde taketh, shal come according to the kinredes therof:
And the kinred which the Lorde shall finde giltie, shall come by housholdes: And
the housholde which the Lorde shal finde faultie, shall come ma by man.
15 And he that is founde with the accursed thing, shalbe burnt with fire, he,
and all that he hath, because he hath transgressed the couenaunt of the Lord,
and wrought follie in Israel.
16 And so Iosuah rose vp early in the morning, and brought Israel by their
tribes, & the tribe of Iuda was caught.
17 And he brought the kinredes of Iuda, and toke the kinred of the Zarehites:
And he brought the kinred of the Zarehites man by ma, & Zabdi was caught.
18 And he brought his housholde man by man, & Achan the sonne of Charmi, the
sone of Zabdi, ye sonne of Zared of the tribe of Iuda, was caught.
19 And Iosuah sayde vnto Achan: My sonne, I beseche thee geue glorie to the
Lorde God of Israel, and make confession vnto him, and shewe me what thou hast
done, hyde it not from me.
20 And Achan auswered Iosuah, & sayd: Of a trueth I haue sinned against the
Lorde God of Israel, and thus & thus haue I done.
21 I sawe among the spoyles a goodly babilonishe garment, and two hundred sicles
of siluer, and a tonge of golde of fiftie sicles wayghte, and I coueted them,
and toke them: and beholde they lye hyd in the earth in the middest of my tent,
and the siluer is ther vnder.
22 And so Iosuah sent messegers: which whe they ranne vnto his tent, beholde
they were hyd in his tent, and the siluer ther vnder.
23 Therfore they toke them out of the middest of his tent, and brought them vnto
Iosuah, and vnto all the children of Israel, and layed them out before the
Lorde.
24 And Iosuah toke Achan the sonne of Zareth, and the siluer, and the garmet,
and the tonge of gold, and his sonnes, and his daughters, & his oxen, and his
asses, his sheepe, his tent, and al that he had: and al Israel with him brought
them vnto the valley of Achor.
25 And Iosuah sayde: In as much as thou hast troubled vs, the Lorde shall
trouble thee this day. And all Israel stoned hym with stones, and burned them
with fire, and ouerwhelmed them with stones.
26 And they cast vpon hym a great heape of stones vnto this day: And so the Lord
turned from the wrath of his indignation. And the name of the place is called
the valley of Achor vnto this day.

Chapter 8

1 And the Lorde sayde vnto Iosuah: Feare not, neither be thou faint hearted:
Take all the men of warre with thee, and vp, & get thee to Ai. Beholde, I haue
geuen into thy hande the kyng of Ai, and his people, his citie, and his lande:
2 And thou shalt do to Ai and her kyng, as thou dyddest vnto Iericho and her
king. Neuerthelesse, the spoyle & cattell thereof, shall ye take vnto your
selues: Thou shalt lye in wayte agaynst the citie, on the backside thereof.
3 And so Iosuah arose, and all the men of warre, to go vp agaynst Ai: And Iosuah
chose out thirtie thousande strong men and valiaunt, and sent them away by
nyght:
4 And he commaunded them, saying: Beholde, ye shall lye in wayte agaynst the
towne on the backside thereof: Go not verie farre from the citie, but be all
redie:
5 And I, and al the people that are with me, wyll approche vnto the citie: And
when they come out against vs, as they dyd at the first tyme, then wyll we flee
before them:
6 For they wyll come out after vs tyll we haue brought them out of the citie.
For they wyll say, They flee before vs, as at the first tyme: and we will flee
before them.
7 In the meane tyme shall ye ryse vp from lying in wayte, and destroy the citie:
for the Lorde your God wyll delyuer it into your hande.
8 And when ye haue taken the citie, ye shall set it on fire: Accordyng to the
commaundement of the Lorde shall ye do. Behold, I haue charged you.
9 Iosuah therfore sent them foorth, and they went to lye in wayte, and abode
betweene Bethel & Ai, on the westsyde of the citie of Ai: But Iosuah lodged that
nyght among the people.
10 And Iosuah rose vp early in the mornyng, and numbred the people, & went vp,
he and the elders of Israel before the people, against Ai.
11 And all the men of warre that were with him, went vp, & drue nye, and came
agaynst the citie, and pitched on the northsyde of Ai: and there was a valley
betweene them and Ai.
12 And he toke vpon a fiue thousande men, and set them to lye in wayte betweene
Bethel and Ai, on the westsyde of the citie.
13 And the people set all the hoast that was on the northsyde agaynst the citie,
& the lyers in wayte on the west, against the citie: And Iosuah walked the same
nyght in the myddes of the valley.
14 And when the kyng of Ai sawe it, they hasted and rose vp early, and the men
of the citie went out agaynst Israel to battayle, he and all his people at a
tyme appoynted, euen before the playne: and wyst not that there were lyers in
wayte agaynst him on the backsyde of the citie.
15 And Iosuah & all Israel as beaten before them, fledde by the way of the
wildernesse.
16 And all the people of the towne were called together, to folowe after them:
And they folowed after Iosuah, and were drawen away from the citie.
17 And there was not a man left in Ai and in Bethel, that went not out after
Israel: And they left the citie open, and folowed after Israel.
18 And the Lorde sayde vnto Iosuah: Stretch out ye speare that is in thine hand
towarde Ai, for I will geue it into thy hand. And Iosuah stretched out the
speare that he had in his hand, towarde the citie.
19 And the lyers in waite arose quickly out of their place, and ran assoone as
Iosuah had stretched out his hande: and they entred into the citie, and toke it,
and hasted, and set the citie on fyre.
20 And when the men of Ai loked backe after them, they sawe the smoke of the
citie ascend vp to heauen, and they had no place to flee either this way or
that: and the people that fled to the wildernes, turned backe againe vpon the
folowers.
21 And when Iosuah & all Israel sawe that the lyers in waite had taken the
citie, and that the smoke of it ascended, they turned againe and slue the men of
Ai.
22 And the other issued out of the citie against them, and so were they in the
middest of Israel: for these were on the one side of them, and the rest on the
other side. And they laide vpon them, so that they let none of them escape, nor
remaine:
23 And the kyng of Ai they toke aliue, and brought him to Iosuah.
24 And when Israel had made an ende of slayeng all the inhabitantes of Ai in the
fielde of the wildernesse where they chased them, and when they were all fallen
on the edge of the sworde, vntill they were wasted, all the Israelites returned
vnto Ai, and smote it with the edge of the sworde.
25 And al that fell that day, both of men and women, were twelue thousande, euen
all the men of Ai.
26 For Iosuah plucked not his hande backe againe which he stretched out vpo the
speare vntil, he had vtterly destroyed al the enhabitours of Ai.
27 Onely the cattell and the spoile of the citie, Israel toke vnto them selues,
according vnto the word of the Lorde, whiche he commaunded Iosuah.
28 And Iosuah set Ai on fire, and made it an heape for euer, & a wildernesse,
euen vnto this day.
29 And the king of Ai he hanged on a tree, vntill euen: And assoone as the sunne
was downe, Iosuah commaunded that they should take ye carkasse downe of the
tree, and cast it at the entring of the gate of the citie, and laye theron a
great heape of stones, that remaineth vnto this day.
30 Then Iosuah buylt an aulter vnto the Lorde God of Israel in mount Ebal,
31 As Moyses the seruaunt of the Lord commaunded the chyldren of Israel, and as
it is written in the booke of the lawe of Moyses, an aulter of whole stones,
ouer which no man hath lyft an iron: And they sacrificed theron burnt sacrifices
vnto the Lorde, and offered peace offerynges.
32 And he wrote there vpon the stones a rehearsal of the lawe of Moyses, and
wrote it in the presence of the chyldren of Israel.
33 And all Israel and the elders therof, and their officers & iudges, stoode
part on this syde the arke, and part on that syde, before the priestes that were
Leuites whiche bare the arke of the couenaunt of the Lorde, aswell the
straunger, as they that were borne among them: halfe of the ouer against mount
Garizim, & halfe of them ouer against mount Ebal, as Moyses the seruaunt of the
Lorde had commaunded before, that they shoulde blesse the people of Israel.
34 Afterwarde he read all the wordes of the lawe, the blessinges, and cursinges,
accordyng to all that is written in the booke of the lawe.
35 And there was not one worde of all that Moyses commaunded, which Iosuah read
not before all the congregation of Israel, aswel the women and chyldren, as the
straungers that were conuersaunt among them.

Chapter 9

1 And when al ye kinges that dwell beyonde Iordane in the hylles and valleys, &
along by all the coastes of the great sea, ouer against Libanon: Namely the
Hethites, the Amorites, the Chanaanites, the Pherezites, the Heuites, and the
Iebusites, hearde therof:
2 They gathered them selues together, to fyght against Iosuah, and against
Israel, with one accorde.
3 And the inhabitours of Gibeon heard what Iosuah had done vnto Iericho, and to
Ai,
4 And they dyd worke wylylye, & went and made them selues embassadours, and toke
olde sackes vpon their asses, & wine bottels old, both rent & boude vp:
5 And olde clowted shoes vpon their feete, and their rayment was olde: and all
their prouision of bread was dryed vp, and hored.
6 And they came vnto Iosuah into the hoast to Gilgal, and sayde vnto him and
vnto all the men of Israel, We be come from a far countrey: and nowe make ye
agreement with vs.
7 And the men of Israel sayde vnto the Heuite: It may be thou dwellest amog vs,
and then howe can I make peace with thee?
8 And they sayde vnto Iosuah: We are thy seruauntes. And Iosuah sayde vnto them
againe: What are ye, & whence come ye?
9 They aunswered him: From a very farre coutrey thy seruauntes are come, for the
name of the Lorde thy God: for we haue hearde the fame of him, & all that he did
in Egypte,
10 And all that he did to the two kinges of ye Amorites that were beyonde
Iordane, Sehon king of Hesbon, and Og king of Basa, which were at Astaroth.
11 Wherfore our elders and all the enhabitours of our countrey spake to vs,
saying: Take vitailes with you to serue by the way, and go meete them, and say
vnto them, We are your seruautes: And now make ye a couenaunt of peace with vs.
12 This our foode of bread we toke with vs out of our houses whot, ye daye we
departed to come vnto you: But nowe beholde, it is dried vp, and hored.
13 And these bottelles of wine whiche we filled, were newe, and see they be
rent: And these our garmentes and shoes are worne for oldenesse, by the reason
of the exceeding long iourney.
14 And the men toke of theyr vitayles, & counseled not with the mouth of the
Lorde.
15 And Iosuah made peace which the, and made a couenaunt with them, that they
shulde be suffered to liue: And the princes of the congregation sware vnto them.
16 But at the ende of three dayes, after they had made a league with them, they
hearde that they were their neighbours, & that they dwelt among them.
17 And the children of Israel toke their iorney, and came vnto their cities the
thirde day: and their cities were Gibeon, and Caphira, Beroth, and Kiriathiarim.
18 And the children of Israel slue them not, because the princes of the
congregation had sworne vnto them by the Lord God of Israel: and all the
multitude mourned agaynst the princes.
19 But all the princes sayde vnto all the congregation: We haue sworne vnto them
by the Lorde God of Israel, and therfore we may not hurt them.
20 But this we wyll do to them, We wyll let them liue, lest wrath be vpon vs
because of the othe which we sware vnto them.
21 And the princes said vnto them againe, Let them liue, and hewe wood, & drawe
water vnto all the congregation, and they dyd as the princes sayde vnto them.
22 And Iosuah called for them, & talked with them, and sayde, Wherfore haue ye
beguiled vs, saying, We dwell farre from you: when ye dwell among vs?
23 And nowe are ye cursed, and there shal not ceasse to be of you bondmen, and
hewers of wood, & drawers of water for the house of my God.
24 And they aunswered Iosuah, & sayd, It was tolde thy seruauntes how that the
Lorde thy God had commaunded his seruaunt Moyses to geue you all the lande, and
to destroy all the inhabitours therof out of your sight, and therfore we were
exceedyng sore afrayde for our liues at the presence of you, and haue done this
thing.
25 And beholde, we are in thyne hande: as it seemeth good and right in thyne
eyes to do vnto vs, so do.
26 And euen so did he vnto them, and rid them out of the hande of the chyldren
of Israel, that they slue them not.
27 And Iosuah made them that same day hewers of wood, and drawers of water for
the congregation and for the aulter of God, vnto this day, in the place whiche
he shoulde choose.

Chapter 10

1 Nowe when Adonizedec kyng of Hierusalem had hearde howe Iosuah had taken Ai
and had destroyed it: (and howe that as he had done to Iericho and her king,
euen so he had done to Ai and her king) and howe the inhabitours of Gibeon had
made peace with Israel, and were among them:
2 They feared exceedingly, for Gibeon was a great citie as any citie of the
kingdome, and was greater then Ai, & all the men therof were very mightie.
3 Wherfore Adonizedec king of Hierusalem sent vnto Hoham king of Hebron, and
vnto Pira king of Iarmuth, and vnto Iaphia king of Lachis, and vnto Dabir king
of Eglon, saying:
4 Come vp vnto me, and helpe me, that we may smite Gibeon: for they haue made
peace with Iosuah, and with the children of Israel.
5 Therfore the fiue kinges of the Amorites, the king of Hierusalem, the king of
Hebron, the king of Iarmuth, the king of Lachis, and the king of Eglon, gathered
them selues together, and went vp, they with all their hoastes, and besieged
Gibeon, & made warre against it.
6 And the men of Gibeon sent vnto Iosuah to the hoast in Gilgal, saying:
withdrawe not thy hande from thy seruauntes, come vp to vs quickly, and saue vs,
and helpe vs: for all the kinges of the Amorites which dwell in the mountaynes
are gathered together agaynst vs.
7 And so Iosuah ascended from Gilgal, he and all the people of warre with him,
and all the men of might.
8 And the Lorde sayde vnto Iosuah, Feare them not: for I haue deliuered them
into thine hande, neither shall any of them stande agaynst thee.
9 Iosuah therfore came vnto them sodaynly, and went vp from Gilgal all nyght.
10 And the Lorde troubled them before Israel, and slue them with a great
slaughter at Gibeon, and chased them along the way that goeth vp to Bethoron,
and smote them to Azeka and Makeda.
11 And as they fled from before Israel, and were in the going downe to Bethoron,
the Lorde cast downe great stones from heauen vpon them vntyll Azeka, and they
dyed: there were mo dead with hayle stones, then they were whom the children of
Israel slue with the sworde.
12 Then spake Iosuah to the Lorde in the day when the Lorde deliuered the
Amorites before the children of Israel, & he sayd in the sight of Israel, Sunne,
stande thou styll vpon Gibeon, and thou Moone in the valley of Aialon.
13 And the sunne abode, and the moone stoode styll, vntyll the people auenged
them selues vpon their enemies. Is not this written in the booke of the
righteous? So the sunne I say abode in the middest of heauen, and hasted not to
go downe by the space of a whole day.
14 And there was no day like that before it or after it, that the Lorde hearde
the voyce of a man: for the Lorde fought for Israel.
15 And Iosuah returned and all Israel with him, vnto the campe to Gilgal.
16 But the fiue kinges fled, and were hyd in a caue at Makeda.
17 And it was tolde Iosuah of one saying, The fiue kinges are founde hyd in a
caue which is at Makeda.
18 And Iosuah sayd, Roule great stones vpon the mouth of the caue, and set men
by it, for to kepe it:
19 And stand ye not styll, but folowe after your enemies, & smite all the
hindmost, and suffer them not to enter into their cities: for the Lorde your God
hath deliuered them into your hande.
20 And when Iosuah and the children of Israel had made an ende of slaying them
with an exceedyng great slaughter, tyll they were wasted: the rest that remayned
of them, entred into walled cities:
21 And all the people returned to the hoast to Iosuah at Makeda in peace,
neither dyd any man moue his tongue agaynst the children of Israel.
22 Then sayde Iosuah, Open the mouth of the caue, and bryng out these fiue
kinges vnto me out of the caue.
23 And they did so, and brought those fiue kinges vnto him out of the caue, euen
the king of Hierusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Iarmuth, the king of
Lachis, and the king of Eglon.
24 And when they brought out those kinges vnto Iosuah: Iosuah called for all the
men of Israel, and saide vnto the chiefe of the men of warre which went with
him: Come neare, & put your feete vpo the neckes of these kinges. And they came
neare, and put their feete vpon the neckes of them.
25 And Iosuah sayd vnto them, Ye shall not feare, nor be faynt hearted: but be
strong, and plucke vp your heartes, for thus shall the Lorde do to al your
enemies against whom ye fight.
26 And then Iosuah smote them, and slewe them, and hanged them on fiue trees:
And they hanged still vpon the trees vntill the euening.
27 And at the goyng downe of the sunne, Iosuah gaue commaundement: And they toke
them downe of the trees, and cast them into the caue wherin they had ben hyd,
and layed great stones in the caues mouth, which remayne vntil this daye.
28 And that same day Iosuah toke Makeda, and smote it with the edge of the
sworde, & the king therof also destroyed he vtterly, with al the soules that
were therin, and let none remayne: And he dyd to the king of Makeda, as he dyd
vnto the king of Iericho.
29 Then Iosuah went from Makeda, and all Israel with him, vnto Libna, and fought
agaynst Libna.
30 And the Lorde deliuered it & the king therof into the hande of Israel: and he
smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the soules that were therin: He let
none remayne in it, but dyd vnto the king therof as he did vnto the king of
Iericho.
31 And Iosuah departed from Libna, and all Israel with him vnto Lachis, and
besieged it, and assaulted it.
32 And the Lorde deliuered Lachis into the hande of Israel, which toke it the
seconde day, and smote it with the edge of the sworde, & all the soules that
were therin: doing according to all, as he had done to the citie of Libna.
33 Then Horam king of Geser came vp to helpe Lachis: And Iosuah smote him and
his people, vntill none remayned of him.
34 And from Lachis Iosuah departed vnto Eglon, and all Israel with him: and they
besieged it, and assaulted it.
35 And toke it the same day, and smote it with the edge of the sworde: & al the
soules that were therin he vtterly destroyed the same day, according to all that
he he had done to Lachis.
36 And Iosuah departed vp from Eglon, and all Israel with him, vnto Hebron: And
they fought against it.
37 And when they had taken it, they smote it with the edge of the sworde, & the
king therof, and all the townes that parteined to it, and all the soules that
were therin, and he left none remayning: but dyd according to all, as he had
done to Eglon, and destroyed it vtterly, and all the soules that were therin.
38 And Iosuah returned, and all Israel with him to Dabir, & fought against it.
39 And when he had taken it, & the king therof, and all the townes that
parteyded therto, they smote them with the edge of the sworde, & vtterly
destroyed all the soules that were therin, neither let he any remayne: Euen as
he dyd to Hebron, so he dyd to Dabir and the king therof, as he had done also to
Libna and her king.
40 Iosuah therfore smote al the hil countreyes, and the south countreyes, & the
valleyes, and the downes, and al their kinges, and let none remayne of them, but
vtterly destroyed all that breathed, as the Lorde God of Israel commaunded.
41 And Iosuah smote them from Cades Barnea vnto Asah, and all the countrey of
Gosan euen vnto Gibeon.
42 And all these kinges and their lande dyd Iosuah take at one time: because the
Lord God of Israel fought for Israel.
43 And Iosuah and all Israel, returned vnto the hoast that was in Gilgal.

Chapter 11

1 And when Iabin king of Hazor had hearde those thinges, he sent to Iobab king
of Madon, and to the king of Sunron, & to the king of Achsaph,
2 And vnto the kinges that were by the north in the mountaynes and playnes
towarde the southside of Ceneroth, & in the lowe countreys, and in the borders
of Dor westwarde,
3 And vnto the Chanaanites both by east and west, and vnto the Amorites,
Hethites, Pherezites, and Iebusites in the mountaines, and vnto the Heuites that
were vnder Hermon in the lande of Mispah:
4 And they came out, & all their hoastes with them, a multitude of folke, euen
as the sande that is on the sea shore, in a great number, with horses and
charettes exceeding many.
5 And all these kinges met together, and came & pitched together at the waters
of Merom, for to fight against Israel.
6 And the Lord sayde vnto Iosuah, Be not afrayde at the presence of them: for to
morow about this time will I deliuer them all slayne before Israel: thou shalt
hough their horses, and burne their charettes with fire.
7 And so Iosuah came, and all the men of warre with him against them by the
waters of Merom, and sodenly fell vpon them.
8 And the Lorde deliuered them into the hande of Israel, and they smote them,
and chased them vnto great Sidon, & vnto Misrephothmaim, & vnto the valley of
Mispah whiche is eastward: and smote them, vntill they had none remaining of
them.
9 And Iosuah dyd vnto them as the Lorde bad him: he houghed their horses, and
burnt their charettes with fire.
10 And Iosuah at that time turned back, and toke Hazor, & smote the king therof
with the sworde: And Hazor before time was the head of all those kingdomes.
11 And they smote all the soules that were therin with ye edge of the sworde,
vtterly destroying al, and nothing that breathed, was let remaine: And he burnt
Hazor with fire.
12 And all the cities of those kinges, and all the kinges of them did Iosuah
take, and smote them with the edge of the sworde, and vtterly destroyed them, as
Moyses the seruaunt of the Lord commaunded.
13 But Israel burnt none of the cities that stoode still in their strength, saue
Hazor only that Iosuah burnt.
14 And all the spoyle of the sayde cities & the cattel, the children of Israel
caught vnto them selues: But euery ma they smote with the edge of the sword,
vntill they had destroyed them, neither left they ought that had breath.
15 As the Lorde commaunded Moyses his seruaunt, so did Moyses comaunde Iosuah,
and euen so did Iosuah: so that he minisshed no worde of all that the Lorde
commaunded Moyses.
16 And so Iosuah toke all that lande of the hilles, and al the south countrey,
and all the lande of Gosan, and the lowe countrey, & the playne, and the
mountayne of Israel, and the lowe countrey of the same:
17 Euen from the mount Halak, that goeth vp to Seir, vnto Baal Gad in the valley
of Libanon, vnder mount Hermon: And all the kinges of the same he toke, and
smote them, and slewe them.
18 Iosuah made warre long time with those kinges:
19 Neither was there any citie that made peace with the children of Israel, saue
those Hethites that inhabited Gibeon, and therfore all other they toke with
battayle:
20 For it came of the Lorde, whiche dyd harden their heartes that they should
come against Israel in battell, and that they shoulde destroy them vtterly, and
shew them no mercy: but to bring them to naught, as the Lorde commaunded Moyses.
21 And that same season came Iosuah & destroyed the Anakims out of the
moutaynes: as out of Hebron, Dabir, Anab, and out of al the mountaynes of Iuda,
and out of all the mountaynes of Israel: And Iosuah destroyed them vtterly, with
their cities.
22 There was not one Anakim left in the lande of the children of Israel: only in
Asah, Gath, and Asdod, there remayned of them.
23 And Iosuah toke the whole lande, according to all that the Lorde sayde vnto
Moyses, and Iosuah gaue it for a possession vnto Israel according to their
partes and tribes: and the lande rested from warre.

Chapter 12

1 These are the kinges of the lande which the childre of Israel smote, &
possessed their lande, on the other side Iordane eastward, from the riuer Arnon,
vnto mount Harmon, and all the plaine eastwarde.
2 Sehon king of the Amorites, that dwelt in Hesbon, and ruled from Aroer, which
is beside the riuer of Arnon, and from the middle of the riuer, and from halfe
Gilead vnto the riuer Iabok, which is in the border of the children of Ammon:
3 And from the playne vnto the sea of Ceneroth eastward, and vnto the sea of the
plaine, euen the salt sea eastward, the way to Beth Iesimoth, and from the south
vnder the springes of Pisgah.
4 And the coast of Og king of Basan, which was of the remnaunt of the giauntes,
and dwelt at Astharoth, and Edrai:
5 And raigned in mount Harmon, and in Salcah, and in all Basan, vnto the border
of the Gessurites, and the Machathites, and halfe mount Gilead, vnto the borders
of Sehon king of Hesbon.
6 Moyses the seruaunt of the Lorde, and the children of Israel smote them, and
Moyses the seruaunt of the Lord gaue their land for a possession vnto the
Rubenites, Gadites, and the halfe tribe of Manasses.
7 These are the kinges of the countrey which Iosuah and the children of Israel
smote on this side Iordane westwarde, from Baal Gad, whiche is in the valley of
Libanon, euen vnto the mount Halak, that goeth vp to Seir: whiche lande Iosuah
gaue vnto the tribes of Israel to possesse, to euery man his part,
8 In the vpper lande and neather land, in the plaines, and in the hil sides, in
the wildernesse & southe countrey the Hethites, the Amorites, ye Chanaanites,
the Pherezites, ye Heuites, & the Iebusites.
9 The king of Iericho, was one: the king of Ai which is beside Bethel, one:
10 The king of Hierusalem, one: the king of Hebron, one:
11 The king of Iarmuth, one: the king of Lachis, one:
12 The king of Eglon, one: the king of Gazer, one:
13 The king of Dabir, one: the king of Gader, one:
14 The king of Horma, one: the king of Arad, one:
15 The king of Libna, one: the king of Adullam, one:
16 The king of Makeda, one: the king of Bethel, one:
17 The king of Taphuha, one: the king of Hepher, one:
18 The king of Aphek, one: the king of Lasaron, one:
19 The king of Madon, one: the king of Hasor one:
20 The king of Simron Meron, one: the king of Achsaph, one:
21 The king of Thanach, one: the king of Megiddo, one:
22 The king of Kedes, one: the king of Iokneam of Carmel, one:
23 The king of Dor in the coutrey of Dor, one: the king of the nations of
Gilgal, one:
24 The king of Thirza, one: al the kinges together thirtie and one.

Chapter 13

1 Iosuah was olde, and stricken in yeres, and the Lorde sayde vnto him: Thou art
olde, and stricken in yeres, and there remaineth yet exceeding muche lande to be
possessed.
2 This is the lande that yet remaineth: all the regions of the Philistines, and
al Gessuri:
3 From Nilus which is vpon Egypt, vnto the borders of Accaron northward, which
land is counted vnto Chananie, euen fiue lordeshippes of the Philistines, the
Azathites, Asdothites, Ascalonites, Gethites, Accaronites, and the Euites.
4 And from the south, al the lande of the Chanaanites, and the caue that is
beside the Sidonians, euen vnto Aphak & to the borders of the Amorites.
5 And the lande of the Giblites, and all Libanon towarde the sunne rising, from
the plaine of Gad vnder mount Hermo, vntil a man come to Hamath:
6 All the inhabitours of the hil countrey from Libano vnto the Misrephothmaim,
and all the Sidonians will I cast out from before the children of Israel: only
see that thou in any wise deuide it by lot vnto the Israelites to inherite, as I
haue commaunded thee.
7 Nowe therfore deuide this lande to inherite vnto the nine tribes, and the
halfe tribe of Manasses.
8 For with that other, the Rubenites & the Gadites haue receaued their
inheritaunce which Moyses gaue them beyonde Iordane eastwarde, euen as Moyses
the seruaunt of the Lord gaue them:
9 From Aroer that lieth on the brim of the riuer Arnon, and from the citie that
is in the middest of the ryuer, & all the plaine of Medeba vnto Dibon:
10 And al the cities of Sehon king of the Amorites, which raigned in Hesbon,
euen vnto the border of the children of Ammon:
11 And Gilead, and the border of Gessuri and Machati, and all mount Hermon, with
al Basan vnto Salecha:
12 Euen all the kingdome of Og in Basan, which raigned in Astharoth and Edrai:
which same remained yet of the rest of the giauntes. These dyd Moyses smite, and
cast them out.
13 Neuertelesse, the children of Israel expelled not the Gesurites and the
Machathites: But the Gesurites and the Machathites dwell among the Israelites
euen vntill this day.
14 Onely vnto the tribe of Leui he gaue none inheritaunce: but the sacrifices of
the Lord God of Israel is their inheritaunce, as he sayde vnto them.
15 Moyses gaue vnto the tribe of the children of Ruben inheritaunce, according
to their kinredes:
16 And their coast was from Aroer that lyeth on the bancke of the riuer Arnon,
and from the citie that is in the middest of the riuer, and all the playne which
is by Medeba:
17 Hesbon, with all their townes that lye in the playne: Dibon and the hill
places of Baal, and the house of Baalmeon,
18 And Iahazah, and Redemoth, and Mephaath.
19 Kiriathaim, Sabamath, and Zarath Zahar, in the mount of the valley,
20 The house of Peor, and the springes of the hilles, and Bethpheor, and Ashdoth
Pisgah, and Besiesimoth:
21 And al the cities of the plaine, and all the kingdome of Sehon king of the
Amorites, which raigned in Hesbon, which Moyses smote, with the lordes of
Madian, Eui, Bekem, Zur, and Hur, & Keba, the whiche were dukes of Sehon,
dwelling in the countrey.
22 And Balaam also the sonne of Beor the soothsayer, did the childre of Israel
slay with the sworde among other of them that were slayne.
23 And the border of the children of Ruben, was Iordane, with the countrey that
lieth theron. This was the inheritaunce of the children of Ruben after their
kinredes, cities, and villages perteyning therto.
24 And Moyses gaue inheritaunce vnto the tribe of Gad, euen vnto the children of
Gad he gaue by their kinredes:
25 And their coastes were Iazer, and al the cities of Gilead, and halfe the
lande of the children of Ammon vnto Aroer that lieth before Rabba.
26 And from Hesbon vnto Ramath, Mispeh, and Betonim: and from Mahanaim vnto the
borders of Dabir.
27 And in the valley they had Betharam, Bethnimra, Socoth, and Zaphon, the rest
of the kyngdome of Sehon king of Hesbon, vnto Iordane and the coastes that lie
theron, euen vnto the edge of the sea of Cenereth, on the other side Iordane
eastwarde.
28 This is the inheritaunce of the children of Gad, after their kinredes, their
cities, and villages.
29 And Moyses gaue inheritaunce vnto the halfe tribe of Manasses: And this was
the possession of the halfe tribe of Manasses by their kinredes.
30 Their coast was from Mahanaim, euen all Basan, and all the kingdome of Og
king of Basan, and all the townes of Iair which lie in Basan, euen threescore
cities.
31 And halfe Gilead, Astaroth, & Edrai, cities of the kingdome of Og in Basan,
which pertayne vnto the children of Machir the sonne of Manasses, euen to the
one halfe of the children of Machir by their kinredes.
32 These are the heritages which Moyses did distribute in the fieldes of Moab on
the other side Iordane, ouer agaynst Iericho eastwarde.
33 But vnto the tribe of Leui, Moyses gaue none inheritaunce: for the Lorde God
of Israel is their inheritaunce, as he sayde vnto them.

Chapter 14

1 And these are the countreis which the childre of Israel inherited in the lande
of Chanaan, which Eleazer the priest, and Iosuah the sonne of Nun, and the
auncient heades of the tribes of the children of Israel distributed to them:
2 By lot they receaued their possessions, as the Lord commaunded by the hand of
Moyses, to geue vnto the nine tribes, and vnto the halfe tribe.
3 For Moyses had geue inheritaunce vnto two tribes & an halfe, on the other syde
Iordane: But vnto the Leuites he gaue none inheritaunce among the.
4 For the children of Ioseph were two tribes, Manasses and Ephraim: And therfore
they gaue no parte vnto the Leuites in the land, saue cities to dwell in, with
the suburbes of the same, for their beastes and cattel.
5 As the Lord commaunded Moyses: euen so the children of Israel dyd, when they
deuided the lande.
6 And the children of Iuda came vnto Iosuah in Gilgal: And Caleb the sonne of
Iephune the Kenesite sayde vnto him: Thou wottest what ye Lorde sayd vnto Moyses
the man of God about me and thee in Cades Barnea.
7 Fourtie yeres olde was I whe Moyses the seruaunt of the Lorde sent me from
Cades Barnea to espie out the land: and I brought him worde againe euen as it
was in myne hearte.
8 Neuerthelesse, my brethre that went vp with me, discouraged the hearte of the
people: And I folowed the Lorde my God.
9 And Moyses sware the same day, saying: The lande wheron thy feete haue troden,
shalbe thyne inheritaunce and thy childrens for euer, because thou hast folowed
the Lorde my God.
10 And behold, the Lorde hath kept me aliue as he sayde this fourtie and fyue
yeres, euen sence the Lorde spake this worde vnto Moyses, whyle the children of
Israel wandred in the wildernesse: And nowe lo, I am this day fourscore and fyue
yeres olde:
11 And yet am as strong at this time, as I was when Moyses sent me: Loke howe
strong I was then, so strong am I nowe, eyther for warre, or for gouernment.
12 Nowe therfore geue me this mountaine wherof the lorde spake in that day (for
thou heardest in that day, howe the Anakims were there, and the cities great and
walled,) If the Lorde will be with me, and I shalbe able to dryue them out, as
the Lorde sayde.
13 And Iosuah blessed him, and gaue vnto Caleb the sonne of Iephune, Hebron to
inherite.
14 And Hebron therfore became the inheritaunce of Caleb ye sonne of Iephune the
Kenesite, vnto this day: because he folowed constantly the Lorde God of Israel.
15 And the name of Hebron was called in old time, Kiriath Arba, which Irba was a
great man among the Enekims: And the lande ceassed from warre.

Chapter 15

1 This was the lot of the tribe of the children of Iuda by their kinreds, euen
to the border of Edom in the wildernesse of Zin southwarde, euen from the vtmost
parte of the south coast.
2 And their south coast was from the brinke of the salt sea, from a rocke that
leaneth southwarde.
3 And it went out to the southside towarde ye goyng vp to Maale Acrabim, & went
along to Zin, and ascended vp on the southside vnto Cades Barnea: and went along
to Hezron, and went vp to Adar, and fet a compasse to Karcaa.
4 From thence went it along to Azmon, and reached vnto the riuer of Egypt, & the
ende of that coast was on the westside: This is their south coast.
5 Their east coast is the salt sea, euen vnto ye ende of Iordane: And their
border in the north quarter, was from the rocke of the sea and from the ende of
Iordane.
6 And the same border went vp to Bethhagla, and went along by the northside of
Betharabah, and vp from thence to the stone of Bohen ye sonne of Ruben.
7 And againe, the same border went vp to Debir from the valley of Achor, and so
northwarde, turning towarde Gilgal, that lieth before the goyng vp to Adommim,
which is of the south side of the riuer: And the same border went vp to the
waters of the fountayne of the sunne, and ended at the well of Rogel.
8 And then went vp to the valley of the sonne of Hennom, euen vnto the south
syde of Iebusi, the same is Hierusalem: And then went vp to the toppe of the
hyll that lyeth before the valley of Hennom westwarde, and by the end of the
valley of the giauntes northwarde.
9 And then it compasseth from the top of the hill vnto the fountaine of the
water of Nephthoah, and goeth out of the cities of mount Ephron, and draweth to
Baala, which is Kiriathiarim.
10 And then it compasseth from Baala westward vnto mount Seir, and then goeth
along vnto the side of mount Iarim, which is Chesalon on the northside, and
commeth downe to Bethsames, and goeth to Thimnah.
11 And goeth out againe vnto the syde of Akaron northward: And then draweth to
Secron, and goeth along to mount Baala, and stretcheth vnto Iabneel: and the
endes of the coastes leaue at the west sea.
12 And the west border was the great sea, and the same coast was the coast of
the children of Iuda round about, in their kinredes.
13 And vnto Caleb the sonne of Iephune did Iosuah geue a parte among the childre
of Iuda, according to the mouth of the Lorde, euen Kiriatharba of the father of
Enac, whiche citie is Ebron.
14 And Caleb droue thence the three sonnes of Enac, Sesai, and Ahiman, and
Thalmai, which were the sonnes of Enac.
15 And he went vp thence, to the inhabitours of Dabir: and the name of Dabir in
the old time was Kiriath Sephar.
16 And Caleb sayde: He that smyteth Kiriath Sephar, & taketh it, to him wil I
geue Achsah my daughter to wyfe.
17 And Othniel, the sonne of Kenez, the brother of Caleb toke it: And he gaue
him Acsah his daughter to wife.
18 And as she went in vnto him, she moued him to aske of her father a fielde:
And she alighted of her asse. And Caleb sayde vnto her what ayleth thee.
19 Who aunswered: Geue me a blessing, for thou hast geuen me a south lande, geue
me also springes of water. And he gaue her springes of water, both aboue and
beneath.
20 This is the inheritaunce of the tribe of the children of Iuda by their
kinredes.
21 And the vtmost cities of the tribe of the children of Iuda, towarde ye
coastes of Edom southwarde, were Kabzeel, Eder, and Iagur,
22 Kinah, Dimonah, and Adadah,
23 Kedes, Hazor, and Iethnan,
24 Ziph, Telem, and Baloth,
25 Hazor, Hadathah, Karioth, Hesron, which is Hazor,
26 Amam, Shema, and Moladah,
27 Hazar, Gadah, Hasmon, and Bethpheleth,
28 Hazarsual, Beersabe, and Baziothia,
29 Baala, Iim, and Azem,
30 Eltholad, Cecil, and Horma,
31 Zikelag, Medemenah, and Sensenna,
32 Labaoth, Selhim, Ain, and Rimon: all the cities are twentie and nine, with
their villages.
33 And in the lowe countrey they had Esthaol, Zareah, and Asenah,
34 Zanoah, Engannim, Thaphuah, and Enam:
35 Iarmuth, Adulam, Socoh, and Azekah,
36 Saarem, Adithaim, Gederah, & Gederothaim: fourteene citie with their
villages.
37 Zenan, Hadazah, and Magdalgad,
38 Delean, Mispeh, and Iektheel,
39 Lachis, Bazcath, and Eglon,
40 Chabbon, Lehamam, and Cethlis,
41 Gederoth, Bethdagon, Naamah, & Makedah: sixteene cities with their villages.
42 Lebnah, Ether, and Asan,
43 Iephthah, Asnah, and Nezib,
44 Keilah, Achzib, and Maresah: nine cities, with their villages.
45 Akron with her townes and villages.
46 From Akron euen vnto the sea, all that lieth about Asdod, with their
villages.
47 Asdod with her townes and villages, Azah with her townes & villages, vnto the
riuer of Egypt, and the great sea was their coast.
48 And in the mountaines, they had Samir, Iathir, and Socoh.
49 Danah, and Kariah Sennah, which is Dabir,
50 Anab, Esthemoh, and Anim,
51 Gosen, Holon, and Giloh, a leuen cities with their villages.
52 Arab, Dumah, and Esean,
53 Ianum, Beththaphuah, & Aphecah:
54 Humtah, & Kiriatharbe (which is Hebron) & Sior, nine cities with their
villages.
55 Maon, Carmel, Ziph, and Iutah,
56 Iesrael, Iukadan, and Zanoah
57 Cain, Gabaah, and Thanmah: ten cities with their villages.
58 Halhul, Bethzur, and Gedor,
59 Maarath, Bethanoth, and Elthecon: sixe cities with their villages
60 Kariah Baal, whiche is Kariath Iarim, and Rabba: two cities with their
villages.
61 In the wildernesse they had Betharabah, Meddin, and Sacacah,
62 Nebsan, & the citie of Salte, & Engaddi: syxe cities with their villages.
63 Neuerthelesse, ye Iebusites that wer the inhabitaunts of Hierusale, could not
the children of Iuda cast out: But the Iebusites dwell with the children of Iuda
at Hierusalem vnto this daye.

Chapter 16

1 And the lot of the children of Ioseph fell fro Iordane by Iericho, vnto the
water of Iericho eastwarde, & to the wildernesse that goeth vp fro Iericho
throughout mount Bethel.
2 And goeth out fro Bethel to Luz, and runneth along vnto the borders of
Archiataroth:
3 And goeth downe againe westward euen to the coast of Iaphleti, and vnto the
coast of Bethhoron the neather, & to Gazer, and the endes of their coastes leaue
at the west sea.
4 And so the children of Ioseph, Manasses, & Ephraim, toke their inheritaunce.
5 And the border of the children of Ephraim was by their kynreds. Their border
on the east side was, Ataroth Adar, euen vnto Bethhoron the vpper.
6 And went out westwarde to Machmethath on the northside, and returneth eastward
vnto Thaanath Silo, & past it on the eastside vnto Ionoah.
7 And went downe from Ionoah to Atharoth and Naarath, and came to Iericho, and
went out at Iordane.
8 And their border went from Thaphuah westward vnto the riuer Kanah, and the
endes were the west sea. This is the inheritaunce of the tribe of the children
of Ephraim by their kynredes.
9 And the seperate cities for the childre of Ephraim, were among ye inheritauce
of the children of Manasses, euen the cities with their villages.
10 And they draue not out the Chanaanites that dwelt in Gazer: but the
Chanaanites dwelt among the Ephraites vnto this day, and serue vnder tribute.

Chapter 17

1 This was the lot of the tribe of Manasses, which was the eldest son of Ioseph,
to witte of Machir the eldest sonne of Manasses, which was the father of Gilead:
now because he was a man of warre, he had Gilead and Basan.
2 This is the possession of the rest of the children of Manasses by their
kinreds: Namely of the children of Abiezer, the children of Helek, the children
of Ariel, the children of Sichem, the children of Hepher, the children of
Semida: for these were the male children of Manasses, the sonne of Ioseph by
their kinredes.
3 But Selaphead the sonne of Hepher, the sonne of Giliad, ye sonne of Machir,
the sonne of Manasses, had no sonnes: but daughters, whose names are these,
Mahaia, Noa, Hagla, Melcha, and Thirsa.
4 Which came before Eleasar the priest, and before Iosuah the sonne of Nun, &
before the Lordes, saying: The Lord commaunded Moyses to geue vs an enheritaunce
among our brethren.
5 And therfore according to the commaundement of the Lorde, he gaue them an
enheritaunce among the brethren of their father. And there fel ten portions to
Manasses, beside the lande of Gilead and Basan, whiche were on the other side
Iordane.
6 Because the daughters of Manasses dyd enherite among his sonnes: And Manasses
other sonnes had the lande of Gilead.
7 And the coaste of Manasses was from Aser to Machmathath that lieth before
Sichem, and went along on the right hande, euen vnto the inhabitantes of
Entaphuah,
8 And the lande of Thaphuah belonged to Manasses: which Thaphuah is beside the
border of Manasses, beside the border of the children of Ephraim.
9 And the coaste descended vnto the riuer Canah southwarde, euen to the riuer:
These cities of Ephraim, are among ye cities of Manasses. The coaste of Manasses
went also on the northside to the riuer, and the endes of it go out at the sea:
10 So that ye south partained to Ephraim, & the north to Manasses, & the sea is
his border: And they met together in Aser northwarde, & in Isachar eastwarde.
11 And Manasses had in Isachar and in Aser, Bethsean & her townes, Iiblean and
her townes, and the inhabitours of Dor, with the townes pertaining to the same,
and the inhabitours of Endor with the townes of the same, and the inhabitours of
Thaanach with her townes, and the inhabitours of Magedo with the townes of the
same, euen three countreys.
12 Yet the children of Manasses coulde not ouercome those cities: but the
Chanaanites presumed to dwell in the same lande.
13 Neuerthelesse, assoone as the children of Israel were waxed strong, they put
the Chanaanites vnder tribute, but expelled them not.
14 And the children of Ioseph spake vnto Iosuah, saying: Why hast thou geue me
but one lotte and one portion to inherite, seyng I am a great people, and
forasmuche as the Lorde hath blessed me hytherto?
15 And Iosuah auswered them: If thou be much people, then get thee vp to the
wood countrey and prepare for thy selfe there in the lande of the Pherezites and
of the Giauntes, yf mount Ephraim be to narowe for thee.
16 And the children of Ioseph sayd, The hill is not ynough for vs: And all ye
Chanaanites that dwel in the lowe countrey haue charettes of iron, and so haue
they that inhabite Bethlean & the townes of the same, and they also that dwell
in the valley of Iezreel.
17 And Iasuah sayde vnto the house of Ioseph, Ephraim, & Manasses: Ye be much
people, and haue great power, and shall not therfore haue one lotte.
18 Therfore the hyll shalbe yours, and ye shall cut downe the wood that is in
it: and the endes of it shalbe yours, yf ye cast out the Chananaites which haue
iron charettes, and are very strong.

Chapter 18

1 And the whole congregation of the children of Israel came together at Silo,
and set vp the tabernacle of the congregation there, after the land was in
subiection before them.
2 And there remained among the children of Israel seuen tribes, which had not
yet receaued their enheritaunce.
3 And Iosuah sayde vnto the children of Israel: Howe long are ye so slacke to
come and possesse the lande whiche the Lord God of your fathers hath geuen you?
4 Geue out from among you for euery tribe three men, that I may sende them: and
that they may ryse, and walke through the lande, and distribute it accordyng to
the inheritaunce therof, & come againe to me.
5 And let them deuide it vnto them into seuen partes: And (Iuda shall abide in
their coast on the south, and the house of Ioseph shall stande in their coastes
on the north.)
6 Describe ye the lande therfore into seuen partes, and bryng the description
hyther to me: and I shall cast lottes for you here before the Lord our God.
7 But the Leuites haue no part among you, for the priesthood of the Lorde is
their inheritaunce: And Gad, and Ruben, and halfe the tribe of Manasses, haue
receaued their inheritaunce beyond Iordan eastward, which Moyses the seruaunt of
the Lord gaue them.
8 And the men arose, and went their waye: And Iosuah charged them that went to
describe the lande, saying: Depart, and go through the lande, and describe it,
and come againe to me, that I may here cast lottes for you before the Lorde in
Silo.
9 And the men departed, and walked through the lande, and described it by cities
into seuen partes in a booke, and returned to Iosuah into ye hoast at Silo.
10 And Iosuah cast lottes for them in Silo before the Lorde: & there Iosuah
diuided the lande vnto the children of Israel, to eche their portion.
11 And the lot of the tribe of the children of Beniamin came vp according to
their kinredes: And the coast of their lot came betweene the children of Iuda,
and the children of Ioseph.
12 And their north coast was from Iordane, & went vp to the side of Iericho on
the north side, and went vp through the mountaines westwarde, and they ended at
the wildernesse of Bethauen.
13 And went from thence toward Luz, euen to the south side of Luz (the same is
Bethel) & descended againe to Ataroth Adar, vnto the hyll that lyeth on the
south side of ye neather Bethhoron.
14 And the coast turneth thence, & compasseth the corner of the sea southward,
euen from the hyll that lyeth before Bethhoron southward, and goeth out at
Kiriathbaal (which is Kiriath Iarim) a citie of the childre of Iuda: This is the
west quarter.
15 And the south coast goeth from the ende of Kiriathiarim, and goeth out
westwarde, and thence it turneth to the well of waters of Nephthoah,
16 And commeth downe againe to the end of the hyll that lyeth before the valley
of the sonne of Hennom, euen in the valley of the giauntes northwarde, and
descendeth into the valley of Hennom beside Iebusi southward, & goeth downe to
the well of Rogel,
17 And compasseth from the north, and goeth foorth to En shemesh, and departeth
from thence to the places of Geliloth, whiche are towarde the going vp vnto
Adommim: and goeth downe to the stone of Bohan the sonne of Ruben.
18 And then goeth along toward the side of the plaine northward, and goeth downe
into the fieldes.
19 And goeth along to the syde of Bethhagla northwarde, and endureth the poynt
of the salt sea north therefrom, euen at the south ende of Iordane: This is the
south coast.
20 And Iordane kepeth in this coast on the east syde: And this is the
inheritaunce of the chyldren of Beniamin by their coastes rounde about,
throughout their kinredes.
21 These were the cities of the tribes of the chyldren of Beniamin throughout
their kinredes: Iericho, Bethhagla, and the plaine of Casis.
22 Betharabah, Samaraim, and Bethel.
23 Auim, Parah, and Ophrah,
24 Haamonai, Ophni, & Gaba, twelue cities with their villages.
25 Gabaon, Ramah, Beeroth,
26 Mispeh, Chephirah, and Mosah,
27 Recem, Iarephel, and Tharela,
28 Sela, Eleph, and Iebusi (which is Hierusalem) Gibath, and Ciriath, fourteene
cities with their villages. This is the inheritaunce of the chyldren of Beniamin
throughout their kinredes.

Chapter 19

1 And the secod lot came out to Simeon, euen for the tribe of the children of
Simeon by their kinreds: And their inheritauce was in the middes of the
inheritaunce of the children of Iuda.
2 And they had in their inheritaunce, Beersabe, Sabe, and Moladah,
3 Hazorsual, Balah, and Azem,
4 Eltholad, Bethul, and Hormah,
5 Zikelag, Bethmarcaboth, and Hazetsusah,
6 Bethlebaoth, & Saruhen, thirteene cities with their villages.
7 Ain, Remmon, Ether, & Asan, foure cities with their villages.
8 And therto all the villages that were rounde about these cities, euen to
Balasah Beer, and Ramath southward. This is the inheritaunce of the tribe of the
children of Simeon throughout their kinredes.
9 Out of the lot of the children of Iuda, came the inheritaunce of the children
of Simeon: For the part of the children of Iuda was to much for them, and
therfore the children of Simeon had their inheritaunce in the inheritaunce of
them.
10 And the third lot arose for the childre of Zabulon throughout their kynreds:
And the coastes of their inheritaunce came to Sarid.
11 And went vp westward euen to Maralah, and reached to Dabbaseth, & came thence
to the riuer that lyeth before Iokneam.
12 And turned from Sarid eastward toward the sunne risyng vnto the border of
Chisloth Thabor, & then goeth out to Dabereth, and goeth vp to Iaphia.
13 And from thence goeth along eastward to Gethah Hepher, to Itthah Kazin, and
goeth to Remmon, and turneth to Neah:
14 And compasseth it on the north side to Hannathon, and endeth in the valey of
Iephthahel,
15 And Katath, Nahalol, Simeon, Iedalah, and Bethlehem: twelue cities with their
villages.
16 This is the inheritaunce of the children of Zabulon throughout their
kynredes, and these are the cities with their villages.
17 And the fourth lot came out to Isachar, euen for the children of Isachar by
their kinreds.
18 And their coast was Iesraelah, Casuloth, aud Sunem,
19 Hapharaim, Sion, and Anaharath,
20 Harabith, Kision, and Abez,
21 Rameth, Enganim, Enhadah, and Bethphazez.
22 And his coast reacheth to Thabor, & Sahazimah, and Bethsames: and endeth at
Iordane, syxteene cities with their villages.
23 This is the inheritaunce of the tribe of the children of Isachar by their
kinreds: and these are the cities with their villages.
24 And ye fyfth lot came out for the tribe of the children of Aser by their
kinreds.
25 And their coast was, Helkath, Hali, Beten, and Achsap,
26 Alamelech, Amaad, and Miseal: and came to Carmel westwarde, and to Sihor
Libanath.
27 And turneth toward the sunne rising to Bethdagon, and commeth to Zabulon, and
to the valley of Iephthahel, towarde the north side of Bethemek & Neiel, and
goeth out on the lefte side of Cabul,
28 And to Hebron, Rohob, Hammon, and Kanah, euen vnto great Sidon.
29 And then the coast turneth to Ramah & to the strong citie of Zor, and turneth
to Hozah, & endeth at the sea, by the possession of Achzibah,
30 Amah also, and Aphek, and Rohob: twentie and two cities with their villages.
31 This is the inheritaunce of the children of Aser by their kinreds: these are
the cities with their villages.
32 And the syxth lot came out to the children of Nephthali euen to the childre
of Nephthali by their kinredes.
33 And their coast was from Heleph, and from Elon to Zacnanim, Adami Nekeb, and
Iabneel, euen to Lakum, and doth go out at Iordane.
34 And then the coast turneth westward to Asanoth Thabor, & then goeth out from
thence to Hukokah, and reacheth to Zabulon on the south side, and goeth to Aser
on the west side, and to Iuda vpon Iordane toward the sunne risyng.
35 And their strong cities are Ziddim, Zer, Hamath, Raccath, & Cenereth,
36 Adamah, Ramah, and Hazor,
37 Kedes, Edrai, and Enhazor,
38 Ieron, Magdalel, Horem, Bethanah and Bethsames, ninteene cities with their
villages.
39 This is the inheritaunce of the tribe of the children of Nephthali by their
kynredes: these also are the cities and their villages.
40 And the seuenth lot came out for the tribe of the children of Dan by their
kinredes.
41 And the coast of their inheritaunce was, Zaraah, Esthaol, Irsemes,
42 Saelabin, Aialon, Iethlah,
43 Elon, and Themnathah, and Akron,
44 Elthekeh, Gibbethon, and Baalath,
45 Iehud, Banebarac, & Gathrimon,
46 Meiercon, and Arecon, with the border that lyeth before Iapho.
47 And the coastes of the childre of Dan went out from them: And the children of
Dan went vp to fyght against Lesem, and toke it, and smote it with ye edge of
the sworde, & conquered it, and dwelt therin, and called it Dan, after the name
of Dan their father.
48 This is the inheritaunce of the tribe of the childre of Dan in theyr
kinredes: these also are the cities, with their villages.
49 When they had made an ende of deuiding the lande by her coastes, the children
of Israel gaue an inheritaunce to Iosuah the sonne of Nun among the:
50 According to the worde of the Lorde they gaue hym the citie whiche he asked,
euen Thimnath Serah in mount Ephraim: and he buylt the citie, & dwelt therin.
51 These are the inheritaunces whiche Eleazar the priest, & Iosuah the sonne of
Nun, and the auncient fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel deuided by
lot in Silo before the Lorde at the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation:
and so they made an ende of deuidyng the countrey.

Chapter 20

1 The Lorde also spake vnto Iosuah, saying:
2 Speake to the children of Israel, and saye: Appoint out fro amog you cities of
refuge, wherof I spake vnto you by the hande of Moyses:
3 That the slear that kylleth any person vnwares and vnwyttyngly, may flee
thyther: And those cities shall be your refuge from the auenger of blood.
4 And he that doth flee vnto one of those cities, shall stande at the entryng of
the gate of the citie, & shall shewe his cause in the eares of the elders of the
citie: And they shall take him into the citie vnto them, and geue hym a place,
that he may dwell among them.
5 And if the auenger of blood folow after him, they shall not deliuer the slear
into his hand: because he smote his friend ignorauntly, and hated him not before
tyme.
6 And he shall dwell in the sayd citie vntyl he stande before the congregation
in iudgement, or vntyll the death of the hye priest that shall be in those
dayes: for then shall the slear returne, and come vnto his owne citie, and vnto
his owne house, and vnto the citie from whence he fled.
7 And they sanctified Kedes in Galilee in mount Nephthali, & Siche in mount
Ephraim, and Kiriatharba (which is Hebron) in the mountayne of Iuda.
8 And on the other syde Iordane ouer against Iericho eastward, they appoynted
Bezer in the wildernesse vpon the playne, out of the tribe of Ruben, and Ramoth
in Gilead out of the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Basan out of the tribe of
Manasses.
9 These were the cities appointed for all the children of Israel, & for the
straunger that soiourned among them, that whosoeuer kylled any person
ignorautly, the same might flee thyther, & should not dye by the hand of the
auenger of blood, vntil he stoode before the congregation.

Chapter 21

1 And then came the principall fathers of ye Leuites vnto Eleazar the priest,
and vnto Iosuah the sonne of Nun, & vnto the auncient fathers that were ouer ye
tribes of the children of Israel.
2 And spake vnto the at Silo in the lande of Chanaan, saying: The Lorde
commaunded by Moyses to geue vs cities to dwell in, with the suburbes thereof
for our catell.
3 And the children of Israel gaue vnto the Leuites, out of their inheritaunce at
the biddyng of the Lorde, these cities folowing with their suburbes.
4 And the lot came out for the kynred of the Caathites: the children of Aaron
the priest, which were of the Leuites, had geuen them by lot out of the tribe of
Iuda, out of the tribe of Simeon, and out of the tribe of Beniamin, thirteene
cities.
5 And the rest of the children of Caath had by lot, out of the kynredes of the
tribe of Ephraim, out of ye tribe of Dan, and out of the halfe tribe of
Manasses, ten cities.
6 And the children of Gerson had by lot out of the kynredes of the tribe of
Isachar, and out of the tribe of Aser, & out of the tribe of Nephthali, and out
of the other halfe tribe of Manasses in Basan, thirteene cities.
7 And the childre of Merari by their kinredes, had out of the tribe of Ruben, &
out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zabulon, twelue cities.
8 And the children of Israel gaue by lot vnto the Leuites these cities with
their suburbes, as the Lord commaunded by the hand of Moyses.
9 And they gaue out of the tribe of the children of Iuda, and out of the tribe
of the children of Simeon, these cities by name.
10 Which the children of Aaron being of the kynredes of the Caathites, and of
the childre of Leui, obtained: (for theirs was the first lotte.)
11 And they gaue them Kiriath Arba of the father of Enac (which is Hebron) in
the hyll countrey of Iuda, with the suburbes of the same rounde about it.
12 But the lande that pertayned to the citie and the villages therof, gaue they
to Caleb the sonne of Iephune, to be his possession.
13 And thus they gaue to the childre of Aaron the priest, a citie to the which
the slayer myght flee, euen Hebron with her suburbes, and Libna with her
suburbes,
14 And Iathir with her suburbes, and Estemoa with he suburbes:
15 Holon with her suburbes, Dabir with her suburbes:
16 Ain with her suburbes, Iuttah with her suburbes, Bethsames with her suburbes:
nine cities out of those two tribes.
17 And out of the tribe of Beniamin, they gaue Gibeon with her suburbes, Gabae
with her suburbes,
18 Anatoth with her suburbes, Almon with her suburbes, foure cities.
19 All these cities of the children of Aaron priestes, were thirteene cities
with their suburbes.
20 And the kynredes of the children of Caath that were Leuites, that is to say,
the other children of Caath, had cities geuen them for their lot out of the
tribe of Ephraim.
21 For they gaue them the citie that the slear might flee vnto, Sichem with her
suburbes in mount Ephraim, and Gazer with her suburbes.
22 And Cibzaim with her suburbes, and Bethhoron with her suburbes, foure cities.
23 And out of ye tribe of Dan, Elthec with her suburbes, Gabethon with her
suburbes.
24 And Aialo with her suburbes, Gathremon with her suburbes, foure cities.
25 And out of the halfe tribe of Manasses, Thanach with her suburbes, &
Gathremon with her suburbes, two cities.
26 All the cities for the other kynredes of the children of Caath, were ten,
with their suburbes.
27 And vnto the childre of Gerson, which were of the kynredes of the Leuites,
they gaue out of the other halfe tribe of Manasses, the citie of refuge for ye
slear, Golan in Basan with her suburbes, & Beestherah with her suburbes, two
cities.
28 And out of the tribe of Isachar, Kision with her suburbes, and Dabereh with
her suburbes:
29 And Iarmuth with her suburbes, Enganim with her suburbes, foure cities.
30 And out of the tribe of Aser, Misal with her suburbes, Abdo with her
suburbes.
31 Helcath with her suburbes, and Rohob with her suburbes, foure cities.
32 And out of the tribe of Nephthali the citie for the slear to flee vnto, Kedes
in Galilee with her suburbes, Hamothdor with her suburbes, and Carthan with her
suburbes, three cities.
33 All the cities of ye Gersonites throughout their kynredes, were thirteene
cities with their suburbes,
34 And vnto the other kynredes of the children of Merari, the rest of the
Leuites, they gaue out of the tribe of Zabulon, Iecnam with her suburbes, and
Cartha with her suburbes.
35 Dimnah with her suburbes, and Nahalal with her suburbes, foure cities.
36 And out of the tribe of Rube, Bezer with her suburbes, and Iahasa with her
suburbes,
37 Kedmoth with her suburbes, and Mephaath with her suburbes, foure cities.
38 And out of the tribe of Gad, they gaue the citie for the slear to flee vnto,
Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbes, and Mahanaim with her suburbes,
39 Hesbon with suburbes, and Iaser with her suburbes, foure cities in all.
40 So that all the cities of the children of Merari throughout their kinredes
which were the rest of the kynredes of the Leuites, were by their lot twelue
cities.
41 And all the cities that the Leuites had, among the possession of the children
of Israel, were 48 with their suburbes.
42 And these cities lay euery one seuerally, hauing their suburbes rounde about
them throughout al the said cities.
43 And the Lorde gaue vnto Israel all the lande which he sware to geue vnto
their fathers: And they conquered it, & dwelt therin.
44 And the Lord gaue them rest rounde about, according to all that he sware vnto
their fathers: and there stoode not a man of all their enemies before them: The
Lorde also deliuered all their enemies into their handes.
45 There scaped nothing of al the good thinges which the Lord had sayd vnto ye
house of Israel, but all came to passe.

Chapter 22

1 Then Iosuah called the Rubenites, the Gadites, & the halfe tribe of Manasses,
2 And sayd vnto them: Ye haue kept all that Moyses the seruaut of the Lord
comaunded you, and haue obeyed my voyce in all that I comaunded you.
3 Ye haue not lefte your brethren of a long season vnto this day, but haue kept
the commaundement of the Lorde your God.
4 And now that the Lorde hath geuen rest vnto your brethren as he promised them:
therfore returne ye, and go vnto your tentes, and vnto the lande of your
possession, which Moyses the seruaunt of the Lord gaue you on the other side
Iordane.
5 But in any wyse take diligent heede, to do ye commaundement & lawe which
Moyses the seruaunt of the Lord charged you: that ye loue the Lorde your God,
and walke in all his wayes, and kepe his commaundements, and cleaue vnto him,
and serue him with all your heartes, and all your soules.
6 And so Iosuah blessed them, & sent them away: And they went vnto their tentes.
7 Unto the one halfe of the tribe of Manasses Moyses gaue possession in Basan: &
vnto the other halfe thereof gaue Iosuah, among their brethren on this syde
Iordane westwarde. And Iosuah sent them away also vnto their tentes, and blessed
them,
8 And sayde vnto them: Returne with much riches vnto your tentes, and with a
great multitude of cattell, with syluer and golde, with brasse, and iron, and
with much rayment, and deuide the spoyle of your enemies with your brethren.
9 And the children of Ruben, the childre of Gad, & the halfe tribe of Manasses
returned, and departed from the children of Israel out of Silo, which is in the
lande of Chanaan, to go vnto the countrey of Gilead, to the lande of their
possession, which they had obtayned, according to the word of the Lorde by the
hand of Moyses.
10 And when they came vnto the borders of Iordane that are in the land of
Chanaan, there the children of Ruben, the children of Gad, and the halfe tribe
of Manasses buylt there an aulter by Iordane, & that a great aulter to see to.
11 When the children of Israel hearde saye, beholde the children of Ruben, the
children of Gad, and the halfe tribe of Manasses, haue buylt an aulter in ye
forefront of the lande of Chanaan in the borders of Iordane, at the passage of
the children of Israel:
12 When the children of Israel hearde of it, the whole congregation of the
children of Israel gathered them together at Silo, to make battell against them.
13 And the children of Israel sent vnto the children of Ruben, and to the
children of Gad, and to the halfe tribe of Manasses into the lade of Gilead,
Phinehes the sonne of Eleazar the priest,
14 And with him ten lordes, of euery cheefe house a lorde, throughout all the
tribes of Israel, which were heades of their fathers housholdes among the
thousandes of Israel.
15 And they went vnto the children of Ruben, and to the children of Gad, and to
the children of the halfe tribe of Manasses, vnto the lande of Gilead, and they
spake with them, saying:
16 Thus say the whole congregation of the Lorde: what transgression is this,
that ye haue transgressed agaynst the God of Israel, to turne away this day from
the Lord, in that ye haue buylded you an aulter for to rebell this day against
the Lord?
17 Is the wicked deede of Peor to litle for vs, wherof we are not yet cleansed
vnto this day, and there was a plague in the congregation of the Lorde?
18 Ye also are turned away this day from the Lorde: And seyng ye rebell to daye
against the Lorde, it wyll come to passe that to morowe he shalbe wroth with all
the congregation of Israel.
19 Notwithstandyng, yf ye thynke that the lande of your possession is vncleane,
then come ouer vnto the lande of the possession of the Lorde, wherein the Lordes
tabernacle dwelleth, and take possession among vs: But rebell not against the
Lorde, nor rebell against vs, to buylde you any other aulter, saue the aulter of
the Lorde our God.
20 Dyd not Achan the sonne of Zareth trespasse greeuouslie in the accursed
thyng, and wrath fell on all the congregation of Israel? and this man alone
perished not in his wickednes.
21 Then the chyldren of Ruben, and the chyldren of Gad, and the halfe tribe of
Manasses aunswered, and sayde vnto the heades ouer the thousandes of Israel:
22 The Lorde God of gods, the Lorde God of gods knoweth, and also Israel shall
knowe, yf it be to rebell or to transgresse against the Lorde, then thou Lorde
saue vs not this day.
23 Or els yf we haue buylt vs an aulter to turne from folowyng the Lorde, or to
offer theron burnt offeryng or meate offeryng, or to offer peace offerynges
theron, let ye Lord him selfe require it.
24 And yf we haue not rather done it for feare of this thyng, saying, In tyme to
come your chyldren myght say vnto ours: What haue you to do with the Lorde God
of Israel?
25 The Lorde hath made Iordane a border betweene vs and you ye children of Ruben
and of Gad, ye haue no part therfore in the Lorde: and so shall your children
make our children ceasse from fearyng the Lorde.
26 Therfore we saide, We wyll make vs an aulter, not for burnt offering, nor for
sacrifice:
27 But for a witnesse betweene vs and you, and our generations after vs, that we
should serue the Lorde with our offerynges, sacrifices, & peace offerynges
before him: & that your children shoulde not say to ours in tyme to come, Ye
haue no part in the Lorde.
28 Therfore sayde we, that yf they should so say to vs or to our generations in
tyme to come: that we wolde say again, Behold the fassion of the aulter of the
Lord which our fathers made, neither for burnt offringes nor sacrifices, but for
a witnesse betweene vs and you.
29 God forbyd that we should rebell agaynst the Lord, & turne this day from
after hym, and buylde any other aulter for burnt offringes, oblations, or
sacrifices, saue the aulter of the Lorde our God that is before his tabernacle.
30 And when Phinehes the priest, and the lordes of the congregation, & heades
ouer the thousandes of Israel which were with him, hearde these wordes that the
children of Ruben, and the children of Gad, and the children of Manasses spake,
they were well content.
31 And Phinehes the sonne of Eleazar the priest sayd vnto the children of Ruben,
and to the children of Gad, and to the children of Manasses: This day we
perceaue that the Lord is among vs, because ye haue not done this trespasse
agaynst the Lorde: Now ye haue rydde the children of Israel out of the hand of
the Lorde.
32 And Phinehes the sonne of Eleazar the priest, with the lordes, returned from
the children of Ruben, and from the children of Gad, out of the lande of Gilead,
vnto the lande of Chanaan, to the children of Israel, & brought them this worde
agayne.
33 And the saying pleased the children of Israel, and they blessed God, and dyd
not entende to go agaynst the in battell, and to destroy the lande which the
children of Ruben and Gad dwelt in.
34 And the children of Ruben, and the children of Gad, called the aulter Ed for
it shalbe a witnes betweene vs, that the Lorde is God.

Chapter 23

1 And it came to passe, along season after that the Lorde had geuen rest vnto
Israel from al their enemies round about, that Iosuah waxed olde, and was
stricken in age.
2 And Iosuah called for all Israel, and for their elders, their heades, their
iudges, and officers, and sayd vnto them: I am olde and stricken in age,
3 And ye haue seene all that the Lorde your God hath done vnto all these nations
before you, how the Lorde your God himself hath fought for you.
4 Beholde, I haue deuided vnto you by lot these nations that remayne, to be an
inheritaunce for your tribes, euen from Iordane, with all the nations that I
haue destroyed, euen vnto the great sea westward.
5 And the Lorde your God shall expel them before you, & cast them from out of
your sight, and ye shall conquer their lande, as the Lord your God hath sayd
vnto you.
6 Go to therfore, and be of a good courage, that ye take heede and do all that
is written in the booke of the lawe of Moyses, that ye bowe not aside therefrom
to the right hande or to the left.
7 Neither company with these nations that is with them that are left with you,
neither make mention of the name of ther gods, nor cause to sweare by them,
neither serue them, nor bowe your selues vnto them.
8 But sticke fast vnto the Lorde your God, as ye haue done vnto this day.
9 So shall the Lord cast out before you great nations and mightie, as no man
hath ben able to stande before you hytherto.
10 One man of you shall chase a thousand: for the Lorde your God he fighteth for
you, as he hath promised you.
11 Take good heede therfore vnto your selues, that ye loue the Lord your God.
12 Els, if ye go backe and cleaue vnto the rest of these nations that remaine
with you, & shall make mariages with them, and go in vnto them, and they to you:
13 Be ye sure that the Lorde your God will no more cast out all these nations
from before you: but they shalbe snares and trappes vnto you, and scourges in
your sides, & thornes in your eyes, vntill ye perishe from of this good land
whiche the Lorde your God hath geuen you.
14 And behold, this day do I enter into the way of all the world, and ye knowe
in al your heartes and in al your soules, that nothyng hath fayled of all the
good thinges whiche the Lorde your God promised you, but all are come to passe
vnto you, and nothing hath fayled therof.
15 Therfore, as al good thinges are come vpon you, whiche the Lorde your God
promised you: so shall the Lorde bring vpon you all euyll, vntill he haue
destroyed you fro of this good land which the Lorde your God hath geuen you.
16 When ye haue transgressed the appointmet of the Lord your God which he
commaunded you, and haue gone & serued straunge goddes, & bowed your selues to
them: then shall the wrath of the Lorde waxe whot vpon you, and ye shall perishe
quicklie from of the good lande which he hath geuen you.

Chapter 24

1 And Iosuah gathered all ye tribes of Israel to Sichem, and called for the
elders of Israel, & for their heades, iudges, and officers, & they presented
them selues before God.
2 And Iosuah sayde vnto al the people, Thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel: Your
fathers dwelt on the other side of the fludde in olde time, euen Thare the
father of Abraham and of Nachor, and serued straunge goddes.
3 And I toke your father Abraham from the other side of the fludde, and brought
him throughout all the lande of Chanaan, and multiplied his seede, and gaue him
Isahac.
4 And I gaue vnto Isahac, Iacob and Esau, and I gaue vnto Esau mount Seir, to
possesse it: But Iacob and his children went downe into Egypt.
5 I sent Moyses also and Aaron, and I plagued Egypt, and when I had so done
among them, I brought you out.
6 And I brought your fathers out of Egypt: and as they came vnto the sea, the
Egyptians folowed after your fathers with charettes and horsmen vnto the red
sea.
7 And when they cryed vnto the Lord, the Lord put darcknesse betweene you and
the Egyptians, and brought the sea vpon them, & couered them, and your eyes haue
seene what I haue done to the Egyptians: and ye dwelt in thee wildernesse along
season.
8 And I brought you into the lande of the Amorites, which dwelt on the other
syde Iordane: And they fought with you, and I gaue them into your hande, that ye
might conquer their countrey, and I destroied them from out of your sight.
9 Then Balak the sonne of Ziphor king of Moab, arose & warred against Israel,
and sent and called Balaam the sonne of Beor for to curse you:
10 But I woulde not hearken vnto Balaam, & therfore he rather blessed you: and
so I deliuered you out of his hand.
11 And ye went ouer Iordane, and came vnto Iericho: and the men of Iericho
fought against you, the Amorites, Pherezites, Chanaanites, Hethites, Gergesites,
Heuites, and Iebusites, & I deliuered them into your hande.
12 And I sent hornettes before you, whiche caste them out of your sight, euen
the two kinges of the Amorites: but not with your owne sworde, or with your owne
bowe.
13 And I haue geuen you a lande in which ye dyd no labour, & cities which ye
buylt not, & which ye dwell in: vineyardes also and olyue trees whiche ye
planted not, and whereof ye do eate.
14 Nowe therfore feare the Lorde, and serue him in perfectnesse and trueth, and
put away the goddes whiche your fathers serued on the other side of ye fludde
and in Egypt, and serue ye the Lorde.
15 And yf it seeme euyll vnto you to serue the Lorde, then chose you this day
who you wil serue, whether ye goddes which your fathers serued (that were on the
other side of the fludde) either ye goddes of the Amorites, in whose land ye
dwel: As for me and my house, we wil serue the Lorde.
16 The people aunswered and sayd: God forbyd, that we should forsake the Lord,
and serue straunge goddes.
17 For the Lorde our God, he it is that brought vs & our fathers out of the land
of Egypt, & from the house of bondage, and whiche did those great miracles in
our sight, and preserued vs in al the way that we went, and among al the people
which we came thorowe.
18 And the Lord did cast out before vs all the people, euen the Amorites whiche
dwelt in the lande: And therfore wil we also serue the Lord, for he is our God.
19 And Iosuah sayde vnto the people, Ye can not serue the Lord: for he is an
holy God, and a ielous God, and cannot beare your iniquite and sinne.
20 Yf ye forsake the Lorde and serue straunge goddes, he will turne and do you
euill, and consume you, after that he hath done you good.
21 And the people sayde vnto Iosuah: Nay, but we will serue the Lorde.
22 And Iosuah sayde vnto the people: Ye are witnesses against your selues, that
ye haue chosen you the Lorde to serue him. And they sayde: we are witnesses.
23 Then put away sayde he the strauge goddes whiche are among you, & bowe your
heartes vnto the Lorde God of Israel.
24 The people sayde vnto Iosuah: The Lorde our God will we serue, and his voyce
will we obey.
25 And so Iosuah made a couenaut with the people the same day, and set an
ordinaunce & lawe before them in Sichem.
26 And Iosuah wrote these wordes in the booke of the lawe of God: and toke a
great stone, and pitched it on ende in the sayde place, euen vnder an oke that
was in the sanctuarie of the Lorde.
27 And Iosuah sayde vnto al the people: Behold, this stone shalbe a witnesse
vnto vs, for it hath hearde al the wordes of the Lorde whiche he spake with vs,
it shalbe therfore a witnesse vnto you, lest ye denie your God.
28 And so Iosuah let the people depart, euery man vnto his inheritaunce.
29 And after these thinges it came to passe, that Iosuah the sonne of Nun, the
seruaunt of the Lorde died, being an hundreth and ten yeres old.
30 And they buryed him in the countrey of his inheritaunce, euen in Thamnath
Serah, whiche is in mount Ephraim, on the northside of the hill of Gaas.
31 And Israel serued the Lorde all the dayes of Iosuah, and all the dayes of the
elders that ouer lyued Iosuah, and whiche had knowne all the workes of the Lorde
that he had done for Israel.
32 And the bones of Ioseph whiche the childre of Israel brought out of Egypt,
buried they in Sichem, in a parcell of ground whiche Iacob bought of the sonnes
of Hemor the father of Sichem for an hundreth peeces of siluer, and it became
the inheritaunce of the children of Ioseph.
33 And Eleazar the sonne of Aaron died, whom they buried in a hill that
pertayned to Phinehes his sonne, which hill was geuen him in mount Ephraim.


Judges

Chapter 1

1 After the death of Iosuah, it came to passe, that the childre of Israel asked
the Lord, saying: who shall go vp for vs against the Chanaanites, to fight
fyrste against them?
2 And the Lorde sayde, Iuda shall go vp: beholde, I haue deliuered the land into
his handes.
3 And Iuda sayde vnto Simeon his brother: Come vp with me in my lot, that we may
fight against the Chanaanites, and I likewyse will go with thee into thy lot.
And so Simeon went with him.
4 And Iuda went vp, and the Lord deliuered the Chanaanites and Pherezites into
their handes: And they slue of them in Bezek ten thousande men.
5 And they found Adonibezek in Bezek: And they fought against him, and slue the
Chanaanites and Pherezites.
6 But Adonibezek fled, and they folowed after hym, caught hym, and cut of his
thombes and his great toes.
7 And Adonibezek sayde, Three score and ten kinges hauing their thombes & great
toes cut of, gathered their meate vnder my table: As I haue done, so God hath
done to me agayne. And they brought him to Hierusalem, and there he died.
8 (The childre of Iuda had fought against Hierusalem, and had taken it, and
smitten it with the edge of the sword, & set the citie on fire.)
9 Afterward the children of Iuda went downe to fight against the Chanaanites
that dwelt in the mountayne & towarde the south, & in the lowe countrey.
10 And Iuda went against the Chanaanites that dwelt in Hebron, whiche before
time was called Kiriath Arba, & slue Sesai, Ahiman, and Thalmai.
11 And from thence they went to the inhabitauntes of Dabir, whose name in olde
time was called Kiriachsepher.
12 And Caleb sayd: He that smiteth Kiriathsepher, and taketh it, to him will I
geue Achsah my daughter to wyfe.
13 And Othoniel the sonne of Kenez Calebs younger brother toke it: to whom he
gaue Achsah his daughter to wyfe.
14 When she came to him, she counsayled him to aske of her father a fielde: And
then she lighted of her asse, and Caleb sayde vnto her, What wilt thou?
15 She aunswered vnto him, Geue me a blessing: for thou hast geuen me a
southward land, geue me also springes of water. And Caleb gaue her springes,
both aboue and beneath.
16 And the childre of the Kenite Moyses father in lawe, went vp out of the citie
of paulme trees with the children of Iuda, into the wildernesse of Iuda, that
lieth in the south of Arad, and they went and dwelt among the people.
17 And Iuda went with Simeon his brother, and they slue the Chanaanites that
inhabited Zephath, and vtterly destroyed it, and called the name of the citie
Horma.
18 And also Iuda toke Azzah with the coastes therof, & Askalon with ye coastes
therof, and Akaron with the coastes therof.
19 And the Lorde was with Iuda, and he conquered the mountaines: but could not
dryue out the inhabitauntes of the valleyes, because they had charettes of iron.
20 And they gaue Hebron vnto Caleb, as Moyses sayde: And he expelled thence the
three sonnes of Anak.
21 And the children of Beniamin did not cast out the Iebusites that inhabited
Hierusalem: but the Iebusites dwell with the children of Beniamin in Hierusalem
vnto this day.
22 And in like maner they that were of the house of Ioseph went vp to Bethel,
and the Lorde was with them.
23 And the house of Ioseph searched out Bethel, whiche before time was called
Luz.
24 And the spyes sawe a man come out of the citie, & they sayd vnto him: Shewe
vs we pray thee the way into the citie, and we will shewe thee mercy.
25 And when he had shewed them the way into the citie, they smote it with the
edge of the sworde: but let the man and all his housholde go free.
26 And the man went into the land of the Hethites, and buylt a citie, and called
the name therof Luz: whiche is the name therof vnto this day.
27 Neither did Manasses expell Bethsean with her townes, Thanach with her
townes, the inhabitours of Dor with her townes, the inhabitours of Ieblaam with
her townes, neither the inhabitours of Magiddo with her townes: but the
Chanaanites were bolde to dwell in the lande.
28 But it came to passe, that assoone as Israel was waxed mightie, they put the
Chanaanites to tribute, and expelled them not wholly.
29 In lyke maner Ephraim expelled not the Chanaanites that dwelt in Gazer: but
the Chanaanites dwelt still in Gazer among them.
30 Neither dyd Zabulon expell the inhabitours of Ketron, neither the inhabitours
of Nahalol: but the Chanaanites dwelt among them, and became tributaries.
31 Neither did Aser cast out the inhabitours of Acho, neither the inhabitours of
Zidon, and of Ahalab, Aczib, & Helbah, Aphek, nor of Rohob:
32 But the Aserites dwelt among the Chanaanites the inhabitours of the lande:
for they dyd not dryue them out.
33 Neither dyd Nephthalim dryue out the inhabitours of Bethsames, nor the
inhabitours of Bethanath: but dwelt amongest the Chanaanites the inhabitours of
the lande. Neuerthelesse, the inhabitours of Bethsames and of Bethanath became
tributaries vnto them.
34 And the Amorites droue the children of Dan into the mountayne, and suffered
them not to come downe to the valley.
35 And the Amorites were content to dwell in mount Heres in Aialon, and in
Salabim: And the hande of Ioseph preuayled, so that they became tributaries.
36 And the coast of the Amorites was from the goyng vp to Acrabim, & from the
rocke vpwarde.

Chapter 2

1 And the angel of the Lorde came vp from Gilgal to Bochim, and sayde: I made
you to go out of Egipt, & haue brought you vnto the lande whiche I sware vnto
your fathers: And I sayde, I will neuer breake myne appoyntment that I made with
you.
2 And ye also shall make no couenaunt with the inhabitours of this lande, but
shall breake downe their aulters: Neuerthelesse, ye haue not hearkened vnto my
voyce: why haue ye this done?
3 Wherfore I haue lykewyse determined, that I will not cast them out before you:
but they shalbe as thornes vnto you, and their goddes shalbe a snare vnto you.
4 And when the angel of the Lord spake these wordes vnto all the children of
Israel, the people cryed out and wept:
5 And called the name of the sayd place Bochim, & offered sacrifices vnto the
Lorde.
6 And whe Iosuah had sent the people away, the children of Israel went euery man
into his inheritaunce to possesse the lande.
7 And the people serued the Lorde all the dayes of Iosuah, & all the dayes of
the elders that outlyued Iosuah, & had seene al the great workes of the Lorde
that he dyd for Israel.
8 And Iosuah the sonne of Nun, the seruaunt of the Lorde died, when he was an
hundreth and ten yeres olde:
9 Whom they buried in the coastes of his inheritaunce euen in Thimnath Heres in
mount Ephraim, on the northside of the hil Gaas.
10 And euen so all that generation were put vnto their fathers: and there arose
another generation after them, which neither knewe the Lorde, nor yet the workes
whiche he had done for Israel.
11 And then the children of Israel dyd wickedly in the sight of the Lorde, and
serued Baalim,
12 And forsoke the Lord God of their fathers, whiche brought them out of the
lande of Egypt, and folowed straunge goddes, euen of the goddes of the nations
that were rounde about them, and bowed them selues vnto them, and angred the
Lorde:
13 They forsoke the Lorde, and serued Baal and Astharoth.
14 And the wrath of the Lord waxed hot agaynst Israel, and he deliuered them
into the handes of raueners, that spoyled them, & solde them into the handes of
their enemies rounde about them, so that they had no power any longer to stande
before their enemies.
15 But whythersoeuer they went out, the hand of the Lord was sore against them,
euen as the Lord promised them, and as he sware vnto them: And he punished them
sore.
16 Neuerthelesse the Lorde raysed vp iudges, which deliuered them out of the
handes of their oppressers.
17 And yet for all that they woulde not hearken vnto their iudges: but rather
went a whoring after straunge goddes, and bowed them selues vnto them, and
turned quickly out of the way, whiche their fathers walked in, obeying the
comaundementes of the Lorde: But they dyd not so.
18 And when the Lorde raysed them vp iudges, he was with the iudge, and
deliuered them out of the handes of their enemies all the dayes of the iudge: (
for the Lord had compassion ouer their sorowinges, whiche they had by the reason
of them that oppressed them & vexed them:)
19 Yet for all that, assoone as the iudge was dead, they returned, and dyd worse
then their fathers, in folowing straunge goddes, to serue them & worship them:
and ceassed not from their owne inuentions, nor from their malitious way.
20 And the wrath of the Lorde was moued against Israel, and he sayde: Because
this people hath trasgressed myne appoyntment whiche I commaunded their fathers,
and haue not hearkened vnto my voyce:
21 I will hencefoorth not cast out before them one man of the nations whiche
Iosuah left when he dyed:
22 That through them I may proue Israel, whether they wil kepe the way of the
Lorde, and walke therin as their fathers dyd, or not.
23 And so the Lorde left those nations, and droue them not out immediatly,
neither deliuered them into the hande of Iosuah.

Chapter 3

1 These are the nations whiche the Lorde left, that he might proue Israel by
them: (euen as many of Israel as had not knowen al the warres of Chanaan:
2 Onely for the learning of the generations of the childre of Israel that he
also might teach them warre, onely such as before knewe nothing therof.)
3 Of those whom he left, there were fiue lordes of the Philistines, and all the
Chanaanites, and the Sidonites, & the Heuites that dwelt in mount Libanon, euen
from mount Baal Hermon, vnto one come to Hamath.
4 Those remayned to proue Israel by, and to wyt whether they would hearken vnto
the commaundementes of the Lorde, which he commaunded their fathers by the hande
of Moyses.
5 And the children of Israel dwelt among the Chanaanites, Hethites, Amorites,
Pherezites, Heuites, and Iebusites,
6 And toke the daughters of them to be their wiues, & gaue their own daughters
to their sonnes, and serued their goddes.
7 And the children of Israel did wickedly in the sight of the Lorde, and forgat
the Lorde their God, and serued Baalim and Astheroth.
8 Therfore the Lorde was angry with Israel, and he solde them into the handes of
Chusan Risathaim king of Mesopotamia: and the children of Israel serued Chusan
Risathaim eyght yeres.
9 And when the children of Israel cryed vnto the Lorde, the Lorde stirred vp a
sauer to the children of Israel, & saued them, euen Othoniel the sonne of Kenes,
Calebs younger brother.
10 And the spirite of the Lorde came vpon him, and he iudged Israel, & went out
to warre: And the Lorde deliuered Chusan Risathaim king of Mesopotamia into his
hande, and his hande preuayled against Chusan Risathaim.
11 And the land had rest fourtie yeres: and Othoniel the sonne of Kenes died.
12 And the children of Israel agayne committed wickednes in the sight of the
Lorde: And the Lorde strengthed Eglon the king of the Moabites, against the
children of Israel, because they had committed wickednes before the Lorde.
13 And this Eglon gathered vnto him the children of Ammon, and the Amalekites,
and went and smote Israel, and possessed the citie of Panlme trees.
14 And so the children of Israel serued Eglon the king of Moab 18 yeres.
15 But when they cryed vnto the Lord, the Lord stirred them vp a sauer, Ahud the
sonne of Gera the sonne of Gemini, a man lame of his right hande: and by him the
children of Israel sent a present vnto Eglon the king of Moab.
16 But Ahud made him a dagger with two edges, of a cubite length, and he did
gyrde it vnto his raymet vpon his right thygh,
17 And caried the present vnto Eglon the king of Moab: (And Eglon was a very
fatte man.)
18 And when he had presented the present, he sent the people that bare it away:
19 But he him selfe turned agayne (from the place of grauen images, that was by
Gilgal) and sayde: I haue a secret errande vnto thee, O king. Which sayde: Kepe
scilence. And all that stoode before hym, went out from him.
20 And Ahud came vnto him, and in a sommer parler whiche he had, sate he him
selfe alone: and Ahud sayd, I haue a message vnto thee from God. And he arose
out of his seate.
21 And Ahud put foorth his left hande, & toke the dagger from his right thygh,
and thrust it into his belly.
22 And the hafte went in after the blade: and the fatte closed the haft, so that
he might not drawe the dagger out of his belly, but the dyrt came out.
23 Then Ahud gat him out into the porche, and shut the doores of the parler vpon
him, and locked them.
24 When he was gone out, his seruauntes came: And when they sawe that the doores
of the parler were locked, they sayde, Suerly he couereth his feete in his
sommer chamber.
25 And they taried till they were ashamed, and seyng he opened not the doores of
the parler, they toke a key and opened them: And beholde, their Lorde was fallen
downe dead on the earth.
26 And Ahud escaped whyle they taried and was gone beyonde, to the place of the
grauen images, and escaped into Seirath.
27 And when he was come, he blewe a trumpet in mount Ephraim: And the childre of
Israel went downe with him from the hill, and he went before them.
28 And he sayde vnto them, folowe me: for the Lorde hath deliuered your enemies
the Moabites into your hande. And they descended after him, and toke the
passages of Iordane toward Moab, and suffered not a man to passe ouer.
29 And they slue of the Moabites the same time vpon a ten thousande men, which
were all fatte, & men of warre, and there scaped not a man.
30 So Moab was subdued that day vnder the hande of Israel: And the lande had
rest fourescore yeres.
31 After him was Samgar the sonne of Anath, whiche slue of the Philistines sixe
hundred men with an oxe goade, and deliuered Israel also.

Chapter 4

1 And the children of Israel began agayne to do wickedly in ye sight of the
Lord, when Ahud was dead.
2 And the Lorde sold them into the hand of Iabin king of Chanaan, that raigned
in Hazor, whose captayne of warre was called Sisara, which dwelt in Haroseth of
the gentiles.
3 And the children of Israel cried vnto the Lord (for he had nine hundreth
charettes of yron: & twentie yeres he troubled the children of Israel very
sore.)
4 And Debora a prophetisse, the wife of Lapidoth, iudged Israel the same time.
5 And the same Debora dwelt vnder a paulme tree, betweene Ramath & Bethel, in
mount Ephraim: And the children of Israel came vp to her for iudgment.
6 And she sent, and called Barak the sonne of Abinoam, out of Kedes Nephthalim,
and sayd vnto him: Hath not the Lorde God of Israel commaunded, saying: Go, and
drawe toward mount Thabor, and take with thee ten thousand men of the children
of Nephthalim, and of the children of Zabulon?
7 And I will bring vnto thee to the riuer Kison, Sisara ye captayne of warre,
vnto Iabin, with his charettes and his people, and will deliuer him into thyne
handes.
8 And Barak said vnto her, If thou wilt go with me, I will go: But and if thou
wilt not come with me, I will not go.
9 She sayd: I will surely go with thee, but this iourney that thou takest, shall
not be for thyne honour: for the Lorde shall sell Sisara into the hande of a
woman. And Debora arose and went with Barak to Kedes.
10 And Barak called Zabulon & Nephthalim to Kedes, and led after him ten
thousande men: and Debora went vp with him.
11 (But Haber the Kenite which was of the childre of Hobab, the father in lawe
of Moyses, remoued from the Kenites, and pitched his tent vntill the playne of
Zaanaim, whiche is by Kedes.)
12 And they shewed Sisara, that Barak the sonne of Abinoam was gone vp to mount
Thabor.
13 And Sisara gathered together al his charettes, euen nine hundreth charettes
of iron, & all the people that were with him from of Haroseth of the gentiles,
vnto the ryuer of Kison.
14 And Debora sayd vnto Barak: Up, for this is the day in which the Lorde hath
deliuered Sisara into thyne hand: Is not the Lorde gone out before the? And so
Barak went downe fro mount Thabor, and ten thousande men after him.
15 But the Lorde destroyed Sisara and all his charettes, and all his hoaste with
the edge of the sworde, before Barak: so that Sisara lyghted downe of his
charet, and fled away on his feete.
16 But Barak folowed after the charettes and after the hoast, euen vnto Haroseth
of the gentiles: And all the hoast of Sisara fell vpon the edge of the sworde,
and there was not a man left.
17 Howebeit Sisara fled away on his feete to the tent of Iael the wife of Haber
the Kenite (for there was peace betweene Iabin the king of Hazor, and the
houshoulde of Haber the Kenite.)
18 And Iael went out to meete Sisara, and sayd vnto him: Turne in my lorde,
turne in to me, feare not. And whan he had turned in vnto her into her tent, she
couered him with a mantell.
19 And he sayd vnto her: Geue me I pray thee a litle water to drincke, for I am
thirstie. And she opened a bottle of milke, and gaue him drincke, & couered him.
20 And agayne he sayd vnto her: Stande in the doore of the tent, and whan any
man doth come and enquere of thee, whether ther be any man here, thou shalt say,
naye.
21 Then Iael Habers wyfe, toke a nayle of the tent, & an hammer in her hande,
and went softly vnto him, and smote ye nayle into the temples of his head, and
fastened it into the ground (for he slumbred sore, and was wery) and so he died.
22 And beholde, as Barak folowed after Sisara, Iael came out to meete him, &
said vnto him: Come, and I will shewe thee the man whom thou sekest. And when he
came in to her tent, behold Sisara lay dead, and the nayle was in his temples.
23 And so God brought Iabin the kyng of Chanaan into subiection that day before
the children of Israel.
24 And the hand of the children of Israel prospered, and preuayled against Iabin
the kyng of Chanaan, vntil they had destroyed Iabin king of Chanaan.

Chapter 5

1 Then Debora and Barak the sonne of Abinoam sange the same day, saying:
2 Prayse ye the Lord, for the auengyng of Israel, and for the people that became
so willing.
3 Heare O ye kinges, hearken O ye princes: I, euen I will syng vnto the Lord, I
will prayse the Lord God of Israel.
4 Lorde, whan thou wentest out of Seir, whan thou departedst out of the fielde
of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heauens rayned, the cloudes also dropped
water:
5 The mountaynes melted before the Lord, euen as dyd Sinai before ye Lord God of
Israel.
6 In the dayes of Samgar the sonne of Anath, in the dayes of Iael, the hye wayes
were vnoccupied, and the trauelers walked thorowe bye wayes.
7 The inhabitants of the townes were gone, they were gone in Israel, vntyll I
Debora came vp, which came vp a mother in Israel.
8 They chose new goddes, and then had they the enemie in the gates: was there a
shielde or speare seene among fourtie thousande of Israel?
9 My heart loueth the gouerners of Israel, and them that are willyng among the
people: O prayse ye the Lord.
10 Speake ye that ryde on fayre asses, ye that dwell by Middin, and that walke
by the wayes.
11 For the noyse of the archers among the drawers of water ceassed, there shall
they speake of the righteousnes of the Lorde, his righteousnesse in his vnfensed
townes in Israel: Then shal the people of the Lorde go downe to the gates.
12 Up Debora vp, get thee vp, and sing a song: Arise Barac, and leade thy
captiuitie captiue, thou sonne of Abinoam.
13 Then shall they that remayne, haue dominion of the proudest of the people:
The Lord hath geuen me dominion ouer the mightie.
14 Out of Ephraim was there a roote of them agaynst Amelek, and after thee
Beniamin among thy people: Out of Machir came rulers, and out of Zabulon they
that handell the penne of the writer.
15 And of Isachar there were princes with Debora, and Isachar, and also Barak,
he was sent on foote into the valley: for the diuisions of Ruben were great
thoughtes of heart.
16 Why abodest thou among the sheepe foldes, to heare the bleatinges of the
flockes? for the diuisions of Ruben, were great thoughtes of heart.
17 Gilead also abode beyonde Iordane: and why doth Dan remayne in shyppes? Aser
cotinued on the sea shore, and taried in his decayed places.
18 But the people of Zabulon haue ieoparde their lyues euen vnto the death, lyke
as dyd Nephthalim in the hye places of the fielde.
19 The kynges came and fought, then fought ye kynges of Chanaan in Thanach by
the waters of Megiddo, and wan no money.
20 They fought from heauen, euen the starres in their courses fought agaynst
Sisara.
21 The ryuer of Kison swept them away, that auncient ryuer the ryuer Kison: O my
soule, thou hast marched valiauntly.
22 Then were the horse hoofes smitten asunder by the meanes of the praunsings
that their mightie men made.
23 Curse ye the citie of Meros (sayd the angel of the Lord) curse the
inhabitants therof: because they came not to helpe the Lord, to helpe the Lord
against the mightie.
24 Iael the wyfe of Haber the Kenite, shalbe blessed aboue other women, blessed
shall she be aboue other women in the tent.
25 He asked water, and she gaue him mylke, she brought foorth butter in a lordly
dysshe.
26 She put her hande to the nayle, & her ryght hande to the smythes hammer: with
the hammer smote she Sisara, & smote his head, wounded him, and pearsed his
temples.
27 He bowed him downe at her feete, he fell downe, and lay styll: At her feete
he bowed him selfe, & fell. And whe he had sunke downe, he lay there destroyed.
28 The mother of Sisara loked out at a wyndowe, and cryed thorowe the lattesse:
Why is his charret so long a commyng? Why tary the wheeles of his charettes?
29 Al the wyse ladyes aunswered her, yea and her owne wordes aunswered her
selfe.
30 Surely they haue found, they deuide the spoyles, euery man hath a damsell or
two: Sisara hath a pray of diuers couloured garmentes, euen a pray of rayment
dyed with sundry colours, and that are made of nedle worke: rayment of diuers
colours and of nedle worke on both sydes, which is meete for him that is chiefe
in distributing of ye spoyles.
31 So perishe all thine enemies, O Lord: But they that loue him, let them be as
ye sunne whan he ryseth in his myght. And the lande had rest fourtie yeres.

Chapter 6

1 And the children of Israel committed wickednesse in the syght of the Lorde:
And the Lorde deliuered them into the handes of Madian seuen yeres.
2 And the hand of Madian preuayled against Israel: & because of the Madianites,
ye children of Israel made them dennes in the mountaynes and caues, and strong
holdes.
3 And when Israel had sowen, then came vp the Madianites, the Amalechites, and
they of the east, and came vp agaynst them,
4 And pitched their tentes against them, and destroyed the encrease of the
earth, euen tyll thou come vnto Azah, & left no sustenaunce for Israel, neither
sheepe, oxe, nor asse:
5 For they went vp, they and their cattel, and came with their tentes as a
multitude of grasshopers, so that both they and also their camels were without
number: And they entred into the land to destroy it.
6 And so was Israel exceedingly impoueryshed in the sight of the Madianites, and
cried vnto the Lorde.
7 And when the children of Israel cried vnto the Lord, because of the
Madianites,
8 The Lorde sent vnto them a prophet, which sayd vnto them, Thus sayth the Lorde
God of Israel: I fet you from Egypt, & brought you out of the house of bondage.
9 And I ryd you out of the hande of the Egyptians, & out of the hand of all that
oppressed you, and cast them out before you, and gaue you their land:
10 And I sayd vnto you: I am the Lord your God, feare not the goddes of the
Amorites in whose lande you dwell: But you haue not obeyed my voyce.
11 And the angel of the Lorde came and sate vnder an Oke which was in Ephrah,
that parteyned vnto Ioas the father of the Esrites: And his sonne Gedeon
threshed wheat by the wyne presse, to hyde it from the Madianites.
12 And the angel of the Lorde appeared vnto him, and said vnto him: The Lord is
with thee, thou mightie man.
13 And Gedeon aunswered him: Oh my Lord, if the Lorde be with vs, why is all
this come vpon vs? Yea, & where be all his miracles which our fathers tolde vs
of, and sayd: Dyd not the Lord bryng vs out of Egypt? But nowe the Lord hath
forsaken vs, and deliuered vs into the handes of the Madianites.
14 And the Lord loked vpon him, and sayde: Go hence in this thy might, and thou
shalt deliuer Israel out of the handes of the Madianites: Haue not I sent thee?
15 And he aunswered him: Oh Lorde, wherwith shall I saue Israel? Behold my
kinred is poore in Manasses, and I am litle in my fathers house.
16 The Lord sayd vnto him: I will be with thee, & thou shalt smyte the
Madianites, as they were but one man.
17 And he aunswered him: Oh, yf I haue founde grace in thy syght, than shew me a
a signe, that it is thou that talkest with me:
18 Departe not hence I pray thee vntyll I come vnto thee, & tyll I bryng myne
offring, and haue set it before thee. And he sayd: I will tary vntyll thou come
againe.
19 And Gedeon went in, and made redy a kyd, and sweete cakes of an Epha of
floure, and put it with the fleshe in a basket, and put the broth in a pot, and
brought it out vnto him vnder the Oke, and presented it.
20 And the angel of God sayd vnto him: Take the flesh and the sweete cakes, &
lay them vpon this rocke, and powre out the broth. And he dyd so.
21 Then the angel of the Lord put foorth the end of the staffe that he helde in
his hande, and touched the fleshe and the sweete cakes, and there arose vp fire
out of the rocke, and consumed the flesh and the sweete cakes: But the angel of
the Lord departed out of his sight.
22 And when Gedeon perceaued that it was an angel of the Lorde, he sayde: Alas,
O Lorde God, haue I therfore seene an angel of the Lorde face to face, that I
should dye?
23 And the Lorde sayd vnto him: Peace be vnto thee, feare not, thou shalt not
dye.
24 Then Gedeon made an aulter there vnto the Lord, and called it, The Lord of
peace. And vnto this day it is yet in Ephrath, that parteyneth vnto the father
of the Esrites.
25 And the same nyght the Lorde sayde vnto him: Take thy fathers young bullocke,
& an other bullocke of 7 yeres olde, and destroy the aulter of Baal that thy
father hath, and cut downe the groue that is by it:
26 And make an aulter vnto the Lord thy God vpon the top of this rocke in a
conuenient place, and take the second bullocke, and offer burnt sacrifice vpo
the wood of the groue which thou shalt cut downe.
27 Then Gedeon toke ten men of his seruauntes, & did as the Lord bad him: But
because he feared to do it by daye for his fathers housholde and the men of the
citie, he dyd it by nyght.
28 And when the men of the citie arose early in the mornyng, beholde the aulter
of Baal was broken, & the groue cut downe that was by it, and the seconde
bullocke offered vpon the aulter that was made.
29 And they sayde one to another: who hath done this thing? And whan they
enquered and asked, they sayd: Gedeon ye sonne of Ioas hath done this thing.
30 Then the men of the citie sayde vnto Ioas, Bring out thy sonne, that he may
dye: because he hath destroyed the aulter of Baal, and cut downe the groue that
was by it.
31 And Ioas sayd vnto al that stoode by him: Will ye pleade Baals cause? or will
ye saue him? He that will contende for him, let him dye or the morning. If he be
a God, let him pleade for himselfe agaynst him that hath caste downe his aulter.
32 And from that day, was Gedeon called Ierobaal: because his father had sayd,
Let Baal pleade for himselfe, because he hath broken downe his aulter.
33 All the Madianites therfore, and the Amalekites, and they of the east, were
gathered together, & went and pytched in the valley of Iesrael:
34 But the spirite of the Lorde came vppon Gedeon, and he blewe a trumpet, and
Abiezer was ioyned with him.
35 And he sent messengers throughout all Manasses, which also was ioyned with
him, and he sent messengers vnto Azar, Zabulon, and Nephthalim, and they came to
meete them.
36 And Gedeon sayd vnto God: Yf thou wilt saue Israel by myne hand, as thou hast
sayd:
37 Beholde, I wil put a fleece of wool in the treashing place: And if the dewe
come on the fleece onely, and it be drye vpon all the earth besyde, then shall I
be sure that thou wilt saue Israel by my hand, as thou saydest.
38 And it came so to passe: For he rose vp early on the morowe, & thrust the
fleece together, and wrong the dewe therout, and fylled a bowle of water.
39 And Gedeon sayde agayne vnto God: Be not angry with me, that I speake once
more, for I wil proue once agayne by the fleece. Let it be drye onely vpon the
fleece, and dewe vpon al the ground.
40 And God dyd so that same nyght: For it was drye vpon the fleece only, & there
was dewe on all the grounde.

Chapter 7

1 Then Ierobaal (who is Gedeon) and all ye people yt were with him, rose vp
early, & pytched besyde the wel of Harad: so that the hoaste of the Madianites
were on the northsyde of them by the hyll of Moreh in the valley.
2 And the Lord sayd vnto Gedeon: The people that are with thee, are to many for
me to geue ye Madianites into their handes, lest Israel make their vaunt against
me, and saye: Myne owne hand hath saued me.
3 Nowe therfore make a proclamation in the eares of people, and saye: If any man
dread or be afeard, let him returne and depart early from mount Gilead. And
there returned of the people 22 thousande, & there abode ten thousande.
4 And the Lord sayd vnto Gedeon: The people are yet to many, bryng them downe
vnto the water, and I will trye them vnto thee there. And of whom I say vnto
thee, this shal go with thee: the same shal go with thee. And of whom soeuer I
say vnto thee, this shal not go with thee: the same shal not go.
5 So he brought downe the people vnto the water: And the Lord said vnto Gedeon,
As many as lappe ye water with their tongues as a dogge lappeth, them put by
them selues, and so do them that kneele downe vpon their knees to drincke.
6 And the number of them that put their handes to their mouthes and lapped, were
three hundred men: But all ye remnaunt of ye people kneeled downe vpon their
knees to dryncke water.
7 And the Lorde sayd vnto Gedeon: By these three hundred men that lapped will I
saue you, and deliuer the Madianites into thyne hande: And let all the other
people go euery man vnto his place.
8 They therfore of the people toke vittailes with them, and their trumpettes:
And he sent all the rest of Israel, euery man vnto his tent, and retayned those
three hundreth men: And the hoast of Madian was beneath him in a valley.
9 And the same nyght the Lorde sayde vnto him: Aryse, get thee downe vnto the
hoast, for I haue delyuered it into thyne hand.
10 But and if thou feare to go downe, then go thou and Phara thy ladde downe to
the hoast.
11 And thou shalt hearken what they say, and so shall thine handes be strong to
go downe vnto ye hoast. Then went he downe & Phara his ladde vnto the outsyde of
the men of armes that were in the hoast.
12 And the Madianites, the Amalekites, and all they of the east, lay along in
the valley lyke a multitude of grashoppers, and their camelles were without
numbre, euen as the sande by the sea syde in multitude.
13 And when Gedeon was come, behold, there was a man that tolde a dreame vnto
his neyghbour, and sayd: Behold, I dreamed a dreame, and me thought that a cake
of barley bread tumbled into the hoast of Madian, and came vnto a tent, and
smote it that it fell, and ouerturned it that the tent lay along.
14 And his felowe aunswered and sayd: This is nothing els saue the sworde of
Gedeon ye sonne of Ioas, a man of Israel: for into his hande hath God deliuered
Madian, and all the hoast.
15 When Gedeon heard the telling of the dreame, & the interpretation of the
same, he worshypped, and returned vnto the hoast of Israel, and sayde: Up, for
the Lorde hath deliuered into your hande the hoast of Madian.
16 And he deuided the three hundred men into three companies, and gaue euery man
a trumpet in his hande, with emptie pytchers, and lampes therin.
17 And sayde vnto them, Loke on me, and do lykewyse: that when I come to the
syde of the hoast, euen as I do, so do you.
18 When I blowe with a trumpet and all that are with me, blowe ye with
trumpettes also on euery syde of the hoast, and say: For the Lord, and for
Gedeon.
19 So Gedeon and the hundred men that were with him, came vnto the outsyde of
the hoast in the begynnyng of the myddle watche, & raysed vp the watch men: And
they blewe with their trumpettes, & brake the pytchers that were in their
handes.
20 And the three companies blewe with trumpettes, & brake the pytchers, and
helde the lampes in their left handes, and the trumpettes in their right, to
blowe withal: And they cryed, The sworde of the Lorde, and of Gedeon.
21 And they stoode styll, euery man in his place rounde about the hoast: And all
the hoast ranne, and cryed, and fled.
22 And the three hundreth blewe with trumpettes, and the Lorde set euery mans
sworde vppon his neyghbour throughout all the hoast: and the hoast fled to
Bethhasitah, to Zererath, and to the edge of the playne of Meholah vnto Tabbath.
23 And the men of Israel being gathered together out of Nephthalim, of Aser, and
of all Manasses, folowed after the Madianites.
24 And Gedeon sent messengers vnto al mount Ephraim, saying: Come downe against
the Madianites, and take before them the waters vnto Bethbarath, and to Iordane.
Then all the men of Ephraim gathered together, & toke the waters vnto
Bethbarath, & to Iordane.
25 And they toke two princes of the Madianites, Oreb and Zeb: and slue Oreb vpon
the rocke Oreb, and Zeb at the winepresse of Zeb, and folowed after Madian: and
brought the heades of Oreb and Zeb to Gedeon on the other syde Iordane.

Chapter 8

1 And the men of Ephraim said vnto him: Why hast thou serued vs thus, that thou
calledst vs not, when thou wentest to fyght with the Madianites? And they chode
with him sharpely.
2 And he sayde vnto them: What deede haue I done lyke vnto yours? Is not the
gleaning of grapes of Ephraim, better then the vinetage of Abiezer?
3 God hath delyuered into your handes the lordes of Madian, Oreb and Zeb: And
what was I able to do lyke as you haue done? And then their spirites abated from
of him, when he had sayde that.
4 And Gedeon came to Iordane to passe ouer, he & the three hundred men that were
with him weery, and yet folowed the chase.
5 And he sayd vnto ye men of Sucoth: Geue I pray you, takes of bread vnto ye
people that folow me, for they be fayntie, that I may folowe after Zebah, and
Zalmana, kynges of Madian.
6 And the lordes of Sucoth sayde: Are the handes of Zebah and Zalmana now in
thyne handes, that we should geue bread vnto thyne armie?
7 Gedeon sayde: Therfore when the Lord hath deliuered Zebah and Zalmana into
mine hande, I will teare the fleshe of you with the thornes of the wildernes,
and with bryers.
8 And he went vp thence to Phanuel, & spake vnto them lykewyse: And ye men of
Phanuel aunswered him, as did the men of Sucoth.
9 And he sayd also vnto the men of Phanuel: When I come agayne in peace, I will
breake downe this towre.
10 Zebah & Zalmana were in Carcor, and their hoastes with them, vpon a fifteene
thousande men, which were all that were left of all the hoastes of them of the
east: For there was slaine an hundred and twentie thousande men that drewe
swordes.
11 And Gedeon went thorowe them that dwelt in tabernacles on the east syde of
Nobah and Iegbahah, and smote the hoaste: for the hoaste dyd cast no perylles.
12 And whan Zebah and Zalmana fled, he folowed after them, and toke ye two
kynges of Madian, Zebah and Zalmana, and discomfited all the hoaste.
13 And Gedeon the sonne of Ioas, returned from battel afore the sunne was vp,
14 And caught a ladde of the men of Sucoth, & enquired of him: And he wrote him
of the lordes and elders of Sucoth threescore and seuenteene men.
15 And he came vnto the men of Sucoth, and sayd: Beholde Zebah and Zalmana, with
which ye dyd cast me in the teeth, saying: Are the handes of Zebah and Zalmana
alredy in thyne hande, that we should geue bread vnto thy fayntie men?
16 And he toke the elders of the citie, and thornes of the wildernesse, and
bryers, and dyd teare the men of Sucoth with them.
17 And he brake downe the towre of Phanuel, & slue the men of the citie.
18 And then sayde he vnto Zebah and Zalmana: What maner of men were they whom ye
slue at Thabor? And they aunswered: The lykenesse of thee and them is al one,
eue after the fashion of the children of a kyng.
19 And he sayd, They were my brethren, euen my mothers children: As truly as the
Lord liueth, if ye had saued their lyues, I would not slay you.
20 And he sayde vnto Iether his eldest sonne, Up and slay them. But the ladde
drue not his sworde: for he feared, because he was yet young.
21 Then Zebah and Zalmana sayde: Ryse thou, and fall vpon vs: for as the man is,
so is his strength. And Gedeon arose, and slue Zebah and Zalmana, and toke away
the ornamentes that were on their camels neckes.
22 Then the men of Israel sayde vnto Gedeon: Raigne thou ouer vs, both thou, thy
sonne, and thy sonnes sonne, for thou hast deliuered vs out of ye hand of
Madian.
23 And Gedeon sayd vnto them: I wyll not raigne ouer you, neither shall my
childe raigne ouer you: but the Lorde shall raigne ouer you.
24 And agayne Gedeon said vnto them: I would desire a request of you, euen that
you would geue me euery man the earinges of his pray. For they had golden
earinges, because they were Israelites.
25 And they aunswered: We will gyue them. And they spread a mantell, and dyd
cast therin euery man the earynges of his pray.
26 And the wayght of ye golden earinges that he required, was a thousand and
seuen hundred sicles of golde, besyde chaynes and iewelles, and purple rayment
that was on the kynges of Madian, and besyde the chaynes that were about their
camels neckes.
27 And Gedeon made an Ephod therof, and put it in his citie Ephrah: And all
Israel went a whoryng after it in the same place, which thing became a ruyne
vnto Gedeon and to his house.
28 Thus was Madian brought lowe before the children of Israel, so that they lyft
vp their heades no more: And the countrey was in quietnes fourtie yeres in the
dayes of Gedeon.
29 And Ierobaal ye sonne of Ioas, went and dwelt in his owne house.
30 And Gedeon had threescore and ten sonnes of his body begotten: for he had
many wyues.
31 And his cocubine that was in Sichem bare him a sonne also, whose name he
called Abimelech.
32 And Gedeon the sonne of Ioas dyed in a good age, and was buryed in the
sepulchre of Ioas his father, euen in Ephrah, that parteyned vnto the father of
the Esrites.
33 But assoone as Gedeon was dead, the children of Israel turned away, & went a
whoryng after Baalim, and made a couenaunt with Baal to be their God.
34 And the children of Israel thought not on the Lorde their God, which had
deliuered them out of the handes of all their enemies on euery syde:
35 Neither shewed they mercy on the house of Ierobaal otherwyse called Gedeon,
according to all the goodnes which he had shewed vnto Israel.

Chapter 9

1 Abimelech the sonne of Ierobaal! went to Sichem vnto his mothers brethren, &
communed with them, & with all the kynrede of the house of his mothers father,
saying:
2 Saye I pray you, in the eares of all the men of Sichem, whether is better for
you, that all the sonnes of Ierobaal, (which are threescore and ten persons)
raigne ouer you: either that one raigne ouer you? Remember that I am of your
bone, and of your fleshe.
3 And his mothers brethren spake of him in the audience of all the men of Sichem
all these wordes, & their heartes were moued to folow Abimelech: For they sayde,
He is our brother.
4 And they gaue him threescore and ten peeces of siluer out of the house of Baal
Berith, wherwith Abimelech hyred vayne and light persons, which went with hym.
5 And he went vnto his fathers house at Ephrah, and slue his brethren, the
sonnes of Ierobaal, beyng threescore & ten persons, vpon one stone:
Notwithstandyng, yet Ioatham the youngest sonne of Ierobaal escaped, for he hyd
hymselfe.
6 And all the men of Sichem gathered together, and al the house of Mello, and
came and made Abimelech kyng in the playne, where the stone was in Sichem.
7 And when they tolde it to Ioatham, he went and stoode in the top of mount
Garizim, and lyft vp his voyce, & cryed, and sayd vnto them: Hearken vnto me you
men of Sichem, that God may hearken vnto you.
8 The trees went foorth to annoynt a kyng ouer them, and sayde vnto the Olyue
tree: Raigne thou ouer vs.
9 But the Olyue tree sayd vnto them: Should I leaue my fatnesse wherwith by me
they honour God and man, & to be promoted ouer the trees?
10 And the trees sayd to the figge tree: Come thou, and be kyng ouer vs.
11 The figge tree aunswered them: should I forsake my sweetnes, and my good
fruite, and go to be promoted ouer the trees?
12 Then sayde the trees vnto the vine: Come thou and be kyng ouer vs.
13 The vine sayde vnto them: Should I leaue my wine wherby I cheare both God and
man, and go to be promoted ouer the trees?
14 Then said all the trees vnto the bryer: Come thou and raigne ouer vs.
15 And the bryer sayde vnto the trees: If it be true that ye will annoynt me
kyng ouer you, then come and put your trust vnder my shadow: If no, the fyre
come out of the bryer, & waste the Cedar trees of Libanon.
16 Nowe therfore, if ye do truely and vncorruptly to make Abimelech kyng, and if
ye haue dealte well with Ierobaal & his house, and haue done vnto hym according
to the deseruing of his handes:
17 (For euen my father fought for you, and aduentured his life, and ridde you
out of the hande of Madian.
18 And ye are rysen vp agaynst my fathers house this day, and haue slayne his
children, beyng threescore & ten persones vpon one stone, and haue made
Abimelech the sonne of his mayde seruaunt, king ouer the men of Sichem, because
he is your brother.)
19 If ye then haue dealt truely and purely with Ierobaal and with his house this
day, then reioyce ye with Abimelech, and let him reioyce with you.
20 But if you haue not dealt truely, then let a fire come out of Abimelech, &
consume the men of Sichem, & the house of Mello: and let there come out a fire
fro among the men of Sichem, & out of the house of Mello, & consume Abimelech.
21 And Ioatham ran away and fledde, and went to Beer, and dwelt there, for feare
of Abimelech his brother.
22 When Abimelech had raigned three yeres ouer Israel,
23 God sent an euyll spirite betweene Abimelech, & the men of Sichem: and the
citezins of Sichem brake their promise to Abimelech,
24 That the wickednes done to the three score and ten sonnes of Ierobaal might
come on him, and that God might lay the blood of them vnto Abimelech their
brother, which slue them, and vpon the other men of Sichem which ayded him in
the killing of his brethren.
25 And the citezins of Sichem set men to lay awayte for hym in the toppe of the
mountaynes, which men robbed al that came along the way by them: And it was
tolde Abimelech.
26 And Gaal the sonne of Obed came with his brethren, and they gat them to
Sichem: and the men of Sichem put their confidence in him.
27 And they went out into the fieldes, and gathered in their grapes, & trode
them, and made mery, & went into the house of their god, and dyd eate and
drinke, and cursed Abimelech.
28 And Gaal the sonne of Obed sayde: what is Abimelech? & what is Sichem, that
we shoulde serue him? Is he not the sonne of Ierobaal? & Zebul is his officer?
Serue such as come of Hemor the father of Sichem: for what reason is it that we
shoulde serue him?
29 Woulde God this people were vnder my hande, then would I take Abimelech out
of ye way. And he spake against Abimelech: Make thine hoast greater, and go out.
30 And when Zebul the ruler of the citie hearde the wordes of Gaal the sonne of
Obed, he was wroth.
31 And sent messengers vnto Abimelech priuyly, saying: Behold, Gaal the sonne of
Obed and his brethren be come to Sichem, and beholde they fortifie the citie
agaynst thee.
32 Now therfore vp by night, thou and the people that is with thee, and lye in
wayte in the fielde.
33 And rise early in the morning assone as the sunne is vp, and fall vpon the
citie: And if he & the people that is with hym come out against thee, do to hym
what thine handes shalbe able.
34 And Abimelech rose vp, and all the people that were with him, by night, and
they layde awayte against Sichem in foure companies.
35 And Gaal the sonne of Obed went out, and stoode in the entring of the gate of
the citie: And Abimelech rose vp, and the folke that were with him, from lying
in wayte.
36 And when Gaal sawe ye people, he sayd to Zebul: Beholde, there come people
downe from the top of the mountaines. And Zebul sayd vnto him: The shadow of the
hylles seeme men vnto thee.
37 And Gaal aunswered agayne, & sayd: See, there come folke downe by ye middle
of the land, & another company come along by the playne of the charmars.
38 Then sayd Zebul vnto him: Where is nowe thy mouth that said, what felowe is
Abimelech, that we should serue him? Is not this the people that thou hast
despysed? Go out now & fight with the.
39 And Gaal went out before the citezins of Sichem, & fought with Abimelech.
40 And Abimelech chased him, that he fled before him, and many were ouerthrowen
& wounded, euen vnto the entring of the gate.
41 And Abimelech dwelt at Arumah: and Zebul thrust out Gaal & his brethre that
they shoulde not dwell in Sichem.
42 And on the morow, the people wet out into the fielde: And they told
Abimelech.
43 And he toke the people, & deuided them into three copanies, & layd awayte in
the fielde, and loked, and behold the people were come out of the citie, and he
ran vpon them, and smote them.
44 And Abimelech and the companions that were with him, rushed forward, & stoode
in the entring of the gate of the citie: and the two other companions ran vpon
all the people that were in the fieldes, and slue them.
45 And when Abimelech had fought against the citie al that day, he toke it, and
slue the people that was therin, and destroyed the citie, and sowed salte in it.
46 And when all the men of the towre of Sichem heard that, they entred into an
holde of the house of the god Berith.
47 And it was told Abimelech, that all the men of the towre of Sichem were
gathered together.
48 And Abimeleh gat him to mount Zelmon, both he & all the people that were with
him, & toke axes with him, and cut downe bowes of trees, & toke them and bare
them on his shulder, & sayde vnto the folke that were with hym: what ye haue
seene me do, speede your selues, & do lykewyse as I haue done.
49 And al the men that were among the people, cut downe bowes, and folowed
Abimelech, and put them into the hold, and set the holde a fire by them: so that
al the men of the towre of Sichem died also, vpon a thousande men & women.
50 Then went Abimelech to Thebez, & besieged it, and toke it.
51 But there was a strong towre within the citie, and thyther ranne all the men
and women, and all the chiefe that were in the citie, and shut it to them, and
gate them vp to the toppe of the towre.
52 And Abimelech came vnto the towre, and fought agaynst it, and went harde vnto
the doore of ye towre to set it on fire.
53 And a certayne woman cast a peece of a mylstone vpon his head, & all to brake
his brayne panne.
54 Then Abimelech called hastyly vnto the young man that bare his harnesse, and
sayde vnto him: Drawe thy sworde and slea me, that men say not of me, A woman
slue him: And his lad thrust him thorowe, and he died.
55 And when the men of Israel sawe that Abimelech was dead, they departed euery
man vnto his owne house.
56 Thus God rendred the wickednesse of Abimelech which he dyd vnto his father,
in sleyng his seuentie brethren.
57 And therto all the wickednesse of the men of Sichem, dyd God bryng vpon their
heades: And vpon them came the curse of Ioatham the sonne of Ierobaal.

Chapter 10

1 After Abimelech, there arose to defende Israel Thola the sonne of Phuah the
sonne of Dodo, a man of Isachar, whiche dwelt in Sanur in mount Ephraim.
2 And he iudged Israel twentie & three yeres, & died, & was buried in Samir.
3 And after him, arose Iair a Gileadite, and iudged Israel twintie and two
yeres.
4 And he had thirtie sonnes that rode on thirtie Asse coltes, and they had
thirtie cities, which are called Hauoth Iair vnto this day, and are in the lande
of Gilead.
5 And Iair died, and was buried in Camon.
6 And the children of Israel wrought wickednesse yet agayne in the sight of the
Lord, and serued Baalim and Astaroth, and the gods of Siria, the gods of Sidon,
and the gods of Moab, the gods of the children of Ammon, and the gods of the
Philistines, and forsoke the Lorde, and serued not him.
7 And the Lord was wroth with Israel, and he solde them into the handes of the
Philistines, and into the handes of the children of Ammon.
8 Which from that yere foorth, pilde and oppressed the children of Israel
eyghtteene yeres, al that were on the other side Iordane, in the lande of the
Amorites whiche is in Gilead.
9 Moreouer, ye children of Ammon went ouer Iordane to fight agaynst Iuda,
Beniamin, and the house of Ephraim, so that Israel was sore cumbred.
10 And the children of Israel cryed vnto ye Lord, saying: We haue sinned against
thee, for we haue forsaken our owne God, and haue carued Baalim.
11 And the Lorde sayde vnto the childre of Israel: Dyd not I ryd you from the
Egiptians and from the Amorites, from the children of Ammon, and from the
Philistines?
12 The Sidonites also, and the Amalekites, & the Maonites dyd oppresse you, and
ye cryed to me, and I deliuered you out of their handes.
13 And for all that, ye haue forsaken me and serued straunge gods, wherfore I
will helpe you no more.
14 Go and crye vnto the gods whiche ye haue chosen, and let them saue you in the
tyme of your tribulation.
15 And the children of Israel sayde vnto the Lord: We haue sinned, do thou vnto
vs whatsoeuer please thee, deliuer vs onely we pray thee this day.
16 And they put away the straunge gods from them, & serued the Lord: And his
soule had pitie on the miserie of Israel.
17 Then the children of Ammon gathered together, & pitched in Gilead: And the
children of Israel gathered them together, and pitched in Mispah.
18 And the people and lordes of Gilead sayde eche to other: whosoeuer will
beginne the battell agaynst the children of Ammon, the same shalbe head ouer all
the inhabitauntes of Gilead.

Chapter 11

1 And there was one Iephthah a Gileadite, a strong man, the sonne of an harlot.
2 And Gilead begat Iephthah: And Gileads wyfe bare him sonnes, which when they
were come to age, thrust out Iephthah, and said vnto him: Thou shalt not
inherite in our fathers house, for thou art the sonne of a straunge woman.
3 Then Iephthah fled from his brethren, and dwelt in the lande of Tob: And there
gathered ydle men to Iephthah, and went out with him.
4 And in processe of time, the children of Ammon made warre agaynst Israel.
5 And when the children of Ammon fought thus agaynst Israel, the elders of
Gilead went to set Iephthah out of the lande of Tob,
6 And sayde vnto him: Come, and be our captayne, that we may fight with the
children of Ammon.
7 Iephthah aunswered the elders of Gilead: Dyd not ye hate me, & expell me out
of my fathers house? howe then come you vnto me nowe in time of your
tribulation?
8 And the elders of Gilead sayde vnto Iephthah: Therfore we turne agayne to thee
nowe, that thou mayest go with vs, & fight against the children of Ammon, and be
our head ouer all the inhabitauntes of Gilead.
9 And Iephthah sayde vnto the elders of Gilead: If ye bring me home againe to
fight against the children of Ammon, then yf the Lorde deliuer them before me,
shall I be your head?
10 And the elders of Gilead sayd to Iephthah: The Lorde be witnesse betweene vs,
if we do not according to thy wordes.
11 Then Iephthah went with the elders of Gilead, and ye people made hym head &
captayne ouer them: And Iephthah rehearsed al his wordes before the Lorde in
Mispah.
12 And Iephthah sent messengers vnto the king of the children of Ammon, saying:
What hast thou to do with me, that thou art come against me, to fight in my
lande?
13 The king of the children of Ammon aunswered vnto ye messengers of Iephthah:
Because Israel toke away my lande when they came out of Egypt, euen from Arnon
vnto Iabok, and vnto Iordane: Nowe therfore restore those landes agayne with
faire meanes.
14 And Iephthah sent messengers agayne vnto the king of the children of Ammon,
15 And sayd vnto him, thus sayth Iephthah: Israel toke not away the lande of
Moab, nor the lande of the children of Ammon.
16 But when Israel came vp fro Egypt, and walked thorowe the wildernesse, euen
vnto ye red sea, they came to Cades:
17 And Israel sent messengers vnto the king of Edom, saying, Let me I praye thee
go thorow thy lande: But the king of Edo would not agree therto. And in lyke
maner they sent vnto the king of Moab: but he woulde not consent. And Israel
abode stil in Cades.
18 And then they went along thorowe the wildernesse, and compassed the land of
Edom, & the land of Moab, and came along by the east syde of the land of Moab,
and pitched on the other side of Arnon, and woulde not come within the coast of
Moab: for Arnon was the border of Moab.
19 And then Israel sent messengers vnto Sehon king of the Amorites, & king of
Hesbon, and sayde vnto him: Let vs passe we pray thee thorow thy land vnto our
owne countrey.
20 But Sehon consented not to Israel, that he shoulde go thorowe his coast: but
gathered all his people together, & pitched in Iasa, & fought with Israel.
21 And the Lorde God of Israel deliuered Sehon & all his folke into the handes
of Israel, and they smote them: So Israel smote them, and possessed all the land
of the Amorites the inhabitauntes of that countrey.
22 And they possessed al the coastes of the Amorites, from Arnon vnto Iabok, &
from the wildernesse vnto Iordane.
23 So nowe, seyng the Lord God of Israel hath cast out the Amorites before his
people Israel, shouldest thou possesse it?
24 Nay, but what people Camos thy God dryueth out, that lande possesse thou:
Euen so whatsoeuer nation the Lord our God expelleth before vs, that lande ought
we to enioy.
25 And art thou better then Balac the sonne of Zephor king of Moab? Did he not
stryue with Israel and fight against them,
26 All the whyle Israel dwelt in Hesbon and her townes, in Aroer and her townes,
and in all the cities that be along by ye coastes of Arnon three hundred yeres?
Why did ye not recouer them in all that space?
27 Wherfore I haue not synned agaynst thee, but thou doest me wrong to warre
against me: The Lord therfore whiche is a iudge, be iudge this day betweene the
children of Israel, and the children of Ammon.
28 Howbeit, the king of the children of Ammon hearkened not vnto the wordes of
Iephthah, which he sent him.
29 Then the spirite of the Lord came vpo Iephthah, and he passed ouer to Gilead
& to Manasses, and came to Mispah that lieth in Gilead, & from thence vnto the
children of Ammon.
30 And Iephthah vowed a vowe vnto ye Lorde, & sayd: If thou shalt deliuer the
children of Ammon into my handes,
31 Then that thing that commeth out of the doores of my house against me, whe I
come home in peace from the children of Ammon, shalbe the Lordes, and I will
offer it vp for a burnt offering.
32 And so Iephthah went vnto the children of Ammon to fight agaynst them, and
the Lorde deliuered them into his handes.
33 And he smote them from Aroer tyll thou come to Mennith, euen twentie cities,
and so foorth to the playne of the vineyardes, with an exceeding great
slaughter: And thus the childre of Ammon were brought vnder, before the children
of Israel.
34 When Iephthah came to Misphah vnto his house, see, his daughter came out
agaynst him with timbrelles and daunces, which was his onely chylde: so that
beside her, he had neither sonne nor daughter.
35 And when he sawe her, he rent his clotes, & sayde: Alas my daughter, thou
hast brought me lowe, & art one of them that troubleth me: For I haue opened my
mouth vnto the Lorde, and cannot go backe.
36 And she sayde vnto him: My father, if thou haue opened thy mouth vnto the
Lorde, then do with me according to it that proceeded out of thy mouth, for as
much as the Lorde hath auenged thee of thyne enemies ye children of Ammon.
37 And she sayd vnto her father, Do this much for me: Let me alone two monethes,
that I may go to the mountaynes and bewayle my virginite, I and my felowes.
38 And he sayd, go. And he sent her away two monethes: And so she went with her
companions, & lamented her maydenhead vpon the mountaynes.
39 And after the ende of two monethes, she turned agayne vnto her father, whiche
dyd with her according to his vowe whiche he had vowed, & she had knowne no man:
And it grewe to a custome in Israel,
40 The daughters of Israel came yere by yere to lamet the daughter of Iephthah
the Gileadite, foure dayes in a yere.

Chapter 12

1 And the men of Ephraim gathered them selues together, & went northwarde, &
sayd vnto Iephthah: Wherfore wentest thou to fight against the children of
Ammon, and dyddest not call vs to go with thee? we will therfore burne thine
house vpon thee with fire.
2 And Iephthah sayde vnto them, I & my people were at great stryfe with the
children of Ammon: And when I called you, ye deliuered me not out of their
handes.
3 And when I sawe that ye deliuered me not, I put my lyfe in my handes, and went
vpon the children of Ammon, and the Lorde deliuered them into my handes:
Wherfore then are ye come vppon me nowe, to fight against me?
4 Iephthah therfore gathered together all the men of Gilead, and fought with the
Ephraites. And the men of Gilead smote the Ephraites, because they sayd: Ye
Gileadites are but runneagates of Ephraim, among the Ephraites and the
Manassites.
5 Moreouer, the men of Gilead toke the passages of Iordane before the Ephraites:
And when those Ephraites that were escaped, said, Let me go ouer: then the men
of Gilead sayde vnto hym, Art thou an Ephraite? If he sayde, nay:
6 Then sayde they vnto him: Then say, Schibboleth. And he sayde, Sibboleth: for
he coulde not so pronounce. And then they toke him, and slue him at the passages
of Iordane: And there were ouerthrowen at that time of the Ephraites fourtie and
two thousande.
7 And Iephthah iudged Israel six yeres, then died Iephthah the Gileadite, and
was buried in one of ye cities of Gilead.
8 After this man, iudged Israel one Ibzan of Bethlehem.
9 And he had thirtie sonnes and thirtie daughters, whom he sent out, and toke in
thirtie daughters from abrode for his sonnes. And when Ibzan had iudged Israel
seuen yere,
10 He died, & was buried at Bethlehem.
11 After him, Elon a Zabulonite iudged Israel ten yeres.
12 And Elon the Zabulonite died, & was buried in Aialon, in the countrey of
Zabulon.
13 After him, Abdon the sonne of Hellel, a Pharathonite, iudged Israel.
14 And he had fourtie sonnes, and thirtie neuewes, that rode on threscore and
ten asse coltes: And when Abdon the sonne of Hellel the Pharathonite had iudged
Israel eight yeres,
15 He died, & was buryed in Pharathon in the lande of Ephraim, in the mount of
the Amalekites.

Chapter 13

1 And the children of Israel began agayne to comitte wickednesse in the sight of
the lord, and the Lorde deliuered them into the handes of the Philistines
fourtie yeres.
2 And there was a man in Zaraah of the kinred of Dan, named Manoah, whose wife
was barren, and bare not.
3 And the angell of the Lord appeared vnto the woman, & sayde vnto her: Beholde,
nowe thou art barren, & bearest not, but thou shalt conceaue, and beare a sonne.
4 And nowe therfore beware that thou drinke no wyne, nor strong drinke, neither
eate any vncleane thing:
5 For lo, thou shalt conceaue and beare a sonne, And ther may no rasor come on
his head, for ye ladde shalbe a Nazarite vnto God euen from his byrth: And he
shal beginne to saue Israel out of the handes of the Philistines.
6 Then the wife came, & tolde her husbande, saying: A man of God came vnto me,
and the fashion of him was lyke the fashion of an angell of God, exceeding
fearful: But I asked him not whence he was, neither tolde he me his name:
7 But sayde vnto me, behold, thou shalt be with childe and beare a sonne, & now
drinke no wyne nor strong drinke, neither eate any vncleane thing, for the ladde
shalbe an abstayner to God, euen from his byrth to the day of his death.
8 Then Manoah made intercession to the Lorde, and sayde: I pray thee my Lorde,
let the man of God whiche thou sendedst, come agayne vnto vs, & teache vs what
we shal do vnto the ladde whe he is borne.
9 And God heard the voyce of Manoah: and the angel of God came agayne vnto the
wife as she sate in the felde: but Manoah her husbad was not with her.
10 And the wife made haste, and ranne & shewed her husbande, & sayde vnto him:
behold, the man appeared vnto me that came vnto me to day.
11 And Manoah arose & went after his wife, and came to the man, and sayde vnto
him: Art thou the ma that spakest vnto the woman? And he sayde: I am.
12 Manoah sayde, Nowe let thy saying come to passe: Howe shall we order the
childe, and do vnto him?
13 And the angell of the Lord sayd vnto Manoah: The woman must absteyne from all
that I sayde vnto her:
14 She may eate of nothing that cometh of the vine tree, nor drinke wine or
strong drinke, nor eate any vncleane thing: but must obserue all that I bad her.
15 Manoah sayde vuto the angell of the Lorde: I pray thee let vs retayne thee
vntill we haue made redy a kyd before thee.
16 And the angel of the Lord sayde vnto Manoah: Though thou make me abide, I wil
not eate of thy bread: And if thou wilt offer a burnt offering, thou must offer
it vnto the Lorde. For Manoah wist not that it was an angell of the Lorde.
17 And Manoah sayde agayne vnto the angell of the Lord: What is thy name, that
when thy saying is come to passe, we may do thee worshippe?
18 And the angel of the Lorde sayde vnto him: Why askest thou thus after my
name, which is secrete?
19 And so Manoah toke a kyd, with a meat offring, and offred it vpon a rocke
vnto the Lorde: And the angell did wonderously, Manoah and his wife lokyng vpon.
20 And whe the flambe came vp toward heauen from the aulter, the angell of the
Lorde ascended vp in the flambe of the aulter: And Manoah and his wyfe loked
vpon it, and fell on their faces vnto the grounde.
21 (But the angel of the Lord did no more appeare vnto Manoah and his wyfe:) And
then Manoah knewe that it was an angel of the Lorde,
22 And sayd vnto his wyfe: We shal surely dye, because we haue seene God.
23 But his wyfe sayde vnto him: Yf the Lord would kyll vs, he would not haue
receaued a burnt offering and a meate offering of our handes, neither woulde he
haue shewed vs al these thinges, nor woulde nowe haue tolde vs any suche.
24 And the wyfe bare a sonne, and called his name Samson: And ye ladde grewe,
and the Lorde blessed him.
25 And the spirite of the Lorde began to strengthen him in the hoast of Dan,
betweene Zaraah and Esthaol.

Chapter 14

1 Samson went downe to Thamnath, and sawe a woma in Thamnath of the daughters of
the Philistines:
2 And he came vp, and told his father and his mother, & said: I haue sene a
woman in Thamnath of the daughters of the Philistines: & nowe geue me her to
wyfe.
3 Then his father and mother sayd vnto him: Is there neuer a woman among the
daughters of thy brethren, & among al my people, but that thou must go, and take
a wyfe of the vncircumcised Philistines? And Samson sayd vnto his father: Geue
me this woman, for she pleaseth me well.
4 But his father and mother wist not that it was the Lordes doyng, and that he
sought an occasion against the Philistines: for at that time the Philistines
raigned ouer Israel.
5 Then went Samson and his father & his mother downe to Thamnath, and came to
the vineyardes of Thamnath: and beholde, a young Lion roared vpon him.
6 And the spirite of the Lord came vpo him, and he tare him as he would haue
rent a kydde, and yet had nothing in his hande: neither tolde his father and
mother what he had done.
7 And he went downe, & talked with the woman, whiche seemed well fauoured in the
sight of Samson.
8 And within a short space after, as he wet thyther againe to take her to wife,
he turned out of the way to see the carkasse of the Lion: And beholde, there was
a swarme of bees and hony in the carkasse of the Lion.
9 And he toke therof in his handes, and went eating, and came to his father and
mother, and gaue them also, and they did eate: But he tolde not them that he had
taken the hony out of the carkasse of the Lion.
10 And so his father went downe vnto the woman, and Samson made there a feast:
for so vsed the younge men to do.
11 And whe they sawe him, they brought thirtie companions to be with him.
12 And Samson sayd vnto them, I will nowe put foorth a riddle vnto you: & yf you
can declare it me within seuen dayes of the feast, and finde it out, I will geue
you thirtie sheetes, & thirtie chaunge of garmentes:
13 But and if you can not declare it me, then shal ye geue me thirtie sheetes
and thirtie chaunge of garmentes. And they aunswered him: Put foorth thy riddle,
that we may heare it.
14 And he sayd vnto them: Out of the eater came meate, and out of the strong
came sweetnesse. And they coulde not in three dayes expounde the riddle.
15 And whe the seuenth day was come, they sayd vnto Samsons wyfe: Flatter thyne
husband that he may declare vs the riddle, lest we burne thee and thy fathers
house with fire: Haue ye called vs hyther, to make vs beggers? is it not so?
16 And Samsons wyfe wept before him and sayd, Surely thou hatest me and louest
me not: for thou hast put foorth a riddle vnto the children of my folke, and
hast not tolde it me. And he sayde vnto her: Beholde, I haue not tolde it my
father and my mother, and shall I tell it thee?
17 And Samsons wyfe wept before him seuen dayes, whyle the feast lasted: And the
seuenth day he told her, because she lay so sore vpo him. And she tolde the
riddle to the children of her folke.
18 And the men of the citie sayd vnto him the seuenth day, before the sunne went
downe: What is sweeter then hony? and what is stronger then a Lion? Then sayd he
vnto them: Yf ye had not plowed with my heyffer, ye had not founde out my
riddle.
19 And the spirite of the Lord came vpon him, and he went downe to Askalon, and
slue thirtie men of them, and spoyled them, & gaue chaunge of garmentes vnto
them which expounded the riddle: And he was wroth, and went vp to his fathers
house.
20 But Samsons wyfe was geuen to one of his companions that he had taken vnto
him.

Chapter 15

1 But within a while after, euen in the time of wheat haruest, Sason visited his
wife with a kyd, saying: I wil go in to my wyfe into the chaumber. But her
father woulde not suffer him to go in.
2 And her father sayde, I thought that thou haddest hated her, & therfore gaue I
her to thy companion: Is not her younger sister fayrer then she? Take her I pray
thee, in steade of the other.
3 Samson sayde vnto hym: Nowe am I more blamelesse then the Philistines, and
therfore will I do them displeasure.
4 And Samson went out, and caught three hundred foxes, & toke firebrandes, and
turned them tayle to tayle, and put a firebrand in the middes betweene two
tayles.
5 And when he had set the brandes on fire, he sent them out into the standyng
corne of the Philistines, & burnt vp both the reaped corne, and also the
standing, with the vineyardes and oliues.
6 Then the Philistines sayd: Who hath done this? And they aunswered: Samson the
sonne in lawe of the Thamnite, because he had taken his wife, & geuen her to his
companion. And the Philistines came vp, and burnt her and her father with fire.
7 And Samson said vnto them: Though ye haue done this, yet will I be auenged of
you, and then I will ceasse.
8 And he smote them legge and thygh with a myghtie plague, and then he went &
dwelt in the toppe of the rocke Etam.
9 Then the Philistines came vp, and pytched in Iuda, and camped in Lehi.
10 And the men of Iuda sayde: Why are ye come vp vnto vs? They aunswered: To
bynde Samson are we come vp, & to do to hym, as he hath done to vs.
11 Then three thonsande men of Iuda went to the toppe of the rocke Etam, & sayde
to Samson: Wottest thou not that the Philistines are rulers ouer vs? Wherfore
then hast thou done thus vnto vs? He aunswered them: As they dyd vnto me, so
haue I done vnto them.
12 And they sayd vnto him agayne: We are come to bynde thee, and to deliuer thee
into ye hande of the Philistines. And Samson said vnto them: Sweare vnto me,
that ye shall not fal vpon me your selues.
13 They aunswered him, saying: No, but we will bynde thee, & delyuer thee vnto
their handes: but we wyll not kyll thee. And they bounde hym with two new
cordes, and brought him from the rocke.
14 And when he came to Lehi, the Philistines showted agaynst him: And the
spirite of the Lord came vpon him, and the cordes that were vpon his armes,
became as flaxe that was burnt with fire, for the bandes loosed from of his
handes.
15 And he founde a newe iawe bone of an Asse, & put foorth his hande, and caught
it, and slue a thousande men therwith.
16 And Samson sayde: With the iawe of an Asse, heapes vpon heapes: with the iawe
of an Asse haue I slayne a thousande men.
17 And when he had left speakyng, he cast away the iawe bone out of his hande,
and called the place Ramath Lehi.
18 And he was sore a thyrst, and called on the Lord, and sayde: Thou hast geuen
this great victory in the hande of thy seruaunt: and nowe I must dye for thirst,
and fall into the handes of the vncircumcised.
19 But God brake a great tooth that was in the iawe, & there came water therout,
and when he had drunke, his spirite came agayne, & he was refreshed: wherfore
the name thereof was called vnto this day, The well of the caller on: which came
of the iawe.
20 And he iudged Israel in the dayes of the Philistines, twentie yeres.

Chapter 16

1 Then went Samson to Azzah, and sawe there an harlot, and went in vnto her.
2 And it was tolde the Azathites, saying: Samson is come hyther. And they went
about, and layde a wayte for hym there all nyght in the gate of the citie, and
were styll all the nyght, saying: In the mornyng whan it is day, we shall kyll
hym.
3 And Samson toke his rest tyll mydnyght, and arose at mydnyght, and toke the
doores of the gate of the citie, and the two postes, and rent them of with the
barre and all, and put them vppon his shoulders, and caryed them vp to the top
of an hyll, that is before Hebron.
4 And after this, he loued a woman by the ryuer of Sorek, whose name was Dalila.
5 Unto whom came the lordes of the Philistines, and sayde vnto her: Perswade
him, and see wherin his great strength lyeth, and by what meanes we may ouercome
him, that we may bynde him, and punishe hym: and euery one of vs shall geue thee
a leuen hundred siluer lynges.
6 And Dalila sayde to Samson: Oh, tell me where thy great strength lyeth, and
how thou myghtest be bounde and brought vnder.
7 Samson aunswered vnto her: Yf they binde me with seuen greene wythes that were
neuer dryed, I shalbe weake, and be as an other man.
8 And then the lordes of the Philistines brought her seuen wythes that were yet
greene & neuer dryed, and she bound hym therwith.
9 (Notwithstanding she had men lying in wayte with her in the chaumbre): And she
said vnto him, The Philistines be vpon thee Samson. And immediatly he brake the
cordes, as a stryng of towe breaketh when it fealeth fire. And so his strength
was not knowen.
10 And Dalila sayde vnto Samson: See, thou hast mocked me, and tolde me lies:
Now therfore tell me wherwith thou myghtest be bounde.
11 He aunswered her: Yf they bynde me with newe ropes that neuer were occupied,
I shall be weake, and be as an other man.
12 Dalila therfore toke newe ropes, and bounde him therwith, and sayde vnto him,
The Philistines be vpo thee Samson. (And there were lyers of wayte in the
chamber.) And he brake them from of his armes, as they had ben but a threade.
13 And Dalila sayde vnto Samson, Hytherto thou hast beguyled me, and tolde me
lyes: Yet tell me howe thou myghtest be bounde. He sayde vnto her: Yf thou
plattest the seuen lockes of my head with the threades of the wooffe.
14 And she fastened it with a pynne, and sayde vnto him: The Philistines be vpo
thee Samson. And he awaked out of his sleepe, and went away with the pynne of
the webbe and the wooffe.
15 And she sayde vnto him agayne: How canst thou saye I loue thee, when thyne
heart is not with me? Thou hast mocked me this three tymes, and hast not tolde
me wherin thy great strength lyeth.
16 And as she laye vpon hym with her wordes, continually vexyng of him, his
soule was encumbred eue vnto ye death.
17 And so he tolde her all his heart, & said vnto her: There neuer came rasor
vpon myne head, for I haue ben a Nazarite vnto God, euen from my mothers wombe:
Therfore when I am shauen, my strength will go from me, & I shall waxe weake,
and be lyke all other men.
18 And when Dalila sawe that he had tolde her all his heart, she sent and called
for the lordes of the Philistines, saying: Come vp yet this once, for he hath
shewed me all his hearte. Then ye lordes of the Philistines came vp vnto her,
and brought the money in their handes.
19 And she made hym sleepe vpon her knees, and she sent for a man, and he dyd
shaue of the seuen lockes of his head, & began to vexe him, and his strength was
gone from him.
20 And she sayde, The Philistines be vp in thee Samson. And he awoke out of his
sleepe, and sayde: I will go out now as at other tymes before, & shake my selfe.
And he wist not that the Lord was departed from hym.
21 But the Philistines toke hym, and put out his eyes, and brought him downe to
Azzah, and bounde him with fetters of brasse: and he dyd grynde in the prison
house.
22 Howbeit the heere of his head began to growe agayne after that he was shauen.
23 Then the lordes of the Philistines gathered them together, for to offer a
solempne offring vnto Dagon their God, and to reioyce: For they sayd, Our God
hath deliuered Samson our enemie into our handes.
24 And when the people sawe him, they praysed their God: for they sayde, Our God
hath delyuered into our handes our enemie, and destroyer of our countrey, whiche
slue manye of vs.
25 And when their heartes were mery, they sayde: Send for Samson, that he may
make vs laugh. And they set Samson out of the prison house, and he played before
them: and they set hym betweene the pyllers.
26 And Samson sayde vnto the lad that led hym by the hande: Set me that I may
touche the pyllers that the house standeth vpon, and that I may leane to them.
27 And the house was full of men and women, and there were all the lordes of the
Philistines: And there were vpon the roofe a three thousande men and women, that
behelde whyle Samson played.
28 And Samson called vnto the Lorde, and sayde: O Lorde God I pray thee thyncke
vpon me, and strengthen me I beseche thee at this tyme onelye O God, that I may
be at once auenged of the Philistines for my two eyes.
29 And Samson caught the two middle pyllers on which the house stoode and on
which it was borne vp, the one in his ryght hande, and the other in his left.
30 And Samson sayde: My soule shall dye with the Philistines, and bowed them
with all his myght, and the house fell vpon the lordes and vpon all the people
that were therin: And so ye dead which he slue at his death, were mo then they
which he slue in his lyfe.
31 And then his brethren & all the house of his father came downe, and toke him
vp, and brought hym, and buryed hym betweene Zarah and Esthaol, in the burying
place of Manoah his father: And he iudged Israel twentie yeres.

Chapter 17

1 There was a man of mount Ephraim, named Micah.
2 And he sayde vnto his mother: The seuen hundred siluerlynges that were taken
from thee, about which thou cursedst, and spakest it in myne eares, behold the
syluer is with me, I toke it away. And his mother sayd: Blessed be thou my
sonne, in the Lorde.
3 And when he had restored the leuen hundreth syluerlynges to his mother, his
mother sayde: I had dedicated the syluer vnto the Lorde of myne hande for thee
my sonne, that thou shouldest make a grauen and moulten image: Now therfore I
will geue it thee agayne.
4 And when he restored the money vnto his mother, his mother toke two hundreth
syluerlynges, and gaue them the founder, which made therof a grauen moulten
image, and it was in the house of Micah.
5 And the man Micah had an house of goddes, and made an Ephod and Theraphim, and
consecrated one of his sonnes, which became his prieste.
6 In those dayes there was no kyng in Israel, but euery man dyd that which was
good in his owne eyes.
7 And there was a young man out of Bethlehem Iuda, of the kynred of Iuda, which
young man was a Leuite, & soiourned there.
8 And the man departed out of the citie of Bethlehem Iuda, to go dwell where he
coulde fynde a conuenient place: And he came to mount Ephraim, to the house of
Micah as he iourneyed.
9 And Micah sayde vnto him: Whence comest thou? The Leuite aunswered hym: I am
of Bethlehem Iuda, and go to dwell where I may fynde a place.
10 And Micah sayde agayne vnto hym: Dwell with me, and be vnto me a father and a
prieste, and I will geue thee ten syluerlynges by yere, two garmentes, and thy
meate and dryncke. So the Leuite went in.
11 And ye Leuite was content to dwell with the man, and was vnto hym as one of
his owne sonnes.
12 And Micah consecrated the Leuite, & the young man became his priest, and was
in the house of Micah.
13 Then sayde Micah: Now I am sure that the Lord will be good vnto me, seing I
haue a Leuite to my prieste.

Chapter 18

1 In those dayes there was no kyng in Israel, and in those dayes the tribe of
Dan sought them an inheritaunce to dwell in: For vnto that tyme all their
inheritaunce had not fallen vnto them among the tribe of Israel.
2 And the children of Dan sent of their kynred fyue actiue men in feates of
warre out of their coastes, euen out of Zaraah & Esthaol, to viewe the lande and
searche it out, and sayde vnto them: Go, and searche out the lande. Which whan
they came to mount Ephraim, euen to the house of Micah, they lodged there.
3 And when they were in the house of Micah, they knewe the voyce of the young
man the Leuite: And when they turned in thyther, they sayde vnto him: Who
brought thee thyther? What makest thou in this place? and what hast thou here?
4 And he aunswered them: Thus and thus dealeth Micah with me, and hath hyred me,
and I am become his priest.
5 And they sayd vnto hym agayne: Aske counsell now of God, that we may knowe
whether the way which we go shalbe prousperous, or no.
6 And the priest sayde vnto them: Go in peace, for the Lorde guydeth your way
which ye go.
7 Then the fyue men departed, & came to Lais, and sawe the people that were
therin, howe they dwelt carelesse, after the maner of the Sidons styll, &
without castyng of perils, and that no man made any trouble in the lande, or
vsurped any dominion: but were farre from the Sidons, and had no busynesse with
other men.
8 And they came agayne vnto their brethren to Zaraah and Esthaol, and their
brethren sayde vnto them: What haue ye done?
9 And they aunswered: Aryse, that we may go vp agaynst them, for we haue seene
the lande, surely a very good one: And do ye syt styll? Be not slouthfull to go
and entre to possesse the lande.
10 Yf ye will go, ye shall come vnto a people that casteth no perils, and it is
a very large countrey, which God hath geuen into your handes: It is also a place
which doth lacke nothing that is in the worlde.
11 And there departed thence of the kynred of the Danites, euen out of Zaraah
and Esthaol, sixe hundred men appoyntted with instrumentes of warre.
12 And they went vp, and pytched in Kiriath iarim, whiche is in Iuda: Wherfore
they called the place, Mahaneh Dan, vnto this day, and it is on ye backsyde of
Kiriath iarim.
13 And they went thence vnto mount Ephraim, & came vnto the house of Micah.
14 Then aunswered the fiue men that went to spye out the countrey of Lais, and
saide vnto their brethren: Wot ye not that there is in these houses an Ephod,
Theraphim, and a grauen and a moulten image? Nowe therfore consider what ye haue
to do.
15 And they turned thytherwarde, and came to the house of the young man the
Leuite, euen vnto the house of Micah, and saluted hym peaceablie.
16 And the sixe hundred men girded with weapons of warre, which were of the
children of Dan, stoode by the entryng of the gate.
17 And the fiue men that went to spye out the lande, went in thyther, & toke the
graue image, & the Ephod, Theraphim, and the moulten image: (And the priest
stoode in the entryng of the gate with the sixe hundred men that were appointed
with weapons of warre.)
18 Whyle the other went into Micahs house, and fet the carued image, the Ephod,
Theraphim, and the moulten image: Then saide the priest vnto them, what do ye?
19 They aunswered hym: Holde thy peace, lay thine hande vpon thy mouth, and come
with vs, to be our father and priest: Is it better for thee to be a priest vnto
the house of one man, then to be a priest vnto a tribe or kynred in Israel?
20 And the priestes hearte was glad, and toke the Ephod, and Theraphim, and the
grauen image, and went in the middest of the people.
21 And they turned and departed, and put the children, the catell, and their
other substaunce before them.
22 And whe they were a good way from the house of Micah, the men that were in
the houses neare to Micahs house, gathered together, & folowed after the
children of Dan:
23 And called vnto them, and they turned their faces, & said vnto Micah: What
ayleth thee, that thou makest an outcrye?
24 And he sayd: Ye haue taken away my goddes which I made, and also ye priest,
and go your wayes: and what haue I more? How then saye ye vnto me, What ayleth
thee?
25 And the children of Dan said vnto him: Let not thy voyce be hearde among vs,
lest angrye felowes runne vpon thee, & thou lose thy lyfe, with the lyues of all
thyne housholde.
26 And so the children of Dan went their wayes: And when Micah sawe that they
were to strong for hym, he turned and went backe vnto his house.
27 And they toke the thinges which Micah had made, and the priest which he had,
and came vnto Lais, euen vnto a people that were at rest and without mystrust,
and smote them with the edge of the sword, & burnt the citie with fire.
28 And there was no man to helpe, because Lais was farre from Sidon, & they had
medlyng with any other man: And it was in the valley that lyeth by Bethrehob.
29 And they buylt them there a citie, and dwelt therin, & called it Dan after
the name of Dan their father, which was borne vnto Israel: Howbeit, the name of
the citie was Lais at ye begynnyng.
30 And the chyldren of Dan set them vp the grauen image: And Ionathan the sonne
of Gersom, the sonne of Manasses, and his sonnes, were the priestes in the tribe
of Dan, vntyl the day of the captiuitie of the lande.
31 And they set them vp the carued image which Micah made, all the while that
the house of God was in Silo.

Chapter 19

1 Also in those dayes, when there was no kyng in Israel, a certayne Leuite
soiournyng on the syde of mount Ephraim, toke to wyfe a concubine out of
Bethlehem Iuda.
2 And his concubine played the whore by him, and went awaye from him vnto her
fathers house to Bethlehem Iuda, and there continued foure monethes.
3 And her husbande arose, and went after her, to speake frendly vnto her, and to
bryng her agayne, hauyng his lad with him, and a couple of asses: And she
brought hym vnto her fathers house, & when the father of the damosell sawe hym,
he reioyced of his commyng.
4 And his father in lawe, the damosels father, retayned hym, and he abode with
hym three dayes: and so they dyd eate and drinke, and lodged there.
5 The fourth day whan they arose early in the mornyng, the man stoode vp, to
depart. And the damosels father sayde vnto his sonne in lawe: Comfort thyne
heart with a morsell of bread, and then go your way.
6 And they sate downe, and dyd eate and drincke both of them together. And the
damosels father sayde vnto the man: Be content I pray thee, and tary all nyght,
and let thyne heart be mery.
7 And when the man stoode redy to depart, his father in lawe compelled hym:
therfore he returned, and taryed all nyght there.
8 And he rose vp early the fyfth day to departe, and the damosels father said:
Comforte thyne hearte I pray thee. And they taryed vntyll after mydday: and they
dyd eate both of them together.
9 And when the man arose to depart with his concubine and his lad, his father in
lawe the damosels father, sayd vnto hym: Behold nowe, the day goeth fast away,
and draweth towarde euen, I pray you tary all night: Behold the sunne goeth to
rest, lodge here, that thyne hearte may be mery: and to morowe get you early
vpon your waye, that thou mayest get thee to thy tent.
10 Neuerthelatere the man woulde not tary, but arose and departed, and came as
farre as Iebus (which is Hierusalem) and his two asses laden, and his concubine
with hym.
11 And when they were fast by Iebus, the day was sore spent, and the young man
sayde vnto his maister: Come I pray thee, and let vs turne in into this citie of
the Iebusites, and lodge al night there.
12 His maister aunswered him: We wyll not turne into a straunge citie that are
not of the children of Israel, we will go foorth to Gibea.
13 And he sayd vnto his lad: Go forwarde and let vs drawe neare to one of these
places to lodge all nyght, either in Gibea, or in Rama
14 And they went forwarde vpon their way, and the sunne went downe vpon them
when they were fast by Gibea, which belongeth to them of Beniamin.
15 And they turned thytherwarde to go in, and lodge all nyght in Gibea: And when
he came, he sat him downe in a streate of the citie, for there was no man that
toke them into his house to lodgyng.
16 And behold, there came an olde man from his worke, out of the fielde at eue,
which was also of mount Ephraim, and dwelt as a straunger in Gibea: But the men
of the place, were the children of Iemini.
17 And when he had lyft vp his eyes, he sawe a wayfaryng man in the streate of
the citie: And the olde man sayde, Whyther goest thou? and whence commest thou?
18 He aunswered hym: We come from Bethlehem Iuda towarde the syde of mount
Ephraim, from thence am I: and I went to Bethlehem Iuda, and go nowe to the
house of the Lorde, and there is no man that receaueth me to house.
19 We haue strawe and prouender for our asses, and bread and wyne for me and thy
handmayde, and for the lad that is with thy seruaunt: & we lacke nothing.
20 The olde man sayd: Peace be with thee, all that thou lackest shalt thou fynde
with me: Only abyde not in the streate all nyght.
21 And so he brought him into his house, and gaue fodder vnto the Asses: and
they wasshed their feete, and dyd eate and drynke.
22 And as they were makyng their heartes mery, beholde, the men of the citie
which were wicked, beset the house rounde about, and thrust at the doore, &
spake to the man of the house, the olde man, saying: Bring foorth the man that
came into thyne house, that we may knowe him.
23 And this man the maister of the house went out, and sayd vnto them: Oh, nay
my brethren, do not so wickedly, seyng that this man is come into myne house, do
not so vnmeete a thyng.
24 Behold, here is my daughter a mayden, and this mans concubine, them I wyll
bryng out nowe vnto you, and humble them, & do with them what seemeth you good:
but vnto this man do not so abhominable a thing.
25 But the men woulde not hearken to hym: And the man toke his concubine, and
brought her out vnto them, whiche knewe her, and abused her al the night, euen
vnto the mornyng: and when the day began to spryng, they let her go.
26 And then came the woman in the dawnyng of the day, and fell downe at the
doore of the mans house where her lord was, tyll it was day.
27 And her lorde arose vp in the morning, and opened the doores of the house,
and went out to go his way: and beholde the woman, euen his concubine, laye
along before the doore of the house, and her handes vpon the thresholde.
28 And he sayde vnto her, Up, and let vs be goyng: But she aunswered not. Then
the man toke her vp vpo an asse, & stoode vp, & gate hym vnto his place.
29 And whe he was come into his house, he toke a knyfe, and caught his
concubine, and deuided her in peeces, with the bones, into twelue partes, and
sent her into all quarters of Israel.
30 And all that sawe it, sayde: There was no suche deede done or seene sence the
childre of Israel came out of Egypt vnto this day. Consider the matter, take
aduisement, and say your myndes.

Chapter 20

1 Then all the chyldren of Israel went out, and the congregation was gathered
together as one man, euen from Dan to Beerseba, with the lande of Gilead, vnto
the Lorde in Mispah.
2 And there assembled the chiefe men of all the people, and of all the tribes of
Israel, in the congregation of the people of God, foure hundred thousande
footemen that drewe swordes.
3 (Now the chyldren of Beniamin heard that the chyldren of Israel were gone vp
to Mispah) Then sayde the chyldren of Israel: Tell vs howe this wickednes is
committed?
4 And the Leuite the womans husband that was slayne, aunswered and saide: I came
into Gibea that is in Beniamin with my concubine, to lodge all nyght:
5 And the men of Gibea rose against me, and beset the house rounde about vpon me
by night, & thought to haue slayne me, and my concubyne haue they forced, that
she is dead.
6 And I toke my concubine, & cut her in peeces, and sent her throughout all the
countrey of the inheritaunce of Israel: For they haue committed abhomination and
villanie in Israel.
7 Beholde ye are all children of Israel, geue your aduice and counsel herein.
8 And all the people arose as one man, saying: There shal not a man of vs go to
his tent, neither turne into his house.
9 But this shalbe it that we will do to Gibea: we will go vp by lot against it:
10 And we will take ten men of the hundred throughout all the tribes of Israel,
and an hundred of the thousande, and a thousand out of ten thousand, to fetch
vitayle for the people, that they may do when they come to Gibea Beniamin,
according to all the abhomination that they haue wrought in Israel.
11 And so all the men of Israel gathered together against the citie, knyt
together as one man.
12 And the tribes of Israel sent men thorowe all the tribe of Beniamin, saying:
What wickednesse is this that is committed among you?
13 Nowe therfore deliuer vs the men, those children of belial whiche are in
Gibea, that we may slea them, and put away euill from Israel.
14 Neuerthelater, the children of Beniamin would not hearke vnto the voyce of
their brethren the children of Israel: But the children of Beniamin gathered the
selues together out of the cities vnto Gibea, to come out and fight agaynst the
children of Israel.
15 And the children of Beniamin were numbred at that time out of the cities,
twentie & sixe thousand men that drewe swordes, besyde the inhabitauntes of
Gibea, which were numbred seuen hundred chosen men.
16 And among all these folke, were seuen hundred chosen men beyng left handed,
whiche euery one coulde flyng stones at an heere breadth, and not misse.
17 And the children of Israel beside Beniamin, were numbred foure hundred
thousand men that drewe swordes, and were all men of warre.
18 And the children of Israel arose, and wet vp to the house of God, and asked
of God, saying: Whiche of vs shall go vp first to the battel against the
children of Beniamin? And the Lorde sayd: Iuda shall begin.
19 And the children of Israel stoode vp early, and camped against Gibea.
20 And the men of Israel went out to battell against Beniamin, and the men of
Israel put the selues in aray to fight against them, beside Gibea.
21 And the children of Beniamin came out of Gibea, and destroyed downe to the
ground of the Israelites that day twentie and two thousand men.
22 And the people the men of Israel plucked vp their heartes, and set their
battel againe in aray, in the same place where they dyd the first day.
23 (And the children of Israel went vp, and wept before the Lorde vnto euen, and
asked of the Lord, saying: Shal we go agayne to battell against the children of
Beniamin our brethre? And the Lord sayde: Go vp against them.)
24 And the children of Israel came neare against the children of Beniamin the
seconde day.
25 And the children of Beniamin went against them out of Gibea the seconde day,
and destroyed to the earth of the childre of Israel once againe eyghteene
thousand men that drewe swordes euerie man of them.
26 Then al the children of Israel, and all the people, went vp and came vnto the
house of God, and wept, and sate there before the Lord, and fasted the same day
vnto euen, and offered burnt offerynges and peace offerynges before the Lorde.
27 And the children of Israel asked the Lord: (for there was the arke of the
appoyntment of God, in those dayes:
28 And Phinehes the sonne of Eleazar, the sonne of Aaron stoode before it at
that time) saying: Shal I get me vp to go out any more to battell against the
children of Beniamin my brethren, or shal I ceasse? The Lorde sayde: Go vp, for
to morow I wil deliuer them into your handes.
29 And Israel set lyers awayte round about Gibea.
30 And the children of Israel went vp against the childre of Beniamin the third
time, & put them selues in aray against Gibea, as twyse before.
31 And the children of Beniamin came out against the people, & were drawen away
from the citie, & they began to smite of ye people, dead as twise before, by two
hye wayes in the fielde (of whiche one goeth vp to the house of god, & the other
to Gibea) vpon a thirtie men of Israel.
32 (And the children of Beniamin sayde: They are fallen before vs, as at the
first. But the children of Israel sayd: Let vs flee, and plucke them away from
the citie, vnto the hye wayes.)
33 And all the men of Israel rose vp out of their place, & put them selues in
aray at Baal Thamar: And lykewyse the liers in wayte of Israel came foorth out
of their places, euen out of the medowes that were about Gibea,
34 And came against Gibea ten thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and there
was a sore battel: But they wist not that euyll was neare them.
35 And the Lord plagued Beniamin before Israel, and the children of Israel
destroyed of the Beniamites the same day twentie and fyue thousand and an
hundred men, that drue swordes euerie one of them.
36 And the children of Beniamin sawe that they were put to ye stricken downe:
for the men of Israel gaue place to ye Beniamites, because they trusted vnto the
lyers in wayt which they had layde beside Gibea.
37 And the lyers in wayte hasted, & brake foorth against Gibea, & the embushment
drewe them selues along, and smote all the citie with the edge of the sworde.
38 And an appoyntment had the men of Israel from the lyers in wayt, that they
should make a great flambe and smoke ryse vp out of the citie.
39 And when the men of Israel retired in ye battell, Beniamin began to smyte
dead of the children of Israel about a thirtie persons, and sayde: Surely they
are stricken downe before vs, as in the first battell.
40 But when there began to aryse out of the citie a flambe as a piller of smoke,
the Beniamites loked backe, & behold the flambe of the whole citie began to
ascende vp to heauen.
41 When the men of Israel also turned agayne, the men of Beniamin were abashed,
for they sawe that euyll approched them:
42 And therfore they turned their backes before the men of Israel, vnto the way
that leadeth to the wildernesse, but the battel ouertoke them: And besyde that,
they which came out of the citie, destroied the in the middle of the.
43 And thus they compassed the Beniamites about, and chased them at Menuha, and
ouerranne them, euen ouer against Gibea on the east syde.
44 And there were slayne of Beniamin eyghteene thousand men, whiche were men of
warre.
45 And they turned & fled to the wyldernes ward, & vnto the rocke of Rimmon: and
they gleaned by ye way of the rest of them, fiue thousande men: & pursued after
them, vntyll they came to Gidom, and slue two thousand men of them.
46 So that al that were slayne that same day of Beniamin were twentie & fyue
thousand men that drue swordes, which were all men of warre:
47 Onely sixe hundred men turned and fled to the wildernes, vnto the rocke of
Rimmon, and abode in the rocke of Rimmon foure monethes.
48 And the men of Israel turned backe againe vnto the children of Beniamin, and
smote them with the edge of the sword in the cities, both man & beast, and al
that came to hande, and set on fyre all the cities that they coulde come by.

Chapter 21

1 And the men of Israel sware in Mispah, saying: Ther shal none of vs geue his
daughter vnto any of Beniamin to wife.
2 And the people came to the house of God, and abode there till euen, before
God, & lift vp their voyces, and wept sore,
3 And sayde: O Lorde God of Israel, why is this come to passe in Israel, that
there shoulde be this day one tribe lacking in Israel?
4 And on the morowe the people rose vp betyme, and made there an aulter, and
offered burnt offeringes and peace offeringes.
5 And the children of Israel sayd: Who is he among al the tribes of Israel, that
came not vp with the congregation vnto the Lorde? for they had made a great othe
concerning him that came not vp to the Lord to Mispah, saying: He shall surely
dye.
6 And the children of Israel had pitie on Beniamin their brethren, and sayde:
There is one tribe cut of from Israel this day:
7 What shall we do vnto the remnaunt of them, that they may haue wiues? we haue
sworne by the Lorde, that we wyl not geue the of our daughters to wiues.
8 And they sayde: Is there any of the tribes of Israel, that came not vp to
Mispah to the Lord? And behold, there came none of Iabes Gilead vnto the hoaste
and congregation.
9 For the people were viewed, and beholde there were none of the inhabitauntes
of Iabes Gilead there.
10 And the congregation sent thyther twelue thousand men of the strongest, and
commaunded them, saying: Go, and smyte the inhabitauntes of Iabes Gilead with
the edge of the sworde, both women and children.
11 And this is it that ye shall do: ye shall vtterly destroy all the males, and
al the women that haue lyen by men.
12 And they found among the inhabitautes of Iabes Gilead foure hundred
damoselles, virgins, yt had knowne no man, by lyeng with any male: And they
brought them vnto the hoast to Silo, whiche is in the lande of Chanaan.
13 And the whole congregation sent and spake with the children of Beniamin that
were in the rocke of Rimmon, and called peaceably vnto them.
14 And Beniamin came againe at that time, and they gaue them wyues which they
had saued alyue of the woman of Iabes Gilead: But they suffised them not.
15 And the people were sory for Beniamin, because that the Lord had made a
breache in the tribes of Israel.
16 And then the elders of the congregation, sayd: What shall we do to the
remnaunt of them, to get them wiues? seyng all the women of Beniamin are
destroyed?
17 And they sayde: There must be an inheritaunce for them that be escaped of
Beniamin, that a tribe be not destroyed out of Israel.
18 Howbeit, we may not geue the wyues of our daughters. For the children of
Israel had sworne, saying: Cursed be he that geueth a wyfe to Beniamin.
19 Then they sayde: Behold, there is a feast of ye Lorde yerely in Silo, which
is on the northside of Bethel, & on the cast side of the way that goeth from
Bethel to Sichem, and south from Libanon.
20 Therfore they commaunded the children of Beniamin, saying: Go, and lye in
wayte in the vineyardes.
21 And when ye see that the daughters of Silo come out to daunce in daunces, the
come ye out of the vineyardes & catche you euery man a wyfe of the daughters of
Silo, & go to the lande of Beniamin.
22 And when their fathers or brethren come vnto vs to complayne, we will say
vnto them, Haue pitie on vs for their sakes: because we reserued not to eche man
his wyfe in tyme of warre, neither haue ye geuen vnto them, that ye should sinne
at this time.
23 And the children of Beniamin did eue so, and toke them wyues according to the
numbre of them that dauced, whom they caught: and they went, and returned vnto
their inheritaunce, and repayred the cities, and dwelt in them.
24 And the children of Israel departed thence at that tyme, & went euery man to
his tribe, and to his kinred, and went out from thence euery man to his
inheritaunce.
25 In those dayes there was no king in Israel: but euery man dyd that whiche
seemed right in his owne eyes.


Ruth

Chapter 1

1 It came to passe that whe the iudges ruled, there fel a dearth in the land, &
a certein man of Bethlehe Iuda went for to soiourne in the countrey of Moab, he
and his wyfe, and his two sonnes.
2 The name of the man was Elimelech, and the name of his wyfe Naomi, and the
names of his two sonnes were Mahlon and Chilion, Ephraites out of Bethlehem
Iuda: And whe they came into the lande of Moab, they continued there.
3 And Elimelech Naomies husbande died, and she remayned with her two sonnes.
4 Whiche toke them wyues, Moabitesses, of the Moabites: the ones name was Orpha,
and the others Ruth: And they dwelled there about a ten yeres.
5 And Mahlon & Chilion died also euen both of them, and the woman was left
destitute of her two sonnes and of her husband.
6 Then she arose with her daughters in lawe, and returned from the countrey of
Moab: for she had hearde say in the countrey of Moab, howe that the Lorde had
visited his people, and geuen them bread.
7 Wherfore she departed out of the place where she was, and her two daughters in
lawe with her: And they went on their way to returne vnto the lande of Iuda.
8 And Naomi said vnto her two daughters in lawe, Go & returne eche of you vnto
your mothers house: & the Lorde deale as kindly with you, as ye haue dealt with
the dead, and with me:
9 And the Lord geue you, that you may fynde rest, either of you in the house of
her husbande. And when she kyssed them, they lift vp their voyce and wept,
10 And sayde vnto her: Surely we will returne with thee vnto thy folke.
11 And Naomi sayde, Turne againe my daughters: for what cause will you go with
me? Are there any moe children in my wombe, to be your husbandes?
12 Turne againe my daughters, go your way, for I am to olde to haue an husbande:
And if I sayd, I haue hope, if I toke a man also this night, yea & though I had
alredy borne sonnes:
13 Would ye tary after them, till they were of age? or woulde ye for them so
long refrayne from taking of husbandes? Not so my daughters: for it greeueth me
muche for your sakes, that the hand of the Lorde is gone out against me.
14 And they lift vp their voyces, & wept againe: and Orpha kissed her mother in
lawe, but Ruth abode still by her.
15 And Naomi said: See, thy sister in law is gone backe againe vnto her people,
& vnto her gods: returne thou after her.
16 And Ruth aunswered: Entreat me not to leaue thee, and to returne from after
thee: for whyther thou goest, I will go also, & where thou dwellest, there I wil
dwell: Thy people shalbe my people, and thy god my god:
17 Where thou diest, there will I die, and there wyl I be buried: The Lord do so
to me and more also, if ought but death depart thee and me.
18 When she sawe that she was stedfastly minded to go with her, she left
speaking vnto her.
19 And so they wet both, vntil they came to Bethlehe: And whe they were come to
Bethlehem, it was noysed of them thorow all the citie, and they sayde: Is not
this Naomi?
20 And she annswered them: Cal me not Naomi: but call me Mara, for the almightie
hath made me verie bitter.
21 I went out full, and the Lorde hath brought me home agayne emptie: Why then
call ye me Naomi, seying, the Lord hath humbled me, & the almightie hath brought
me vnto aduersite?
22 And so Naomi with Ruth the Moabitesse her daughter in lawe, returned out of
the countrey of Moab, and came to Bethlehe, in the beginning of barlie haruest.

Chapter 2

1 And Naomies husbad had a kinsman, a ma of power and wealth which was of the
kinred of Elimelech, named Booz.
2 And Ruth the Moabitesse sayd vnto Naomi: Let me nowe go to the fielde, &
gather eares of corne after any man in whose sight I finde grace. And she sayde
vnto her: Go my daughter.
3 And she went, and came to the fielde, and gathered after the reapers: and so
it was, that the same fielde parteyned vnto Booz, whiche was of the kinred of
Elimelech.
4 And beholde, Booz came from Bethlehem, and sayde vnto the reapers: The Lorde
be with you. And they aunswered him: The Lorde blesse thee.
5 Then sayde Booz vnto his young man that stode by the reapers? Whose damosel is
this?
6 And the young man that stode by the reapers aunswered, and sayd: It is the
Moabitishe damosel, that came with Naomi out of the countrey of Moab,
7 And she sayde vnto vs, I pray you let me gleane and gather after the reapers,
amongst the sheaues: and so she came, and hath continued euen from the morning
vnto nowe, saue that she taried a litle in the house.
8 Then sayd Booz vnto Ruth: Hearest thou my daughter? Go to no other fielde to
gather, neither go from hence, but abyde here by my maydens.
9 Let thyne eyes be on the fielde that they do reape, & go thou after the
maydens: Haue I not charged the young men, that they shall do thee no hurte?
Moreouer, when thou art a thyrst, go vnto the vessels, & drinke of that which
the laddes haue drawen.
10 Then she fell on her face, and bowed her selfe to the ground, and sayde vnto
him: Howe is it that I haue founde grace in thyne eyes, & that thou shouldest
knowe me, seing I am an aliaunt?
11 And Booz aunswered and sayde vnto her: Al is tolde & shewed me that thou hast
done vnto thy mother in law sence the death of thyne husband: howe thou hast
left thy father and thy mother and the land where thou wast borne, and art come
vnto a people which thou knewest not in time passed.
12 The Lord quyte thy worke, and a full reward be geuen thee of the Lord God of
Israel, vnder whose winges thou art come to trust.
13 Then she sayde: Let me finde fauour in thy sight my lord, thou that hast
comforted me, and spoken comfortably vnto thy mayde, whiche yet am not lyke vnto
one of thy maydens.
14 Booz sayde vnto her agayne: At the meale tyme come thou hyther, and eate of
the bread, and dyp thy morsel in the vineger. And she sat besyde the reapers:
and he reached her parched corne, & she dyd eate, and was suffised, & left part:
15 And when she was rysen vp to gather, Booz comaunded his young men, saying:
Let her gather euen among the sheaues, and rebuke her not.
16 And leaue her some of the sheaues for the nonce, and let it lye, that she may
gather it vp, and rebuke her not.
17 And so she gathered in the fielde vntil euen, and threshed that she had
gathered, and it was in measure vpon an Epha of barlye.
18 And she toke it vp, and went into the citie: and when her mother in lawe had
seene what she had gathered, she plucked out also, & gaue to her that she had
reserued when she had eaten enough.
19 And her mother in lawe sayde vnto her: Where hast thou gathered to day? and
where wroughtest thou? blessed be he that knewe thee. And she shewed her mother
in lawe howe she had wrought with him, and sayde: The mans name with whom I
wrought to day is Booz.
20 And Naomi said vnto her daughter inlawe: Blessed be he of the Lord, for he
ceasseth not to do good to the lyuing & to the dead. And Naomi sayd agayne vnto
her: The man is nye vnto vs, and of our affinitie.
21 And Ruth the Moabitesse sayd: he sayd vnto me also, Thou shalt be with my
young men, vntil they haue ended al my haruest.
22 And Naomi aunswered vnto Ruth her daughter in lawe: It is best my daughter
that thou go out with his maydens, that they come not against thee in any other
fielde.
23 And so she kept her by the maydens of Booz, to gather, vnto the ende of
barlye haruest and of wheate haruest also, & dwelt with her mother in lawe.

Chapter 3

1 Then Naomi her mother in lawe sayde vnto her: My daughter, shal I not seke
rest for thee, yt thou mayest prosper?
2 And is not Booz our kinsman, with whose maydens thou wast? Beholde, he
winnoweth barlie to night in the thresshing floore.
3 Wasshe thy selfe therfore, and annoynt thee, and put thy rayment vpon thee, &
get thee downe to the floore: but let not the man knoweof thee, vntill he haue
left eating and drincking.
4 And when he goeth to sleepe, marke the place where he layeth him downe, and
then go and lyft vp the clothes that are on his feete, & lay thee downe there:
and he shall tel thee what thou shalt do.
5 And she aunswered her: All that thou biddest me, I will do.
6 And she went downe vnto the floore, and dyd according to al that her mother in
lawe bad her.
7 And when Booz had eaten and drunken, & cheared his heart, he went to lye downe
at the ende of the heape of corne: and she came softly, and lift vp the clothes
of his feete, and layed her downe.
8 And at midnight, the man was afraide, and caught holde: and beholde, a woman
lay at his feete.
9 And he sayde: What art thou? She aunswered, I am Ruth thyne handmayde: Spreade
the wing of thy garment ouer thyne handmayde, for thou art the kinsman.
10 He sayde: Blessed be thou in the Lord my daughter, for thou hast shewed more
goodnesse in the latter ende, then at the beginning, inasmuche as thou folowedst
not young men, whether they were poore or riche.
11 And nowe my daughter feare not, I will do to the all that thou requirest: for
all the citie of my people doth know, that thou art a woman of vertue.
12 And it is true that I am of thy next kinne, howbeit there is one nier then I.
13 Tary this night, and when morning is come, if he wil perfourme the part of a
kinsman vnto thee, it is good, let him do the kinsmans part: but if he wyl not
do the kinsmans part, then wyl I do the duetie of a kinsman, as the Lorde
liueth: sleepe vntil the morning.
14 And she lay at his feete vntill the morning: and she arose vp before one
coulde knowe another. And he sayde: Let no man knowe that there came any woman
into the floore.
15 And he sayde againe: Bring the mantel that thou hast vpon thee, & holde it.
And when she held it, he mette in sixe measures of barlye, and layde it on her:
And she gat her into the citie.
16 And when she came in, to her mother in lawe, she sayde: Who art thou, my
daughter? And she tolde her all that the man had done to her,
17 And sayde: These sixe measures of barlye gaue he me, and sayde: Thou shalt
not come emptie vnto thy mother in lawe.
18 Then sayde she: My daughter, sit still vntil thou knowe howe the matter will
fall: for the man will not be in rest, vntill he haue finished the thing this
same day.

Chapter 4

1 Then went Booz vp to the gate, and sat him downe there: and beholde, the
kinsman of which Booz spake, came by, vnto whom, he sayde: Ho, suche one, come,
sit downe here. And he turned, & sat downe.
2 And he toke ten men of the elders of the citie, and said: sit ye downe here.
And they sat downe.
3 And he sayd vnto the kinsman: Naomi that is come agayne out of the countrey of
Moab, will sel a parcell of lande, which was our brother Elimelechs.
4 And I thought to do thee to wyt, and byd the bye it before thee inhabitauntes
and elders of my people. If thou wilt redeeme it, redeeme it: but & if thou wilt
not redeeme it, then tell me, that I may knowe: For there is none to redeeme it,
saue thou, and I next thee. And the other aunswered: I will redeeme it.
5 Then sayd Booz: What day thou biest the fielde of the hande of Naomi, thou
must bye it also of Ruth the Moabite the wyfe of the dead, to stirre vp the name
of the dead vpon his inheritaunce.
6 The kinsman aunswered: I can not redeeme it, for marring of myne owne
inheritaunce: redeeme thou my right to thee, for I cannot redeeme it.
7 Nowe this was the maner of olde time in Israel concerning redeeming &
chaunging, for to stablishe al thing: that a man must plucke of his shoe, & geue
it his neyghbour: And this was a sure witnesse in Israel.
8 Therfore the kinsman sayde to Booz, Bye it thou: and so drue of his shoe.
9 And Booz sayde vnto the elders and vnto all the people: Ye are witnesses this
day, that I haue bought all that was Elimelechs, and all that was Chilions, and
Mahalons, of the hande of Naomi.
10 And moreouer, Ruth the Moabite the wyfe of Mahalo, haue I purchased to be my
wyfe, to stirre vp the name of the dead vpon his inheritaunce, & that the name
of the dead be not put out fro among his brethren, and from the gate of his
place: ye are witnesses this day.
11 And all the people that were in the gate, and the elders, sayde, We are
witnesses: The Lord make the woma that is come into thyne house, lyke Rahel and
Lea, whiche twayne dyd buylde the house of Israel: & that thou mayest do
worthyly in Ephrata, and be famous in Bethlehem.
12 Thy house be like the house of Pharez (whom Thamar bare vnto Iuda) eue of the
seede whiche the Lord shall geue thee of this young woman.
13 And so Booz toke Ruth, and she was his wyfe: And when he went in vnto her,
the Lorde gaue, that she conceaued and bare a sonne.
14 And the women sayde vnto Naomi: Blessed be the Lorde, the whiche hath not
left thee this day without a kinsman, and his name shalbe continued in Israel.
15 And that shall bring thy lyfe agayne, and cherishe thyne olde age: For thy
daughter in lawe whiche loueth thee, hath borne vnto him, and she is better to
thee then seuen sonnes.
16 And Naomi toke the child, & layed it in her lappe, and became nurse vnto it.
17 And the women her neyghbours gaue it a name, saying: There is a child borne
to Naomi, & called it Obed: the same is the father of Isai, the father of Dauid.
18 These are the generations of Pharez, Phares begat Hezron,
19 Hezron begat Ram, Ram begat Aminadab,
20 Aminadab begat Naasson, Naasson begat Salmon,
21 Salmon begat Booz, Booz begat Obed,
22 Obed begat Isai, Isai begat Dauid.


1 Samuel

Chapter 1

1 There was a man of one of the two Ramathaim Zophim, of mout Ephraim, named
Elkana, the sonne of Ieroham, the sonne of Elihu, the sonne of Thohu, the sonne
of Zuph, an Ephrathite:
2 Which had two wyues, the one called Hanna, & the other Phenenna: And Phenenna
had children, but Hanna had no children.
3 And this man went vp out of his citie euery yere, to worship and to sacrifice
vnto the Lord of hoastes in Silo, where were the two sonnes of Eli, Hophni and
Phinehes, the Lordes priestes.
4 And it fel on a day, that Elkana offered, and gaue to Phenenna his wyfe, and
to all her sonnes and daughters, portions.
5 But vnto Hanna he gaue a worthy portion: for he loued Hanna, & the Lorde had
made her barren.
6 And her enemie Phenenna vexed her sore, forasmuche as she vpbrayded her,
because the Lord had made her barren.
7 (And so dyd he yere by yere) and as oft as she wet vp to the house of the
Lord, thus she vexed her, that she wept, and dyd not eate.
8 Then sayde Elkana her husband to her: Hanna, why wepest thou? and why eatest
thou not? and why is thine hearte troubled? Am not I better to thee then ten
sonnes?
9 So Hanna rose vp after that they had eaten and drunke in Silo. (And Eli the
priest sate vpon a stoole by one of the postes of the temple of the Lorde.)
10 And she was troubled in her minde, and prayed vnto the Lord, & wept sore,
11 And vowed a vowe, and sayd: O Lord of hoastes, if thou wilt loke on the
trouble of thyne handmayde and remembre me, and not forget thyne hand mayde, but
geue vnto thyne handmayde a man childe, I will geue him vnto the Lorde all the
dayes of his lyfe, and there shall no rasor come vpon his head.
12 And as she continued praying before the Lord, Eli marked her mouth.
13 For Hanna spake in her hearte, & her lippes did but moue onely, but her voyce
was not hearde, & therfore Eli thought she had ben drunken.
14 And Eli sayde vnto her: Howe long wilt thou be drunken? Put away from thee
the wine that thou hast.
15 Hanna aunswered, and sayde, Not so my Lord: I am a woman of a sorowful
hearte, I haue drunke neither wine nor strong drincke, but haue powred out my
soule before the Lorde:
16 Count not thine handmayde for a wicked woman: for out of the aboundaunce of
my heauynesse & griefe, haue I spoken hytherto.
17 Eli aunswered her againe, and sayde: Go in peace, the God of Israel graunt
thee thy petition that thou hast asked of him.
18 She said: Let thyne handmayde finde grace in thy sight. And so the woman went
her way, and dyd eate, and loked no more sad.
19 And they rose vp early, & worshipped before the Lorde, and then returned, &
came to their house to Ramath: And when Elkana knewe Hanna his wyfe, the Lorde
remembred her.
20 For in processe of time it came to passe, that she conceaued, and bare a
sonne, & called his name Samuel, saying: Because I haue asked him of the Lorde.
21 And the man Elkana and all his house, went vp to offer vnto the Lorde the
yerely sacrifice, and also his vowe.
22 Neuerthelesse, Hanna wet not vp, but sayde vnto her husband: I will tary
vntill the lad be weaned, and then I will bryng hym, that he may appeare before
the Lord, and there abyde for euer.
23 Elkana her husband aunswered her: Do what seemeth thee best, tary at home
vntyll thou hast weaned him, and I beseche the Lord to make good his saying. And
so the woman abode, and gaue her sonne sucke, vntyll she weaned hym.
24 And when she had weaned hym, she toke hym with her, with three bullockes, and
an Epha of floure, and a bottle of wine, and brought hym vnto the house of the
Lorde in Silo, and the child was young.
25 And they slue a bulloke, and brought in the lad to Eli.
26 And she sayd: Oh my Lorde, as thy soule lyueth my Lorde, I am the woman that
stoode before thee here praying vnto the Lorde.
27 For this lad I prayed, and the Lorde hath geuen me my desyre whiche I asked
of him:
28 And therfore I haue geuen him vnto the Lord, as long as he liueth he shalbe
geuen to the Lorde. And he worshipped the Lorde there.

Chapter 2

1 And Hanna prayed, & sayde: Myne heart reioyceth in the Lorde, and myne horne
is exalted in the Lorde: My mouth is wyde open ouer myne enemies, for I reioyce
in thy saluation.
2 There is none holy as the Lorde: for without thee is nothing, neither is there
any of strength as is our God.
3 Talke no more proudly, let not arrogancie come out of your mouthes: for the
Lorde is a God of knowledge, and his purposes come to passe.
4 The bowe with the mightie men are broken, and they that were weake haue gyrde
them selues with strength.
5 They that were full, haue hyred out them selues for bread, and they that were
hungry, ceasse, tyll the barren hath borne seuen, and she that had many
children, is waxed feeble.
6 The Lord kylleth and maketh alyue, bryngeth downe to the graue & fetcheth vp
agayne.
7 The Lord maketh poore, and maketh ryche, bringeth lowe, and heaueth vp on hye.
8 He rayseth vp the poore out of the dust, and lyfteth vp the beggar from the
dounghyll, to set them among princes, and to make them inherite the seate of
glory: For the pyllers of the earth are the lordes, and he hath set the worlde
vpon them.
9 He wyll kepe the feete of his saintes, and the wicked shall kepe scilence in
darknesse, and in his owne myght shal no man be strong.
10 The lordes aduersaries shal be destroyed of hym, & out of heauen shall he
thunder vpon them: The Lorde shall iudge the endes of the worlde, and shall gyue
myght vnto his king, and exalt the horne of his annoynted.
11 And Elkana went to Ramath to his house, and the lad dyd minister vnto the
Lorde before Eli the priest.
12 But the sonnes of Eli were children of Belial, and knewe not the Lord.
13 And the priestes custome toward the people was, that whensoeuer any man
offered any offring, ye priestes lad came whyle the fleshe was a seethyng, and a
fleshhoke with three teeth in his hande:
14 And thrust it into the panne, kettle, caldren, or pot: and all that the
fleshehoke brought vp, that the priest toke for hym self: And so they dyd vnto
all the Israelites that came thyther to Silo.
15 Yea, and thereto before they burnt the fat, the priestes lad came and sayde
to the man that offered, Geue fleshe, that I may roste it for the priest: for he
wyll not haue sodde fleshe of thee, but rawe.
16 And yf any man sayde vnto hym, Let them burne the fat according to the
custome, and then take as much as thyne hearte desireth: Then he would aunswere
hym, Yea, thou shalt geue it me nowe: and if thou wilt not, I wyll take it with
violence.
17 And the sinne of the young men was very great before the Lord: For men
abhorred the offering of the Lord.
18 But the childe Samuel ministred before the Lorde, girded with a linnen Ephod.
19 Moreouer, his mother made him a litle coate, and brought it to him from yere
to yere, when she came vp with her husband to offer the yerely sacrifice.
20 And Eli blessed Elkana and his wife, and said: The Lorde geue thee seede of
this woman, for the petition that she asked of the Lord. And they went vnto
their owne home.
21 And the Lorde visited Hanna, so that she conceaued, and bare three sonnes, &
two daughters: And the childe Samuel grew before the Lorde.
22 Eli was very olde, and heard all that his sonnes did vnto Israel, & how they
lay with the women that wayted at the doore of the tabernacle of the
congregation.
23 And he saide vnto them: Why do ye such thinges? For of all these people I
heare euill reportes of you.
24 Oh, nay my sonnes: For it is no good report that I heare, how that ye make
the Lordes people to trespasse.
25 If one man sinne against another, the Iudge shall iudge it: But if a man
sinne against the Lord, who will be his dayseman? Notwithstandiug, they
hearkened not vnto the voyce of their father, because the Lorde would slay the.
26 (The childe Samuel profited & grew, and was in fauour both with the Lord and
also with men.)
27 And there came a man of God vnto Eli, and sayde vnto hym, thus saith the
Lorde: Dyd not I playnely appeare vnto the house of thy father, when they were
in Egypt in Pharaos house?
28 And I chose him out of al the tribes of Israel to be my priest, for to offer
vppon mine aulter, and to burne incense, and to weare an Ephod before me: and I
gaue vnto the house of thy father, all the offerynges made by fire of the
chyldren of Israel.
29 Wherfore treade ye downe my sacrifice and mine offering which I comaunded in
the tabernacle, and honorest thy chyldren aboue me, to make your selues fat of
the first fruites of all the offerynges of Israel my people?
30 Wherefore the Lorde God of Israel saith: I sayde, that thy house and the
house of thy father should walke before me for euer: But nowe the Lorde saith,
That be farre fro me: For them that worship me, I wyll worship, and they that
despise me, shall come to shame.
31 Behold, the dayes come, that I wyll cut of thine arme, and the arme of thy
fathers house, that there shall not be an olde man in thine house.
32 And thou shalt see thine enemie in the habitation of the Lorde and in all the
wealth which God shall geue Israel, and there shall not be an olde man in thyne
house for euer.
33 Neuerthelesse, I wyll not destroy euery one that come of thee from mine
aulter, to make thine eyes to fayle, and to make thine heart sorowfull: And all
they that be multiplied in thine house, shall dye when they be men.
34 And this shalbe a signe vnto thee, that shal come vpon thy two sonnes Hophni
and Phinehes: euen in one day they shall dye both.
35 And I wyll stirre me vp a faythfull priest, yt shall do according to my heart
and minde, and I wil builde him a sure house, and he shall walke before mine
annoynted for euer.
36 And all that are left in thyne house, shall come and crouch to him for a
peece of siluer and a morsell of bread, and shal saye: Put me (I pray thee) in
one office or other among ye priestes, that I may eate a morsell of bread.

Chapter 3

1 And the chylde Samuel ministred vnto the Lorde before Eli, and the worde of
the Lord was precious in those dayes, neither was there any open vision.
2 And as at that tyme Eli lay in his place, his eyes began to waxe dymme that he
coulde not see.
3 And yet the lampe of God went out, Samuel layde hym downe to sleepe in the
temple of the Lord, where the arke of God was.
4 And the Lorde called Samuel. And he aunswered, I am here.
5 And he ran vnto Eli, and sayde: Here am I, for thou calledst me. And he said,
I called thee not, go againe and sleepe. And he went, and layde hym downe to
sleepe.
6 And the Lorde called once againe, Samuel. And Samuel arose and went to Eli,
and sayde: I am here, for thou diddest call me. And he aunswered: I called thee
not my sonne, go againe and sleepe.
7 Samuel knewe not yet the Lorde, neither was the worde of the Lorde yet opened
vnto hym.
8 And the Lorde went to, and called Samuel the thirde tyme. And he arose and
went to Eli, and saide: I am here, for thou hast called me. And Eli perceaued
that the Lord had called the childe.
9 Therefore Eli sayde vnto Samuel: Go and sleepe, and yf he call thee, then say:
Speake Lorde, for thy seruaunt heareth thee. So Samuel went, and slept in his
place.
10 And the Lorde came, and stoode and called as before, Samuel, Samuel. Then
Samuel aunswered: Speake, for thy seruaunt heareth.
11 And the Lorde saide to Samuel: Beholde, I wyll do a thing in Israel, that
both the eares of as many as heareth it shall tyngle.
12 In that day, I wyll rayse vp against Eli all thynges whiche I haue spoken
concernyng his house: when I begyn, I wyll also make an ende.
13 I haue tolde hym that I wyll iudge his house for euer, for the wickednesse
which he knoweth: For whe the people cursed his sonnes for ye same wickednesse
he hath not corrected them.
14 And therfore I haue sworne vnto the house of Eli, that the wickednesse of
Elies house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor offeryng for euer.
15 Samuel slept vntyl the mornyng, and opened the doores of the house of the
Lorde: and Samuel feared to shewe Eli the vision.
16 Then Eli called Samuel, and sayde: Samuel, my sonne. And he aunswered: Here
am I.
17 He saide: What is that the Lord hath saide vnto thee? I pray thee hyde it not
from me: God do so to thee, & more also, if thou hyde any thyng from me of all
that he sayde vnto thee.
18 And Samuel tolde hym euerywhyt, and hyd nothyng from hym. And he saide: It is
the Lord, let hym do what seemeth hym good.
19 And Samuel grewe, and the Lorde was with hym, and left none of his wordes
vnperfourmed.
20 And all Israel, from Dan to Beerseba, wyst that faythfull Samuel was the
Lordes prophete.
21 And the Lorde appeared againe in Silo: for the Lorde opened him selfe to
Samuel in Silo, through the worde of the Lorde.

Chapter 4

1 And Samuel spake vnto all Israel: And Israel went out against the Philistines
to battell, and pitched besyde the Eben ezer, and the Philistines pitched in
Aphec,
2 And put them selues in aray against Israel: and when they ioyned the battell,
Israel was smytten downe before the Philistines, and the Philistines slue of the
armie in the fielde about a foure thousand men.
3 And when the people were come into their tentes, the elders of Israel sayde:
Wherfore hath the Lorde caste vs downe this day before the Philistines? let vs
fetch the arke of the appoyntmet of the Lorde out of Silo vnto vs, that when it
cometh among vs, it may saue vs out of the hand of our enemies.
4 And so the people went to Silo, and fet from thence the arke of the
appoyntment of the Lorde of hoastes, which dwelleth betweene the cherubims: And
there wer the two sonnes of Eli, Hophni and Phinehes, with the arke of the
appoyntment of God.
5 And when the arke of the appoyntment of the Lorde came into the hoast, all
Israel showted a mightie showte, so that the earth rang againe.
6 And when the Philistines heard the noyse of the showte, they saide: What
meaneth the sounde of this mightie showte in the hoast of the Ebrues? And they
vnderstode howe that the arke of the Lorde was come into the hoast.
7 And the Philistines were afraide, and saide: God is come into the hoast. And
they said againe: Wo vnto vs, for it was neuer so before this.
8 Wo vnto vs, who shall deliuer vs out of the hand of these mightie goddes?
these are the goddes that smote the Egyptians with many plagues in the
wildernes.
9 Be strong and quite your selues lyke men, O ye Philistines, that ye be no
seruaunts vnto the Ebrues, as they haue ben to you: Be of a manly corage
therfore and fight.
10 And the Philistines fought, and Israel was smitten downe, and fled euery man
into his tent: And there was an exceeding great slaughter, for there were
ouerthrowen of Israel thirtie thousand footemen.
11 And the arke of God was taken, and the two sonnes of Eli, Hophni & Phinehes,
were dead.
12 And there ran a man of Beniamin out of the armie, and came to Silo the same
day with his clothes rent, and earth vpon his head.
13 And when he came, lo, Eli sat vpon a stoole by the way side, wayting: for his
heart feared for the arke of God. And when the man came into the citie, and
tolde it, all the citie cryed.
14 And when Eli heard the noyse of the crying, he saide: What meaneth this noyse
of the tumult? And the man came in hastyly, and tolde Eli.
15 Eli was 98 yeres olde, & his sight failed, him that he could not see.
16 And the man said vnto Eli: I am he that came out of the armie, & fled this
day out of the hoast. And he said: What thing is done my sonne?
17 The messenger aunswered, and said: Israel is fled before the Philistines, &
there hath ben a great slaughter among the people, and thy two sonnes Hophni and
Phinehes are dead, and the arke of God is taken.
18 And when he made mention of the arke of God, Eli fell from of his stoole
backward by the side of the gate, and his necke brake, and he dyed: For he was
an olde man and heauy, and iudged Israel fourtie yeres?
19 And his daughter in lawe Phinehes wyfe was with childe, and nye the birth:
And when she heard the tidinges that the arke of God was taken, and that her
father in law and her husband were dead, she bowed her selfe, and trauayled, for
her paynes came vpon her.
20 And about the tyme of her death, the women that stoode about her, saide vnto
her: Feare not, for thou hast borne a sonne. But she aunswered not, nor regarded
it.
21 And she named the childe Ichabod, saying: The glorie is departed fro Israel,
(because the arke of God was taken, and because of her father in lawe and her
husband.)
22 And she saide againe: The glorie is gone from Israel, for the arke of God is
taken.

Chapter 5

1 And the Philistines toke the arke of God, and caryed it from the Eben ezer
vnto Asdod.
2 Yea the Philistines toke the arke of God, and brought it into the house of
Dagon, and set it by Dagon.
3 And when they of Asdod were vp in the next daye in the mornyng, beholde, Dagon
was fallen vpon his face on the earth before the arke of the Lorde: And they
toke Dagon, and set him in his place agayne.
4 And when they were come earlie in the next morning, beholde, Dagon was fallen
vpon his face on the grounde before the arke of the Lorde, and his head and his
two handes cut of vpon the thresholde, that onely the stumpe of Dagon was left
to him.
5 And therfore is it, that the priestes of Dagon, neither any man that commeth
into Dagons house, treade not on the thresholde of Dagon in Asdod, vnto this
day.
6 But the hand of the Lorde was heauie vpon them of Asdod, and he destroyed
them, and smote them with emerodes, both Asdod, and all the coastes thereof.
7 And when the men of Asdod sawe that it was so, they saide: The arke of the God
of Israel shal not abide here with vs, for his hand is sore vpon vs, & vpon
Dagon our God.
8 They sent therfore, and gathered all the lordes of the Philistines vnto them,
and saide: What shall we do with the arke of the God of Israel? They aunswered:
Let the arke of the God of Israel be caryed about vnto Gath. And they caried the
arke of the God of Israel about.
9 And when they had caryed it about, the hand of the Lorde was agaynst the citie
with a very great destruction, and he smote the men of the citie both small and
great, and they had emerodes in their secrete partes.
10 Therfore they sent the arke of God to Acaron: and assoone as the arke of God
came to Acaron, the Acaronites cryed out, saying: They haue brought the arke of
the God of Israel to vs, to slea vs, and our people.
11 And so they sent, and gathered together al the lordes of the Philistines, and
saide: Send away the arke of the God of Israel, to go agayne to his owne place,
that it slea vs not, and our people. For there was a destruction and death
thorowout all the citie, and the hand of God was exceeding sore there.
12 And the men that dyed not, were smitten with the emerodes: And the crye of
the citie went vp to heauen.

Chapter 6

1 And the arke of the Lord was in the countrey of the Philistines seuen
monethes.
2 And the Philistines called for the priestes and the soothsayers, saying: What
shall we do with the arke of the Lord? Tell vs wherewith we shall sende it home
againe:
3 They sayde: If you send away the arke of the God of Israel, send it not
emptie: but rewarde it with sinne offeryng, and then ye shall be whole, and it
shall be knowen to you, why his hand departeth not from you.
4 Then sayd they: And what shalbe the sinne offering, which we shall rewarde him
with? They aunswered: Fiue golden emerodes, and fiue golden myce, accordyng to
the number of the princes of ye Philistines: For one plague was on you all, and
on your princes.
5 Wherfore ye shall make images lyke to your emerodes, & images like to your
myce that corrupt the land, and ye shall geue glorie vnto the God of Israel,
that he may take his hand from of you, and from of your goddes, and from of your
land.
6 Wherfore do ye harden your heartes, as the Egyptians and Pharao hardened their
heartes? Which when he wrought wonderfullie among them, did they not let the
people go, and they departed?
7 Now therfore, make a newe cart, and take two melche kyne, on whom there hath
come no yocke, and tye the kyne to the carte, and bring the calues home from
them.
8 And take the arke of the Lorde, and lay it vpon the cart, and put the iewels
of golde whiche ye rewarde him with for a sinne offering, in a coffer by the
side thereof, and send it awaye, that it may go.
9 And if ye see that he go vp by the way of his owne coaste to Bethsames, then
it is he that did vs this great euill: If no. we shall knowe then that it is not
his hand that smote vs, but it was a chaunce that happened vs.
10 And the men did euen so: And toke two kyne that gaue milke, & tyed them to
the cart, and kept the calues at home.
11 And they layde the arke of the Lorde vpon the cart, and the coffer with the
myce of golde, and with the images of their emerodes.
12 And the kyne toke the strayght way to Bethsames, & went on the strayght way:
and as they went, lowed, and turned neither to the ryght hande nor to the left:
And the princes of the Philistines went after them, vnto the borders of
Bethsames.
13 And they of Bethsames were reaping their wheate haruest in the valley: And
they lyft vp their eyes, and spied the arke, and reioyced when they sawe it.
14 And the carte came into the fielde of one Iehosua, a Bethsamite, and stoode
still ther. There was also a great stone: And they claue the wood of the carte,
and offred the kyne a burnt offring vnto the Lorde.
15 And the Leuites toke downe the arke of the Lorde, and the coffer that was
with it, wherein the iewels of golde were, and put them on the great stone: And
the men of Bethsames sacrificed burnt sacrifice, and offered offeringes the same
day vnto the Lorde.
16 And when the fiue princes of the Philistines had seene it, they returned to
Acaron the same day.
17 And these are the golden emerodes which the Philistines gaue for a sinne
offering to the Lord: for Asdod one, for Gaza one, for Ascalon one, for Gath
one, and for Acaron one.
18 And golden myce, accordyng to the number of al the cities of the Philistines
belongyng to the fyue lordes, both of walled townes, and of townes vnwalled,
euen vnto the great stone of Abel, whereon they set downe the arke of the Lorde
vnto this day, in the fielde of Iehosua the Bethsamite.
19 And he smote of the men of Bethsames, because they had loked in the arke of
the Lorde, and he slue among the people fiftie thousand and three score and ten
men: And the people lamented, because the Lorde had slaine the people with so
great a slaughter.
20 Wherfore the men of Bethsames said: Who is able to stand before this holie
Lorde God? And to whom shall he go from vs?
21 And they sent messengers to the inhabitaunts of Kiriathiarim, saying: The
Philistines haue brought againe the arke of the Lord, come ye downe and fet it
vp to you.

Chapter 7

1 And so the men of Kiriathiarim came and set vp the arke of the Lorde, &
brought it into the house of Aminadab in the hyll, and sanctified Eleazar his
sonne, to keepe the arke of the Lorde.
2 And while the arke abode in Kiriathiarim, the tyme was long, for it was
twentie yeres: & all the house of Israel lamented after the Lorde.
3 And Samnel spake vnto al the house of Israel, saying: If ye be come agayne
vnto the Lorde with all your heartes, then put away the straunge gods and
Astaroth from among you, and prepare your heartes vnto the Lord, and serue him
onely: For he shall ryd you out of the hand of the Philistines.
4 Then the children of Israel dyd put away Baalim and Astaroth, and serued the
Lorde onely.
5 And Samuel sayde: Gather all Israel to Mispah, and I wyll praye for you vnto
the Lord.
6 And they gathered together to Mispah, and drewe water, and poured it out
before the Lorde, and fasted the same day, and sayd there: We haue sinned
against the Lorde. And Samuel iudged the children of Israel in Mispah.
7 When the Philistines heard that the children of Israel were gathered together
to Mispah, the princes of the Philistines went vp against Israel: And when the
children of Israel hard that, they were afrayde of the Philistines.
8 And the children of Israel sayd to Samuel: Ceasse not to crye vnto the lord
our God for vs, that he may saue vs out of the hand of the Philistines.
9 And Samuel toke a sucking lambe, and offered it altogether for a burnt
offering vnto the Lord, and cryed vnto the Lorde for Israel, and the Lorde heard
him.
10 And as Samuel offered the burnt offering, the Philistines came to fight
against Israel: But the Lorde thundred a great thunder the same day among the
Philistines, & scattered them, that they were slaine before Israel.
11 And the men of Israel went out of Mispah, and pursued the Philistines, &
smote the vntill they came vnder Bethchar.
12 And then Samuel toke a stone, and pitched it betweene Mispah & Shen, and
called the name thereof Eben ezer, saying: Hitherto hath the Lorde helped vs.
13 And so the Philistines were brought vnder, and they came no more into the
coaste of Israel: and the hande of the Lorde was against the Philistines all the
dayes of Samuel.
14 Therto the cities which that the Philistines had taken from Israel, were
restored to Israel euen from Acaron to Gath, and the coastes of the same dyd
Israel deliuer out of the handes of the Philistines: And there was peace
betweene Israel and the Amorites.
15 Samuel iudged Israel all the dayes of his life:
16 And went about yere by yere to Bethel, Gilgal, and Mispah, and iudged Israel
in all those places.
17 And came againe to Rama, for there was his house, and there he iudged Israel
also, & there he buylt an aulter vnto the Lorde.

Chapter 8

1 When Samuel was old, he made his sonnes iudges ouer Israel.
2 The name of his eldest sonne was Ioel, and the name of the seconde Abia, and
they were iudges in Beerseba.
3 And his sonnes walked not in his wayes, but turned aside after lucre, and
tooke rewarde, and peruerted the ryght.
4 Then all the elders of Israel gathered them together, and came to Samuel vnto
Rama,
5 And sayd vnto him: Beholde, thou art olde, and thy sonnes walke not in thy
wayes: Now therfore make vs a king to iudge vs, as all other nations haue
6 But the thing displeased Samuel when they said, geue vs a king to iudge vs:
And Samuel prayed vnto the lorde.
7 And the Lorde saide vnto Samuel, Heare the voyce of the people in all that
they say vnto thee: For they haue not cast thee away, but they haue cast me
away, that I should not raigne ouer them.
8 And as they haue euer done sence I brought them out of Egypt vnto this day,
and haue forsaken me, and serued other gods, euen so do they vnto thee.
9 Now therefore hearken vnto their voyce: howbeit yet testifie vnto them, &
shewe them the maner of the king that shall raigne ouer them.
10 And Samuel tolde all the wordes of the Lorde vnto the people that asked a
king of him,
11 And he said: This shal be the maner of the king that shall raigne ouer you,
he will take your sonnes and put them to his charets, and make his horsemen of
them, to run before his charet.
12 And will make him of the captaines ouer thousandes and ouer fifties, and will
set them to eare his grounde, and to gather in his haruest, & to make
instrumentes of warre, and thinges that serue for his charets.
13 And he will take your daughters, and make them appoticaries, cookes, and
bakers.
14 And he shall take your fieldes, and your vineyardes, and your best oliue
trees, and geue them to his seruauntes.
15 And he shall take the tenth of your seede, and of your vineyardes, and geue
it to his eunuches, & to his seruauntes.
16 And he shal take your men seruauntes, and maide seruauntes, young men, and
the chiefe of your asses, and put them to his worke.
17 And he shall take the tenth of your sheepe, and ye shall be his seruauntes.
18 And ye shall crie out at that time, because of your king whiche ye shall haue
chosen you, & the Lorde wil not heare you at that day.
19 Neuerthelesse, the people woulde not heare the voyce of Samuel, but did say,
Nay, not so: But there shalbe a king ouer vs,
20 That we may be lyke other nations, and that our king may iudge vs, and go out
before vs, and fight our battailes.
21 Therfore when Samuel hearde all the wordes of the people, he rehearsed them
in the eares of the Lord.
22 And the Lord sayd to Samuel: Hearken vnto their voyce, and make them a king.
And Samuel said vnto the men of Israel: Go euery man vnto his citie.

Chapter 9

1 There was a man of Beniamin named Cis the sonne of Abiel, the sonne of Zeror,
ye sonne of Bechorath, the sonne of Aphiah, the sonne of a man that was a
Ieminite, mightie in power.
2 And the same had a sonne called Saul, a goodly young man and a faire, so that
among the children of Israel there was none goodlier then he: From the shoulders
vpwarde he was hygher then all the other people.
3 And the asses of this Cis Sauls father were lost, and Cis sayd to Saul his
sonne: Take one of the laddes with thee, and arise, go and seke the asses.
4 And he went through mount Ephraim, and passed through the lande of Salisa: but
they founde them not. Then they went through the lande of Salim, and there they
were not. When they went also through the land of Iemini, they found them not.
5 At the last, when they were come to the lande of Zuph, Saul sayde to his lad
that was with him: Come, let vs returne, lest my father leaue caring for the
asses, and take thought for vs.
6 He sayde vnto him: Behold, there is in this citie a man of God, & he is an
honorable man, all that he sayth, commeth suerly to passe: Now then let vs go
thyther, if so be he can shewe vs what way we may go.
7 Then sayde Saul to his lad: If we will go, what shall we bring the man? For
the bread is spent in our vessels, & there is no other present to bring the man
of God: what haue we?
8 And the lad aunswered Saul againe, and sayde: Behold I haue found about me the
fourth part of a sicle of siluer, that will I geue the man of God, to tell vs
our way.
9 (Before time in Israel when a man went to seke an aunswere of God, thus wyse
he spake, Come and let vs go to the Seer: For he that is now called a prophete,
was in the olde tyme called a Seer.
10 Then sayde Saul to his lad, wel sayd of thee: Come, let vs go. And so they
wet vnto the citie where the man of God was.
11 And as they went their way vp the hil to the citie, they met with damosels
that came out to drawe water, and sayd vnto them: Is there here a Seer?
12 And the maydens aunswered them, and sayd: yea, beholde he is before you, make
hast nowe, for he came this day to the citie, for ther is an offring of the
people this day in the hill.
13 When ye be come into the citie, ye shall finde him strayghtway yer he go vp
to the hil to eate: for ye people wil not eate vntil he come, because he doth
blesse the offring, and then eate they that be bydden to the feast: Nowe
therfore get you vp, for this day shal ye finde him.
14 And they went vp into the citie: And when they were come into the middes of
the citie, beholde Samuel came out agaynst them, for to go vp to the hill.
15 But the Lorde had tolde Samuel in his eare (a day before Saul came) saying:
16 To morowe this tyme I wyll sende thee a man out of the lande of Beniamin, him
shalt thou annoynt to be captaine ouer my people Israel, that he may saue my
people out of ye handes of the Philistines: for I haue loked vpon my people, and
their crie is come vnto me.
17 When Samuel therfore sawe Saul, the Lorde aunswered him: See, this is the man
whom I spake to thee of, this same shall raigne ouer my people.
18 Then went Saul to Samuel in the middle of the gate, and sayd: Tell me I pray
thee where the sears house is?
19 Samuel aunswered Saul and sayd, I am the sear: Go vp before me vnto the hil,
for ye shall eate with me to day, and to morowe I wil let thee go, and wil tel
thee all that is in thyne heart.
20 And as for thyne asses that were lost three dayes ago, care not for them, for
they are founde: And whose shall the beawtiful thinges of Israel be? Belong they
not to thee, and vnto all thy fathers house?
21 But Saul aunswered and sayde: Am not I the sonne of a Ieminite, of the
smallest tribe of Israel? and my kinred is the lest of all the kinredes of the
tribe of Beniamin? Wherfore then speakest thou so to me?
22 And Samuel toke Saul and his lad, and brought them into the parler, and made
the sit in the chiefest place among them that were bidden, whiche were vpon a
thirtie persons.
23 And Samuel sayde vnto the cooke: Bring foorth the portion which I gaue thee,
and of which I said vnto thee, kepe it with thee.
24 And the cooke toke vp the shoulder, & that which was vpon it, and set it
before Saul. And Samuel sayd: Behold that which is left, put it before thee and
eate: for hytherto hath it ben kept for thee, saying: Also I called the people.
And so Saul dyd eate with Samuel that day.
25 And when they were come downe fro the hyghe place into the citie, Samuel
communed with Saul vpon the top of the house.
26 And when they arose earely about the spring of the day, Samuel called Saul
vpon the toppe of the house, saying: Up, that I may send thee away. And Saul
arose, and they went out, both he and Samuel.
27 And when they were come almost out of the towne, Samuel sayde to Saul: Bid
the lad go before vs (and he went before) but stande thou stil a whyle, that I
may shewe thee the worde of God.

Chapter 10

1 And the Samuel toke a vessell of oyle, and powred it vpon his head, and kissed
him, and sayd: Hath not the Lord annoynted thee, to be captaine ouer his
inheritaunce?
2 When thou art departed from me this day, thou shalt finde two men by Rahels
sepulchre in ye border of Beniamin, euen at Zalezah, and they wil say vnto thee,
ye asses which thou wetest to seke, are found: And lo, thy father hath left the
care of the asses, & soroweth for you, saying: what shal I do for my sonne?
3 Then shalt thou go foorth fro thence, & shalt come to the playne of Thabor,
and ther shal meete thee three me going vp to God to Bethel, one carying three
kiddes, & another carying three loues of bread, & another carying a botel of
wine.
4 And they wil salute thee and geue thee two loues of bread, which thou shalt
receaue of their handes.
5 After that, shalt thou come to the hil of God, wher is the garison of the
Philistines: And when thou art come thyther to the citie, thou shalt meete a
companie of prophetes comming downe fro the hyghe place, with a psalter, a
timbrell, a pype, & a harpe before them, and they shal prophesie.
6 And the spirite of the Lorde wil come vpon thee also, and thou shalt prophsie
with them, & shalt be turned into another man.
7 Therfore when these signes are come vnto thee, do what thou hast to do, for
God is with thee.
8 And thou shalt go downe before me to Gilgal, and I also will come downe vnto
thee to sacrifice burnt sacrifices, & to offre peace offringes: Tary for me
seuen dayes till I come to thee, & shewe thee what thou shalt do.
9 And when he had turned his backe to go fro Samuel, God gaue him another
hearte, and all those tokens came to passe that same day.
10 And when they came thyther to the hill, beholde, the companie of prophetes
met him, and the spirite of God came vpon him, & he prophecied among the.
11 And all that knewe him before, when they sawe that he prophecied among the
prophetes, they sayd eche to other: what is this that is come vnto the sonne of
Cis? Is Saul also among the prophetes?
12 And one of the same place aunswered, and sayde: Who is their father? And
therof came ye prouerbe: What is Saul also among the prophetes?
13 And whe he had made an ende of prophecying, he came to the hyghe place.
14 And Sauls vncle sayde vnto him, and to his lad: Whyther went ye? He sayde, To
seke the asses: And when we sawe that they were no where, we came to Samuel.
15 And Sauls vncle sayde: Tell me, I pray thee, what Samuel sayd vnto you?
16 Saul aunswered his vncle: He tolde vs plainely that the asses were found. But
of ye kingdome wherof Samuel spake, tolde he him not.
17 And Samuel called the people together vnto the Lorde to Mispah,
18 And sayd vnto the children of Israel: Thus sayde the Lorde God of Israel, I
brought Israel out of Egypt, and deliuered you out of the hand of the Egyptians,
and out of the handes of al kingdomes that troubled you.
19 And ye haue this day cast away your God, who onely deliuereth you out of al
your aduersities and tribulations. And ye haue sayd vnto him: No, but make a
king ouer vs. Nowe therfore stande ye before the Lorde by your tribes, & your
thousandes.
20 And when Samuel had assembled together all the tribes of Israel, the tribe of
Beniamin was taken.
21 When he had assembled together the tribe of Beniamin by their kinredes, the
kinred of Matri was caught, and at the last Saul the sonne of Cis was caught:
And when they sought him, he coulde not be founde.
22 Therfore they asked the Lord further, if the man should yet come thyther? And
the Lord aunswered: Behold he hath hyd him selfe among the stuffe.
23 And they ranne and set him thence, and when he stoode among the people, he
was hygher then any of the people from the shoulders vpwarde.
24 And Samuel said to al the people: See ye not him whom the Lorde hath chosen,
and howe there is none lyke him among all the people? And all the people
showted, and sayd: God saue the king.
25 Then Samuel tolde the people the duetie of the kingdome, & wrote it in a
booke, and laide it vp before the Lord, and sent all the people away, euery man
to his house.
26 And Saul also went home to Gibea, and there folowed him a band of men, whose
heartes God had touched.
27 But the children of Belial sayd: Howe shall he saue vs? And they despised
him, and, brought him no presentes: And he helde his tongue.

Chapter 11

1 Then Nahas ye Ammonite came vp, & besieged Iabes in Gilead: And all the men of
Iabes sayd vnto Nahas, Make a couenaut with vs, and we wilbe thy seruauntes.
2 And Nahas the Ammonite aunswered them: In this will I make a couenaunt with
you, if I may thrust out al your right eyes, and bring that shame vpon all
Israel.
3 To whom the elders of Iabes sayde: Geue vs seuen dayes respite, that we may
sende messengers vnto all ye coastes of Israel: and then if there be no man to
deliuer vs, we will come out to thee.
4 Then came the messengers to Gibea of Saul, and tolde this tydinges in the
eares of the people: And all the people lift vp their voyces, and wept.
5 And beholde, Saul came folowing the cattell out of the fielde, and Saul sayde:
what alyeth this people that thei wepe? And they tolde him the tydinges of the
men of Iabes.
6 And the spirite of God came vpon Saul when he heard those tydinges, & he was
exceeding angrie.
7 And toke a yoke of oxen, & hewed them in peeces, and sent them thorowout all
the coastes of Israel by the handes of messengers, saying: Whosoeuer cometh not
foorth after Saul and after Samuel, so shal his oxen be serued. And the feare of
the Lord fell on the people, and they came out with one consent.
8 And whe he numbred them in Bezek, the children of Israel were three hundred
thousand men, and the men of Iuda thirtie thousande.
9 And they sayd vnto the messengers that came: So say vnto the men of Iabes in
Gilead, To morowe by that time ye sunne be hotte ye shal haue helpe. And the
messengers came, and shewed it to the men of Iabes, which were glad.
10 Therfore the men of Iabes sayde: To morowe we will come out vnto you, and ye
shall do with vs all that pleaseth you.
11 And on the morowe Saul put the people in three partes, & they came in vpon
the hoast in the morning watche, and slue the Ammonites vntill the heate of the
day: And they that remayned, were skattered, so that two of them were not left
together.
12 And the people sayd vnto Samuel: Who is he that sayde, shal Saul raigne ouer
vs? bring those men, that we may slay them.
13 And Saul sayde: There shall no man dye this day: For to day the Lorde hath
saued Israel.
14 Then sayde Samuel vnto the people: Come, that we may go to Gilgal, and renue
the kingdome there.
15 And all the people went to Gilgal, and made Saul king there before the Lord
in Gilgal, and there they offred peace offringes before the Lorde: And there
Saul and al the men of Israel reioyced exceedingly.

Chapter 12

1 And Samuel sayd vnto al Israel: Beholde, I haue hearkened vnto your voyce in
all that ye sayde vnto me, and haue made a king ouer you.
2 Nowe therfore, your king walketh before you: and I am olde and graye headed,
and behold my sonnes are with you, & I haue walked before you from my childehod
vnto this day.
3 Beholde here I am, beare recorde of me before the Lorde & before his
annoynted: Whose oxe haue I taken? or whose asse haue I taken? whom haue I done
wrong to? Whom haue I hurt? Or of whose hande haue I receaued any bribe, to
blind myne eyes therwith? and I will restore it you.
4 They sayde: Thou hast done vs no wrong, nor hurt vs, neither hast thou taken
ought of any mans hande.
5 He sayd vnto them againe: The Lord is witnesse against you, and his annoynted
is witnesse this day, that ye haue found naught in my handes. And they
aunswered: He is witnesse.
6 And Samuel sayd vnto the people: It is the Lorde that made Moyses and Aaron,
and that brought your fathers out of the lande of Egypt.
7 Nowe therfore stand still, that I may reason with you before the Lorde,
according to all the righteousnesses of the Lorde, whiche he shewed both you and
your fathers.
8 After yt Iacob was come into Egypt, and your fathers cryed vnto the Lord, the
Lord sent Moyses & Aaron, which brought your fathers out of Egypt, and made them
dwel in this place.
9 And whe they forgat the Lord their God, he solde the into ye hand of Sisara
captayne of the hoast of Hazor, & into the hande of the Philistines, and into
the hand of the king of Moab, and they fought against them.
10 And they cryed vnto the Lord, & sayd: We haue sinned, because we haue
forsaken the Lord, and haue serued Baalim and Astharoth: Nowe therfore deliuer
vs out of the handes of our enemies, and we will serue thee.
11 And ye Lord sent Ierobaal, Bedan, Iephthah, and Samuel, and deliuered you out
of the handes of your enemies on euerie side, and ye dwelled safe.
12 And for all that, when you sawe that Nahas the king of the children of Ammon
came against you, ye sayd vnto me: Not so, but a king shall raigne ouer vs: when
yet the Lord your God was your king.
13 Nowe therfore behold the king whom ye haue chosen, and whom ye haue desired:
lo, ye Lorde hath set a king ouer you.
14 If ye will feare the Lorde and serue him, and heare his voyce, & not disobey
the worde of the Lorde, both ye and the king that raigneth ouer you, shall
folowe the Lord your God.
15 If ye will not hearken vnto the voyce of the Lorde, but disobey the Lordes
mouth, then shall the hand of the Lord be vpon you, and on your fathers.
16 Now also stand, & see this great thing whiche the Lorde will do before your
eyes.
17 Is it not nowe wheate hearuest? I will call vnto the Lorde, & he shal sende
thunder & rayne, that ye may perceaue and see howe that your wickednes is great
which ye haue done in the sight of the Lord in asking you a king.
18 And so Samuel called vnto the Lord, and the Lorde sent thunder and rayne the
same day: And all the people feared the Lord and Samuel exceedingly.
19 And al the people sayd vnto Samuel: Pray for thy seruauntes vnto the Lord thy
God, that we dye not: for we haue sinned in asking vs a king, besyde all our
other sinnes.
20 And Samuel sayde vnto the people, feare not (Ye haue in deede done al this
wickednesse, yet depart not from folowing of the Lorde, but serue the Lorde with
all your heartes:
21 Neither turne ye away, for then ye go after vayne thinges, which are not able
to profite you, nor deliuer you, for they are but vanitie.)
22 For the Lorde will not forsake his people, because of his great names sake:
because it hath pleased the Lorde to make you his people.
23 Moreouer, God forbid that I shoulde sinne against the Lord, and ceasse
praying for you: but I will shewe you the good and right way.
24 Therfore feare you the Lorde, & serue him in the trueth, and with all your
heartes: & consider howe great thinges he hath done for you.
25 But and yf ye do wickedly, then shall ye perishe, both ye and your king.

Chapter 13

1 Saul now had ben king one yere (& he raigned two yeres ouer Israel.)
2 And Saul chose him three thousand men of Israel: Two thousand were with Saul
in Michmas and in mount Bethel, and a thousand with Ionathan in Gibea Beniamin:
and the rest of the people he sent euery man to his tent.
3 And Ionathan smote the garison of the Philistines that was in the hill, and it
came to the Philistines eares: And Saul blewe ye trumpet throughout al the land,
saying: Let the Hebrues heare.
4 And all Israel hearde say howe that Saul had destroyed a garison of ye
Philistines: wherfore Israel was had in abomination with ye Pilistines. And the
people gathered together after Saul to Gilgal.
5 The Philistines also gathered them selues together to fyght with Israel,
thirtie thousand charettes, & sixe thousand horsemen, with other people lyke the
sand by the seas side in multitude, & came vp, and pitched in Michmas, eastwarde
from Bethauen.
6 And when the men of Israel sawe it, they were in a strayte (and the people
were in a distresse) & the people hyd the selues in caues, and in holdes, and in
rockes, and iin hye places, and in pittes.
7 And some of the Hebrues went ouer Iordane to go vnto the land of Gad and
Gilead: And Saul was yet in Gilgal, and all the people being afrayde, folowed
him.
8 And he taried seuen dayes, euen vnto the time that Samuel had appoynted: But
Samuel came not to Gilgal, and the people were therfore skattered from him.
9 And Saul sayde: Bring a burnt sacrifice to me, and peace offeringes. And he
offered a burnt sacrifice.
10 And assoone as he had made an ende of offering the burnt sacrifice, beholde
Samuel came, and Saul went against him, to salute him.
11 And Samuel sayde: What hast thou done? Saul sayde: Because I sawe that the
people skattered from me, and that thou camest not within the dayes appointed,
and that the Philistines gathered them selues together to Michmas:
12 Therfore sayde I, The Philistines shal come downe nowe vpon me to Gilgal, and
I haue not made supplication vnto the Lord: I was bolde therfore, & offred a
burnt offring.
13 And Samuel sayd to Saul: Thou art become a foole, thou hast not kept the
commaundemet of the Lord thy God which he commauded thee: For at this time
woulde the Lorde haue stablished thy kingdome vpon Israel for euer.
14 But nowe, thy kingdome shal not continue: The Lorde hath sought him a man
after his owne heart, and the Lord hath commaunded him to be captayne ouer his
people, because thou hast not kept that whiche the Lorde commaunded thee.
15 And Samuel arose, & gate him vp from Gilgal in Gibea of Beniamin, and Saul
numbred the people that were found with him, and they were about a sixe hundred
men.
16 And Saul and Ionathan his sonne, & the people that were found with them, had
their abiding in Gibea of Beniamin: but ye Philistines pitched in Michmas.
17 And there came out of the hoast of the Philistines three copanies to
destroye: one companie turned vnto the way that leadeth to Ophra vnto ye lande
of Sual:
18 And another companie turned the way to Bethoron: And the thirde companie
turned to the way of the coast that is seene aboue ye valley of Zeboim toward
the wildernesse.
19 There was no smith founde throughout all the lande of Israel: For the
Philistines sayde, Lest the Hebrues make them swordes or speares.
20 But all the Israelites went downe to the Philistines, to mende euery man his
share, his mattocke, his axe, & weeding hooke.
21 Yet they had a file for the shares, for the mattockes, for the pickforkes,
and for the axes, and for to sharpen to goades.
22 And so in time of battel there was neither sword nor speare found in the
handes of any of the people that were with Saul and Ionathan: But with Saul &
Ionathan his sonne was there found.
23 And the garison of the Philistines came out, to go ouer vnto Michmas.

Chapter 14

1 Then on a time Ionathan the sonne of Saul sayde vnto his young man that bare
his harnesse: Come, & let vs go ouer to the Philistines garison that are yonder
on the other syde: and he tolde not his father.
2 And Saul taried in the vttermost part of Gibea vnder a pomegranate tree which
is in Migron: and the people that were with him were vpo a sixe hundred men.
3 And Ahia the sonne of Ahitob, Ichabods brother, the sonne of Phinehesthe sonne
of Eli, was the Lordes priest in Silo, and ware an Ephod: And the people wist
not that Ionathan was gone.
4 And in the middes of the passage by which Ionathan sought to go ouer vnto the
Philistines garison, there was a sharpe rocke on the one syde, & a sharpe rocke
on the other syde: the one called Bozez, and the other Sene.
5 The forefront of the one leaned northwarde towarde Michmas, & the other was
southward toward Gibea.
6 And Ionathan sayd to the young man that bare his harnesse: Come, and let vs go
ouer vnto the garison of these vncircumcised, it may be that the Lorde will
worke with vs: for it is no hardnesse with the Lord to saue either in manie or
in fewe.
7 And his harnesse bearer said vnto him, Do all that is in thyne heart: Go where
it pleaseth thee, behold I am with thee as thyne heart lusteth.
8 Then sayd Ionathan: Beholde, we go ouer vnto these men, and shall shewe our
selues vnto them.
9 Yf they say on this wyse to vs, Tarie vntil we come to you: then we wil stand
still in our place, & not go vp vnto them.
10 But and if they say, Come vp vnto vs: then we wil go vp, for the Lorde hath
deliuered them into our handes: And this shalbe a signe vnto vs.
11 And they both shewed them selues vnto the garison of the Philistines. And the
Philistines sayde: See, the Hebrues come out of the holes where they had hyd
them selues in.
12 And the men of the garison aunswered Ionathan & his harnesse bearer, & sayd:
Come vp to vs, and we will shewe you a thing. And Ionathan sayde vnto his
harnesse bearer: Come vp after me, for the Lorde hath deliuered them into the
hande of Israel.
13 And Ionathan clymed vp vpon handes and feete, and his harnesse bearer after
him: And they fell before Ionathan, & his harnesse bearer slue the after him.
14 And that first slaughter whiche Ionathan & his harnesse bearer made, was vpon
a twentie men, within the compasse as it were about an halfe aker of land which
two oxen plowe.
15 And there was a feare in the hoast, in the field, & among al ye people:
insomuch that they that were gone out of the garrison to robbe, were afrayde
also, & the earth trembled, for the feare that was sent of God.
16 And the watchmen of Saul in Gibea Beniamin, sawe: And behold, the multitude
were discomfited, & were smitten as they went.
17 Then sayd Saul vnto the people that was with him: Searche, and see who is
gone away from vs. And when they had numbred, beholde, Ionathan and his harnesse
bearer were not there.
18 And Saul sayd vnto Ahia: Bring hyther the arke of God. (For the arke of God
was at time with the children of Israel.)
19 And while Saul talked vnto ye priest, the noyse that was in the hoaste of the
Philistines spred farther abrode and encreased. And Saul sayd vnto the priest:
Withdrawe thyne hande.
20 And Saul ioyned him selfe vnto al the people that were with him, & they came
to the battell, and behold euery mans sword was against his felow, and there was
a very great discomfiture.
21 Moreouer, the Hebrues that were with the Philistines before that tyme, & were
come with them into all partes of the hoaste, turned to be with the Israelites
that were with Saul and Ionathan.
22 And all the men of Israel also, whiche had hyd the selues in mount Ephraim,
assoone as they hearde howe that the Philistines were fled, they folowed after
them in the battel.
23 And so the Lorde saued Israel that day: and the battel continued vnto
Bethauen.
24 And when the men of Israel were kepte downe with hunger that day, Saul
charged the people with an oth, saying: Cursed be the man that eateth any foode
vntill night, till I be auenged of myne enemies. And so none of the people
tasted any sustenaunce.
25 And al they of the land came to a wood, where honie lay vpon the grounde.
26 And the people came into the wood: And behold, the honie dropped, and no man
moued his hand to his mouth: for the people feared the oth.
27 But Ionathan hearde not whe his father charged the people with the oth,
wherfore he put foorth the ende of the rod that was in his hand, and dipt it in
an honie combe, & put his hande to his mouth, and his eyes receaued sight.
28 Then aunswered one of the people, and sayde: Thy father made the people to
sweare, saying: Cursed be the ma that eateth any sustenaunce this day. And the
people were faynt.
29 The sayd Ionathan, My father hath troubled the lande: See howe myne eyes hath
receaued sight, because I tasted a litle of this honie:
30 Howe muche more then to day, if the people had eaten of the spoyle of their
enemies whiche they found? And had there not ben then a muche greater slaughter
among the Philistines?
31 And they smote the Philistines that day, from Michmas to Aialon: And the
people were exceeding faynt.
32 And the people gat them to the spoyle, and toke sheepe, oxen, and calues, &
slue them on the ground, and the people dyd eate them with the blood.
33 Then men tolde Saul, saying: Behold, the people sinne against the Lorde, in
that they eate with the blood. And he sayde, Ye haue trespassed: Rowle a great
stone vnto me this day.
34 And Saul sayde againe: Go abrode among the people, and bid them bring me
euery man his oxe, and euery man his sheepe, and slay them here, and eate, and
sinne not against the Lorde in eating with the blood. And the people brought
euery man his oxe in his hande that night, and slue them there.
35 And Saul made an aulter vnto ye Lord: And that was the first aulter that he
made vnto the Lorde.
36 And Saul sayde: Let vs go downe after the Philistines by night, and spoyle
them, vntil it be day in the morning, and let vs not leaue one man of them. And
they sayde: Do whatsoeuer thou thinkest best. Then sayde the priest: Let vs come
hyther vnto God.
37 And Saul asked of God: Shall I go downe after the Philistines? Wilt thou
deliuer them into the handes of Israel? But he aunswered him not at that time.
38 And Saul sayde: Let al the chiefe of the people come hyther, and knowe and
see by whom this sinne is done this day.
39 For as the Lorde liueth, whiche saued Israel, though it be in Ionathan my
sonne, he shal dye the death. But there was no man among all the people that
aunswered him.
40 Then he sayde vnto al Israel: Be ye on one syde, and I and Ionathan my sonne
will be on the other syde. And the people saide vnto Saul: What thou thinkest
best, that do.
41 Therfore Saul saide vnto the Lorde God of Israel, geue a perfect lot. And
Saul and Ionathan were caught: but the people scaped free.
42 And Saul said: Cast lot betweene me and Ionathan my sonne. And Ionathan was
caught.
43 Then Saul saide to Ionathan: Tell me what thou hast done. And Ionathan tolde
him, and sayde: I tasted a litle honie with the ende of the rod that was in myne
hand, & lo, I must dye.
44 Saul aunswered: God do so & more also to me, thou shalt dye the death
Ionathan.
45 And the people said vnto Saul: Shal Ionathan dye, which hath so mightilie
deliuered Israel? God forbid. As the Lord lyueth, there shall not one heere of
his head fall to ye ground, for he hath wrought with God this daye. And so the
people deliuered Ionathan, that he dyed not.
46 And then Saul departed vp from folowing the Philistines: And the Philistines
went to their owne place.
47 And so Saul helde the kingdome ouer Israel, and fought against all his
enemies on euery side, against Moab, against the children of Ammon, against
Edom, against the kinges of Zoba, and against the Philistines: And whyther
soeuer he turned him selfe, he put them to the worse.
48 And he gathered his hoast together, & smote the Amalekites, & rid Israel out
of the handes of them that spoyled them.
49 The sonnes of Saul were, Ionathan, Iessui, and Melchisua: And his two
daughters were thus named, the elder was called Merob, and the younger Michol.
50 And the name of Sauls wife, was Ahinoa, the daughter of Ahimaaz: and the name
of his chiefe captaine, was Abner the sonne of Ner, Sauls vncle.
51 And Cis was Sauls father: & Ner the father of Abner, was the sonne of Abiel.
52 And there was sore warre against the Philistines all ye dayes of Saul: And
whomsoeuer Saul sawe to be a strong man, and meete for the warre, he toke him
vnto him.

Chapter 15

1 Samuel also saide vnto Saul: The Lord sent me to anoynt thee, to be king ouer
his people, ouer Israel: Now therfore hearken thou vnto the voyce of the wordes
of the Lorde.
2 Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes: I remember that which Amalek did to Israel,
how they layed waite for them in the waye as they came vp from Egypt.
3 Nowe therfore go, and smyte Amalek, and destroye ye all that pertaineth vnto
them, and haue no compassion on them, slay both man & woman, infant and
suckling, oxe and sheepe, camel and asse.
4 And Saul gathered the people together, and numbred them in Telaim, two hundred
thousand footemen, and ten thousand men of Iuda.
5 And Saul came vnto a citie of Amalek, and set watch in the brooke.
6 And Saul saide vnto the Kenites: Go, & depart, & get you downe from among the
Amalekites, lest I destroy you with them: for ye shewed mercie to all the
children of Israel, when they came out of Egypt. And so the Kenites departed
from among ye Amalekites.
7 And Saul smote the Amalekites, from Heuila, as thou commest to Sur, that lyeth
before Egypt.
8 And toke Agag the king of the Amalekites alyue, and vtterly destroyed all the
people with the edge of the sworde.
9 But Saul and the people spared Agag, the better sheepe, and the fatter oxen,
and the lambes, and all that was good, & would not destroy them: But al that was
foule & naught worth, that they destroyed vtterlie.
10 Then came the word of the Lord vnto Samuel, saying:
11 It repenteth me that I haue made Saul king: For he is turned from me, & hath
not perfourmed my commaundementes. And Samuel was euill apayed, & cryed vnto the
Lord all night.
12 And whe Samuel rose early to meete Saul in the morning, it was tolde Samuel
that Saul was come to Carmel, and beholde, he hath made him there a place, and
is returned, and departed and gone downe to Gilgal.
13 And Samuel came to Saul, & Saul said vnto him, Blessed be thou in the Lorde:
I haue fulfilled the comaundement of the Lord.
14 Samuel sayde: What meaneth then the bleating of the sheepe in mine eares and
the lowing of the oxen which I heare?
15 Saul aunswered, They haue brought them from the Amalekites: For the people
spared the best of the sheepe, and of the oxen, to sacrifice them vnto the Lorde
thy God, and the remnaunt haue we destroyed vtterlie.
16 Samuel said to Saul: Let me tell thee what the Lorde hath saide to me this
night. And he sayd vnto him: saye on.
17 Samuel said: When thou wast litle in thyne owne sight, wast thou not made the
head of the tribes of Israel, and the Lorde annoynted thee kyng ouer Israel?
18 And the Lorde sent thee on a iourney, and said: Go, and vtterly destroy those
sinners the Amalekites, & fight against them vntyll thou destroy them.
19 And wherfore hast thou not hearkened vnto the voyce of the Lorde? but hast
turned to the praye, and hast done that which is wicked in the syght of the
Lorde?
20 And Saul sayde vnto Samuel: Yea, I haue hearkened vnto the voyce of the
Lorde, and haue gone the way which the Lord sent me vnto, & haue brought Agag
the kyng of Amalek, and haue destroyed the Amalekites.
21 But the people toke of ye spoyle, sheepe, oxen, and the chiefest of the
thynges whiche shoulde haue ben destroyed, to offer vnto the Lord thy God in
Gilgal.
22 And Samuel sayde: Hath the Lorde as great pleasure in burnt sacrifices and
offerynges, as when the voyce of the Lorde is obeyed? Beholde, to obey, is
better then sacrifice: and to hearken, is better then the fat of rammes.
23 For rebellion is as the sinne of witchcraft, and stubbernnesse is as the
wickednes of idolatrie: Because thou hast cast away the worde of the Lorde,
therefore he hath cast away thee also from being king.
24 And Saul sayde vnto Samuel, I haue sinned: For I haue gone farther then the
saying of the Lorde and thy wordes, because I feared the people, and obeyed
their voyce.
25 Now therfore I pray thee take away my sinne, and turne agayne with me, that I
may worship the Lorde.
26 And Samuel sayde vnto Saul, I wyll not returne with thee: For thou hast cast
away the worde of the Lorde, and the Lord hath cast away thee, that thou shalt
not be kyng ouer Israel.
27 And as Samuel turned hym selfe to go away, he caught the lappe of his coate,
and it rent.
28 And Samuel sayde vnto hym: The Lorde hath rent the kyngdome of Israel from
thee this day, and hath geuen it to a neighbour of thine that is better then
thou.
29 The strength of Israel wyl not beguyle, nor repent: for he is not a man that
shoulde repent.
30 He sayde, I haue sinned: But nowe honour me before the elders of my people
and before Israel, and turne againe with me, that I may worship the Lord thy
God.
31 And so Samuel turned againe, and folowed Saul: and Saul worshipped the Lorde.
32 Then sayde Samuel: Bryng you hyther to me Agag, the kyng of the Amalekites.
And Agag came vnto hym dilicately, and Agag sayde: Truely the bitternesse of
death is past.
33 And Samuel sayde: As thy sworde hath made women chyldlesse, so shall thy
mother be chyldlesse aboue other women. And Samuel hewed Agag in peeces before
the Lorde in Gilgal.
34 And then Samuel departed to Rama, and Saul went home to his house to Gibea
Saul.
35 And Samuel came no more to see Saul, vntyll the day of his death:
Neuerthelesse Samuel mourued for Saul: and the Lorde repented that he had made
Saul kyng ouer Israel.

Chapter 16

1 The Lorde sayd vnto Samuel: Howe long wilt thou mourne for Saul, seing I haue
cast him away from raigning ouer Israel? Fill thyne horne with oyntment, and
come, that I may send thee to Isai the Bethlemite: for I haue prouided me a king
among his sonnes.
2 And Samuel sayd: How can I go? For if Saul heare it, he will kill me. The Lord
aunswered: Take an heyfer with thee, and saye: I am come to offer to the Lorde.
3 And call Isai to the offering, and I will shewe thee what thou shalt do: And
thou shalt annoynt vnto me him whom I name vnto thee.
4 And so Samuel did as the Lord bade him, and came to Bethlehem: and the elders
of the towne were astonyed at his comming, and saide: Commest thou peaceably?
5 He aunswered: Yea, I am come to offer vnto the Lorde: Sanctifie your selues,
and come with me to the offering. And he sanctified Isai and his sonnes, and
bade them to the offering.
6 And when they were come, he loked on Eliab, & saide: Surelye the Lordes
annoynted is before him.
7 But the Lorde sayde vnto Samuel: Loke not on his fashion, or on ye height of
his stature, because I haue refused him: For God seeth not as man seeth. For man
loketh on the outward appearaunce, but the Lorde beholdeth the heart.
8 Then Isai called Abinadab, & made him come before Samuel, and he sayd: Neither
hath the Lorde chosen this.
9 Then Isai made Samma come, and he sayd: Neither yet hath the Lorde chosen him.
10 Againe Isai made seuen of his sonnes to come before Samuel, and Samuel sayd
vnto Isai: The Lorde hath chosen none of these.
11 And Samuel sayde vnto Isai: Are heare all thy children? He sayde: There is,
yet a litle one behind, that kepeth the sheepe. And Samuel said vnto Isai, Sende
and fet him: for we will not syt downe, till he be come hyther.
12 And he sent, and brought him in: And he was ruddie, and of an excellet
beawtie, and wel fauoured in sight. And the Lorde said, Aryse & annoynt him: For
this is he.
13 Therefore Samuel toke the horne with the annoyntment, and annoynted him in
the middes of his brethren. And the spirite of the Lorde came vpon Dauid from
that daye forwarde: And Samuel rose vp, and went to Rama.
14 But the spirite of the Lorde departed from Saul, and an euill spirite sent of
the Lord vexed him.
15 And Sauls seruauntes said vnto him: Beholde, an euill spirite sent of God
vexeth thee.
16 Let our Lorde therefore commaunde thy seruauntes (that are before thee) to
seeke a man that is a cunnyng player with an harpe: that when the euill spirite
of God commeth vpon thee, he may play with his hande, & thou shalt be eased.
17 Saul sayd vnto his seruauntes: Prouide me a man then that can play well, and
bring him to me.
18 The aunswered one of his seruauntes and said: Beholde, I haue seene a sonne
of Isai the Bethlehemite, that can play vpon instrumentes, and is strong,
valiaunt, and a man of warre, and prudent in doing of feates, and well made, and
the Lorde is with him.
19 Wherefore Saul sent messengers vnto Isai, and said: Sende me Dauid thy sonne,
which is with the sheepe.
20 And Isai tooke an asse laden with bread, and a flacket of wine, and a kyd,
and sent them by Dauid his sonne vnto Saul.
21 And Dauid came to Saul, and stoode before him, and he loued him very well, &
he was made his harnesse bearer.
22 And Saul sent to Isai, saying: Let Dauid nowe remaine with me, for he hath
founde fauour in my sight.
23 And so when the euill spirite of God came vpon Saul, Dauid toke an harpe and
played with his hand: and so Saul was refreshed, & did amende, and the euyll
spirite departed from him.

Chapter 17

1 The Philistines gathered their hoast to battayle, and came together to Socho
which is in Iuda, and pytched betweene Socho and Azekah, in the coaste of
Dammim.
2 And Saul & the men of Israel came together, and pytched in the valley of Elah,
and put them selues in battaile aray, to meete the Philistines.
3 And the Philistines stoode on a mountaine on the one syde, and Israel stoode
on a mountaine on the other syde, and there was a valley betweene them.
4 And there came a man betweene the both, out of the tentes of the Philistines,
named Goliath, of Gath: sixe cubites and a handbreadth long:
5 And had an helmet of brasse vpon his head, and a coate of male about him. And
the weight of his coate of mayle, was fiue thousand sicles of brasse.
6 And he had bootes of brasse vpon his legges, and a shielde of brasse vpon his
shoulders.
7 And the shaft of his speare was lyke a weauers beame, and his speare head
wayed sixe hundred sicles of iron: And one bearing a shielde went before him.
8 And he stoode and cryed against the hoast of Israel, and sayde vnto them: Why
are ye come to set your battaile in array? am not I a Philistine, and you
seruauntes to Saul? choose you a man for you, and let him come downe to me.
9 And if he be able to fyght with me, & to kill me, then will we be your
seruauntes: But if I can ouercome hym & beate him, then shal ye be our seruautes
and serue vs.
10 And the Philistine sayde: I defie the hoast of Israel this day, geue me a
man, that we may fight together.
11 When Saul and all Israel heard those wordes of ye Philistine, they were
discouraged, and greatly afraide.
12 Dauid was the sonne of an Ephrathite of Bethlehem Iuda, named Isai, which had
eyght sonnes, & this man was taken for an olde man in the dayes of Saul.
13 And the three eldest sonnes of Isai went, and folowed Saul to the battell:
And the names of his three sonnes that went to battaile, were: Eliab the eldest,
and the next Abinadab, and the thyrd Samma:
14 And Dauid was the leaste. And the three eldest, went after Saul.
15 Dauid also went, and departed from Saul, to feede his fathers sheepe at
Bethlehem.
16 And the Philistine came foorth in the morning and euening, and continued
fourtie dayes.
17 And Isai sayd vnto Dauid his sonne: Take for thy brethren an Epha of this
partched corne, & these ten loaues, and runne to the hoast to thy brethren.
18 And cary these ten freshe cheeses vnto the captayne, and loke howe thy
brethren fare, and set out their pledge.
19 And Saul and they and all the men of Israel were in the valley of Elah,
fyghtyng with the Philistines.
20 And Dauid rose vp early in ye morning, and left the sheepe with a keper, &
toke, and went as Isai had commaunded him, and came within the compasse of the
hoast: And the hoast went out in array, and shouted in the battaile.
21 For Israel and the Philistines had put them selues in array armie against
armie.
22 And Dauid left the thinges which he bare, vnder the handes of the keper of
the vessels, and ran into the hoast, and came, and saluted his brethren.
23 And as he talked with them, behold, there stoode a man in the middes (Goliath
the Philistine by name, of Gath) out of the armie of the Philistines, & spake
such wordes: and Dauid heard it.
24 And all the people of Israel, when they sawe the man, ranne away from him,
and were sore afrayde.
25 And euery man of Israel said: Sawe ye not this man that commeth vp? euen to
reuile Israel is he come: And to him that killeth him, will the king geue great
ritches, and will geue him his daughter thereto, yea and make his fathers house
free in Israel.
26 And Dauid spake to ye men that stoode by, and sayd: What shall be done to the
man that killeth this Philistine, and taketh awaye the shame from Israel? And
what is this vncircumcised Philistine, that he shoulde reuile the hoast of the
liuing God?
27 And the people aunswered him (after this maner) saying: So shall it be done
to the man that killeth him.
28 And Eliab his eldest brother heard when he spake vnto the men, and Eliab was
angrye with Dauid, & sayde: Why camest thou downe hyther? and with whom hast
thou left those fewe sheepe in the wildernes: I know thy pride and the malice of
thyne heart, that thou art come downe to see the battel.
29 And Dauid sayde: And what haue I nowe done? is there not a cause?
30 And he departed from him into the presence of another, and spake of the same
maner: and the people aunswered him againe, as before.
31 And they that heard the wordes which Dauid spake, rehearsed them before Saul,
which caused him to be fet.
32 And Dauid sayde to Saul: Let no mans heart fayle him because of him: Thy
seruaunt will go, and fight with yonder Philistine.
33 And Saul sayde to Dauid againe: Thou art not able to go against yonder
Philistine, to fight with him: For thou art but a childe, but he is a man of
warre euen from his youth.
34 Dauid aunswered vnto Saul: Thy seruaunt kept his fathers sheepe, & ther came
a lion and likewise a beare, and toke a sheepe, out of the flocke:
35 And I went out after him, and smote him, and toke it out of his mouth: And
whe he arose against me, I caught him by the bearde, and smote him, and slue
him.
36 And so thy seruaunte slue both the lion, and the beare: And trulie this
vncircumcised Philistine shalbe as one of them, seing he hath rayled on the
hoast of the liuyng God.
37 And Dauid spake moreouer: The Lord that deliuered me out of the hand of the
lion, and out of the hande of the beare, he shal deliuer me also out of the hand
of this Philistine. And Saul sayd vnto Dauid: Go, and the Lorde shall be with
thee.
38 And Saul put his rayment vpon Dauid, and put an helmet of brasse vpon his
head, and put a coate of mayle vpon him.
39 And gyrded Dauid with his owne sword vpon his rayment, and he assayed to go,
and because he neuer proued it, Dauid saide vnto Saul: I cannot go with these,
for I haue not vsed my selfe thereto. And Dauid put them of him,
40 And toke his staffe in his hand, and chose him fiue smoth stones out of a
brooke, and put them in a shepheardes bagge which he had, that is in a scrippe,
and his sling was in his hande, and he went to the Philistine.
41 And the Philistine came and drewe neare against Dauid, and the man that bare
the shielde went before him.
42 And when the Philistine loked about & sawe Dauid, he disdayned him: for he
was but young, ruddie & of a comly face.
43 And the Philistine sayd vnto Dauid: Am I a dogge, that thou commest to me
with staues? And the Philistine cursed Dauid in ye name of his goddes.
44 And the Philistine sayde to Dauid: Come to me, and I wyll geue thy fleshe
vnto the foules of the ayre, and to the beastes of the fielde.
45 Then sayde Dauid to the Philistine: Thou commest to me with a sword, a
speare, & a shielde: But I come to thee in the name of the Lord of hoastes, the
God of the hoast of Israel, whom thou hast rayled vpon.
46 This day shal the Lorde close thee into my hand, and I shall smite thee, &
take thyne head from thee, & will geue the carkases of the hoast of the
Philistines this daye vnto the foules of the ayre, & to the beastes of the
earth, that all they which be in the worlde, maye knowe that there is a God in
Israel:
47 And all this congregation shal know that the Lorde saueth not with sword, &
speare (For the battaile is ye Lordes) and he shall geue you into our handes.
48 And when the Philistine arose to come and drawe nye to Dauid, Dauid hasted,
and ran to fight against the Philistine,
49 And Dauid put his hand in his bagge, and toke out a stone, and slang it, and
smote the Philistine in his forehead, that the stone suncke into his forehead,
and he fell groueling to the earth.
50 And so Dauid ouercame the Philistine with a sling and a stone, and smote the
Philistine, & slue him, euen when Dauid had no sword in his hand.
51 But Dauid ran and stoode vpon the Philistine, and toke his sword, and drue it
out of his sheathe, & slue him, and cut of his head therewith. And when the
Philistines sawe that their champion was dead, they fled.
52 And the men of Israel and of Iuda arose, and showted, and folowed after the
Philistines, vntill they came to the valley, and vnto the gates of Acaron: And
the Philistines fell downe wounded by the way to Saaraim, euen vnto Gath, and
Acaron.
53 And the children of Israel returned from chasing after the Philistines, and
spoyled their tentes.
54 And Dauid toke the head of the Philistine, and brought it to Hierusalem, but
he put his armour in his tent.
55 When Saul sawe Dauid go foorth against the Philistine, he sayd vnto Abner the
captaine of his hoast: Abner, whose sonne is this young man? Abner aunswered: As
thy soule liueth (O king) I cannot tell.
56 And the king sayde: Enquire thou whose sonne the youngling is.
57 And whe Dauid was returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, Abner toke
him, & brought him before Saul, with the head of the Philistine in his hand.
58 And Saul sayde to him: whose sonne art thou, thou young man? Dauid aunswered:
I am the sonne of thy seruaunt Isai the Bethlehemite.

Chapter 18

1 And whe he had made an end of speaking vnto Saul, the soule of Ionathan was
knit with the soule of Dauid, and Ionathan loued him as his owne soule.
2 And Saul toke him that daye, and woulde let him go no more home to his fathers
house.
3 Then Ionathan and Dauid made a couenaunt, because he loued him as his owne
soule.
4 And Ionathan put of the robe that was vpon him, and gaue it to Dauid, and
thereto his garmentes, euen to his sword, and to his bowe, and to his gyrdel.
5 And Dauid went out whythersoeuer Saul sent him, and behaued him selfe wysely:
And Saul set hym ouer his men of warre, and he was accepted in the sight of all
the people, & in the sight of Sauls seruauntes.
6 And as they came againe when Dauid was returned from the slaughter of the
Philistine, the women came out of all cities of Israel, singing and dausing, to
meete king Saul, with timbrels, with ioy, and with instrumentes of musicke.
7 And the women aunswered one another in their play, and sayde: Saul hath slaine
his thousand, and Dauid his ten thousand.
8 And Saul was exceeding wroth, and the saying displeased him, and he sayd: They
haue ascribed vnto Dauid ten thousand, & to me but a thousande: and what can he
more haue, saue the kingdome?
9 Wherfore Saul had an eye on Dauid from that day forwarde.
10 And on the morow, the euyll spirite sent of God came vpon Saul, and he
prophesied in the middes of ye house: And Dauid played with his hand, like as at
other tymes: & there was a iauelyn in Sauls hand.
11 And Saul toke the iauelyn, and sayd: I will nayle Dauid to the wall with it.
And Dauid auoyded out of his presence two times.
12 And Saul was afrayde of Dauid, because the Lorde was with him, & was departed
from Saul.
13 Therefore Saul put him from him, and made him a captaine ouer a thousand, and
he went out and in before the people.
14 And Dauid behaued him selfe wisely in all his wayes, and the Lorde was with
him.
15 Wherefore when Saul sawe that he was so exceeding wise, he was afrayde of
him.
16 But all Israel and Iuda loued Dauid, because he went out and in before them.
17 And Saul sayde to Dauid: Beholde my eldest daughter Merob, her I will geue
thee to wife: Onely be a valiaunt sonne vnto me, & fight the Lordes battayles.
For Saul thought: Mine hand shall not be vpon him, but the hande of the
Philistines shalbe vpon him.
18 And Dauid aunswered Saul: What am I? and what is my lyfe or the kynred of my
father in Israel, that I should be sonne in lawe to the king?
19 Howbeit, when the time was come that Merob Sauls daughter shoulde haue ben
geuen to Dauid, she was geue vnto Adriel a Meholathite, to wife.
20 Howbeit, Michol Sauls daughter loued Dauid: and they shewed Saul, and the
thing pleased him.
21 And Saul sayde: I will geue him her that she may be a snare to him, and that
the hand of the Philistines may be against him. Wherefore Saul sayde to Dauid:
Thou shalt this day be my sonne in lawe in the one of the twayne.
22 And Saul comaunded his seruautes to come with Dauid secretely, & to say:
Behold, the king hath a fauour to thee, and all his seruautes loue thee: be now
therefore the kinges sonne in lawe.
23 And Sauls seruauntes spake those wordes in the eares of Dauid. And Dauid
said: semeth it to you a light thing to be a kinges sonne in lawe? seeing that I
am a poore man, and of smal reputation.
24 And the seruauntes brought Saul word againe, saying: Of this maner spake
Dauid.
25 And Saul sayde, This wise shall ye saye to Dauid: The king careth for no
other dowry, but for an hundred foreskinnes of the Philistines, to be auenged of
the kynges enemies. But Saul thought to make Dauid fall into the handes of the
Philistines.
26 And when his seruauntes tolde Dauid these wordes, it pleased Dauid wel to be
the kinges sonne in lawe: And the dayes were not expired.
27 Afterward Dauid arose with his men, and went and slue of the Philistines two
hundred men, and Dauid brought their foreskinnes, and they gaue them wholly to
the king, that he might be the kinges sonne in lawe: Wherefore Saul gaue him
Michol his daughter to wife.
28 And Saul saw and vnderstoode how that the Lorde was with Dauid, and that
Michol his daughter loued him:
29 And he was the more afrayde of Dauid, and Saul became alway Dauids enemie.
30 The Lordes of the Philistines vsed to go foorth, and whe they went foorth
Dauid behaued him selfe more wysely then all the seruauntes of Saul, so that his
name was much set by.

Chapter 19

1 Saul spake to Ionatha his sonne, and to all his seruauntes, that they should
kill Dauid.
2 But Ionatha Sauls sonne had a great fauour to Dauid, & Ionathan tolde Dauid,
saying, Saul my father goeth about to slay thee: Nowe therfore I pray thee take
heede to thy selfe vntyll the mornyng, and abyde in some secrete place, and hyde
thy selfe:
3 And I wyll go out, and stande by my father in the fielde where thou art, and
wyll commune with my father of thee, and whatsoeuer I see, I wyll tell thee.
4 And Ionathan spake good of Dauid vnto Saul his father, and sayde vnto him: Let
not the king sinne against his seruaunt, against Dauid: for he hath not sinned
against thee, and his workes haue ben to theewarde very good.
5 For he dyd put his life in his hande, and slue the Philistine, and the Lorde
brought to passe a great health for all Israel: Thou sawest it, and thou
reioycedst: Wherfore then wilt thou sinne against innocent blood, and slay Dauid
without a cause?
6 And Saul hearkened vnto the voyce of Ionathan, and Saul sware, as the Lorde
lyueth he shall not dye.
7 And Ionathan called Dauid, & Ionathan shewed hym all those wordes: & Ionathan
brought Dauid to Saul, & he was in his presence as in tymes past.
8 And the warre began againe, and Dauid went out, and fought with the
Philistines, and slue them with a great slaughter, and they fled from hym.
9 And the euyl spirite of the Lorde was vpon Saul as he sate in his house,
hauing a iauelin in his hand: And Dauid played with his hand.
10 And Saul entended to smyte Dauid to the wall with the iauelyn: But he ryd him
selfe out of Sauls presence, as he smote the speare into the walle: And Dauid
fled & was saued the same night.
11 Saul also sent messengers vnto Dauids house, to watch him, and to slay him in
the morning: And Michol Dauids wyfe tolde it him, saying: If thou saue not thy
selfe this night, to morowe thou shalt be slayne.
12 And so Michol let Dauid downe through a windowe: and he went and fled, and
was saued.
13 And Michol toke an image, and layde it in the bed, & put a pillowe stuffed
with goates heere vnder the head of it, and couered it with a cloth.
14 And when Saul sent messengers to fetche Dauid, she said, he is sicke.
15 And Saul sent the messengers againe to see Dauid, saying: Bring him to me bed
and all, that I may slay him.
16 And when the messengers were come in, behold there lay an image in the bed,
with a pillowe of goates heere vnder the head of it.
17 And Saul sayde vnto Michol: Why hast thou mocked me so, and sent away mine
enemie, that he is escaped? Michol aunswered Saul: For he sayd vnto me, let me
go, or els I will kill thee.
18 And so Dauid fled, and escaped, & came to Samuel to Rama, and tolde him all
that Saul had done to him: And he and Samuel went and dwelt in Naioth.
19 And one tolde Saul, saying: Beholde, Dauid is at Naioth in Rama.
20 And Saul sent messengers to fet Dauid: And when they sawe a company of
prophetes prophecying, & Samuel standing as appoynted ouer them, the spirite of
God fell vpon the messengers of Saul, and they prophecied to.
21 And when it was tolde Saul, he sent other messengers, and they prophecied
lykewyse. And Saul sent messengers yet againe the third time, and they
prophecied also.
22 Then went he him selfe to Rama, and came to a great well that is in Sechu,
and he asked and sayde: Where are Samuel & Dauid? And one sayd: Beholde, they be
at Naioth in Rama.
23 And he went thyther euen to Naioth in Rama, and the spirite of God came vpon
him also, and he went prophecying vntill he came to Naioth in Rama.
24 And he stript of his clothes & prophecied before Samuel in lyke maner, and
fell naked al that day and all that night: And therof it is that they say, Is
Saul also among the prophetes?

Chapter 20

1 And Dauid fled from Naioth whiche is in Rama, and came, and said before
Ionathan, What haue I done? wherin am I faultie? what is the sinne that I haue
committed before thy father, that he seketh my lyfe?
2 He sayde vnto him: God forbid, thou shalt not dye: Behold, my father wil do
nothing either great or smal, but that he will shewe it me: And howe should my
father hyde this thing from me? He will not do it.
3 And Dauid sware againe, and sayde: Thy father knoweth that I haue found grace
in thyne eyes, & therfore he thinketh, Ionathan shall not knowe it, lest he be
sory: And in very deede, euen as the Lorde lyueth, and as thy soule liueth,
there is but a steppe betweene me and death.
4 Then sayde Ionathan vnto Dauid: Whatsoeuer thy soule desireth, that I will do
vnto thee.
5 And Dauid sayd vnto Ionathan: Beholde, to morowe is the beginning of the
moneth, and I should sit with the king at meate: But let me go, that I may hide
my selfe in the fieldes vnto the thirde day at euen.
6 If thy father speake of me, then say: Dauid asked leaue of me, that he might
go to Bethlehem to his owne citie, for there is holden a yerely feast for all
the kinred.
7 And if he say it is well done, then thy seruaunt shal haue peace: But and if
he be angry, then be sure that wickednesse is vtterly concluded of him.
8 And then thou shalt shewe mercy vnto thy seruaunt for thou hast ioyned thy
seruaunt into a couenant of the Lord with thee: Notwithstandyng, if there be in
me iniquitie, slay me thy selfe? for why shouldest thou bring me to thy father?
9 And Ionathan aunswered, God kepe that from thee: For if I knewe that
wickednesse were concluded of my fathere to come vpon thee, woulde not I tel it
thee?
10 Then sayd Dauid to Ionathan: Who shall tell me? how shall I knowe if thy
father aunswere thee cruelly?
11 And Ionathan sayde vnto Dauid: Come, and let vs go out into the fielde. And
they went out both of them into the fielde.
12 And Ionathan sayde vnto Dauid: O Lorde God of Israel, when I haue groped my
fathers mynd, as this time to morowe, or within these three dayes, and if it be
wel with Dauid, and I then sende not vnto thee, and shew it thee:
13 The Lord do so and muche more vnto Ionathan, But if my father haue pleasure
to do thee euyll, I will shewe thee also, and send thee away, that thou mayest
go in peace, and the Lorde be with thee, as he hath ben with my father.
14 And I require not whiles I liue, for I dout not but thou wilt shewe me the
mercie of the Lord, that I die not:
15 But I require that thou cut not of thy mercy from my house for euer, no not
when the Lord hath destroyed the enemies of Dauid, euery one from the face of
the earth.
16 And so Ionathan made a bonde with the house of Dauid, saying: Let the lord
require it at the handes of Dauids enemies.
17 And Ionathan sware againe vnto Dauid, because he loued him (For he loued him
as his owne soule)
18 Then sayde Ionathan to Dauid: To morowe is the first day of the moone, and
thou shalt be missed, because the place where thou wast wont to sit, shall be
emptie.
19 Therfore thou shalt hyde thy self three dayes, then thou shalt go downe
quickly, and come to the place where thou diddest hyde thy selfe when the
busines was in hande, and shalt remayne by the stone Esel.
20 And I wil shoote three arowes on the syde therof, as though I shot them at a
marke,
21 And I wil sende a lad, and byd him go seke the arrowes. And if I say vnto the
lad, See, the arrowes are on this side thee, bring them: then come thou, for it
is peace and no hurt, as the Lorde lyueth:
22 But and if I say vnto the lad, behold the arows are beyond thee, go thy way,
for the Lorde hath sent thee away.
23 And as touching this which thou and I haue spoken, behold the Lorde be
betweene thee and me for euer.
24 And so Dauid hid him selfe in the fielde: And when the newe moone was come,
the king sate him downe to eate meate.
25 And the king sate as at other times vpon his seate, euen vpon his seate by
the wall: And Ionathan arose, and Abner sate by Sauls syde, and Dauids place was
emptie.
26 Neuerthelesse, Saul sayde nothing at all that day: For he thought, Some thing
hath befallen him, though he were cleane.
27 But on the morowe, whiche was the second day of the newe moone, Dauids place
was emptie againe: And Saul sayde vnto Ionathan his sonne, Wherfore commeth not
that sonne of Isai to meate, neither yesterday nor to day?
28 And Ionathan aunswered vnto Saul: Dauid asked licence of me to go to
Bethlehem.
29 For he sayd: Let me go I pray thee, for our kinred doth hold an offering in
the citie, and my brother hath sent for me: and therfore if I haue found fauour
in thyne eyes, let me go I pray thee, and see my brethren. This is the cause
that he commeth not vnto the kinges table.
30 Then was Saul angry with Ionathan, and sayd vnto him: Thou sonne of the
wicked rebellious woman, do not I knowe that thou hast chosen the sonne of Isai
vnto thyne owne rebuke, and vnto the rebuke and shame of thy mother?
31 For as long as the sonne of Isai liueth vpon the earth, thou shalt not be
stablished, nor yet thy kingdome: Wherfore nowe send and fet him vnto me, for he
is the childe of death.
32 And Ionathan aunswered vnto Saul his father, and sayde to him: Wherfore
should he dye? what hath he done?
33 And Saul lift vp a speare to hit him, wherby Ionathan wist well that it was
vtterly determined of his father to slay Dauid.
34 And so Ionathan arose from the table in a great anger, and did eate no meate
the seconde day of the moneth: for he was sory for Dauid, because his father had
done him shame.
35 On the next morning, Ionathan went out into the fielde, at ye time appoynted
with Dauid, and a litle lad with him.
36 And he sayde vnto his boy: Runne, and seke out myne arrowes whiche I shote.
And as the boy ran, he shot an arrowe beyond him.
37 And when the lad was come to the place whyther Ionathan had shot the arrowe,
Ionathan cryed after the lad, & sayd: Is not the arrowe beyond there?
38 And Ionathan cried after the lad againe: Make speede, haste, & stand not
still. And Ionathans lad gathered vp the arrowes, and came to his maister.
39 But the lad wist nothing of the matter, only Ionathan an Dauid wist it.
40 And Ionathan gaue his instrumetes vnto the lad that was with him, and sayd
vnto him: Go, and carry them to the towne.
41 And assoone as the lad was gone, Dauid arose out of a place that was towarde
the south, & fel on his face to the ground, & bowed him selfe three times, And
they kissed either other, and wept together, so long till Dauid exceeded.
42 And Ionathan sayd to Dauid, Go in peace: And the thinges which we haue sworne
both of vs in ye name of the lord, saying, the Lord be betweene thee & me, and
betweene thy sede & myne: let them stand for euer. And he arose, & departed: And
Ionathan went into the towne.

Chapter 21

1 Then came Dauid to Nob to Ahimelech the priest, and Ahimelech was astonied at
the meeting of Dauid, & sayd vnto him: Why art thou alone and no man with thee?
2 And Dauid said to Ahimelech the priest: The king hath commaunded me a certaine
thing, and hath sayd vnto me, Let no man know wher about I send thee, and what I
haue commaunded thee: And I haue appoynted my seruauntes to suche and suche
places.
3 Nowe therfore if thou hast ought vnder thyne hand, geue me fyue loaues of
bread, or what commeth to hande.
4 And the priest aunswered Dauid, and sayd: There is no common bread vnder myne
hand, but here is halowed bread: if the young me haue kept them selues,
specially from women.
5 Dauid aunswered the priest, and sayd vnto him: Of a trueth, women hath ben
separated fro vs this two or three days since I came out, & the vessels of the
young men were holy: Howebeit, this way is vnpure, and howe muche more shall
there be holines in the vessell?
6 And so the priest gaue him halowed bread: for there was none other bread
there, saue the shew bread that was taken from before the Lord, to put freshe
bread there the day that it was taken away.
7 (And there was there the same day a certaine man, of the seruautes of Saul,
abyding before ye Lord, named Doeg, an Edomite, the chiefest of Sauls heardmen.)
8 And Dauid sayd vnto Ahimelech: Is not here vnder thyne hand either speare or
sworde? for I haue neither brought my sword nor my harnesse with me, because the
kinges busines required haste.
9 And the priest sayd: The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom thou sluest in
the valley of Elah, beholde it is here wrapt in a cloth behind the Ephod: If
thou wilt take that, take it: for ther is no other saue that here. And Dauid
sayd: There is none to that, geue it me.
10 And Dauid arose, & fled the same day from the presence of Saul, and went to
Achis the king of Gath.
11 And the seruauntes of Achis sayde vnto him: Is not this Dauid the king of the
land? Dyd they not sing vnto him in daunses, saying: Saul hath slayne his
thousand, and Dauid his ten thousand?
12 And Dauid put those wordes into his heart, & was sore afrayde of Achis the
king of Gath.
13 And he chaunged his speache before them, and fained him selfe mad in their
handes, and scrabled on the doores of the gate, and let his spettell fall downe
vpon his beard.
14 Then sayd Achis vnto his seruauntes: Lo, ye see that this man is besyde him
selfe, wherfore then haue ye brought him to me?
15 Haue I neede of mad men, that ye haue brought this felowe to play the mad man
in my presence? Shall he come into my house?

Chapter 22

1 Dauid therfore departed thence, & escaped to the caue Adullam: Whe his
brethren also & his fathers house heard it, they went downe thyther to him.
2 And there gathered vnto him all men that were in combraunce, and in det, and
troubled in their mindes, & he became a captayne ouer them: And there were with
him vpon a foure hundred men.
3 And Dauid went thence to Mispah in the land of Moab, and sayde vnto the king
of Moab: Let my father and my mother (I pray thee) come foorth vnto you, till I
knowe what God wyl do for me.
4 And he brought them before the king of Moab: and they dwelt with him all the
whyle that Dauid kept him selfe in the holde.
5 And the prophete Gad sayde vnto Dauid: Abyde not in the hold, but depart & go
into the land of Iuda. Then Dauid departed, & came into the forest Hareth.
6 And Saul hearde that Dauid was discouered, and also the men that were with
him: and Saul sat in Gibea vnder a tree in Rama, hauing his speare in his hande,
and all his men stoode about him.
7 And Saul sayde vnto his seruauntes that stoode about him, Heare I pray you, ye
sonnes of Iemini: will ye sonne of Isai geue euery one of you fieldes and
vineyardes, and make you all captaines ouer thousandes and ouer hundredes,
8 That ye haue also conspired agaynst me, & there is none that telleth me that
my sonne hath made a couenaunt with the sonne of Isai, and there is none of you
yt is sory for me, or sheweth me that my sonne hath stirred vp my seruaunt to
lye in wayte agaynst me as appeareth this day?
9 Then aunswered Doeg the Edomite (which was appoynted by ye seruauntes of Saul)
and sayd: I sawe the sonne of Isai, when he came to Nob to Ahimelech the sonne
of Ahitob,
10 Whiche asked councel of the Lorde for him, and gaue him vittayles, and the
sword of Goliath the Philistine also.
11 Then the king sent and called for Ahimelech the priest the sonne of Ahitob, &
all his fathers house that is to saye the priestes that were in Nob: And they
came all to the king.
12 And Saul sayde: Heare nowe thou sonne of Ahitob. He aunswered: Here I am, my
lorde.
13 And Saul sayde vnto him: Why haue ye conspired agaynst me, thou, and the
sonne of Isai, in that thou hast geuen him vittayle, and a sworde, and hast
asked councel of God for him, yt he shoulde aryse against me, and lye in waite
for me as appeareth this day?
14 Ahimelech aunswered the king, and sayde: Who is so faithfull among all thy
seruauntes, as Dauid, and therto the kinges sonne in lawe: and goeth at thy
bidding, and is had in honour in thyne house?
15 Haue I this day begun first to aske councell of God for him? That be farre
from me: Let not the king impute any thing vnto his seruaut, nor to all ye house
of my father: For thy seruaunt knewe nothing of all this, either lesse or more.
16 The king sayde, Thou shalt surely die Ahimelech, thou, & al thy fathers
house.
17 And the king sayde vnto the footemen that stoode about him: Turne, and slay
the priestes of the Lorde: both because their hand is with Dauid, and because
they knewe when Dauid fled, and shewed it not to me. But the seruauntes of the
king would not moue their hades to fal vpon the priestes of the Lorde.
18 And the king sayde to Doeg: Turne thou, & fall vpon the priestes. And Doeg
the Edomite turned, and ranne vpon the priestes, & slue that same day fourescore
and fiue persons that did weare a linnen Ephod.
19 And Nob the citie of ye priestes, smote he with the edge of the sword, both
men and women, children and sucklinges, oxen and asses, & sheepe, with the edge
of the sworde.
20 And one of the sonnes of Ahimelech the sonne of Ahitob, named Abiathar,
escaped, and fled to Dauid.
21 And Abiathar shewed Dauid howe that Daul had slayne ye Lordes priestes.
22 And Dauid sayde vnto Abiathar: I wist it the same day, when Doeg the Edomite
was there, that he would tel Saul: and I am cause of the death of all the
persons of thy fathers house.
23 Abyde thou with me, and feare not: For he that seketh my lyfe, he shall seke
thine also, with me thou shalt be in safegarde.

Chapter 23

1 Then they tolde Dauid, saying: Beholde, the Philistines fight against Keila,
and spoyle the barnes.
2 Therfore Dauid asked counsell of the lord, saying: Shal I go and smyte these
Philistines? And the Lord aunswered vnto Dauid: Go, and smite the Philistines,
and saue Keila.
3 And Dauids men said vnto him, See, we be afrayde here in Iuda: howe much more
then if we come to Keila against the hoast of the Philistines?
4 Then Dauid asked counsell of the Lorde agayne. And the Lorde aunswered him,
and sayd: Aryse, and go downe to Keila, for I will deliuer the Philistines into
thyne hande.
5 And so Dauid and his men went to Keila, and fought with the Philistines, and
brought away their cattell, & smote them with a great slaughter, and so Dauid
saued ye inhabitauntes of Keila.
6 And when Abiathar the sonne of Ahimelech fled to Dauid to Keila, he brought an
Ephod with him in his hande.
7 And it was tolde Saul that Dauid was come to Keila: And Saul sayde, God hath
deliuered him into myne hande: For he is shut in, now that he is come into a
towne that hath gates and barres.
8 And Saul called all the people together to warre, for to go downe to Keila,
and to besiege Dauid and his men.
9 And Dauid hauing knowledge that Saul imagined mischiefe agaynst him, sayde to
Abiathar the priest: Bring the Ephod.
10 Then sayde Dauid: O Lorde God of Israel, thy seruaunt hath hearde that Saul
is about to come to Keila to destroye the citie for my sake:
11 Will the lordes of Keila deliuer me into his hande? And will Saul come downe,
as thy seruaunt hath hearde, O Lorde God of Israel: I besech thee tell thy
seruaunt. And the Lorde sayde: He wil come downe.
12 Then sayde Dauid: Will the lordes of Keila deliuer me and the men that are
with me into the hand of Saul? And the Lorde sayde: They wil deliuer thee vp.
13 Then Dauid, & his men, whiche were vpon a sixe hundred, arose and departed
out of Keila, and went whyther they coulde: And it was tolde Saul that Dauid was
fled from Keila, and he let the iourney alone.
14 Dauid abode in the wildernesse in strong holdes, and remained in a mountayne
in the wildernesse of Ziph: And Saul sought him euery day, but God deliuered him
not into his hande.
15 And Dauid sawe that Saul was come out to seke his lyfe: And Dauid was in the
wildernesse of Ziph in the wood.
16 And Ionathan Sauls sonne arose and went to Dauid into the wood, and comforted
his hande in God,
17 And sayd vnto him: Feare not, for the hand of Saul my father shall not finde
thee, & thou shalt be king ouer Israel, and I shall be next vnto thee: and that
doeth Saul my father knowe.
18 And they made a bond both of them together before the Lorde: And Dauid taried
still in the wood, and Ionathan went to his house.
19 Then came the Ziphites to Saul to Gibea, saying: Doth not Dauid hyde him
selfe fast by vs in strong holdes, in the wood in the hill of Hachila, on the
right side of Iesimon?
20 Nowe therfore O king, thou mayest come downe according to all the lust of thy
soule, and our part shalbe to deliuer him into the kinges hande.
21 And Saul sayde: Blessed are ye in the Lord, for ye haue compassion on me:
22 Go I pray you and prepare yet better, knowe and see where his foote hath ben,
& who hath seene him there: for it is tolde me that he is very subtyll.
23 See therfore, and know al the lurking places where he hydeth him selfe, and
come ye againe to me with ye certaintie, and I wil go with you: And yf he be in
the lande, I will searche him out throughout al the thousandes of Iuda.
24 And they arose, and went to Ziph before Saul: But Dauid & his men were in the
wildernesse of Maon, in the plaine that is on the right hande of Iesimon.
25 Saul also and his men went to seke him: And they told Dauid, wherfore he came
downe vnto a rocke, and abode in the wildernesse of Maon: And when Saul heard
that, he folowed after Dauid in the wildernesse of Maon.
26 And Saul and his men went on the one syde of the mountayne, and Dauid & his
men on the other syde of the mountaine: And Dauid made haste to get fro the
presence of Saul. For Saul and his men, compassed Dauid and his men round about,
to take them.
27 But ther came a messenger to Saul, saying: Haste thee and come, for the
Philistines haue inuaded the lande.
28 Wherfore Saul returned from persecuting Dauid, and went against the
Philistines: And therfore they called that place, Sela Hamnahlekoth.
29 And Dauid went thence, and dwelt in strong holdes at Engadi.

Chapter 24

1 When Saul was come againe fro folowing after ye Philistines, there were which
told him, saying: Behold, Dauid is in the wildernesse of Engadi.
2 Then Saul toke three thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and went to seke
Dauid and his men in the heyght of the rockes where wilde goates remayne.
3 And he came to the sheepe coates by the way, where there was a caue, & Saul
went in to do his easement: And Dauid and his men remayned in the inward partes
of the caue.
4 And the men of Dauid sayd vnto him: See, the day is come, of which the Lord
sayde vnto thee, Behold I will deliuer thyne enemie into thyne hand, and thou
shalt do to him as it shall seeme good in thy sight. Then Dauid arose, and cut
of the lappe of Sauls garment priuily.
5 And afterwarde Dauids heart smote him, because he had cut of the lap of Sauls
garment.
6 And he sayd vnto his men: The Lorde kepe me from doyng that thing vnto my
maister the lordes annoynted to lay myne hande vpon him, seing he is the
annoynted of the Lorde.
7 And so Dauid kept of his seruauntes with these wordes, and suffred them not to
rise against Saul: But Saul rose vp out of the caue, and went away.
8 Dauid also arose afterward, and went out of the caue, and cryed after Saul,
saying: My Lorde king. And when Saul loked behind him, Dauid stowped with his
face to the earth, and bowed him selfe.
9 And Dauid sayde to Saul: Wherfore geuest thou an eare to mens wordes that say,
beholde Dauid seketh euyll against thee?
10 Behold, this day thyne eyes haue seene howe that the Lord hath deliuered thee
this day into myne hande in the caue: And some bad me kill thee, but I had
compassion on thee, and sayd: I will not lay myne handes on my maister, for he
is the Lordes annoynted.
11 And moreouer my father, beholde and see yet the lap of thy garment in my
hand: Inasmuch as I killed thee not when I cut of the lap of thy garment,
vnderstand therfore, & see that there is neither euyll nor wickednesse in me,
and that I haue not sinned against thee: And yet thou huntest after my soule to
take it.
12 The Lorde be iudge betweene thee and me, & the Lorde auenge me of thee: but
myne hande be not vpon thee.
13 According as the olde prouerbe sayeth, wickednesse proceedeth fro the wicked:
But myne hande be not vpon thee.
14 After whom is the king of Israel come out? After whom doest thou pursue?
After a dead dog, and after a flea.
15 The Lorde therfore be iudge, & iudge betweene thee & me, and see & pleade my
cause, & auenge me out of thyne hande.
16 When Dauid had made an ende of speaking these wordes to Saul, Saul sayde: Is
this thy voyce my sonne Dauid? And Saul lift vp his voyce, and wept,
17 And sayde to Dauid, Thou art more righteous then I: for thou hast rewarded me
with good, where as I haue rewarded thee with euyll.
18 And thou hast shewed this day, howe that thou hast dealt wel with me:
forasmuch as when the Lorde had closed me in thyne handes, thou killedst me not.
19 For who shall finde his enemie, and let him depart into a good way? Wherfore
the Lord reward thee with good, for that thou hast done vnto me this day.
20 And nowe beholde, I wote wel that thou shalt be king, & that the kingdome of
Israel shalbe stablished in thyne hande:
21 Swere nowe therfore vnto me by the Lorde, that thou shalt not destroy my
seede after me, and that thou shalt not put my name out of my fathers house.
22 And Dauid sware vnto Saul, & Saul went home: But Dauid and his men gat them
vp vnto the holde.

Chapter 25

1 And Samuel died, and all the Israelites gathered together, and lamented him,
and buried him in his owne house at Rama. And Dauid arose, & went downe to the
wildernesse of Pharan.
2 And ther was a man in Maon, whose possession was in Carmel, and the man was
exceeding mightie, and had three thousande sheepe & a thousand goates: And he
was shearing his sheepe in Carmel.
3 The name of the man was Nabal, and the name of his wyfe was Abigail, and she
was a woman of a singuler wysedome, and beautifull: But the man was churlishe,
and of shrewde conditions, & was of the kinred of Caleb.
4 And Dauid hearde in the wildernesse, that Nabal did sheare his sheepe.
5 And Dauid sent out ten young men, and sayd vnto them: Get you vp to Carmel,
and go to Nabal, and greete him in my name.
6 And ye shal say: So mayest thou lyue, peace be to thee, peace be to thyne
house, and peace be vnto all that thou hast.
7 Beholde I haue hearde say that thou hast shearers: Nowe, thy shepheardes were
with vs, & we did them no spite, neither was there ought missing vnto them al
the while they were in Carmel:
8 Aske thy laddes, & they will shew thee: Wherfore let these young men finde
fauour in thyne eyes (for we come in a good season) & geue I pray thee
whatsoeuer commeth to thyne hande vnto thy seruauntes, and to thy sonne Dauid.
9 And when Dauids young men came, they told Nabal all those wordes in the name
of Dauid: and helde their peace.
10 And Nabal aunswered Dauids seruauntes, and said: Who is Dauid? and who is ye
sonne of Isai? There is plentie of seruauntes now a dayes that breake away euery
man from his maister.
11 Shal I then take my bread, my water, and my fleshe that I haue killed for my
shearers, and geue it vnto men whom I wot not whence they be?
12 And so Dauids seruauntes turned their way, and went againe, and came and
tolde him all those sayinges.
13 And Dauid sayd vnto his men: Girde euery man his sword about him. And they
girded euery man his sword about him, and Dauid was girded with his sword: And
there folowed Dauid vpon a foure hundred men, and two hundred abode by the
stuffe.
14 But one of the laddes tolde Abigail Nabals wyfe, saying: Beholde, Dauid sent
messengers vnto our maister out of the wildernesse to salute him: and he rayled
on them.
15 And yet the men were very good vnto vs, and dyd vs no displeasure, neither
missed we any thyng as long as we were conuersaunt with them when we were in the
fieldes.
16 They were a wall vnto vs both by night and day, all the while we were with
them keping sheepe.
17 Now therefore take heede, & see what thou shalt do: for surelie euyll will
come vpon our maister and al his housholde, for he is so wicked, that a man can
not speake to him.
18 Then Abigail made haste, and tooke two hundred loaues, and two bottels of
wine, and fiue sheepe redie dressed, and fiue measures of parched corne, and an
hundred frailes of reasynges, and two hundred cakes of fygges, & laded them on
asses,
19 And sayde vnto her young men: Go before me, beholde I come after you. But she
tolde her husband Nabal nothing thereof.
20 And as she rode on her asse, she came priuylie downe the syde of the hill,
and behold Dauid and his men came downe against her, and she met them.
21 And Dauid saide: Surelie in vayne haue I kept all that this felow hath in the
wildernes, so that nothing was missed of all that pertayned vnto him: and he
hath quite me euill for good.
22 So and more also do God vnto the enemies of Dauid, if I leaue of all that
pertayne to him by the dawnyng of the day, any that pysseth against the wall.
23 And when Abigail sawe Dauid, she hasted and lyghted of her asse, and fell
before Dauid on her face, and bowed her selfe to the grounde,
24 And fell at his feete, and sayde: Let this iniquitie be counted myne my lord,
and let thyne handmaide I praye thee speake in thyne audience, & heare the
wordes of thy handmayd.
25 Let not my lorde I pray thee regarde this wicked man Nabal: For as his name
is, so is he: Nabal is his name, & folly is with him: But I thyne handmayd sawe
not the young men of my lorde whom thou sendedst.
26 Now therefore my lorde, as the Lord lyueth, and as thy soule liueth, euen the
Lorde that hath withholden thee from comming to shed blood, and saued thee thyne
hand: So nowe, I pray God that thyne enemies, & they that intende to do my lorde
euyll, may be as Nabal.
27 And now this blessing which thyne handmayd hath brought vnto my lord, let it
be geuen vnto the young men that folowe my lorde.
28 I praye thee forgeue the trespasse of thyne handmayd: for the Lorde will make
my lord a sure house, because my lorde fighteth the battailes of the Lord, and
there could none euill be found in thee in all thy dayes.
29 And yet a man hath rysen to persecute thee, and to seeke thy soule: but the
soule of my Lorde shall be bound in the bundel of the lyuyng with the Lord thy
God, and the soules of thy enemies shall God cast out, euen as out of the middle
of a slyng.
30 And when the Lorde shall haue done to my lord al the good that he hath
promysed thee, and shall haue made thee ruler ouer Israel:
31 Then shall it be no griefe vnto thee, nor offence of mynde vnto my lorde,
that thou hast not shed blood causelesse, and that my lord hath not auenged him
selfe: But when the Lorde shall haue dealt well with my lord, then thinke on
thyne handmayde.
32 And Dauid said to Abigail: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee
this day to meete me.
33 Blessed is thy saying, and blessed art thou which hast kept me this day from
comming to shed blood, & from auengeing my selfe with myne owne hande.
34 For in very deede, as the Lorde God of Israel lyueth, which hath kept me
backe from hurting thee: except thou haddest hasted and met me, surely there
hadde not ben left vnto Nabal by the dawnyng of the day, any that pysseth
against the wall.
35 And so Dauid receaued of her hande that which she had brought him, and sayde
vnto her: Go vp in peace to thyne house, beholde I haue heard thy voyce, and
haue graunted thy petition.
36 And Abigail came to Nabal, and beholde, he held a feast in his house lyke the
feast of a king, and Nabals heart was mery within hym, for he was very drunken:
Wherfore she tolde him nothyng neither lesse nor more, vntyll the morowe
mornyng.
37 But in the morning when the wine was gone out of Nabal, his wyfe tolde him
these wordes, and his heart dyed within him, and he became as a stone.
38 And vpon a ten dayes after, the Lord smote Nabal, that he dyed.
39 And when Dauid heard that Nabal was dead, he sayd: Blessed be the Lord that
hath iudged ye cause of my rebuke of the hand of Nabal, & hath kept his seruaunt
from euill: For the Lord hath recompenced the wickednes of Nabal vpon his owne
head. And Dauid sent to commune with Abigail, to take her to his wyfe.
40 And when the seruauntes of Dauid were come to Abigail to Carmel, they spake
vnto her, saying: Dauid sent vs vnto thee, to take thee to his wyfe.
41 And she arose, & bowed her selfe on her face to the earth, and saide:
Beholde, let thy handmayd be a seruaunt, to washe the feete of the seruauntes of
my lorde.
42 And Abigail hasted, and arose, & gate her vpon an Asse, with fiue damosels of
hers that went at her feete, and she went after the messengers of Dauid, &
became his wyfe.
43 Dauid also toke Ahinoam of Iezrael, and they were both his wyues.
44 But Saul had geuen Michol his daughter, Dauids wyfe, to Phalti the sonne of
Lais, which was of Gallim.

Chapter 26

1 The Ziphites came againe vnto Saul to Gibea, saying: Doth not Dauid hide him
selfe in the hill of Hachilia, which is before Iesimon?
2 Saul arose, & went downe to the wildernes of Ziph, hauing three thousand
chosen men of Israel with him, for to seke Dauid in the wildernesse of Ziph.
3 And Saul pitched in the hil of Hachilia, which is before Iesimon by the way
side: But Dauid dwelt in the wildernesse, and he sawe that Saul came after him
into the wildernesse:
4 Dauid therefore sent out spies, & vnderstoode that Saul was come in very
deede.
5 And Dauid arose, & came to the place where Saul had pitched: & Dauid beheld
the place where Saul lay, & Abner the sonne of Ner which was his chiefe
captayne: for Saul lay in the fort, & the people pytched rounde about him.
6 Then aunswered Dauid, and spake to Ahimelech the Hethite, and to Abisai the
sonne of Zaruia, & brother to Ioab, saying: Who wyll go downe with me to Saul to
the hoast? And Abisai saide: I wyll go downe with thee.
7 And so Dauid and Abisai came downe to the people by night, and behold Saul lay
sleepyng within the fort, and his speare stacke in ye grounde at his head: but
Abner and the people lay rounde about hym.
8 Then saide Abisai to Dauid, God hath closed thyne enemie into thyne hand thys
day: Nowe I pray thee let me smite him once with my speare to the earth, & I
will not smite him the second tyme.
9 And Dauid saide to Abisai, Destroye him not: For who can laye his hand on the
Lordes annoynted, and be giltlesse?
10 And Dauid sayd furthermore: As the Lorde lyueth, the Lorde shall smyte him or
his day shall come to dye, or he shall descend into battaile, and perishe.
11 The Lorde kepe me from laying myne hand vpon the Lordes annoynted: But I
praye thee take thou nowe the speare that is at his head, and the cruse of
water, and let vs go.
12 And so Dauid toke the speare and the cruse of water from Sauls head, and they
gat them away, and no man sawe it, nor marked it, neither awaked: For they were
all asleepe, because the Lorde had sent a dead sleepe vpon the.
13 Then Dauid went ouer to the other syde, and stoode on the toppe of an hill a
farre of (a great space being betweene them:)
14 And Dauid cryed to the people, and to Abner the sonne of Ner, saying: Hearest
thou not Abner? Abner aunswered and sayd: Who art thou that cryest to the king?
15 And Dauid sayde to Abner: Art not thou a man? and who is lyke to thee in
Israel? Wherefore then hast thou not kept thy lorde the king? For there came one
of the folke in to destroye the king thy lorde.
16 It is not well done of thee: As the Lorde lyueth, ye are worthy to dye,
because ye haue not kept the Lordes annoynted: And nowe see where the kinges
speare is, and the cruse of water that was at his head.
17 And Saul knew Dauids voyce, and sayd: Is this thy voyce my sonne Dauid? And
Dauid sayde: It is my voyce my lorde, O king.
18 And he sayde: Wherefore doth my lorde thus persecute his seruaunt? for what
haue I done? or what euyll is in myne hand?
19 Nowe therefore I praye thee, let my lorde the king heare the wordes of his
seruaunt: If the Lorde haue stirred thee vp against me, let him smell the sauour
of a sacrifice: But and if they be the children of men, cursed are they before
the Lorde, for they haue cast me out this day from abidyng in the inheritaunce
of the Lorde, saying: Go, serue other goddes.
20 Now therefore let not my blood fall to the earth before the face of the
Lorde: For the king of Israel is come out to seeke a flea, as when one doth hunt
a partridge in the mountaynes.
21 Then saide Saul, I haue sinned: Come agayne my sonne Dauid, for I will do
thee no more harme, because my soule was precious in thyne eyes this day:
Beholde, I haue played the foole, and haue erred exceedinly.
22 And Dauid aunswered and said: Beholde the kinges speare, let one of the young
men come ouer and fet it.
23 The Lorde rewarde euery man according to his righteousnes, and faythfulnesse:
For the Lorde deliuered thee into my hand this day, but I would not lay mine
hand vpon the Lordes annoynted.
24 And behold, like as thy life was much set by this day in myne eyes: so be my
lyfe set by in the eyes of the Lorde, that he deliuer me out of all tribulation.
25 Then Saul saide to Dauid: Blessed art thou my sonne Dauid, for thou shalt do
great thinges and preuaile. And so Dauid went his way, and Saul turned to his
place agayne.

Chapter 27

1 And Dauid sayd in his heart, I shall perishe one day by the hand of Saul:
therefore is there nothing better for me, then to flee and saue my self in the
land of the Philistines, and Saul shall ceasse and seeke me no more in all the
coastes of Israel, and so shall I escape out of his hand.
2 And Dauid arose, and he and the sixe hundred men that were with him, went vnto
Achis the sonne of Maoch, king of Gath.
3 And Dauid dwelt with Achis at Gath, both he and his men, euery man with his
housholde, and Dauid with his two wiues, Ahinoam the Iezrahelite, and Abigail
Nabals wyfe the Carmelite.
4 And it was tolde Saul that Dauid was fled to Gath, and he sought no more for
him.
5 And Dauid sayde vnto Achis: If I haue now founde grace in thyne eyes, let them
geue me a place in some towne in ye countrey, that I may dwell there: For why
should thy seruaunt dwell in the head citie of the kingdome with thee?
6 Then Achis gaue him Ziklag that same day, for which cause Ziklag pertayneth
vnto the kinges of Iuda vnto this day.
7 And the tyme that Dauid dwelt in the countrey of the Philistines, was foure
monethes, and certaine dayes.
8 And Dauid and his men went vp and inuaded the Gesurites, the Gerzites, & the
Amalekites: For those natios were from the beginnyng the inhabitauntes of the
lande, as men go to Sur, vnto the land of Egypt.
9 And Dauid smote the lande, & left neither man nor woman alyue, and droue away
the sheepe, the oxen, the asses, camelles, and clothes, and returned, and came
to Achis.
10 And Achis saide: Where haue ye ben a rouing this day? And Dauid aunswered:
Against the south of Iuda, and against the south of the Ierameelites, and
against the south of the Kenites.
11 And Dauid saued neither man nor woman alyue to bring to Gath, saying: lest
they should tell on vs, saying, so dyd Dauid, and so will be his maner all the
whyle he dwelleth in the countrey of the Philistines.
12 And Achis beleued Dauid, saying: He hath made his people Israel vtterly to
abhorre him, & therefore he shalbe my seruaunt for euer.

Chapter 28

1 And in those dayes, the Philistines gathered theyr hoast together to warre, to
fight with Israel: And Achis sayd to Dauid, Be sure thou shalt go out with me to
battayle, thou and the men that are with thee.
2 And Dauid sayde to Achis: Surelie thou shalt knowe what thy seruaunt can do.
And Achis said to Dauid: Then I will make thee keper of my head for euer.
3 Samuel was then dead, and all Israel had lamented him, and buried him in Rama
his owne citie: And Saul had put away the sorcerers, and the soothsayers out of
the land.
4 And the Philistines gathered together, and came, and pytched in Sunem: And
Saul gathered all Israel together, and they pytched in Gilboa.
5 And when Saul sawe the hoast of the Philistines, he was afrayde, & his heart
was sore astonied.
6 And when Saul asked councell of the Lorde, the Lorde aunswered him not,
neither by dreames, nor by Urim, nor yet by prophetes.
7 Then sayd Saul vnto his seruautes: Seeke me a woman that hath a familier
spirite, that I may go to her, and aske of her. And his seruauntes sayd to him:
Beholde, there is a woman that hath a familier spirite at Endor.
8 And Saul chaunged him selfe, and put on other rayment, and then went he & two
men with him, and they came to the woman by nyght, and he sayde: I pray thee
coniecture vnto me by the familier spirite, & bring me him vp whom I shall name
vnto thee.
9 And the woman saide vnto him: Beholde, thou knowest what Saul hath done, how
he hath destroyed the sorcerers, and the soothsayers out of the land: Wherfore
then layest thou a snare for my soule, to cause me to die?
10 And Saul sware to her by the Lord, saying: As the Lorde lyueth, there shall
no harme come to thee for this thyng.
11 Then saide the woman: Whom shall I fetch vp vnto thee? He aunswered: Bring me
vp Samuel.
12 When the woman sawe Samuel, she cryed with a loude voyce, and spake to Saul,
saying: Why hast thou deceaued me? for thou art Saul.
13 And the king saide vnto her: Be not afrayd: What sawest thou? The woman saide
vnto Saul: I sawe gods ascending vp out of the earth.
14 He saide vnto her againe: What fashion is he of? She aunswered: There cometh
vp an olde man with a mantel vpon him. And Saul perceaued that it was Samuel,
and he stowped with his face to the ground, and bowed him selfe.
15 And Samuel said to Saul: Why hast thou vnquieted me, to make me be brought
vp? Saul aunswered: I am sore encumbred, for ye Philistines make warre against
me, and God is departed from me, and aunswereth me no more, neither by prophets,
nor by dreames: And therefore I haue called thee, that thou mayest tell me what
I shall do.
16 Then saide Samuel: Wherefore doest thou aske of me, while the Lord is gone
from thee, and is become thyne enemie?
17 Trulie the Lord hath done to him, euen as he spake by my hand: For the Lorde
hath rent the kingdome out of thyne hand, and geuen it thy neyghbour Dauid.
18 Because thou obeyedst not the voyce of the Lorde, nor executedst his fierce
wrath vpon the Amalekites, therefore hath the Lord done this vnto thee this day.
19 And moreouer, the Lord will deliuer Israel with thee into the handes of the
Philistines: To morrowe shalt thou and thy sonnes be with me, and the Lorde
shall geue the hoast of Israel into the handes of the Philistines.
20 Then Saul fell straightway all along on the earth, and was sore afrayde
because of the wordes of Samuel. And there was no strength in him: for he had
eaten no bread all the day, nor all the night.
21 And the woman came vnto Saul, & sawe that he was sore troubled, & sayde vnto
him: See, thyne handmayde hath obeyed thy voyce, & haue put my soule in my hand,
and haue hearkened vnto thy wordes which thou sayedst vnto me.
22 Nowe therefore I pray thee hearken thou also vnto the voyce of thyne
handmayde, and let me set a morsell of bread before thee, that thou mayest eate,
and get thee strength, & then go on thy iourney.
23 He refused, and sayde: I will not eate. But his seruauntes and the woman
together compelled him, and he hearkened vnto their voyce: And so he arose from
the earth, and sat on a bed.
24 The woman had a fat calfe in the house, and she hasted and killed it, and
tooke floure and kneded it, and did bake vnleauened bread thereof:
25 And brought them before Saul, and before his seruauntes: And when they had
eaten, they stoode vp, & went away the same night.

Chapter 29

1 So the Philistines were gathered together with all their armies in Aphec: and
the Israelites pytched by Ain, which is in Iezrael.
2 And the princes of the Philistines went foorth by hundreds and thousandes: But
Dauid and his men came behinde with Achis.
3 The sayd the princes of the Philistines, what do these Ebrues here? Achis said
vnto the princes of the Philistines: Is not this Dauid, the seruaunt of Saul the
king of Israel, which hath ben with me these dayes, or these yeres, and I haue
found no fault in him, since he fell vnto me, vnto this day?
4 And the princes of the Philistines were wroth with hym, and the princes of the
Philistines sayde vnto hym: Make this felowe returne, that he may go againe to
his place which thou hast appoynted hym, and let hym not go downe with vs to
battayle, lest in the battayle he be an aduersarie to vs: For wherewith shoulde
he obtayne the fauour of his maister? shoulde it not be with the heades of these
men?
5 Is not this Dauid, to whom they sang in daunces, saying: Saul slue his
thousande, & Dauid his ten thousande?
6 Then Achis called Dauid, and sayde vnto him: As the Lorde lyueth, thou hast
ben honest, and good in my sight, when thou wentest out and in with me in the
hoast, neither haue I founde euyll with thee sence thou camest to me, vnto this
day: Neuerthelesse, the princes fauour thee not.
7 Wherefore nowe returne, and go in peace, that thou displease not the princes
of the Philistines.
8 And Dauid sayde vnto Achis: And what haue I done? what hast thou founde in thy
seruaunt as long as I haue ben with thee vnto this day, that I may not go fight
against the enemies of my lorde the king?
9 Achis aunswered and sayd to Dauid: I know that thou art good in my sight, as
an angell of God: Notwithstanding, the princes of the Philistines haue sayde,
Let him not go vp with vs to battaile.
10 Wherefore now ryse vp earlie in the morning with thy maisters seruautes that
are come to thee: and whe ye be vp earlie, assoone as ye haue lyght, departe.
11 And so Dauid & his men rose vp earlie, to depart in the morning, and to
returne into the land of the Philistines: And the Philistines wet vp to Iezrael.

Chapter 30

1 But when Dauid and his men were come to Ziklag the third day, the Amalekites
had inuaded vppon the south, euen vnto Ziklag, and had smitten Ziklag, and burnt
it with fyre.
2 And had taken the women that were therein prisoners, both small and great: but
slue not a man, saue carryed them away, and went their wayes.
3 So Dauid and his men came to the citie, and beholde it was burnt with fyre:
and their wiues, their sonnes, and their daughters were taken prisoners.
4 Then Dauid & the people that were with him, lift vp their voyces and wept,
vntill they could weepe no more.
5 And Dauids two wiues were taken prisoners also, Ahinoam the Iezrahelite, and
Abigail the wyfe of Nabal the Carmelite.
6 And Dauid was in great cumbraunce: For the people entended to stone him,
because the heartes of all ye people were vexed euery man for his sonnes and for
his daughters: But Dauid toke a good courage to him in the Lorde his God,
7 And sayde to Abiathar the priest Ahimelechs sonne: I pray thee, bring me the
Ephod. And Abiathar brought the Ephod to Dauid.
8 And Dauid asked councel at the Lord, saying: Shall I follow after this
company? shall I ouertake them? And he aunswered him: Folowe, for thou shalt
suerlie ouertake them, and recouer all.
9 So Dauid and the sixe hundred men that were with him, went and came to the
ryuer Befor, where a parte of them abode.
10 But Dauid and foure hundred men folowed: (For two hundred abode behinde,
being to weery to go ouer the ryuer Befor)
11 And they founde an Egyptian in the fielde, and brought him to Dauid, and gaue
him bread, & he did eate, and water to drinke.
12 And gaue him a fewe fygges, and two clusters of reasinges: And when he had
eaten, his spirite came againe to him: For he had eaten no bread nor druncke any
water in three dayes and three nightes.
13 And Dauid said vnto him: To whom belongest thou? and whence art thou? He
sayd: I am a young man of Egypt, and seruaunt to an Amalekite, and my maister
left me, because three dayes agone I fell sicke.
14 We came a rouyng vpon the south of Chretus, and vpon the coast belonging to
Iuda, and toward the south of Caleb, and we burnt Ziklag with fyre.
15 And Dauid saide to him: Canst thou bring me to this company? And he said:
Sweare vnto me by God, that thou wilt neither kill me, nor deliuer me into the
handes of my maister, and I will bring thee to this company.
16 And when he had brought him thyther, beholde they laye scattered abrode vpon
all the earth, eating, and drynking, & daunsing, because of al the great praye
that they had carried away out of the land of the Philistines, and out of the
land of Iuda.
17 And Dauid layde vpon them from the twylight, euen vnto the euening of the
next morowe: so that there escaped not a man of them, saue foure hundred young
men which rode vpon cammels, and fled.
18 And Dauid recouered all that the Amalekites had carryed away, and Dauid
rescued his two wyues:
19 So that there was nothing lacking to them, small or great, sonne or daughter,
or of the spoyle of all that they had taken away, Dauid recouered them all.
20 And Dauid tooke all the sheepe, and the oxen, and they draue them before his
cattaile, and saide: This is Dauids pray.
21 And Dauid came to the two hundred men, that were to weery for to folowe
Dauid, whom they had made also to abyde at the ryuer Befor: And they came to
meete Dauid & the people that were with him: And when Dauid came to the people,
he saluted them.
22 Then aunswered all the wicked and the vnthryftes of the men that went with
Dauid, and saide: Because they went not with vs, therfore wil we geue them none
of the pray that we haue recouered: But let euery man take his wife and his
children, those let them carry away and departe.
23 Then sayd Dauid: Ye shall not do so my brethren with that which the Lord hath
geuen vs, who hath preserued vs, and delyuered the company that came against vs,
into our handes.
24 For who will hearke vnto you in this matter? But as his parte is that goeth
downe and fighteth, so shall his parte be that tarryeth by the stuffe: they
shall parte alyke.
25 And so from that day forward, was that made a statute and lawe in Israel,
vnto this day,
26 When Dauid therefore came to Ziklag, he sent of the pray vnto the elders of
Iuda and to his friendes, saying: See, there is a blessing for you of the spoyle
of the enemies of the Lorde.
27 He sent to them of Bethel, to them of south Ramoth, to them of Iathir,
28 To them of Aroer, to them of Sephamoth, to them of Esthema,
29 To them of Rachal, to them of the cities of Ierahmeel, to them of the cities
of the Kenites,
30 To them of Horma, to them of Chorashan, to them of Athach,
31 To them that are in Hebron, and to all places where Dauid and his men were
wont to haunt.

Chapter 31

1 And the Philistines fought against Israel: and the men of Israel fled away
from the Philistines, and fell downe wounded in mount Gilboa.
2 And the Philistines preassed sore vpon Saul & his sonnes, & slue Ionathan, &
Abinadab, & Melchisua, Sauls sonnes.
3 And when the battaile went sore against Saul, the archers with bowes found
him, and he was fore afrayde of the archers.
4 The said Saul vnto his harnesse bearer, Draw out thy sword, & thrust me
through therewith: lest the vncircumcised come and thrust me through & mocke me.
And his harnesse bearer wolde not, for he was sore afrayd: Therefore Saul toke a
sword, and fell vpon it.
5 And when his harnesse bearer sawe that Saul was dead, he fell lykewise vpon
his sword, and dyed with him.
6 And so Saul dyed, & his three sonnes, and his harnesse bearer, and al his men
that same day together.
7 And when the men of Israel, that were on the other syde of the valley, and
they of the other syde Iordaine, sawe that the men of Israel were put to flight,
and that Saul and his sonnes were dead, they left the cities, and ran away, and
the Philistines came and dwelt in them.
8 On the morow when the Philistines were come to spoyle them that were slaine,
they founde Saul and his three sonnes lying in mount Gilboa.
9 And they cut of his head, and stripped him out of his harnesse, & sent into
the land of ye Philistines on euery syde, that they should puplishe it in the
temple of their idolles, and among the people.
10 And they layed vp his harnesse in the house of Astaroth: but they hanged vp
his body on the wall of Bethsan.
11 When the inhabitauntes of Iabes in Gilead heard thereof, what the Philistines
had done to Saul:
12 They arose, as many as were strong men, and went all night, & toke the bodie
of Saul, & the bodies of his sonnes, from the wall of Bethsan, and came to
Iabes, and burnt them there.
13 And toke their bones & buryed them vnder a tree at Iabes, & fasted seuen
dayes.


2 Samuel

Chapter 1

1 After the death of Saul, when Dauid was returned from the slaughter of the
Amalekites, and had ben two daies in Ziklag:
2 Beholde, there came a man the thirde day out of the hoast from Saul, with his
clothes rent, & earth vpon his head: And when he came to Dauid, he fell to the
earth, and did obeysaunce.
3 Dauid sayde vnto him: whence comest thou? He sayde vnto him: Out of the hoast
of Israel I am escaped.
4 And Dauid sayde vnto him: And what is done I pray thee? tell me. He sayde: The
people is fled from the battell, and many of the people are ouerthrowen and
dead, and Saul and Ionathan his sonne are dead also.
5 And Dauid sayd vnto the young man that tolde it him: Howe knowest thou that
Saul and Ionathan his sonne be dead?
6 The young man that tolde him, aunswered: As I came vnaduisedly to mount
Gilboa, beholde Saul leaned vpon his speare: and lo, the charettes and horsemen
folowed hard after him.
7 And when he loked backe, he sawe me, and called me. And I aunswered: here am
I.
8 And he sayde vnto me: Who art thou? I aunswered him: I am an Amalekite.
9 He sayde vnto me agayne: I pray thee come vpon me, and slea me: For anguyshe
is come vpon me, because my life is yet whole in me.
10 And so I stoode vpon him, and slue him, and because I was sure that he coulde
not liue after that he had fallen, I toke the crowne that was vpon his head, and
the braselet that was on his arme, and haue brought them hyther vnto my lorde.
11 Then Dauid toke holde on his clothes, and rent them, and so did all the men
that were with him.
12 And they mourned, and wept, and fasted vntil euen for Saul and Ionathan his
sonne, & for the people of the Lorde, and for the house of Israel, because they
were ouerthrowen with the sworde.
13 And Dauid sayd vnto the young man that brought him these tidings: Whence art
thou? He aunswered: I am the sonne of an aliaunt, an Amakelite.
14 And Dauid sayde vnto him: Howe is it that thou wast not afrayde to lay thyne
hande on the lordes annoynted, to destroy him?
15 And Dauid called one of his young me, and sayd: Go to, and fall vpon him. And
he smote him, that he died.
16 Then said Dauid vnto him, Thy blood be vpon thyne owne head: For thyne owne
mouth hath testified against thee, saying, I haue slayne the lordes annoynted.
17 And Dauid mourned with this lamentation ouer Saul and ouer Ionathan his
sonne,
18 (Also he bad them teache the children of Iuda the vse of the bowe: And
beholde, it is written in the booke of the righteous:)
19 O noble Israel, he is slaine vpon thy hie places: howe are the mightie
ouerthrowen?
20 Tell it not in Gath, nor publishe it in the streates of Askalon: lest the
daughters of the Philistines reioyce, and lest the daughters of the
vncircumcised triumph.
21 Ye mountaynes of Gilboa, vpon you be neither deawe nor raine, nor fieldes of
offeringes: For there the shield of the mightie is cast downe, the shielde of
Saul, as though he had not ben annoynted with oyle.
22 The bowe of Ionathan neuer turned backe, neither did the sword of Saul
returne emptie fro the blood of the slayne, and from the fat of the mightie.
23 Saul and Ionathan were louely and pleasaunt in their lyues, and in their
deathes they were not deuided: They were swyfter then Egles, and stronger then
Lions.
24 Ye daughters of Israel weepe ouer Saul, which clothed you in scarlet with
pleasures, and hanged ornamentes of golde vpon your apparell.
25 Howe were the mightie slayne in the middest of the battel? O Ionathan thou
wast slayne in thyne hye places.
26 Wo is me for thee my brother Ionathan, very kinde hast thou ben vnto me: Thy
loue to me was wonderful, passing the loue of women.
27 O how are the mightie ouerthrowen, and the weapons of warre destroyed?

Chapter 2

1 After this, Dauid asked counsel at the lord, saying: Shall I go vp into any of
the cities of Iuda? And the Lorde sayd vnto him: Go vp. And Dauid said: Whyther
shall I go? He aunswered: Unto Hebron.
2 And so Dauid went thyther with his two wyues, Ahinoam the Iezraelite, &
Abigail Nabals wyfe the Carmelite.
3 And the men that were with him did Dauid cary vp also, euery man with his
housholde: And they dwelt in the townes of Hebron.
4 And the men of Iuda came, and there they annoynted Dauid kyng ouer the house
of Iuda: And they tolde Dauid, saying, It is the men of Iabes Gilead that buried
Saul.
5 And Dauid sent messengers vnto the men of Iabes Gilead, and sayde vnto them:
Blessed are ye vnto the lord, that ye haue shewed suche kindnesse vnto your lord
Saul, and haue buried him.
6 And nowe the Lorde shewe mercy and trueth vnto you: And I will do you also
suche kindnes, as ye haue done in this thing:
7 Therfore nowe let your handes be strong, and play ye the men: For your maister
Saul is dead, and they that are of the house of Iuda haue annoynted me king ouer
them.
8 But Abner the sonne of Ner that was captayne of Sauls hoaste, toke Isboseth
the sonne of Saul, and brought him to Mahanaim,
9 And made him king ouer Gilead, and ouer the Assurites, and ouer Iezrael,
Ephraim, Beniamin, & ouer all Israel.
10 And Isboseth Sauls sonne was fourtie yeres olde when he began to raigne ouer
Israel, and raigned two yeres: But the house of Iuda folowed Dauid.
11 (And the time whiche Dauid raigned in Hebron ouer the house of Iuda, was
seuen yeres and sixe monethes.)
12 And Abner the sonne of Ner, and the seruauntes of Isboseth the sonne of Saul
wet out of Mahanaim to Gibeon
13 And Ioab the sonne of Zaruia, and the seruauntes of Dauid, went out and met
one another by the poole of Gibeon: And they sate downe, the one on the one side
of the poole, and the other on the other side.
14 And Abner sayde to Ioab: Let the young men nowe aryse, and play before vs.
And Ioab sayde: Let them aryse.
15 Then there arose & went ouer twelue of Beniamin by numbre, which pertayned to
Isboseth the sonne of Saul, and twelue of the seruauntes of Dauid.
16 And euery one caught his felowe by ye head, & thrust his sword in his felowes
side, and so they fell downe together: Wherefore the place was called Helkath
hazzurim, which is in Gibeon.
17 And there was an exceeding cruell battel that same day: For Abner and the men
of Israel fell before the seruauntes of Dauid.
18 And there were three sonnes of Zaruia there: Ioab, Abisai, and Asahel: And
Asahel was as light of foote as a wilde Roe.
19 And Asahel folowed after Abner, and in goyng he turned neither to the right
hande nor to the left, from Abner.
20 Then Abner loked behynd him, and sayde: Art thou Asahel? He aunswered: Yea.
21 Abner sayd: Turne thee either to the right hande or the left, and catche one
of the young men, and take thee his weapons. But Asahel woulde not depart from
him.
22 And Abner sayd agayne to Asahel, Depart fro me: Wherfore should I smite thee
to the grounde, and not be able to holde vp my face to Ioab thy brother?
23 Howebeit, when he woulde in no wyse depart, Abner with the hynder ende of the
speare smote him vnder the fyft ribbe, that the speare came out behinde him,
that he fell downe in the same place, and died there: And as many as came to the
place where Asahel fell downe and died, stoode still.
24 Ioab also and Abisai pursued after Abner: And the sunne went downe when they
were come to the hil Amma, that lyeth before Giah, by the way of the wildernesse
of Gibeon.
25 And the children of Beniamin gathered them selues together after Abner, &
were on a heape, and stoode on the top of an hill.
26 Then Abner called to Ioab, and said: Shall the sword deuour for euer? Knowest
thou not, that it wil be bitternesse in the latter ende? Howe long then shall it
be yer thou bid the people returne from folowing their brethren?
27 And Ioab sayde: As God lyueth, if thou haddest not spoken, suerly euen in the
morning the people had departed, euery one from persecuting his brother.
28 And so Ioab blewe a trumpet, and all the people stoode still, and pursued
after Israel no more, neither fought they any more.
29 And Abner and his men walked all that night through the playne, & went ouer
Iordane, & past through all Bethhoron, till they came to Mahanaim.
30 And Ioab returned from persecuting Abner, and when he had gathered all the
people together, there lacked of Dauids seruautes nineteene men, & Asahel.
31 But the seruauntes of Dauid had smitten of Beniamin and of Abners men, so
that three hundred and threescore men died.
32 And they toke vp Asahel, and buried him in the sepulchre of his father, which
was in Bethlehem: And Ioab and his men went all night, and the day arose to them
at Hebron.

Chapter 3

1 There was then long warre betweene the house of Saul, and the house of Dauid:
But Dauid waxed stroger and stronger, and the house of Saul waxed weaker and
weaker.
2 And vnto Dauid were children borne in Hebron: his eldest sonne also was Amnon
of Ahinoam the Iesraelite:
3 The seconde, Cheleab of Abigail the wyfe of Nabal the Carmelite: the third,
Absalom the sonne of Maacha the daughter of Thalmai, the king of Gessur:
4 The fourth, Adonia the sonne of Haggith: the fyft, Sephatia the sonne of
Abital:
5 And the sixt Iethream, by Egla Dauids wyfe: These were borne to Dauid in
Hebron.
6 And whyle there was warre betweene the house of Saul and the house of Dauid,
Abner held vp the house of Saul.
7 And Saul had a concubine named Rispha, the daughter of Ahia: And Isboseth sayd
to Abner, Wherfore hast thou gone in vnto my fathers concubine?
8 Then was Abner very wroth for the wordes of Isboseth, and sayde: Am I a dogges
head, whiche against Iuda do shew mercie this day vnto the house of Saul thy
father, and to his brethren and frendes, & haue not deliuered thee into the
hande of Dauid: and thou fyndest a fault in me this day for this woman?
9 So do God to Abner, and more also, except as the Lorde hath sworne to Dauid,
euen so will I do to him,
10 To bring the kingdome fro the house of Saul, that the throne of Dauid may be
stablisshed ouer Israel and ouer Iuda, euen from Dan to Beerseba.
11 And he coulde geue Abner neuer a worde to aunswere, because he feared him.
12 And Abner sent messengers to Dauid secretly, saying: Whose is the land? Who
should also say, Make a bond with me, and beholde my hande is with thee, to
bring all Israel vnto thee.
13 He sayde: Well, I will make a bonde with the: But one thing I require of
thee, that is, that thou see not my face, except thou first bring Michol Sauls
daughter, when thou comest to see me.
14 And Dauid sent messengers to Isboseth Sauls sonne, saying: Deliuer me my wife
Michol, whiche I maried for an hundred foreskinnes of ye Philistines.
15 And Isboseth sent, and toke her from her husband Phalti the sonne of Lais.
16 And her husband went with her, and came weeping behinde her, til they came to
Bahurim. Then sayde Abner vnto him, Go and returne. And he returned.
17 And Abner had communication with the elders of Israel, saying: Ye sought for
Dauid in times past, that he might be your king:
18 Nowe then do it: for the Lorde hath spoken of Dauid, saying: By the hande of
my seruaunt Dauid, I will saue my people Israel out of the handes of the
Philistines, and out of the hande of all their enemies.
19 And Abner spake in the eares of Beniamin: and afterward Abner went to speake
in the eares of Dauid in Hebron all that Israel was content with and the whole
house of Beniamin.
20 And so Abner came to Dauid to Hebron, hauing twentie men with him: & Dauid
made him & the men that were with him a feast.
21 And Abner sayde vnto Dauid: I will vp, & go gather all Israel vnto my lorde
the king, that they may make an appoyntment with thee, and that thou mayest
raigne ouer all that thyne heart desireth. And when Dauid had let Abner depart,
he went in peace.
22 And behold, the seruauntes of Dauid and Ioab came from the campe, and brought
a great pray with them: (But Abner was not with Dauid in Hebron, for he had sent
him away to depart in peace.)
23 When Ioab and al the hoast that was with him were come, men tolde Ioab,
saying: Abner the sonne of Ner came to the king, and he hath sent him away, that
he is gone in peace.
24 Then Ioab came to the king, and said: What hast thou done? Behold, Abner came
vnto thee, and why hast thou sent him away, and he is quyte gone?
25 Thou knowest Abner the sonne of Ner, for he came to deceaue thee, and to
knowe thy outgoyng and ingoyng, and to knowe all that thou doest.
26 And when Ioab was come out from Dauid, he sent messengers after Abner, which
brought him againe from the well of Sira, vnknowing to Dauid.
27 And when Abner was come againe to Hebron, Ioab toke him asyde in the gate to
speake with him peaceably, and smote him vnder the fyft ribbe, that he died for
the blood of Asahel his brother,
28 And when afterwarde it came to Dauids eare, he sayde: I and my kingdome are
giltlesse before the Lord for euer concerning the blood of Abner the sonne of
Ner.
29 Let the blood fall on the head of Ioab and on all his fathers house, that the
house of Ioab be neuer without one or other that hath running issues or leper,
or that leaneth on a staffe, or that doth fall on the sword, or that lacketh
bread.
30 (So Ioab & Abisai his brother slue Abner, because he had slayne their brother
Asahel at Gibeon in battell.)
31 And Dauid sayde to Ioab and to all the people that were with him: Rent your
clothes, and put on sackcloth, and mourne before Abner. And king Dauid him selfe
folowed the beere.
32 And when they buried Abner in Hebron, the king lift vp his voyce, & wept
besyde the sepulchre of Abner, and al the people wept.
33 And the king lamented ouer Abner, and sayde: Died Abner as a foole dieth?
34 Thy handes were not bounde, nor thy feete brought into fetters of brasse: but
as a man falleth before wicked children, so fellest thou. And all they that were
of the people, wept yet more ouer him.
35 And when all the people came to cause Dauid eate meate whyle it was yet day,
Dauid sware, saying: So do God to me and more also, if I taste bread or ought
els tyll the sunne be downe.
36 And all the people wist it, and it pleased them: as whatsoeuer the king did,
pleased all the people.
37 For all the people and all Israel vnderstoode that day, how that it was not
the kinges deede that Abner the sonne of Ner was slayne.
38 And the king said vnto his seruauntes: Knowe ye not howe that there is a
prince and a great man fallen this day in Israel?
39 And I am this day tender and newly annoynted king, and these men the sonnes
of Zaruia be to hard for me: The Lorde rewarde the doer of euyll, according to
his wickednesse.

Chapter 4

1 And when Sauls sonne hearde that Abner was dead in Hebron, his handes were
feeble, & al the Israelites were afrayde.
2 And Sauls sone had two me that were captaines of bandes, the one called
Baanah, & the other Rechab, the sonnes of Rimmon a Berothite, of the children of
Beniamin: (for Beroth was reckened to Beniamin,
3 And these Berothites fled to Githaim, and soiourned there vntill this day)
4 And Ionathan Sauls sonne had a sonne that was lame on his feete, and was fiue
yeres olde when the tydinges came of Saul & Ionathan out of Iesrael: And his
nurse toke hym vp, and fled away, and as she made haste to flee, the chylde
fell, and began to halt, and his name was Miphiboseth.
5 And the sonnes of Rimmon the Berothite, Rechab and Baanah, went and came in
the heate of the day to the house of Isboseth (whiche slept on a bed at noone.)
6 And behold, they came into the middes of the house, as though they woulde haue
fetched wheate, and Rechab and Baanah his brother smote him vnder the fyft
ribbe, and fled.
7 For when they came into the house, he slept on his bed in his bed chamber, and
they smote him and slue him, & beheaded him, and toke his head, & gat them away
through the plaine all the night.
8 And they brought the head of Isboseth vnto Dauid to Hebron, and sayde to the
king: Behold, there is the head of Isboseth Sauls sonne thyne enemie whiche
sought after thy lyfe, and the Lorde hath auenged my lorde the kyng this day of
Saul and of his seede.
9 And Dauid aunswered Rechab and Baanah his brother ye sonnes of Rimmon the
Berothite, and said vnto them: As the Lorde lyueth, whiche hath deliuered my
soule out of all aduersites:
10 When one tolde me & sayde that Saul was dead (thynking to haue brought good
tydinges) I caught him, and slue him in Ziklag: whiche thought that I woulde
haue geuen him a rewarde for his tydinges bringing:
11 Howe much more when wicked men haue slayne a righteous person in his owne
house and vpon his bed? Shal I not nowe therfore require his blood of your
hande, & take you from the earth?
12 And Dauid commaunded his young men, and they slue them, and cut of their
handes and feete, and hanged them vp ouer the poole in Hebron: But they toke the
head of Isboseth, & buried it in the sepulchre of Abner in Hebron.

Chapter 5

1 Then came all the tribes of Israel to Dauid vnto Hebron, and sayde thus:
Beholde, we are thy bone, and thy fleshe.
2 And in time past whe Saul was our king, thou leddest Israel in and out: and
the Lord hath sayd to thee, thou shalt feede my people Israel, & thou shalt be a
captayne ouer Israel.
3 And so all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron, and king Dauid
made a couenaunt with them in Hebron before the Lorde: and they annointed Dauid
king ouer Israel.
4 Dauid was thirtie yeres olde when he began to raigne, and he raigned fourtie
yeres.
5 In Hebron he raigned ouer Iuda seuen yeres and sixe monethes: and in
Hierusalem he raigned thirtie and three yeres ouer all Israel and Iuda.
6 The king also and his men went to Hierusalem vnto the Iebusites the
inhabitauntes of the lande, whiche spake vnto Dauid, saying: Except thou take
away the blinde and the lame, thou shalt not come in hyther: For they said, Thou
art not able to come in hyther.
7 Neuerthelesse, Dauid toke the strong hold of Sion: the same is the citie of
Dauid.
8 And Dauid sayde the same day: Whosoeuer smyteth the Iebusites, and getteth vp
to the gutters of the houses, and smyteth the lame and the blinde, hated of
Dauid soule, I will preferre him. Wherfore they said: The blinde and the lame
shal not come into that house.
9 And so Dauid dwelt in the towre, and called it the citie of Dauid, and buylt
round about it, from Millo & inward.
10 And Dauid prospered and grewe, and ye Lord God of hoastes was with him.
11 And Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to Dauid, and Cedar trees, &
carpenters, and masons for walles: and they buylt Dauid an house.
12 And Dauid perceaued that the Lord had stablished him king ouer Israel, & that
he had exalted his kingdome for his people Israels sake.
13 And Dauid toke him mo concubines and wyues out of Hierusalem, after he was
come from Hebron, and mo sonnes & daughters were yet borne to Dauid.
14 And these be the names of the sonnes that were borne vnto him in Hierusalem:
Samua, Sobab, Nathan, & Solomon,
15 Ibhar also and Elisua, Nepheg, and Iaphia,
16 Elisama, Eliada, and Eliphelet.
17 But when the Philistines hearde that they had annoynted Dauid king ouer
Israel, they came all vp to seke Dauid: And assoone as Dauid hearde of it, he
gat him to an holde.
18 And when the Philistines came, they spread them selues in the valley of
Raphaim.
19 And Dauid asked counsel of the Lord, saying: Shall I go vp to the
Philistines? Wilt thou deliuer them into my handes? And the Lorde aunswered vnto
Dauid: Go vp, for I will doubtlesse deliuer the Philistines into thy handes.
20 And Dauid came to Baal Perazim, and smote them there, and sayde: The Lorde
hath deuided myne enemies asunder before me, as waters be deuided asunder: And
therefore he called the name of that place Baal Perazim.
21 And there they left their images, and Dauid and his men burnt them.
22 And the Philistines came yet againe, and layde them selues in the valley of
Rephaim.
23 And when Dauid asked counsel of the Lorde, he aunswered, Thou shalt not go
vp: but compasse them on the backsyde, and come vpon them ouer against the
Mulbery trees.
24 And when thou hearest the noyse of a thing goyng in the toppe of the Mulbery
trees, then remoue: for then shall the Lorde go out before thee, to smyte the
hoast of the Philistines.
25 And Dauid did as the Lorde had commaunded him: and smote the Philistines from
Geba, vntill thou come to Gazer.

Chapter 6

1 Againe Dauid gathered together all the chosen men of Israel, euen thirtie
thousand.
2 And arose, and went with all the folke that were with him, from Baala of Iuda,
to fet away from thence the arke of God, whose name is called by the name of the
lord of hoastes that dwelleth vpon it betweene the cherubims.
3 And they put the arke of God vpon a newe cart, & brought it out of the house
of Abinadab that was in Gibea: And Uzza and Ahio the sonnes of Abinadab draue
the newe carte.
4 And when they brought the arke of God out of the house of Abinadab that was at
Gibea, Ahio went before the arke.
5 And Dauid and all the house of Israel played before the lord on sundry
instrumentes made of Cedar wood, with harpes, psalteries, timbrelles, hornettes,
and simbals.
6 And when they came to Nachons thresshing floore, Uzza put his hand to the arke
of God, & helde it, for the oxen did shake it.
7 And the Lord was wroth with Uzza, and God smote him in the same place for his
fault, and there he died before the arke of God.
8 And Dauid was displeased, because the Lorde had smitten Uzza: And he called
the name of the place Perez Uzza, vntill this day.
9 And Dauid was then afraide of the Lorde, and sayd: Howe shall the arke of the
Lord come to me?
10 And so Dauid woulde not bring the arke of the Lorde vnto him into the citie
of Dauid: but Dauid caried it into the house of Obed Edom, a Gethite.
11 And the arke of the Lorde continued in the house of Obed Edom the Gethite
three monethes: and the Lorde blessed Obed Edom, and all his housholde.
12 And one tolde king Dauid howe that the Lorde had blessed the house of Obed
Edom, and all that parteyned vnto him, because of the arke of God. And Dauid
went, and brought the arke of God from the house of Obed Edom, into the citie of
Dauid with gladnes.
13 And when they that bare the arke of the Lorde, had gone sixe paces, he
offered an oxe and a fat beast.
14 And Dauid daunced before the Lorde with all his might, & was girded with a
linnen Ephod.
15 So Dauid and all the house of Israel brought the arke of the Lorde with
showting and trumpet blowing.
16 And as ye arke of the Lord came into the citie of Dauid, Michol Sauls
daughter loked through a windowe, and sawe king Dauid spring and daunce before
the Lord, and she despysed him in her heart.
17 And when they brought in the arke of the Lord, they set it in his place, euen
in the middes of the tabernacle that Dauid had pitched for it: and Dauid offered
burnt offeringes & peace offeringes before the Lorde.
18 And assoone as Dauid had made an ende of offering burnt offeringes and peace
offeringes, he blessed the people in the name of the Lorde of hoastes,
19 And gaue among all the folke, euen among the whole multitude of Israel, aswel
to the women as men, to euery one a cake of bread, & a peece of flesshe, and a
flacked of wine: And so al the people departed euery one to his house.
20 Then Dauid returned to blesse his housholde, and Michol the daughter of Saul
came out to meete Dauid, & sayd: O howe glorious was the king of Israel this
day, whiche was vncouered to day in the eyes of the maydens of his seruauntes,
as a foole vncouereth him selfe?
21 And Dauid sayd vnto Michol: It was before the Lorde, whiche chose me rather
then thy father and all his house, and commaunded me to be ruler ouer all the
people of the Lorde, euen ouer Israel, and therefore will I play before the
Lorde:
22 And will yet be more vyle then so, and will be meeke in myne owne sight: and
of the very same mayde seruauntes which thou hast spoken of, shall I be had in
honour.
23 Therfore Michol the daughter of Saul had no childe vnto the day of her death.

Chapter 7

1 Afterward when the king sate in his house, & the Lord had geuen him rest round
about from all his enemies,
2 The king sayde vnto Nathan the prophete: Beholde, I dwell nowe in an house of
Cedar trees, but the arke of God dwelleth within the curtaynes.
3 And Nathan sayde to the king: Go, and do all that is in thyne heart, for the
Lord is with thee.
4 And the same night the worde of the Lorde came vnto Nathan, saying:
5 Go, and tell my seruaunt Dauid, thus sayeth the Lorde: shalt thou buylde me an
house to dwell in?
6 For I haue not dwelt in any house, sence the time that I brought the children
of Israel out of Egypt, vnto this day: but haue walked in a tent and tabernacle.
7 In al the places wherin I haue walked with all the childre of Israel, spake I
one worde with any of ye tribes of Israel, when I commaunded the iudges to feede
my people Israel, saying, Why build ye not me an house of Cedar trees?
8 Now therfore, so say vnto my seruaunt Dauid: thus sayeth the lord of hoastes,
I toke thee from the sheepe coate as thou wast folowing sheepe, that thou
mightest be ruler ouer my people ouer Israel.
9 And I was with thee in all that thou wentest to, and haue destroyed all thyne
enemies out of thy sight, & haue made thee a great name, lyke vnto the name of
the great men that are in the earth.
10 (Also I will appoynt a place for my people Israel, and will plant it, that
they may dwell in a place of their owne, & moue no more: neither shall wicked
people trouble them any more, as before time,
11 And sence the time that I set iudges ouer my people of Israel) And I will
geue thee rest from all thyne enemies: And the Lorde telleth thee, that he will
make thee an house.
12 And when thy dayes be fulfilled, thou shalt sleepe with thy fathers, and I
will set vp thy seede after thee, whiche shall proceede out of thy body, and
will stablyshe his kingdome.
13 He shall buyld house an for my name, & I wil stablyshe the throne of his
kingdome for euer.
14 I will be his father, and he shalbe my sonne: If he sinne, I will chasten him
with the rodde of men, and with the plagues of the children of men.
15 But my mercy shall not depart away from him, as I toke it from Saul, who I
put away before thee.
16 And thyne house, and thy kingdome shall be stablished for euer before thee,
euen thy throne shalbe stablished for euer.
17 According to all these wordes and according to all this vision, so dyd Nathan
speake vnto Dauid.
18 Then went king Dauid in, and set him downe before the Lord, and sayde: Who am
I, O Lorde God? and what is my house that thou hast brought me hyther to?
19 And this was yet a small thing in thy sight O Lorde God: but thou hast spoken
also of thy seruauntes house for a great whyle: but doth this appertayne to man,
O Lorde God?
20 And what can Dauid say more vnto thee? for thou Lorde God knowest thy
seruaunt.
21 Euen for thy wordes sake, & according to thyne owne heart, hast thou done al
these great thinges, to make them knowen vnto thy seruaunt.
22 Wherfore thou art great, O Lorde God: for there is none like thee, neither is
there any God besides thee, according to al that we haue heard with our eares.
23 And what one people in the earth is lyke thy people, lyke Israel, whose God
went and redeemed them to hym selfe, that they myght be his people, and that he
myght make hym a name, and do for you great thynges and terrible for thy lande,
O Lorde euen for thy people which thou redeemedst to thee out of Egypt euen from
the nations and their gods.
24 For thou hast ordeyned thy people Israel to be thy people for euer, and thou
Lorde art become their God.
25 And nowe Lorde God, the worde that thou hast spoken concernyng thy seruaunt
and his house, make it good for euer, and do as thou hast saide:
26 And let thy name be magnified for euer of men that shall say, The Lorde of
hoastes is the God ouer Israel: and let the house of thy seruaunt Dauid be
stablished before thee.
27 For thou, O Lorde of hoastes, God of Israel, hast tolde in the eare of thy
seruaunt, saying, I wyll buylde thee an house: And therefore hath thy seruaunt
founde in his heart to pray this prayer vnto thee.
28 Therefore nowe Lorde God (thou art God, and thy wordes be true, thou that
hast tolde this goodnes vnto thy seruaunt)
29 Therefore nowe let it please thee to blesse the house of thy seruaunt, that
it may continue for euer before thee: for thou Lorde God hast spoken it, and
with thy blessyng let the house of thy seruaunt be blessed for euer.

Chapter 8

1 After this, now Dauid smote the Philistines, and subdued them: and Dauid toke
the bridel of bondage out of the hand of the Philistines.
2 And he smote the Moabites, and measured them with a lyne, and cast them downe
to the grounde, euen with two lynes measured he them, to put them to death, and
with one full corde to kepe them alyue: And so became the Moabites Dauids
seruauntes, and brought giftes.
3 Dauid smote also Hadarezer ye sonne of Rehob king of Zoba, as he went to
recouer his border at the ryuer Pherath.
4 And Dauid toke of his, a thousand and seuen hundred horsemen, and destroyed
all the charets, and twentie thousand footemen: but reserued an hundred charets
of them.
5 And when the Syrians of Damascon came to succour Hadarezer king of Zoba, Dauid
slue of the Syrians two and twentie thousand men.
6 And put souldiers in Syria Damascon: And the Syrians became seruautes to
Dauid, and brought giftes, and the Lorde saued Dauid, in all that he went vnto.
7 And Dauid toke the shieldes of golde that belonged to the seruauntes of
Hadarezer, & brought them to Hierusalem.
8 And out of Beta and Berothai, cities of Hadarezer, did Dauid bryng exceeding
much brasse.
9 When Thoi king of Hamath heard how Dauid had smitten all the hoast of
Hadarezer,
10 Thoi sent Ioram his sonne vnto king Dauid, to salute him, and to blesse him,
because he had fought against Hadarezer, and beaten him (for Thoi had great
warre with Hadarezer) And Ioram brought with him vessels of siluer, vessels of
golde, and vessels of brasse.
11 Which brasse king Dauid did dedicate vnto the Lorde, with the siluer & golde
that he had deditate of al nations which he subdued.
12 Of Syria, of the Moabites, & of the children of Ammon, of the Philistines,
and of Hamalek, and of the spoyle of Hadarezer sonne of Rehob king of Zoba.
13 And Dauid gat him a name after that he returned & had smitten of the Syrians
in the valley of salt 18 thousand men.
14 And he put a garison in Edom, euen throughout all Edom put he souldiers, and
all they of Edom became Dauids seruauntes: And the Lorde kept Dauid whatsoeuer
he toke in hand.
15 And Dauid raigned ouer all Israel, and executed iudgement and iustice vnto
all his people.
16 And Ioab the sonne of Zaruia was ouer the hoast, & Iehosaphat the sonne of
Ahilud was recorder.
17 And Sadoc the sonne of Ahitob, and Ahimelech the sonne of Abiathar were the
priestes, & Saraiah was the scribe.
18 And Banaiahu the sonne of Iehoida and the Cherethites, and the Phelethites,
and Dauids sonnes, were chiefe rulers.

Chapter 9

1 And Dauid sayde: Is there yet any man left of ye house of Saul? For I wil
shewe him mercie for Ionathans sake.
2 And there was of the householde of Saul, a seruaunt whose name was Ziba, and
when they had called him vnto Dauid, the king saide vnto him: Art thou Ziba? He
said: Thy seruaunt is he.
3 And the king saide: Remaineth there yet any man of the house of Saul, who I
may shewe the mercie of God vpon? Ziba aunswered the king: Ionathan hath yet a
sonne, which is lame on his feete.
4 The king said vnto him: where is he? Ziba saide vnto the king: Behold, he is
in the house of Machir the sonne of Amiel of Lodeber.
5 Then king Dauid sent, & fet him out of the house of Machir the sonne of Amiel
of Lodeber.
6 Now when Miphiboseth the sonne of Ionathan ye sonne of Saul was come vnto
Dauid, he fell on his face, and dyd reuerence: And Dauid saide, Miphiboseth? He
aunswered: Beholde thy seruaunt.
7 Dauid saide vnto him: Feare not, for I will surelie shewe thee kindnesse for
Ionathan thy fathers sake, and will restore thee all the fieldes of Saul thy
father, & thou shalt eate bread on myne owne table continually.
8 And he bowed him selfe, and sayde: What is thy seruaunt, that thou shouldest
loke vpon such a dead dogge as I am?
9 Then the king called to Ziba Sauls seruaunt, and said vnto him: I haue geuen
vnto thy maisters sonne all that parteyned to Saul and to all his house.
10 Thou therefore, and thy sonnes, and thy seruauntes, shall tyll the land for
him, & bring in, that thy maisters sonne may haue foode to eate: But Miphiboseth
thy maisters sonne shall eate bread alway vpon my table. For Ziba had fifteene
sonnes, & twentie seruauntes.
11 Then saide Ziba vnto the king: According to all that my Lorde the king hath
commaunded his seruaunt, so shall thy seruaunt do, that Miphiboseth may eate as
the king saide vpon my table, as one of the kinges sonnes.
12 Miphiboseth had a sonne that was young, named Micha: and al that dwelt in the
house of Ziba, were seruauntes vnto Miphiboseth.
13 And Miphiboseth dwelt in Hierusalem, for he dyd eate continually at the
kinges table, and was lame on both his feete.

Chapter 10

1 After this, the king of the children of Ammon dyed, and Hanon his sonne
raigned in his steade.
2 Then saide Dauid: I will shewe kindnesse vnto Hanon the sonne of Nahas, as his
father shewed kindnesse vnto me. And Dauid sent to comfort him by the hand of
his seruauntes, ouer his father: And Dauids seruauntes came in to the land of
the children of Ammon.
3 And the princes of the children of Ammon sayde vnto Hanon their lorde:
Thinkest thou that Dauid doth honor thy father, that he hath sent comfortours to
thee? Hath not Dauid rather sent his seruauntes vnto thee, to searche the citie,
and to spie it out, and to ouerthrowe it?
4 Wherefore Hanon toke Dauids seruauntes, and shaued of the one halfe of their
beardes, & cut of their garmetes in the middle, euen hard to the buttockes of
them, and sent them away.
5 When they tolde it vnto Dauid, he sent to meete them (for they were men
exceedingly ashamed) and the king said: Tary at Iericho vntill your beardes be
growen, and then returne.
6 And when the children of Ammon sawe that they stancke in the sight of Dauid,
they sent & hyred the Syrians of the house of Rehob, and the Syrians of Zoba 20
thousand footemen, and of king Maacha a thousand men, and of Istob twelue
thousand men.
7 And when Dauid heard of it, he sent Ioab and all the hoast of strong men.
8 And the children of Ammon came out, and put their armie in aray at the entring
in of the gate: and the Syrians of Zoba, of Rehob, Istob, and Maacha, were by
them selues in the fielde.
9 Whe Ioab sawe that the front of the battaile was against him before and
behinde, he chose of all the choyse of Israel, and put them in aray against the
Syrians.
10 And the rest of the people he deliuered into the hand of Abisai his brother,
that he might put them in aray against the children of Ammon.
11 And he saide: If the Syrians be stronger then I, thou shalt helpe me: But if
the children of Ammon be to strong for thee, I will come and succour thee.
12 Therefore quite thee lyke a man, and let vs be valiaunt for our people and
for the cities of our God: And the Lorde do that which is good in his owne eyes.
13 And Ioab proceeded foorth, & the people that was with him, to fight against
the Syrians: but they fled before him.
14 And when the children of Ammon sawe that the Syrians were fled, then fled
they also before Abisai, and entred into the citie: And so Ioab returned from
the children of Ammon, and came to Hierusalem.
15 And whe the Syrians saw that they were smitten before Israel, they gathered
them together.
16 And Hadarezer sent, and brought out the Syrians that were beyond the ryuer,
and they came to Helam: & Zoba the captayne of the hoast of Hadarezer went
hefore them.
17 And when it was shewed Dauid, he gathered al Israel together, & passed ouer
Iordane, and came to Helam: And the Syrians set them selues in aray against
Dauid, and fought with him.
18 And the Syrians fled before Israel, and Dauid destroyed seuen hundred charets
of the Syrians, & fourtie thousand horsemen, and smote Zoba the captaine of
their hoast, which also dyed there.
19 And when all the kinges that were seruauntes to Hadarezer, saw that they fel
before Israel, they made peace with Israel, and serued them: and so the Syrians
feared to helpe the children of Ammon any more.

Chapter 11

1 And it came to passe that after the yere was expired, in the time when kinges
go foorth to battaile, Dauid sent Ioab & his seruautes with him, and all Israel,
which destroyed the children of Ammon, & besieged Rabba: But Dauid taryed still
at Hierusalem.
2 And in an euening tyde, Dauid arose out of his bed, and walked vpon the roofe
of the kinges palace, and from the roofe he sawe a woman washing her selfe, and
the woman was very beautifull to loke vpon.
3 And Dauid sent to enquire what woman it should be: And one saide, Is not this
Bethsabe the daughter of Eliam, and wyfe to Urias the Hethite?
4 And Dauid sent messengers, and toke her away: And she came in vnto him, and he
lay with her (and she was purified from her vnclennesse) and returned vnto her
house.
5 And the woman conceaued, and sent and tolde Dauid, & sayde: I am with childe.
6 And Dauid sent to Ioab, saying: Send me Urias the Hethite. And Ioab sent Urias
to Dauid.
7 And whe Urias was come vnto him, Dauid demaunded of him howe Ioab did, and how
the people fared, and how the warre prospered?
8 And Dauid sayde to Urias: Go downe to thy house, & washe thy feete. And Urias
departed out of the kinges palace, and there folowed him a present from the
king.
9 But Urias slept at the doore of ye kinges palace, with all the seruauntes of
his lorde, and went not downe to his house.
10 Which when they had tolde Dauid, saying, Urias went not downe vnto his house:
Dauid saide vnto Urias, Camest thou not from thy iourney? why diddest thou not
go downe then vnto thyne house?
11 Urias aunswered Dauid: The arke, & Israel, and Iuda dwell in pauilions, and
my lorde Ioab and the seruauntes of my lorde abyde in the open fieldes, and
shall I then go into myne house, to eate, and drinke, & lye with my wyfe? By thy
lyfe, and by the lyfe of thy soule, I will not do this thing.
12 And Dauid saide vnto Urias: Tary here this day also, and to morow I wil let
thee departe. And so Urias abode in Hierusalem that day, and the morow.
13 And when Dauid had called him, he did eate and drinke before him, and he made
him drunke: And at euen he went out to lye on his couch with ye seruautes of his
lorde, but went not downe to his house.
14 On the morowe Dauid wrote a letter to Ioab, and sent it by the hand of Urias.
15 And he wrote thus in the letter: Put ye Urias in the forefront of the sharper
battaile, and come ye backe from him, that he maye be smytten, and dye.
16 So when Ioab besieged the citie, he assigned Urias vnto a place where he wist
that strong men were.
17 And the men of the citie came out, and fought with Ioab: And there were
certayne ouerthrowen of the people of the seruauntes of Dauid: & Urias the
Hethite dyed also.
18 Then Ioab sent, and tolde Dauid all the thinges concerning the warre:
19 And charged the messenger, saying: When thou hast made an ende of telling the
matters of the warre vnto the king:
20 If the kinges anger aryse, and he say vnto thee, wherfore approched ye so nye
vnto the citie when ye did fight? wyst ye not that they would hurle and shoote
from the wall?
21 Who smote Abimelech sonne of Ierubesheth? Did not a woman cast a peece of a
mylstone vpon him from of the wall, and he dyed in Thebes? why went ye nye the
wall? Then say thou: Thy seruaunt Urias the Hethite is dead also.
22 So the messenger went, & came and shewed Dauid all that Ioab had sent him
for.
23 And the messenger saide vnto Dauid: The men preuailed against vs, & came out
vnto vs into the fielde, & we pursued them, euen vnto the entring of the gate:
24 And the shooters shotte from the walles vpon thy seruauntes, and some of the
kinges seruauntes be dead, and thy seruaunt Urias the Hethite is dead also.
25 And Dauid saide vnto the messenger, thus shalt thou saye vnto Ioab: Let not
that thing trouble thee, for ye sword deuoureth one as well as another: Make thy
battayle more strong against the citie to ouerthrowe it, & encourage thou him.
26 And when the wyfe of Urias heard that her husband was dead, she mourned for
him.
27 And when the mourning was past, Dauid sent and fet her to his house, and she
became his wyfe, and bare him a sonne: But this thing that Dauid dyd, displeased
the Lorde.

Chapter 12

1 And the Lord sent Nathan vnto Dauid, and he came vnto him, and tolde him:
There were two men in one citie, the one rich, & the other poore.
2 The rich man had exceeding many sheepe and oxen:
3 But the poore had nothing saue one litle sheepe, which he had bought and
nouryshed vp: And it grew vp with him and with his children also, and did eate
of his owne meate, and drancke of his owne cuppe, & slept in his bosome, and was
vnto him as his daughter.
4 And there came a straunger vnto the rich man, and he spared to take of his
owne sheepe and of his owne oxen to dresse for ye straunger that was come vnto
him: But toke the poore mans sheepe, and dressed it for the man that was come to
him.
5 And Dauid was exceeding wroth with the man, and saide to Nathan: As the Lorde
lyueth, the man that hath done this thing is the childe of death.
6 He shal restore the lambe foure folde, because he did this thyng and had no
pitie.
7 And Nathan saide to Dauid, Thou art the man: Thus saith the Lord God of
Israel, I annoynted thee king ouer Israel, and ryd thee out of the hand of Saul.
8 I gaue thee thy maisters house, and thy maisters wyues into thy bosome, and
gaue thee the house of Israel and of Iuda, and might (if that had ben to litle)
haue geuen thee so muche more.
9 Wherefore then hast thou despised the commaundement of the Lorde to do euill
in his sight? Thou hast kild Urias the Hethite with the sword, & hast taken his
wyfe to thy wyfe, and hast slaine him with the sword of the children of Ammon.
10 Now therefore, the sword shall neuer depart from thyne house, because thou
hast despised me, and taken the wyfe of Urias the Hethite to be thy wyfe.
11 Wherefore thus saith the Lorde: Beholde, I will stirre vp euil against thee,
euen out of thyne owne house, and wyll take thy wyues before thyne eyes, and
geue them vnto thy neyghbour, and he shall lye with thy wyues in the sight of
this sunne.
12 For thou diddest it secretly: but I wil do this thing before al Israel, and
in the open sunne lyght.
13 And Dauid saide vnto Nathan: I haue sinned against the Lord. And Nathan saide
vnto Dauid: The Lord also hath put away thy sinne, thou shalt not dye.
14 Howbeit, because in doing this deede thou hast geuen ye enemies of the Lord a
cause to blaspheme, the childe that is borne vnto thee shall surely dye.
15 And Nathan departed vnto his house: And the Lorde strake the childe that
Urias wyfe bare vnto Dauid, and it sickened sore.
16 Dauid therefore besought God for the childe, and fasted, and went in, & laye
all night vpon the earth.
17 And the elders of his house arose and went to him, to take him vp from the
earth: But he would not, neither did he eate meate with them.
18 And the seuenth day the childe dyed, and the seruauntes of Dauid feared to
tell him that the childe was dead: For they said, beholde, while the childe was
yet alyue we spake vnto hym, and he would not hearke vnto our voyce: how will he
then vexe him selfe, if we tell him that the childe is dead?
19 But Dauid seing his seruautes whispering, perceaued that the childe was dead:
& Dauid said vnto his seruauntes, Is the childe dead? They saide: He is dead.
20 And Dauid arose from the earth, and washed and annoynted him selfe, and
chaunged his apparell, and came into the house of the Lord, and worshipped: and
afterward came to his owne house, & bad that they should set bread before him,
and he dyd eate.
21 Then said his seruauntes vnto him: What thing is this that thou hast done?
Thou diddest fast & weepe for the childe while it was alyue, & assoone as it was
dead, thou diddest ryse vp & eate meate.
22 He said: While the childe was yet ailue I fasted and wept: for this I
thought, Who can tell whether God wyll haue mercy on me, that the childe may
lyue?
23 But now seeing it is dead, wherefore should I fast? Can I bring him againe
any more? I shall go to him, rather then he shall come againe to me.
24 And Dauid comforted Bethsabe his wyfe, & went in vnto her and lay with her,
and she bare a sonne, and he called his name Solomon, and the Lord loued him,
25 And had sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet: therefore he called his name
Iedidia, of the Lordes behalfe.
26 Then Ioab fought against Rabba of the children of Ammon, and toke the citie
of the kingdome.
27 And Ioab sent messengers to Dauid, saying: I haue fought against Rabba, and
haue taken the citie of waters.
28 Now therefore gather the rest of the people together, and besiege the citie,
that thou mayst take it: lest I take it, & it be called after my name.
29 And Dauid gathered al the people together, & went against Rabba, and besieged
it, and toke it.
30 And he toke their kinges crowne from of his head (which wayed a talent of
golde, & in it were precious stones) and it was set on Dauids head, and he
brought away the spoyle of the citie, in exceeding great abundaunce.
31 And he caryed away the people that was therein, & put them vnder sawes, and
vnder iron harrowes, and vnder axes of iron, & thrust them into the tylekyll:
thus dyd he with all the cities of the children of Ammon. And so Dauid and al
the people returned vnto Hierusalem.

Chapter 13

1 After this, so it was that Absalom the sonne of Dauid had a fayre sister,
named Thamar, whom Amnon ye sonne of Dauid loued.
2 And he was so sore vexed, that he fell sycke for his sister Thamar: for she
shas a virgin, and he thought it hard for him to do any thing to her.
3 But Amnon had a frende called Ionadab, the sonne of Simah, Dauids brother: And
Ionadab was a very subtile man.
4 And he said vnto him: How commeth it, that thou being the kinges sonne, art
thus consumed from day to day? Wylt thou not tell me? Amnon aunswered him: I
loue Thamar my brother Absaloms sister.
5 Ionadab saide vnto him, Lay thee downe on thy bed, and make thy selfe sicke:
And when thy father is come to see thee, saye vnto him: I pray thee let my
sister Thamar come, and geue me meate, and dresse it in my syght, that I may see
it, and eate it of her hand.
6 And so Amnon laye downe, and made him selfe sicke: And when the king was come
to see him, Amnon saide vnto the king: I pray thee let Thamar my sister come,
and make me a coople of cakes in my sight, that I may eate of her hand.
7 Then Dauid sent home to Thamar, saying: Go now to thy brother Amnos house, and
dresse him meate.
8 So Thamar went to her brother Amnons house, & he was layed downe: And she toke
floure, and kneaded it, and made cakes in his sight, and dyd bake them.
9 And toke a panne, and powred them out before him: but he would not eate. And
Amnon saide: Haue out all men from me. And they went all out from him.
10 And Amnon saide vnto Thamar: Bring the meate into the chamber, that I may
eate of thyne hand. And Thamar toke ye cakes which she had made, and brought
them into the chamber to Amnon her brother:
11 And whe she had set them before him to eate, he toke her, and saide vnto her:
Come, lye with me my sister.
12 And she aunswered him: Nay my brother, do not force me, for there hath no
such thing ben done in Israel: Do not thou this folly.
13 And I, whyther shall I cause my shame to go? And thou shalt be as one of the
fooles in Israel: Now therefore, I pray thee speake vnto the king, and he wyll
not denie me vnto thee.
14 Howbeit, he would not hearken vnto her voyce: but being stronger then she,
forced her, and lay with her.
15 And then Amnon hated her exceedingly, so that the hatred wherewith he hated
her, was greater then the loue with which he before loued her: And Amnon saide
vnto her: Up, and get thee hence.
16 She aunswered him, There is no cause: This euill that thou puttest me away,
is greater then the other that thou diddest vnto me. Neuerthelesse, he would not
heare her:
17 But called his boye that serued him, and saide: Put away this woman from me,
and bolt the doore after her.
18 And she had a garment of diuers colours vpon her: for with such wer the
kinges daughters (that were virgins) appareled. Then his seruaunt brought her
out, and locked the doore after her.
19 And Thamar toke and put ashes on her head, and rent her garment of diuers
colours that was on her, & layed her hand on her head, and so went, and as she
went, cryed.
20 And Absalom her brother saide vnto her: Hath Amnon thy brother ben with thee?
Now yet be still my sister, he is thy brother, let not this thing greeue thyne
heart. And so Thamar remayned desolate in her brother Absaloms house.
21 But when king Dauid heard of all these thinges, he was very wroth.
22 And Absalom sayde vnto his brother Amnon neither good nor bad: Howbeit,
Absalom hated Amnon, because he had forced his sister Thamar.
23 And after the tyme of two yeres, Absalom had sheepe shearers in the playne of
Hazor beside Ephraim, & bade all the kinges sonnes.
24 And came to the king, and saide: Beholde, thy seruaunt hath sheepe shearers,
I pray thee that the king with his seruauntes come to thy seruaunt.
25 The king aunswered Absalom: Nay my sonne, I pray thee let vs not go all, lest
we be chargeable vnto thee. And Absalom laye sore vpon him: howbeit he would not
go, but blessed him.
26 Then saide Absalom: but I pray thee shall not my brother Amnon go with vs?
And the king aunswered him: what needeth it that he go with thee?
27 But Absalom made such instaunce, that he let Amnon & all the kinges children
go with him.
28 Now had Absalom commaunded his young men, saying: Marke when Amnons heart is
mery with wine, and when I bid you smyte Amnon: then kil him, and feare not:
haue not I bidden you? be bolde therfore, & play the men.
29 And the seruauntes of Absalom dyd vnto Amnon euen as Absalom had commaunded:
And al the kinges sonnes arose, and euery man gat him vp vpon his mule, and
fled.
30 And whyle they were yet in the way, tydinges came to Dauid, saying: Absalom
hath slaine all the kinges sonnes, and there is none left alyue.
31 Then the king arose, & tare his garmentes, and lay along on the earth: and
all his seruauntes stoode by with their clothes rent.
32 And Ionadab the sonne of Simeach Dauids brother, aunswered, and sayde: Let
not my lorde suppose that they haue slaine all the young men of the kings
sonnes, but Amnon onely is dead: For that hath ben determined in Absaloms minde,
since he forced his sister Thamar.
33 Now therefore, let not my lorde the king take the thing so greeuously, to
thinke that all the kinges sonnes are dead, for Amnon onely is dead.
34 But Absalom fled: And ye young man that kept the watch, lyft vp his eyes &
loked, and beholde there came much people by the way of the hill syde behinde
him.
35 And Ionadab said vnto the king, Beholde, the kinges sonnes come: As thy
seruaunt said, so it is.
36 And assoone as he had left speaking, beholde the kinges sonnes came, & lyft
vp their voyces, and wept: The king also & all his seruauntes wept exceedingly
sore.
37 But Absalom escaped, and went to Thalmai the sonne of Ammihur kyng of Gesur:
And Dauid mourned for his sonne euery day.
38 And so Absalom escaped, and went to Gesur, and was there three yeres.
39 And king Dauid desired to go foorth vnto Absalom: For where as Amnon was
dead, he was comforted ouer him.

Chapter 14

1 Ioab ye sonne of Zaruia perceaued that the kynges heart was toward Absalom:
2 And he sent to Thekoa, and fet thence a wyse woman, & sayde vnto her: I pray
thee faine thy selfe to be a mourner, and put on mourning apparell, and annoynt
not thy self with oyle, but be as a woman that had long tyme mourned for the
dead:
3 And come to the king, and speake on this maner vnto hym (And so Ioab taught
her what she should say.)
4 And when the woman of Thekoa spake with the king, she fell on her face to the
grounde, and did obeysaunce, and sayde: Helpe, O king.
5 The king said vnto her: What ayleth thee? She aunswered: I am in deede a
wydow, and myne husband is dead.
6 And thy hande mayde had two sonnes, and they two fought together in the
fielde, where was no man to go betweene them, but the one smote the other, and
slue him.
7 And beholde, the whole kindred is risen against thy handmayd, & they said:
Delyuer hym that smote his brother, that we may kill him for the soule of his
brother whom he slue, we will destroy the heyre also: And so they shall quenche
my sparkle which is left, and shall not leaue to my husband neither name nor
issue vpon the earth.
8 And the king sayde vnto the woman: Go home to thyne house, I wyll geue a
charge for thee.
9 And the woman of Thekoa saide vnto the king: My lorde O king, this trespasse
be on me and on my fathers house: and the king and his throne be giltlesse.
10 And the king saide: If any man say ought vnto thee, bring him to me, and he
shall hurt thee no more.
11 Then saide she: I pray thee let the king remember the Lord thy God, that thou
wouldest not suffer many reuengers of blood to destroy, lest they slay my sonne.
And he aunswered: As the Lorde lyueth, there shal not one heere of thy sonne
fall to the earth.
12 The woman sayde: Let thyne handmayde speake one worde vnto my lorde the king.
And he sayde: Say on.
13 The woman sayd: Wherfore then hast thou thought suche a thing against the
people of God? For the king doth speake this thing as one which is faultie, that
he shoulde not fet home againe his banished.
14 For we must nedes dye, and are as wather spilt on the ground, which cannot be
gathered vp againe: Neither doth God spare any person, yet doth he appoynt
meanes that his banished be not vtterly expelled from him.
15 Nowe therfore I am come to speake of this thing vnto the my lord the king,
because they that be of ye people haue made me afrayd: And thy handmayde sayd,
Now will I speake vnto the king, it may be that the king will perfourme the
request of his handmayde.
16 And the king shall heare his handmayde, to deliuer her out of the hand of the
man that woulde haue destroyed me, and also my sonne out of the inheritaunce of
God.
17 And thyne handmayde sayde: The worde of my lord the king shall now be
comfortable: For my lord the king is as an angel of God, in hearing of good &
bad: Therfore the Lorde thy God be with thee.
18 Then the king aunswered, and sayde vnto the woman: Hyde not from me I pray
thee ye thing that I shall aske thee. And the woman sayde: Let my lord the king
nowe speake.
19 And the king sayd: Is not the hand of Ioab with thee in all this matter? The
woman aunswered, and sayde: As thy soule liueth my lorde the king, I wil not
turne to the right hande nor to the left from ought that my lorde the king hath
spoke: for euen thy seruaunt Ioab bad me, and he put all these wordes in the
mouth of thyne handmayde:
20 For to the intent that I shoulde chaunge the fourme of speach, hath thy
seruaunt Ioab done this thing: And my lorde is wyse, according to the wisdome of
an angel of God, to vnderstande all thinges that are in the earth.
21 And the king sayd vnto Ioab: Behold, I haue done this thing: Go & bring the
young man Absalom againe.
22 And Ioab fell to the ground on his face, and bowed him selfe, and thanked the
king: And Ioab sayd, Now thy seruaunt knoweth, that I haue founde grace in thy
sight my lorde O king, in that the king hath fulfilled the request of his
seruaunt.
23 And so Ioab arose, and went to Gesur, and brought Absalom to Hierusalem.
24 And the king sayde: Let him turne to his owne house, & not see my face. And
so Absalo returned to his owne house, and sawe not the kinges face.
25 But in al Israel there was none to be so muche praysed as Absalom for
beautie: from ye sole of his foote to the toppe of his head, there was no
blemishe in him.
26 And when he polled his head (for at euery yeres ende he polled it, because
the heere was heauy on him therfore he polled it) he weighed the heere of his
head at two hundreth sicles, after the kinges wayght.
27 And Absalom had three sonnes borne him, and one daughter named Thamar, whiche
was a fayre woman to loke vpon.
28 So Absalom dwelt two yeres in Hierusalem, and sawe not the kinges face.
29 Therfore Absalom sent for Ioab to haue sent him to the king, but he would not
come to him: And when he sent againe, he would not come.
30 Therfore he sayde vnto his seruauntes: Behold, Ioab hath a field by my place,
& he hath barlye therin: Go, & set it on fyre. And Absaloms seruauntes set it on
fire.
31 Then Ioab arose, and came to Absalom vnto his house, and sayd vnto him:
Wherfore haue thy seruauntes burnt my fielde with fire?
32 And Absalo aunswered Ioab: Behold, I sent for thee, desiring thee to come,
because I woulde haue sent thee to the king, for to say, Wherfore am I come from
Gesur? It had ben better for me to haue ben there still: Nowe therfore would I
see the kinges face: And if ther be any trespasse in me, let hym kil me.
33 And so Ioab came to the king, and tolde him: Which when he had sent for
Absalom, he came to the king, and fel to the ground on his face before him, and
the king kissed Absalom.

Chapter 15

1 After this, Absalo prepared him charettes & horses, and fiftie men to runne
before him.
2 And Absalom rose vp early, and stoode in the place of the entring in of the
gate: And euery man that had any matter and came to the king for iudgement, him
did Absalom cal vnto him, and sayde: Of what citie art thou? He aunswered: Thy
seruaunt is of one of the tribes of Israel.
3 And Absalom said vnto him: See, thy matters are good and righteous, but there
is no man deputed of the king to heare thee.
4 Absalom sayde moreouer: Oh, that I were made iudge in the land, that euery man
which hath any plea and matter in the lawe, might come to me, and that I might
do him iustice.
5 And when any man came nye to him, and dyd him obeysaunce, he put foorth his
hande, and toke him to him, and kissed him.
6 And on this maner dyd Absalom to al Israel that came to the king for
iudgement: so Absalom stale the heartes of the men of Israel.
7 And after fourtie yeres, Absalom said vnto the king: I pray thee let me go to
Hebron, & pay my vowe which I haue vowed vnto the Lorde:
8 For thy seruaunt vowed a vowe (when I was in Gesur in Siria) saying: If the
Lorde shall bring me againe in deede to Hierusalem, I wil serue the Lorde.
9 And the king said vnto him: Go in peace. And so he arose, and went to Hebron.
10 But Absalom sent spies throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying: Assoone
as ye heare the voyce of the trumpet blow, ye shall say, Absalom raigneth in
Hebro.
11 And with Absalom went two hundred men out of Hierusalem, that were called:
And they went with pure heartes, not knowing of any thing.
12 And Absalom sent for Ahithopel the Gilonite Dauids counseller, fro his citie
Gilo, while he offered sacrifices, and there was wrought strong treason: For the
people went and increased with Absalom.
13 And ther came a messenger to Dauid, and sayde: The heartes of the men of
Israel are turned after Absalom.
14 And Dauid said vnto all his seruautes that were with him at Hierusalem: Up,
that we may flee, for we shall not els escape from Absalom: Make speede to
departe, lest he come sodenly & catche vs, and bring euyll vpon vs, and smyte
the citie with the edge of the sworde.
15 And the kinges seruauntes sayd vnto him: Beholde, thy seruauntes are redy to
do whatsoeuer my lord the king shall appoynt.
16 And the king departed, and al his housholde at his feete: And the king left
ten concubines to kepe the house.
17 And the king went foorth and all the people at his feete, and taried in a
place that was farre of.
18 And al his seruauntes went about him: and all the Cerethites, and all the
Phelethites, and all the Gethites, euen sixe hundred men whiche were come after
him from Geth, went before the king.
19 Then sayde the king to Ithai the Gethite: Wherfore commest thou with vs?
Returne, and abyde with the king, for thou art a straunger, depart therfore to
thy place.
20 Thou camest yesterday, and should I vnquiet thee to day to go with vs? I will
go whyther I can: Therfore returne thou, & cary againe thy brethren: Mercy and
trueth be with thee.
21 And Ithai aunswered the king, & said: As the Lord lyueth, and as my lord the
king lyueth, in what place my lorde the king shalbe, whether in death or lyfe,
euen there also will thy seruaunt be.
22 And Dauid said to Ithai: Come then, and go forward. And Ithai the Gethite
went foorth, and all his men, and all the children that were with him.
23 And all the countrey wepte with a loude voyce, & all the people went ouer:
The king also him selfe passed ouer the brooke Cedron, and all the people went
ouer towarde the waye that leadeth to the wildernesse.
24 And lo Sadoc also and all the Leuites were with him, & bare the arke of the
appoyntment of God, and they set downe the arke of God, and Abiathar went vp,
vntill the people were all come ouer, out of the citie.
25 And the king sayde vnto Sadoc, Cary the arke of God againe into the citie: If
I shall finde fauour in the eyes of the Lorde, he will bring me againe, & shewe
me both it, and the tabernacle therof.
26 But if he thus say, I haue no lust vnto thee: beholde here am I, let hym do
with me what semeth good in his eyes.
27 The king sayde also vnto Sadoc the priest: Art not thou a Sear? Returne into
the citie in peace, and take your two sonnes with you, Ahimaaz thy sonne, and
Ionathan the sonne of Abiathar.
28 Behold, I wil tary in the fieldes of the wildernesse, vntil there come some
word from you to be tolde me.
29 Sadoc therfore and Abiathar caried the arke of God againe to Hierusalem, and
they taried there.
30 And Dauid went vpon mount Oliuet, and wept as he went vp, and had his head
couered, & went barefoote: And all the people that was with him, had euery man
his head couered: & as they went vp, they wept.
31 And one tolde Dauid, saying: Ahithophel is one of them that haue conspired
with Absalom. And Dauid sayde: O Lorde I pray thee, turne the counsell of
Ahithophel into foolishnes.
32 When Dauid was come to the toppe of the mount, he worshipped God: and
beholde, Husai the Arachite came against him, with his coate torne, and hauing
earth vpon his head.
33 Unto whom Dauid sayde: If thou go with me, thou shalt be a burthen vnto me.
34 But if thou returne to the citie, and say vnto Absalom, I will be thy
seruaunt O king: as I haue thus long ben thy fathers seruaunt, so am I nowe thy
seruaunt, thou mayest for my sake destroy the counsel of Ahithophel.
35 And hast thou not there with thee Sadoc and Abiathar the priestes? therfore
whatsoeuer thou shalt here out of the kings house, thou shalt shewe to Sadoc and
Abiathar the priestes.
36 And behold, they haue there with them their two sonnes, Ahimaaz Sadocs sonne,
and Ionathan Abiathars sonne: by them also shal ye sende me all that ye can
heare.
37 And so Husai Dauids freende went to the citie, and Absalom entred into
Hierusalem.

Chapter 16

1 And when Dauid was a litle past the toppe of the hill beholde, Ziba the
seruaunt of Miphiboseth mette him with a coople of asses sadled, & vpon them two
hundred loues of bread, & one hundred bunches of resinges, and an hundred of
dried figges, & a bottel of wyne.
2 And the king sayde vnto Ziba: What meanest thou with these? And Ziba sayde:
They be Asses for the kinges houshold to ryde on, and bread and fruit for the
young men to eate, and wine, that such as be faynt in the wildernesse may
drinke.
3 And the king sayde: Where is thy maisters sonne? Ziba aunswered vnto the king,
Behold he tarieth still at Hierusalem: For he sayde, This day shall the house of
Israel restore me the kingdome of my father.
4 Then sayd the king to Ziba: Behold, thyne are all that pertayned vnto
Miphiboseth. And Ziba sayde: I humbly beseche thee that I may finde grace in thy
sight, my lorde O king.
5 And when king Dauid came to Bahurim, beholde, thence came out a man of the
kinred of the house of Saul, named Semei the sonne of Gera, and he came out
cursing.
6 And he cast stones at Dauid, and at all the seruauntes of Dauid: And all the
people and al the men of warre were on his right hande, and on his left.
7 And thus sayd Semei when he cursed: Come foorth, come foorth thou bloodsheder,
and thou man of Belial.
8 The Lord hath brought vpon thee all the blood of the house of Saul, in whose
steade thou hast raigned, and the Lorde hath deliuered the kingdome into the
hande of Absalom thy sonne: And beholde, thou art come to thy mischiefe, because
thou art a bloodsheder.
9 Then sayde Abisai the sonne of Zaruia vnto the king: Why doth this dead dogge
curse my lord the king? let me go nowe, and take of the head of him.
10 And the king sayde: What haue I to do with you ye sonnes of Zaruia? for he
curseth euen because the Lord hath bidden him curse Dauid: Who dare then say,
Wherfore hast thou done so?
11 And Dauid sayde to Abisai, and to all his seruautes, Behold, my sonne which
came of myne owne bowels, seketh my lyfe: How much more then may this sonne of
Iemini do it? Suffre him to curse, for the Lorde hath bidden him.
12 It may be that the Lorde will loke on myne affliction, and do me good for his
cursing this day.
13 And as Dauid and his men went by the way, Semei went along on the hilles syde
ouer against him, & cursed as he went, and threwe stones at him, and cast duste.
14 And the king and all that were with him came weery, and refreshed them selues
there.
15 And Absalom & al the people the men of Israel came to Hierusalem, and
Ahithophel was with him.
16 And assoone as Husai the Arachite Dauids frend, was come vnto Absalo, Husai
sayde vnto Absalom: God saue the king, God saue the king.
17 And Absalom sayde to Husai: Is this the kindnesse to thy frende? Why wentest
thou not with him?
18 Husai aunswered vnto Absalom, Nay not so: But whom the Lorde and this people
and all the men of Israel choose, his will I be, & with him wil I dwell.
19 And moreouer, vnto whom shal I do seruice? not to his sonne? And as I was
seruaunt before thy father, so will I before thee.
20 Then spake Absalom to Ahithophel: Geue counsel what we shall do.
21 And Ahithophel said vnto Absalom: Get thee in vnto thy fathers cocubines
whiche he hath left to kepe the house, and all Israel shal heare, that thou art
abhorred of thy father: then shall the hades of al that are with thee, be
strong.
22 And so they spread Absalom a tent vpon the toppe of the house, and Absalom
went in vnto his fathers concubines in the sight of all Israel.
23 And the counsel of Ahithophel whiche he counseled in those dayes, was as a
man had asked counsel at the oracle of God: euen so was all the counsel of
Ahithophel, both with Dauid and with Absalom.

Chapter 17

1 Ahithophel also said vnto Absalom: Let me choose out now twelue thousand men,
and I wil vp and folowe after Dauid this night:
2 And I wil come vpo him whyle he is weery and weake handed, and will feare him:
And all the people that are with him, shall flee, and so will I smite the king
only,
3 And wil bring againe all the people vnto thee: and when al shall returne, the
man whom thou sekest beyng slayne all the people shalbe in peace.
4 And the saying pleased Absalom wel and al the elders of Israel.
5 Then sayde Absalom: Cal nowe Husai the Arachite also, and let vs heare
lykewyse what he sayth.
6 When Husai was come to Absalom, Absalom spake vnto him, saying: Ahithophel
hath geuen such counsel: Shal we do after his saying, or no? tell thou.
7 Husai aunswered vnto Absalom: The counsel that Ahithophel hath geuen, is not
good at this time.
8 For sayde Husai, thou knowest thy father & his men howe that they be strong
men, and they be chased in their mindes, and are euen as a Beare robbed of her
whelpes in the fielde: Thy father is a man also practised in warre, and wil not
lodge with the people.
9 Behold he is hyd nowe in some caue, or in some other place: And though some of
his men be ouerthrowen at the first brunt, yet they that heare it, will say: The
people that foloweth Absalom, be put to the worse.
10 And he also that is valiaunt, whose heart is as ye heart of a Lio, shal
shrink and faynt: For all Israel knoweth, that thy father is a mightie man, and
they which be with him are stout men.
11 Therfore my counsell is, that al Israel be gathered vnto thee fro Dan to
Beerseba, as the sande of the sea in numbre, and that thou go to battayle in
thyne owne person.
12 For so shall we come vpon him in one place or other where we shal finde him,
and we wil fal vpon him, euen as thicke as the deawe falleth on ye ground: And
of al the men that are with him, we shal not leaue him one.
13 Moreouer, if he be gotten into a towne, then shall al the men of Israel bring
ropes to that citie, and we will drawe it into the riuer, vntil ther be not one
small stone founde there.
14 And Absalom and all the men of Israel sayde: The counsel of Husai the
Arachite, is better then the counsell of Ahithophel. For it was euen the Lordes
determination to destroy the good counsell of Ahithophel, that the Lorde might
bring euyll vpon Absalom.
15 Then sayde Husai vnto Sadoc & Abiathar the priestes: Of this & that maner did
Ahithophel and the elders of Israel counsel Absalom, and thus & thus haue I
counsayled.
16 Nowe therfore send quickly, & shewe Dauid, saying: Tarie not this night in ye
fieldes of the wildernesse, but get thee ouer, lest the king be deuoured, & all
the people that are with him.
17 Now Ionathan and Ahimaaz abode by the well Rogel: (for they might not be
seene to come into the citie) and a wench went and told them: And they went, and
shewed king Dauid.
18 Neuerthelesse, a lad sawe them, and tolde it to Absalom: But they went both
of them away quickly, & came to a mans house in Bahurim, which had a well in his
yarde, into the whiche they went downe.
19 And the wyfe toke and spread a couerlet ouer the welles mouth, & spread
ground corne theron: and the thing was not spied.
20 And when Absaloms seruauntes came to the wyfe to the house, they sayde: Where
is Ahimaaz & Ionathan? The woman aunswered the: They be gone ouer the brooke of
water. And whe they had sought them, and coulde not finde them, they returned to
Hierusalem.
21 And assoone as they were departed, the other came out of the wel, and went
and tolde king Dauid, and sayde vnto him: Up, and get you quickly ouer the
water, for suche counsel hath Ahithophel geuen against you.
22 Then Dauid arose, and all the people that were with him, & they were come
ouer Iordane by that it was day: so that there lacked not one of them: that was
not come ouer Iordane.
23 And when Ahithophel sawe that his counsel was not folowed, he sadled his
Asse, and arose and gate him home to his owne house, and to his owne citie, &
put his housholde in order, and hanged him selfe, and died, and was buried in
the sepulchre of his father.
24 Then Dauid came to Mahanaim, And Absalom passed ouer Iordane, he and all the
men of Israel with him.
25 And Absalom made Amasa captaine of the hoast in stede of Ioab: which Amasa,
was a mans sonne named Iethra an Israelite, that went into Abigail the daughter
of Nahas, sister to Zaruia Ioabs mother.
26 So Israel and Absalom pitched in the land of Gilead.
27 And when Dauid was come to Mahanaim, Sobi the sonne of Nahas, out of Rabba of
the children of Ammon, & Machir the sonne of Ammiel out of Lodeber, and
Barzellai the Gileadite out of Rogelim,
28 Brought beddes, basens, earthen vessels, wheat and barly, floure & parched
corne, beanes, lentiles, & parched pulse,
29 Hony, butter, sheepe, & cheese of kyne, for Dauid and for the people that
were with him, to eate: For they sayde, The people is hungry, weery, and
thirstie, in the wildernesse.

Chapter 18

1 And Dauid numbred the people that were with him, and set captaynes of
thousandes and of hundredes ouer them.
2 And Dauid set foorth the third part of the people vnder the hande of Ioab, and
the third part vnder the hand of Abisai the sonne of Zaruia Ioabs brother, and
the other third part vnder the hand of Ithai the Gethite: And the king said vnto
the people, I will go with you my selfe also.
3 And the people aunswered, Thou shalt not go foorth: for if we flee away, they
wil not care for vs, neither shal they regard vs, though halfe of vs were
slaine: but thou art nowe worth ten thousande of vs, Wherfore it is better that
thou succour vs out of the citie.
4 And the king sayde vnto them: What seemeth you best, that wil I do. And the
king stoode by the gate syde, and all the people came out by hundredes, and by
thousandes.
5 And the king commaunded Ioab, and Abisai, and Ithai, saying: Intreate the
young man Absalom gently for my sake. And all the people hearde that the king
gaue all the captaynes charge concerning Absalom.
6 And so the people wet out into the fielde against Israel (and the battel was
in the wood of Ephraim)
7 Where the people of Israel were slaine before the seruauntes of Dauid: & there
was a great slaughter that day, euen of twentie thousande men.
8 For the battell was scattered ouer al the countrey: And the wood deuoured mo
people that day, then dyd the sword.
9 And Absalom mette the seruauntes of Dauid ryding vpon a mule, whiche caried
him vnder the thycke bowes of a great oke, and his head was caught of the oke,
and he was lift vp betweene the heauen and the earth: and the mule that was
vnder him, went away.
10 And one that sawe it, tolde Ioab, saying: Beholde, I sawe Absalom hange in an
oke.
11 And Ioab sayd vnto the man that told him: If thou diddest see him, why
diddest not thou there smite him to the ground, and I would haue geuen thee ten
sicles of siluer, and a gyrdle?
12 The man sayd vnto Ioab: Though I should receaue a thousande sicles of siluer
in myne hande, yet woulde I not stretche out myne hand against ye kinges sonne:
For we heard with our eares when the king charged thee, & Abisai, and Ithai,
saying: Beware that none touche the young man Absalom.
13 Moreouer, if I had done it, I shoulde haue done against mine owne lyfe: for
there is no matter hyd from the king, yea & thou thy selfe wouldest haue ben
against me.
14 Then sayde Ioab, I may not stand thus tarying with thee: And he toke three
dartes in his hande, & thrust them through Absalom whyle he was yet alyue in the
middes of the oke.
15 And ten seruauntes that bare Ioabs weapons, turned and smote Absalom, and
slue him.
16 And Ioab blew the trumpet, and the people returned from folowing Israel: for
Ioab held backe the people.
17 And they toke Absalom, and cast him into a great pyt in the wood, and layed a
mightie great heape of stones vpon him: And all Israel fled euery one to their
tentes.
18 And this Absalom yet in his lyfe time toke and reared vp a piller, whiche is
in the kinges dale: For he sayd, I haue no sonne to kepe my name in
remembraunce, and he called the piller after his owne name, and it is called
vnto this day Absaloms place.
19 Then sayd Ahimaaz the sonne of Sadoc: Let me runne nowe and beare the king
tydinges, how that the Lord hath iudged him quyte of the hande of his enemies.
20 And Ioab sayd vnto him: Thou art no man to beare tidinges to day, thou shalt
beare tydinges another time: but to day thou shalt beare none, because the
kinges sonne is dead.
21 Then sayd Ioab to Chusi: Go and tell the kyng what thou hast seene. And Chusi
bowed him selfe vnto Ioab, and ranne.
22 Then sayd Ahimaaz the sonne of Sadoc againe to Ioab: What I pray thee, if I
also runne after Chusi? And Ioab sayde: Wherfore wilt thou runne my sonne, seyng
that thou hast no tydinges to bring?
23 Yet what if I runne? He said vnto him: Runne. Then Ahimaaz ranne by the way
of the playne, & came before Chusi.
24 And Dauid sate betweene the two gates: And the watchman went vp to the roofe
ouer the gate vnto the wal, and lift vp his eyes and sawe, & beholde there came
a man runnyng alone.
25 And the watchman cryed, & tolde the king. And the king sayd: If he be alone,
there is tydinges in his mouth. And he came a pace, and drewe neare.
26 And the watchman sawe another man running, and the watchman called vnto the
porter, and sayd: Behold, there commeth another man running alone. And the king
sayd: He is also a tydinges bringer.
27 And the watchman sayde: Me thinketh the running of the formost, is lyke the
running of Ahimaaz the sonne of Sadoc. The king sayde: He is a good man, and
commeth with good tidinges.
28 And Ahimaaz called & said vnto ye king, peace be with thee: And he fell downe
to the earth vpo his face before the king, and sayd: Blessed be the Lord thy
God, which hath shut vp the me that lift vp their handes against my lorde the
king.
29 And the king sayd: Is the young man Absalom safe? Ahimaaz aunswered: When
Ioab sent the kinges seruaunt, and me thy seruaunt, I sawe a great tumult, but I
wote not what it was.
30 And the king sayde vnto him: Turne aside, and stand here. And he turned
aside, and stoode styll.
31 And behold, Chusi came also, and sayd: Tydinges my lorde the king, for the
Lord hath deliuered thee this day out of the hande of al them that rose against
thee.
32 And the king sayde vnto Chusi: Is the young man Absalom safe? Chusi
aunswered: The enemies of my lorde the king, and all that ryse against thee to
do thee hurt, be as that young man is.
33 And the king was moued, and went vp to the chamber ouer the gate, and wept:
and as he went, thus he sayde, O my sonne Absalom, my sonne, my sonne Absalom:
woulde God I had died for thee, O Absalom my sonne, my sonne.

Chapter 19

1 And it was told Ioab, beholde the king weepeth, & mourneth for Absalom.
2 And the victorie of that day was turned into mourning vnto al the people: for
the people heard say that day howe ye king sorowed for his sonne.
3 And the people went that day into the citie by stealth, as people confounded
to conuey themselues when they flee in battell.
4 But the king hyd his face, and cryed with a loude voyce: O my sonne Absalom, O
Absalom my sonne, my sonne.
5 And Ioab came into the house to the king, and sayd: Thou hast shamed this day
the faces of all thy seruautes, which this day haue saued thy life, & the liues
of thy sonnes, and of thy daughters, & the liues of thy wyues, and of thy
concubines,
6 In that thou louest thyne enemies, and hatest thy frendes: For thou hast
declared this day, that thou regardest neither thy princes nor seruauntes: And
this day I do perceaue, that if Absalom had lyued, and all we had died this day,
that had pleased thee well.
7 Nowe therfore vp, and come out, and speake cofortably vnto thy seruauntes: For
I sweare by the Lorde, except thou come out, there will not tary one man with
thee this night, and that wilbe worse vnto thee, then all the euyll that fell on
thee from thy youth vnto this houre.
8 Then the king arose, and sate in the gate: And they tolde vnto all the people,
saying, beholde the king doth sit in the gate, and all the people came before
the king: For Israel had fled, euery man to his tent.
9 And al ye people were at strife throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying:
The king saued vs out of the hand of our enemies, & he deliuered vs out of the
hande of the Philistines, and nowe he is fled out of the lande for Absalom:
10 But Absalom whom we annoynted ouer vs, is dead in battell: Therefore, why are
ye so still, that ye bring not the king agayne?
11 And king Dauid sent to Sadoc & Abiathar the priestes, saying: Speake vnto the
elders of Iuda, and say: Why are ye behinde to bring the king againe to his
house (seyng that such tydinges is come from all Israel vnto the king, euen to
his house?)
12 Ye are my brethren, my bones, and my fleshe: Wherfore then are ye the last
that bryng the king againe?
13 And say ye to Amasa: Art thou not of my bone and of my fleshe? God do so to
me and more also, if thou be not captayne of the hoast to me for euer in the
roome of Ioab.
14 And he bowed the heartes of all the men of Iuda, euen as the heart of one
man, so that they sent this word to the king: Returne thou with all thy
seruauntes.
15 So the king returned, and came to Iordane: And Iuda came to Gilgal for to go
to meete the king, and to conuey him ouer Iordane.
16 And Simei the sonne of Gera the sonne of Iemini, whiche was of Bahurim,
hasted and came downe with the men of Iuda to meete king Dauid.
17 And there were a thousand men of Beniamin with him, and Ziba the seruaunt of
the house of Saul and his fyfteene sonnes and twentie seruauntes with him, and
they went ouer Iordane before the king.
18 And there went ouer a boate to carie ouer the kinges housholde, and to do him
pleasure: And Simei the sonne of Gera fel before the king as he was come ouer
Iordane,
19 And sayde vnto the king: Let not my lorde impute wickednes vnto me, nor
remembre the thinges that thy seruaunt dyd wickedly when my lord the king
departed out of Hierusale, that the king should take it to his heart.
20 For thy seruaunt doth knowe howe that I haue done amisse: And therfore
behold, I am the first this day of all the house of Ioseph, that am come downe
to meete my lorde the king.
21 But Abisai the sonne of Zaruia aunswered, and sayd: Shall not Simei dye for
this, because he cursed the Lordes annoynted?
22 And Dauid sayde: What haue I to do with you ye sonnes of Zaruia? For this day
ye be aduersaries vnto me: Shall there any man dye this day in Israel? Do not I
knowe that I am this day kyng ouer Israel?
23 And therfore the kyng sayde vnto Simei, Thou shalt not dye: and the kyng
sware vnto hym.
24 And Miphiboseth the sonne of Saul came downe to meete the kyng, and had
neither washed his feete, nor dressed his bearde, nor washed his clothes, from
the tyme the kyng departed, vntyll he came againe in peace.
25 And when he was come to Hierusalem and met the king, the king sayde vnto him:
Wherfore wentest not thou with me Miphiboseth?
26 He aunswered: My lorde O king, my seruaunt deceaued me: For thy seruaunt
saide, I would haue myne asse sadled to ryde thereon, for to go to the king:
because thy seruaunt is lame.
27 And he hath accused thy seruaunt vnto my lorde the king, and my lorde the
king is as an angell of God: do therfore what seemeth good in thine eyes.
28 For all my fathers house were but dead men before my lorde the king, and yet
diddest thou put thy seruaunt among the that dyd eate at thyne owne table: What
right therefore haue I yet to crye any more vnto the king?
29 And the king said vnto him: Why speakest thou any more of thy matters? I haue
saide, Thou and Ziba deuide the landes betweene you.
30 And Miphiboseth sayd vnto the king: yea, let him take all forsomuch as my
lord ye king is come againe in peace vnto his owne house.
31 And Barzellai ye Gileadite came downe from Roglim, and went ouer Iordane with
the king, to conduct him ouer Iordane.
32 Barzellai was a very aged man, euen foure score yeres olde, and prouided the
king of sustenaunce while he laye at Mahanaim: for he was a man of very great
substaunce.
33 And the king said vnto Barzellai, come ouer with me, & I will feede thee with
me in Hierusalem.
34 And Barzellai saide vnto the king: How long haue I to liue, that I shuld go
vp with the king vnto Hierusalem?
35 I am this day foure score yeres olde: & can I deserue betweene good or euyll?
Hath thy seruaunt any taste in that he eateth or drinketh? Can he heare any more
the voyce of syngyng men and women? wherfore the should thy seruaunt be yet a
burthen vnto my lord the king?
36 Thy seruaunt will go a litle way ouer Iordane with the king: & why wyl the
king recompence it me with such a rewarde?
37 O let thy seruaunt turne backe agayne, that I may dye in myne owne citie, and
be buryed in the graue of my father & of my mother: Beholde, here is thy
seruaunt Chimham, let him go with my lorde the king, and do to him what shall
please thee.
38 And the king aunswered: Chimham shall go with me, and I will do to him that
thou shalt be content with: And what soeuer thou shalt require of me, that same
will I do for thee.
39 And al the people went ouer Iordane: and whe the king was come ouer Iordane,
he kissed Barzellai, & blessed him, & he went backe againe vnto his owne place.
40 And then the king went to Gilgal, & Chimham went with him: And al the people
of Iuda, conducted the king, and also halfe the people of Israel.
41 And beholde, all the men of Israel came to the king, & saide vnto the king:
Why haue our brethren the men of Iuda stolen thee away, and haue brought the
king and his housholde and all Dauids men with him ouer Iordane?
42 And all the men of Iuda aunswered the men of Israel, Because the king is
neare of kinne to vs: Wherefore be ye angry for this matter? Haue we eaten of
the kinges cost? or haue we taken any brybes?
43 And the men of Israel aunswered the men of Iuda, and saide: We haue ten
partes in the king, and haue thereto more ryght to Dauid then ye: Why then did
ye despise vs, that our aduise should not be first had, in restoring our king?
And the wordes of the men of Iuda were fiercer the the wordes of the men of
Israel.

Chapter 20

1 When there came thither a certaine man of Belial, named Seba, the sonne of
Bichri, a man of Iemini, he blew a trumpet, and said: we haue no part in Dauid,
neither haue we inheritaunce in the sonne of Isai: euery man to his tentes, O
Israel.
2 And so euery man of Israel went fro Dauid, and folowed Seba the sonne of
Bichri: But the men of Iuda claue fast vnto their king from Iordane to
Hierusalem.
3 And Dauid came to his house to Hierusalem, and the king toke the ten women his
concubines, that he had left behind him to kepe ye house, & put them in warde, &
fed them, but lay no more with them: And so they were inclosed vnto the day of
their death, lyuing in wydowhood.
4 Then saide the king to Amasa: Call me the men of Iuda together within three
dayes, and be thou here also.
5 And so Amasa went to gather ye men of Iuda together, but taryed longer the the
time which he had appoynted him.
6 And Dauid saide to Abisai: Now shal Seba the sonne of Bichri do vs more harme
then did Absalom: Take thou therefore thy lordes seruauntes, and folowe after
him, lest he get him walled cities, and escape vs.
7 And there went out after him Ioabs men, and the Cerethites, and the
Phelethites, and all the mightyest men: And they departed out of Hierusalem, to
folow after Seba the sonne of Bichri.
8 And when they were at ye great stone in Gibeon, Amasa went before them: And
Ioabs garment that he had about him, was girde vnto him, & he had gyrded thereon
a sword, which was ioyned fast to his loynes in a sheath, that as he went it
fell sometime out.
9 And Ioab saide to Amasa: Art thou in health my brother? And Ioab toke Amasa by
ye beard with the right hand, to kisse him.
10 But Amasa toke no heede to the sword that was in Ioabs hand: for therewith he
smote him in the fyst rybbe & shed out his bowels to the grounde, and thrust at
him no more, & he dyed: So Ioab and Abisai his brother folowed after Seba the
sonne of Bichri.
11 And one of Ioabs men stoode by him, and saide: He that beareth any fauour to
Ioab, or good will to Dauid, let him go after Ioab.
12 And Amasa wallowed in blood in the middes of the way: And when the man sawe
that all the people stoode still, he remoued Amasa out of the way into the
fielde, and cast a cloth vpon him, because he saw that euery one that came by
him stoode still.
13 And assoone as he was remoued out of the way, al the people went after Ioab,
to folow after Seba the sonne of Bichri.
14 And he went thorow all the tribes of Israel, vnto Abel, and to Bethmaacha,
and all the places of Berim: And they gathered together, and went after him.
15 And they came and besieged him in Abel, neare to Bethmaacha: And they cast vp
a bancke against the citie, and the people therof stoode on the ramper, and all
the people that was with Ioab, thrust at the wall to ouerthrowe it.
16 Then cryed a wyse woman out of the citie, heare, heare, I pray you say vnto
Ioab: Come hither that I may speake with thee.
17 When Ioab was come vnto her, the woman saide: Art thou Ioab? He aunswered: I
am he. She saide vnto him: Heare the wordes of thyne handmayd. And he aunswered:
I do heare.
18 Then she spake thus: They spake in the olde tyme, saying, They should aske of
Abel: And so haue they continued.
19 I am one of them that are peaceable & faithfull in Israel, and thou goest
about to destroy a citie, and a mother in Israel: Why wilt thou deuour the
inheritaunce of the Lorde?
20 And Ioab aunswered, and sayd: God forbyd, God forbid it me that I should
either deuour, or destroy.
21 The matter is not so: But a man of mount Ephraim (Seba the sonne of Bichri by
name) hath lyft vp his hand against the king, euen against Dauid: Delyuer vs him
onely, & I wyll depart from the citie. And the woman said vnto Ioab: Behold, his
head shalbe throwen to thee ouer the wall.
22 And then the woman went vnto all the people with her wisedome, and they smote
of the head of Seba ye sonne of Bichri, and cast it out to Ioab: And he blew a
trumpet, & they retyred from the citie, euery man to his tent: And Ioab returned
to Hierusalem, vnto the king.
23 Ioab was ouer all the hoast of Israel, and Banaia the sonne of Iehoida was
ouer the Cerethites & Phelethites.
24 And Aduram was ouer the tribute, and Iehosaphat the sonne of Ahilud, was
recorder.
25 Seua was scribe, and Sadoc and Abiathar were the priestes.
26 And Ira the Iairite was chiefe about Dauid.

Chapter 21

1 Then there was an hunger in the dayes of Dauid three yeres together: And Dauid
enquired of ye Lorde. And the Lorde aunswered: It is for Saul, and the house of
blood, because he slue the Gibeonites.
2 And the king called the Gibeonites, and saide vnto them: (Now the Gibeonites
were not of the children of Israel, but a remnaunt of the Amorites, and the
children of Israel sware vnto them: And Saul sought to slay them, for a zeale
that he had to the children of Israel and of Iuda.)
3 Wherefore Dauid saide vnto the Gibeonites: What shall I do for you, &
wherewith shall I make the attonement, that ye may blesse ye inheritaunce of the
Lorde?
4 The Gibeonites aunswered him: We will haue no siluer nor golde of Saul nor of
his house, neither is it our mind that thou shouldest kil any man in Israel. He
saide: What you shall say, that will I do for you.
5 They aunswered the king: The man that consumed vs, and imagined to bring vs to
naught, that we are destroyed from remaining in any of the coastes of Israel:
6 Let seuen men of his sonnes be deliuered vnto vs, & we will hang them vp vnto
the Lorde in Gibeah of Saul whom ye Lord did choose. And the king saide: I will
geue them you.
7 But the king had compassion on Miphiboseth the sonne of Ionathan the sonne of
Saul, because of the Lordes oth that was betweene them, euen betweene Dauid &
Ionathan the sonne of Saul.
8 But the king toke the two sonnes of Rispha the daughter of Aia whom she bare
vnto Saul, euen Armoni and Miphiboseth, and the fiue sonnes of Michol the
daughter of Saul, whom she bare to Adriel the sonne of Barzellai the
Meholathite.
9 And he deliuered them vnto ye handes of the Gibeonites, which hanged them in
the hill before the Lorde: And they fell all seuen together, and were slaine in
the dayes of haruest, euen in the first dayes, and in the beginning of barlye
haruest.
10 And Rispha the daughter of Aia, toke sackcloth, & hanged it vp for her vpon
the rocke euen from the beginning of haruest, vntill water dropped vpon them out
of heauen, & suffered neither the byrdes of the ayre to lyght on them by day,
nor beastes of ye fielde by night.
11 And it was tolde Dauid what Rispha the daughter of Aia the concubine of Saul,
had done.
12 And Dauid went and toke the bones of Saul and of Ionathan his sonne, from the
citezins of Iabes in Gilead, which had stolen them from the streate of Bethsan
where the Philistines had hanged them, whe the Philistines had slaine Saul in
Gilboa:
13 And he brought thence the bones of Saul, and the bones of Ionathan his sonne,
and they gathered the bones of them that were hanged.
14 And the bones of Saul & Ionathan his sonne buryed they in the countrey of
Beniamin, in Zela, in the sepulchre of Cis his father: And when they had
perfourmed al that the king commaunded, God was then at one with the land.
15 Moreouer, yt Philistines had yet warre againe with Israel, and Dauid went
downe and his seruauntes with him, & fought against the Philistines: And Dauid
waxed faintie.
16 And Iesbi benob one of the sonnes of the giauntes (the iron of whose speare
wayed three hundred sicles of brasse) and he being gyrded with a new sword,
thought to haue slaine Dauid.
17 But Abisai the sonne of Zaruia succoured him, & smote the Philistine, and
killed him. Then the seruauntes of Dauid sware vnto him, saying: Thou shalt go
no more out with vs to battaile, that thou quenche not the light of Israel.
18 And yet after this, there was a battaile with the Philistines at Gob, and
then Sibbechai the Husathite slue Saph which was one of ye sonnes of the
giauntes.
19 And there was another battaile in Gob with the Philistines, where Elhanan the
sonne of Iaere Oregim a Beth lehennite slue Goliath ye Gethite: the staffe of
whose speare was as great as a weauers clothbeame.
20 And there was yet another battaile in Geth, wher was a man of a great
stature, and had on euery hand sixe fingers, & on euery foote sixe toes, foure &
twentie in number, and was borne also of the kindred of the giauntes in Geth.
21 And when he defyed Israel, Ionathan the sonne of Simea the brother of Dauid
slue him.
22 These foure were borne to the giaunt in Geth, and dyed by the hand of Dauid,
& by the handes of his seruauntes.

Chapter 22

1 And Dauid spake the wordes of this song vnto the Lorde, what time the Lorde
had delyuered him out of the hand of al his enemies, and out of the hand of
Saul.
2 And he saide: The Lorde is my rocke, and my castell, and my delyuerer.
3 God is my strength, in him will I trust: he is my shielde, and the horne of my
saluation, my hie towre, and my refuge, my sauiour, thou hast saued me from
wrong.
4 I will call on the Lorde which is prayse worthy: and so shall I be saued from
myne enemies.
5 For the panges of death closed me about: the fludes of Belial put me in feare.
6 The sorowes of hell compassed me about, the snares of death ouertoke me.
7 In my tribulation did I call vppon the Lorde, and crye to my God: and he dyd
heare my voyce out of his temple, and my crye did enter into his eares.
8 The earth trembled and quaked: the foundations of heauen moued & shooke when
he was angry.
9 Smoke went out at his nosthryls, & consuming fyre out of his mouth: coles were
kindled thereat.
10 And he bowed heauen & came downe: and there was darkenesse vnder his feete.
11 And he rode vpon Cherub and did flee: he was seene vppon the winges of the
winde.
12 He made darknes a tabernacle rounde about him: with waters gathered together
in thicke cloudes.
13 Through the brightnes of his presence were the coles of fyre kindled.
14 The Lorde thundred from heauen: & he that is most hie, put out his voyce.
15 He shot arrowes, and scattered them: to wit lyghtning, & ouerthrew them.
16 The chanels of the sea appeared: and the foundatios of the world were seene,
by the reason of ye rebuking of the Lord, and through the blasting of the breath
of his nosthryls.
17 He sent from aboue and toke me: he drew me out of many waters.
18 He deliuered me from my mightie enemie, and from them that hated me: for they
were to strong for me.
19 When they had preuented me in the daye of my calamitie: the Lorde stayed me
vp.
20 For he brought me out into roomth: he deliuered me, because he had a fauour
vnto me.
21 The Lorde rewarded me according to my righteousnesse: accordyng to the
purenes of my hands he recompensed me.
22 For I haue kept the wayes of ye Lord: and did not wickedly agaynst my God.
23 For all his lawes were in my sight: & his statutes, I did not depart
therefro.
24 In his sight also haue I ben vpright: and haue kept me from myne owne
iniquitie.
25 And the Lorde did to me againe according to my righteousnesse: euen after my
purenes in his eye sight.
26 With the godly thou shalt be godlie: and with the man that is vpright, thou
shalt be vpright.
27 With the pure thou shalt be pure: and with the froward thou wilt shewe thy
selfe froward.
28 And the poore people thou wilt saue: but thyne eyes are vpon the proude, to
bring them downe.
29 For thou art my lyght, O Lorde: and the Lorde shall light my darkenesse.
30 For by thee I shall breake through an hoast of men: and by my God wyll I
spring ouer a wall.
31 God is vncorrupt in his way, the word of the Lord is tryed in the fyre: he is
a shielde to all them that trust in him.
32 For who is a God saue the Lord? and who is mightie saue our God?
33 God strengthneth me in battaile: & ryddeth the way cleare before me.
34 He maketh my feete lyke hyndes feete: and setteth me vpon my hie places.
35 He teacheth my handes to fight: that euen a bowe of steele is broken with
myne armes.
36 Thou hast geuen me the shielde of thy saluation: and with thy louing
mekenesse thou doest multiplie me.
37 Thou hast enlarged my steps vnder me: and my legges shall not faile me.
38 I haue folowed vpon myne enemies, and destroyed them: and turned not againe,
vntill I had consumed them.
39 I haue wasted them, and wounded them, that they shal not be able to aryse:
yea, they shall fall vnder my feete.
40 Thou hast gyrded me about with might to battayle: and them that rose against
me, hast thou subdued vnder me.
41 And thou hast geuen me the neckes of myne enemies: that I might destroye them
that hate me.
42 They loked about, but there was none to saue them: euen vnto the Lorde, but
he heard them not.
43 Then did I beate them as small as the dust of the earth: I did stampe them as
the clay of the streate, and did spreade them abrode.
44 Thou also hast deliuered me from the discention of my people, thou hast kept
me to be an head ouer nations: the people which I knew not, do serue me.
45 Straunge childre dissemble with me: at the hearing of the eare, they obey me.
46 Straunge children wil shrinke away: and they shall be smytten with feare in
their priuie chamber.
47 Let the Lord lyue, and blessed be my strength: magnified be God euen the
force of my saluation.
48 It is God that geueth me power to reuenge me: & bringeth downe the people
vnder me.
49 He deliuereth me from myne enemies, thou also hast lyft me on hie from them
that rose against me: thou hast delyuered me from the wicked man.
50 And therefore I wyll prayse thee O Lorde among the nations: and wyll sing
vnto thy name.
51 He is the towre of saluation for his king, and dealeth mercyfully with his
annoynted: euen with Dauid, and with his seede for euermore.

Chapter 23

1 These also be the last wordes of Dauid: Dauid the sonne of Isai said: and ye
man which was ordayned the annoynted of the God of Iacob and the sweete Psalmist
of Israel, sayde:
2 The spirite of the Lorde spake by me, and his word was in my tongue.
3 The God of Israel spake to me, euen the most mightie of Israel sayde: A ruler
ouer men being iust, ruling in ye feare of God:
4 And as the morning lyght when the sunne is vp, a morning in which are no
cloudes, so shal my house be, but not as the grasse of the earth is by
bryghtnesse and rayne.
5 For so shal not my house be with God: For he hath made with me an euerlasting
couenaunt, perfect and sure in all poyntes: and this is truly all my health, and
all my desyre, that it growe, but not as grasse.
6 But the vngodly man, shall be as a thorne cleane pluckt vp, which can not be
taken with handes:
7 But the man that shall touche them, must be defenced with iron, or with the
shaft of a speare, and they shalbe burnt with fire in the same place.
8 These be the names of the mightie men whom Dauid had: One that sate in the
seate of wisedome, being chiefest among the princes, was Adino of Ezni, he slue
eyght hundred at one tyme.
9 After him was Eliazar the sonne of Dodo the sonne of Ahohi, one of the three
worthies with Dauid, which defyed the Philistines that were there gathered
together to battaile, when the men of Israel were gone vp.
10 He arose and layed on the Philistines, vntill his hand was weery, and claue
vnto the sword: And the Lorde gaue great victory the same day, and the people
returned after him, only to spoyle.
11 After him was Samma the sonne of Age the Hararite: & the Philistines gathered
together besyde a towne, where was a parcell of land full of lentils, and the
people fled from the Philistines:
12 But he stoode in ye middest of the groud, and defended it, & slue the
Philistines: and the Lorde gaue great victorie.
13 These three (which were of the thirtie chiefe captaines) went downe to Dauid
in the haruest tyme vnto the caue Adullam: and the hoast of the Philistines
pytched in the valley of giauntes.
14 And Dauid was then in an houlde, and the souldiers of ye Philistines were in
Bethlehem.
15 And Dauid longed, & saide: Oh that I had of the water that is in the wel by
the gate of Bethlehem for to drynke.
16 And the three mightie brake through the hoast of the Philistines, & drue
water out of the well of Bethlehem that was by the gate, and toke and brought it
to Dauid: Neuerthelesse he would not drinke thereof, but powred it vnto the
Lorde,
17 And saide, The Lorde forbyd that I should do so: Is not this the blood of the
men that went in ieoperdie of theyr lyues? & therefore he would not drinke it.
And these thinges did these three mightie men.
18 Abisai the brother of Ioab the sonne of Zaruia, was chiefe among the three, &
he lyft vp his speare against three hundred, and slue them, & had the name among
the three:
19 For he was most excellent of the three, and was their captayne: Howbeit he
attayned not vnto the first three.
20 And Banaiah the sonne of Iehoida the sonne of a mightie man, valiaunt in
actes, of Rabzeel, slue two strog men of Moab: He went downe also, and slue a
lion in the middest of a pit in time of snowe.
21 And he slue an Egyptian a goodly bigge man, and the Egyptian had a speare in
his hand: But he went downe to him with a staffe, and plucked the speare out of
the Egyptians hand, and slue him with his owne speare.
22 These thinges did Banaiah ye sonne of Iehoida, and had the name among the
three worthies.
23 He was honorable among thirtie, but he attayned not to the first three: And
Dauid made him of his counsel.
24 Asahel the brother of Ioab, was one of the thirtie: Elhanan the sonne of
Dodo, of Bethlehem:
25 Samma the Harodite, Elica the Harodite,
26 Helez the Paltite, Ira the sonne of Acces the Thecoite:
27 Abiezer of Anathoth, Mebunnai ye Husathite:
28 Zelmon an Ahohite, Maharai the Netophathite:
29 Heleb the sonne of Baanah an Netophatite, Ithai the sonne of Ribai out of
Gibea of the children of Beniamin:
30 Banaiah the Pirathonite, Heddai of the ryuer of Gaas:
31 Abialbon the Arbathite, Asmaueth the Barhumite:
32 Eliahba a Saalbonite: of the sonnes of Iasen, Ionathan:
33 Samma the Hararite, Ahiam ye sonne of Sarar an Hararite:
34 Eliphelet ye sonne of Aasbai the sonne of Maachathi, Eliam the sonne of
Ahithophel the Gilonite:
35 Hezrai the Carmelite, Paarai the Arbite.
36 Igal the sonne of Nathan of Zoba, Bani the Gadite:
37 Zelec the Ammonite, Naharai the Berothite, which was the harnesse bearer of
Ioab the sonne of Zaruia:
38 Ira the Iethrite, Gareb ye Iethrite:
39 Aria the Hethite: thirtie and seuen in all.

Chapter 24

1 And agayne the Lorde was wroth against Israel, and he moued Dauid agaynst
them, in that he sayde: Go number Israel & Iuda.
2 For the king sayde to Ioab the captaine of the hoast which was with him: Go
thou abrode now throughout al the tribes of Israel, euen from Dan to Beerseba,
and number ye the people, that I may knowe the number of them.
3 And Ioab saide vnto the king: The Lorde thy God encrease the people an
hundreth folde mo then they be, & that the eyes of my lorde the king may see it:
And what is the cause that my lorde the king hath a lust to this thyng?
4 Notwithstanding, the kinges word preuayled agaynst Ioab & against the
captaines of the hoast: And Ioab & the captaynes of the hoast, went out from the
presence of the king, to number the people of Israel.
5 And they passed ouer Iordane, & pitched in Aroer on the right syde of the
citie that lyeth in the myddest of the valey of Gad, and toward Iazer.
6 And then they came to Gilead, and to the land Tahtim hodshi, & from thece they
came to Dan Iaan, and about to Sidon.
7 And came to the strong hould of Tyre, and to all the cities of the Heuites and
of the Chanaanites: & then went out to the south of Iuda, euen to Beerseba.
8 And so when they had ben abrode throughout all the land, they returned to
Hierusalem, after the end of nine monethes and twentie dayes.
9 And Ioab deliuered the number and summe of the people vnto the king, and there
were in Israel eyght hundred thousand men of might that drewe swordes: and the
men of Iuda were fiue hundred thousand men.
10 And Dauids heart smote him, after that he had numbred the people: And Dauid
saide vnto the Lord, I haue sinned exceedingly in that I haue done: And nowe I
beseche thee Lord take away the trespasse of thy seruaunt, for I haue done very
foolishly.
11 And when Dauid was vp in the morning, the word of the Lorde came vnto the
prophet Gad Dauids sear, saying:
12 Go and say vnto Dauid, thus sayth the Lorde: I offer thee three thynges,
choose thee which of them I shall do vnto thee.
13 So Gad came to Dauid, and shewed him, and said vnto him: Wylt thou haue seuen
yeres hunger to come vpon thy land: or wilt thou flee three monethes before
thyne enemies, they folowyng thee: or that there be three dayes pestilence in
thy land? Now therefore aduise thee, and see what aunswere I shall geue to him
that sent me.
14 And Dauid saide vnto Gad, I am in a wonderfull strayte: Let vs fall now into
the hand of the Lorde (for much is his mercy) and let me not fall into the hand
of man.
15 And so the Lorde sent a pestilence in Israel, from the morning vnto the time
appoynted: And there dyed of the people from Dan to Beerseba seuentie thousand
men.
16 And when the angel stretched out his hand vpon Hierusalem to destroy it, the
Lorde repented him of the euill, & saide to the angel that destroyed the people:
It is now sufficient, holde thyne hand. And the angell of the Lord was by the
threshing place of Areuna the Iebusite.
17 And Dauid spake vnto the Lorde, when he saw the angell that smote the people,
and saide: Lo, it is I that haue sinned, and that haue done wickedlie: But these
sheepe, what haue they done? Let thyne hand I pray thee be against me, and
against my fathers house.
18 And Gad came the same day to Dauid, and said vnto him: Go vp and reare an
aulter vnto the Lorde in the threshing floore of Areuna the Iebusite.
19 And Dauid according to the saying of Gad, went vp as the Lorde commaunded.
20 And Areuna loked, and sawe the king and his seruauntes comming toward him:
and Areuna went out, and bowed him selfe before the king on his face vpon the
ground.
21 And Areuna sayde: Wherefore is my lord the king come to his seruaunt? Dauid
aunswered: To bye the threshing floore of thee, and to make an aulter vnto the
Lord, that the plague may ceasse from the people.
22 And Areuna saide vnto Dauid: Let my lorde the king take and offer what
seemeth him good in his eyes: Beholde, here be oxen for burnt sacrifice, and
charets, and the other instrumentes of the oxen for wood.
23 All these thinges did Areuna as a king geue vnto the king, & said moreouer
vnto the king: The Lorde thy God accept thee.
24 And the king saide vnto Areuna: Not so, but I will bye it of thee at a price,
and wil not offer sacrifice vnto the Lord my God of the which doth cost me
nothing. And so Dauid bought the thresshing floore and the oxen for fiftie
sicles of siluer.
25 And Dauid buylt there an aulter vnto the Lorde, and offered burnt sacrifices,
and peace offeringes: And so the Lorde was intreated for the land, and the
plague ceassed from Israel.


1 Kings

Chapter 1

1 And king Dauid was olde and stricken in yeres, so that whe they couered him
with clothes, he caught no heate.
2 Wherefore his seruauntes sayde vnto him: Let there be sought for my lord the
king a young virgyn, to stande before the king and to cherishe him, and let her
lye in thy bosome, that my lorde the king may get heate.
3 And so they sought for a faire damosell throughout al the coastes of Israel,
and founde one Abisag a Sunamite, and brought her to the king.
4 And the damosell was exceeding faire, and cherished the king, and ministred to
him: But the king knewe her not.
5 And Adonia the sonne of Haggith exalted him selfe, saying: I wilbe king. And
he gat him charettes and horsemen, and fyftie men to runne before him.
6 And his father for his time would not displease him, to say why hast thou done
so? And he was a very goodly man: and his mother bare him next after Absalom.
7 And he toke counsell at Ioab the sonne of Zaruia, and at Abiathar the priest:
and they helped forward Adonia:
8 But Sadoc the priest, Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada, Nathan the prophete,
Semei, and Rei, and the men of might which were with Dauid, they were not with
Adonia.
9 And Adonia sacrificed sheepe, and oxen, and fat cattel, by the stone of
Zoheleth, whiche is by the well of Rogel, and called all his brethren the kinges
sonnes, and all the men of Iuda the kinges seruauntes:
10 But Nathan the prophete, and Banaiah, and the mightie men, and Solomon his
brother he called not.
11 Wherfore Nathan spake vnto Bethsabe the mother of Solomon, saying: Hast thou
not hearde that Adonia the sonne of Haggith doth raigne, and Dauid our lorde
knoweth it not?
12 Nowe therfore come, and I will geue thee counsell howe to saue thyne owne
lyfe, and the lyfe of thy sonne Solomon.
13 Go and get thee in vnto king Dauid, & say vnto him: Diddest not thou my lorde
O king, sweare vnto thy handmayde, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy sonne shall
raigne after me, and he shall sit vpon my seate? why is then Adonia king?
14 Beholde, whyle thou yet talkest there with the king, I wil come in after
thee, and confirme thy wordes.
15 And Bethsabe went in vnto the king into the chamber: And the king was very
olde, and Abisag the Sunamite ministred vnto the king.
16 And Bethsabe stouped & made obeysaunce vnto the king: And the king sayd, What
is thy matter?
17 She aunswered: My lorde, thou swarest by the Lorde thy God vnto thine
handmayde saying Assuredly Solomon thy sonne shall raigne after me, and he shall
sit vpon my seate.
18 And beholde, nowe is Adonia king, and thou my lorde the king knowest it not.
19 And he hath offered oxen, fat cattel, and many sheepe, and hath called all
the sonnes of the king, and Abiathar the priest, and Ioab the captayne of the
hoast: But Solomon thy seruaunt hath he not bydden.
20 And nowe my lorde O king, the eyes of all Israel wayte on thee, that thou
shouldest tell them who ought to sit on the seate of my lord the king after him:
21 For els when my lorde the king shall sleepe with his fathers, I & my sonne
Solomon shalbe synners.
22 And lo whyle she yet talked with the king, Nathan the prophet came also.
23 And they told the king, saying: Behold, here commeth Nathan the prophet. And
when he was come in to the king, he made obeysaunce before the king vpo his face
on the grounde.
24 And Nathan sayde: My lord (O king) hast thou sayde, Adonia shall raigne after
me, and he shall sit vpon my seate?
25 For he is gone downe this day, & hath slayne oxen, & fat cattell, and sheepe
a great meany, & hath called al the kinges sonnes, and the captaynes of the
hoast, and Abiathar the priest: And beholde, they eate & drinke before him, and
say: God saue king Adonia.
26 But me thy seruaunt, and Sadoc the priest, and Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada,
& thy seruaunt Solomon, hath he not called.
27 Is this thing done of my lord the king, and thou hast not shewed it vnto thy
seruaunt who should sit on the seate of my lorde the king after him?
28 Then king Dauid aunswered, & sayd: Cal me Bethsabe. And she came into the
kinges presence, and stoode before him.
29 And the king sware, saying: As the Lord lyueth that hath ryd my soule out of
all aduersite,
30 Euen as I sware vnto thee by the Lord God of Israel, saying, Assuredly
Solomon thy sonne shal raigne after me, & he shal sit vpon my seate for me: so
will I certeinly do this day.
31 Then Bethsabe bowed on her face to the earth, and dyd reuerence vnto the
king, & sayde: I pray God that my lorde king Dauid may lyue for euer.
32 And king Dauid sayde: Call me Sadoc the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and
Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada. And they came before the king.
33 The king also sayde vnto them: Take with you the seruauntes of your lord, &
set Solomo my sonne vpon myne owne mule, and cary him downe to Gihon:
34 And let Sadoc the priest and Nathan the prophet annoynt him there king ouer
Israel: And blowe ye with trumpettes, & say, God saue king Solomon.
35 And then ye shall come vp after him, that he may come and sit vpo my seate,
for he shalbe king in my steade: and I haue commaunded him to be captayne ouer
Israel and Iuda.
36 And Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada aunswered the king, and sayde, Amen: And
the Lord God of my lorde the king say so to.
37 And as the Lorde hath ben with my lord the king, eue so be he with Solomo
also, and make his seate greater then the seate of my lord king Dauids hath ben.
38 And so Sadoc the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Banaiah the sonne of
Iehoiada, and the Cerethites, and Phelethites went downe, and set Solomon vpon
king Dauids mule, and brought him to Gihon.
39 And Sadoc the priest toke an horne of oyle out of the tabernacle, & annoynted
Solomon: And they blew the trumpettes, and al the people sayde: God saue king
Solomon.
40 And all the people came vp after him, pyping with pypes and reioysing
greatly, so that the earth rang with the sounde of them.
41 And Adonia and al the ghestes that he had called vnto him, hearde it euen as
they had made an ende of eating. And when Ioab hearde the sounde of the trumpet,
he sayde: What meaneth this noyse and vprore in the citie?
42 And as he yet spake, beholde Ionathan the sonne of Abiathar the priest came,
and Adonia said vnto him: Come in, for thou art a valiant man, and bringest good
tydinges.
43 And Ionathan aunswered and sayde to Adonia: Ueryly our lorde king Dauid hath
made Solomon king.
44 And the king hath sent with him Sadoc the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and
Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada, & the Cerethites, and the Phelethites, & they
haue set him vpo the kinges mule.
45 And Sadoc the priest & Nathan the prophete, haue annoynted him king in Gihon.
And they came vp from thence, & reioyced, that the citie did sounde againe: And
that is the noyse, that ye haue hearde.
46 And Solomon sitteth on the seate of the kingdome.
47 And moreouer, the kinges seruauntes came to blesse our lorde king Dauid,
saying: God make the name of Solomo more honorable then thy name, & make his
seate greater then thy seate. And the king bowed him selfe vpon the bed.
48 And thus sayd the king: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which hath made
one to sit on my seate this day, myne eye seyng it.
49 And al the ghestes that were with Adonia were afrayde, and rose vp, & went
euery man his way.
50 And Adonia fearing the presence of Solomon, arose, and went and caught hold
on the hornes of the aulter.
51 And one tolde Solomon, saying: Behold, Adonia feareth king Solomon: for lo he
hath caught hold on the hornes of the aulter, saying: Let king Solomon sweare
vnto me this day that he wil not slay his seruaunt with the sword.
52 And Solomo said: If he wil shew him selfe a worthy ma, ther shal not an heer
of hym fal to the earth: But & if wickednesse be founde in him, he shall dye.
53 And so king Solomon sent, and they brought him from the aulter, and he came
and did obeysaunce vnto king Solomon: And Solomon sayde vnto him, Get thee to
thyne house.

Chapter 2

1 The dayes of Dauid drew nie that he should dye, & he charged Solomon his
sonne, saying:
2 I go the way of al the earth, be thou strong therfore, & shewe thy selfe a
man.
3 Kepe thou the watch of the Lorde thy God, that thou walke in his wayes, and
kepe his statutes, and his preceptes, his iudgementes, and his testimonies, euen
as it is written in the lawe of Moyses: that thou mayst prosper in all that thou
doest, and in euery thing that thou medlest withall.
4 That the Lorde also may make good his worde which he spake vnto me, saying: If
thy children take heede to their way, that they walke before me in trueth, with
all their heartes, & with al their soules, thou shalt not (saith he) be without
a man on the seate of Israel.
5 Moreouer, thou wottest howe Ioab the sonne of Zaruia serued me, and what he
did to the two captaynes of the hoastes of Israel, vnto Abner the sonne of Ner,
and vnto Amasa the sonne of Iether, whom he slue, and shed blood in time of
peace (euen as it had ben in warre) & put the blood of warre vpon his girdle
that was about his loynes, and in his shoes that were on his feete.
6 Deale with him therefore according to thy wisdome, and bring not his hoore
head downe to the graue in peace.
7 But shewe kindnes vnto the sonnes of Barzellai ye Gileadite, that they may
eate at thy table: For they came to me whe I fled from Absalom thy brother.
8 And behold, thou hast with thee Semei the sonne of Gera the sonne of Iemini of
Bahurim, whiche cursed me with an horrible curse, in the day when I went to
Mahanaim: But he came to meete me at Iordane, & I sware to him by the Lord,
saying: I wil not slay thee with the sworde.
9 But thou shalt not count him as vngiltie: For thou art a man of wisdome, and
knowest what thou oughtest to do vnto him, his hoore head shalt thou bring to
the graue with blood.
10 And so Dauid slept with his fathers, and was buried in the citie of Dauid.
11 And the dayes whiche Dauid raigned vpon Israel were fourtie yeres: seuen
yeres raigned he in Hebron, & thirtie and three yeres raigned he in Hierusalem.
12 Then sate Solomon vpon the seate of Dauid his father, and his kingdome was
stablished mightyly.
13 And Adonia the sonne of Haggith came to Bethsabe the mother of Solomon, and
she sayde: Comest thou peaceably? And he sayde, peaceably.
14 He sayde moreouer: I haue somwhat to say vnto thee. She sayd: Say on.
15 And he sayd: Thou knowest that the kingdome was myne, & that all Israel set
their faces on me, that I shoulde raigne: howbeit, the kingdome is turned away,
and geuen to my brother: for it is appoynted him of the Lorde.
16 And nowe I aske a petition of thee, deny me not. And she sayde vnto him: Say
on.
17 And he said: Speake I pray thee, vnto Solomo the king (for he wil not say
thee nay) that he geue me Abisag the Sunamite to wyfe.
18 And Bethsabe sayd: Wel, I wil speake for thee vnto the king.
19 Bethsabe therfore went vnto king Solomon, to speake vnto him for Adonia: And
the king rose vp to meete her, and bowed him selfe vnto her, and sate hym downe
on his seate, & there was a seate set for the kinges mother, & she sate on his
right syde.
20 Then she sayd: I desire a litle petition of thee, I pray thee say me not nay.
And the king sayd vnto her: Aske on, my mother, for I wil not say thee nay.
21 She sayde: Let Abisag the Sunamite be geuen to Adonia thy brother to wyfe.
22 And king Solomon aunswered and sayde vnto his mother: Why doest thou aske
Abisag the Sunamite for Adonia? aske for him the kingdome also: for he is myne
elder brother, and hath for him Abiathar the priest, and Ioab the sonne of
Zaruia.
23 Then king Solomon sware by the Lord, saying: God do so and so to me, if
Adonia haue not spoken this worde against his owne lyfe.
24 Nowe therefore, as the Lorde lyueth, whiche hath ordeyned me, and set me on
the seate of Dauid my father, and made me an house as he promised, Adonia shall
dye this day.
25 And king Solomon sent by the hande of Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada, and he
smote him that he died.
26 And vnto Abiathar the priest sayd the king: Get thee to Anatoth vnto thine
owne fieldes, for thou art worthy of death: but I will not at this time kill
thee, because thou barest the arke of the Lorde God before Dauid my father, and
because thou hast suffered with my father in all his afflictions.
27 And so Solomon put away Abiathar from beyng priest vnto the Lord: that he
might fulfill the wordes of the Lord, which he spake ouer the house of Eli in
Silo.
28 Then tydinges came also to Ioab (for Ioab had turned after Adonia, though he
turned not after Absalom) and Ioab fled vnto the tabernacle of the Lorde, and
caught holde on the hornes of the aulter.
29 And it was told king Solomon howe that Ioab fled vnto the tabernacle of the
Lorde, and beholde he is by the aulter: Then Solomon sent Banaiah the sonne of
Iehoiada, saying: Go and fall vpon him.
30 And Banaiah came to the tabernacle of the Lorde, and sayde vnto him: Thus
sayeth the king, Come out. And he sayde: Nay, but I wil dye euen here. And
Banaiah brought the king word againe, saying: Thus sayde Ioab, and thus he
aunswered me.
31 And the king sayde vnto him, Do euen as he hath sayd: Smite him, & burie him,
that thou mayest take away the blood which Ioab shed causelesse, from me, and
from the house of my father.
32 And the Lorde shall bring his blood vpon his owne head: for he smote two men
righteouser and better then he, and slue them with the sworde, my father Dauid
not knowing therof, euen Abner the sonne of Ner captayne of the hoast of Israel,
and Amasa the sonne of Iether captayne of the hoast of Iuda.
33 Their blood shal therfore returne vpon the head of Ioab, & on the head of his
seede for euer: But vpon Dauid, & vpon his seed, & vpon his house, & vpo his
seat shall there be peace for euer of the Lord.
34 So Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada went vp, & he fel vpon him and slue him, and
buried him in his house in the wildernesse.
35 And the king put Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada in his roome ouer ye hoast,
and put Sadoc the priest in the roome of Abiathar.
36 And the king sent and called Semei, & sayde vnto him: Buylde thee an house in
Hierusalen, and dwell there, & see that thou go not foorth thence any whyther.
37 For be thou sure, that the day that thou goest out, and passest ouer the
riuer of Cedron, thou shalt dye that day, and thy blood shalbe vpon thyne owne
head.
38 And Semei sayde vnto the king, This saying is good: As my lorde ye king hath
sayde, so will thy seruaunt do. And Semei dwelt in Hierusalem many a day.
39 And it chaunced after three yeres, that two of the seruauntes of Semei ranne
away vnto Achis sonne of Maacha king of Geth: And they told Semei, saying,
Behold, thy seruauntes be in Geth.
40 And Semei stoode vp, and sadled his asse, and gat him to Geth to Achis to
seke his seruauntes: And Semei wet & brought his seruauntes againe from Geth.
41 And it was tolde Solomon, howe that Semei had gone from Hierusalem to Geth,
and was come againe.
42 And the king sent & called Semei, and said vnto him: Did I not charge thee by
the Lorde with an oth, & testified vnto thee, saying: Be sure, that whensoeuer
thou goest out & walkest abroade any whyther, thou shalt bye the death? And thou
saydest vnto me: It is good tydinges that I haue heard.
43 Why then hast thou not kept the oth of the Lorde, and the commaundement that
I charged thee withall?
44 The king sayde moreoeur to Semei: Thou remembrest all the wickednesse which
thyne heart knoweth, and that thou diddest to Dauid my father: the Lorde also
shall bring thy wickednesse vpon thyne owne head:
45 And king Solomon shalbe blessed, and the seate of Dauid stablished before the
Lorde for euer.
46 So the king commaunded Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada: which went out, and
smote him that he died: And the kingdome was stablished in the hande of Solomon.

Chapter 3

1 Solomon made affinitie with Pharao king of Egypt, & toke Pharaos daughter, and
brought her into the citie of Dauid, vntil he had made an ende of buylding his
owne house, and the house of the Lorde, and the wall of Hierusalem round about.
2 Onely the people sacrificed in hygh places, because there was no house built
vnto the name of the Lorde vntill those dayes.
3 And Solomon loued the Lorde, walking in the ordinaunces of Dauid his father:
saue onely that he sacrificed and offered incense vpon aulters in hygh places.
4 And the king went to Gibeon, to offer there, for that was the speciall hygh
place: And a thousande burnt offringes dyd Solomon offer vpon that aulter.
5 And in Gibeon the Lorde appeared to Solomon in a dreame by night, and God
sayd: Aske what thou wilt, that I may geue it thee.
6 And Solomon sayde: Thou hast shewed vnto thy seruaut Dauid my father great
mercie, when he walked before thee in trueth, in righteousnesse, and in
plainnesse of heart with thee, and thou hast kept for him this great mercy, that
thou hast geuen him a sonne to sit on his seate, as it is come to passe this
day.
7 And nowe O Lord my God, it is thou that hast made thy seruaunt king in steade
of Dauid my father: And I am but young, & wote not howe to go out and in.
8 And thy seruaunt is in the middest of thy people which thou hast chosen: and
veryly the people are so many, that they cannot be told nor nubred for
multitude.
9 Geue therfore thy seruaunt an vnderstanding heart to iudge thy people, that I
may discerne betweene good & bad: For who is able to iudge this thy so mightie a
people?
10 And this pleased the Lorde well that Solomon had desired this thing,
11 And God sayde vnto him: Thou hast not asked for thy selfe long lyfe, neither
hast asked riches for thy selfe, nor hast asked the lyfe of thy enemies, but
hast asked for thy selfe vnderstanding & discretion in iudgement:
12 Behold, I haue done according to thy wordes, lo I haue geuen thee a wyse & an
vnderstanding heart, so that there was none lyke thee before thee, neither after
thee shal any aryse lyke vnto thee.
13 And I haue also geuen thee that which thou hast not asked, euen rychesse and
honour, so that ther shalbe no king lyke vnto thee all thy dayes.
14 And if thou wilt walke in my wayes, to kepe myne ordinaunces and my
commaundementes, as thy father Dauid dyd walke, I will lengthen thy dayes.
15 When Solomon awoke, beholde it was a dreame: And he came to Hierusalem and
stoode before the arke of the couenaunt of the Lorde, & offred burnt offringes
and peace offringes, and made a feast to all his seruauntes.
16 Then came there two women that were harlottes, vnto the king, & stoode before
him.
17 And the one woman sayde: Oh my lorde, I and this woman dwell in one house,
and I was deliuered of a childe, with her in the house:
18 And the thirde day after that I was deliuered, she was deliuered also: and we
were together, & no straunger with vs in the house, saue we two.
19 And this wiues childe died in the night, for she smothered it.
20 And she rose at midnight and toke my sonne from my syde while thyne handmayde
slept, and layde it in her bosome, and put her dead childe in my bosome.
21 And when I rose in the mornyng to geue my chylde sucke, beholde it was dead:
But when I had loked vpon it in the morning, beholde, it was not my sonne which
I dyd beare.
22 And the other woman sayd: It is not so, but my sonne liueth, and thy sonne is
dead. And she sayde againe: No, but thy sonne is dead, and my sonne is alyue.
And thus they pleaded before the king.
23 Then sayde the king: The one sayth, this that is alyue is my sonne, and the
dead is thyne: And the other sayth, nay: but thy sonne is the dead, and the
liuing childe is myne.
24 And the king sayde: Bring me a sworde. And they brought out a sworde before
the king.
25 And the king sayde: Deuide the liuing child in two, and geue the one halfe to
the one, aud the other to the other.
26 Then spake the woman whose the liuing childe was, vnto the king (for her
bowelles yerned vpon her sonne) and sayde: I besech thee my lorde geue her the
liuing childe, and in no wyse slay it: But the other sayde, Let it be neither
myne nor thyne, but deuide it.
27 Then the king aunswered and sayde: Geue her the liuing childe, and slay it
not, for she is the mother therof.
28 And all they of Israel hearde of the iudgement which the king had iudged, and
feared the king: for they sawe that the wysdome of God was in him to do iustice.

Chapter 4

1 And so king Solomon was king ouer all Israel.
2 And these were his lordes: Azariahu the sonne of Sadoc the priest.
3 Elihozeph and Ahiah the sonnes of Sisa, scribes: Iehosaphat the sonne of
Ahilud, the recorder.
4 Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada was ouer the hoast: Sadoc and Abiathar were the
priestes.
5 And Azariahu the sonne of Nathan was ouer the officers: And Zabud the sonne of
Nathan was a priest, ye kinges companion.
6 And Ahisar was steward of ye houshold: And Adoniram the sonne of Abda was ouer
the tributes.
7 And Solomon had twelue officers ouer all Israel, which prouided vittayles for
the king and his houshold: eche man his moneth in a yere, made prouision for
necessarie thinges.
8 And these are their names: the sonne of Hur in mount Ephraim,
9 The sonne of Dekar in Makaz and in Saalbin, and Bethsames, Elon, and
Bethhanan.
10 The sonne of Hesed in Aruboth, to whom parteyned Socho and all the land of
Hepher.
11 The sonne of Abinadab in all the region of Dor, whiche had Tapheth the
daughter of Solomon to wyfe.
12 Baana the sonne of Ahilud was ouer Thaanach and Megiddo, and ouer all
Bethsan, whiche is by Zarthana beneath Iezrael, fro Bethsan to ye plaine of
Mehola, euen vnto the place that is ouer against Iecmeam.
13 The sonne of Gaber had Ramoth Gilead, and his were the townes of Iair the
sonne of Manasse which are in Gilead: and vnder him was the region of Argob
whiche is in Basan threescore great cities with walles and barres of brasse.
14 Ahinadab the sonne of Hiddo had Mahenaim.
15 Ahimaaz was in Nephthalim, and he toke Basmath the daughter of Solomon to
wyfe.
16 Baana the sonne of Husai was in Aser and in Aloth.
17 Iehosaphat the sonne of Paruah was in Isachar.
18 Semei the sonne of Ela was in Beniamin.
19 Gaber the sonne of Uri was in the countrey of Gilead, the land of Sehon king
of the Amorites, and of Og king of Basan, & was officer alone in the lande.
20 And Iuda and Israel were many euen as the sande of the sea in numbre, eating,
drincking, and making mery.
21 And Solomon raigned ouer all kingdomes from the riuer vnto the lande of the
Philistines, euen vnto the border of Egypt: and they brought presentes, and
serued Solomon al the dayes of his life.
22 And Solomons bread for one day was thirtie quarters of manchet flowre, &
threescore quarters of meale:
23 Ten stalled oxen, and twentie out of the pastures, and a hundred sheepe,
beside hartes, buckes, and wilde goates, and capons.
24 For he ruled in all the region on the other syde Euphrates, from Thiphsah to
Azza, ouer al the kinges on the other syde the riuer: And he had peace with all
his seruauntes on euery syde.
25 And Iuda and Israel dwelt without feare, euery man vnder his vine and vnder
his figgetree, from Danto Beerseba all the dayes of Solomon.
26 And Solomon had fourtie thousand stalles of horses for charettes, & twelue
thousande horsemen.
27 And the officers prouided vittayle for king Solomon and for all that came out
of any place to king Solomons table, euery man his moneth, so that they lacked
nothing.
28 Barly also and strawe for the horses and mules brought they vnto the place
where the officers were, euery man in his office.
29 And God gaue Solomon wysdome and vnderstanding exceeding much, and a large
heart, euen as the sand that is on the sea shore.
30 And Solomons wysdome excelled the wysedome of all the children of the east
countrey, and al the wisdome of Egypt.
31 For he was wiser then al men, yea then Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman,
Chalcol, and Darda the sonnes of Mahol: And his name was spoken of throughout
all nations on euery syde.
32 And Solomon spake three thousande prouerbes: And his songes were a thousande
and fiue.
33 And he spake of trees, euen from the Cedar tree that groweth in Libanon, vnto
the Isope that springeth out of the wall: He spake also of beastes, of foules,
of wormes, and of fishes.
34 And there came of all nations to heare the wysdome of Solomon, and from all
kinges of the earth, which had heard of his wysdome.

Chapter 5

1 And Hira king of Tyre sent his seruauntes vnto Solomon (for he had hearde that
they had annoynted him king in the roome of his father) For Hira was euer a
louer of Dauid.
2 And Solomon sent to Hiram, saying:
3 Thou knowest howe that Dauid my father could not buyld an house vnto the name
of the Lorde his God for the warres which were about him on euery syde, vntill
the Lorde put them vnder the soles of his feete.
4 But now the Lorde my God hath geuen me rest on euery syde, so that there is
neither aduersarie nor euill to resist.
5 And beholde, I am determined to build an house vnto ye name of the Lord my
God, as the Lord spake vnto Dauid my father, saying: Thy sonne whom I wil set
vpon thy seate for thee, he shal build an house vnto my name.
6 Now therefore commaund thou that they hewe me Cedar trees out of Libanon, & my
seruautes shalbe with thyne, and vnto thee wyll I geue the hyre for thy
seruauntes, accordyng to all such thinges as thou shalt appoynt: for thou
knowest that there are not among vs that can skyl to hewe tymber, lyke vnto the
Sidones.
7 And it came to passe, when Hiram heard ye wordes of Solomo, he reioysed
greatly, & said: Blessed be the Lord this day, which hath geuen vnto Dauid a
wyse sonne ouer this mightie people.
8 And Hiram sent to Solomon, saying: I haue considered the thinges which thou
sentest to me for, & wyl accomplishe all thy desyre concerning tymber of Cedar
trees and firre.
9 My seruauntes shall bring them from Libanon to the sea, and I wyl conuey them
by sea in flootes vnto the place that thou shalt shew me, and wil cause them to
be discharged there, and thou shalt receaue them: and thou shalt do me a
pleasure againe, if thou minister foode for myne house.
10 Aud so Hiram gaue Solomon Cedar trees and firre trees according to all his
desyre.
11 And Solomon gaue Hiram twentie thousand quarters of wheate for foode to his
housholde, and twentie buts of pure oyle: Thus much gaue Solomon to Hiram yere
by yere.
12 And the Lorde gaue Solomon wisedome as he promysed him: And there was peace
betweene Hiram and Solomon, & they two were consedered together.
13 And king Solomon raysed a summe out of Israel, and the summe was thirtie
thousand men:
14 Whom he sent to Libanon, ten thousand a moneth by course: so that when they
had ben one moneth in Libanon, they abode two monethes at home: And Adoniram was
ouer the summe.
15 And Solomon had threescore and ten thousand that bare burdens, and foure
score thousand masons in the mountaines:
16 Besides the lordes whom Solomon appoynted to ouersee the worke, euen three
thousand & three hundred, which ruled the people & them that wrought in the
worke.
17 And the king commaunded them to bring great stones, costly stones, & hewed
stones, for the foundatio of the house.
18 And Solomons masons, and the masons of Hiram did hewe them, and the stone
squarers: And so they prepared both tymber and stones, for the building of the
house.

Chapter 6

1 And it came to passe, that in the foure hundred & fourescore yere, after the
childre of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, and in the fourth yere of
the rayne of Solomon vpon Israel, & in the moneth Zif, which is the second
moneth, he began to build the house of the Lorde.
2 And the house which king Solomon built for the Lorde, was threescore cubites
long, and twentie cubites broade, and thirtie cubites hie.
3 And he made a porche before the temple of the house, which was twentie cubites
long, after ye breadth of the house, and ten cubites brode, euen in the fore
front of the house.
4 And in the house he made windowes, broade without, and narow within.
5 And by the wall of the house he made chambers round about euen in the walles
of the house round about the temple & the quier: and he made chambers round
about.
6 The neathermost chamber was fiue cubites broade, & the middle was sixe cubites
broade, & the third was seuen cubites broade: For without in the wall of the
house he made restes round about that the beames of the chambers shoulde not be
fastened in ye walles of the house.
7 And the house was built of stone, made perfect alredye before it was brought
thyther: so that there was neither hammer nor axe, either any toole of iron
heard in the house while it was in buylding.
8 The doore of the middle chamber was in the ryght syde of the house: and men
went vp with wineding stayres into the middle chamber, and out of the middle
into the third.
9 And so he built the house, and finished it: and he roofed the house vaultly
with beames of Cedar tymber.
10 And then he built chambers to all the temple fiue cubites heyght, & they were
ioyned to the house with beames of Cedar.
11 And the word of the Lorde came to Solomon, saying:
12 Concerning the house which thou art in building, if thou wilt walke in myne
ordinaunces, and execute my lawes, and kepe all my commaundementes to walke in
them: then wyll I make good vnto thee my promise which I promysed Dauid thy
father:
13 And I will dwell among the children of Israel, and will not forsake my people
Israel.
14 Solomon therefore built the house, and finished it.
15 And seeled the walles of the house within with boordes of Cedar tree: euen
fro the pauement of the house vnto the roofe did he seele the walles of it
within with Cedar tree: and boorded the floore of the house with planckes of
firre.
16 And he builded twentie cubites in the sydes of the quier of the temple both
floore & walles with boordes of Cedar: and dressed it within the secret place of
the temple, euen in the most holy.
17 But the house, that is the temple before it, was fourtie cubites long.
18 And the Cedar of the house within, was carued with knoppes, and grauen with
flowres: & all was Cedar timber, so that no stone was sene.
19 And the quier that was within the temple he prepared, to set there the arke
of the appoyntment of the Lorde.
20 And the quier before was twentie cubites long, & twentie cubites in breadth,
and twentie cubites in height: And he couered it with pure golde, and boorded
the aulter with Cedar.
21 So Solomon couered the house within with pure golde: And he made golde barres
runne along the quier, which he had couered with golde.
22 And the whole house he ouerlayde with golde vntil he had ended it: also al
the aulter that was in the quier he ouerlayde with golde.
23 And within the quier he made two Cherubims of Oliue tree ten cubites hie.
24 Fiue cubites long was a wing of the one Cherub, & fiue cubites long was a
wing of the other Cherub: so that from the vttermost part of one wing, vnto the
vttermost part of the other, were ten cubites.
25 And the other Cherub was ten cubites hie also: so that both the Cherubs were
of one measure, and one sise:
26 For the height of the one Cherub was ten cubites, and so was it of the other.
27 And he put the Cherubs within the inner house: And the Cherubs stretched out
their winges, so that the one wing of the one touched the one wall, and the one
wing of the other touched the other wall: And the other two winges of them
touched one another in the middest of the house.
28 And he ouerlayde the Cherubs with golde.
29 And in all the walles of ye house round about, he made figures of carued &
seeled worke: as namely pictures of Cherubs, & paulme trees, & grauen flowres,
both within in the quier and without in the temple.
30 And the floore of the house he couered with golde, both within in the quier
and also without in the temple.
31 And in the entering of the quier, he made two doores of Oliue tree: And both
the vpper & two side postes were fiue square.
32 The two doores also were of oliue tree, & he graued them with grauing of
Cherubs and paulme trees and grauen flowres, & couered them with golde, & layde
thinne plates of golde vpon the Cherubs and paulme trees.
33 And so made he for the doore of the temple, postes of Oliue tree foure
square.
34 The two doores were of firre tree, and either doore with foulding leaues.
35 And he graued thereon Cherubs, paulme trees, & carued flowres: and couered
the carued worke with golde finelie wrought.
36 And he built the inner court with three rowes of hewed stone, and one rowe of
Cedar wood.
37 In the fourth yere was the foundation of the house of the Lorde layde, euen
in the moneth Zif.
38 And in the leuenth yere, in the moneth Bul (which is the eyght moneth) was
the house full finished throughout all the partes thereof, according to all the
fashion of it: And so was he seuen yeres in building it.

Chapter 7

1 But Solomon was buildinge his owne house thirteene yeres, and finished it all.
2 And he built ye house in the wood Libanon, an hundred cubites long, and fiftie
cubites broade, and thirtie cubites hie: And it stoode vpon foure rowes of Cedar
pillers, and Cedar beames were layde vpon the pillers.
3 And the roofe was Cedar aboue vpon the beames that laye on the pillers, euen
45 beames in fifteene rowes.
4 And there were windowes in three rowes, and the windowes were one against
another three folde.
5 And al the doores with the syde postes & the vpper postes were foure square,
and had windowes one against another three folde.
6 And he made a porche by the pillers that bare vp the house fiftie cubites
long, and thirtie cubites broade, and the porche was before those and the other
pillers: for there was a thicke tree set before them.
7 Then he made a porche to sit & iudge in, euen a porche of iudgmet, seeled with
Cedar throughout all the pauementes.
8 And his house wherein he dwelt had an other hall, more inward then the porche,
of lyke worke: And then Solomo made an house for Pharaos daughter ( whom he had
taken to wyfe) lyke vnto the fashion of the porche.
9 And all these were of the best stones, hewed after a measure and sawed with
sawes within and without, from the foundation vnto the beames that laye aboue,
after the measure, and euen so on the out syde toward the great court.
10 And the foundation was layde vpon rich stones, and that very great stones,
whereof some were ten cubites, and some eyght cubites.
11 And aboue were riche stones, squared after a certayne rule, and couered with
Cedar.
12 And the great court round about, was with three rowes of hewed stones, and
one rowe of Cedar planckes, after the maner of the inner court of the house of
the Lorde, and of the porche of the temple.
13 And king Solomon sent and fet one Hiram out of Tyre,
14 A widowes sonne of ye tribe of Nephthalim, his father being a man of Tyre:
Which Hiram was a craftesman in brasse, ful of wisedome, vnderstanding, and
cunning, to worke all maner of worke in brasse: And he came to king Solomon, and
wrought all his worke.
15 For he cast two pillers of brasse of eyghteene cubites hie a peece: & a
string of twelue cubites did compasse either of them about.
16 And he made two pommels of moulten brasse, after the fashion of a crowne, to
set on the toppes of the pillers: The height of the one head peece contayned
fiue cubites, and the height of the other head peece contayned fiue cubites
also.
17 He made networke, & wrythen worke like chaines for the pommels vpon the head
peeces that were on the top of the pillers: euen seuen rowes vpon the one head
peece, and seuen vpon the other.
18 And so he made the pillers, and two rowes of pomegranets rounde about in the
one networke to couer the pommels that were vpon the top: and this he did also,
for the other head peece.
19 And the pommels that were on the top of the pillers, were after lillie worke
in the porche foure cubites.
20 And the pommels vpon the two pillers had also aboue ouer against the middest
within the networke: pomegranets and vpon the second head peece were there two
hundred pomegranets in two rowes round about.
21 And he set vp the pillers in the porch of the temple: And when he had set vp
the right piller, he called the name therof Iachin: and when he had set vp the
left piller, he called the name thereof Boaz.
22 And vpon the top of the pillers were lillie worke: & so was the workmanship
of the pillers finished.
23 And he made a moulten lauatorie ten cubites wide from brim to brim, round in
compasse, and fiue cubites hie: And a string of thirtie cubites did compasse it
about.
24 And vnder the brim of it there were knoppes round about, ten in one cubite,
and thei compassed the lauatorie round about: And the knoppes were cast with it
in two rowes when it was cast.
25 And it stoode on twelue oxen, of which three loked toward the north, three
toward the west, three toward the south, and three toward the east: and the
lauatorie stoode vpon them, and al their hinder partes were inward.
26 It was an hand breadth thicke, and the brym was wrought lyke the brym of a
cup with flowres of lilies, and it contained two thousand battes.
27 And he made ten feete of brasse: foure cubites long, and foure cubites broade
a peece, and three cubites hie.
28 And the worke of the feete was on this maner: They had sides, and the sides
were betweene the ledges.
29 And on the sides that were betweene the ledges, were lions, oxen, and
Cherubs: and likewise vpo the ledges that were aboue: and beneath the lions and
oxen, were certayne additions made of thynne worke.
30 And vnder euery foote were foure brasen wheeles, and boordes of brasse: and
in the foure corners thereof vnder the lauatorie, were vndersetters moulten at
the side of euery addition.
31 And the stalke of the lauatorie was in the middle of it, and aboue one
cubite: But the stalke thereof was round after the worke of the foote, a cubite
& a halfe: and also vpon the stalke were grauings with their bands, foure square
and not round.
32 And vnder the sydes were foure wheeles, and the axeltrees ioyned fast to the
bottome, and the height of euery wheele was a cubite and an halfe.
33 And the workmanship of the wheeles was lyke the worke of a charet wheele: and
the axeltrees, the nauelles, spokes, and shaftes, were al moulten.
34 And there were foure vndersetters in the foure corners of one foote, & the
vndersetters were of ye very bottome selfe.
35 And in the height of the bottome was there a rounde compasse of halfe a
cubite hie: and in that height of the bottome there proceeded both ledges and
sydes out of the same.
36 For in the boordes of the ledges and on the sydes, he had grauen pictures of
Cherubims, lions, & paulme trees, one by another rounde about.
37 Thus made he the ten feete after this maner: and they had all one fashion of
casting, one measure, and one syse.
38 Then made he ten lauers of brasse one lauer contayning fourtie battes: and
euery lauer was foure cubites, & vpon euery one of the ten feete, he put one
lauer.
39 And he put fiue of those feete on the ryght syde of the house, and other fiue
on the left: and he set the lauatorie on the right syde of the house eastward,
and toward the south.
40 And Hiram made pots, shouels, and basons, & so finished all the worke that he
made king Solomon for the house of the Lorde:
41 That is to say, two pillers, and two round head peeces that were to be set on
the toppes of the two pillers.
42 And foure hundred pomegranates for the two networkes, euen two rowes of
pomegranates in one networke to couer the two head peeces that were to be set on
the toppes of the pillers:
43 And the ten feete, and ten lauers on the feete:
44 The lauatorie, and twelue oxen vnder it:
45 And pottes, shouels, and basons: And all these vessels which Hiram made to
king Solomo for the house of the Lord, were of bright brasse.
46 In the playne of Iordane did the king cast them euen in the thicke claye,
betweene Socoh and Zarthan.
47 And Solomon left all the vessels vn. wayed because they were so exceeding
many, neither founde they out the waight of the brasse.
48 And so Solomon made al the vessels that parteyned vnto the house of the
Lorde, the golden aulter, and the golden table wheron the shew bread was:
49 And fiue candelstickes for the ryght side, and fiue for the left before the
quier, of pure golde, with flowres, lampes, and snuffers of golde.
50 And bowles, flat peeces, basons, spoones, & masours, of pure golde: and
hyndges made he of golde, both for the doores of the quier the place most holy,
and for the doores of the temple also.
51 And so was ended all the worke that king Solomon made for the house of the
Lorde: And Solomon brought in the thinges which Dauid his father had dedicated,
euen the siluer, golde, and vessels, and layde them vp among the treasures of
the house of the Lord.

Chapter 8

1 Then Solomon gathered the elders of Israel, & al the heads of the tribes, and
them that were captaynes amog the fathers of the children of Israel, vnto him in
Hierusalem, that they might bring vp the arke of the appoyntment of the Lorde
out of the citie of Dauid, which is Sion.
2 And all the men of Israel assembled vnto king Solomon to the feast that
falleth in the moneth Ethanim, which is the seuenth moneth.
3 And al the elders of Israel were come, and the priestes tooke vp the arke.
4 And they bare the arke of the Lorde, the tabernacle of the congregation, and
all the holy vessels that were in the tabernacle: those dyd the priestes and the
leuites beare.
5 And king Solomon and all the congregation of Israel that were assembled vnto
him and went with him before the arke, did offer sheepe and oxen, that could not
be tolde nor numbred for multitude.
6 And so the priestes brought the arke of the appoyntment of the Lord vnto his
place euen into the quier of the temple and place most holy, vnder the winges of
the Cherubs:
7 For the Cherubs stretched out their winges ouer the place of the arke, and
couered both it and also the staues therof a hie vpon it.
8 And they drew out the staues, that the endes of them might appeare out of the
holy place within the quier, but they were not seene without, and there they
haue ben vnto this day.
9 And there was nothing in the arke saue the two tables of stone, which Moyses
put there at Horeb, in ye which tables the Lorde made an appoyntment with the
children of Israel when he brought them out of the lande of Egypt.
10 And it fortuned that when the priestes were come out of the holy place, the
cloude filled the house of the Lorde,
11 That the priestes could not stand and minister because of the cloude: for the
glory of the Lorde had filled the house of the Lorde.
12 Then spake Solomon: The Lorde saide that he would dwell in the darke cloude.
13 I haue built thee an house to dwell in, an habitation for thee to abyde in
for euer.
14 And the king turned his face, and blessed all the congregation of Israel: and
all the congregation of Israel stoode still.
15 And he saide: Blessed be the Lorde God of Israel, which spake with his mouth
vnto Dauid my father, & hath with his hand fulfilled it, saying:
16 Sence the day that I brought my people Israel out of Egypt, I chose no citie
of all the tribes of Israel to build an house, that my name might be therein:
But I haue chosen Dauid to be ruler ouer my people of Israel.
17 And it was in the heart of Dauid my father to build an house for the name of
the Lorde God of Israel:
18 And the Lorde saide vnto Dauid my father: Whereas it was in thyne heart to
build an house vnto my name, thou diddest well that thou wast so minded:
19 Neuerthelesse, thou shalt not build the house: but thy sonne that shall come
out of thy loynes, he shall build the house vnto my name.
20 And the Lorde hath made good his word that he spake, and I am rysen vp in the
roome of Dauid my father, and sit on the seate of Israel, as the Lorde promysed,
and haue built an house for the name of the Lorde God of Israel:
21 And I haue prepared therein a place for the arke, wherein is the couenaunt of
the Lorde which he made with our fathers when he brought them out of the lande
of Egypt.
22 Solomon stoode before the aulter of the Lorde in the sight of all the
congregation of Israel, and stretched out his handes toward heauen, and sayde:
23 Lord God of Israel, there is no God like thee in heauen aboue, or in the
earth beneath, thou that kepest couenaunt & mercy for thy seruauntes that walke
before thee with all their heart.
24 Thou that hast kept with thy seruaut Dauid my father that thou promisedst
him: Thou spakest also with thy mouth and hast fulfilled it with thyne hand, as
it is come to passe this day.
25 Therfore now Lorde God of Israel, keepe with thy seruaunt Dauid my father
that thou promisedst him, saying, Thou shalt not be without a man in my sight to
syt on the seate of Israel: so that thy childre take heede to their way, that
they walke before me, as thou hast walked in my sight.
26 And now O God of Israel, let thy word be verified which thou spakest vnto thy
seruaunt Dauid my father.
27 Wyll God in deede dwell on the earth? Beholde, the heauens and heauens of all
heauens are not able to contayne thee: and how should then this house do it that
I haue builded?
28 Haue thou therefore respect vnto the prayer of thy seruaunt, and to his
supplication O Lorde my God, to heare the crye and prayer which thy seruaunt
prayeth before thee this day:
29 That thyne eyes may be open toward this house nyght and day, euen toward this
place, of which thou haste said, My name shal be there: That thou mayst hearken
vnto the prayer which thy seruaunt prayeth in this place,
30 And regarde thou the supplication of thy seruaunt and of thy people Israel
when they pray in this place: and heare thou in heauen thy dwelling place, and
when thou hearest haue mercy.
31 If any man trespasse against his neyghbour, & there go an oth betweene them,
and the one compel the other, and come, swearing before thyne aulter in this
house:
32 Then hearken thou in heauen, and do and iudge thy seruauntes, that thou
condemne the vngodly, to bring his way vpon his head: and iustifie the
righteous, to geue him according to his righteousnesse.
33 When thy people Israel be put to the worse before the enemie, because they
haue sinned against thee, & afterwarde turne againe to thee, and knowledge vnto
thy name, and pray and make supplication vnto thee in this house:
34 Then heare thou in heauen, to be mercifull vnto the sinne of thy people
Israel, and bring them againe vnto the land which thou gauest vnto their
fathers.
35 If heauen be shut vp, and there be no rayne, because they haue sinned against
thee: yet if they pray in this place, and knowledge vnto thy name, and turne
from their sinne through thy scourging of them:
36 Then heare thou in heauen, and be mercyfull vnto the sinnes of thy
seruauntes, and of thy people Israel, that thou shewe them a good way to walke
in, and geue rayne vpon the lande that thou hast geuen to thy people to
inherite.
37 If there be in the lande dearth, or pestilence, drouth, blasting, grashopper,
or caterpiller: or if their enemie besiege the in the lande of their cities, or
whatsoeuer plague or sickenesse chaunce,
38 Then what prayers and supplication soeuer be made of any man, of all thy
people Israel, which shall knowledge euery man the plague of his owne heart, and
stretch foorth his handes toward this house:
39 Heare thou then in heauen, euen in thy dwelling place, and be mercyfull, and
do and geue euery man according to his wayes, euen as thou that onely knowest
his heart (for thou onely knowest the heartes of all the children of men:)
40 That they may feare thee as long as they lyue in the lande which thou gauest
vnto our fathers.
41 And likewyse if a straunger that is not of thy people Israel, come out of a
farre countrey for thy names sake:
42 (For they shal heare of thy great name, and of thy mightie hand, & of thy
stretched out arme) and shall come and pray in this house:
43 Therfore heare thou in heauen thy dwelling place, & do all that the straunger
calleth to thee for: that all nations of the earth may knowe thy name, and feare
thee as do thy people Israel, and that they may knowe that thy name is called
vpon in this house which I haue builded.
44 If thy people go out to battell against their enemie whythersoeuer thou shalt
send them, and shal pray vnto the Lord toward the way of the citie which thou
hast chosen, and toward the house that I haue built for thy name:
45 Heare thou in heauen their prayer and supplication, and iudge their cause.
46 If they sinne against thee (for there is no man that sinneth not) & thou be
angry with them, and delyuer them into the hand of their enemies, so that they
cary them away prisoners, vnto the lande of their enemies whether farre or
neare:
47 Yet if they turne againe vnto their heartes in the lande of them that caryed
them away captiues, & returne and pray vnto thee in the lande of their enemies,
saying, we haue sinned, we haue done wickely, and haue committed vngodlynesse:
48 And so turne agayne vnto thee with all their heart and all their soule in the
lande of their enemies which led them away captiue, and pray vnto thee, toward
the way of their land which thou gauest vnto their fathers, and toward the citie
which thou hast chosen, and toward the house which I haue built for thy name:
49 Then heare thou their prayer and supplication in heauen thy dwellyng place,
and iudge their cause:
50 And be mercyfull vnto thy people that haue sinned against thee, and vnto all
their iniquities wherby they haue done wickedly against thee, & get thou them
the fauour of those whiche led them away captiue, that they may haue compassion
on them.
51 For they be thy people, and thyne inheritaunce, whiche thou broughtest out of
Egypt, euen from the middest of the fornace of iron.
52 And let thyne eyes be open vnto the prayer of thy seruaunt, and vnto the
prayer of thy people Israel, to hearken vnto them in all that they call for vnto
thee.
53 For thou dyddest seperate them from among all the nations of the earth to be
thyne owne inheritaunce, as thou saydest by the hande of Moyses thy seruaunt,
when thou broughtest our fathers out of Egypt O Lorde God.
54 And when Solomon had made an ende of praying all this prayer and supplication
vnto the Lorde, he arose from before the aulter of the Lorde, & from kneling on
his knees, & from stretching of his handes vp to heauen,
55 And stoode & blessed all the congregatio of Israel, with a loude voyce,
saying:
56 Blessed be the Lorde that hath geuen rest vnto his people Israel, according
to al that he promised: there hath not fayled one worde of all the good promise
which he promised by the hand of Moyses his seruaunt.
57 The Lorde our God be with vs, as he was with our fathers, and forsake vs not,
neither leaue vs:
58 But that he may bowe our heartes vnto him, that we may walke in all his
wayes, & kepe his commaundementes, his statutes, and his lawes whiche he
commaunded our fathers.
59 And these my wordes whiche I haue prayed before the Lorde, be nye vnto the
Lorde our God day and night, that he defende the cause of his seruaunt, and the
cause of his people Israel, what thing soeuer chaunce at any time:
60 That al nations of ye earth may knowe that the Lord is God, and none but he.
61 Let your heart therfore be perfect with the Lord our God, that ye walke in
his statutes, and kepe his commaundementes, as this day.
62 And the king and al Israel with him offered offeringes before the Lorde.
63 And Solomon offered a sacrifice of peace offringes whiche he offered vnto the
Lorde to wit twentie and two thousande oxen, and an hundred and twentie
thousande sheepe: And so the king and all the children of Israel dedicated the
house of the Lorde.
64 The same day dyd the king halowe the middle of the court that was before the
house of the Lord: for there he offered burnt offeringes, meate offeringes, and
the fat of the peace offeringes: because the brasen aulter that was before the
Lorde, was to litle to receaue the burnt offringes, meate offeringes, and the
fat of the peace offeringes.
65 And Solomon helde that same time an hye feast, and all Israel with him, a
verie great congregation, euen from the entring in of Hemath vnto the riuer of
Egypt before the Lorde our God seuen dayes, and seuen dayes, euen foureteene
dayes.
66 And the eyght day he sent the people away, & they blessed the king, and went
vnto their tentes, ioyous and with glad heart, because of all the goodnesse that
the Lorde had done for Dauid his seruaunt, and for Israel his people.

Chapter 9

1 And when Solomon had finished the buylding of the house of the Lorde, and the
kinges palace, and all that he had in his minde & was appoynted to make:
2 The Lorde appeared to Solomon the second time, as he appeared vnto him at
Gibeon.
3 And ye Lord said vnto him, I haue heard thy prayer & thy intercession that
thou hast made before me: For I haue halowed this house, which thou hast built
to put my name there for euer, & mine eies & myne hearte shalbe there
perpetually.
4 And if thou wilt walke before me, as Dauid thy father walked, in purenes of
heart and in righteousnes, to do all that I haue commaunded thee, and wilt kepe
my statutes, and my lawes:
5 Then will I stablishe the seate of thy kingdome vpon Israel for euer, as I
promised to Dauid thy father, saying: Thou shalt not be without a ma vpon the
seate of Israel.
6 But and if ye and your children turne away from me, and will not kepe my
commaundementes and my statutes whiche I haue set before you, but go and serue
other gods, & worship them:
7 Then will I weede Israel out of the lande which I haue geuen them, and this
house which I haue halowed for my name, will I cast out of my sight, and Israel
shalbe a prouerbe and a fable among all nations,
8 And this house shalbe taken away: so that euery one that passeth by it, shalbe
astonied, and shall hysse, and they shall say: Why hath the Lord done thus vnto
this lande, and to this house?
9 And they shal aunswere: Because they forsoke the Lorde their God, whiche
brought their fathers out of the land of Egypt, and haue taken hold vpon other
gods, and haue worshipped them, and serued them: therfore hath the Lorde brought
vpon them all this euyll.
10 And it fortuned, that at the ende of twentie yeres when Solomon had finished
the buylding of the two houses, that is to wyte, the house of the Lorde and the
kinges palace,
11 (And Hiram the king of Tyre brought Solomon timbre of Cedar, & firre trees,
golde, and whatsoeuer he desired) Then Solomon gaue Hiram twentie cities in the
lande of Galilee.
12 And Hiram came out from Tyre to see the cities whiche Solomon had geuen hym,
and they pleased him not.
13 And he sayde: What cities are these which thou hast geuen me my brother? And
he called them the lande of barren vnto this day.
14 And Hiram sent the king sixe score talentes of gold.
15 (And this is the summe whiche king Solomon raysed for a tribute when he
buylded the house of the Lorde, and his owne house, and Millo, and the wall of
Hierusalem, and Hazor, and Megeddo, and Gazer.
16 For Pharao king of Egypt went vp, and toke Gazer and burnt it with fire, and
slue the Chanaanites that dwelt in the citie, and gaue it for a present vnto his
daughter, Solomons wyfe.
17 And Solomon buylt Gazer & Bethhoron the neather,
18 And Baalath and Thamar in the wildernesse in the lande:
19 And all the treasure cities that Solomon had, and cities for his charettes,
and cities for his horsemen, and all that Solomon desired, and woulde buyld in
Hierusalem, in Libanon, and in all the lande of his dominion)
20 And al the people that were left of the Amorites, Hethites, Pherezites,
Heuites and Iebusites, whiche were not of the children of Israel,
21 Their children that were left after them in the lande, whom the children of
Israel also were not able to destroy: those dyd Solomon compell to bring
tribute, vnto this day.
22 But of the children of Israel dyd Solomon make no bondmen: But they were men
of warre, his ministers, his lordes, his captaynes, and rulers of his charettes,
and his horsemen.
23 And these were the lordes that were set ouer Solomons worke euen fiue hundred
were they and fiftie, and they ruled the people that wrought ye worke.
24 And Pharaos daughter came vp out of the citie of Dauid, vnto her house which
Solomon had buylt for her: and then dyd he also buylde Millo.
25 And thryse a yere did Solomon offer burnt offringes & peace offringes vpon
the aulter whiche he buylt vnto the Lorde, and he burnt incense vpon the aulter
that was before the Lord, and so he finished the house.
26 And king Solomon made a nauie of shippes in Azion Gaber, which is beside
Eloth, on the brinke of the red sea, in the lande of Edom.
27 And Hiram sent by shippe also of his seruauntes, that were shipmen and had
knowledge of the sea, with the seruauntes of Solomon:
28 And they came to Ophir, and set from thence foure hundred and twentie
talentes of golde, and brought it to king Solomon.

Chapter 10

1 And the queene of Saba hearing the fame of Solomon (concerning the name of the
Lord) came to proue him with harde questions.
2 And she came to Hierusalem with a verie great trayne, with camels that bare
sweete odours, and gold exceeding much, & precious stones: And she came to
Solomon, and communed with him of al that was in her heart.
3 And Solomon declared vnto her all her questions, so that there was not one
thing hyd from the king whiche he expounded not vnto her.
4 And the queene of Saba considered al Solomons wysdome, & the house that he had
buylded,
5 And the meate of his table, and the sitting of his seruauntes, the order of
his ministers & their apparell, & his drinke, and his burnt sacrifices that he
offred in the house of the Lorde: and she was astonied.
6 And she sayde vnto the king: It was a true word that I hearde in myne owne
land of thy sayinges, & of thy wisdome.
7 Howbeit I beleued it not, till I came & sawe it with myne eyes: And beholde,
the one halfe was not tolde me: for thy wysdome and prosperitie exceedeth the
fame which I hearde of thee.
8 Happy are thy men, and happy are these thy seruauntes whiche stand euer before
thee, and heare thy wysdome.
9 Blessed be the Lorde thy God, whiche loued thee, to set thee on the seate of
Israel, because the Lorde loued Israel for euer, & made thee king to do equite
and righteousnes.
10 And she gaue the king sixe score talentes of golde, and of sweete odours
exceeding much, and precious stones: There came no more suche aboundaunce of
sweete odours, as the queene of Saba gaue to king Solomon.
11 The nauie also of the shippes of Hiram (that caried golde from Ophir) brought
lykewyse great plentie of Almuge trees, and precious stones from Ophir.
12 And the king made of the Almuge trees pillers for the house of the Lorde and
for the kinges palace, and made harpes and psalteries for singers: Ther came no
more suche Almuge trees, nor were any more seene vnto this day.
13 And king Solomon gaue vnto the queene of Saba according to all her desire
whatsoeuer she asked, besides that he gaue her of a free wil with his owne
hande: And so she returned vnto her owne countrey, both she and her seruauntes.
14 The waight of golde that came to Solomon in one yere, was sixe hundred
theescore and sixe talentes of golde,
15 Besydes that he had of marchauntes, and of the marchaundises of the spices,
and of all the kinges of Arabia, & of the lordes of the countrey.
16 And king Solomon made two hundred targettes of beaten golde: sixe hundred
sicles of golde went to a target.
17 And he made three hundred shieldes of beaten golde: three pounde of gold went
to one shielde, and the king put them in the house of the wood of Libanon.
18 And the king made a great seate of iuorie, and couered it with the best
golde.
19 And the seate had sixe steppes, and the toppe of the seate was rounde
behinde, & there were pommelles on either syde on the place of the seate, and
two lions stoode besyde the pommelles.
20 And there stoode twelue lions on the steppes, sixe on a syde: There was none
lyke worke seene in any kingdome.
21 And al king Solomons drinking vessels were of golde, and lykewyse all the
vessels of the house of the wood of Libanon were of pure golde: And as for
siluer, it was nothing worth in the dayes of Solomon:
22 For the kinges nauie of shippes went on the sea vnto Tharsis with the nauie
of Hirams shippes: euen once in three yeres went the nauie to Tharsis, and
brought golde and siluer, Elephantes teeth, apes, and pecockes.
23 And so king Solomon exceeded al the kinges of the earth both in ryches and
wysdome.
24 And all the worlde resorted to Solomon, to heare his wysdome which God had
put in his heart:
25 And brought him euery man his present, vessels of siluer, & vessels of golde,
rayment, harnesse, and sweete odours, and horses, and mules, yere by yere.
26 And Solomon gathered together charettes and horsemen: and he had a thousande
and foure hundred charettes, and twelue thousande horsemen, whom he bestowed in
the charet cities, and with the king at Hierusalem.
27 And the king made siluer in Hierusalem as plenteous as stones, and Cedar as
plenteous as the wilde fegge trees that growe aboundauntly in the fieldes.
28 Also Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, and fine linnen: the kinges
marchauntes receaued the linnen for a price.
29 A charet came vp out of Egypt for sixe hundred sicles of siluer, that is, one
horse for an hundred and fiftie: And euen so for al the kinges of the Hethites,
and for the kinges of Siria, did they bring them out through their handes.

Chapter 11

1 But king Solomo loued many outlandishe women, & the daughter of Pharao, and
women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Zidonites, & Hethites:
2 Wher as yet concerning these nations, the Lorde sayd vnto the children of
Israel: Go not ye into them, nor let them come into, els will they turne your
heartes after their gods: Neuerthelesse, Solomon claue vnto them in loue.
3 And he had seuen hundred queenes, and three hundred concubines: and his wyues
turned away his heart.
4 For it came to passe when Solomon was olde, his wyues turned his heart after
other gods: and his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, as was the
heart of Dauid his father.
5 For Solomon folowed Astaroth the god of the Zidons, and Milcom the
abhomination of the Ammonites.
6 And Solomon wrought wickednesse in the sight of the Lorde, and folowed not the
Lorde perfectly, as dyd Dauid his father.
7 For then dyd Solomon buylde an hye place for Chamos the abhomination of Moabim
the hill that is before Hierusalem, & vnto Moloch the abhomination of the
children of Ammon.
8 And lykewyse dyd he for all his outlandishe wyues, which burnt cense and
offered vnto their gods.
9 And the Lorde was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned fro the
Lord God of Israel which had appeared vnto him twyse,
10 And gaue him a charge concerning this thyng, that he shoulde not folowe other
gods: But he kept not that which the Lorde commaunded him.
11 Wherfore the Lorde sayde vnto Solomon: Forasmuche as this is done of thee,
and thou hast not kept myne appoyntment, and my statutes whiche I commaunded
thee, I wil rent the kingdome from thee, and will geue it to thy seruaunt.
12 Notwithstanding, in thy dayes I will not do it, because of Dauid thy father:
but wil take it fro the hand of thy sonne.
13 Howbeit, I will not take away all the kingdome: But will geue one tribe to
thy sonne, because of Dauid my seruaut, and because of Hierusalem whiche I haue
chosen.
14 And the Lorde stirred vp an aduersarie vnto Solomon, euen one Hadad an
Edomite, of the kinges seede, whiche was in Edom.
15 For when Dauid was in Edom, and Ioab the captayne of the hoast was gone vp to
burie them that were slaine, he smote all the men children in Edom:
16 (For sixe monethes dyd Ioab remayne there, and all Israel, till he had
destroyed all the men children of Edom.)
17 And this Hadad fled, and certaine other Edomites of his fathers seruautes
with hym, to come into Egypt, Hadad beyng yet a litle childe.
18 And they arose out of Madian, & came to Paran, and toke men with them out of
Paran, and came to Egypt vnto Pharao king of Egypt, whiche gaue him an house,
and appoynted him vittailes, and gaue him lande.
19 And Hadad gat great fauour in the sight of Pharao, so that he gaue him to
wyfe the sister of his owne wyfe, euen the syster of Thahpenes the queene.
20 And the sister of Thahpenes bare him Genubath his sonne, who Thahpenes
norished in Pharaos house: And Genubath was with Pharaos housholde among the
sonnes of Pharao.
21 And when Hadad hearde in Egypt that Dauid was layde to sleepe with his
fathers, & that Ioab the captayne of the hoaste was dead also, he sayde to
Pharao: Let me depart, that I may go to myne owne countrey.
22 Pharao sayde vnto him: What hast thou lacked here with me, that thou wouldest
thus go to thyne owne countrey? He aunswered, Nothing: howbeit, let me go.
23 And God stirred him vp another aduersarie, one Rezon the sonne of Eliada,
whiche fled from his lorde Hadadezer king of Zoba:
24 And he gathered men vnto him, and became captayne ouer the companie when
Dauid slue them: And they went to Damasco, and dwelt there, and raigned in
Damasco.
25 Therfore was he an aduersarie to Israel all the dayes of Solomon, and this
was the mischiefe, in that Hadad dyd abhorre Israel and raigned ouer Syria.
26 And Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat, an Ephrathite of Zareda (whose mother was
called Zeruah, whiche was a wydowe) and he Solomons seruaunt, lyft vp his hande
against the king.
27 But this was the cause that he lift vp his hande against the king: Solomon
buylt Mello, and mended the broken places of the citie of Dauid his father.
28 And this felowe Ieroboam was a man of strength & courage: And Solomon sawe
the young man that he was able to do the worke, he made him ruler ouer all the
charge of the house of Ioseph.
29 And it chaunced at that season that Ieroboam went out of Ierusalem, and the
prophete Ahia the Silonite met him by the way, hauing a newe mantel on him, and
they two were alone in the fielde.
30 Ahia caught the newe mantel that was on him, & rent it in twelue peeces,
31 And sayd to Ieroboam, Take thee ten peeces: For thus sayth the Lorde God of
Israel, Behold, I will rent the kingdome out of the handes of Solomon, and will
geue ten tribes to thee.
32 And he shal haue one for my seruaunt Dauids sake, and for Hierusalem, the
citie which I haue chosen out of all the tribes of Israel:
33 Because they haue forsaken me, & haue worshipped Astharoth the god of the
Zidons, and Chamos the god of the Moabites, & Milcom the god of the children of
Ammon, & haue not walked in my wayes, to fulfill my pleasure, my statutes, and
my lawes, as dyd Dauid his father.
34 I will not take the whole kingdome out of his hand: But I will make him
chiefe all his lyfe long for Dauid my seruauntes sake whom I chose: because he
kept my commaundementes and my statutes:
35 But I will take the kingdome out of his sonnes hande, and will geue it vnto
thee, euen ten tribes of it:
36 And vnto his sonne will I geue one tribe, that Dauid my seruaut may haue a
light alway before me in Hierusalem, the citie which I haue chosen me to put my
name there.
37 And I will take thee, and thou shalt raigne according to all that thy soule
desireth, and shalt be king ouer Israel.
38 And if thou hearken vnto all that I commaunde thee, and wilt walke in my
wayes, and do that is right in my sight, that thou kepe my statutes and my
commaundementes as Dauid my seruaunt dyd, then will I be with thee, and buyld
thee a sure house, as I buylt for my seruaunt Dauid, and will geue Israel vnto
thee:
39 And I will for this offence whiche Solomon hath committed vexe the seede of
Dauid, but nor for euer.
40 Solomon sought therfore to kil Ieroboam, and Ieroboam arose, and fled into
Egypt, vnto Sisac king of Egypt, and continued there in Egypt vntill the death
of Solomon.
41 The rest of the wordes that concerne Solomon, and all that he dyd, and his
wysdome, are they not written in the booke of the wordes of Solomon?
42 The tyme that Solomon raigned in Hierusalem vpon al Israel was fourtie yeres.
43 And Solomon slept with his fathers, and was buried in the citie of Dauid his
father: and Rehoboam his sonne raigned in his steade.

Chapter 12

1 And Rehoboam went to Siche: for all Israel were come to Sichem, to make him
king.
2 And when Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat whiche was yet in Egypt, heard of it: for
he fled to Egypt from the presence of king Solomon, and dwelt in Egypt.
3 So they sent, and called him: and Ieroboam and all the congregation of
Is-Israel came, & spake vnto Rehoboam, saying:
4 Thy father made our yocke greeuous, nowe therfore make thou the greenous
seruice of thy father and his sore yocke whiche he put vpon vs, lighter, and we
will serue thee.
5 And he sayde vnto them: Depart yet for the space of three dayes, and then come
againe to me. And the people departed.
6 And king Rehoboam toke counsel with the olde men that stoode before Solomon
his father, while he yet lyued, and sayd: What counsel geue ye, that I may haue
matter to aunswere this people?
7 And they sayd vnto him: If thou be a seruaunt vnto this people this day, and
folowe their mindes, and aunswere them, & speake kinde wordes to them, they will
be thy seruauntes for euer.
8 But he forsoke the counsell that the old men had geuen him, and called vnto
his counsel young men, that were growe vp with him and wayted on him,
9 And he sayde vnto them: What counsell geue ye, that we may aunswere this
people? for they haue communed with me, saying: Make the yocke whiche thy father
did put vpon vs, lighter.
10 And ye young men that were growen vp with him, spake vnto him, saying: Thus
shalt thou speake vnto this people that haue sayd vnto thee, thy father made our
yocke heauy, but make thou it vs lighter: Euen thus shalt thou say vnto them, My
litle finger shalbe wayghtier then my father was in the loynes.
11 And nowe where as my father did lade you & put a greeuous yocke vpon you, I
will make it heauier: My father hath chastised you with roddes, but I will
correct you with scourges.
12 And so Ieroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam the thirde day, as the
king had appoynted, saying, Come to me againe the thirde day.
13 And the king aunswered the people churlishly, and left the old mens counsel
that they gaue him:
14 And spake to them after the counsel of the young men, saying: My father made
your yocke greeuous, and I will make it greeuouser: My father also chastised you
with roddes, but I will chastise you with scourges.
15 And the king hearkened not vnto the people: for it was the ordinaunce of God,
that he might perfourme his saying, whiche the Lord spake by Ahia the Silonite
vnto Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat.
16 And so when all Israel sawe that the king regarded them not, the people
aunswered the king with these wordes, saying: What portion haue we in Dauid? we
haue no inheritaunce in the sonne of Isai: To your tentes O Israel, nowe see to
thyne owne house Dauid. And so Israel departed vnto their tentes.
17 Howebeit, ouer the children of Israel which dwelt in the cities of Iuda, dyd
Rehoboam raigne still.
18 The king Rehoboam sent Aduram the receauer of the tribute, and all they of
Israel stoned him to death: But king Rehoboam made speede to get him vp to his
charet, and to flee to Hierusalem.
19 And they of Israel rebelled against the house of Dauid, vnto this day.
20 And when al Israel heard that Ieroboam was come againe, they sent, and called
him vnto the multitude, and made him king ouer al Israel: and there was no tribe
that folowed the house of Dauid, but Iuda onely.
21 And when Rehoboam was come to Hierusalem, he gathered all the house of Iuda,
with the tribe of Beniamin, an hundred and fourescore thousande of chosen men
which were good warriours, to fight against the house of Israel, and to bring
the kingdome againe to Rehoboam the sonne of Solomon.
22 And the worde of God came vnto Semaia the man of God, saying:
23 Speake vnto Rehoboam the sonne of Solomon king of Iuda, & vnto all the house
of Iuda and Beniamin, & to the remnaunt of the people, saying:
24 Thus sayeth the Lorde, Ye shall not go vp, nor yet fight against your
brethren the children of Israel: returne euery man to his house, for this thing
is my doyng. They hearkened therfore to the worde of the Lorde, and returned to
depart, according to the word of the Lord.
25 Then Ieroboam buylt Sichem in mount Ephraim, and dwelt therin: and went from
thence, and buylt Penuel.
26 And Ieroboam thought in his heart: nowe shall the kingdome returne to the
house of Dauid.
27 For if this people go vp and do sacrifice in the house of the Lorde at
Hierusalem, then shall the heart of this people turne againe vnto their lorde
Rehoboam king of Iuda, and so shal they kill me, and go againe to Rehoboam king
of Iuda.
28 Wherupon the king toke counsel, and made two calues of golde, and sayd vnto
them, It is muche for you to go vp to Hierusalem: Behold O Israel, these are thy
goddes, which brought thee out of the lande of Egypt.
29 And he set the one in Bethel, and the other set he in Dan.
30 And this thing turned to sinne: for the people went (because of the one) as
farre as Dan.
31 And he made an house of hill aulters, and made priestes of the lowest of the
people, which were not of the sonnes of Leui.
32 And Ieroboam made a feast the fyfteene day of the eyght moneth, lyke vnto the
feast that is in Iuda, and offered on the aulter: And so did he in Bethel, to
offer vnto the calues that he had made: And he put in Bethel the priestes of the
hill aulters which he had made.
33 And he went vp to the aulter to burne incense whiche he had made in Bethel
the fyfteene day of the eyght moneth, euen in the moneth whiche he had imagined
of his owne hearte: and made a solemne feast vnto the children of Israel, and
offered vpon the aulter, and burnt incense.

Chapter 13

1 And behold, ther came a man of God out of Iuda by the worde of the lord, vnto
Bethel: and Ieroboam stoode by the aulter to put incense.
2 And he cried against the aulter in the worde of the Lorde, and sayd: O aulter
aulter, thus sayeth the Lorde: Behold, a childe shall be borne vnto the house of
Dauid, Iosia by name, and vpon thee shall he offer the priestes of the hill
aulters that burnt incense vpon thee, and mens bones shalbe burnt vpon thee.
3 And he gaue a token the same time, saying: This is the token that the Lorde
hath spoken it: Beholde, the aulter shall rent, and the ashes that are vpon it
shall fall out.
4 And when the king hearde the saying of the man of God whiche had cryed against
the aulter in Bethel, he stretched out his hande from the aulter, saying, Holde
him: And his hand which he put foorth against him dried vp, & he coulde not pull
it in againe to him.
5 The aulter also claue asunder, and the ashes fell out from the aulter,
according to the token which the man of God had geuen by the worde of the Lorde.
6 And the king aunswered, and sayd vnto the man of God: Oh pray vnto the Lorde
thy God, and make intercession for me, that my hande may be restored me againe.
And the ma of God besought the Lord, and the kinges hand was restored againe,
and became as it was afore.
7 And the king sayde vnto the man of God: Come home with me, that thou mayest
dine, and I will geue thee a reward.
8 And the man of God sayde vnto the king: If thou wouldest geue me halfe thyne
house, I will not go in with thee, neither will I eate bread, nor drinke water
in this place:
9 For so was it charged me through the word of the Lord, saying: Eate no bread
nor drinke water, nor turne agayne by the same way that thou camest.
10 And so he went another way, and returned not by the way that he came to
Bethel.
11 And there dwelt an olde prophet in Bethel, and his sonnes came and tolde him
al the workes that the man of God had done that day in Bethel, and the wordes
which he had spoken vnto the king tolde they their father also.
12 And their father sayde vnto them: What way went he? And his sonnes shewed him
what way the man of God went which came from Iuda.
13 And he saide vnto his sonnes: Saddle me the asse. Which when they had
saddled, he gat him vp thereon,
14 And went after the man of God, and founde him sytting vnder a tree, and he
said vnto him: Art thou the man of God that camest from Iuda? And he sayde, I
am.
15 He sayde vnto him: Come home with me, and eate bread.
16 He aunswered: I may not returne with thee, to go in with thee: neither wyl I
eate bread, or drinke water with thee in this place.
17 For it was saide to me in the word of the Lord: Thou shalt eate no bread, nor
drinke water there, nor turne againe to go by the way that thou camest.
18 He saide vnto him: I am a prophet also as well as thou, and an angell spake
vnto me in the word of the Lorde, saying: Bryng him againe with thee into thyne
house, that he may eate bread, & drinke water. And he lyed vnto him.
19 And so he went againe with him, and did eate bread in his house, and drancke
water.
20 And it fortuned, that as they sat at the table, the word of the Lorde came
vnto the prophet that brought him againe:
21 And he cryed vnto the man of God that came from Iuda, saying, Thus saith the
Lord: Because thou hast disobeyed the mouth of the Lorde, and hast not kept the
commaundement which the Lorde thy God commaunded thee:
22 But camest backe againe, and hast eaten bread, & druncke water in the place
concerning the which the Lorde did say vnto thee, Thou shalt eate no bread, nor
dryncke no water: thy carkasse shall not come vnto the sepulchre of thy fathers.
23 And so it came to passe that when he had eaten bread, and druncke, he sadled
him the asse, to wit, to the prophet who he had brought againe.
24 And when he was gone, a lion met him by the way, and slue him: and his
carkasse was cast in the way, & the asse stoode thereby, and the lion stoode by
the corse also.
25 And men that passed by sawe the carcasse cast in the way, & the lion standing
by the carcasse: and they came and tolde it in the towne where the olde prophet
dwelt.
26 And when the prophet that brought him backe againe from the way heard
thereof, he sayd: It is the man of God, he was disobedient vnto the word of the
Lorde, and therefore the Lord hath deliuered him vnto the lion, which hath rent
him, & slaine him according to the word of the Lorde which he spake vnto him.
27 And he spake to his sonnes, saying: Sadle me an asse: And they sadled him.
28 And he went, and founde his body cast in the way, and the asse and the lion
stoode by the corse, and the lion had not eaten the carcasse, nor hurt the asse.
29 And the prophet toke vp the body of the man of God, and layde it vpon the
asse, and brought it againe: and the olde prophet came to the citie to lament,
and to burie him.
30 And he layde his body in his owne graue, and then lamented ouer him saying
Alas my brother.
31 And when he had buryed him, he spake to his sonnes, saying: When I am dead,
see that ye burie me in the sepulchre wherein the man of God is buried: laye my
bones beside his bones.
32 For the saying which he cryed at the word of the Lorde against the aulter in
Bethel, and against all the houses of hie places which are in the cities of
Samarie, shall come to passe.
33 Howbeit, for all that Ieroboam conuerted not from his wicked way: but turned
backe, and made of the lowest of the people priestes of the hie places: And who
so pleased him, he filled his hand, and he became priest of the hie places.
34 And this thing turned to sinne vnto the house of Ieroboam, euen to destroy
him, and to bring him to naught from of the face of the earth.

Chapter 14

1 At that time Abia the sonne of Ieroboam fel sicke.
2 And Ieroboam saide vnto his wyfe: Up I pray thee, and disguise thy selfe, that
thou be not knowen to be the wyfe of Ieroboam: and get thee to Silo, for there
is Ahia the prophet which tolde me that I should be king ouer this people.
3 And take with thee ten loaues, and cracknelles, and a cruse of hony, and go to
him, that he may tell thee what shall become of the childe.
4 And Ieroboams wyfe did so, and arose, and went to Silo, and came to the house
of Ahia: But Ahia could not see, for his eyes were waxen dimme for age.
5 And the Lorde saide vnto Ahia: Beholde, the wyfe of Ieroboam commeth to aske a
thing of thee for her sonne, for he is sicke: But thus & thus shalt thou saye
vnto her. And whe she came in, she fayned her selfe to be an other woman.
6 But when Ahia heard the sounde of her feete as she came in at the doore, he
sayd: Come in thou wyfe of Ieroboam, why faynest thou thy selfe so to be
another? I am sent to thee to shew thee heauy thynges.
7 Go, tell Ieroboam, thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel: It repenteth me
forasmuch as I exalted thee from among the people, and made thee prince ouer my
people Israel,
8 I did rent the kingdome away from the house of Dauid, & gaue it thee:
Neuerthelesse, thou hast not ben as my seruaunt Dauid, which kept my
commaundementes, and folowed me with all his heart, to do that onely which was
right in myne eyes:
9 But hast done euil aboue al that were before thee: For thou hast gone & made
thee other gods, and moulten images, to prouoke me, and hast cast me behinde thy
backe:
10 Therefore beholde, I wyll bring euill vpon the house of Ieroboam, and wyll
roote out from Ieroboam euen him that pysseth against the wall, and him that is
in pryson and forsaken in Israel, and wyll take away the remnaunt of the house
of Ieroboam, as a man taketh away doung tyll he hath caryed all.
11 Whosoeuer of Ieroboams house die in the towne, him shall the dogges eate: and
he that dyeth in the fielde, shall the foules of the ayre eate: for the Lorde
hath saide it.
12 Up therfore & get thee to thyne owne house: Beholde, when thy foote entreth
into the citie, the childe shall dye,
13 And all they of Israel shall mourne for him, and burie him: For he onely of
Ieroboam shal come to the sepulchre, because in him there is found goodnesse
toward the Lord God of Israel in the house of Ieroboam.
14 Moreouer, the Lord shal stirre him vp a king ouer Israel which shall destroy
the house of Ieroboam in that day: But what is it now?
15 For the Lorde shall smyte Israel as when a reede is shaken in the water, & he
shall weede Israel out of this good lande which he gaue to their fathers, &
shall scatter them beyond the ryuer, because they haue made them groues, and
angred the Lorde.
16 And he shall geue Israel vp because of the sinnes of Ieroboam, which did
sinne, and made Israel to sinne.
17 And Ieroboams wyfe arose, and departed, and came to Thirzah: & when she came
to the thressholde of the doore, the childe was dead.
18 And al Israel buried him, and lamenting him, according to the word of the
Lorde which he spake by the hande of his seruaunt Ahia the prophet.
19 And the rest of the wordes that concerne Ieroboam, how he warred, and how he
raigned, beholde they are written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of
Israel.
20 And the dayes which Ieroboam raigned, were two and twentie yeres: And when he
was layed asleepe with his fathers, Nadab his sonne raigned in his steade.
21 Rehoboam the sonne of Solomon raigned in Iuda: and Rehoboam was fourtie and
one yeres olde when he began to raigne, & he raigned seuenteene yeres in
Hierusalem, the citie which the Lorde did choose out of all the tribes of
Israel, to put his name there: His mothers name was Naama, an Ammonite.
22 And Iuda wrought wickednesse in the sight of the Lorde, and angred him in mo
thinges then their fathers dyd in their sinnes which they sinned.
23 For they also made them hie places, images, and groues on euery hie hill, and
vnder euery thicke tree.
24 And there was a stewes of male children in the lande, and they did according
to all the abhominations of the nations which the Lord cast out before the
children of Israel.
25 And it fortuned, that in the fift yere of king Rehoboam, Sisac king of Egypt
came vp against Hierusalem:
26 And toke away the treasures of the house of the Lorde, and the treasures of
the kings house, & spoyled all that was to be had: And he toke away all the
shieldes of golde which Solomon had made.
27 In whose steade king Rehoboam made brasen shieldes, and committed them vnto
the handes of the keping of the captaynes of the garde, which wayted at the
doore of the kinges house.
28 And when the king went into the house of the Lorde, they of the garde bare
them, & brought them againe into the garde chamber.
29 The rest of the wordes that concerne Rehoboam, and all that he did, are they
not written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Iuda?
30 And there was warre betweene Rehoboam and Ieroboam all their lyues.
31 And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buryed besyde his fathers in the
citie of Dauid: His mothers name was Naama, an Ammonite. And Abiam his sonne
raigned in his steade.

Chapter 15

1 In the eighteenth yere of king Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat, raigned Abiam ouer
Iuda.
2 Three yeres raigned he in Hierusalem: and his mothers name was Maacha, the
daughter of Abisalom.
3 And he walked in all the sinnes of his father which he had done before him,
and his heart was not perfect with the Lorde his God, as the heart of Dauid his
father.
4 Neuerthelesse, for Dauids sake did the Lorde his God geue him a lyght in
Hierusalem, that he set vp his sonne after him, and stablished Hierusalem:
5 Because Dauid did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and turned
from nothing that he commaunded him all the dayes of his lyfe, saue onely in the
matter of Urias the Hethite.
6 And there was warre betweene Rehoboam and Ieroboam, as long as he lyued.
7 The rest of the wordes that concerne Abiam, and all that he did, are they not
written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Iuda? And there was warre
betweene Abiam & Ieroboam.
8 And Abiam slept with his fathers, & they buried him in the citie of Dauid: and
Asa his sonne raigned in his steade.
9 In the twentith yere of Ieroboam king of Israel raigned Asa ouer Iuda.
10 Fourtie & one yeres raigned he in Hierusalem: and his mothers name was
Maacha, the daughter of Abisalom.
11 And Asa did that seemed ryght in the eyes of the Lorde, as did Dauid his
father.
12 And he toke away the male stewes out of the lande, and put away all the
abhominable idols that his fathers had made.
13 And he put downe Maacha his mother from bearing rule, because she had made an
idoll in a groue: And Asa destroyed her idoll, and burnt it by the brooke
Cedron.
14 But the hie places were not put downe: Neuerthelesse Asa his heart was
perfect with the Lorde all his dayes.
15 He brought in the holy vessels of his father, and that he had dedicate vnto
the house of the Lord, golde, and siluer, and iewels.
16 And there was warre betweene Asa, & Baasa king of Israel all their dayes.
17 And Baasa king of Israel went vp against Iuda, and built Rama, so that he
woulde let none go out or in to Asa king of Iuda.
18 Then Asa toke al the siluer and golde that was left in the treasures of the
house of the Lorde, and the treasures of the kinges house, and deliuered them
vnto the handes of his seruauntes, and king Asa sent them to Benhadad the sonne
of Tabrimon the sonne of Hezion king of Syria that dwelt at Damasco, saying:
19 There is a bonde betweene me & thee, betweene my father and thy father: and
beholde I haue sent vnto thee a present of siluer and golde, that thou come and
breake the bonde that thou hast with Baasa king of Israel, that he may depart
from me.
20 So Benhadad hearkened vnto king Asa, & sent the captaynes of the hoastes
which he had, against the cities of Israel, and smote Hion, and Dan, and Abel,
Beth Maacah, and all the region of Ceneroth, with all the lande of Nephthali.
21 And when Baasa heard thereof, he left building of Rama, and dwelt in Thirza.
22 Then king Asa made a proclamation throughout all Iuda, that none should be
excused: And so they toke the stones of Ramah and the tymber wherewith Baasa had
builded, and king Asa built with them the hill of Beniamin and Mispah.
23 The remnaunt of all the wordes that concerne Asa, and all his might, and all
that he did, and the cities which he builded, are they not written in the booke
of the cronicles of the kinges of Iuda? Neuerthelesse, in his olde age he was
diseased in his feete.
24 And Asa slept with his fathers, & was buried beside his fathers in the citie
of Dauid his father: And Iehosaphat his sonne raigned in his steade.
25 And Nadab the sonne of Ieroboam began to raigne vpon Israel the second yere
of Asa king of Iuda, and raigned vpon Israel two yeres.
26 And he did euill in ye sight of the Lord, walking in ye way of his father, &
in his sinne wherewith he made Israel sinne.
27 And Baasa the sonne of Ahia, which was of the house of Isachar, conspired
against him, and Baasa smote him at Gibbethon, which is a citie of the
Philistines (for Nadab and al Israel layed siege to Gibbethon)
28 Euen in the third yere of Asa king of Iuda, did Baasa slay him, and raigned
in his steade.
29 And it fortuned that when he was king, he smote all the house of Ieroboam,
and he left him naught that breathed, vntill he had put him cleane out,
according vnto the saying of the Lorde which he spake by his seruaunt Ahia the
Selonite:
30 Because of the sinnes of Ieroboam, wherewith he sinned and made Israel sinne,
when he with his prouocation angred the Lorde God of Israel.
31 The rest of the wordes that concerne Nadab, and all that he did, are they not
written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Israel?
32 And there was warre betweene Asa & Baasa king of Israel all their dayes.
33 So in the third yere of Asa king of Iuda, began Baasa the sonne of Ahia to
raigne ouer all Israel in Thirza, twentie and foure yeres.
34 And he did that which is euill in the sight of the Lorde, walking in the way
of Ieroboam, and in his sinne, wherewith he made Israel to sinne.

Chapter 16

1 Then the worde of the Lorde came to Iehu the sonne of Hanani against Baasa,
saying:
2 Forasmuch as I exalted thee out of the duste, and made thee captayne ouer my
people Israel, and thou hast walked in the way of Ieroboam, and hast made my
people Israel to sinne, to anger me with their sinnes:
3 Beholde, I will roote out the posteritie of Baasa, and the posteritie of his
house: and will make thy house lyke the house of Ieroboa the sonne of Nabat.
4 That man of Baasa which dyeth in the citie, him shall the dogges eate: and
that man of him which dyeth in the fieldes, shall the foules of the ayre eate.
5 The rest of the wordes that concerne Baasa, and what he did, & his power, are
they not written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Israel?
6 And so Baasa slept with his fathers, and was buried in Thirza, and Ela his
sonne raigned in his steade.
7 And by the hande of the prophet Iehu the sonne of Hanani, came the worde of
the Lord against Baasa, and against his house, & against all the wickednesse
that he did in the sight of the Lorde, in angryng him with the worke of his owne
handes, that he should be like the house of Ieroboam, and because he killed him.
8 The twentie & sixth yere of Asa king of Iuda, began Ela the sonne of Baasa to
raigne ouer Israel in Thirza, two yeres.
9 And his seruaunt Zimri (which was captayne of halfe his charets) conspired
against him as he was in Thirza drinking, and was druncken in the house of Arza,
steward of his house in Thirza.
10 And Zimri came, and smote him, and killed him in the twentie & seuenth yere
of Asa king of Iuda, and raigned in his steade.
11 And it fortuned that when he was king and sat on his seate, he slue al the
house of Baasa, not leauing thereof one to pysse against a wall: Yea, he slue
his kinsefolkes and freendes also.
12 And thus did Zimri destroy all the house of Baasa, according to the worde of
the Lorde, which he spake against Baasa by the hande of Iehu the prophet,
13 For all the sinnes of Baasa and sinnes of Ela his sonne which they sinned,
and made Israel to sinne and angre the Lorde God of Israel with their vanities.
14 The rest of the wordes that concerne Ela & all that he did, are they not
written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Israel?
15 In the twentie & seuenth yere of Asa king of Iuda, did Zimri raigne seuen
dayes in Thirza: & the people was then in the hoast besieging Gibbethon, a citie
of the Philistines.
16 And the people in the hoast heard one saye, Zimri hath conspired, and slayne
the king: Wherefore all they of Israel made Amri the captayne of the hoast, king
ouer Israel that same day, euen in the hoast.
17 And Amri departed vp from Gibbethon, and all Israel with him, and they
besieged Thirza.
18 And when Zimri sawe that the citie must needes be taken, he went into the
palace of the kinges house, and burnt him selfe & the kinges house with fyre,
and so dyed
19 For his sinnes which he sinned, in doing that which is euill in the sight of
the Lorde, and in walking in the waye of Ieroboam, and in his sinnes which he
did, and in that he made Israel to sinne.
20 The rest of the wordes that concerne Zimri, & the treason that he wrought,
are they not written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Israel?
21 Then were the people of Israel deuided into two partes: for halfe the people
folowed Thibni the sonne of Ginath, making him king: and the other halfe folowed
Amri.
22 But the people that folowed Amri, preuayled against the people that folowed
Thibni the sonne of Ginath: And so Thibni dyed, and Amri raigned.
23 In the thirtie and one yere of Asa king of Iuda, began Amri to raigne ouer
Israel twelue yeres: Sixe yeres raigned he in Thirza.
24 He bought the hill Schomron of one Schemar for two talents of siluer, and
buylt in the hill, and called the name of the citie which he buylt, after the
name of Schemar, which had ben owner of the hill Schomron.
25 But Amri wrought that which is euil in the eyes of the Lorde, and did worse
then all that were before him.
26 For he walked in all the way of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat, and in his
sinnes, that made Israel sinne, to anger the Lorde God of Israel with their
vanities.
27 The rest of the wordes that concerne Amri, & al that he did, and his strength
that he shewed, are they not written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges
of Israel?
28 And so Amri slept with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria, & Ahab his
sonne raigned in his steade.
29 In the thirtie and eyght yere of Asa king of Iuda, began Ahab the sonne of
Amri to raigne ouer Israel, & the same Ahab the sonne of Amri raigned ouer
Israel in Samaria twentie and two yeres.
30 And Ahab the sonne of Amri did euill in the sight of the Lorde aboue all that
were before him.
31 For it seemed vnto him but a light thing to walke in the sinnes of Ieroboam
the sonne of Nabat: He toke Iezabel also the daughter of Ethbaal king of the
Sidonites to wyfe, and went and serued Baal, and worshipped him.
32 And he reared vp an aulter for Baal in the temple of Baal which he had
builded in Schomron:
33 And Ahab made a groue, and proceeded further in angring the Lorde God of
Israel then all the kinges of Israel that were before him.
34 In his dayes did Hiel of Bethel build Iericho: He layde the foundation therof
in Abiram his eldest sonne, and set vp the gates thereof in his youngest sonne
Segub, according vnto the word of the Lorde which he spake by Iosuah the sonne
of Nun.

Chapter 17

1 And Elias ye Thesbite, which was of the inhabiters of Gilead, sayde vnto Ahab:
As the Lorde God of Israel lyueth, before whom I stande, there shalbe neither
deawe nor rayne these yeres, but according to my worde.
2 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto him, saying:
3 Get thee hence, & turne thee eastward, and hide thy selfe in the brooke
Cherith, that is, it that lyeth before Iordane.
4 Thou shalt drinke of the ryuer, and I haue commaunded the rauens to feede thee
there.
5 And so he went, and did according vnto the word of the Lorde: for he went, and
dwelt by the brooke Cherith that is before Iordane.
6 And the rauens brought him bread and fleshe in the morning, and likewyse bread
and fleshe in the euening: and he drancke of the brooke.
7 And it chaunced after a while that the brooke dryed vp, because there fell no
rayne vpon the earth.
8 And the word of the Lorde came vnto him, saying:
9 Up, and get thee to Zarphath, which is in Sidon, and dwell there: Beholde, I
haue commaunded a wydow there to sustaine thee.
10 So he arose, and went to Zarphath: and when he came to the gate of the citie,
beholde the widow was there gathering of stickes: And he called to her, and
said: set me I pray thee a litle water in a vessel, that I may drincke.
11 And as she was going to fet it, he cryed after her, and saide: bryng me I
pray thee a morsell of bread also in thyne hand.
12 She sayde: As the Lorde thy God lyueth, I haue no bread redy, but euen an
handful of meale in a barrel, & a litle oyle in a cruse: And beholde, I am
gathering two stickes, for to go in and dresse it for me and my sonne, that we
may eate it, and dye.
13 And Elias saide vnto her, Feare not, go, and do as thou hast saide: but make
me thereof a litle cake first of all, & bring it vnto me, and afterward make for
thee and thy sonne.
14 For thus saith the Lord God of Israel: The meale in the barrel shall not be
wasted, neither shal the oyle in the cruse be minished, vntil the Lorde haue
sent rayne vpon the earth.
15 And she went, and did as Elias sayde: And she, and he, and her house, did
eate a good space.
16 And the meale wasted not out of the barrell, neither was the oyle spent out
of the cruse, according to the word of the Lorde which he spake by the hande of
Elias.
17 And after these thinges, it happened that the sonne of the wyfe of the house
fel sicke, & his sicknesse was so sore that there was no breath left in him.
18 And she said vnto Elias: What haue I to do with thee O thou man of God? Art
thou come vnto me to call my sinne againe to remembraunce, and to slay my sonne?
19 He saide vnto her: geue me thy sonne. And he toke him out of her lap, &
caried him vp into a loft where he abode, and layde him vpon his owne bed:
20 And called vnto the Lorde, and saide: O Lorde my God, hast thou punished also
this wydow with whom I dwell as a straunger, & hast slaine her sonne?
21 And he stretched him selfe vpon the childe three tymes, and called vnto the
Lorde, and saide: O Lorde my God, I pray thee let this childes soule come into
him againe.
22 And the Lord heard the voyce of Elias, & the soule of the childe came into
him againe, and he reuiued.
23 And Elias toke the boye, and brought him downe out of the chamber into the
house, and deliuered him vnto his mother: And Elias saide, Behold, thy sonne
lyueth.
24 And the woman said vnto Elias: Now I knowe that thou art a man of God, and
that the worde of the Lorde in thy mouth, is true.

Chapter 18

1 After processe of many dayes, the word of the Lord came to Elias in the third
yere, saying: Go shewe thy selfe vnto Ahab, and I wyll sende rayne vpon the
earth.
2 And Elias went to shewe him selfe vnto Ahab: and there was a great famishment
in Samaria.
3 And Ahab called Obadia, which was the gouernour of his house: (and Obadia
feared God greatly.
4 For when Iezabel destroyed the prophets of the Lord, Obadia toke an hundred
prophets, and hid them by fiftie in a caue, and prouided bread and water for
them.)
5 And Ahab saide vnto Obadia: Go into the lande, vnto all fountaines of water,
and vnto all brookes, if happyly we may finde grasse to saue the horses and
mules aliue, and that we destroy not some of the beastes.
6 And so they deuided the lande betweene them to walke through it: Ahab went one
way by him selfe, and Obadia went another way by him selfe.
7 And it chaunced that as Obadia was in the way, beholde Elias met him, and he
knew him, and fell on his face, and saide: Art not thou my lorde Elias?
8 And he aunswered him, I am he: Go, and tel thy lorde, beholde, Elias is here.
9 He saide: What haue I sinned, that thou wouldest delyuer thy seruaunt into the
hande of Ahab, to slay me?
10 As the Lorde thy God liueth, there is no nation or kingdome, whyther my lord
hath not sent to seeke thee: And when they saide, he is not there: he toke an
oth of the kingdome and nation when he found thee not.
11 And now thou sayest, Go, and tell thy lorde that Elias is here.
12 And assoone as I am gone from thee, the spirite of the Lorde shall carrie
thee into some place that I do not knowe, and so when I come and tell Ahab, and
he can not finde thee, he shall slay me: But I thy seruaunt feare the Lorde from
my youth vp.
13 Was it not tolde my lorde what I did, when Iezabel slue the prophets of the
Lorde? how I hid an hundred men of the Lordes prophets, fiftie men in one caue,
and fiftie in another, and prouided them of bread and water?
14 And thou sayest, Go thou now & shewe thy lorde, beholde Elias is here: that
he may slay me.
15 And Elias saide: As the Lorde of hoastes liueth before whom I stand, I wyll
shewe my selfe vnto him this day.
16 So Obadia went to meete Ahab, and tolde him: And Ahab went to meete Elias.
17 And it fortuned that when Ahab sawe Elias, he saide vnto him: Art thou he
that troubleth Israel?
18 He aunswered: It is not I that haue troubled Israel, but thou and thy fathers
house, in that ye haue forsaken the commaundements of the Lorde, & thou hast
folowed Baal.
19 Now therefore send, and gather to me all Israel vnto mount Carmel, and the
prophets of Baal foure hundred and fiftie, and the prophets of the idols groues
foure hundred, which eate at Iezabels table.
20 So Ahab sent vnto all the children of Israel, and gathered the prophets
together vnto mount Carmel.
21 And Elias came vnto all the people, and said: how long halt ye betweene two
opinions? If the Lorde be God, folowe him: but if Baal be he, then go after him.
And the people aunswered him not one worde.
22 Then saide Elias vnto the people againe I onely remayne a prophete of the
Lorde: but Baals prophets are foure hundred and fiftie.
23 Let them therefore geue vs two oxen, and let them choose the one, & cut hym
in peeces, and lay him on wood, and put no fire vnder: and I wyll dresse the
other oxe, and laye him on wood, & wyll put no fyre vnder.
24 And call ye on the name of your gods, & I wyl call on the name of the Lorde:
and then the God that aunswereth by fire, let him be God. And all the people
aunswered and saide, It is wel spoken.
25 And Elias saide vnto the prophets of Baal: Choose you an oxe, & dresse him
first, for ye are many: & call on the name of your gods, but put no fire vnder.
26 And they toke the one oxe that he dyd geue them, and they dressed it, and
called on the name of Baal from morning to noone, saying, O Baal heare vs. But
there was no voyce, nor one to aunswere: And they lept vpon the aulter that they
had made.
27 And at noone Elias mocked them, and sayde: Crye lowde, for he is a God,
peraduenture he is talking, or occupied in folowing vpon his enemies, or is in
his iourney, or happyly he slepeth, and must be awaked with your crie.
28 And they cried lowde, and cut them selues as their maner was with kniues &
launcers, till the blood folowed on the.
29 And it chaunced, that when midday was passed, they prophesied vntill the time
of the euening sacrifice: But there was neither voyce, nor one to aunswere, nor
any that regarded them.
30 And Elias said vnto all the folke: Come to me. And all the people came to
him: And he repaired the aulter of the Lord that was broken.
31 And Elias toke twelue stones, according to the number of the twelue tribes of
the sonnes of Iacob, vnto whom the word of the Lorde came, saying: Israel shalbe
thy name.
32 And with the stones he made an aulter in the name of the Lorde: And he made a
ditch about the aulter, as great as would conteyne two measures of seede.
33 And he put the wood in order, and hewed the oxe in peeces, and layed him on
the wood, and said: Fill foure barrels with water, and powre it on the burnt
sacrifice, and on the wood.
34 And he sayde: Do so againe. And they dyd so the seconde time. And he sayde
againe: Do it the thirde time. And they dyd it the thirde time:
35 And the water ran round about the aulter, & he filled the pitte with water
also.
36 And it fortuned, that when they should offer the euening sacrifice, Elias the
prophete came, and sayde: Lorde God of Abraham, Isahac, and of Israel, it shalbe
knowen this day that thou art the God in Israel, & that I am thy seruaunt, and
that I haue done all these thinges at thy commaundement.
37 Heare me O Lord, heare me, that this people may knowe that thou art the Lorde
God, and that thou hast turned their heart againe nowe at the last.
38 And the fire of the Lord fel, and consumed the burnt sacrifice, and the wood,
and the stones, and the duste, and licked vp the water that was in the pit.
39 And when all the people sawe it, they fell on their faces, and sayde: The
Lord he is God, the Lorde he is God.
40 And Elias sayd vnto them: Take the prophetes of Baal, and let not one of them
escape. And they toke them, and Elias brought them vnto the brooke Kison, and
slue them there.
41 And Elias sayde vnto Ahab: Get thee vp, eate and drinke: for there is a
sounde of much rayne.
42 And so Ahab went vp to eate and to drinke, and Elias went vp to the top of
Carmel, and he layde him selfe flat vpo the earth, and put his face betweene his
knees,
43 And sayde to his seruaunt: Go vp I pray thee and loke towarde the way of the
sea. And he went vp, and loked, and sayde: There is nothing. And againe he
sayde: Go againe seuen times.
44 And it fortuned that at the seuenth time, he sayde: Beholde there aryseth a
litle cloude of the sea lyke a mans hand. He sayde: Go, and say vnto Ahab, Make
fast thy charet and get thee downe, that the rayne stoppe thee not.
45 And it came to passe, that in the meane whyle the heauen was blacke with
cloudes and winde, & there was a great rayne: And Ahab gat vp, and came to
Iezrahel.
46 And the hande of the Lorde was on Elias, and he girded vp his loynes, and
ranne before Ahab, till he came to Iezrahel.

Chapter 19

1 And Ahab tolde Iezabel all that Elias had done, and how he had slayne al the
prophetes with the sworde.
2 Then Iezabel sent a messenger vnto Elias, saying: So and so let the gods do to
me, if I make not thy soule lyke one of theirs by to morowe this time.
3 When he sawe that, he arose, and went for his life, and came to Beerseba in
Iuda, and left his seruaunt there.
4 But he him selfe went a dayes iourney into the wildernesse, and came and sat
downe vnder a Iuniper tree, and desired for his soule that he might dye, and
sayde: It is nowe enough O Lorde, take my soule, for I am not better then my
fathers.
5 And as he lay and slept vnder the Iuniper tree: behold an angel touched him,
and sayde vnto him: Up, and eate.
6 And when he loked about him, beholde there was a cake baken on the coales, and
a vessell of water at his head: And he dyd eate and drinke, and layde him downe
againe to sleepe.
7 And the angel of the Lord came againe the seconde time, and touched him, and
sayde: Up, and eate, for thou hast yet a great iourney.
8 And he arose, and dyd eate and drinke, & walked in the strength of that meate
fourtie dayes and fourtie nightes, euen vnto Horeb the mount of God.
9 When he came thyther vnto a caue, he lodged therein al night: And behold, the
word of the Lord came to him, and sayd vnto him: What doest thou here Elias?
10 And he aunswered, I haue ben ielous for the Lorde God of hoastes sake: For
the children of Israel haue forsaken thy couenaunt, broken downe thyne aulters,
and slayne thy prophetes with the sword: and I onely am left, and they seke my
lyfe to take it away.
11 And he sayd: Come out and stand vpon ye mount before the Lorde. And behold,
the Lorde went by, & a mightie strong winde that rent the mountaynes and brake
the rockes before the Lorde, but the Lord was not in the winde: And after the
winde, came an earthquake, but the Lorde was not in the earthquake:
12 And after the earthquake came fire, but the Lorde was not in the fire: And
after the fire, came a small still voyce.
13 And when Elias hearde, he couered his face with his mantle, and went out, and
stoode in the entring in of the caue: And beholde, there came a voyce vnto him,
& said: What doest thou here Elias?
14 And he aunswered: I haue ben ielous for the Lorde God of hoastes sake,
because the children of Israel haue forsaken thy couenaunt, cast downe thyne
aulters, and slayne thy prophetes with the sworde: and I onely am left, & they
seke my lyfe to take it away.
15 And the Lord sayde vnto him: Go, and turne thy way to the wildernesse vnto
Damasco: & when thou commest there, annoynt Hazael king ouer Syria:
16 And Iehu sonne of Nimsi shalt thou annoynt king ouer Israel: And Elisa the
sonne of Saphat of Abel Meholah shalt thou annoynt to be prophete in thy roome.
17 And it shall come to passe, that whoso escapeth the sworde of Hazael, him
shall Iehu slay: & if any man scape the sword of Iehu, him shall Elisa put to
death.
18 And thereto I haue left me seuen thousande in Israel, of whiche neuer man
bowed his knees vnto Baal, nor kissed him with his mouth.
19 So he departed thence, & found Elisa the sonne of Saphat plowing, & hauing
twelue yocke of oxen before him, and he with the twelue: And Elias went by him,
and cast his mantle vpon him.
20 And he left the oxen, and ranne after Elias, and sayde: Let me I pray thee
kysse my father and my mother, & then I will folowe thee. He sayde vnto him: Go
backe againe, for what is it that I haue done to thee?
21 And when he went backe againe from him, he toke a couple of oxen, and slue
them, and dressed the fleshe with the instrumentes of the oxen, and gaue vnto
the people, and they dyd eate: And then he arose and went after Elias, and
ministred vnto him.

Chapter 20

1 And Benhadad the king of Syria gathered all his hoast together, hauing thirtie
& two kinges with him, and horses and charets: and went vp and besieged Samaria,
& warred against it.
2 And he sent messengers to Ahab king of Israel into the citie, and sayde vnto
him, thus saith Benhadad.
3 Thy siluer & thy gold is myne, & the fayrest of thy wiues & of thy childre be
mine.
4 And the king of Israel aunswered and said: My lord king, according to thy
saying, I am thyne and all that I haue.
5 And when the messengers came againe, they sayd, thus sayth Benhadad: Forasmuch
as I haue sent vnto thee, saying, Thou shalt deliuer me thy siluer and thy
golde, and thy wyues, and thy children:
6 I will therfore send my seruauntes vnto thee to morowe this time: and they
shall searche thyne house, & the houses of thy seruauntes, and whatsoeuer is
pleasaunt in thyne eyes, they shall take it in their handes, and bring it away.
7 Then the king of Israel sent for all the elders of the land, and said: Take
heede I pray you, and see howe this felowe goeth about mischiefe: For he sent
vnto me for my wiues, for my children, for my siluer, and for my golde, and I
denyed him not.
8 And all the elders and all the people said: Hearken not vnto him, nor consent.
9 Wherfore he sayde vnto the messengers of Benhadad: Tell my lord the king, all
that thou dyddest send for to thy seruaut at the first time, that I will do: but
this thing I may not do. And the messengers departed, and brought aunswere
againe.
10 And Benhadad sent vnto him againe, and sayde: Thus and thus do the gods vnto
me, if the dust of Samaria be enough for al the people that folowe me, to take
euery man an handfull.
11 And the king of Israel aunswered, and sayd: Tell him, let not him that
putteth on his harnesse boast him selfe, as he that putteth it of.
12 And it fortuned, that when Benhadad hearde that tydinges, as he was with the
kinges drinking within the pauilions, and he saide vnto this seruauntes, Put
your selues in order. And they set them selues in aray against the citie.
13 And beholde, there came a prophete vnto Ahab king of Israel, saying, thus
sayeth the Lord: Hast thou seene all this great multitude? beholde, I will
deliuer it into thyne hand this day, & thou shalt knowe that I am the Lorde.
14 And Ahab sayd: By whom? He sayde: Thus sayth the Lorde, euen by the
seruauntes of the gouernours of ye shyres. He sayd againe: who shall order the
battayle? And he aunswered: Thou.
15 Then he numbred the seruauntes of the gouernours of the shyres, & they were
two hundred and thirtie and two: And after them also he numbred all the people
of the children of Israel euen seuen thousande.
16 And they went out at noone: but Benhadad dyd drinke till he was drunken in
the pauillions, both he and the kinges: eue thirtie & two kinges, that holpe
him.
17 And the seruauntes of the gouernours of the shyres went out first, and
Benhadad sent out, & they shewed him, saying: There are men come out of Samaria.
18 He sayde: Whether they be come out for peace, take them alyue: or whether
they be come out to fight, take them yet alyue.
19 And so those young men of the gouernours of the shyres came out of the citie,
and the hoast after them:
20 And they slue euery one his enemie that came in his way: and the Syrians
fled, & they of Israel folowed after the: And Benhadad the king of Syria scaped
on a horse, with his horsemen.
21 And the king of Israel went out, and smote the horses and charettes, & with a
great slaughter slue he the Syrians.
22 (And there came a prophete to the king of Israel, and said vnto him: Go
foorth, and play the man, be wyse, & take heede what thou doest: for when the
yere is gone about, the king of Syria will come vp against thee.)
23 And the seruauntes of the king of Syria sayde vnto him: The gods of the
hilles are their gods, and therefore they had the better of vs: but let vs fight
against them in the playne, and for what ye will we shall haue the better of
them.
24 And this do: Take the kinges away euery man out of his place, & put dukes in
their roomes:
25 And do thou number thee an hoast, lyke the hoast that thou hast lost, such
horses and suche charets, and we will fight against them in the plaine, and thou
shalt see vs get the better of the. And he hearkened vnto their voyce, and dyd
euen so.
26 And it fortuned, that after the yere was gone about, Benhadad numbred the
Syrians, and went vp to Aphec to fight against Israel.
27 And the children of Israel were numbred, & with their whole number went they
against them, and the children of Israel pitched before them lyke two litle
flockes of kiddes: but the Syrians filled the countrey.
28 And there came a man of God, and sayd vnto the king of Israel, thus sayth the
Lorde: Because the Syrians haue sayd, the Lorde is but God of the hilles, and
not God of the valleys: therfore wil I deliuer all this great multitude into
thyne hande, and ye shall knowe that I am the Lorde.
29 And they pitched one ouer against the other seuen dayes: and it came to
passe, that in the seuenth day the battaile was ioyned, and the children of
Israel slue of the Syrians an hundred thousande footemen in one day.
30 But the rest fled to Aphec into the citie, and there fell a wall vpon twentie
and seuen thousande of the men that were left: And Benhadad fled, and came into
the citie, from chamber to chamber.
31 And his seruauntes said vnto him: Behold, we haue heard say that the kinges
of the house of Israel are mercyfull kinges: We will therfore put sackcloth
about our loynes, and ropes about our heades, and go out to the king of Israel,
if happyly he will saue thy lyfe.
32 And so they girded sackcloth about their loynes, & put ropes about their
heades, and came to the king of Israel, and said: Thy seruaunt Benhadad sayth, I
pray thee let me lyue. He sayde: Is he yet alyue? he is my brother.
33 And ye men toke that word for good lucke and hastyly caught it out of his
mouth, and sayd: Yea thy brother Benhadad. He sayde: Go, bring him hyther. And
Benhadad came out vnto him, and he caused him to come vp into the charet.
34 And he said vnto him: The cities which my father toke from thy father, I will
restore agayne, and thou shalt make streates for thee in Damasco, as my father
dyd in Samaria: And I wil make an appoyntment with thee, & send the away. And so
he made an appoyntment with him, and sent him away.
35 And there was a certayne man of the children of the prophetes, whiche sayde
vnto his neyghbour in the word of the Lord: Smyte me I pray thee. And the man
woulde not smyte him.
36 Then sayd he vnto him: Because thou hast not hearkened vnto the voyce of the
Lorde: beholde, assoone as thou art departed fro me, a lion shal slay thee. And
it came to passe, that assoone as he was departed from him, a lion found him,
and slue him.
37 Then he founde another man, & sayde: Smyte me I pray thee. And the man smote
him, so that in smyting he wounded him.
38 So the prophete went foorth, & wayted for the king by the way, and put him
selfe out of knowledge with ashes whiche he layed vpon his face.
39 And when the king came by, he cryed vnto the king, and sayde: Thy seruaunt
wet out in the middes of the battel, and behold there went away a man, whom
another man brought vnto me, & sayde, Kepe this man: and if he be myssed or
lost, thy lyfe shall go for his, or els thou shalt pay a talent of siluer.
40 And as thy seruaunt had here & there to do, he was gone. And the king of
Israel sayde vnto him: Euen so shall thy iudgement be, as thou hast defined it
thy selfe.
41 And he hasted, & toke the ashes away from his face, and the king of Israel
knewe him, that he was of ye prophetes.
42 And he sayde vnto him, Thus sayth the Lorde: Because thou hast let go out of
thy hande a man that is in my curse, thy lyfe shall go for his lyfe, and thy
people for his people.
43 And the king of Israel went to his house wayward and in displeasure, and came
to Samaria.

Chapter 21

1 After these thinges, it chaunced, that Naboth the Iezraelite had a vineyard in
Iezrahel, hard by the palace of Ahab king of Samaria.
2 And Ahab spake vnto Naboth, saying: Geue me thy vineyarde, that I may make me
a garde of hearbes thereof, because it lyeth so nye my house, and I wil geue
thee for it a better vineyarde then it is: or rather if it please thee, I will
geue thee the worth of it in money.
3 And Naboth sayd to Ahab: The Lord forbid that from me, that I should geue the
inheritauce of my fathers vnto thee.
4 And Ahab came into the house heauy and euyll apayde because of the worde
whiche Naboth the Iesraelite had spoken to him, for he had sayde: I will not
geue thee the inheritaunce of my fathers. And he layde him downe vpon his bed,
and turned away his face, and woulde eate no bread.
5 But Iezabel his wyfe came to him, and sayde vnto him: Why is thy spirite so
wayward that thou eatest no bread?
6 And he sayd vnto her: For I spake vnto Naboth the Iezraelite, and said vnto
him, Geue me thy vineyarde for money: Or els if it please thee, I will geue thee
another vineyarde for it. And he aunswered: I will not geue thee my vineyarde.
7 And Iezabel his wyfe sayde vnto him: Doest thou nowe gouerne the kingdome of
Israel? vp, and eate bread, and set thyne heart at rest: I wil geue thee ye
vineyarde of Naboth the Iezraelite.
8 And so she wrote a letter in Ahabs name, and sealed it with his seale, and
sent the letter vnto the elders, and to the nobles that were in his citie
dwelling with Naboth.
9 And she wrote in the letter, saying: Proclayme a fast, and set Naboth on hye
among the people:
10 And set two vnthriftes before him, to beare witnesse against him, saying,
Thou dyddest blaspheme God and the king: And then carie him out, and stone him
to death.
11 And the men of his citie, euen the elders and gouernours whiche dwelt in his
citie, dyd as Iezabel had sent vnto them, and as it was written in the letter
whiche she had sent vnto them.
12 They proclaymed a fast, and set Naboth among the chiefe of the people.
13 And there came in two men the children of Belial, and sate before him: And
the two vnthriftie persons witnessed against Naboth in the presence of the
people, saying: Naboth dyd blaspheme God and the king. And they caried him out
of the citie, & stoned him with stones, that he died.
14 And then they sent to Iezabel, saying: Naboth is stoned to death.
15 And it fortuned, when Iezabel hearde that Naboth was stoned to death, she
sayde to Ahab: Up, and take possession of the vineyarde of Naboth the
Iezraelite, whiche he denied to geue for money: for Naboth is not alyue, but
dead.
16 And when Ahab hearde that Naboth was dead, he stoode vp to go downe to the
vineyarde of Naboth the Iezraelite, and to take possession of it.
17 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto Elias the Thesbite, saying:
18 Up, and go downe to meete Ahab king of Israel, whiche is in Samaria: Beholde
he is in the vineyarde of Naboth, whyther he is gone downe to possesse it.
19 And therfore shalt thou say vnto him, thus sayth the Lorde: Hast thou killed
& also gotten possession? And thou shalt speake vnto him, saying, thus sayth the
Lord: In the place were dogges licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogges licke
euen thy blood also.
20 And Ahab sayde to Elias: Hast thou founde me, O thou myne enemie? He
aunswered: I haue founde thee, for thou hast sold thy selfe to worke wickednesse
in the sight of the Lorde.
21 Behold, I will bring euyll vpon thee, & wil make cleane riddaunce of thy
posteritie, and wil destroy fro Ahab, euen him that maketh water against the
wal, and him that is shut vp, & left behind in Israel.
22 And will make thyne house lyke the house of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat, &
lyke the house of Baasa the sonne of Ahia, for the prouocation wherwith thou
hast prouoked, and made Israel to synne.
23 And of Iezabel spake the Lord, saying: The dogges shall eate Iezabel by the
wall of Iezrahel,
24 And he that dieth of Ahab in ye towne, him shall dogges eate: and he that
dieth in the fielde, him shal the fowles of the ayre eate.
25 But there was none lyke Ahab, which dyd euen sell him selfe to worke
wickednesse in the sight of the Lorde, and that because Iezabel his wyfe pricked
hym forwarde.
26 He dyd exceeding abhominablie in folowing foule idols, according to all
thinges as dyd the Ammorites whom the Lorde cast out before the children of
Israel.
27 And it fortuned, that whe Ahab heard those wordes, he rent his clothes, and
put sackcloth about his flesh, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth & wene bare
foote.
28 And the worde of the Lorde came to Elia the Thesbyte, saying:
29 Seest thou howe Ahab humbleth him selfe before me? because he so submitteth
him selfe before me, I wil not bring that euil in his dayes: but in his sonnes
dayes will I bring euyll vpon his house.

Chapter 22

1 And they cotinued three yeres without warre betweene Syria & Israel.
2 And in the third yere dyd Iehosaphat the king of Iuda come downe to the king
of Israel.
3 (And the king of Israel sayde vnto his seruauntes: Know ye not that Ramoth in
Gilead is ours, and we sit still, and take it not out of the hande of the king
of Syria?)
4 And he sayde vnto Iehosaphat: Wilt thou come with me to battayle against
Ramoth in Gilead? And Iehosaphat sayde vnto the king of Israel: I am as thou
art, my people as thy people, and my horses as thy horses.
5 And Iehosaphat sayde vnto the king of Israel: Aske counsel I pray thee at the
worde of the Lorde to day.
6 And then the king of Israel gathered the prophetes together, vpon a foure
hundred men, & sayde vnto them: Shall I go against Ramoth in Gilead to battayle,
or shall I let it alone? And they sayde, Go vp: for the Lorde shall deliuer it
into the handes of the king.
7 And Iehosaphat sayd: Is there here neuer a prophete of the Lord more, that we
might inquire of him?
8 And the king of Israel sayde vnto Iehosaphat: There is yet one man (Michea the
sonne of Iimla) by whom we may aske counsell of the Lorde: But I hate him, for
he doth not prophecie good vnto me, but euyll. And Iehosaphat sayde: Let not the
king say so.
9 Then the king of Israel called a chamberlayne, & sayde: Fet Michea the sonne
of Iimla hyther at once.
10 And the king of Israel, and Iehosaphat the king of Iuda, sate eyther in his
seate, and their apparell on them, in a voyde place besyde the entring in of the
gate of Samaria, and all the prophetes prophecied before them.
11 And Zedekia the sonne of Chanaana made hornes of iron, and sayde, thus sayth
the Lord: With these hornes shalt thou pushe the Syrians, vntill thou haue made
an ende of them.
12 And all the prophetes prophecied euen so, saying: Go vp to Ramoth in Gilead,
and prosper: for the Lorde shall deliuer it into the kinges hande.
13 And the messenger that was gone to cal Michea, spake vnto him, saying:
Beholde, the wordes of ye prophetes speake good vnto the king with one mouth:
Let thy worde therefore I pray thee, be lyke the worde of euery one of them, to
speake that whiche is good.
14 And Michea sayde: As the Lorde lyueth, whatsoeuer the Lord sayth vnto me,
that will I speake.
15 And so he came to the king, & the king sayd vnto him: Michea, ought we to go
against Ramoth in Gilead to battayle, or to be stil? He aunswered to him: Go,
and prosper, the Lorde shall deliuer it into the hande of the king.
16 And the king sayde vnto him: So and so many times do I charge thee that thou
tell me nothing but that whiche is true, in the name of the Lorde.
17 He sayd: I saw all them of Israel scattered vpon the hilles, as sheepe that
haue not a sheephearde. And the Lorde sayde: These haue no maister, let euery
man returne to his house in peace.
18 (And the king of Israel sayde vnto Iehosaphat: Dyd I not tell thee, that he
woulde prophecie no good vnto me, but euyll?)
19 And he sayd againe: Heare thou therefore the word of the Lorde. I sawe the
Lord sit on his seate, and all the hoast of heauen stoode about him on his right
hande and on his left.
20 And the Lorde sayde: Who shall persuade Ahab, that he may go and fall at
Ramoth in Gilead? And one sayde on this maner, and another on that.
21 And there came foorth a certayne spirite, and stoode before the Lorde, and
sayde: I will persuade him. And the Lorde sayde vnto him: Wherwith?
22 And he sayde: I will go out, and be a false spirite in the mouth of all his
prophetes. He sayde, Thou shalt persuade him and preuayle: Go foorth then, & do
euen so.
23 Nowe therefore beholde the Lorde hath put a lying spirite in the mouth of all
these thy prophetes, and the Lorde hath spoken euyll towarde thee.
24 But Zedekia the sonne of Chanaana went to & smote Michea on the cheke, and
sayde: When went the spirite of the Lorde from me, to speake vnto thee?
25 And Michea sayde: Behold, thou shalt see in that day when thou shalt go from
chamber to chamber to hyde thee.
26 And the king of Israel sayde: Take Michea and cary him vnto Amon the gouerner
of the citie, and vnto Ioas the kinges sonne,
27 And say: Thus sayeth ye king: Put this felow in the prison house, and feede
him with bread of affliction, and with water of trouble, vntill I returne in
peace.
28 And Michea sayde: If thou returne in peace, the Lord hath not spoken by me.
And he sayde: Hearken ye people euery one of you.
29 And so the king of Israel, and Iehosaphat the king of Iuda, went vp to Ramoth
in Gilead.
30 And the king of Israel sayde vnto Iehosaphat: I wil chaunge my apparell, and
will enter into the battel, but put thou on thyne apparell. And the king of
Israel chaunged him selfe, and went to battell.
31 But the king of Syria commaunded the thirtie and two captaynes that had rule
ouer his charettes, saying: Fight neither with small nor great, saue onely
against the king of Israel.
32 And when the captaynes of the charets saw Iehosaphat, they sayd: Surely it is
the king of Israel. And they turned to fight against him: And Iehosaphat cryed.
33 And so it came to passe, that when the captaynes of the charettes sawe that
he was not the king of Israel, they turned backe from him.
34 And a certayne man drewe a bowe ignorantly, & smote the king of Israel
betweene the ribbes and his harnesse: Wherfore he sayd vnto the driuer of his
charettes, Turne thy hand, and cary me out of the hoast, for I am hurt.
35 (And the battel encreased that day: and the king stoode still in his charet
against the Syrians) and died at euen: And the blood ran out of the wounde into
the middes of the charet.
36 And ther wet a proclamation throughout the hoast about the goyng downe of the
sunne, saying: Euery man to his citie, and to his owne countrey.
37 So the king died, and was brought to Samaria, and they buried the king in
Samaria.
38 And one washed the charet in the poole of Samaria, & the dogges licked vp his
blood: and they washed his armour, according vnto the worde of the Lorde whiche
he spake.
39 The rest of the wordes that concerne Ahab and all that he did, and the iuorie
house whiche he made, and all the cities that he buylded, are they not written
in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Israel?
40 And so Ahab slept with his fathers, & Ahazia his sonne raigned in his steade.
41 Iehosaphat the sonne of Asa began to raigne vpon Iuda in the fourth yere of
Ahab king of Israel.
42 And Iehosaphat was thirtie and fiue yeres old when he began to raigne, and
raigned twentie and fiue yeres in Hierusalem: His mothers name was Azuba the
daughter of Silhi.
43 And he walked in all the wayes of Asa his father, and bowed not therefrom,
but dyd that whiche was right in the eyes of the Lorde: Neuerthelesse the high
places were not taken out of the way: for the people offred and burnt incense
yet in the high places.
44 And Iehosaphat made peace with the king of Israel.
45 The rest of the wordes that concerne Iehosaphat, & the might that he vsed, &
howe he warred, are they not written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges
of Iuda?
46 And the remnaunt of the stewes of the males which remayned in the dayes of
his father Asa, he put cleane out of the lande.
47 There was then no king in Edom, the deputie was king.
48 And Iehosaphat made shippes in the sea, to come through Tharsis to Ophir for
golde, but they went not: for the shippes brake at Ezion Gaber.
49 Then sayd Ahazia the sonne of Ahab vnto Iehosaphat: Let my seruautes go with
thy seruauntes in the shippes. But Iehosaphat woulde not.
50 And Iehosaphat dyd sleepe with his fathers, & was buried with his fathers in
the citie of Dauid his father: And Iehoram his sonne raigned in his steade.
51 Ahazia the sonne of Ahab began to raigne ouer Israel in Samaria the
seuenteenth yere of Iehosaphat king of Iuda, & raigned two yeres ouer Israel.
52 But he did euyl in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the way of his
father, & in the way of his mother, & in the way of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat,
whiche made Israel to synne.
53 For he serued Baal, & worshipped him, and prouoked the Lorde God of Israel
vnto wrath, according vnto all that his father had done.


2 Kings

Chapter 1

1 Then Moab rebelled against Israel, after the death of Ahab.
2 And Ahazia fell through a lattesse wyndowe of his vpper chamber that he had in
Samaria, and while he was in his sickenesse, he sent messengers and saide vnto
them: Go, and enquire of Beelzebub the god of Ekrom, whether I shall recouer of
this my disease.
3 But the angell of the Lorde spake to Elias the Thesbite: Arise, and go vp
against the messengers of the king of Samaria, and say vnto them: Is there not a
God in Israel, that ye go to aske counsel at Beelzebub the God of Ekrom?
4 Wherefore thus saith the Lorde: Thou shalt not come downe fro the bed on which
thou art gone vp, but shalt die the death. And Elias departed.
5 And when the messengers turned backe againe vnto him, he saide vnto them: Why
are ye now come againe?
6 They aunswered him: There came a man vp against vs, and sayde vnto vs: Go, &
turne againe vnto the king that sent you, and saye vnto him, thus saith the
Lorde: Is there not a God in Israel, that thou sendest to enquyre of Beelzebub
the God of Ekrom? Therefore thou shalt not come downe from the bed on which thou
art gone vp, but shalt dye the death.
7 And he said vnto them: What maner of man was that which came vp and met you,
and tolde you these wordes?
8 And they aunswered him: It was an heery man, and girt with a girdell of
leather about his loynes. And he saide: It is Elias the Thesbite.
9 Then the king sent vnto him a captayne ouer fiftie, with his fiftie men: which
came to him (and beholde he sat on the top of an hill) And he spake vnto him,
Thou man of God, the king hath saide: come downe.
10 Elias aunswered and saide to the captaine ouer the fiftie: If I be a man of
God, let fyre come downe from heauen & consume thee & thy fiftie. And there came
fyre from heauen, and consumed him and his fiftie.
11 Againe also he sent vnto him an other captaine ouer fiftie, with his fiftie:
And he spake and saide vnto him, O man of God, thus hath the king saide: Make
haste, and come downe.
12 Elias aunswered & saide vnto them: If I be a man of God, let fyre come downe
from heauen, and consume thee and thy fiftie. And there came fyre of God from
heauen, and consumed him and his fiftie.
13 And the king yet againe sent the third captaine ouer fiftie, with his fiftie
men: And the third captaine ouer fiftie went vp, and came and fell on his knees
before Elias, and besought him, & sayde vnto him: Oh man of God, I pray thee let
my lyfe and the lyfe of the fiftie thy seruauntes be precious in thy sight.
14 Beholde, there came fyre downe from heauen, and burnt vp the two fore
captaines ouer fiftie with their fifties: therfore let my lyfe now be precious
in thy sight.
15 And the angell of the Lorde saide vnto Elias: Go downe with him, and be not
afrayde of him. And he arose, and went downe with him vnto the king.
16 And he saide vnto him, thus saith the Lorde: Forasmuch as thou hast sent
messengers to aske counsell at Beelzebub the god of Ekrom, as though there had
ben no God in Israel, whose word thou mightest seeke after: therfore thou shalt
not come downe of the bed on which thou art gone vp, but shalt dye the death.
17 And so he dyed according to the worde of the Lorde which Elias had spoken:
And Iehoram his brother began to raigne in his steade, in the second yere of
Iehoram the sonne of Iehosaphat king of Iuda, because he had no sonne.
18 The rest of the wordes that concerne Ahazia, what thinges he dyd, are they
not written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Israel?

Chapter 2

1 And it chaunced, that whe the Lord would take vp Elias into heauen by a whorle
wind, Elias went with Elisa from Gilgal.
2 And Elias saide vnto Elisa: Tary here I praye thee, for the Lorde hath sent me
to Bethel. Elisa saide vnto him: As the Lorde lyueth, and as thy soule liueth, I
will not leaue thee. And they came downe to Bethel,
3 And the children of the prophetes that were at Bethel came out to Elisa, and
saide vnto him: knowest thou not how that the Lord wyll take away thy maister
from thy head this day? He saide: I knowe it also, holde you your peace.
4 And Elia saide vnto him: Elisa, tary here I praye thee, for the Lorde hath
sent me to Iericho. He saide: As the Lorde lyueth, and as thy soule lyueth, I
will not leaue thee. And so they came to Iericho.
5 And the children of the prophetes that were at Iericho came to Elisa, and said
vnto him: Knowest thou not, that the Lorde wil take away thy maister from thy
head this day? He aunswered: I know it also, holde ye your peace.
6 And Elias said vnto him: Tary I pray thee here, for the Lorde hath sent me to
Iordane. He saide: As the Lord liueth, & as thy soule lyueth, I wyll not leaue
thee. And so they two went together.
7 And fiftie men of the sonnes of the prophetes came & stoode on the other syde
a farre of: and they two stoode by Iordane.
8 And Elias toke his mantell, & wrapt it together, and smote the waters, and
they were deuided parte the one way, and part the other, so that they two went
ouer through the drye lande.
9 And it fortuned, that assoone as they were ouer, Elias saide vnto Elisa: Aske
what I shal do for thee, yer I be taken away from thee. And Elisa saide: I pray
thee let thy spirite be double vpon me.
10 And he said, Thou hast asked an hard thing: Neuerthelesse, if thou see me whe
I am taken away from thee, thou shalt haue it so: yf thou do not, it shall not
be.
11 And it fortuned, that as they went walking and talking: beholde, there
appeared a charet of fyre, and horses of fyre, & parted them both a sunder, and
Elias went vp through the whorle winde into heauen.
12 And Elisa sawe, and cryed: O my father, O my father, the charet of Israel,
and the horsemen thereof. And he sawe him no more: and he toke his owne clothes,
and rent them in two peeces.
13 He toke vp also the mantell of Elias that fell from him, and went backe
againe, and stoode by Iordanes syde.
14 And toke the mantel of Elias that fel from him, and smote the waters, & he
said: Where is the Lord God of Elias, & he him selfe? And when he had smitten
the waters, they parted this waye and that waye: and Elisa went ouer.
15 And when the childre of the prophetes which were at Iericho sawe him from a
farre, they sayde, The spirite of Elias doth rest on Elisa: And they came to
meete him, and fel to the grounde before him,
16 And saide vnto him: See, now there be with thy seruauntes fiftie strong men,
let the go we pray thee & seeke thy maister: yf happly the spirite of the Lorde
hath taken him vp, and cast him vpon some mountaine, or into some valley. And he
saide: Ye shall send none.
17 And when they laye vpon him tyll he was ashamed, he said: Send. They sent
therefore fiftie men, which sought him three dayes, but found him not.
18 And when they came againe to him (which taryed at Iericho) he saide vnto
them: Did I not saye vnto you, that ye should not go?
19 And the men of the citie saide vnto Elisa: beholde sir, the dwelling of this
citie is pleasaunt, as thou thy selfe seest: but the water is naught, & the
grounde barren.
20 He saide: Bring me a new cruse, and put salt therein. And they brought it to
him.
21 And he went vnto the spring of the waters, and cast the salt in thyther, and
saide, thus saith the Lord: I haue healed these waters, there shall not come
hencefoorth either death or barennesse.
22 So the waters were healed vnto this day, according to the saying of Elias,
which he spake.
23 And he went vp from thence vnto Bethel: And as he was going vp the way, there
came litle children out of the citie, and mocked him, & saide vnto him: Go vp
thou balde head, go vp thou balde head.
24 And he turned backe, and loked on them, and cursed them in the name of the
Lorde: And there came two shee beares out of the wood, and tare fourtie and two
children of them.
25 And he went from thence to mount Carmel, and from thence he turned againe to
Samaria.

Chapter 3

1 Now Iehoram the sonne of Ahab began to raigne vpon Israel in Samaria the
eyghtteenth yere of Iehosaphat king of Iuda, and raigned twelue yeres.
2 And he wrought euil in the sight of the Lorde, but not lyke his father and
lyke his mother: for he put away the images of Baal that his father had made.
3 Neuerthelesse, he cleaued vnto the sinnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat which
made Israel to sinne, and departed not therefrom.
4 And Mesa king of Moab was a lorde of sheepe, and rendered vnto the king of
Israel an hundred thousand lambes, and an hundred thousand rammes with the
wooll.
5 But when Ahab was dead, it fortuned that the king of Moab rebelled against the
king of Israel.
6 And king Iehoram went out of Samaria the same season, and numbred all Israel:
7 And went, & sent to Iehosaphat the king of Iuda, saying: The king of Moab hath
rebelled against me, wilt thou come with me against Moab in battell? He
aunswered, I will come vp: for as I am, so art thou: and as my people be, so are
thy people: & thy horses, as myne.
8 And he saide: What way shall we go vp? And he aunswered: The way through the
wildernesse of Edom.
9 And so the king of Israel toke his iourney, and the king of Iuda, and the king
of Edom: And when they had compassed the way seuen dayes, they had no water for
the hoast, and for the cattayle that folowed them.
10 And the king of Israel saide: Alas, the Lorde hath called these three kinges
together, to deliuer them ouer into the hande of Moab.
11 But Iehosaphat said: Is there not here a prophete of the Lorde, that we maye
enquire of the Lord by him? And one of the king of Israels seruauntes aunswered
and saide: Here is Elisa the sonne of Saphat, which powred water on the handes
of Elias.
12 And Iehosaphat saide: The word of the Lorde is with him. And so the king of
Israel, & Iehosaphat, and the king of Edom went downe to him.
13 And Elias saide vnto the king of Israel: What haue I to do with thee? Get
thee to the prophetes of thy father, & to the prophetes of thy mother. And the
king of Israel saide vnto him, Oh naye: for the Lorde hath called these three
kinges together, to deliuer them into the hand of Moab.
14 And Elias saide: As the Lorde of hoastes liueth, in whose sight I stande, and
it were not that I regarde the presence of Iehosaphat the king of Iuda, I would
not loke towarde thee, nor yet see thee.
15 But now bryng me a minstrell. And when the minstrell played, the hand of the
Lorde came vpon him:
16 And he sayde, thus saith the Lorde: Make this valley full of ditches:
17 For thus saith the Lorde: Ye shall see neither wynde nor rayne, yet the
valley shall be filled with water, that ye maye drinke, both ye, and your
beastes, & your cattayle:
18 And this is yet but a small thing in the sight of the Lorde, forasmuch as he
wil geue ouer the Moabites also into your handes.
19 And ye shal smite euery strong towne, and euery goodly citie, and shal fell
euery pleasaunt tree, and stop euery well of water, and marre euery good platte
of ground with stones.
20 And in the morning when the meate offering was offered, beholde, there came
water by the way of Edom, and the cuntrey was filled with water.
21 And when al the Moabites heard that the kinges were come vp to fight against
them, they gathered all that was able to put on harnesse, and stoode in the
border of the lande:
22 And they were vp earlie in the morning, and the sunne shone vpon the water,
that the Moabites sawe the water a farre of as red as blood.
23 And they saide, This is the blood of slaughter: The kinges are slaine, & one
haue smitten another: Now therefore Moab get thee to the spoyle.
24 And when they came to the hoast of Israel, the Israelites stoode vp & smote
the Moabites, so that they fled before them: but they folowed vpon them and
smote Moab,
25 And they ouerthrew the cities, and on euery good parcell of lande cast euery
man his stone, and filled it, & they stopt all the welles of water, and feld all
the good trees, onely in Kirharaseth left they the stones thereof: howbeit they
went about it with slinges, & smote it.
26 And when the king of Moab saw that the battaile was to sore for him, he toke
with him seuen hundred men that drew ye sword, to haue gone through euen vnto
the king of Edom: but they could not.
27 And then he toke his eldest sonne that should haue raigned in his steade, and
offered him for a burnt offering vpon the wall: And there was great indigtion
against Israel, and they departed from him, and returned to their owne lande.

Chapter 4

1 And there cryed a certayne woman of the wyues of the sonnes of the prophetes,
vnto Elisa, saying: Thy seruaunt my husband is dead, & thou knowest that thy
seruaunt did feare the Lorde: And the creditor is come to fet my two sonnes to
be his bondmen.
2 Elisa saide vnto her: Tell me what I shall do for thee? What hast thou in
thyne house? She saide: Thyne handemayde hath nothing at all in the house, saue
a pitcher with oyle.
3 He saide vnto her: Go, and borow vessels for thee of them that are without,
euen of all thy neighbours, emptie vessels, and that not a fewe:
4 And when thou art come in, thou shalt shut the doore after thee and after thy
sonnes, and powre out into all those vessels: and set asyde that which is full.
5 And so she went from him, and shut the doore after her & after her sonnes: And
they brought to her, & she powred out.
6 And it came to passe, that when the vessels were ful, she said vnto her sonne:
Bryng me yet a vessel. And he said vnto her: I haue no mo. And ye oyle ceassed.
7 Then she came and tolde the man of God: And he sayde, Go, and sell the oyle,
and pay them that thou art in debt vnto: but lyue thou and thy children of the
rest.
8 And it fell on a day, that Elisa came to Sunem, where was a great woman, that
toke him in for to eate bread: And so it came to passe, that from that tyme
foorth (as oft as he came that way) he turned in thyther to eate bread.
9 And she saide vnto her husband: Beholde, I perceaue that this is an holy man
of God which passeth by vs continually.
10 Let vs make him a litle chamber I pray thee, with walles, & let vs set him
there a bed, and a table, and a stoole, and a candelsticke: that he may turne in
thyther when he commeth to vs.
11 And it fortuned on a day that he came thither, and turned into the chamber, &
lay therein,
12 And saide to Gehezi his seruaunt: Call this Sunamite. And when he called her,
she presented her selfe before him.
13 And againe he said vnto him: Tel her, beholde thou hast ben carefull for vs
with all this care, What shal we now do for thee? Wouldest thou be spoken for to
the king, or to the captayne of the hoast? She aunswered: I dwell among myne
owne people.
14 And he said againe: What is to be done for her? Gehezi aunswered: Ueryly she
hath no childe, and her husband is olde.
15 And he said: Call her. And when he had called her, she stoode in the doore.
16 And he saide: At this tyme appoynted, according to the tyme of lyfe, thou
shalt imbrace a sonne. And she said: Oh nay my lorde thou man of God, do not lye
vnto thyne handmayde.
17 And the wyfe conceaued, and bare a sonne that same season that Elisa had
sayde vnto her, acording to the tyme of lyfe.
18 And when the childe was growen, it fell on a day that he went out to his
father, and to the reapers,
19 And he said vnto his father: My head, my head. And he saide to a lad: Cary
him to his mother.
20 And when he had taken him & brought him to his mother, he sate on her knees
till noone, and then dyed.
21 And she went vp, and laide him on the bed of the man of God, & shut the doore
vpon him, and went out,
22 And called vnto her husband, & sayde: Send with me I pray thee one of the
young men, and one of the asses: for I will runne to the man of God, and come
againe.
23 And he saide: Wherefore wylt thou go to him? seing that to day is neither
newe moone nor sabbath day. And she aunswered: All shalbe well.
24 Then she sadled an asse, and saide to her seruaunt: Dryue and go forwarde,
staye not for me to get vp, except I hyd thee.
25 And so she went, and came vnto the man of God to mount Carmel: And it
fortuned, that when the man of God sawe her farre of, he saide to Gehezi his
seruaunt: Beholde, yonder is the Sunamite:
26 Runne therefore to meete her, & saye vnto her: Is all well with thee, & with
thy husband, and with the lad? And she aunswered: All is well.
27 And when she came to the man of God vp to the hill, she caught him by the
feete: But Gehezi went to her, to thrust her away. And the man of God sayde: Let
her alone, for her soule is vexed within her, and the Lorde hath hid it from me,
and hath not tolde it me.
28 Then she saide: Did I desire a sonne of my Lorde? did I not require thee that
thou shouldest not deceaue me?
29 Then he saide to Gehezi: Girde vp thy loynes, and take my staffe in thyne
hande, and go thy way: If thou meete any man salute him not: And if any salute
thee, aunswere him not againe: And lay my staffe vpon the face of the childe.
30 And the mother of the childe said: As the Lorde lyueth, and as thy soule
lyueth, I wyll not leaue thee. And he arose, and folowed her.
31 Gehezi went before them, and layed the staffe vpon the face of the childe,
but ther was neither voyce nor any feeling: wherfore he went againe to meete
him, and tolde him, saying: The childe is not awaked.
32 And when Elisa was come into the house, behold the childe was dead, and layde
vpon his bed.
33 He went in therefore, & shut the doore vpon them twayne, & prayed vnto the
Lorde,
34 And went vp, and laye vpon the lad, and put his mouth on his mouth, & his
eyes vpon his eyes, & his handes vpon his handes, & when he so laye vpon the
childe, the fleshe of the childe waxed warme.
35 And he went againe, and walked once vp and downe in the house, & then went
vp, & layde him selfe vpon him againe: And then the childe gasped seue times,
and opened his eyes.
36 And he called Gehezi, and saide: Call for this Sunamite. So he called her:
which when she was come in vnto him, he saide vnto her: Take thy sonne.
37 Therfore she went in, and fell at his feete, and bowed her selfe to the
ground, and toke vp her sonne, and went out.
38 Elisa came againe to Gilgal, and there was a dearth in the lande, and the
children of the prophetes dwelt with him: And he saide vnto his seruaunt, Set a
great pot on the fyre and make potage for the children of the prophetes.
39 And one went out into the fielde to gather hearbes, and found a wylde vine,
and gathered therof wylde gourdes his lap ful, and came and shred them into the
pot of pottage: for they knew it not.
40 So they powred out for the men to eate: And it fortuned, that when they
tasted of the pottage, they cryed out and said, O thou man of God, there is
death in the pot. And they could not eate therof.
41 But he saide: bring meale. And he cast it into the pot, and he saide: Fill
for the people, that they may eate. And there was no more harme in the pot.
42 There came a man from Baal Salisa, and brought the man of God bread of the
first fruites, euen twentie loaues of barlye, & full eares of corne in the
huske: And he said, Geue vnto the people, that they may eate.
43 And his minister aunswered: Why shall I set this before an hundred men? He
said againe, Geue it vnto the people, that they may eate: For thus saith the
Lorde, They shall eate, and there shal be left ouer.
44 And so he set it before them, and they did eate, and left ouer, according to
the word of the Lorde.

Chapter 5

1 Naaman captayne of the hoast of the king of Syria, was a great man, and
honorable in the sight of his maister, because that by him the Lorde had geuen
health vnto Syria: He was also a mightie man, & expert in warre but he was a
leaper.
2 And the Syrians had gone out by companies, & had brought out of the countrey
of Israel a litle mayde, & she was with Naamans wyfe.
3 And she saide vnto her lady: I would to God my lorde were with the prophet
that is in Samaria, for he would delyuer him of his leprosie.
4 And he went in, and tolde his lorde, saying: Thus and thus saide the mayd that
is of the lande of Israel.
5 And the king of Syria saide: Go thy way thither, and I wyll send a letter vnto
the king of Israel. And he departed, and toke with him ten talentes of siluer,
and sixe thousand peeces of golde, and ten chaunges of raymentes,
6 And brought the letter to the king of Israel, conteyning this tenour. Now,
when this letter is come vnto thee, beholde I haue therewith sent Naaman my
seruaunt to thee, that thou mayest ridde him of his leprosie.
7 And it fortuned, that when the king of Israel had red the letter, he rent his
clothes, and saide: Am I God, that I should slay, and make a lyue? For he doth
send to me that I should delyuer a man from his leprosie: Wherefore consider I
pray you, & see how he seeketh a quarell against me.
8 Which when Elisa the man of God had heard how that the king of Israel had rent
his clothes, he sent to the king, saying: Wherfore hast thou rent thy clothes?
Let him come now to me, and he shall knowe that there is a prophet in Israel.
9 And so Naaman came with his horses and with his charets, and stoode at the
doore of the house of Elisa.
10 And Elisa sent a messenger vnto him, saying: Go, and washe thee in Iordane
seuen tymes, and thy fleshe shall come againe to thee, and thou shalt be
cleansed.
11 But Naaman was wroth, and went away, and saide: Beholde, I thought with my
selfe, he would surely come out, and stande and call on the name of the Lord his
god, & put his hand on the place, that he may heale the leprosie.
12 Are not Abana and Pharphar riuers of Damasco, better then all the waters of
Israel? If I washe me also in them, shal I not be cleansed? And so he turned
him, and departed with displeasure.
13 And his seruauntes came, and communed with him, and saide: Father, if the
prophet had byd thee do some great thing, oughtest thou not to haue done it? How
much rather then when he saith to thee, washe, and be cleane?
14 Then went he downe, & washed him selfe seuen tymes in Iordane, according to
the saying of the man of God, and his fleshe came againe lyke vnto the fleshe of
a litle childe, and he was cleansed.
15 And he turned againe to the man of God, he and al his company, and stoode
before him, and saide: Behold, I know nowe that there is no God in all the
worlde, but in Israel: Now therfore I pray thee take a blessing of thy seruaunt?
16 But he saide: As the lorde lyueth before whom I stande, I wyll receaue none:
And when the other would haue constrayned him to receaue it, he would not.
17 And Naaman saide: Shall there not be geue to thy seruaunt as much of this
earth as two mules may beare? For thy seruaunt wyll hencefoorth offer neither
burnt sacrifice nor offering vnto any other God, saue vnto the Lorde.
18 But herein the Lorde be mercyfull to thy seruaunt, that when my maister goeth
into the house of Rimmon for to worship there, and leaneth on my hand, and I
bowe my selfe in the house of Rimmon: when I do bowe downe I say in the house of
Rimmon, the Lorde be mercyfull vnto thy seruaunt because of this thing.
19 Unto whom he saide: Go in peace. And when he was departed from him as it were
a furlong of grounde,
20 Gehezi the seruaunt of Elisa the man of God, said: Beholde, my maister hath
spared Naaman this Syrian, that he would not receaue at his hande those thinges
that he offered: As the Lorde lyueth, I wyll runne after him, & take somewhat of
him.
21 And so Gehezi folowed Naaman: And when Naaman saw him running after him, he
light downe from the charet to meete him, and saide: Is all well?
22 He aunswered, All is well: Beholde, my maister hath sent me, saying: See,
there be come to me euen nowe from mount Ephraim two young men of the children
of the prophetes: Geue them I pray thee one talent of siluer, and two chaunge of
garmentes.
23 And Naaman said: With a good will, take two talentes: And he constrained him,
& bounde two talentes of siluer in two bagges, with two chaunge of garmentes,
and laide them vpon two of his seruauntes, to beare them before him.
24 And when he came to the lower place, he toke them from their hand, and
bestowed them in the house, and he let the men go, and they departed.
25 But he went in and stoode before his maister: And Elisa said vnto him, whece
commest thou Gehezi? He saide: Thy seruaunt went no whyther.
26 But he saide vnto him: went not myne heart with thee when the man turned
againe from his charet to meete thee? Is it now a tyme to receaue money, to
receaue garmentes, olyue trees, vnieyardes, sheepe, and oxen, men seruauntes,
and mayde seruauntes.
27 The leprosie therefore of Naaman shal cleaue vnto thee, and vnto thy seede
for euer. And he went out from his presence a leper as white as snowe.

Chapter 6

1 The children of the prophetes saide vnto Elisa: Beholde we pray thee, the
place where we dwell with thee is to litle for vs:
2 Let vs go we pray thee vnto Iordane, & take thence euery man a beame, & build
vs a place to dwel in. And he aunswered, Go.
3 And one saide: Be content I pray thee, and come with thy seruauntes. And he
aunswered: I wyll come.
4 And so he went with them: And when they came to Iordane, they cut downe wood.
5 But it fortuned, that as one was felling downe of a tree, the axe head fell
into the water: And he cryed, and saide, Alas maister, it was lent me.
6 And the man of God saide: Where fell it? And he shewed him the place: And he
cut downe a sticke, and cast it in thyther, and immediatly the iron did swymme.
7 Therfore sayde he: Take it vp. And he stretched out his hand, and toke it vp.
8 But the king of Syria warred against Israel, and toke counsell with his
seruauntes, and sayde: In such and such a place shalbe my campe.
9 And the man of God sent vnto the king of Israel, saying: Beware that thou go
not ouer to such a place, for there the Syrians are lurkyng.
10 Therfore the king of Israel sent to the place which the man of God tolde him
and warned him of, and saued him selfe from it, not once, nor twyse.
11 And the heart of the king of Syria was troubled for this thing, and he called
for his seruauntes, and said vnto them: Wil ye not shewe me, whiche of our men
betrayght me to the king of Israel?
12 And one of his seruauntes sayde, None my lorde O king: But Elisa the prophet
that is in Israel, telleth the king of Israel, yea euen the wordes that thou
speakest in thy priuie chamber.
13 He sayde: Go, and spie where he is, that I may sende and fet him. And one
told him, saying: Behold, he is in Dothan.
14 Therefore sent he thyther horses and charets, and a mightie hoast: and they
came by night, and compassed the citie about.
15 And when the seruaunt of the man of God rose vp early to go out: beholde,
there was an hoast rounde about the towne with horses & charets: And his
seruaunt sayde vnto him, Alas maister, what shall we do?
16 He aunswered, Feare not: for they that be with vs, are mo then they that be
with them.
17 And Elisa prayed and sayd: Lord I besech thee open his eyes that he may see.
And the Lorde opened the eyes of the young man, and he loked: and beholde the
mountayne was full of horses, and charets of fire round about Elisa.
18 And when they came downe to him, Elisa prayed vnto the Lord, and sayde: Smyte
this people I pray thee with blindnesse. And he smote them with blindnesse,
according to the worde of Elisa.
19 And Elisa sayd vnto them: This is not the way, neither is this the towne:
folowe me, & I will bring you to the man whom ye seke. But he led them to
Samaria.
20 But it fortuned that when they were come to Samaria, Elisa sayde: Lorde, open
their eyes that they may see. And the Lorde opened their eyes, and they sawe, &
behold they were in the middes of Samaria.
21 And the king of Israel sayde vnto Elisa when he sawe them: My father, shall I
smyte them, shall I smyte them?
22 And he aunswered, Thou shalt not smyte them: But smyte those that thou hast
taken with thine owne sworde, and with thyne owne bowe: But rather set bread and
water before them, that they may eate & drinke, & go to their maister.
23 And he prepared a great refection for them, and when they had eaten and
drunke, he sent them away, & they went to their maister: And so the souldiours
of Syria came no more into the lande of Israel.
24 After this it chaunced, that Benhadad king of Syria gathered al his hoast and
went vp, and besieged Samaria.
25 But there was a great dearth in Samaria: and beholde, they besieged it,
vntill an asses head was sold for fourescore siluer pence, and the fourth part
of a cab of doues doung for fiue peeces of siluer.
26 And as the king of Israel was goyng vpon the wal, there cryed a woman vnto
him, saying: Help me my lord O king.
27 He sayde: If the Lorde do not succour thee, wherwith can I helpe thee? with
the barne, or with the wine presse?
28 And the king sayde vnto her: What wilt thou? She aunswered: Yonder woman sayd
vnto me, Bring thy sonne, that we may eate him to day, and we will eate myne to
morowe.
29 And so we dressed my sonne, and dyd eate him: And I sayde to her the other
day, bring thy sonne, that we may eate him: And she hath hyd her sonne.
30 And it came to passe, that when the king hearde the wordes of the woman, he
rent his clothes, and went vp on the wall, and the people loked, and beholde he
had a sackcloth vnder vpon his fleshe.
31 Then he sayd: God do so & more also to me, if the head of Elisa the sonne of
Saphat shall stande on him this day.
32 But Elisa sate in his house (& the elders sate by him) And the king sent a
man before him: but yer the messenger came to him, he sayd to the elders: haue
ye not seene howe that the sonne of this murtherer hath sent to take away myne
head? Be circumspect when the messenger commeth, and shut the doore, and hold
him at the doore: Is not the sound of his maisters feete behynde him?
33 While he yet talked with them: behold, the messenger came downe vnto him, &
sayd, Behold, this euyl is of the Lorde: And what more shall I loke for of the
Lorde?

Chapter 7

1 Then Elisa saide: Heare ye the word of the lord, thus sayth the Lorde: To
morow this time shall a bushell of fyne flowre be solde for a sicle, and two
bushels of barlye for a sicle in the gate of Samaria.
2 Then a certayne lorde (on whose hand the king leaned) aunswered the man of
God, and sayde: Beholde, if the Lorde would make windowes in heaue, might this
saying come to passe? He sayde: Behold, thou shalt see it with thyne eyes, but
shalt not eate therof.
3 And there were foure leperous men at the entring in of the gate: And they sayd
one to another, Why sit we here vntill we dye?
4 If we say, we will enter into the citie: behold, the dearth is in the citie,
and we shal die therin: And if we sit stil here, we dye also. Nowe therfore
come, and let vs fall vpon the hoast of the Syrians: If they saue our liues, we
shall lyue: If they kill vs, then are we dead.
5 And they rose vp in the twylight to go to the hoast of the Syrians: And when
they were come to the vtmost part of the hoast of Syria, behold there was no man
there.
6 For the Lorde had made the hoast of the Syrians to heare a noyse of charets, &
a noyse of horses, & the noyse of a great hoast: Insomuch that they sayde one to
another, Lo, the king of Israel hath hyred against vs the kinges of the
Hethites, and the kinges of the Egyptians, to come vpon vs.
7 Wherfore they arose, and fled in the twylight, and left their tentes, their
horses, and their asses, and the fielde which they had pitched, euen as it was,
and fled for their lyues.
8 And when these lepers came to the edge of the hoast, they went into a tent,
and did eate and drinke, and caried thence siluer, and golde, and rayment, &
went and hyd it: and came againe and entred into another tent, and caried thence
also, and went and hyd it.
9 Then sayde one to another: We do not well this day, forasmuche as it is a day
to bring good tydinges, and we holde our peace. If we tarie till the day light,
some mischiefe wil come vpon vs: Now therfore come, that we may go and tell the
kinges housholde.
10 And so they came, and called vnto the porter of the citie, and told them,
saying: We came to the pauillions of the Syrians, and see there was no man
there, neither voyce of man, but horses & asses tyed, and the tentes were euen
as they were wont to be.
11 And so the man called vnto the porters, and they told the kinges house
within.
12 And the king arose in the night, & sayde vnto his seruauntes: I wil shewe you
nowe what the Syrians haue done vnto vs: They knowe that we be hungrie, and
therefore are they gone out of the pauillions to hyde them selues in the fielde,
saying: When they come out of the citie, we shall catche them alyue, and get in
to the citie.
13 And one of his seruauntes aunswered, and sayde: Let men take I pray you fyue
of the horses that remayne and are left in the multitude: (Beholde they are euen
as all the multitude of Israel that are left in the citie: Beholde I say they
are euen as all the multitude of the Israelites that are consumed) and we will
send, and see.
14 They toke therfore the horses of two charets, and the king sent after the
hoast of the Syrians, saying: Go, and see.
15 And they went after them euen vnto Iordane, and lo, all the way was full of
clothes, and vessels, which the Syrians had cast from them in their haste: And
the messengers returned, and tolde the king.
16 And the people went out, and spoyled the tentes of the Syrians: And so it
came to passe that a bushell of fyne flowre was solde for a sicle, and two
bushelles of barlye for a sicle, according to the worde of the Lorde.
17 And the king appoynted that lorde (on whose hand he leaned) to be at the
gate: And the people trode vpon him in the gate, and he dyed according to the
word of the man of God whiche he sayde when the king came downe to him.
18 And so came the thing to passe, that the man of God had spoken to the king,
saying: Two bushels of barlye for a sicle, and a bushell of fyne flowre for
another shalbe to morowe this tyme in the gate of Samaria.
19 Whervnto that lorde aunswered the man of God, and sayde: Yea and if the Lorde
made windowes in heauen, might it come to passe? And he sayd: Beholde, thou
shalt see it with thyne eyes, and shalt not eate thereof.
20 And euen so chaunced it vnto him: For the people trode vpon him in the gate,
and he dyed.

Chapter 8

1 Then spake Elisa vnto the woman (whose sonne he had restored to lyfe againe)
saying: Up, and go thou and thyne house, and soiourne where so euer thou canst:
For the Lord hath called for a dearth, and the same shall come vpon the lande
seuen yeres.
2 And the woman arose, and dyd after the saying of the man of God, and went both
she and her houshold, & soiourned in the land of the Philistines seue yeres.
3 And at the seuen yeres ende, it fortuned that the woman came againe out of the
land of the Philistines, and went out to call vpon the king for her house and
for her lande.
4 And the king talked with Gehezi the seruaunt of the man of God, saying: Tel me
I pray thee al the great deedes that Elisa hath done.
5 He told the king howe he had restored a dead body to lyfe againe: but in the
meane time the woman whose sonne he had raysed vp againe, cryed to the king for
her house, and for her land: And Gehezi sayde, My lorde O king, this is the
woman, and this is her sonne whom Elisa raysed vp againe.
6 And when the king asked the woman, she tolde him: And so the king deliuered
her a chamberlayne, saying, Restore thou vnto her all that are hers and all the
fruites of the fielde, sence the day that she left the land, vnto this tyme.
7 And Elisa came to Damascon, & Benhadad the king of Syria was sycke: And one
tolde him, saying, The man of God is come hyther.
8 And the king sayd vnto Hazael: Take a present in thyne hande, and go meete the
man of God, that thou mayest inquire of the Lord by him, saying: Shal I recouer
of this disease?
9 And so Hazael went to meete him, and toke the present with him, and of euery
good thing of Damascon, euen as much as fourtie camels coulde beare: & came and
presented him selfe before him, and said: Thy sonne Benhadad king of Syria hath
sent me to thee, saying: Shal I recouer of this disease?
10 And Elisa sayde vnto him: Go, and say vnto him, Thou shalt recouer: howebeit,
the Lorde hath shewed me that he shall surely dye.
11 He loked vpon him stedfastlie, vntill he was ashamed: & the man of God wept.
12 And Hazael sayde: Why weepeth my lorde? He aunswered: For I knowe the euyl
thinges that thou shalt do vnto the children of Israel: for their strong cities
shalt thou set on fire, and their young men shalt thou slay with the sword, and
shalt dashe out the braynes of their sucking children, and al to teare their
women with childe.
13 But Hazael sayd: What is thy seruaunt a dogge, that I shoulde do this great
thing? And Elisa aunswered: The Lord hath shewed me that thou shalt be king of
Syria.
14 And so he departed from Elisa, & came to his maister: which sayd to him, What
sayde Elisa to thee? He aunswered: He tolde me, that thou shouldest recouer.
15 And on the morowe it fortuned, that he toke a thycke cloth, and dipt it in
water, and spread it on his face: & he died, and Hazael raigned in his steade.
16 The fyft yere of Ioram the sonne of Ahab king of Israel, Iehosaphat being
also king of Iuda, Ioram the sonne of Iehosaphat king of Iuda began to raigne.
17 Thirtie and two yeres olde was he when he began to raigne, and he raigned
eyght yeres in Hierusalem.
18 And he walked in the wayes of the kinges of Israel, as they that were of the
house of Ahab: for the daughter of Ahab was his wyfe, and he dyd euyll in the
sight of the Lorde.
19 And the Lord woulde not destroy Iuda and that because of Dauid his seruaunt,
as he promised him, to geue him alway a light among his children.
20 In those dayes Edom rebelled from vnder the hand of Iuda: for they made them
a king of their owne.
21 So Ioram wet to Zair, he & al his charettes with him: And he rose by night,
and smote the Edomites which compassed him in with the captaynes of his
charettes, and the people fled into their tentes.
22 But Edom rebelled, so that he woulde not be vnder the hande of Iuda vnto this
day: Then Libnah rebelled that same time.
23 The rest of the wordes that concerne Ioram, and al that he dyd, are they not
written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Iuda?
24 And Ioram rested with his fathers, and was buried besyde his fathers in the
citie of Dauid: And Ahaziahu his sonne raigned in his steade.
25 In the twelfth yere of Ioram the sonne of Ahab king of Israel, dyd Ahaziahu
the sonne of Ioram king of Iuda begin to raigne.
26 Two and twentie yeres old was Ahaziahu when he began to raigne, and he
raigned one yere in Hierusalem: and his mothers name was Athaliahu, the daughter
of Omri king of Israel.
27 But he walked in the way of the house of Ahab, and dyd euyll in the sight of
the Lorde euen as dyd the house of Ahab: for he was the sonne in law of the
house of Ahab.
28 And he went with Ioram the sonne of Ahab, to warre against Hazael king of
Syria in Ramoth Gilead, and the Syrians wounded Ioram.
29 And king Ioram went back againe to be healed in Iezrahel of the woundes
whiche the Syrians had geuen him at Ramoth when he fought against Hazael king of
Syria: And Ahaziahu the sonne of Ioram king of Iuda, went downe to see Ioram the
sonne of Ahab in Iezrahel, because he was sicke there.

Chapter 9

1 And Elisa the prophete called one of the childre of the prophetes, and sayd
vnto him: Gyrde vp thy loynes, and take this boxe of oyle in thyne hand, & get
thee to Ramoth in Gilead.
2 And when thou commest thyther, loke wher is Iehu the sonne of Iehosaphat the
sonne of Nimsi, and go to him, and make him arise vp from among his brethren, &
cary him to a secrete chamber.
3 Then take the boxe of oyle, and powre it on his head, and say, thus saith the
Lord, I haue annoynted thee to be king ouer Israel: And then open the doore, and
flee, without any tarying.
4 And so the seruaunt of the prophete gat him to Ramoth Gilead:
5 And when he came in, beholde, the captaynes of the hoast were sitting
together: And he sayde, I haue an errand to thee, O captayne.
6 And Iehu sayd: Unto whiche of al vs? He sayd: To thee, O captayne. And he
arose, and went into the house, and he powred the oyle on his head, and sayde
vnto him: Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, I haue annoynted thee to be king
ouer the people of the Lorde, euen ouer Israel.
7 Thou shalt smyte the house of Ahab thy maister, that I may auenge the blood of
my seruauntes the prophetes, & the blood of all the seruauntes of the Lord, of
the hande of Iezabel:
8 For the whole house of Ahab shall be destroyed, and I will destroy from Ahab
euen hym that maketh water against the wal, and him that is prysoned and
forsaken in Israel:
9 And I wil make the house of Ahab, like the house of Ieroboam the sonne of
Nabat, and like the house of Baasa the sonne of Ahia.
10 And as for Iezabel, the dogges shall eate her in the fielde of Iezrahel, and
there shalbe none to burie her. And he opened the doore, and fled.
11 Iehu came out to the seruauntes of his lord, and one sayd vnto him: Is al
well? Wherfore came this madde felowe to thee? And he sayd vnto them: Ye knowe
what maner of man it is, and what his communication is.
12 They said vnto him againe: It is not so, tell vs. He said: Thus & thus spake
he to me, saying, thus saith the Lord: I haue annoynted thee to be king ouer
Israel.
13 Then they hasted, and toke euery man his garment, and put it vnder him on the
toppe of the staires, and blewe with trumpettes, saying: Iehu is king.
14 And so Iehu the sonne of Iehosaphat the sonne of Nimsi, conspired against
Ioram: (Ioram kept Ramoth Gilead, he and al Israel, because of Hazael king of
Syria:
15 And king Ioram returned to be healed in Iezrahel of the woundes which the
Syrians had geuen him when he fought with Hazael king of Syria) And Iehu sayde:
If it be your mindes, then let no man depart and escape out of the citie, to go
and tell in Iezrahel.
16 So Iehu gat vp into a charet & went to Iezrahel where Ioram lay: and Ahaziahu
king of Iuda was come downe thyther to see Ioram.
17 And the watchman that stoode on the towre in Iezrahel, spied the companie of
Iehu as he came, and sayde: I see a companie. And Ioram sayde: Take an horsman,
and send to meete them, that he may aske whether it be peace.
18 And so there went one on horsbacke to meete him, and sayde: Thus sayth the
king: is it peace? And Iehu sayd: What hast thou to do with peace? turne thee
behind me. And the watchman told, saying: The messenger came to them, but he
commeth not againe.
19 Then he sent out another on horsbacke, whiche came to them, and sayde: Thus
sayth the king: is it peace? Iehu aunswered: What hast thou to do with peace?
turne thee behynd me.
20 And the watchman tolde, saying: He came to them also, and commeth not againe:
And the driuing, is lyke the driuing of Iehu the sonne of Nimsi: for he driueth
the charet as he were mad.
21 And Ioram sayde: Make redy. And the charet was made redy. And Ioram king of
Israel, and Ahaziahu king of Iuda, went out eyther of them in his charet against
Iehu, and met him in the fielde of Naboth the Iezrahelite.
22 And it fortuned, that when Ioram sawe Iehu, he sayd: Is it peace Iehu? He
aunswered: What peace should there be, so long as the whordoms of thy mother
Iezabel and her wytchcraftes are so great?
23 And Ioram turned his hande, and fled, and sayde to Ahaziahu: There is
falshood O Ahaziahu.
24 And Iehu toke a bow in his hande, and smote Ioram betweene the armes, & the
arrowe went through his heart, and he fell downe flat in his charet.
25 Then said Iehu to Bidkar a captayne: Take him and cast him in the plat of the
ground of Naboth the Iezrahelite: For I remember that when I & thou rode
together after Ahab his father, the Lorde layed this heauy burthen vpon him:
26 I haue seene yesterday the blood of Naboth & the blood of his sonnes, sayde
the Lord: and I wil quite it thee in this ground sayth the Lord. Nowe therfore
take him and cast him in the plat of ground, according to ye word of the Lord.
27 But when Ahaziahu the king of Iuda sawe this, he fled by the way of the
garden house: And Iehu folowed after him, and sayde, Smyte him also in the
charet, at the goyng vp to Gur by Iebleam. And he fled to Megiddo, and ther
died.
28 And his seruauntes caryed him in a charet to Hierusalem, and buried him there
in his sepulchre with his fathers in the citie of Dauid.
29 And in the eleuenth yere of Ioram the sonne of Ahab, began Ahaziahu to raigne
ouer Iuda.
30 And when Iehu was come to Iezrahel, Iezabel hearde of it, & paynted her face,
and tired her head, and loked out at a wyndowe.
31 And as Iehu entred at the gate, she sayd: Had Zimri peace, which slue his
maister?
32 And he lift vp his eyes to the windowe, and sayde: Who is of my side, who?
And there loked out to him two or three chamberlaynes.
33 And he sayd: Throwe her downe. So they threwe her downe, & her blood dasshed
toward the wall, and towarde the horses: and he troade her vnder foote.
34 And when he was come in, he dyd eate and drinke, & sayd: Go and visite I pray
you yonder cursed creature, and burie her: for she is a kinges daughter.
35 And so when they came to burie her, they founde no more of her then the
skull, and the feete, and the palmes of her handes.
36 Wherfore they came againe, and tolde him: And he sayd, This is the worde of
the Lorde whiche he spake by the hand of his seruaunt Elias the Thesbite,
saying: In the fielde of Iezrahel shall dogges eate the fleshe of Iezabel.
37 And so the carkasse of Iezabel was euen as dounge vpon the earth in the
fielde of Iezrahel, so that no man might say, This is Iezabel.

Chapter 10

1 Ahab had threescore & ten sonnes in Samaria: And Iehu wrote letters, and sent
to Samaria, vnto the rulers of Iezrahel, to the elders, and to them that brought
vp Ahabs children, saying:
2 Nowe when this letter commeth to you (ye that haue with you your maisters
sonnes, ye haue with you both charets and horses, a strong citie haue ye also,
and harnesse)
3 Loke which of your maisters sonnes is best and most meete, and set him on his
fathers seate, and fight for your lordes house.
4 But they were exceedingly afrayde, & sayde: See, two kinges were not able to
stande before him: howe shall we then be able to stande?
5 And he that was gouernour of Ahabs house, & he that ruled the citie, the
elders also, & the tutours, sent to Iehu, saying: We are thy seruauntes, & will
do all that thou shalt byd vs, we wil make no man king: therefore do thou what
seemeth good in thyne eyes.
6 Then he wrote another letter to them, saying: If ye be myne, and wil hearken
vnto my voyce, then take the heades of the men that are your maisters sonnes,
and come to me to Iezrahel by to morowe this time: (And the kinges sonnes were
threescore and ten persons, and they were with the great men of the citie which
brought them vp.)
7 And when the letter came to them, they toke the kinges children, and slue
them, euen threescore and ten persons, & layed their heades in baskettes, and
sent them to him to Iezrahel.
8 And there came a messenger, and told him, saying: They haue brought the heades
of the kinges sonnes. And he said: Let them lay them on two heapes in the
entring in of the gate, vntill the morning.
9 And when it was day, he went out, and stoode, and sayde to al the folke, Ye be
righteous: Behold, I conspired against my maister, and slue him: But who slue
all these?
10 Learne here that there shall fall vnto the earth nothing of the worde of the
Lorde, whiche he spake concerning the house of Ahab: For the Lorde hath brought
to passe ye thinges that he spake by the hande of his seruaunt Elias.
11 And so Iehu slue all that remayned of the house of Ahab in Iezrahel, and all
that were great with him, and his kinsfolkes, and his priestes, so that he let
nothing of him remayne.
12 And he arose, & departed, and came to Samaria: And when Iehu was in the way
of the house where the sheepheardes dyd sheare their sheepe,
13 He met with the brethren of Ahaziahu king of Iuda, and sayde: What are ye?
They aunswered: The brethren of Ahaziahu are we, and go downe to salute the
children of the king & of the queene.
14 And he said: Take them alyue. Whom when they had taken them alyue, they slue
them at the wel whiche was beside the house where the sheepe are shoren, euen
two and fourtie men, neither left he any of them.
15 And when he was departed thence, he met with Iehonadab the sonne of Rechab
comming against him, and he blessed him, & sayde to him: Is thyne heart right,
as myne heart is true with thine? And Iehonadab aunswered: Yea that it is. Then
geue me thyne hand. And when he had geuen him his hande, he toke him vp to him
into the charet,
16 And sayde: Come with me, and see the zeale that I haue for the Lord. And so
they made him ride in his charet.
17 And when he came to Samaria, he slue al that remained vnto Ahab in Samaria,
till he had wiped him out, accorcording to the saying of the Lord which he spake
to Elias.
18 And Iehu gathered all the people together, and sayd vnto them: Ahab serued
Baal a litle, but Iehu shall serue him more.
19 Now therfore call vnto me all the prophetes of Baal, all such as serue him,
and al his priestes, & let none be lacking: For I haue a great sacrifice to do
to Baal, & therefore whosoeuer is missed he shall not lyue. But Iehu dyd it for
a sutteltie, to the intent that he might destroy the seruauntes of Baal.
20 And Iehu sayde: Proclayme an holy conuocation for Baal. And they proclaymed
it.
21 And Iehu sent vnto all Israel, and al the seruauntes of Baal came, that there
was not a man left behind that came not: And they came into the house of Baal,
and the house of Baal was full from one ende to another.
22 And he sayde vnto him that was the keper of the vestrie: Bring foorth
garmentes for all the seruauntes of Baal. And he brought them out garmentes.
23 And when Iehu went with Iehonadab the sonne of Rechab into the house of Baal,
he sayd vnto the seruauntes of Baal: Searche, & loke that ther be here with you
none of the seruauntes of the Lord, but the seruauntes of Baal only.
24 And when they went in to offer sacrifice and burnt offring, Iehu appoynted
foure score men without, and sayde: If any of ye men whom I haue brought vnder
your handes escape, he that letteth him go, shall dye for him.
25 And it fortuned, that assoone as he had made an ende of offring the burnt
sacrifice, Iehu sayd to the men of warre and to the captaynes: Go in, and slay
them, let none come out. And they smote them with the edge of the sword: And the
men of warre & the captaynes cast them out, & went to the citie of the temple of
Baal,
26 And set the images out of the temple of Baal, and burnt them.
27 And they brake the image of Baal, and brake the house of Baal, & made a draft
house of it vnto this day.
28 And so Iehu destroyed Baal out of Israel.
29 But from the sinnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat whiche made Israel to
sinne, Iehu departed not from them neither from the golden calues that were in
Bethel and in Dan.
30 And the Lorde sayde vnto Iehu: Because thou hast done right wel, in bringing
to passe the thing that is right in myne eyes, and hast done vnto the house of
Ahab according to all thinges that are in myne heart, therefore shall thy
children vnto the fourth generation sit on the seate of Israel.
31 But Iehu cared not for this, to walke in the lawe of the Lorde God of Israel
with all his heart: for he departed not from the sinnes of Ieroboam whiche made
Israel to sinne.
32 In those dayes the Lorde began to cut Israel short, and Hazael smote them in
all the coastes of Israel,
33 From Iordane eastward, euen all the land of Gilead, the Gadites, the
Rubenites, and them that were of Manasses, from Aroer (which is by the riuer
Arnon) euen Gilead and Basan.
34 The rest of the wordes that concerne Iehu, and al that he did, & al his
power, are they not written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of
Israel?
35 And Iehu slept with his fathers, and they buryed him in Samaria, & Iehoahas
his sonne raigned in his steade.
36 And the time that Iehu raigned vpon Israel in Samaria, is twentie & eyght
yeres.

Chapter 11

1 And Athalia ye mother of Ahaziahu, when she saw that her sonne was dead, she
arose, and destroyed all the kinges seede.
2 But Iehosaba the daughter of king Ioram and syster of Ahaziahu, toke Ioas the
sonne of Ahaziahu, and stale him from among the kinges sonnes that were slayne,
and his nurse with him in the bedde chamber: and hyd him from Athalia, that he
was not slayne.
3 And he was with her hyd in the house of the Lord sixe yeres: And Athalia dyd
raigne ouer the lande.
4 And the seuenth yere Iehoiada sent and set the rulers ouer hundredes, with the
captaynes and them of the garde, and toke them to him into the house of the
Lorde, & made a bonde with them, and toke an oth of them in the house of the
Lorde, and shewed them the kinges sonne.
5 And he commaunded them, saying, This is it that ye must do: One third part of
you, whose duetie is to come in on the Sabbath day, shall keepe the watch of the
kinges house:
6 And another third part shal keepe the gate of Sur: And another third part
shall keepe the gate which is behinde them of the garde: and so shall ye keepe
the watch of the house of Messah.
7 And two partes of you, that is, al that go out on the Sabbath day, shall keepe
the watch of the house of the Lorde about the king.
8 And ye shall compasse the king round about, & euery man shall haue his weapon
in his hand: And whosoeuer commeth within ye ranges, let him be slaine: And see
that ye be with the king as he goeth out and in.
9 And the captaynes ouer the hundredes did according to all thinges that
Iehoiada the priest commaunded: and they toke euery man his men that were to
come in on the Sabbath day, with them that should go out on the Sabbath, and
came to Iehoiada the priest.
10 And to the captaynes ouer hundredes, did the priest geue king Dauids speares
and shieldes, that were in the temple.
11 And they of the garde stoode, and euery man had his weapon in his hande
rounde about the king, from the ryght corner of the temple to the left, along by
the aulter and the temple.
12 And he brought out the kinges sonne, and put the crowne vpon him, and
delyuered him the witnesse, & made him king, & annoynted him: And they clapt
their handes, and saide: God saue the king.
13 And when Athalia heard the noyse of the running of the people, she came to
the people into the temple of the Lorde.
14 And whe she looked, behold, the king stoode by a piller as the maner was, &
the singers & the trumpets by the king, and all the people of the land reioysed,
and blew with trumpets: And Athalia rent her clothes & cryed, treason, treason.
15 But Iehoiada the priest commaunded the captaines of the hundredes that had
the rule of the hoast, and saide vnto them: Haue her foorth of the ranges, & if
any folowe her, kill him with the sword. For the priest had saide: she may not
be slaine in the house of the Lorde.
16 And they layde handes on her, till she came into the way by the which the
horses went in to the kinges palace, and there was she slaine.
17 And Iehoiada made a bond betweene the Lorde and the king and the people, that
they should be the Lordes people, and also betweene the king and the people.
18 And all the people of the lande went into the house of Baal, and destroyed
it, his aulters also, and his images brake they downe lustylie, and slue Mathan
the priest of Baal before the aulters: And the priest set watch ouer the house
of the Lorde.
19 And toke the rulers ouer hundredes, the captaines, and them of the gard, and
all the people of the lande, and they brought the king from the house of the
Lorde, and came by the way of the gate of them of the gard to the kings palace,
and he sat him downe on the seate of the kinges.
20 And all the people of the lande reioyced, and the citie was in quiet: And
they slue Athalia with the sword, beside the kinges palace.
21 Seuen yeres olde was Iehoas when he began to raigne.

Chapter 12

1 And Iehoas began to raigne in the seuenth yere of Iehu, fouretie yeres raigned
he in Hierusalem: & his mothers name was Zebiah of Beerseba.
2 And he did that which was good in the sight of the Lorde, as long as Iehoiada
the priest enfourmed him.
3 But the high places were not taken away: for the people offred and burnt
incense yet vpon the high places.
4 And Iehoas sayde to the priestes: All the siluer of the dedicate thinges that
be brought to the house of the Lorde, that is, the money of them that were
numbred, the money that euery man is set at, and all the money that euery man
with a willing heart geueth and bryngeth into the house of the Lorde:
5 Let the priestes take it to them, euery man of his acquayntaunce, to repayre
the broken places of the house wheresoeuer any decaye is founde.
6 And so it came to passe, that vnto the three and twentith yere of king Iehoas,
the priestes had mended nothing that was decayed in the temple.
7 Then king Iehoas called for Iehoiada the priest, and the other priestes, and
saide vnto them: Why repaire ye not the broken places of the temple? Now
therfore, see that ye receaue no more money of your acquayntaunce, except ye
deliuer it to repaire the temple withall.
8 And the priestes consented to receaue no more money of the people, except to
repaire the decayed places of the temple.
9 But Iehoiada the priest toke a chest, and bored a hole in the lyd of it, and
set it besyde the aulter, on the right syde as euery man commeth into the temple
of the Lorde, and the priestes that kept the vessels put therein all the money
that was brought into the house of the Lorde.
10 And it fortuned, that when they sawe ther was much money in the chest, the
kinges scribe & the hye priest came vp, and tolde the money that was found in
the house of the Lorde, and put it into a bagge.
11 And they gaue the money sealed into the handes of them that executed the
worke, and that had the ouersight of the house of the Lorde: and they brought it
out to the carpenters and builders that wrought vpon the house of the Lorde,
12 And to masons, and hewers of stone: And they bought timber and free stone to
repaire the decaye in the house of the Lorde, and to al that went out to mend
the temple.
13 Howbeit, there was not made for the house of the Lorde bowles of siluer,
instrumentes of musicke, basons, trumpets, or any vessels of golde, or vessels
of siluer, of the money that was brought into the house of the Lorde.
14 But they gaue that to the workemen, and repaired therewith the house of the
Lorde.
15 Moreouer, they reckened not with the men into whose handes they deliuered
that money to be bestowed on workme: for they did their busines faithfully:
16 Howbeit, trespasse money, and sinne money, was not brought into the house of
the Lorde, for it was the priestes.
17 Then came Hazael king of Syria vp, and fought against Geth, and toke it: And
Hazael set his face to go vp to Hierusalem.
18 And Iehoas king of Iuda, toke all the halowed thinges that Iehosaphat,
Iehoram & Haziahu his fathers kinges of Iuda had dedicate, and that he him selfe
had dedicated, and al the gold that was founde in the treasures of the house of
the Lorde and in the kinges house, and sent it to Hazael king of Syria, & so he
departed from Hierusalem.
19 The remnaunt of the wordes that concerne Iehoas, and all that he dyd, are
they not written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Iuda?
20 And his owne seruauntes arose, and wrought treason, and slue Iehoas in the
house Millo, when he came downe to Silla:
21 Iozachar the sonne of Semaath, and Iehozabad the sonne of Somer his
seruauntes, smote him, and he dyed: And they buryed him with his fathers in the
citie of Dauid, and Amaziahu his sonne raigned in his steade.

Chapter 13

1 In the three & twentith yere of Ioas the sonne of Ahaziahu king of Iuda,
Iehoahaz the sonne of Iehu began to raigne ouer Israel in Samaria seuenteene
yeres.
2 And he wrought that which was euil in the sight of the Lorde, and folowed the
sinnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat which made Israel to sinne, and departed
not therfrom.
3 And the Lorde was angry with Israel, and delyuered them into the hand of
Hazael king of Syria, & into the hand of Benhadad the sonne of Hazael all their
dayes.
4 And Iehoahaz besought the Lord, & the Lorde heard him: For he considered the
trouble of Israel, wherewith the king of Syria troubled them.
5 (And the Lord gaue Israel a deliuerer, so that they went out from vnder the
subiection of the Syrians: And the children of Israel dwelt in their tentes as
before tyme.
6 Neuerthelesse, they departed not from the sinnes of the house of Ieroboam
which made Israel sinne, but walked in them: And there remayned an idols groue
still also in Samaria.)
7 Neither did he leaue of the people to Iehoahaz but fiftie horsemen, ten
charets, and ten thousand footemen: for the king of Syria destroyed them, and
made them lyke thresshed dust.
8 The rest of the wordes that concerne Iehoahaz and all that he dyd, and his
power, are they not writte in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of
Israel?
9 And Iehoahaz slept with his fathers, and they buryed him in Samaria, and Ioas
his sonne raigned in his steade.
10 In the thirtie and seuenth yere of Ioas king of Iuda, began Iehoas the sonne
of Iehoahaz to raigne ouer Israel in Samaria sixteene yeres.
11 And did that which is euill in the sight of the Lorde, and departed not from
all the sinnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat that made Israel sinne: for he
walked therein.
12 The remnaunt of the wordes that concerne Ioas, and all that he did, and his
power wherewith he fought against Amaziahu king of Iuda, are they not written in
the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Israel?
13 And Ioas slept with his fathers, and Ieroboam sat vpon his seate: And Ioas
was buryed in Samaria among the kinges of Israel.
14 When Elisa was fallen sicke of his sicknesse whereof he dyed, Ioas the king
of Israel came downe vnto him, and wept before him, and saide: O my father, my
father, the charet of Israel, & the horsemen of the same.
15 Elisa saide vnto him: Take bowe and arrowes. And he toke vnto him bowe and
arrowes.
16 And he saide to the king of Israel: Put thyne hand vpon the bowe. And he put
his hand vpon it: And Elisa put his handes vpon the kinges handes,
17 And said: Open a windowe eastward. And when he had opened it, Elisa sayd:
shoote. And he shot: And he saide, The arrowe of health of the Lorde, and the
arrowe of health against Syria: For thou shalt smyte Syria in Aphec, till thou
haue made an ende of them.
18 And he saide: Take the arrowes. And he toke them: And he said vnto the king
of Israel, Smyte the grounde. And he smote thrise, and ceassed.
19 And the man of God was angry with him, and saide: Thou shouldest haue smitten
fiue or sixe tymes, and then thou haddest smytten Syria till thou haddest made
an end of them: where now thou shalt smyte Syria but thrise.
20 And so Elisa dyed, & they buried him: and the souldiers of the Moabites came
into the lande the same yere.
21 And it chaunced as some of them were burying a man, and spyed the souldiers,
they cast ye man into the sepulchre of Elisa: And when the man was roulled
downe, and touched the bones of Elisa, he reuiued, and stoode vpon his feete.
22 But Hazael king of Syria vexed Israel all the dayes of Iehoahaz.
23 And the Lorde had mercie on them, and pitied them, and had respect vnto them,
because of his appoyntment made with Abraham, Isahac, and Iacob, and would not
destroy them, neither cast he them from him as yet.
24 So Hazael the king of Syria dyed, & Benhadad his sonne raigned in his steade.
25 And Iehoas the sonne of Iehoahaz went againe, and toke out of the hande of
Benhadad the sonne of Hazael, the cities which he had taken away out of the
hande of Iehoahaz his father in warre: For three times did Ioas beate him, and
restored the cities vnto Israel againe.

Chapter 14

1 The second yere of Ioas, sonne of Iehoahaz king of Israel, raigned Amaziahu
the sonne of Ioas king of Iuda.
2 He was twentie and fiue yeres olde when he began to raigne, and raigned
twentie and nyne yeres in Hierusalem: and his mothers name was Iehoadan, of
Hierusalem.
3 And he did that which is good in the sight of the Lorde, yet not lyke Dauid
his father: but did according to all thinges as Ioas his father did.
4 Neither were the high places taken a way: For as yet the people did sacrifice
and burnt incense on the high places.
5 And assoone as the kingdome was setled in his hande, it came to passe, that he
slue his seruauntes which had killed the king his father.
6 But the children of those murtherers he slue not, according vnto it that is
written in the booke of the law of Moyses, wherein the Lorde commaunded, saying:
Let not the fathers dye for the children, nor let the children be slaine for the
fathers: but let euery man be put to death for his owne sinne.
7 He slue of Edom in the salt valley ten thousand, and toke the castell on the
rocke in the same battaile, and called the name of it Ioktheel vnto this day.
8 Then Amaziahu sent messengers to Iehoas the sonne of Iehoahaz sonne of Iehu
king of Israel, saying: Come, let vs see eche other.
9 And Iehoas the king of Israel sent to Amaziahu king of Iuda, saying: Did not a
thistle that is in Libanon, send to a Cedar tree that is in Libanon, saying:
Geue thy daughter to my sonne to wife? And the wilde beast that was in Libanon
went and trode downe the thystle.
10 Thou hast smitten Edom, thyne heart hath made thee proude: Enioye this glory,
& tarry at home: Why doest thou prouoke to mischiefe, that thou shouldest be
ouerthrowen & Iuda with thee?
11 But Amaziahu would not heare: And Iehoas king of Israel went vp, and he and
Amaziahu king of Iuda, sawe either other at Bethsames, which is in Iuda.
12 And Iuda was put to the worse before Israel, and they fled euery man to their
tentes.
13 And Iehoas king of Israel toke Amaziahu king of Iuda the sonne of Iehoas the
sonne of Ahaziahu at Bethsames, and came to Hierusalem, & brake downe the wall
of Hierusalem, from the gate of Ephraim, to the corner gate, foure hundred
cubites.
14 And he toke all the golde and siluer, and all the vessels that were founde in
the house of the Lorde, and in the treasures of the kinges house: and the
children toke he to be his wardes, and returned to Samaria againe.
15 The rest of the actes of Iehoas which he did, and his power, & how he fought
with Amaziahu king of Iuda, are they not written in the booke of the cronicles
of the kinges of Israel?
16 And Iehoas slept with his fathers, and was buried at Samaria among the kinges
of Israel, & Ieroboam his sonne raigned in his steade.
17 Amaziahu the sonne of Ioas king of Iuda, liued after the death of Iehoas
sonne of Iehoahaz king of Israel fifteene yeres.
18 And the remnaunt of the wordes that concerne Amaziahu, are they not written
in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Iuda?
19 But they conspired treason against him in Hierusalem: And when he fled to
Lachis, they sent after him to Lachis, and slue him there.
20 And they brought him on horses, and he was buried at Hierusalem with his
fathers in the citie of Dauid.
21 And all the people of Iuda toke Azaria (which was sixteene yeres olde) and
made him king for his father Amaziahu.
22 He built Elath, and brought it againe to Iuda after that the king was layde
to rest with his fathers.
23 In the fifteenth yere of Amaziahu the sonne of Ioas king of Iuda, was
Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas made king ouer Israel in Samaria, and raigned fourtie
and one yeres:
24 And wrought that which was euill in the sight of the Lorde, neither turned he
away from all the sinnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat which made Israel to
sinne.
25 He restored the coast of Israel from the entring of Hemath vnto the sea of
the wildernesse, according to the worde of the Lorde God of Israel which he
spake by the hande of his seruaunt Ionas the sonne of Amithai the prophete,
which was of Geth Hepher:
26 For the Lorde sawe howe that the affliction of Israel was exceeding bytter,
insomuch that the prisoned and the forsaken were at an ende, and there was none
to helpe Israel.
27 And the Lorde saide not that he would put out the name of Israel from vnder
heauen: but he helped them by the hande of Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas.
28 The rest of the wordes that concerne Ieroboam, and all that he did, and his
strength, and howe he fought in the warres, & howe he restored Damascon & Hemath
to Iuda in Israel, are they not written in the booke of the cronicles of the
kinges of Israel?
29 And Ieroboam slept with his fathers, euen with the kinges of Israel, &
Zacharia his sonne raigned in his steade.

Chapter 15

1 In the twentie and seuenth yere of Ieroboam king of Israel, began Azaria sonne
of Amazia king of Iuda to raigne.
2 Sixteene yeres olde was he when he was made king, and he raigned two and
fiftie yeres in Hierusalem: and his mothers name was Iecholiahu, of Hierusalem.
3 And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lorde, according to all
thinges as did his father Amaziahu.
4 Saue that the high places were not put a way: For the people offered and burnt
incense still on the high places.
5 And the Lorde smote the king, and he was a leaper vnto the day of his death,
and dwelt in a seuerall house at libertie: and Iotham the kinges sonne gouerned
the palace, and iudged the people of the lande.
6 The rest of the wordes that concerne Azaria, and all that he did, are they not
written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Iuda?
7 And so Azaria slept with his fathers, and they buryed him with his fathers in
the citie of Dauid, and Iotham his sonne raigned in his steade.
8 In the thirtie and eyght yere of Azaria king of Iuda, did Zacharia the sonne
of Ieroboam raigne vpon Israel in Samaria sixe monethes:
9 And wrought that which was euill in the sight of the Lorde, as did his
fathers: And turned not away from the sinnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat
which made Israel to sinne.
10 And Sallum the sonne of Iabes conspired against him, and smote him in the
sight of the people, and killed him, and raigned in his steade.
11 The rest of the wordes that concerne Zacharia, beholde they are written in
the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Israel.
12 This is also the worde of the Lorde which he spake vnto Iehu, saying: Thy
sonnes shall sit on the seate of Israel in the fourth generation after thee. And
so it came to passe.
13 Sallum the sonne of Iabes began to raigne in the thirtie and ninth yere of
Uzziah king of Iuda, and he raigned a moneth in Samaria.
14 For Menahem the sonne of Gadi went vp from Thirza, & came to Samaria, and
smote Sallum the sonne of Iabes in Samaria, and slue him, and raigned in his
steade.
15 The rest of the wordes that concerne Sallum, and the treason which he
conspired, beholde they are written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges
of Israel.
16 The same time Menahem destroyed Thiphsah, and all that were therein, & the
coastes therof from Thirza: And because they opened not to him, he smote it, and
ript vp al the women with childe.
17 The thirtie and ninth yere of Azaria king of Iuda began Menahem the sonne of
Gadi to raigne vpon Israel ten yeres in Samaria.
18 And he did euil in the sight of the Lord, and turned not away al his dayes
from the sinne of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat which made Israel to sinne.
19 And Phul the king of Assyria came vpon the lande: And Menahem gaue Phul a
thousand talentes of siluer, that his hand might be with him & stablishe the
kingdome in his hande.
20 And Menahem made a proclamation for the money in Israel, that all men of
substaunce should geue the king of Assyria fiftie sicles of siluer a peece: And
so the king of Assyria turned backe againe, and taryed not there in the lande.
21 The rest of the wordes that concerne Menahem, and all that he did, are they
not written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Israel?
22 And Menahem slept with his fathers, and Pecahia his sonne did raigne in his
steade.
23 In the fiftith yere of Azaria king of Iuda, began Pecahia the sonne of
Menahem to raigne ouer Israel in Samaria two yeres:
24 And did that which was euill in the sight of the Lorde, and left not of from
the sinnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat which made Israel sinne.
25 But Pecah the sonne of Remaliahu, which was a captaine of his, conspired
against him, & smote him in Samaria, euen in the place of the kinges house, with
Argob and Aria, and with hym were fiftie men of the Gileadites: and he killed
him, and raigned in his roome.
26 The rest of the wordes that concerne Pecahia, & all that he did, behold they
are written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Israel.
27 In the fiftie and two yere of Azaria king of Iuda, began Pecah the sonne of
Remaliahu to raigne ouer Israel in Samaria twentie yeres:
28 And did euill in the sight of the Lorde, and turned not away from the sinnes
of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat that made Israel sinne.
29 In the dayes of Pecah king of Israel, came Thiglath Pelesar king of Assyria,
& toke Iion, Abel Beth maacha, Ianoah, Kedes, Hazor, Gilead, Galilee, and all
the lande of Nephthali, and carryed them away to Assyria.
30 And Hosea the sonne of Ela, conspired treason against Pecah the sonne of
Remaliahu, and smote him, & slue him, & raigned in his steade in the twentith
yere of Iotham the sonne of Uzziah.
31 The rest of the wordes that concerne Pecah, and al that he did, behold they
are written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Israel.
32 The second yere of Pecah the sonne of Remaliahu king of Israel, began Iotham
the sonne of Uzziah king of Iuda to raigne.
33 Fiue and twentie yeres olde was he when he began to raigne, and he raigned
sixteene yeres in Hierusalem: His mothers name was Ierusa, the daughter of
Zadoc.
34 And he did that which is right in the sight of the Lorde: euen according to
all as did his father Uzziah, so did he.
35 But the high places were not put away, for the people offered and burnt
incense still in the high places: he built the higher doore of the house of the
Lorde.
36 The rest of the wordes that concerne Iotham, and all that he did, are they
not written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Iuda?
37 (In those dayes the Lorde began to sende into Iuda, Rezin the king of Syria,
& Pecah the sonne of Remaliahu.)
38 And Iotham slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the
citie of Dauid his father, and Ahaz his sonne raigned in his steade.

Chapter 16

1 The seuenteenth yere of Pecah the sonne of Remaliahu king of Israel Ahaz the
sonne of Iotham king of Iuda began to raigne.
2 Twentie yeres olde was he when he was made king, and raigned sixteene yeres in
Hierusalem, & did not that which was right in the eies of the Lorde his God,
lyke Dauid his father:
3 But walked in the way of the kinges of Israel, yea and made his sonnes to go
through the fire after the abhominations of the heathen whom the Lorde cast out
before the children of Israel.
4 And he offred and burnt incense in the high places, and on the hilles, and
vnder euery thicke tree.
5 Then Rezin king of Syria, and Pecah sonne of Remaliahu king of Israel, came vp
to Hierusalem to fight: And they fought against Ahaz, but could not ouercome
him.
6 At the same tyme Rezin king of Syria brought Elath againe to Syria, and ryd
the Iewes thence: And the Syrians came to Elath, and dwelt therein vnto this
day.
7 So Ahaz sent messengers to Thiglath Peleser king of Assyria, saying: I am thy
seruaunt and thy sonne, come vp and deliuer me out of the hande of the king of
Syria, and out of the hande of the king of Israel, which rise vp against me.
8 And Ahaz toke the siluer and golde that was founde in the house of the Lord,
and in the treasures of the kinges house, and sent a rewarde to the king of
Assyria.
9 And the king of Assyria consented vnto him: For the king of Assyria went vp
against Damasco, and when he had taken it, he carryed the people away to Kir,
and slue Rezin.
10 And king Ahaz went to Damascon, to meete Thiglath Peleser king of Assyria:
And when king Ahaz sawe an aulter that was at Damascon, he sent to Uria the
priest, the paterne of the aulter and the fashion of it, and all the
workemanship thereof.
11 And Uria the priest made an aulter, in all poyntes lyke to the paterne which
king Ahaz had sent from Damascon, euen so did Uria ye priest make it against
king Ahaz came from Damascon.
12 And so when the king was come from Damascon, he sawe the aulter: and the king
went to it, and offred thereon:
13 And he burnt his burnt offring, and his meate offring, & powred his drincke
offring, and sprinckled the blood of his peace offringes beside the aulter,
14 And by the brasen aulter which was before the Lorde, and set it without the
temple betweene the aulter and the temple of the Lorde, and put it on the
northsyde of the aulter.
15 And king Ahaz commaunded Uria the priest, & saide: Upon the great aulter, set
on fire in the morning the burnt offring, and in the euen the meate offering,
and the kinges burnt sacrifice, and his meate offring, with the burnt offering
of all the people of the lande, and their meate offring, and their drinke
offringes, and powre thereby al the blood of the burnt offring, and all the
blood of the sacrifice: and the brasen aulter wyll I come, and see.
16 And Uria the priest did according to al thinges as king Ahaz commaunded him.
17 And king Ahaz brake the sydes of the botomes, and toke the lauer from of
them, & toke downe the lauatorie from of the brasen oxen that were vnder it, and
put it vpon a pauement of stones.
18 And the vayle for the Sabbath that they had made in the house, and the kinges
entrie without, turned he to the house of the Lorde, for feare of the king of
Assyria.
19 The rest of the wordes that concerne Ahaz what he did, are they not written
in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Iuda?
20 And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the citie
of Dauid, & Hezekia his sonne raigned in his steade.

Chapter 17

1 In the twelfth yere of Ahaz king of Iuda, began Hosea the sonne of Elah to
raigne in Samaria vpon Israel nine yeres:
2 And did that which was euill in the sight of the Lorde, but not as the kinges
of Israel that were before him.
3 And Salmanasar king of Assyria came vp against him, and Hosea became his
seruaunt, and gaue him presentes.
4 And the king of Assyria founde treason in Hosea: for he had sent messengers to
So king of Egypt, and brought no present vnto the king of Assyria from yere to
yere: and therefore the king of Assyria shut him vp, and bounde him in the
pryson house.
5 And then the king of Assyria came vp throughout all the lande, and gat vp
against Samaria, and besieged it three yeres.
6 In the ninth yere of Hosea, the king of Assyria toke Samaria, and carryed
Israel away vnto Assyria, & put them in Hala & in Habor by the ryuer of Goza and
in the cities of the Medes.
7 For it came to passe, that the children of Israel sinned against the Lord
their God which had brought them out of the land of Egypt, from vnder the hand
of Pharao king of Egypt, and feared other gods.
8 And they walked in the ceremonies of the heathen whom the Lorde cast out
before the children of Israel, and in the
9 And the children of Israel went about to hide those thinges that were not wel
from the Lorde their God: And they buylt them hygh places in all their cities,
both in the towres where they kept watch, and also in the strong townes:
10 And they made the images & groues in euery hye hill, & vnder euery thicke
tree.
11 And there they burnt incense in all the hygh places, as did the heathen whom
the Lord caryed away before them, and wrought wicked thinges to anger the Lorde
withall:
12 For they serued most vile idols, wherof the Lorde had sayd vnto them: Ye
shall do no such thing.
13 And the Lorde testified in Israel and in Iuda by all the prophetes and by all
the sears, saying: Turne from your wicked wayes, and kepe my commaundementes and
my statutes, according to all the law which I commaunded your fathers, and which
I sent to you by my seruauntes the prophetes.
14 Nothwithstanding they woulde not heare, but rather hardened their neckes,
lyke to the stubburnesse of their fathers, that dyd not beleue in the Lorde
their God.
15 For they refused his statutes, and his appoyntment that he made with their
fathers, and the witnesses wherwith he witnessed vnto them, and they folowed
vanitie, and became vayne, and went after the heathen that were round about
them, concerning whom the Lorde had charged them that they shoulde not do lyke
them.
16 But they left al the commaundemetes of the Lord their God, and made them
images of metal, euen two calues, and made idol groues, & worshipped all the
hoast of heauen, and serued Baal.
17 And they sacrificed their sonnes and their daughters in fire, and vsed
witchcraftes, & enchauntmentes, euen selling them selues to worke wickednesse in
the sight of the Lorde, and to anger him.
18 And the Lorde was exceeding wroth with Israel, & put them out of his sight,
that there was left but the tribe of Iuda onely.
19 Neuerthelesse, Iuda also kept not the commaundementes of the Lorde their God,
but walked in the ceremonies of Israel whiche they made.
20 And the Lord cast of all the seede of Israel, and vexed them, & deliuered
them into the handes of spoylers, vntil he had rast them out of his sight.
21 For he cut of Israel from the house of Dauid, and made them a king, euen
Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat: And Ieroboam drewe Israel away that they shoulde
not folowe the Lorde, and made them sinne a great sinne.
22 For the children of Israel walked in all the sinnes of Ieroboam whiche he
dyd, and departed not therfrom,
23 Untill the Lord put Israel away out of his sight, as he had sayd by all his
seruauntes the prophetes: And so was Israel caried away out of their owne land
to Assyria euen vnto this day.
24 And the king of Assyria brought men from Babylon, from Cutha, fro Aua, from
Hamath, and from Sepharuaim, and put them in the cities of Samaria in steede of
the children of Israel: and they possessed Samaria, and dwelt in the cities
therof.
25 And it fortuned, that at the beginning of their dwelling there, they feared
not the Lorde, and the Lorde sent lions among them, which slue them.
26 Wherfore they spake to the king of Assyria, saying: The nations which thou
hast translated & put in the cities of Samaria knowe not the lawe of the God of
the lande: therefore he hath sent lions vpon them, and behold they slay them,
because they knowe not the maner of worshipping the God of the lande.
27 Then the king of Assyria commaunded, saying: Cary thyther one of the priestes
whom ye brought thence, and let hym go and dwell there, and teache them the
fashion how to serue the God of the countrey.
28 And then one of the priestes whom they had caried from Samaria, came and
dwelt in Bethel, and taught them howe they shoulde feare the Lorde.
29 Howebeit euery nation made them gods of their owne, and put them in the
houses of the hygh places whiche the Samaritans had made, euery nation in their
cities wherin they dwelt.
30 The men of Babylon made Socoth Benoth, & the men of Cuth made Nergal, & the
men of Hamath made Asima,
31 The Auites made Nibbaz and Tharthak: And the Sepharuites burnt their children
in fire for Adramelech and Anamelech, the gods of Sepharuaim.
32 And so they feared the Lorde, & made them priestes of the basist of them,
which sacrifised for them in the houses of the hygh places.
33 And so they feared the Lord, and serued their owne gods, after the maner of
the people whom they caryed thence.
34 And vnto this day they do after the olde maner: and neither feare God,
neither do after their ordinaunces and customes, and after the lawe &
commaundement which the Lorde commaunded the children of Iacob, whom he called
Israel.
35 And the Lorde made an appoyntment with them, and charged them, saying: Feare
none other gods, nor bowe your selues to them, nor serue them, nor sacrifice to
them:
36 But feare the Lorde whiche brought you out of the land of Egypt with great
power & a stretched out arme, him feare, and to him bow, and to him do
sacrifice.
37 The statutes, ordinaunces, lawe and commaundement whiche he wrote for you,
see that ye be diligent to do for euermore, and feare not any other gods.
38 And the appoyntment that I haue made with you see ye forget not, and feare
none other gods:
39 But the Lord your God ye shal feare, & he shall deliuer you out of the handes
of all your enemies.
40 Howebeit, they dyd not hearken, but did after their olde custome.
41 And so these nations feared the Lord, and serued their images also, like as
did their children and their childrens children: Euen as dyd their fathers, so
do they vnto this day.

Chapter 18

1 In the thirde yere of Hosea sonne of Ela king of Israel, it came to passe that
Hezekia ye sonne of Ahaz king of Iuda did raigne.
2 Twentie and fyue yeres olde was he when he began to raigne, and raigned
twentie and nine yeres in Hierusalem: His mothers name also was Abi, ye daughter
of Zacharia.
3 And he dyd that whiche is right in the sight of the Lord, according to al as
did Dauid his father.
4 He put away the high places, & brake the images, and cut downe the groues, and
all to brake the brasen serpent that Moyses had made: For vnto those dayes the
children of Israel dyd burne sacrifice to it: and he called it Nehustan.
5 He trusted in the Lorde God of Israel, so that after him was none lyke him
among all the kinges of Iuda, neither were there any such before him.
6 For he claue to the Lorde, and departed not from him: but kept his
commaundementes, which the Lorde commaunded Moyses.
7 And the Lorde was with him, so that he prospered in all thinges whiche he toke
in hande: And he rebelled against the king of Assyria, and serued him not.
8 He smote the Philistines euen vnto Azza & the coastes therof, both castels
where they kept watches, and strong cities.
9 And in the fourth yere of king Hezekia, (whiche was the seuenth yere of Hosea
sonne of Ela king of Israel) it fortuned that Salmanazar king of Assyria came vp
against Samaria, and besieged it.
10 And after three yeres they toke it: euen in the sixth yere of Hezekia (that
is to say the nynth yere of Hosea king of Israel) Samaria was wonne.
11 And the king of Assyria dyd cary away Israel vnto Assyria, & put them in
Halah and in Habor by the riuer of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes:
12 Because they woulde not hearken vnto the voyce of the Lord their God, but
transgressed his appoyntment, and all that Moyses the seruaunt of the Lorde
commaunded: and would neither heare them, nor do them.
13 Therfore in the fourteenth yere of king Hezekia, did Semacherib king of
Assyria come vp against all the strong cities of Iuda, and toke them.
14 And Hezekia king of Iuda sent to the king of Assyria to Lachis, saying: I
haue offended: depart from me, and all that thou puttest on me, that will I
beare. And the king of Assyria appoynted vnto Hezekia king of Iuda three hundred
talentes of siluer, and thirtie talentes of golde.
15 And Hezekia gaue him all the siluer that was founde in the house of the
Lorde, & in the treasures of the kinges house
16 At the same season dyd Hezekia rent of the doores of the temple of the Lorde
and the pillers (whiche the sayde Hezekia king of Iuda had couered ouer) and
gaue them to the king of Assyria.
17 And the king of Assyria sent Tharthan, and Rabsaris, & Rabsakeh from Lachis,
to king Hezekia with a great hoast against Hierusalem: And they went vp, and
came to Hierusalem, and gat them vp and stoode by the conduite of the vpper
poole, whiche is in the way of the fullers fielde.
18 And when they had called to the king, there came out to them Eliakim the
sonne of Elkia, which was stewarde of the houshold, and Sobna the scribe, and
Ioah the sonne of Asaph, the recorder.
19 And Rabsakeh sayd vnto them: Tell ye Hezekia I pray you, thus sayth the great
king, euen the king of Assyria: what confidence is this that thou hast?
20 Thou thinkest surely I haue eloquece, but counsell and strength are for the
warre: On whom then doest thou trust, that thou rebellest against me?
21 Doest thou trust to the staffe of this broken reede Egypt, on which if a man
leane, it will go into his hande, & pearse it: Euen so is Pharao king of Egypt
vnto all that trust on hym.
22 If ye say vnto me, we trust in the Lorde our God: Is not that he whose hygh
places and whose aulters Hezekia hath put downe? and hath sayd to Iuda and
Hierusalem, ye shall worship before this aulter here in Hierusalem.
23 Nowe therfore I pray thee geue hostages to my lorde the king of Assyria, and
I will deliuer thee two thousande horses, if thou be able to set ryders vpon
them:
24 Why thinkest thou scorne at the presence of one of the least Dukes of my
maisters seruauntes, and trustest to Egypt for charets and horsmen?
25 Moreouer, am I come nowe without the bidding of the Lorde to this place, to
destroy it? The Lord said to me: Go vp to this lande, and destroy it.
26 And Eliakim the sonne of Helkia, and Sobna, & Ioah, sayde vnto Rabsakeh:
Speake I pray thee to thy seruauntes in the Syrians language (for we vnderstande
it) and talke not with vs in the Iewes tongue in the eares of this people that
are on the wall.
27 And Rabsakeh sayde vnto them: Hath my maister sent me to thy maister and
thee, to speake these wordes? Hath he not sent me because of the men which sit
on the wall, that they may eate their owne dongue, & drinke their owne pisse
with you?
28 And so Rabsakeh stoode, & cryed with a lowde voyce in the Iewes language, and
spake, saying: Heare the wordes of the great king, euen of the king of Assyria.
29 Thus sayth the king: Let not Hezekia beguile you, for he shal not be able to
deliuer you out of myne hande:
30 Neither let Hezekia make you to trust in the Lorde, saying, The Lorde shall
surely deliuer vs, & this citie shall not be geuen ouer into the hande of the
king of Assyria.
31 Hearken not vnto Hezekia: For thus sayth the king of Assyria, Deale kindely
with me, and come out to me, and then eate euery man of his owne vine, and of
his owne figge tree, and drincke euery man of the water of his owne well,
32 Till I come, and set you to as good a lande as yours is, a lande of corne and
wine, a lande of bread and vineyardes, a lande of oyle, of olyue trees, and of
hony, that ye may liue, and not dye: And hearken not vnto Hezekia, for he
beguileth you, saying: The Lorde shall deliuer vs.
33 Hath euery one of the gods of the nations deliuered his land out of the hand
of the king of Assyria?
34 Where is the god of Hamath, & of Arphad? and where is the god of Sepharuaim,
Hena, and Iua? Dyd they deliuer Samaria out of myne hande?
35 And what god is among al the gods of the nations, that hath deliuered his
land out of myne hande? Shall the Lorde deliuer Hierusalem out of myne hande?
36 But the people held their peace, and aunswered not him a word: for the king
had commaunded, saying: Aunswere hym not.
37 Then Eliakim the sonne of Helkia, which was the steward of the houshold, and
Sobna the scribe, & Ioah the sonne of Asaph the recorder, came to Hezekia with
their clothes rent, and tolde him the wordes of Rabsakeh.

Chapter 19

1 So it came to passe, that when king Hezekia hearde it, he rent his clothes, &
put on sacke, & came into the house of the Lorde,
2 And sent Eliakim which was the steward of the houshold, and Sobna the scribe,
and the elders of the priestes clothed in sacke, to Isai the prophete, the sonne
of Amoz.
3 And they sayd vnto him, thus sayth Hezekia: This day is a day of tribulation,
& of rebuke and blasphemie: For the children are come to the byrth, and there is
no strength to be deliuered.
4 Peraduenture the Lorde thy God will heare al the wordes of Rabsakeh, who the
king of Assyria his maister hath sent to rayle on the lyuing God, & to rebuke
him with wordes which the Lorde thy God hath hearde: And lift thou vp thy prayer
for the remnaunt that are left.
5 So the seruauntes of king Hezekia came to Isai.
6 And Isai sayde vnto them, So shall ye say to your maister: Thus sayth the
Lorde, Be not afrayde of the wordes which thou hast heard, with which the young
men of the king of Assyria haue rayled on me.
7 Beholde, I will put hym in another mynde, and he shall heare tydinges, and so
returne to his owne land, and I will bring to passe, that he shall fall vpon the
sworde euen in his owne land.
8 And Rabsakeh went backe againe, and founde the king of Assyria fighting
against Libna: for he had hearde howe that he was departed from Lachis.
9 And when he hearde men say of Thirhaka king of the blacke Mores, Behold he is
come out to fight against thee: he departed, and sent messengers vnto Hezekia,
saying.
10 Thus speake to Hezekia king of Iuda, saying: Let not thy God deceaue thee in
whom thou trustest, saying: Hierusalem shall not be deliuered into the hand of
the king of Assyria.
11 Beholde, thou hast hearde what the kinges of Assyria haue done to all landes,
how they haue vtterly destroyed them: And shalt thou escape?
12 Haue the gods of the heathen deliuered them, whiche myne auncestours haue
destroyed? As Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of Eden which were
in Thelassar?
13 Where is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arphad, the king of the citie of
Sepharuaun, and of Hena and Iua?
14 And Hezekia receaued the letter of the hand of the messengers, and read it:
And Hezekia went vp into the house of the Lorde, and layde it abrode before the
Lorde.
15 And Hezekia prayed before the Lord, and sayd: O Lord God of Israel which
dwellest betweene ye Cherubs, thou art God alone ouer al the kingdomes of the
earth, thou hast made heauen & earth.
16 Lorde bowe downe thyne eare, and heare: Open Lorde thyne eyes, I besech thee,
and see: and heare the wordes of Sennacherib whiche hath sent this man to rayle
on the lyuing God.
17 Of a trueth Lorde, the kinges of Assyria haue destroyed nations and their
landes,
18 And haue set fire on their gods: For they were no gods, but the worke of the
handes of man, euen of wood and stone: and they destroyed them.
19 Nowe therfore O Lord our God I besech thee, saue thou vs out of his hande,
that all the kingdomes of the earth may knowe that thou onely art the Lorde God.
20 And Isai the sonne of Amoz sent to Hezekia, saying, Thus sayth the Lorde God
of Israel: That whiche thou hast prayed me concerning Sennacherib king of
Assyria, I haue hearde it.
21 This is therefore the worde that the Lorde hath sayd of him: The virgin, euen
the daughter of Sion hath despised thee, and laughed thee to scorne O thou king
of Assyria, the daughter of Hierusalem hath shaken her head at thee.
22 Whom hast thou rayled on? and whom hast thou blasphemed? Against whom hast
thou exalted thy voyce, and lyfted vp thyne eyes so hye? Euen against the holy
of Israel.
23 By the hande of thy messengers thou hast rayled on the Lord, and sayd: With
the multitude of my charets I am come vp to the toppes of the mountaynes, euen
along by the sides of Libanon, and I will cut downe the hye Cedar trees and the
lusty fyrre trees therof: and I will go into the lodging of his borders, and
into the wood of his Carmel.
24 I haue digged and druncke straunge waters: & with the steppe of my goyng wil
I drye al the water pooles that are besieged.
25 Hast thou not heard howe I haue ordeyned such a thing a great whyle a go, and
haue prepared it from the beginning? And shall I not nowe bring it foorth that
it may destroy and bring strong cities into wast heapes of stones?
26 And the inhabiters of them shalbe of litle power, and faynt hearted, and
confounded, and shalbe lyke the grasse of the field, or greene hearbe, or as the
hay on the toppes of the houses, or as the corne that is vnripe & smitten with
blasting.
27 I knowe thy dwelling, thy comming out and thy goyng in, and thy fury against
me.
28 And because thou ragest against me, & thy tumult is come vp to myne eares, I
will put my hoke in thy nostrels, and my byt in thy lippes, and wil bring thee
backe againe the same way thou camest.
29 And this shalbe a signe vnto thee, O Hezekia: Ye shall eate this yere of such
thinges as grow of them selues, and the next yere such as come vp of those that
dyd growe of their owne accorde, and the thirde yere sowe ye and reape, plant
vineyardes, and eate the fruites therof.
30 And it that is escaped and left of the daughter of Iuda, shall yet againe
take roting downewarde, and beare fruite vpwarde.
31 For out of Hierusalem shall go a remnaunt and a number that shall escape out
of mout Sion: The zeale of the lord of hoastes shal bring this thing to passe.
32 Wherfore thus sayth the Lord concerning the king of Assyria: he shall not
come to this citie, nor shote an arrowe into it, nor come before it with
shielde, nor cast a banke against it.
33 But shall go backe againe the way he came, and shall not come into this
citie, sayth the Lorde.
34 For I will defende this citie, to saue it, for myne owne sake, and for Dauid
my seruauntes sake.
35 And it came to passe, that the selfe same night the angell of the Lorde went
out, and smote in the hoast of the Assyrians an hundred fourescore & fyue
thousand: And when the remnaunt were vp early in the morning, beholde they were
all dead coarses.
36 And so Sennacherib king of Assyria auoyded and departed, and went againe and
dwelt at Niniue.
37 And it fortuned, that as he was in a temple worshipping Nisroch his God,
Adramelech & Saresar his owne sonnes smote hym with the sworde: And they escaped
into the lande of Armenia, and Asarhaddon his sonne raigned in his steade.

Chapter 20

1 About that time was Hezekia sicke vnto the death: And the prophete Isai the
sonne of Amoz came to him, and sayde vnto him, Thus saith the Lord: Put thine
houshold in an order, for thou shalt dye, and not lyue.
2 And Hezekia turned his face to the wal, and prayed vnto the Lord, saying.
3 I beseche the, O Lorde, remember now how I haue walked before thee in trueth
and with a perfect heart, & haue done that whiche is good in thy sight. And
Hezekia wept sore.
4 And it fortuned that afore Isai was gone out into the middle of the court, the
word of the Lorde came to him, saying:
5 Turne againe, and tell Hezekia the captayne of my people, thus sayth the Lorde
God of Dauid thy father: I haue hearde thy prayer, and seene thy teares, and
beholde I will heale thee, so that on the thirde day thou shalt go vp into the
house of the Lorde.
6 And I wil adde vnto thy dayes yet fifteene yeres, & I will deliuer thee & this
citie out of the hand of ye king of Assyria, & will defende this citie, for myne
owne sake, & for Dauid my seruauntes sake.
7 And Isai sayd: Take a lumpe of dried figges. And they toke and layed it on the
sore, and he recouered.
8 And Hezekia sayde vnto Isai: What shalbe the signe that the Lorde will heale
me, and that I shal go vp into the house of the Lorde the thirde day?
9 Isai aunswered: This signe shalt thou haue of the Lord, that the Lord will do
that he hath spoken: Shall the shadowe go forwarde ten degrees? or go backe
againe ten degrees?
10 Hezekia aunswered: It is a light thing for the shadowe to go downe ten
degrees, I desire not that: but let the shadowe go backwarde ten degrees.
11 And Isai the prophete called vnto the Lord, and he brought the shadowe ten
degrees backewarde, by whiche it had gone downe in the dyall of Ahaz,
12 The same season Berodach Baladan the sonne of Baladan king of Babylon, sent
letters and a present vnto Hezekia: for he had hearde howe that Hezekia was
sicke.
13 And Hezekia was glad of them, and shewed them all his treasure house, siluer,
golde, odours, precious oyntment, all the house of his armory, and all that was
found in his treasures: There was nothing in his house, & in all his realme,
that Hezekia shewed them not.
14 And Isai the prophete came vnto king Hezekia, and sayd vnto him: What sayde
these men? and from wence came they to thee? And Hezekia sayde: They be come
from a farre countrey, euen from Babylon.
15 And he sayde againe: What haue they seene in thy house? Hezekia aunswered:
All ye thinges that are in my house haue they seene: there is nothing among my
treasures, that I haue not shewed the.
16 And Isai sayde vnto Hezekia: Heare the word of the Lord,
17 Beholde, the dayes come, that all that is in thy house, and whatsoeuer thy
fathers haue layde vp in store vnto this day, shalbe caryed into Babylon: and
nothing shalbe left sayth the Lorde.
18 And of thy sonnes that shall proceede out of thee, and which thou shalt
beget, shall they take away, and they shalbe chamberlaynes in the palace of the
king of Babylon.
19 And Hezekia sayde vnto Isai: Welcome be the worde of the Lorde whiche thou
hast spoken. And he sayde: Shall there not be peace & trueth in my dayes?
20 The remnaunt of the wordes that concerne Hezekia, and all his power, and howe
he made a poole and a conduite, & brought water into the citie, are they not
written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Iuda?
21 And Hezekia slept with his fathers, & Manasse his sonne raigned in his steade

Chapter 21

1 Manasse was twelue yeres old when he began to raigne, and raigned fyftie and
fyue yeres in Hierusale: his mothers name also was Hephziba.
2 And he did euil in the sight of the Lord, euen after the abominations of the
heathen whom the Lorde cast out before the children of Israel.
3 For he went and buylt vp the hygh places whiche Hezekia his father had
destroyed, and he reared vp aulters for Baal, and made idol groues as dyd Ahab
king of Israel, and worshipped all the hoast of heauen, and serued them.
4 And he buylt aulters in the house of the Lord, of which the Lorde sayde: in
Hierusalem will I put my name.
5 And he buylt aulters for all the hoast of heauen, euen in two courtes of the
house of the Lorde.
6 And he offred his owne sonne in fire, and gaue heede vnto witchcraft and
sorcery, and mainteyned workers with spirites, and tellers of fortunes, and
wrought much wickednesse in the sight of the Lorde to anger him.
7 And he put an image of a groue that he had made euen in the temple, of which
the Lord had sayd to Dauid and Solomon his sonne: in this house and in
Hierusalem which I haue chosen out of all tribes of Israel, will I put my name
for euer.
8 Neither will I make the feete of Israel moue any more out of the lande which I
gaue their fathers: so that they will obserue and do all that I haue commaunded
them, and according to all the law that my seruaunt Moyses commaunded them.
9 But they hearkened not: and Manasse led them out of the way, to do more
wickedly then dyd the heathen people whom the Lorde destroyed before the
children of Israel.
10 And the Lord spake by his seruauntes the prophetes, saying:
11 Because Manasse king of Iuda hath done such abhominations, and hath wrought
more wickedly then all the Amorites whiche were before him dyd, and hath made
Iuda sinne also with his idols:
12 Therfore thus sayth the Lord God of Israel: Behold, I will bring such euyll
vpon Hierusalem and Iuda, that whoso heareth of it, both his cares shal tingle.
13 And I will stretche ouer Hierusalem the squaryng line of Samaria, & the
plummet of the house of Ahab: And I will wype out Hierusalem, as a man wypeth a
dishe, and when he hath wyped it, turneth it vp syde downe.
14 And I will leaue the remnaunt of myne inheritaunce, and deliuer them into the
hand of their enemies, and they shalbe robbed and spoyled of all their
aduersaries:
15 Euen because they haue done euyll in my sight, and haue angred me, sence the
time their fathers came out of Egypt, vnto this day.
16 And Manasse shed innocent blood exceeding much, till he replenished
Hierusalem from corner to corner, besyde his sinne wherwith he made Iuda to
sinne and to do euyll in the sight of the Lorde.
17 The rest of the wordes that concerne Manasse, and all that he dyd, and his
sinne that he sinned, are they not written in the booke of the cronicles of the
kinges of Iuda?
18 And Manasse slept with his fathers, and was buried in the garden of his owne
house, euen in the garde of Uzza, & Amon his sonne raigned in his steade.
19 Amon was twentie and two yeres olde when he began to raigne, and he raigned
two yeres in Hierusalem: His mothers name also was Mesullemeth the daughter of
Harus of Iotba.
20 And he dyd euyll in the sight of the Lord, as his father Manasse dyd:
21 And walked in al the way that his father walked in, and serued the idols that
his father serued, and worshipped them:
22 And he forsoke the Lord God of his fathers, and walked not in the way of the
Lorde.
23 And the seruauntes of Amon conspired against hym, & slue the king in his owne
house.
24 And the people of the land slue al them that had conspired against king Amon,
and the people made Iosia his sonne king in his steade.
25 The rest of the wordes that concerne Amon what thinges he dyd, are they not
written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Iuda?
26 And they buryed him in his sepulchre in the garden of Uzza, & Iosia his sonne
raigned in his steade.

Chapter 22

1 Iosia was eight yeres olde when he began to raigne, & he raigned thirtie & one
yeres in Hierusalem: His mothers name also was Iedida the daughter of Adaia of
Bozcath.
2 He dyd that which is right in the sight of the Lorde, & walked in all the
wayes of Dauid his father, and bowed neither to the right hande or to the left.
3 And it came to passe, that in the eyghtteenth yere of the raigne of king
Iosia, the king sent Saphan the sonne of Azalia the sonne of Mesulam the scribe
to the house of the Lord, saying:
4 Go vp to Helkia the hye priest, that he may summe the siluer whiche is brought
into the house of the Lorde, which the kepers of the porche haue gathered of the
people:
5 And let them deliuer it into the hande of them that do the worke, and that
haue the ouersight of the house of the Lord: and let them geue it to them that
worke in the house of the Lorde, to repaire the decayed places of the temple,
6 Euen vnto carpenters and masons, and workers vpon the walles, and for to bye
tymber and free stone, to repaire the temple.
7 Howbeit, let no reckenyng be made with them of the money that is deliuered
into their hande, for their vse is to deale faithfully.
8 And Helkia the hie priest said vnto Saphan the scribe: I haue founde the booke
of the lawe in the house of the Lorde. And Helkia gaue the booke to Saphan, and
he read in it.
9 And Saphan the scribe came to the king, and brought him worde againe, and
sayde: Thy seruauntes haue gathered the money that was founde in the temple, and
haue deliuered it vnto them that do the worke, and that haue the ouersight of
the house of the Lorde.
10 And Saphan the scribe shewed the king, saying, Helkia the priest hath
deliuered me a booke: And Saphan read in it before the king.
11 And it fortuned, that when the king had hearde the wordes of the booke of the
lawe, he rent his clothes.
12 And the king commaunded Helkia the priest, and Ahikan the sonne of Saphan,
and Achbor the sonne of Michaia, and Saphan the scribe, and Asahia a seruaunt of
the kinges, saying:
13 Go ye and enquire of the Lord for me, and for the people, and for al Iuda,
concerning the wordes of this booke that is founde: For great is the wrath of
the Lord that is kyndled against vs, because our fathers haue not hearkened vnto
the wordes of this booke, to do according vnto al that which is written therin
for vs.
14 So Helkia the hye priest and Ahikam, Achbor, and Saphan, and Asahia, went
vnto Hulda the prophetisse the wyfe of Sallum the sonne of Thikua the sonne of
Harhas keper of the wardrope: (which prophetisse dwelt in Hierusalem in the
house of the doctrine:) & they communed with her.
15 And she aunswered them: thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel, Tell the man that
sent you to me,
16 Thus sayth the Lorde: Behold, I wil bring euyll vpon this place, and on the
inhabiters therof, euen all the wordes of the booke whiche the king of Iuda hath
read:
17 Because they haue forsaken me, and haue burnt incense vnto other gods, to
anger me with all the workes of their handes: My wrath also shalbe kindled
against this place, and shall not be quenched.
18 But to the king of Iuda whiche sent you to aske counsell of the Lord, so
shall ye say: Thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel, as touching the wordes whiche
ye haue hearde:
19 Because thyne heart dyd melt, and because thou hast humbled thy selfe before
me the Lorde, when thou heardest what I spake against this place, and against
the inhabiters of the same, howe that they should be destroyed and accursed: and
hast rent thy clothes and wept before me, of that also haue I hearde sayth the
Lorde:
20 Beholde therefore I wyll receaue thee vnto thy fathers, and thou shalt be put
into thy graue in peace, and thyne eyes shall not see all the euill which I wyll
bryng vpon this place. And they brought the king worde againe.

Chapter 23

1 And then the king sent, and there gathered vnto him all the elders of Iuda and
of Hierusalem.
2 And the king went vp into the house of the Lorde, with all the men of Iuda,
and all the inhabitours of Hierusalem, with the priestes, and prophetes, and all
the people both small and great: And he read in the eares of them al the wordes
of the couenaunt which was founde in the house of the Lorde.
3 And the king stoode by a piller, & made a couenaunt before the Lorde, that
they should walke after the Lorde, and kepe his commaundementes, his witnesses,
and his statutes, with all their heart and all their soule, and make good the
wordes of the sayde appoyntment, that were written in the foresayde booke: And
all the people consented to the appoyntment.
4 And the king commaunded Helchia the hie prieste, and the inferior priestes,
and the kepers of the ornamentes, to bryng out of the temple of the Lorde all
the vessels that were made for Baal, for the idoll groues, and for all the hoast
of heauen: And he burnt them without Hierusalem in the fieldes of Cedron, and
carryed the asshes of them into Bethel.
5 And he put downe the ministers of Baal whom the kinges of Iuda had founded to
burne incense in the high places and cities of Iuda that were rounde about
Hierusalem, & also them that burnt incense vnto Baal, to the sunne, to the
moone, to the planets, and to all the hoast of heauen.
6 And he brought out the groue from the temple of the Lorde without Hierusalem
vnto the brooke Cedron, and burnt it there at the brooke Cedron, and stampt it
to powder, and cast the dust thereof vpon the graues of the children of the
people.
7 And he brake downe the celles of the male stewes that were by the house of the
Lorde, where the women woue hanginges for the idol groue.
8 And he brought all the priestes out of the cities of Iuda, and defiled the
high places where the priestes had burnt incense, euen from Geba to Beerseba,
and destroyed the high places of the gates that were in the entering in of the
gate of Iosua ye gouernour of the citie, which were as a man goeth in on the
left hande of the gate of the citie.
9 Neuerthelesse, the priestes of the high places came not vp to the aulter of
the Lorde in Hierusalem, saue onely they did eate of the sweete bread among
their brethren.
10 And he defiled Thopheth, which is in the valley of the children of Hinnom,
because no man should offer his sonne or his daughter in fire to Moloch.
11 He put downe the horses that the kinges of Iuda had geuen to the sunne, at
the entering in of the house of the Lorde, by the chambre of Nathanmelech the
chamberlayne, which was ruler of the suburbes, and burnt the charets of the
sunne with fire.
12 And the aulters that were on the top of the parlour of Ahaz which the kinges
of Iuda had made, and the aulters which Manasse had made in the two courtes of
the house of the Lorde, did the king breake downe, & ran thence, and cast the
dust of them into the brooke Cedron.
13 And the high places that were before Hierusalem, on the right hand of the
mount Oliuet, which Solomon the king of Israel had builded for Astaroth the idol
of the Zidons, and for Chamos the idol of the Moabites, and for Milthon the
abhominable idoll of the children of Ammon, those the king defiled:
14 And brake the images, and cut downe the idol groues, and filled their places
with the bones of men.
15 Moreouer, the aulter that was at Bethel, the high places made by Ieroboam the
sonne of Nabat which made Israel sinne, both the aulter and also the high places
he brake downe, and burnt the high places, and stampt it to powder, and burnt
the idol groue.
16 And as Iosia turned him selfe, he spyed the graues that were in the mount,
and sent and fet the bones out of the graues, and burnt them vpon the aulter, to
pollute it, according to the word of the Lorde that the man of God proclaymed
which tolde the same wordes.
17 Then he saide: What title is that that I see? And the men of the citie tolde
him: It is the sepulchre of the man of God, which came from Iuda, and tolde the
selfe same thinges that thou hast done to the aulter of Bethel.
18 And he saide, let him be: see that no man moue his bones. And so his bones
were saued, with the bones of a prophete that came out of Samaria.
19 And all the houses of the high places in the cities of Samaria, which the
king of Israel had made to anger the Lorde withal those Iosia put out of the
way, & did to them according to all the actes that he had done in Bethel.
20 And he sacrifised all the priestes of the high places that were there, euen
vpon the aulters, and burnt mens bones vpon them, and returned to Hierusalem.
21 And the king commaunded all the people, saying: Kepe the feast of Passouer
vnto the Lorde your God, as it is written in the booke of this couenaunt.
22 There was no Passouer holden lyke that from the dayes of the iudges that
iudged Israel, and in all the dayes of the kinges of Israel and of the kinges of
Iuda.
23 In the eighteenth yere of king Iosia, was this Passouer holden to the Lord in
Hierusalem.
24 And therto workers with spirites, & soothsayers, images, idols, and all the
abhominations that were spyed in the lande of Iuda and in Hierusalem, those did
Iosia put out of the way, to perfourme the wordes of the lawe, which were
written in the booke that Helchia the priest founde in the house of the Lorde
25 Lyke vnto him was there no king before him that turned to the Lorde with all
his heart, with all his soule, and all his might, according to all the lawe of
Moyses, neither after him arose ther any such as he.
26 Notwithstanding, the Lorde turned not from the fiercenesse of his great wrath
wherewith he was angry against Iuda, because of all the prouocations that
Manasse had prouoked him withall.
27 And the Lorde sayde: I wyll put Iuda also out of my sight, as I haue done
away Israel, and wyll cast of this citie Hierusalem which I haue chosen, and the
house of which I sayde, My name shall be there.
28 The rest of the wordes that concerne Iosia, and all that he did, are they not
written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Iuda?
29 In his dayes Pharao Necho king of Egypt went vp against the king of Assyria
to the riuer of Euphrates: And king Iosia went against him, and was slaine of
him at Megiddo when he had seene him.
30 And his seruauntes carryed him dead from Megiddo, and brought him to
Hierusalem, & buryed him in his owne sepulchre: And the people of the lande toke
Iehoahaz the sonne of Iosia, and annoynted him, and made him king in his fathers
steade.
31 Iehoahaz was twentie & three yeres olde when he began to raigne, and raigned
three monethes in Hierusalem: His mothers name also was Hamiel, the daughter of
Ierenna of Libna.
32 And he did euil in the sight of the Lord, according to all thinges as his
fathers had done.
33 And Pharao Necho put him in bondes at Ribla in the lande of Hamath while he
raigned in Hierusalem, and put the lande to a tribute of an hundred talents of
siluer, and a talent of golde.
34 And Pharao Necho made Eliakim the sonne of Iosia king in the roome of Iosia
his father, and turned his name to Iehoakim, and toke Iehoahaz away: which when
he came to Egypt, dyed there.
35 And Iehoakim gaue the siluer and the golde to Pharao, & tayed the lande, to
geue the money according to the commaundement of Pharao: requiring of euery man
according to their habilitie siluer and golde, euen of the people of the lande,
to geue vnto Pharao Necho.
36 Iehoakim was twentie & fiue yeres olde when he began to raigne, and he
raigned aleuen yeres in Hierusalem: His mothers name also was Zebuda, the
daughter of Pedaia of Ruma.
37 And he did that which was euill in the sight of the Lord, according to al
things as his fathers had done.

Chapter 24

1 In his dayes came Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon vp, & Iehoakim became his
seruaunt three yeres: and then turned, and rebelled against him.
2 And the Lord sent against him bandes of the Chaldes, and bandes of the
Syrians, and bandes of the Moabites, and bandes of the Ammonites: and sent them
against Iuda to destroye it, according to the saying of the Lorde which he spake
by his seruauntes the prophetes.
3 Onely at the bidding of the Lorde happened it so to Iuda, to put them out of
his sight for the sinnes of Manasse, according to all that he did.
4 And for the innocent blood that he shed, and filled Hierusalem with innocent
blood: and the Lorde would not be reconciled.
5 The rest of the wordes that concerne Iehoakim, and all that he did, are they
not written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges of Iuda?
6 And so Iehoakim slept with his fathers: and Iehoachin his sonne raigned in his
steade.
7 And the king of Egypt came no more out of his lande: For the king of Babylon
had taken from the ryuer of Egypt vnto the ryuer of Euphrates, all that
pertayned to the king of Egypt.
8 Iehoachin was eighteene yeres olde when he began to raigne, and raigned in
Hierusalem three monethes: His mothers name also was Nehusta, the daughter of
Elnathan of Hierusalem.
9 And he did that which was euil in the sight of the Lorde, according to all as
his father had done.
10 In that tyme came the seruauntes of Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon vp against
Hierusalem, & the citie was besieged.
11 And Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon came against the citie, and his
seruauntes did besiege it.
12 And Iehoachin the king of Iuda, came out to the king of Babylon, he and his
mother, his seruauntes, his lordes, and his chamberlaynes: and the king of
Babylon toke him in the eight yere of his raigne.
13 And he carryed out thence al the treasures of the house of the Lorde, and the
treasure of the kinges house, and brake al the vessels of golde which Solomon
king of Israel had made in the temple of the Lorde, as the Lorde had sayde.
14 And he carryed away all Hierusalem, and al the lordes, and all the strong men
of warre, euen ten thousand, into captiuitie, and all the craftesmen, & kepers,
none remaining saue the poore common people of the lande.
15 And he carryed away Iehoachin to Babylon, and the kinges mother, and the
kinges wyues, his chamberlaynes: & them that were mightie in the lande those
carryed he away into captiuitie, from Hierusalem to Babylon.
16 And all the actiue men of warre, euen seuen thousand, and craftesmen, and
porters a thousand, all that were strong and apt for warre, did the king of
Babylon bryng to Babylon captiue.
17 And the king of Babylon made Mathania his fathers brother king in his steade,
and chaunged his name to Zedekia.
18 Zedekia was twentie and one yeres olde when he began to raigne, and he
raigned aleuen yeres in Hierusalem: His mothers name also was Hamital, the
daughter of Ieremia of Libna.
19 And he did euill in the sight of the Lorde, according to all as Iehoachin had
done.
20 For the wrath of the Lorde was moued against Hierusalem & Iuda, vntill he
cast them out of his sight: And Zedekia rebelled against the king of Babylon.

Chapter 25

1 And it fortuned, that in the ninth yere of his raigne, the tenth day of the
tenth moneth, Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon came, he & all his hoast, against
Hierusalem, and pitched against it, and made engins against it on euery syde.
2 And the citie was besieged vnto the eleuenth yere of king Zedekia.
3 And the ninth day of the moneth, there was so great hunger in the citie, that
there was no bread for the people of the lande.
4 And the citie was broken vp, and all the men of armes fled by night by a way
through a gate which is betweene two walles by the kinges garden (the Chaldees
lying about the citie:) And the king went the way toward the playne.
5 And the souldiers of the Chaldees folowed after the king, and toke him in the
playne of Iericho: and all his army were scattered away from him.
6 So they toke the king, and brought him to Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon
to Ribla, where they gaue iudgement vpon him.
7 And they slue the sonnes of Zedekia before his eyes, and he put out the eyes
of Zedekia, and fettered him with chaynes, and carryed him to Babylon.
8 And the seuenth day of the fifth moneth (which is the nineteenth yere of king
Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon) came Nebusaradan a seruaunt of the king of
Babylon & chiefe captayne of the men of warre, vnto Hierusalem:
9 And burnt the house of the Lord, and the kinges house, and all the houses of
Hierusalem, and all great houses burnt he with fire.
10 And all the souldiers of the Chaldees that were with the chiefe captayne of
the men of warre, brake downe the walles of Hierusalem rounde about.
11 But the rest of the people that were left in the citie, and them that were
fled to the king of Babylon, with the remnaunt of the common people, did
Nabusaradan the chiefe captayne of the men of warre carry away.
12 But the captaine of the souldiers left of the poore of the land, to dresse
the vines and to tyll the grounde.
13 And the pillers of brasse that were in the house of the Lorde, and the
sockets, and the brasen lauatorie that was in the house of the Lorde, did the
Chaldees breake, & carryed all the brasse of them to Babylon.
14 And the pots, shouels, instrumentes of musicke, spoones, and all the vessels
of brasse that they ministred in, toke they away,
15 And the fire pannes, and basons: and such thinges as were of golde and of
siluer, them toke ihe chiefe captayne away:
16 Euen two pillers, one lauatorie, and the sockets which Solomon had made for
the house of the Lorde: The brasse of al these vessels was without waight.
17 The height of the one piller was eightteene cubites, and the pommel thereof
was brasse: and the height of the pommel was with wreathen worke three cubites,
& pomegranates vpon the pommel rounde about all of brasse: And of the same
fashion was the second piller, with a wreathen worke.
18 And the chiefe captayne of the men of warre toke Saraia the chiefe priest,
and Zephoniah the highest priest saue one, and the three kepers of the holy
things:
19 And out of the citie he toke a chamberlayne that had the ouersight of the men
of warre, & fiue men of them that were euer in the kinges presence which were
founde in the citie, and him that was scribe to the captaine of the hoast which
brought out the people of the lande to warre, and threescore men of the people
of the lande that were founde in the citie.
20 And Nebusaradan the chiefe captaine of the men of warre, toke these, and
brought them to the king of Babylon to Ribla.
21 And the king of Babylon smote them, and slue them at Ribla in the lande of
Hamath: And so Iuda was carryed away out of their lande.
22 Howebeit, there remayned people in the lande of Iuda, whom Nabuchodonosor
king of Babylon left, & made Gedalia the sonne of Ahikam the sonne of Saphan
ruler ouer them.
23 And all the captaynes of the souldiers, & other men, heard that the king of
Babylon had made Gedalia gouernour, and there came to Gedalia to Mizpah Ismael
ye sonne of Nathania, Iohannan the sonne of Karea, Saraia the sonne of
Thanhumeth the Netophatite, and Iaazania the sonne of Maachati, they and their
men.
24 And Gedalia sware to them and to the men whom they had with them, and saide
vnto them: Feare not ye because ye are the seruauntes of the Chaldees: dwell in
the lande, and serue the king of Babylon, and ye shall be well.
25 But it chaunced in the seuenth moneth, that Ismael the sonne of Nathania the
sonne of Elisama of the kinges blood, came, and ten men with him, and smote
Gedalia that he dyed: and so did he the Iewes and the Chaldees that were with
him at Mizpah.
26 And all the people both small & great, and the captaynes of warre, arose and
came to Egypt: for they were afrayde of the Chaldees.
27 Notwithstading, yet in the seuen & thirtith yere after Iehoachin king of Iuda
was carryed away, the seuen and twentith day of the twelfth moneth Euilmerodach
king of Babylon the same yere that he began to raigne, did lyft vp the head of
Iehoachin king of Iuda out of pryson.
28 And spake kindely to him, and set his seate aboue the seate of the kinges
that were with him in Babylon,
29 And chaunged his pryson garmentes, and he did euer eate bread before him al
the dayes of his lyfe.
30 His portion was a continuall portion that was assigned him of the king, euery
day a certaine as long as he lyued.


1 Chronicles

Chapter 1

1 Adam, Seth, Enos.
2 Kenan, Mahalchel, Iared.
3 Henoh, Methusalah, Lamech.
4 Noah, Sem, Ham, and Iapheth.
5 The sonnes of Iapheth: Gomer, Magog, Madai, Iauan, and Thubal, Mesech, and
Thiras.
6 The sonnes of Gomer: Aschenaz, Riphath, and Thogarma.
7 And the sonnes of Ianan: Elisa, and Tharsis, Citim, and Dodanun.
8 The sonnes of Ham: Chus, and Mizraim, Phut, and Chanaan.
9 The sonnes of Chus: Seba, and Hauila, Sabbetha, and Raama: and Sabtheca. And
the sonnes of Raama: Seba, and Dedan.
10 And Chus begat Nimrod: and he began to be mightie vpon the earth.
11 Mizraim begat Ludim, and Anamim, Lahabim, and Naphthuim,
12 Phathzusim, and Casluim, of which came the Philistines and the Caphthorites.
13 Chanaan begat Zidon his eldest sonne, and Heth.
14 Iebusi also, and Amori, and Girgasi,
15 Heui, Araki, and Sini,
16 And Aruadi, Zamari, and Hemathi.
17 The sonnes of Sem: Elam, and Assur, Arphacsad, Lud, and Aram, & Uz, Hul, and
Gether, and Mesech.
18 Arphacsad begat Selah, and Selah begat Eber.
19 And vnto Eber were borne two sonnes: the name of the one was Peleg, because
that in his dayes the land was deuided, and his brothers name was Ioktan.
20 Ioktan begat Almodad, and Saleph, Hazermaneth, and Ierah,
21 Hadoram also and Usal, and Dikla,
22 Ebal, and Abimael, and Seba,
23 And Ophir, Hauila, and Iobab:
24 All these were the sonnes of Ioktan: Sem, Arphacsad, Selah,
25 Eber, Peleg, Rehu,
26 Serug, Nahor, Therah,
27 Abram, otherwyse called Abraham.
28 The sonnes of Abraham: Isahac, and Ismael.
29 And these are their generations: the eldest sonne of Ismael was Nabaioth,
then Kedar, Adbeel, and Mibsam.
30 Misma, and Dumah, Massa, Hadad, and Thema,
31 Ietur, Naphis, and Kedma: These are the sonnes of Ismael.
32 The children of Ketura Abrahams concubine, she bare Zimram, Ioksan, Medan,
Midian, Iisbok, and Suah. The children of Ioksan: Seba, and Dedan.
33 The children of Midian: Epha, and Ephar, Henoch, Abida, and Eldaa: All these
are the children of Ketura.
34 And so Abraham begat Isahac. The sonnes of Isahac: Esau and Israel.
35 The sonnes of Esau: Eliphaz, Rehuel, Iehus, Iaelam, and Korah.
36 The children of Eliphaz: Theman, Omar, Zephi, and Gatham, Kenas, Thunna, and
Amalek.
37 The children of Rehuel: Nahath, Zerah, Samma, and Miza.
38 The sonnes of Seir: Lotan, Sobal, Zibeon, and Ana, Dison, Ezer, and Disan.
39 The children of Lotan: Hori, and Homan: and Thimna was Lotans sister.
40 The children of Sobal: Alian, Manahath, Ebal, Sephi, and Onam. The sonnes of
Zibeon: Aia, and Ana.
41 And the sonnes of Ana: Dison. The sonnes of Dison: Hamran, Esban, Iethran,
and Cheran.
42 The sonnes of Ezer: Bilhan, Zaeuan, and Iakan. The sonnes of Dison: Uz, and
Aram.
43 These are the kinges that raigned in the land of Edom, before any king
raigned ouer the children of Israel: Bela, the sonne of Beor, and the name of
his citie was Dinhaba.
44 And Bela dyed, and Iobab the sonne of Zerah of Bozra raigned in his steade.
45 And when Iobab also was dead, Husam of the lande of ye Themanites raigned in
his steade.
46 And when Husam was dead, Hadad the sonne of Bedad, which smote Midian in the
fielde of Moab, raigned in his steade: and the name of his citie was Auith.
47 So Hadad dyed, and Samla of Masreka raigned in his steade.
48 And Samla dyed, and Saul of Rehoboth by the ryuer syde, raigned in his
steade.
49 And when Saul was dead, Baalhanan the sonne of Achbor raigned in his steade.
50 And Baalhanan dyed, & Hadad raigned in his steade: and the name of his citie
was Phai, and his wyues name was Mehetabel the daughter of Matred the daughter
of Mesahab.
51 Hadad dyed also. And there were dukes in Edom: Duke Thimna, Duke Aliah, Duke
Ietheth,
52 Duke Aholibama, Duke Ela, Duke Pinon,
53 Duke Kenaz, Duke Theman, Duke Mibzar,
54 Duke Magdiel, Duke Iram. These are the Dukes of Edom.

Chapter 2

1 These are the sonnes of Israel: Ruben, Simeon, Leui, Iuda, Isachar, and
Zabulon.
2 Dan, Ioseph, Beniamin, Nephthali, Gad, and Aser.
3 The sonnes of Iuda: Er, Onan, and Sela: These three were borne vnto him of
Bath Sua ye Chanaanitesse. And Er the eldest sonne of Iuda was euil in the sight
of the Lorde, and he slue him.
4 And Thamar his daughter in lawe bare him Pharez, and Zara: and so all the
sonnes of Iuda were fiue.
5 The sonnes of Pharez: Hezron, and Hamul.
6 The sonnes of Zara: Zimri, Ethan, Heman, Chalchol, and Dara: which were fiue
in all.
7 And the sonnes of Charmi, Achan, that troubled Israel, transgressing in the
thing that was dampned.
8 The sonnes of Ethan: Azaria.
9 The sonnes also of Hezron that were borne vnto him: Ierameel, Ram, and
Chelubai.
10 And Ram begat Aminadab, and Aminadab begat Naasson a lorde of the children of
Iuda.
11 And Naasson begat Salma, and Salma begat Boaz.
12 Boaz begat Obed, and Obed begat Isai.
13 And Isai begat his eldest sonne Eliab, and Aminadab the second, and Simaa the
third,
14 Nathanael the fourth, and Radai the fifth,
15 Ozem the sixt, and Dauid the seuenth:
16 Whose sisters were Zeruia and Abigail. The sonnes of Zeruia: Abisai, Ioab,
and Azael, three.
17 And Abigail bare Amaza, the father of which Amaza, was Iether an Ismaelite.
18 And Caleb the sonne of Hezron begat Asuba, of his wyfe Asuba, and Ierioth,
whose sonnes are these: Iaser, Sobab, and Ardon.
19 And when Asuba was dead, Caleb toke Euphrata, which bare him Hur.
20 And Hur begat Uri, and Uri begat Bezaleel.
21 Afterward came Hezron to the daughter of Machir the father of Gilead, and
toke her when he was threescore yeres olde: and she bare him Segub.
22 And Segub begat Iair, which had three and twentie cities in the lande of
Gilead.
23 And he ouercame Gessur and Aram the townes of Iair, from them which dwelt in
them and Kenath and the townes therof, euen threescore townes: All these were
the sonnes of Machir the father of Gilead.
24 And after that Hezron was dead at Caleb in Euphrata, Abia Esroms wyfe bare
him Ashur the father of Thekoa.
25 And the sonnes of Ierahmeel the eldest sonne of Hezron, were: Ran the eldest,
Buna, Oren, Ozem, and Ahia.
26 And Ierahmeel had yet another wyfe named Atara, which was the mother of Onam.
27 And the sonnes of Ram the eldest sonne of Ierahmeel, were: Maaz, Iamin, and
Ekar.
28 The sonnes of Onam were: Sammai, and Iada. The sonnes of Sammai: Nadab, and
Abisur.
29 And the wyfe of Abisur was called Abihail, and she bare him Ahban, and Molid.
30 The sonnes of Nadab: Seled, and Appaim. And Seled dyed without children.
31 The sonne of Appaim, Iesi: And the sonne of Iesi, Sesan: And the sonne of
Sesan, Ahlai.
32 And the sonnes of Iada the brother of Samai, Iether & Ionathan: And Iether
dyed without children.
33 The sonnes of Ionatham: Peleth, & Zaza. These were the sonnes of Ierahmeel.
34 Sesan had no sonnes, but daughters: And Sesan had a seruaunt that was an
Egyptian, named Iarha:
35 To whom he gaue his daughter to wyfe, and she bare him Athai.
36 And Athai begat Nathan, and Nathan begat Zabad.
37 And Zabad begat Aphlal, and Aphlal begat Obed.
38 Obed begat Iehu, and Iehu begat Azaria.
39 Azaria begat Helez, and Helez begat Elasa.
40 Elasa begat Sisamai, and Sisamai begat Sallum.
41 Sallum begat Iecamia, Iecamia begat Elisamah.
42 The sonnes of Caleb the brother of Ierahmeel: Mesa his eldest sonne, which
was the father of Ziph: and the sonnes of Maresa the father of Hebron.
43 The sonnes of Hebron: Corah, and Thapuah, Rekem, and Sama.
44 Sama begat Raham the father of Ierkoam, and Rekem begat Sammai.
45 The sonne of Sammai was Maon: And Maon was the father of Bethzur.
46 And Epha a concubine of Calebs, bare Haran, and Mosa, and Gazez: Haran begat
Gazez.
47 The sonnes of Iahdai, were: Regem, Iotham, Gesan, Phelet, Epha, & Saaph.
48 And Maacha was Calebs concubine, of whom he begat Seber and Thirhana:
49 And she bare also Saaph the father of Madmanna, and Seua the father of
Machbena, and the father of Gibea: And Achsa was Calebs daughter.
50 These were the sonnes of Caleb the sonne of Hur the eldest sonne of Ephrata:
Sabal the father of Kiriath Iarim,
51 Salma the father of Bethlehem, and Hareph the father of Beth Gader.
52 And Sobal the father of Kiriath Iarim had sonnes, and he sawe the halfe of
the countrey of the mansions.
53 The kinredes of Kiriath Iarim are these: The Iethrites, the Puthites, the
Sumathites, & the Misrahethites: And of them came the Zarathites, and the
Esthaulites.
54 The sonnes of Salma: Bethlehem, and Netophathi, the glory of the house of
Ioab, and halfe the countrey of the Manahethites, the Zaraites.
55 The kinredes of the wryters dwelt at Iabes, the Thirathites, the Simeathites,
the Suchathites, which are the Kenites that came of Hemath the father of the
house of Rechab.

Chapter 3

1 These were the sonnes of Dauid whiche were borne vnto him in Hebron: ye
eldest, Ammon of Ahinoam the Iesraelitesse: the seconde, Daniel of Abigail the
Carmelitesse:
2 The thirde Absalom the sonne of Maacha, the daughter of Thalmai king of Gesur:
the fourth, Adonia the sonne of Haggith:
3 The fyft, Sephatia of Abital: the sixt, Iethream, by Egla his wyfe.
4 These sixe were borne vnto him in Hebron, and there he raigned seuen yeres and
sixe monethes: and in Hierusalem he raigned thirtie and three yeres.
5 And these were borne vnto him in Hierusalem: Sima, Sobab, Nathan, and Solomo,
foure, of Bathsua the daughter of Ammiel,
6 Ibhar also and Elisama, Eliphelet,
7 Noga, Nepheg, and Iephia,
8 Elisama, Eliada, and Eliphelet: nine in number.
9 These are all the sonnes of Dauid, beside the sonnes of the concubines: and
Thamar was their sister.
10 Solomons sonne was Rehoboam, whose sonne was Abia, and Asa was his sonne, and
Iehosaphat his sonne,
11 Whose sonne was Ioram, & his sonne was Ahazia, and Ioas was his sonne,
12 Amazia his sonne, Azariah his sonne, and Iotham his sonne,
13 Ahaz was his sonne, Hezekia his sonne, and Manasse his sonne,
14 And Amon was his sonne, and Iosia was his sonne.
15 And the sonnes of Iosia, were: the eldest sonne Iohanan, the second Iehoakim,
the thirde Zedekia, and the fourth Sallum.
16 The sonnes of Iehoakim, were: Ieconiah his sonne, and Zedekiah his sonne.
17 The sonne of Ieconiah: Assir, and Salathiel his sonne.
18 Malchiram also and Pedaia, Senazar, Iecamia, Hosama, and Nedabia.
19 The sonnes of Pedaia, were: Zorobabel, and Semei: The sonnes of Zorobabel,
Mesullam, Hanania, and Selomith their sister:
20 And Hasubah, Ohel, Berechia, Hasadia, and Iusabhesed, fiue in number.
21 The sonnes of Hanania: Pelatia, and Iesaia: whose sonne was Rephaia, and his
sonne Arnan, & his sonne was Obadia, and his sonne Sechania.
22 The sonne of Sechania was, Semaia: and the sonnes of Semaia, were: Hattus,
Igal, Bariah, Neariah, and Saphat, sixe.
23 And the sonnes of Neariah, were: Elioenai, Hizciiah, and Azricam, three.
24 And the sonnes of Elioenai, were: Hodauiahu, Eliasib, Pelaiah, Accub,
Iohanam, Dalaia, and Anani, seuen.

Chapter 4

1 The sonnes of Iuda: Pharez, Hesron, Charmi, Hur, & Sobal.
2 And Reaia the sonne of Sobal begat Iahath, and Iahath begat Ahumai and Lahad:
and these are the kinredes of the Zorathites.
3 And these were of the father of Etam: Iezrahel, Isma, and Idbas: and the name
of their sister was Hazlelphuni.
4 Penuel was the father of Gedor, and Eser the father of Husa: And these are the
sonnes of Hur the eldest sonne of Ephratha the father of Bethlehem.
5 And Ashur the father of Thekoa had two wyues: Helah, and Naarah.
6 And Naarah bare him Ahusam, Hepher, Themeni, and Ahasthari: These were the
sonnes of Naarah.
7 And the sonnes of Helah, were: Zereth, Iezoar, and Ethuan.
8 And Coz begat Anob, and Zobeba, and the kinred of Aharhel the sonne of Harum.
9 And Iabes was more honorable then his brethren: And his mother called his name
Iabes, saying: because I bare him with sorowe.
10 And Iabes called on the God of Israel, saying: If thou wilt blesse me in
deede, and enlarge my coastes, and shalt let thyne hande be with me, and wilt
kepe me from euyll that it hurt me not. And God graunted him his desire.
11 Chelub the brother of Suah begat Mehir, which was the father of Esthon.
12 And Esthon begat Beth rapha and Paseha, & Thehinna the father of the citie of
Nahas: these are the men of Recha.
13 The sonnes of Kenas: Othniel, and Saraia: And the sonne of Othniel was,
Hathath.
14 And Meonathi begat Ophrah: And Seraia begat Ioab the father of the valley of
craftes men, so called because they were craftes men.
15 And the sonnes of Caleb the sonne of Iephune were, Iru, Ela, and Naam: And
the the sonne of Ela was Kenas.
16 And the sonnes of Iehaleleel, were: Ziph, and Ziphah, Thiria, and Asarel.
17 And the sonnes of Ezra: were, Iether, Mered, Epher, and Ialon: and he begat
Miriam, and Sammai, and Iisbah the father of Esthemoa.
18 And his wife Iehudia bare Iered the the father of Gedor, and Heber the father
of Socho, and Iecuthiel the father of Zanoah. And these are the sonnes of
Bithiah the daughter of Pharao, which Mered toke.
19 The sonnes of the wife of Hodia the sister of Naham ye father of Keilah,
were: Garmi, & Esthemoia the Maachathite.
20 The sonnes of Simon, were: Ammon, and Rimna, Ben hanan, and Thilon: And the
sonnes of Iissi, were: Zoheth, and Ben zoheth.
21 The sonnes of Selah the sonne of Iuda, were: Er the father of Lecha, and
Laada the father of Maresa, and the kinredes of the housholdes of them that
wrought linnen in the house of Asbea.
22 And Iokim and the men of Chozebah, and Ioas, and Saraph whiche had the
dominion in Moab, and Iasubi Lehem: these also are wordes of olde.
23 These were potters, and dwelt there among trees and hedges, nye vnto the
king, because of his worke.
24 The sonnes of Simeon were: Nemuel, Iamin, Iarib, Zerah, and Saul:
25 Whose sonne was Sallum, and the sonne of him was Mibsam, & his sonne was
Misma,
26 And the sonne of Misma was Hamuel, and his sonne was Zachur, & the sonne of
him was Semehi.
27 Semehi had sixteene sonnes and sixe daughters: But his brethren had not many
children, neither was all the kinred of them like to the children of Iuda in
multitude.
28 And they dwelt at Beerseba, Molada, and at Hazar Sual,
29 At Bilha, at Ezem, and at Tholad,
30 At Bathuel, at Horma, & at Ziklag,
31 At Bethmarcaboth, Hazer, Susim, at Bethbirei, & at Saaraim: These were their
cities vnto the raigne of Dauid.
32 And their villages were: Etan, and Ain, Rimmon, Tochen, & Asan, fiue townes.
33 And all their villages that were round about the same cities, vnto Baal. This
is the habitation of them, and their genealogie:
34 Mosobab, and Iamlech, and Iosa the sonne of Amasia,
35 And Ioel, and Iehu the sonne of Iosibi, the sonne of Saraia, the sonne of
Asiel,
36 And Elioenai, and Iaakoba, Isohaia, and Asaiah, Adiel, Ismiel, and Benaia,
37 And Ziza the sonne of Siphi, the sonne of Allon, the sonne of Iedaia, the
sonne of Zimri, the sonne of Semaia.
38 These are famous captaynes in their kinredes, setting vp greatly the house of
their fathers.
39 And they went to the entring in of Gedor, euen vnto the eastsyde of the
valley, to seke pasture for their sheepe:
40 And they founde fat pasture and good, and a wide lande, quiete and
fruitefull: for they of Ham had dwelt there before.
41 And these now afore written by name, came in the dayes of Hezekia king of
Iuda, and smote the tentes of them, and the habitations that were found there,
and destroyed them vtterly vnto this day, and dwelt in their roomes: because
ther was pasture there for their sheepe.
42 And some of the children of Simeon went to mount Seir, euen fiue hundred men,
hauing for their captaynes, Phelathia, Nearia, Raphaia, and Uzziel, the sonnes
of Isi:
43 And smote the rest of the Amalekites that were escaped, and they dwelt there
vnto this day.

Chapter 5

1 The sonnes of Ruben, the eldest sonne of Israel (forasmuch as he was the
eldest, & had defiled his fathers bedde, his birthright was geuen vnto the
sonnes of Ioseph the sonne of Israel: Howbeit the genealogie is not reckened
after this birthright.
2 For Iuda preuayled aboue his brethren, & of his tribe came the chiefe, and the
birthright was geuen to Ioseph.)
3 The sonnes then of Ruben the eldest sonne of Israel, were: Henoch, Phalu,
Hezron, and Charmi.
4 The sonnes of Ioel: Samaiah his sonne, Gog his sonne, and Semhi his sonne,
5 Micah his sonne, Reaia his sonne, and Baal his sonne.
6 Beera his sonne, whom Thiglath Pilneser king of Assyria caried away: for he
was a great lorde among the Rubenites.
7 And when his brethren in their kinredes reckened the genealogie of their
generations, Ieiel and Zachariah were the chiefe,
8 And Baal the sonne of Azan, the sonne of Sema, the sonne of Ioel, dwelt in
Aroer, & so foorth vnto Nebo, and Baalmeon.
9 And eastwarde he inhabited vnto the entring in of the wildernesse, from the
riuer Euphrates: for they had much cattel in the land of Gilead.
10 And in the dayes of Saul, they warred with the Agarites, whiche were
ouerthrowen by their hand: and they dwelt in their tentes throughout all the
east land of Gilgal.
11 And the children of Gad dwelt ouer against them in the land of Basan, euen
vnto Salcha:
12 And in Basan Iohel was the chiefest, and Sapham the next: then Ianai, and
Saphat.
13 And their brethren of the housholde of their fathers, were Michael, Mesullam,
Seba, Iorai, Iahcan, Zia, Eber, seuen.
14 These are the children of Abihail the sonne of Huri, the sonne of Iaroah, the
sonne of Gilead, the sonne of Michael, the sonne of Iesisai, the sonne of Iahdo,
the sonne of Buz:
15 Ahi the sonne of Abdiel, the sonne of Guni was a captayne of the housholde of
their fathers.
16 And they dwelt in Gilead in Basan and in her townes, and in all the suburbes
of Saron and in their borders.
17 And these were reckened by kinredes in the dayes of Iotham king of Iuda, and
in the dayes of Ieroboam king of Israel.
18 The sonnes of Ruben, and of Gad, and of halfe the tribe of Manasse, were
fighting men, and hable to beare shielde and sworde, and to shoote with bowe,
exercised in warre, euen foure and fourtie thousand, seuen hundred and
threescore, that went out to the warre.
19 And they fought with the Hagarites, with Ietur, Nephis, and Nodab.
20 And they were helped of the Lorde against them, and the Hagarites were
deliuered into their hande, and so were all that were with them: For they cryed
to God in the battayle, and he heard them, because they put their trust in him.
21 And they toke of their cattell & of their camels, fiftie thousande and two
hundred, and fiftie thousande sheepe, and two thousande asses, and of the soules
of men an hundred thousande.
22 And there fell many wounded, because the warre was of God: And they dwelt in
their steades, vntill the time that they were caryed away.
23 And the children of the halfe tribe of Manasse dwelt in the lande, from Basan
vnto Baal Hermon, and Semir, and vnto mount Hermon: for they were growen to a
great multitude.
24 And these were the heades of the housholdes of their fathers: Epher, and
Iesi, Eliel, and Azriel, Ieremia, and Hodauia, and Iahdiel, strong men and
valiaunt, famous men, and heades of the housholdes of their fathers.
25 And they transgressed against the God of their fathers, and went a whoring
after the gods of the people of the lande whom God destroyed before them.
26 And the God of Israel stirred vp the spirite of Phul king of Assyria, & the
spirite of Thiglath Pilneser king of Assyria, and caried them away: euen the
Rubenites, the Gadites, and the halfe tribe of Manasse, and brought them vnto
Halah, Habor, Hara, and to the riuer Gosan, vnto this day.

Chapter 6

1 The sonnes of Leui: Gersom, Caath, and Merari.
2 The sonnes of Caath: Amram, Izahar, Hebron, & Uzziel.
3 The childre of Amram: Aaron, Moyses, & Miriam. The sonnes also of Aaron:
Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
4 Eleazar begat Phinehes, Phinehes begat Abisua.
5 Abisua begat Boki, Boki begat Uzzi,
6 Uzzi begat Zarahia, Zarahia begat Meraioth,
7 Meraioth begat Amaria, and Amaria begat Ahitob,
8 Ahitob begat Zadoc, and Zadoc begat Ahimaaz,
9 Ahimaaz begat Azaria: and Azaria begat Iohonan,
10 Iohonan begat Azaria, whiche ministred in the temple that Solomon buylt in
Hierusalem.
11 Azaria begat Amaria, Amaria begat Ahitob,
12 Ahitob begat Zadoc, and Zadoc begat Sallum,
13 Sallum begat Helkia, and Helkia begat Azaria.
14 Azaria begat Saraia, and Saraia begat Iehozedech,
15 And Iehozedech departed when the Lorde caryed away Iuda and Hierusalem by the
hand of Nabuchodonoser.
16 The sonnes of Leui: Gersom, Caath, and Merari.
17 And these be the names of the sonnes of Gersom: Libni, and Simhi.
18 And the sonnes of Caath were: Amram, Izahar, Hebron, and Uzziel.
19 The sonnes of Merari: Mahali, and Musi: and these are the kinredes of Leui
concerning their fathers.
20 The sonne of Gersom was Libni, whose sonne was Iahath, & his sonne Zemma.
21 And his sonne Ioah, and his sonne Iddo, and his sonne Zerah, and his sonne
Ieathrai.
22 The sonnes of Caath: Aminadab, and his sonne Korah, and his sonne Assir,
23 And his sonne Elcana, and his sonne Ebiasaph, and his sonne Assir,
24 And Thahath was his sonne, and Uriel his sonne, and Uzzia his sonne, and Saul
was his sonne.
25 The sonnes of Elcana: Amasai and Ahimoth.
26 And Elcana: The sonnes of Elcana, Zophai, whose sonne was Nahath,
27 And his sonne Eliab, and Ieroham his sonne, and Elcana his sonne,
28 And the sonnes of Samuel: the eldest Uasui, and Abia.
29 The sonnes of Merari: Mahali, & his sonne Libni, and his sonne Sunhi, and his
sonne Uzza,
30 And his sonne Simha, and his sonne Haggia, and his sonne Asaia.
31 And these be they whom Dauid set for to sing in the house of the Lorde, after
that the arke had rest.
32 And they ministred before the dwelling place of the tabernacle of the
congregation with singing, vntill Solomon had buylt the house of the Lorde in
Hierusalem: and then they wayted on their offices, according to the order of
them.
33 These are they that wayted with their children, of the sonnes of Caath, Heman
a singer, whiche was the sonne of Ioel, the sonne of Samuel,
34 The sonne of Elcana, the sonne of Ieroham, the sonne of Eliel, the sonne of
Thoah,
35 The sonne of Zuph, the sonne of Elcana, the sonne of Mahath, ye sonne of
Amasai,
36 The sonne of Elcana, the sonne of Ioel, the sonne of Azaria, the sonne of
Zephania.
37 The sonne of Thahath, the sonne of Assyr, the sonne of Ebiasaph, the sonne of
Korah,
38 The sonne of Izahar, the sonne of Caath, the sonne of Leui, the sonne of
Israel:
39 And his brother Asaph stoode on his right hande, and Asaph was the sonne of
Barachia, the sonne of Simha,
40 The sonne of Michael, the sonne of Baasa, the sonne of Melchia,
41 The sonne of Athan, the sonne of Zarah, the sonne of Adaia,
42 The sonne of Ethan, the sonne of Zimma, the sonne of Simhi,
43 The sonne of Iahath, the sonne of Gecsom, the sonne of Leui.
44 And their brethren the sonnes of Merari stoode on the left hand, euen Ethan
the sonne of Kisi, the sonne of Abdi, the sonne of Maluch,
45 The sonne of Hazabia, the sonne of Amazia, the sonne of Helkia,
46 The sonne of Amzi, the sonne of Bani, the sonne of Samer,
47 The sonne of Mahli, the sonne of Musi, the sonne of Merari, the sonne of
Leui.
48 Their brethren also the Leuites were appoynted vnto all maner of seruice of
the tabernacle of the house of God.
49 But Aaron and his sonnes burnt incense vpon the aulter of burnt offering, and
on the aulter of incense and were appoynted for all that was to do in the place
most holy, and to make an attonement for them of Israel, according to all that
Moyses the seruaunt of God had commaunded.
50 These are the sonnes of Aaron: Eleazar his sonne, whose sonne was Phinehes,
and his sonne Abisua,
51 And his sonne Bocci, whose sonne was Uzzi, and his sonne Zerahiah,
52 And the sonne of him Maraioth, and his sonne Amaria, and the sonne of him
Ahitob,
53 And Zadoc his sonne, and Ahimaaz his sonne.
54 And these are the dwelling places of them througout their townes & coastes,
euen of the sonnes of Aaron throughout the kinredes of the Caathites: for so the
lot fell for them.
55 And they gaue them Hebron in the land of Iuda, and the suburbes thereof
rounde about it.
56 But the fieldes of the citie and the villages pertayning thereto, they gaue
to Caleb the sonne of Iephune.
57 And to the sonnes of Aaron they gaue the cities of refuge, euen Hebron and
Libna with their suburbes, Iathir and Esthemoa with their suburbes:
58 And Hilen with her suburbes, and Dabir with her suburbes,
59 Asan and her suburbes, Bethsemes and her suburbes.
60 And out of the tribe of Beniamin, Geba and her suburbes, Alemeth and her
suburbes, Anathoth and her suburbes: all their cities throughout their kinredes
were thirteene.
61 And vnto the sonnes of Caath the remnaunt of the kynrede of the tribe, were
cities geuen out of the halfe tribe of Manasse by lot, euen ten cities.
62 And the sonnes of Gersom throughout their kinredes, had out of the tribe of
Isachar, out of the tribe of Aser, & out of the tribe of Nephthali, and out of
the tribe Manassem Basan, thirteene cities.
63 And vnto the sonnes of Merari were geuen by lot throughout their kinredes out
of the tribe of Ruben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of
Zabulon, twelue cities.
64 And the children of Israel gaue the Leuites cities with their suburbes,
65 And that by lot, out of the tribe of the children of Iuda, and out of the
tribe of the children of Simeon, and out of the tribe of the children of
Beniamin, these cities, whiche they called by their names.
66 And they that were of the kinredes of the sonnes of Caath, had cities & their
coastes out of the tribe of Ephraim.
67 And they gaue vnto them cities of refuge: Sichem in mount Ephraim and her
suburbes, Gaser and her suburbes,
68 Iocmeam and her suburbes, Bethhoron and her suburbes,
69 Aialon and her suburbes, Geth Rimmon and her suburbes.
70 And out of the halfe tribe of Manasse, Auer and her suburbes, and Bileam and
her suburbes, for the kinred of the remnaunt of the sonnes of Caath.
71 And vnto the sonnes of Gersom were geuen out of the kinred of the halfe tribe
of Manasse: Golon in Basan and her suburbes, and Astharoth and her suburbes.
72 Out of the tribe of Isachar, Kedes, and her suburbes, Dabrath and her
suburbes,
73 Ramoth also and her suburbes, Anem and her Suburbes.
74 And out of Aser, Masal and her suburbes, Abdon and her suburbes,
75 Hukock and her suburbes, Rehob and her suburbes.
76 Out of the tribe of Nephthali, Kedes in Galilea and her suburbes, Hammon and
her suburbes, Kiriathaim and her suburbes.
77 And vnto the rest of the children of Merari were geuen out of the tribe of
Zabulon, Rimmon and her suburbes, Thabor and her suburbes.
78 And on the other syde Iordane by Iericho, euen on the east syde of Iordane,
were geuen them out of the tribe of Ruben, Bezer in the wildernesse with her
suburbes, Iahzah with her suburbes,
79 Kedemoth also with her suburbes: Mephaath with her suburbes.
80 Out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead with her Suburbes, Mahanaim with
her suburbes,
81 Hesbon with her suburbes, and Iazer with her suburbes.

Chapter 7

1 The sonnes of Isachar: Thola, Phua, Iasub, Simron, foure.
2 And ye sonnes of Thola: Uzzi, Rephaia, Ieriel, Iamai, Iebsam, and Sehmuel,
which were heades in the housholdes of their fathers. Of Thola ther were men of
might in their generations, whose number was in the daies of Dauid two & twentie
thousande and sixe hundred.
3 The sonnes of Uzzi: Izrahia. The sonnes of Izrahia, Michael, Obadia, Ioel, &
Iesiah, fiue men, all captaynes.
4 And with them in their generations after the houshold of their fathers, were
sixe and thirtie thousande souldiers and valiaunt men of warre: For they had
many wyues and sonnes.
5 And their brethren among all the kinredes of Isachar were valiaunt men of
warre, reckened in all by their genealogies fourescore and seuen thousande.
6 The sonnes of Beniamin: Bela, Becher, and Iediel, three.
7 The sonnes of Bela: Ezbon, Uzzi, Uzziel, Ierimoth, & Iri, fiue heades of the
houshold of their fathers, men of might, and were reckenened by their
genealogies twentie and two thousand and thirtie and foure.
8 The sonnes of Becher: Zemira, Ioas, Eliezer, Elionai, Omri, Ieremoth, Abia,
Anathoth, and Alamath: All these are the children of Becher.
9 And the number of them after their genealogie and generations, & captaynes of
the housholdes of their fathers, men of might were twentie thousande and two
hundred.
10 The sonnes of Iediel: Bilhan. The sonnes of Bilhan: Ieus, Beniamin, Ehud, and
Chanaana, Zethan, Tharsis, and Ahisahar.
11 All these are the sonnes of Iediel, auncient heades and men of warre,
seuenteene thousande and two hundred, that went out harnessed to battayle.
12 And Suppim and Huppim were the children of Ir: and the Husites were the
children of Aher.
13 The sonnes of Nephthali: Iahziel, Guni, Iezer, and Sallum, the children of
Bilha.
14 The sonnes of Manasse: Azriel, whom his wife bare vnto him: But Aramiah his
concubine bare Machir the father of Gilead.
15 And Machir toke wyues for Huppim, and Suppim: And the name of his sister was
Maacha, and the name of an other sonne was Zelophahad: and Zelophahad had
daughters.
16 And Maacha the wyfe of Machir bare a sonne, and called his name Pherez: and
the name of his brother was Zeres, and his sonnes were Ulam, and Recem.
17 The sonnes of Ulam: Bedam. These are the sonnes of Gilead, the sonne of
Machir, the sonne of Manasse:
18 And his sister Molecath bare Ieshud, Abieser, and Mahelah.
19 And the sonnes of Semida, were: Ahia, Sechem, Lichi, and Aniham.
20 The sonnes of Ephraim: Suthalah, whose sonne was Bered, and Thahah his sonne,
and his sonne Eladah, and Thahah his sonne,
21 And Sabad his sonne, and Suthelah his sonne, and Eser, and Elead: And the men
of Gath that were borne in that lande, slue them, because they were come downe
to take away their cattell.
22 And Ephraim their father mourned many a day, and his brethren came to comfort
hym.
23 And when he went in to his wyfe, she conceaued and bare him a sonne, and he
called the name of it Beria, because it went euyll with his housholde,
24 And his daughter was Seera, which buylt Bethhoron the neather and also the
vpper, and Uzan Seera,
25 And Raphah was his sonne: whose sonne was Reseph, and Thelah, whose sonne was
Thaham,
26 And his sonne Ladan, and his sonne Amihud, and his sonne Elisama,
27 And his sonne Nun, and his sonne Iosuah.
28 Their possessions and habitations was in Bethel, and the townes that longed
thereto, & vnto the east of Naeram, and on the west syde of Gazer with the
townes thereof, Sichem and the townes thereof, Adaia and the townes therof,
29 And a long by the borders of the children of Manasse, Bethsean and her
townes, Thaanach and her townes, Megiddo and her townes, and Dor and her townes:
In those dwelt the children of Ioseph the sonne of Israel.
30 The sonnes of Aser: Iunna, Iesua, Isui, and Beria, and Serah their sister.
31 The sonnes of Beria, Heber, and Melchiel, which is the father of Birsaith.
32 And Heber begat Iaphlet, Somer, Hotham, and Sua was their sister.
33 The sonnes of Iaphlet: Pasah, Bimhal, & Asuah: These are the children of
Iaphlet.
34 The sonnes of Semer: Ahi, Rohga, Iehubba, and Aram.
35 And the sonnes of his brother Helem: Zophah, Iimna, Seles, and Amal.
36 The sonnes of Zophah: Suah, Harnepher, Sual, Beri, and Iimrah,
37 Bezer, Hod, Samma, Silsa, Iethran, and Beera.
38 The sonnes of Iether: Iephune, Pispa, and Ara.
39 The sonnes of Olla: Areh, Haniel, and Rezia.
40 Al these were the children of Aser, and heades of their fathers house, noble
men, and mightie head captaynes: The number throughout the genealogie of them
that were apt to the warre and battel, was twentie and sixe thousande men.

Chapter 8

1 Beniamin begat Bela his eldest sonne, Asbel the second, and Aharah the thirde,
2 Nohah the fourth, & Raphah the fyfth.
3 And the sonnes of Bela, were: Adar, Gera, Abihud,
4 Abisna, Naaman, and Ahoha,
5 Gera, Sephuphan, and Huram.
6 And these are the sonnes of Ehud, and these are auncient heades among the
inhabiters of Geba, and they caryed them to Manahath:
7 Naaman, Ahia, and Gera, which Gera caryed them away, and begat Uzza, and
Ahihud.
8 And he begat Saharaim in the fielde of Moab, after he had sent them away,
Husim also, & Baarah were his wyues.
9 And he begat of Hodes his wyfe, Iobab, and Zibia, Mesa, and Malcham,
10 Ieuz, and Sachia, and Mirma: These were his sonnes and auncient fathers.
11 And of Husim he begat Ahitob, and Elpaal.
12 The sonnes of Elpaal, were: Eber, Misaham, and Samed, which buylt Ono, Lod,
and the townes therof.
13 Beria and Sema were auncient fathers among the inhabiters of Aialon, and they
draue away the inhabiters of Geth,
14 And Aio, Sasar, and Ierimoth,
15 Zebadia, Arad, and Ader,
16 Michael, and Iispa, and Ioha, the sonnes of Beria.
17 Zebadia, Mesullam, Hezeki, & Heber,
18 Ismerai also and Iessiah, and Iobab the sonnes of Elpaal.
19 Iakim, and Zicri, and Sabdi,
20 Elienai, Zilthai, and Eliel,
21 Adaia, and Beraia, and Zimreth the sonnes of Simhi.
22 Iispan, Eber, and Eliel,
23 Abdon, and Zicri, and Hanan,
24 Hanania, Elam, and Anathothia,
25 Iephdeia, and Phenuel, the sonnes of Sadac.
26 And Samserai, Seharia, and Athaliah,
27 Iaresiah, Elia, and Zichri, the sonnes of Ieroham.
28 These were auncient fathers and captaynes in their kinredes, & these dwelt in
Hierusalem.
29 And at Gibeon dwelt Abi Gibeon, whose wyfe was called Maacah.
30 And his eldest sonne was Abdon, then Zur, Cis, Baal, and Nadab,
31 Gedor, Ahio, and Zacher.
32 And Mikloth begat Simea: And these also dwelt with their brethren in
Hierusalem ouer against them.
33 Ner begat Cis, and Cis begat Saul, and Saul begat Iehonathan, Malchisua,
Abinadab, and Esbaal.
34 And the sonne of Iehonathan was Meribbaal, & Meribbaal begat Micah.
35 And the sonnes of Micah were Piton, Melech, Tharea, and Ahaz.
36 And Ahaz begat Iehoiada: And Iehoiada begat Alemeth, Asmaneth, and Zimri:
Zimri begat Moza.
37 Moza begat Binea, whose sonne was Rapha, and his sonne was Elasa, and his
sonne Azel.
38 And Azel had sixe sonnes, whose names are these: Esricam, Bochri, Ismael,
Searia, Obadia, and Hanan: Al these were the sonnes of Azel.
39 And the sonnes of Esek his brother, were: Ulam his eldest, Iehus the second,
and Eliphelet the thirde.
40 And the sonnes of Ulam were mightie men, & strong archers, and had many
sonnes, and sonnes sonnes, an hundred & fyftie. All these are of the sonnes of
Beniam.

Chapter 9

1 And so all Israel numbred by kinredes, beholde they are written in the booke
of the kinges of Israel and of Iuda, and were caryed away to Babylon for their
transgression:
2 Euen the olde inhabiters that dwelt in their owne possessions and cities, the
Israelites, the priestes, Leuites, and Nathenei.
3 And in Hierusalem dwelt of the children of Iuda, of the children of Beniamin,
and of the children of Ephraim and Manasse:
4 Uthai the sonne of Amihud, the sonne of Omri, the sonne of Imri, the sonne of
Beni, of the children of Pharez the sonne of Iuda.
5 And of Siloni: Asaia the eldest, and his sonnes.
6 And of the sonnes of Zerah: Iehuel, & their brethren sixe hundred & ninetie.
7 And of the sonnes of Beniamin: Salu the sonne of Mesullam, the sonne of
Hodauia, the sonne of Senua.
8 And Iibneia the sonne of Ieroham: And Ela the sonne of Uzi the sonne of
Michri: And Mesullam the sonne of Sephatia the sonne of Rehuel the sonne of
Iibnia.
9 And their brethren according to their kinredes, nine hundred fyftie and sixe:
All these were principall men and auncient in the housholdes of their fathers.
10 And of the priestes: Iedaia, Iehoiarib, and Iachin,
11 Azaria the sonne of Helkia, the sonne of Mesullam, the sonne of Zadoc, the
sonne of Maraioth, the sonne of Ahitob the chiefest in the house of God.
12 And Adaiah the sonne of Ieroham, the sonne of Phashur, the sonne of Melchia:
and Maasi the sonne of Adiel, the sonne of Iehezrah, the sonne of Mesullam, the
sonne of Mesillamith, the sonne of Immer.
13 And their brethren which were heads of the auncient housholdes of their
fathers, a thousand seuen hundred and threescore, actiue men for the worke of
the seruice of the house of God.
14 And of the Leuites: Semeia the sonne of Hasub, ye sonne of Africam, the sonne
of Hasabia of the sonnes of Merari.
15 And Bacbakar Heres, and Galal: And Mathania the sonne of Micah, the sonne of
Zicri, the sonne of Asaph.
16 And Obadia the sonne of Semeia, the sonne of Galal, the sonne of Iduthun: And
Berechia the sonne of Aza, the sonne of Elcana, that dwelt in the villages of
the Netophathites.
17 The porters were, Sallum, Accub, Talmon, and Ahiman, and their brother:
Sallum was the chiefe.
18 For they watched hitherto, euen vnto the kinges gate eastwarde by course, the
children of Leui.
19 And Sallum the sonne of Core, the sonne of Abiasaph, the sonne of Corah, and
his brethren the Corathites of the house of their father, had their busines and
office to kepe the porches of the tabernacle: and their fathers being ouer the
hoast of the Lorde, kept the entering.
20 And Phinehes the sonne of Eliazar was their foreguide, and the Lord was with
him.
21 And Zacharia the sonne of Meselemia kept the watch before the doore of the
tabernacle of the congregation.
22 All these were chosen men to kepe the thressholdes, euen two hundred and
twelue: and throughout all the genealogie wer they numbred in their villages:
And them did Dauid and Samuel the sear institute, because of their fidelitie.
23 So they and their children had the ouersight of the gates of the house of the
Lorde, euen of the tabernacle, to kepe them.
24 In foure quarters did they kepe the watch: toward the east, west, north, and
south.
25 And their brethren remayned in the countrey, and came after seuen dayes from
tyme to tyme with them.
26 For the Leuites which had the ouersight of the vestries and treasures of the
house of God, were vnder the custody of foure notable porters.
27 And they laye rounde about the house of God, because the keping thereof
pertayned to them, and they had the charge to open it euery mornyng.
28 And certaine of them had the rule of the ministring vessels, & brought them
in and out by tale.
29 Some of them were appoynted to ouersee the vessels, and al the ornaments of
the sanctuarie, and the flowre, wine, oyle, frankencense, and sweete odours.
30 And certaine of the sonnes of the priestes made oyntmentes of the sweete
odours.
31 And Mathathia one of the Leuites, (which was the eldest sonne of Sallum the
Corathite) had the ouersight of the thinges that were made in the frying panne.
32 And other of their brethren the sonnes of Cahath had the ouersight of the
shew bread, which they prepared euery Sabbath.
33 These are the singers, euen auncient fathers of the Leuites, which dwelt in
seperate chambers and were free: for they had to doe in the temple both day and
nyght.
34 These were auncient fathers of the Leuites in their generations, & dwelt at
Hierusalem.
35 And in Gibeon dwelt the father of Gibeon, Iehiel: whose wyfe was called
Maacha.
36 His eldest sonne was Abdon, then Zur, Cis, Baal, Ner, and Nadab,
37 Gedor, Ahio, Zacharia, and Mikloth.
38 And Mikloth begat Simeam: And they also dwelt with their brethren at
Hierusalem, euen hard by them.
39 And Ner begat Cis, and Cis begat Saul, and Saul begat Iehonathan, Malchisua,
Abinadab, and Esbaal.
40 And the sonne of Iehonathan, was Meribbaal: And Meribbaal begat Micah.
41 And the sonnes of Micah, were: Pithon, Melech, and Thahrea.
42 And Ahaz begat Iahra, Iahra begat Alameth, and Asmaueth, and Zimri: Zimri
begat Moza,
43 Moza begat Binea, whose sonne was Rephaia, and his sonne was Elasa, and his
sonne Azel.
44 And Azel had sixe sonnes, whose names are these: Azricam, Bochru, Ismael,
Searia, Obadia, and Hanan: These are the sonnes of Azel.

Chapter 10

1 And the Philistines fought against Israel, and the men of Israel fled before
the Philistines, and were ouerthrowen & wounded in mount Gilboa.
2 And the Philistines folowed after Saul and his sonnes, and the Philistines
smote Ionathan and Abinadab and Malchisua the sonnes of Saul.
3 And the battaile went sore against Saul, and the archers founde him, and he
was wounded of shooters.
4 Then saide Saul to his harnesse bearer: Drawe thy sword, and thrust me through
therwith, that these vncircumcised come not and do me shame. But his harnesse
bearer would not, for he feared exceedingly: So Saul caught a sword, and fell
vpon it.
5 And when his harnesse bearer saw that Saul was dead, he fell on a sword also,
and dyed.
6 And thus Saul and his three sonnes and al they of his house, dyed together.
7 And when all the men of Israel that were in the valley, sawe how they fled,
and that Saul & his sonnes were dead, they forsoke their cities, and ran away:
and the Philistines came, and dwelt in them.
8 And it fortuned, that on the morowe when the Philistines came to strip the
dead bodies, they founde Saul and his sonnes ouerthrowen in mount Gilboa.
9 And when they had stript him, they toke his head and his harnesse, and sent
them into the lande of the Philistines rounde about, to shewe them vnto their
idols, and to the people.
10 And they put his harnesse in the house of their god, and set vp his head in
the temple of Dagon.
11 And when all they of Iabes in Gilead hearde all that the Philistines had done
to Saul:
12 They arose all the strongest of them, and fet away the body of Saul, and the
bodies of his sonnes, and brought them to Iabes, and buried the bones of them
vnder an oke in Iabes, and fasted seuen dayes.
13 So Saul dyed for his trespasse that he trespassed against the Lorde, in that
he kept not the word of the Lorde, and in that he sought and asked counsaile of
a woman that wrought with a spirite:
14 And asked not of the Lorde, and therefore he slue him, and turned the
kingdome vnto Dauid the sonne of Isai.

Chapter 11

1 Then all Israel gathered them selues to Dauid vnto Hebron, saying:
2 Beholde, we be thy bones, and thy fleshe: And moreouer in tyme past, euen when
Saul was king, thou leddest Israel out & in: And the Lorde thy God sayde vnto
thee, Thou shalt feede my people Israel, and thou shalt be captayne ouer my
people Israel.
3 Therefore came all the elders of Israel to the king to Hebron, and Dauid made
a couenaunt with them in Hebro before the Lorde: And they annoynted Dauid king
ouer Israel according to the worde of the Lorde, by the hande of Samuel.
4 And Dauid and all Israel went to Hierusalem (which is Iebus, where as were the
Iebusites, the inhabiters of the lande.)
5 And the inhabiters of Iebus sayde to Dauid: Thou commest not in here.
Neuerthelesse, Dauid wan the castel of Sion: which is called the citie of Dauid.
6 And Dauid sayde: Whosoeuer smyteth the Iebusites first, shalbe the principall
captayne, and a lorde. So Ioab the sonne of Zaruia went first vp, and was made
the chiefe captayne.
7 And Dauid dwelt in the castell Sion and therefore they called it the citie of
Dauid.
8 And he built the citie on euery syde, euen from Millo round about: and Ioab
repaired the rest of the citie.
9 And Dauid prospered & waxed great, & the Lorde of hoastes was with him.
10 These are the principall men of power whom Dauid had, and that claue to him
in his kingdome with all Israel to make him king, according to the word of the
Lorde ouer Israel.
11 And this is the number of the mightie men whom Dauid had: Iosobeam the sonne
of Hachmoni the chiefe among thirtie: he lift vp his speare against three
hundred, and wounded them at one tyme.
12 After him was Eleazar his vncles sonne an Ahothite, which was one of the
three mightiest:
13 He was with Dauid at Pasdammim, and there the Philistines were gathered
together to battaile: And there was there a parcell of grounde full of barly,
and the people fled before the Philistines.
14 And they stept foorth into the middest of the fielde, and saued it, and slue
the Philistines, and the Lorde gaue a great victorie.
15 And the three of the thirtie chiefe captaynes went to a rocke to Dauid, into
the caue Adullam: And the hoast of the Philistines abode in the valley of
Rephaim.
16 And when Dauid was in the holde, the Philistines watch was at Bethlehem that
same tyme.
17 And Dauid longed, and sayde: Oh that one woulde geue me drinke of the water
of the well that is at the gate at Bethlehem.
18 And the three brake through the hoast of the Philistines, and drewe water out
of the wel that was by ye gate at Bethlehem, and toke it and brought it to
Dauid: Neuerthelesse, Dauid woulde not drinke of it, but rather offered it to
the Lorde,
19 And sayd: my God forbyd it me that I shoulde do this thing: Shall I drinke
the blood of these men, that haue put their liues in ieoperdie? for with the
ieoperdie of their liues they brought it: therefore he would not drinke it. And
this did these three mightiest.
20 And Abisai the brother of Ioab, he also was captayne among three: For he lyft
vp his speare against three hundred, and wounded them, and had a name among the
three:
21 Yea among three, he was more honorable then the two, for he was their
captayne: Howbeit, he attayned not to the first three.
22 Banaia ye sonne of Iehoiada, the sonne of a very strong man, which had done
many actes, of Cabzeel: he slue two strong lions of Moab, & went downe and slue
a lion in a pit in time of snowe.
23 And he slue an Egyptian, whose stature was euen fiue cubites long, and in the
Egyptians hand was a speare lyke a weauers beame: And the other went downe to
him with a waster, & plucked the speare out of the Egyptians hand, and slue him
with his owne speare.
24 Such thinges did Banaia the sonne of Iehoiada, and had the name among the
three mightiest,
25 And was honorable among thirtie: but attayned not vnto the first three: And
Dauid made him of his counsaile.
26 The other men of armes were these: Asahel the brother of Ioab, Elhanan his
vncles sonne, of Bethlehem:
27 Samoth the Harodite, Helez the Pelonite,
28 Ira the sonne of Ickes the Thekoite, Abieser the Anatothite,
29 Sibbecai the Husathite, Ilai the Ahohite,
30 Maharai the Nepthophathite, Heled the sonne of Baana the Nethophathite,
31 Ithai the sonne of Ribai of Gibea that pertayued to the children of Beniamin,
Benaia the Phirathonite,
32 Hurai of the riuers of Gaas, Abiel the Arbathite,
33 Azmaueth the Baharumite, Elihaba the Salabonite.
34 The sonnes of Hassem the Gezonite: Ionathan the sonne of Sage an Hararite,
35 Ahiam the sonne of Sacar the Hararite, Eliphal the sonne of Ur.
36 Hepher the Mecherathite, Ahia the Pelonite,
37 Hezro the Carmelite, Naari the sonne of Ezbai,
38 Ioel the brother of Nathan, Mibhar the sonne of Hagari,
39 Zelec the Ammonite, Naharai a Berothite the bearer of the harnesse of Ioab
the sonne of Zaruia,
40 Ira the Iethrite, and Gareb a Iethrite,
41 Uria the Hethite, and Zahad the sonne of Ahlai,
42 Adina the sonne of Sisa a Rubenite a captaine of the Rubenites, and thirtie
with him.
43 Hanan the sonne of Maacah, and Iosaphat a Mithanite,
44 Uzzia an Astherathite, Sama & Iehiel the sonnes of Hothan an Aroerite:
45 Iediel the sonne of Zimri, and Ioha his brother a Thosaite,
46 Eliel a Mahauite, Ieribai and Iosaia the sonnes of Elnaam, and Iithma a
Moabite,
47 Eliel and Obed, and Iasiel a Mesobaite.

Chapter 12

1 These are they that came to Dauid to Ziklag while he yet kept himselfe close
because of Saul the sonne of Cis: and they were very strong helpers in battaile.
2 They were weaponed with bowes, and could hurle stones with the right hand and
with the left, and shoote arrowes out of a bowe, & were of Sauls brethren, euen
of Beniamin.
3 The chiefest were Ahiezer, and Ioas the sonnes of Simaa a Gibeonite, and
Ieziel and Pelet the sonnes of Asmaueth, Beracah and Iehu of Anathoth.
4 And Ismaia a Gibeonite, a mightie man among thirtie, and more then the
thirtie: Ieremiah, Iehaziel, Iehonan, and Iosabad of Gedor.
5 Eleusai, Ierimoth, Bealia, Semaria, and Seaphatia, the Haraphites.
6 Elcana, Iesia, Azarael, Ioezer, Iosebeam, Coranites.
7 Ioela and Zebadiah the sonnes of Ieroam of Gedor.
8 And of the Gadites there seperated themselues some vnto Dauid into the houlde
of the wildernesse, men of might and men apt for the warre, & that coulde handle
shielde and speare, whose faces were lyke the faces of lions, and they were as
swyft as the Roes in the mountaynes.
9 Ezer the first, Obdia the seconde, and Eliab the third,
10 Masmana the fourth, Ieremia the fifth,
11 Atthai the sixt, Eliel the seuenth,
12 Iohanan the eight, Elsabad the ninth,
13 Ieremia the tenth, and Machbanai the eleuenth,
14 These were of the sonnes of Gad, and were captaines ouer the men of warre:
one of the least coulde resist an hundred, and the greatest a thousand.
15 These are they that went ouer Iordane in the first moneth when he had filled
ouer all his banckes, and they put to flight all them of the valley both toward
the east and west.
16 And there came of the children of Beniamin & Iuda to the houlde vnto Dauid.
17 And Dauid went out to meete them, and aunswered, and sayd vnto them: If ye be
come peaceably vnto me, to helpe me, myne heart shalbe knit vnto you: but and if
you come to betraye me to myne aduersaries, seeing there is no wickednes in myne
handes, the God of our fathers loke thereon and rebuke it.
18 And the spirite came vpon Amasai, which was the chiefe among thirtie, &
saide: Thyne are we Dauid, and on thy side thou sonne of Isai: Peace, peace be
vnto thee, & peace be to thy helpers, for thy God is thyne helpe. Then Dauid
receaued them, & made them heades of companies of the men of warre.
19 And there fell some of Manasse to Dauid, when he came with the Philistines
against Saul to battaile, but they helped them not: For the lordes of the
Philistines toke aduisement, and sent him away againe, saying: he will fall to
his maister Saul to the ieoperdie of our heades.
20 As he went to Ziklag, there fel to him of Manasse Adna, Iozadad, Iediel,
Michael, Iozabad, Elihu, and Zilthai, heades of the thousandes that were of
Manasse.
21 And they holpe Dauid against the rouers: For they were all mightie men of
warre, and captaynes in the hoast.
22 For at that tyme there came one or other to Dauid day by day to helpe him,
vntil it was a great hoast, like the hoast of God.
23 And this is the number of the chiefe captaynes that were prepared to
battaile, and came to Dauid to Hebron, to turne the kingdome of Saul to him,
according to the word of the Lorde.
24 The children of Iuda that bare shield and speare, were sixe thousand & eight
hundred, redie prepared to the warre.
25 Of the children of Simeon, men of might to warre 7 M. & one hundred.
26 Of the children of Leui, foure thousand and sixe hundred.
27 And Iehoiada was the chiefe of them of Aaron, and with him three thousand and
seuen hundred.
28 And Zadoc a young man, strong and valiaunt, and of his fathers housholde,
twentie and two captaines.
29 And of the children of Beniamin the brothren of Saul, three thousand: And a
great part of them did vnto that tyme folowe the house of Saul.
30 And of the children of Ephraim, twentie thousand and eight hundred, mightie
men of warre, and famous men in the houshoulde of their fathers.
31 And of the halfe tribe of Manasse, eyghteene thousand, which were appointed
by name to come and make Dauid king.
32 And of the children of Isachar, which were men that had vnderstanding of the
tymes, to knowe what Israel ought to do, the heads of them were two hundred: &
all their brethren were at their wyll.
33 And of Zabulon which went out to battaile, expert in warre and in all
instrumentes of warre, fiftie thousand, which coulde set the battaile in arraye,
they were not of double heart.
34 And of Nephthali a thousand captaines, and with them with shielde and speare
thirtie and seuen thousand.
35 And of Dan expert in battayle, twentie & eyght thousand and sixe hundred.
36 And of Aser that went out to the warre and kept the forefront of the battaile
fourtie thousand.
37 And of the othersyde of Iordane, of the Rubenites, and Gadites, and of the
halfe tribe of Manasse, with all manner of instrumentes of warre, and hundred
and twentie thousand.
38 All these were men of warre, keping the forefront of the battel and with
perfecte heart came to Hebron to make Dauid king ouer all Israel: And all the
rest of Israel was of one accorde to make Dauid king.
39 And there they were with Dauid three dayes eating & drinking: for their
brethren had prepared for them.
40 Moreouer, they that were nye them, euen vnto Isachar, Zabulon, & Nephthali,
brought bread on asses, cammels, mules, & oxen, & meate, flowre, figges,
reasinges, wine, & oyle, oxen, and sheepe aboundantly: For there was ioy in
Israel.

Chapter 13

1 And Dauid counsailed with the captaynes of thousandes and hundredes, and with
al the Lordes,
2 And sayde vnto all the congregation of Israel: If it seeme you good, & to be
of the Lord our God, we will send abrode vnto our brethren that are left in all
the lande of Israel, and with them also to the priestes and Leuites which are in
their suburbes, to gather them together vnto vs:
3 And we will bring againe the arke of our God to vs: for we regarded it not in
the dayes of Saul.
4 And all the congregation was content that he should do so: for the thing
seemed good in the eyes of all the people.
5 So Dauid gathered all Israel together from Sihor in Egypt, vnto the entering
of Hemath, to bring the arke of the Lorde from Kiriathiarim.
6 And Dauid went vp and all Israel to an high place towarde Kiriathiarim, that
was in Iuda, to set thence the arke of the Lorde God that dwelleth betweene the
Cherubs, where his name is called on.
7 And they carryed the arke of God in a newe carte out of the house of Abinadab:
and Uzza and his brother guided the carte.
8 And Dauid and all Israel played before the arke of God with all their might,
with singing, and harpes, psalteries, and tymbrels, and cymbales, and
trumpettes.
9 And when they came vnto the thresshing floore of Chidon, Uzza put foorth his
hande to holde the arke, for the oxen stumbled.
10 And the Lorde was wroth with Uzza, and smote him, because he put his hand to
the arke: and there he dyed before God.
11 And Dauid was out of quiet because the Lorde had rent a rent in Uzza, and he
called the name of that place, the renting of Uzza, vnto this day.
12 And Dauid was afrayde of God that day, saying: how shall I bring the arke of
God home to me?
13 And so Dauid brought not the arke home to him to the citie of Dauid: but
carryed it into the house of Obed Edom a Gethite.
14 And the arke of God remayned with Obed Edom, euen in his house, three
monethes: And the Lorde blessed the house of Obed Edom, & all that he had.

Chapter 14

1 So Hiram the king of Tyre sent messengers to Dauid, and timber of Cedar trees,
with masons and carpeters, to builde him an house.
2 And Dauid perceaued that the Lorde had confirmed him king vpon Israel, & that
his kingdome was lift vp on hie because of his people Israel:
3 And Dauid toke yet mo wyues at Hierusalem, and begat mo sonnes and daughters.
4 These are the names of his children, which were borne vnto him at Hierusalem:
Samua, Sobab, Nathan, & Solomon,
5 Iibhar, Elisua, and Eliphalet,
6 Noga, Nepheg, and Iaphia,
7 Elisama, Beeliada, and Eliphalet.
8 And when the Philistines heard that Dauid was annoynted king vpon all Israel,
all the Philistines went vp to seeke Dauid: And Dauid heard of it, & went out
against them.
9 And the Philistines came in, and spread them selues through the valley of
Rephaim.
10 And Dauid asked counsaile at God, saying: Shall I go against the Philistines?
and wilt thou deliuer them into myne hand?
11 And the Lorde saide vnto him: go vp, for I wil deliuer them into thyne hand.
And so they came vp to Baal Perazim, and Dauid smote them there, and Dauid
saide: God hath deuided myne enemies with myne hand, as a man would deuide
water, and therefore they called the name of that place Baal Perazim.
12 And when they had left their gods there, Dauid gaue a commaundement, and they
were burnt with fire.
13 And the Philistines came together againe, and russhed into the valley.
14 And Dauid asked againe at God: And God said to him, Go not vp after them, but
turne away from them that thou mayest come vpon them ouer against the peretrees.
15 And when thou hearest a sounde go in the toppes of the peretrees, then go out
to battaile: for God is gone forth before thee, to smyte the hoast of the
Philistines.
16 Dauid therfore did as God commaunded him, and they smote the hoast of the
Philistines, from Gibeon to Gazer.
17 And the fame of Dauid went out into all landes, and the Lorde made all
nations feare him.

Chapter 15

1 And Dauid made him houses in the citie of Dauid, and prepared a place for the
arke of God, and pitched for it a tent.
2 Then Dauid saide: The arke of God ought not to be carryed but of the Leuites:
For them hath the Lord chosen to beare the arke of the Lorde, and to minister
vnto him for euer.
3 And Dauid gathered all Israel together to Hierusalem, to fetch the arke of the
Lorde vnto his place which he had ordayned for it.
4 And Dauid brought together the children of Aaron and the Leuites.
5 Of the sonnes of Caath, was Uriel the chiefe, & of his brethren there were an
hundred and twentie.
6 Of the children of Merari, Asaia the chiefe, and of his brethren two hundred
and twentie.
7 Of the sonnes of Gersom, Ioel the chiefe, and of his brethren an hundred and
thirtie.
8 Of the children of Elizaphan, Semaia the chiefe, & of his brethren two
hundred.
9 Of the sonnes of Hebron, Eliel the chiefe, and of his brethren fourescore.
10 Of the sonnes of Uzziel, Aminadab the chiefe, and of his brethren an hundred
and twelue.
11 And Dauid called Zadoc and Abiathar the priestes: and the Leuites, Uzziel,
Asaia, Ioel, Semaia, Eliel, and Aminadab,
12 And saide vnto them: Ye that are the principall fathers of the Leuites, see
that ye be holy with your brethren, that ye may bring in the arke of the Lorde
God of Israel vnto the place that I haue prepared for it.
13 For, because ye were not there at the first, the Lorde our God made a rent
among vs, for that we sought him not as the fassion ought to be.
14 So the priestes and the Leuites sanctified them selues, to fet the arke of
the Lorde God of Israel.
15 And the children of the Leuites bare the arke of God vpon their shoulders
with staues thereon, as Moyses commaunded according to the worde of the Lorde.
16 And Dauid spake to the chiefe heades of the Leuites, that they should appoynt
certaine of their brethren to sing with instrumentes of musicke, psalteries,
harpes, and cymbales, that they might make a sounde, and to sing on hie with
ioyfulnesse.
17 And the Leuites appoynted Heman the sonne of Ioel, and of his brethren, Asaph
the sonne of Berechia, and of the sonnes of Merari and of their brethren, Ethan
the sonne of Cusaiahu.
18 And with them their brethren of the second degree, Zacharia, Ben, Iaziel,
Semiramoth, Iehiel, Unni, Eliab, Benaiahu, Maasiah, Mathathiahu, Eliphalehu,
Mikniahu, Obed Edom, and Ieiel, porters.
19 So Heman, Asaph, and Ethan the singers, made a sounde with cymbales of
brasse.
20 And Zacharia, Aziel, Semiramoth, Iehiel, Unni, Eliab, Maasiahu, and Banaiahu,
played with psalteries on an Alamoth.
21 Mathathiahu, Eliphalehu, Mikniahu, Obed Edom, Ieiel, and Azaiahu, played vpon
harpes an eyght aboue, with courage.
22 And Chenaniahu the chiefe of the Leuites was maister of the song: for he
taught other to sing, because he was a man of vnderstanding.
23 Berechia and Elcana kept the doore of the arke.
24 And Sebaniahu, Iehosaphat, Nathanael, Amasai, Zachariahu, Banaiahu, and
Eliezer the priestes did blowe with trumpettes before the arke of God: And Obed
Edom and Iehia were kepers of the doore of the arke.
25 And Dauid and the elders of Israel, and the captaynes ouer thousandes, went
to fet the arke of the appoyntmet of the Lorde out of the house of Obed Edom
with gladnesse.
26 And when God helped the Leuites that bare the arke of the appoyntment of the
Lorde, they offered seuen oxen, and seuen rammes.
27 And Dauid had on him a linnen garment, lyke as had also all the Leuites that
bare the arke, & so had the singers and Chenania the ruler of the songe, with
the singers: and Dauid had vpon him an Ephod of linnen.
28 And al they of Israel brought the arke of the Lordes couenaunt with showting,
and blowing of the shawme, and trumpettes, making a noyse with cymbales,
psalteries, and harpes.
29 And as the arke of the appointment of the Lorde came into the citie of Dauid,
Michol the daughter of Saul looking out at a windowe, sawe king Dauid daunsing
and playing, and she despised him in her heart.

Chapter 16

1 So they brought in the arke of God, and set it in the middest of the tent that
Dauid pitched for it: And they offered burnt sacrifices and peace offringes
before God.
2 And when Dauid had made an end of offring the burnt offringes and peace
offringes, he blessed the people in the name of the Lorde.
3 And he dealt to all Israel both man and woman, a cracknel of bread, and a good
peece of fleshe, and a flacket of wine.
4 And he appoynted certaine of the Leuites to minister before the arke of the
Lord, and to repeate, and to thanke and prayse the Lorde God of Israel.
5 And Asaph was the chiefe, and nexte to him Zacharia, Ieiel, Semiramoth,
Iehiel, Mathathia, Eliab, Benaia, Obed Edom, & Ieiel with instruments,
psalteries, & harpes: But Asaph made a sounde with cymbales.
6 Banaia and Iahaziel priestes blewe with trumpettes continually before the arke
of the couenaunt of God.
7 And that same tyme Dauid did appoynt chiefely to thanke the Lorde by Asaph and
his brethren.
8 Confesse you it vnto God, call vpon his name: cause the people to vnderstande
his deuises.
9 Sing vnto him, sing psalmes vnto him: talke you of all his wonderous workes.
10 Glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them reioyce that do seeke God.
11 Seeke God and his strength: seeke his face euermore.
12 Remember the marueylous workes that he hath done: his wonders, and the
iudgementes of his mouth,
13 O ye seede of Abraham his seruaunt, ye his chosen children of Iacob:
14 he is God our Lorde, his iudgementes are in all the earth.
15 He hath ben mindfull alwayes of his couenaunt (for he promysed a word to a
thousande generations:)
16 euen of his couenaunt that he made with Abraham, and of his othe vnto Isaac.
17 And he appoynted the same vnto Iacob for a law: and to Israel for an
euerlasting couenaunt.
18 Saying, vnto thee I wyll geue the lande of Chanaan: the lot of your
inheritaunce.
19 When they were a fewe men in number, and had ben straungers but a litle while
in it:
20 and when they went from one nation to another, from one kingdome to another
people,
21 He suffred no man to do them wrong: yea he reproued euen kinges for their
sakes.
22 Touche not myne annoynted: and triumph not ouer my prophetes.
23 Sing vnto the Lorde all the earth: and shewe from day to day his saluation.
24 Tell of his glory among the heathen: his wonderfull deedes among all
natitions.
25 For great is the Lorde, and worthy to be praysed exceedingly: he is to be
feared aboue all gods.
26 For all the gods of the people are but idoles: but the Lorde made heauen.
27 Prayse and honour are in his presence: strength and gladnesse are in his
place.
28 Asscribe vnto the Lord ye kinredes of people, Asscribe to the Lorde glorie
and dominion.
29 Asscribe vnto the Lord the glorie due vnto his name, bring sacrifices, and
come before him, and worship the Lord in his glorious sanctuarie.
30 Let all the earth feare him: surely the world shalbe stable and not moue.
31 Let the heauens reioyce, and let the earth be glad, and let men tel among the
nations that the Lorde is king.
32 Let the sea rore & the fulnesse thereof: let the fieldes reioyce, & all that
is therin.
33 Then shall the trees of the wood reioyce at the presence of the Lord, because
he commeth to iudge the earth.
34 O geue thankes vnto the Lorde, for he is good, for his mercie endureth euer:
35 And say ye, saue vs O God our saluation, gather vs together, and deliuer vs
from among the heathen, that we may geue thankes to thy holy name, and triumph
in the prayse of thee.
36 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel for euer and euer: & let all people say
Amen, and prayse the Lorde.
37 And so he left there before the arke of the lordes couenaunt Asaph & his
brethren, to minister before the arke continually, in such thinges as were to be
done day by day.
38 And Obed Edom and his brethren, threescore and eyght, and Obed Edom the sonne
of Ieduthun, and Hosa, were appoynted to be porters.
39 And Zadoc the priest & his brethren the priestes were before ye tabernacle of
the lord, in the hie place that was at Gibeon,
40 To offer burnt offeringes vnto the Lorde vpon the burnt offering aulter
perpetually, in the morning and euening, according to all that which is written
in the lawe of the Lorde whiche he commaunded Israel.
41 And with them were Heman and Ieduthun, and other that were chosen, whose
names were expressed to geue thankes to the Lorde, That his mercie lasteth euer.
42 And with them dyd Heman and Ieduthun sing with the trumpets and cymbales,
making a sweete melodie with instrumentes of musicke & godly songues: And the
sonnes of Ieduthun were porters.
43 And al the people departed euery man to his house, & Dauid returned to blesse
his house.

Chapter 17

1 And it fortuned, that when Dauid dwelt in his house, he sayde to Nathan the
prophete: Lo, I dwel in an house of Cedar tree, but the arke of the lordes
couenaunt remayneth vnder curtaynes.
2 And Nathan sayde vnto Dauid: Do all that is in thyne heart, for God is with
thee.
3 And the same night, it fortuned that the worde of God came to, Nathan, saying:
4 Go and tell Dauid my seruaunt, thus sayth the Lorde, Thou shalt not buylde me
an house to dwell in:
5 For I haue dwelt in no house sence the day that I brought out the children of
Israel, vnto this day: but haue gone from tent to tent, and from one habitation
to an other.
6 And whersoeuer I haue walked with all Israel, spake I euer one worde to any of
the iudges of Israel, whom I commaunded to feede my people, saying, Why haue ye
not buylt me an house of Cedar tree?
7 Nowe therfore thus shalt thou say vnto my seruaunt Dauid, thus sayth the Lorde
of hoastes: I toke thee from the sheepe coate, and from folowing the sheepe,
that thou shouldest be captayne ouer my people Israel:
8 And I haue ben with thee whyther soeuer thou hast walked, and haue weeded out
all thyne enemies out of thy sight, & haue made thee a name like the name of the
greatest men that are in the earth.
9 And I haue ordeyned a place for my people Israel and made it fast, so that
nowe they may dwell in their place, and moue no more: Neither shall the children
of wickednesse vexe them any more as at the beginning.
10 And sence the time that I commaunded iudges to be ouer my people Israel, I
haue subdued all thyne enemies: and I told thee that the Lord would buyld thee
an house.
11 This also shal come to passe: when thy dayes be expired that thou must go
vnto thy fathers, I will rayse vp thy seede after thee, which shalbe of thy
sonnes, and I will stablishe his kingdome.
12 He shall buylde me an house, and I wil stablishe his seate for euer.
13 I wilbe his father, and he shalbe my sonne, and I will not take my mercie
away from him, as I toke it from hym that was before thee.
14 But I wil stablishe him in myne house and my kingdome for euer, and his seate
shalbe sure for euermore.
15 According to all these wordes, and according to al this vision, did Nathan
tell king Dauid.
16 And Dauid the king came and sate before the Lord, and sayde: What am I O Lord
God, and what is myne houshold, that thou hast promoted me thus farre?
17 And yet this seemed litle in thyne eyes, O God: But thou hast also spoken of
thy seruauntes house for a great whyle to come, and hast loked vpon me as vpon a
man of hye degree, O Lorde God.
18 What shall Dauid desire more of thee for the honour of thy seruaunt? For thou
hast knowen thy seruaunt.
19 O Lord, for thy seruauntes sake, euen according to thine owne heart, hast
thou done all this magnificence, to shewe all great thinges.
20 Lord there is none like thee, neither is there any God saue thou, according
to al that we haue hearde with our eares.
21 Moreouer, what nation on the earth is like thy people Israel, to whom God
hath vouchsafed to come and redeeme them to be his owne people, and to make thee
a name of excellencie & terriblenes, with casting out nations from before the
people, whom thou hast deliuered out of Egypt?
22 Thy people of Israel diddest thou make thyne owne people for euer, and thou
becamest their God.
23 Therfore now Lord, let the thing that thou hast spoken concerning thy
seruaunt & his house, be true for euer, that thou Lord do as thou hast sayde:
24 Let it come to passe, that thy name may be magnified for euer, that it may be
said, The Lord of hoastes is the God of Israel, euen the God of Israel, and the
house of Dauid thy seruaunt endureth stable before thee.
25 For thou O my God, hast tolde thy seruaunt that thou wilt buylde him an
house, and therefore thy seruaunt hath founde in his heart to pray before thee.
26 And now Lorde, thou art God, & hast promised this goodnes vnto thy seruaut
27 Nowe therefore let it be thy pleasure to blesse the house of thy seruaunt,
that it may continue before thee for euer: For whom thou blessest O Lorde, the
same is blessed for euer.

Chapter 18

1 And after this, it fortuned that Dauid smote the Philistines, & subdued them,
and toke Geth and the townes that longed therto out of the handes of the
Philistines.
2 And he smote Moab, and the Moabites became Dauids seruauntes, and payde him
tribute.
3 And Dauid smote Hadarezer king of Zoba vnto Hanath, as he went to stablishe
his dominion by the riuer Euphrates.
4 And Dauid toke from him a thousand charets, and seuen thousande horsemen, and
twentie thousande footemen, and lamed all the charet horses, and reserued of
them an hundred charets.
5 And when the Syrians of Damascon came to helpe Hadarezer king of Zoba, Dauid
slue of the Syrians twentie and two thousande.
6 And Dauid put souldiers in Syria Damascon, and the Syrians became Dauids
seruauntes, and brought him tribute: And the Lord preserued Dauid in all that he
went to.
7 And Dauid toke the shieldes of golde that were on the seruauntes of Hadarezer,
and brought them to Hierusalem.
8 And from Tebhath, and from Chun, cities of Hadarezar, brought Dauid exceeding
much brasse, wherwith Solomon made the brasen lauatorie, the pillers, and the
vessels of brasse.
9 And when Thou king of Hemath heard how Dauid had beaten al the strength of
Hadarezer king of Zoba,
10 He sent Hadoram his sone to king Dauid, to make peace with him, & to blesse
him, because he had fought against Hadarezer, and beaten him (for Thou had warre
with Hadarezer) and Hadoram brought all maner of iewels of golde, siluer, and
brasse, with him.
11 And king Dauid dedicated them vnto the Lord, with the siluer and golde that
he brought fro all nations, from Edom, fro Moab, from ye children of Ammon, from
the Philistines, and from Amelec.
12 And Abisai the sonne of Zaruia slue of the Edomites in the salt valley
eyghteene thousande,
13 And put souldiers in Edom, and all the Edomites became Dauid seruauntes: Thus
the Lorde kept Dauid in all that he toke in hande.
14 And Dauid raigned ouer all Israel, and executed iudgement and righteousnesse
among all his people.
15 And Ioab the sonne of Zaruia was ouer the hoast, & Iehosaphat the sonne of
Ahilud recorder:
16 And Zadoc the sonne of Ahitob and Abimelech the sonne of Abiathar were the
priestes, and Sausa was scribe,
17 And Banaiahu the sonne of Iehoiada was ouer the Crethites and the
Phelethites: and the sonnes of Dauid were next vnto the king.

Chapter 19

1 After this, it chaunced that Nahas the king of the children of Ammon dyed, &
his sonne raigned in his steade.
2 And Dauid sayde: I will shewe kindnesse vnto Hanon the sonne of Nahas, because
his father dealt kindly with me. And Dauid sent messengers to comfort him ouer
the death of his father: And the seruauntes of Dauid came into the lande of the
children of Ammon to Hanon, to comfort him.
3 But the lordes of the children of Ammon sayd to Hanon: Thinkest thou that
Dauid doeth honour thy father in thy sight, that he hath sent comforters vnto
thee? Are not his seruauntes come to search, to loke, and espie out the land?
4 Wherefore Hanon toke Dauids seruauntes, and shaued them, and cut of their
coates harde by their buttockes, & sent them away.
5 And there went certayne and told Dauid how the men were serued: And the king
sent to meete them (for the men were exceedingly ashamed) and the king sayde:
Tary at Iericho vntill your beardes be growen, and then returne.
6 And when the children of Ammon saw that they stanke in the sight of Dauid,
Hanon and the children of Ammon sent a thousande talentes of siluer to hyre them
charets and horsmen out of Mesopotamia, and out of Syria Maacha, and out of
Zoba.
7 And they hyred thirtie and two thousande charets, and the king of Maacha and
his people: which came and pitched before Medeba: And the children of Ammon
gathered them selues together fro their cities, and came to battayle.
8 And when Dauid hearde of it, he sent Ioab and all the hoast of strong men.
9 And the children of Ammon came out, and put them selues in aray to battayle
before the gate of the citie: And ye kinges that were come, kept them by them
selues backe in the fielde.
10 When Ioab also saw that the frunt of the battayle was against him before and
behind, he chose out of al the chosen men of Israel, and put them in aray
against the Syrians.
11 And the rest of ye people he deliuered vnto the hand of Abisai his brother, &
they put them selues in aray against the children of Ammon.
12 And he sayde: If the Syrians be to strong for me, thou shalt succour me, and
if the children of Ammon preuayle against thee, I will helpe thee.
13 Plucke vp thyne heart, and let vs play the men for our peoples sake, and for
the cities of our God: and the Lord shall do that which is good in his owne
sight.
14 So Ioab and the people that were with him, drue nye before the Syrians vnto
the battayle: and they fled before him.
15 And when the children of Ammon saw that the Syrians were fled, they ran away
likewise before Abisai his brother, and gat them into the citie: and Ioab came
to Hierusalem.
16 And when the Syrians saw that they were put to the worse before Israel, they
sent messengers and set out the Syrians that were beyond the riuer: and Sophach
the captayne of the hoast of Hadarezer went before them.
17 And it was told Dauid: and he gathered all Israel, and went together ouer
Iordane, and came and set vpon them: And when Dauid had put hym selfe in aray
against the Syrians, they fought with him.
18 But the Syrians fled before Israel, and Dauid destroyed of the Syrians seuen
thousand charets, and fourtie thousand footemen, and killed Sophach the captayne
of the hoast.
19 And when the seruauntes of Hadarezer sawe that they were put to ye worse
before them of Israel, they made peace with Dauid, & became his seruauntes:
Neither would the Syrians helpe the children of Ammon any more.

Chapter 20

1 And it came to passe, that after the yere was expired( about ye time that
kinges go out a warrefare) Ioab caryed out the armie of the hoast, and destroyed
the countrey of the children of Ammon, and came and besieged Rabba, and
destroyed it: But Dauid taried at Hierusalem whyle Ioab smote Rabba and
destroyed it.
2 And Dauid toke the crowne of their king from of his head, and founde that it
had the wayght of a talent of golde, and there were precious stones in it, and
it was set vpon Dauids head: And he brought also exceeding much spoyle out of
the citie.
3 And he brought out the people that were in it, and tormented them with sawes
and harrowes of iron, and with other sharpe instrumentes, and so dealt Dauid
with all the cities of the children of Ammon: And Dauid and all the people came
againe to Hierusalem.
4 After this, it fortuned that there arose warre at Gazer with the Philistines:
at which time Sobokai the Husathite slue Sippai that was of the children of
Rephaim, and they were subdued.
5 And there was battayle agayne with the Philistines, & Elhanan the sonne of
Iair slue Lahemi the brother of Goliah the Gethite, whose speare was lyke a
weauers beame.
6 And there chaunced yet againe warre at Geth, where as was a man of a great
stature, with twentie and foure fingers and toes, sixe on euery hand, and sixe
on euery foote, and was the sonne of Raphah.
7 But when he defyed Israel, Iehonathan the sonne of Simea Dauids brother slue
him.
8 These were borne vnto Raphah at Geth, and were ouerthrowen in the hande of
Dauid and in the hande of his seruauntes.

Chapter 21

1 And Satan stoode vp against Israel, and prouoked Dauid to number Israel.
2 And Dauid sayde to Ioab and to the rulers of the people: Go ye and number
Israel from Beerseba to Dan: & bring it to me, that I may knowe the number of
them.
3 And Ioab aunswered: The Lorde make his people an hundred times so many mo as
they be: But my lorde, O king, are they not all my lordes seruauntes? why then
doth my lord require this thing? why will my lorde be a cause of trespasse to
Israel?
4 Neuerthelesse the kinges word preuayled against Ioab: And Ioab departed, and
walked throughout all them of Israel, and came to Hierusalem againe,
5 And gaue the summe of the number of the people vnto Dauid: And all they of
Israel were a thousande thousand and an hundred thousande men that drue sworde:
and Iuda was foure hundred threescore and ten thousande men that drue sworde.
6 But the Leuites and Beniamin counted he not among them: For the kinges word
was abhominable to Ioab.
7 And the Lorde was displeased with this thing, and smote Israel.
8 And Dauid sayde vnto God: I haue sinned exceedingly in doyng this thing: And
nowe I besech thee, do away the wickednesse of thy seruaunt, for I haue done
very foolyshly.
9 And the Lord spake vnto Gad Dauids sear, saying:
10 Go, and tell Dauid, saying, thus sayth the Lord, I geue thee the choyse of
three thinges: choose the one of them, that I may do vnto thee.
11 And Gad came to Dauid, and sayd vnto him, thus sayth the Lorde: Choose thee
12 Eyther three yeres famishment, or three monethes to be destroyed before thyne
aduersaries, & that the sworde of thyne enemies may ouertake thee: or els the
sworde of the Lord and pestilence in the lande three dayes, and the angell of
the Lorde destroying throughout all the coastes of Israel: And nowe aduise thy
selfe, what worde I shal bring againe to him that sent me.
13 And Dauid sayde vnto Gad, I am in an exceeding strayte: Let me fall nowe into
the hande of the Lorde (for passing great are his mercies) but let me not fal
into the hand of men.
14 So the Lorde sent pestilence vpon Israel: and there were ouerthrowen of
Israel threescore and ten thousande men.
15 And God sent the angell into Hierusalem to destroy it: And as he was about to
destroy, the Lorde behelde, and had compassion on the euyll, & sayde to the
angel that destroyed: It is enough, let nowe thyne hand ceasse. And the angel of
the Lorde stoode by the threshing floore of Ornan the Iebusite.
16 And Dauid lift vp his eyes, and sawe the angell of the Lorde stand betweene
the earth and heauen, hauing a drawen sword in his hand, stretched out toward
Hierusalem: Then Dauid and the elders of Israel whiche were clothed in sacke,
fell vpon their faces.
17 And Dauid sayde vnto God: Is it not I that commaunded the people to be
numbred? It is I that haue sinned and done euyll in deede: and what haue these
sheepe done? Let thyne hande O Lorde my God be on me, and on my fathers house:
but not on thy people, that they shoulde be punished.
18 And the angell of the Lord commaunded Gad to say to Dauid, that Dauid shoulde
go vp and set vp an aulter vnto the Lorde in the threshing floore of Ornan the
Iebusite.
19 And Dauid went vp according to the saying of Gad whiche he spake in the name
of the Lorde.
20 And Ornan turned about, and saw the angell, and his foure sonnes were with
him, and hyd them selues: But Ornan was threshing wheate.
21 And as Dauid came to Ornan, Ornan loked and sawe Dauid, and went out of the
threshing floore, and bowed hym selfe to Dauid with his face to the grounde.
22 And Dauid sayde to Ornan: Geue me the place of the threshing floore, that I
may buylde an aulter therin vnto the lord: Thou shalt geue it me for as much
money as it is worth, that the plague may ceasse from the people.
23 And Ornan sayd vnto Dauid: Take it to thee, and let my lorde the king do that
which seemeth good in his eyes: Lo, I geue thee oxen also for burnt sacrifices,
and treshing instrumentes for wood, & wheate for meate offring, I geue it all.
24 And king Dauid sayde to Ornan: Not so, but I will bye it for as much money as
it is worth: For I will not take that whiche is thyne for the Lorde, nor offer
burnt offringes without coast.
25 And so Dauid gaue to Ornan for that place sicles of golde sixe hundred by
wayght.
26 And Dauid buylt there an aulter vnto the Lorde, and offred burnt offringes
and peace offringes, and called vpon the Lorde, and he hearde him from heauen in
fire vpon the aulter of burnt offring.
27 And when the Lorde had spoken to the angel, he put vp his sword againe into
the sheathe of it.
28 At that time when Dauid sawe that the Lorde had hearde him in the thresshing
floore of Ornan the Iebusite, he vsed to offer there:
29 For the tabernacle of the Lorde which Moyses made in the wildernesse, & the
aulter of burnt offring, were at that season in the hill of Gibeon:
30 And Dauid coulde not go before it, to aske counsell at God, for he was
afrayde of the sword of the angel of the Lorde.

Chapter 22

1 And Dauid said: This is the house of the lord God, & this is the aulter for
the burnt offring of Israel.
2 And Dauid commaunded to gather together the straungers that were in the lande
of Israel, and he set masons to hew and pullishe stones for the building of the
house of God.
3 And Dauid prepared plentie of iron for nayles, & doores of the gates, & to
ioyne withal, and aboundaunce of brasse without wayght,
4 And Cedar trees without number: For the Zidons and they of Tyre brought much
Cedar wood to Dauid.
5 And Dauid sayde: Solomon my sonne is young and tender, and the house that is
to be buylded for the Lorde must be magnificall, excellent, and of great fame
and dignitie throughout all countreys: I wil therfore make ordinaunces for it.
And so Dauid prepared many thinges before his death.
6 And he called Solomon his sonne, and charged him to buylde an house for the
Lorde God of Israel.
7 And Dauid sayde to Solomon: My sonne, I thought as it was in myne heart to
buylde an house vnto the name of the Lorde my God:
8 But the word of the Lord came to me, saying: Thou hast shed much blood, and
hast made great battayles: thou shalt therefore not buylde an house vnto my
name, for thou hast shed much blood vpon the earth in my sight.
9 Behold, a sonne is borne to thee, and he shalbe a man of rest, for I wil geue
him rest from all his enemies rounde about: For his name is Solomon, & I wil
send rest and peace vpon Israel in his dayes.
10 He shall buylde an house for my name, and he shalbe my sonne, and I wilbe his
father, and I wil establishe the seate of his kingdome vpon Israel for euer.
11 Nowe therfore my sonne, the Lorde be with thee, and prosper thee, and thou
shalt buylde an house to the Lorde thy God, as he hath sayde of thee.
12 And the Lord shall geue thee wysdom and vnderstanding, and shall geue thee
commaundementes for Israel, that thou mayst kepe the lawe of the Lorde thy God.
13 For then thou shalt prosper, euen when thou takest heede and fulfillest the
statutes and lawes which the Lorde charged Moyses with for Israel: Plucke vp
thyne hearte therfore, & be strong, dread not, nor be discouraged.
14 Behold, according to my pouertie haue I also prepared for the house of the
Lorde, an hundred thousande talentes of golde, and a thousande thousande
talentes of siluer: and as for brasse & iron, it can not be nubred, (for it is
verie much) And I haue prepared timber and stone, and thou mayest prouide more
thereto.
15 Moreouer, thou hast workemen with thee mowe, and masons, and carpenters to
worke in stone and timber, & many men that be actiue for euery worke,
16 And of golde, siluer, brasse, & iron, there is no number: Up therefore, and
be doing, and the Lorde shalbe with thee.
17 And Dauid commaunded al the lordes of Israel to helpe Solomon his sonne,
saying:
18 Is not the Lord your God with you? and hath he not geuen you rest on euery
side? for he hath geuen the inhabitours of the lande into my hande, and the land
is subdued before the Lorde, and before his people.
19 Nowe therefore set your heartes and your soules to seke the Lord your God:
Up, and buylde ye the temple of the Lord God, to bring the arke of the couenaunt
of the Lorde and the holy vessels of God into the house so buylt for the name of
the Lorde.

Chapter 23

1 So when Dauid was olde and full of dayes, he made Solomon his sonneking ouer
Israel.
2 And then he gathered together all the lordes of Israel, with the priestes and
the Leuites.
3 And the Leuites were numbred from the age of thirtie yeres and aboue: and the
number and summe of them was thirtie and eyght thousande men.
4 Of which twentie and foure thousand were set to further the worke of the house
of the Lorde: and sixe thousande were officers and iudges.
5 Foure thousande were porters, & foure thousand praysed the Lorde with such
instrumentes as was made to prayse withall.
6 And so Dauid put an order among them deuiding them, in partes: Of the children
of Leui, Gerson, Caath, and Merari.
7 Of the Gersonites was Laadan, and Semei.
8 The sounes of Laadan, the chiefe was Iehiel, Zethan, and Ioel, three.
9 The sonnes of Semei: Selomith, Haziel, and Haran, three. These were the
auncient fathers of Laadan.
10 And the sonnes of Semei: were, Iahath, Zina, Ieus, & Beria: these foure were
the sonnes of Semei.
11 And Iahath was the chiefe, Ziza the seconde: but Ieus, and Beria had not many
sonnes, therfore they were in one reckening according to their fathers
housholde, reckened for one auncient housholde.
12 The sonnes of Caath: Amram, Izahar, Hebron, and Uzziel, foure.
13 The sonnes of Amram: Aaron, and Moyses: And Aaron was separated to haue the
rule of the holy thinges in the place most holy, he & his sonnes for euer, and
to burne incense before the Lorde, and to minister vnto him, and to blesse in
his name for euer.
14 Moyses also the man of God, and his children, were named with the tribe of
Leui.
15 The sonnes of Moyses: Gerso, & Eliezer.
16 Of the sonnes of Gersom, Sebuel was the chiefe.
17 The sonnes of Eliezer, Rehabia the chiefe: And Eliezer had none other sonnes,
but the sonnes of Rehabia were verie many.
18 The sonnes of Izahar, Selomith the chiefe.
19 The sonnes of Hebron, Ieriahu the first, Amaria the seconde, Iahaziel the
thirde, and Iermaam the fourth.
20 The sonnes of Uzziel: Micha the first, and Iesia the seconde.
21 The sonnes of Merati: Mahli, & Musi. The sonnes of Mahli: Eleazar and Cis.
22 And Eleazar dyed, and had no sonnes, but daughters: and their brethren the
sonnes of Cis toke them.
23 The sonnes of Musi: Mahli, Eder, and Ieremoth, three.
24 These are the children of Leui after the houshold of their fathers, euen the
auncient of the fathers according to their offices, and after the number and
summe of the names of them that dyd the worke in the seruice of the house of the
Lord, from the age of twentie yeres and aboue.
25 And Dauid sayde: The Lorde God of Israel hath geuen rest vnto his people,
that they may dwell in Hierusalem for euer.
26 That the Leuites also shoulde nowe no more beare the tabernacle, and al the
vessels for the seruice thereof.
27 For according to the last wordes of Dauid, the Leuites were numbred from
twentie yeres and aboue.
28 And their office was vnder the hande of the sonnes of Aaron, for the seruice
of the house of the Lorde in the courtes and celles, and in the purifying of all
holy thinges, and in the worke of the seruice of the house of God:
29 In the shewbread, in the fine flowre, in the meate offring, in ye wafers of
sweete bread, in the frying panne, in the gredyron, and in all maner of measures
& sise:
30 And to stand euery day in the morning to thanke and prayse the Lorde, and so
likewise at euen:
31 And to offer all burnt sacrifices vnto the Lord, in the Sabbathes, in the new
moones, and on the feastfull dayes, by number and custome continually as they
were commaunded, before the Lord.
32 And that they should wayte on the tabernacle of the congregation, & on the
holy place, and on the sonnes of Aaron their brethre, in the seruice of the
house of the Lord.

Chapter 24

1 These are the deuisions of the sonnes of Aaro. The sonnes of Aaron: Nadab,
Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
2 Nadab also and Abihu dyed before their father, & had no children: But Eleazar,
& Ithamar executed the priestes office.
3 And Dauid ordred them on this maner: Zadoc of the sonnes of Eleazar, and
Ahimelec of the sonnes of Ithamar were according to their offices in their
ministration.
4 And there were mo auncient men founde among the sonnes of Eleazar, then the
sonnes of Ithamar. And thus were they ordred together: Among the sonnes of
Eleazar there were sixteene rulers according to the houshold of their fathers,
and eyght among the sonnes of Ithamar according to the housholde of their
fathers.
5 And thus were they put in order by lot the one sort from the other: and so
were there rulers in the sanctuarie and lordes before God, aswell of the sonnes
of Eleazer, as of the sonnes of Ithamar.
6 And Semeia the sonne of Nathanael the scribe, of the kinred of the Leuites,
wrote them before the king & the lordes, & before Zadoc the priest and Ahimelec
the sonne of Abiathar, and before the auncient fathers of the priestes and
Leuites, one principall housholde being reserued for Eleazar, and one for
Ithamar.
7 And the first lot fell to Iehoiarib: and the seconde to Iedaia,
8 The third to Harim, and the fourth to Sehorim,
9 The fyft to Melchia, and the sixth to Miiamin,
10 The seuenth to Hakos, and the eyght to Abia,
11 The nynth to Iesua, and the tenth to Secaniah,
12 The eleuenth to Eliasib, & the twelfth to Iakim,
13 The thirteenth to Huppa, and the fourteenth to Iesebeab,
14 The fyftenth to Bilga, and the sixtenth to Immer,
15 The seuenteenth to Hezir, and the eyghteenth to Aphses,
16 The nynteenth to Pethahia, and the twentieth to Ieheskel,
17 The twentie and one to Iachin, and the twentie and two to Gamul,
18 The twentie and three to Delaiahu, and the twentie and foure to Maasiahu.
19 These are the ordinaunces of them in their offices when they came into the
house of the Lord, according to their maner vnder Aaron their father, as the
lord God of Israel had comaunded him.
20 The rest of the sonnes of Leui, are these: Of the sonnes of Amram, Subael: of
the sonnes of Sabuel, Iehediahu.
21 Of the sonnes of Rehabia, the first Iesia.
22 Of the Iezaharites Selomoth: Of the sonnes also of Selomoth Iahath.
23 His sonnes Ieriahu the first, Amariahu the second, Iahaziel the third, and
Iekameam the fourth.
24 Of the sonnes of Uzziel, Micha: Of the sonnes of Micha, Samir.
25 The brother of Micha was Issia: Of the sonnes also of Issia, Zechariahu.
26 The sonnes of Merari, were Mahli, and Musi: The sonnes of Iaaziahu, Beno.
27 The sonnes of Merari by Iaaziahu, Beno, Soham, Zacur, and Ibri.
28 Of Mahli came Eleazar, and he had no sonnes.
29 Of Cis: the sonnes of Cis, Ierahemeel.
30 The sonnes of Musi, Mahli, Eder, and Ierimoth: These are the children of the
Leuites, after the housholde of their fathers.
31 And these cast lottes next to their brethren the sonnes of Aaron in the
presence of Dauid the king, and Zadoc, and Ahimelec, and the auncient fathers of
the priestes & Leuites, euen the principall fathers, before their younger
brethren. The singers are appoynted with their places and lottes.

Chapter 25

1 And so Dauid and the captaynes of the hoast appoynted out to do seruice the
sonnes of Asaph, and Heman, & Ieduthun, which should prophecie with harpes,
psalteries, and cymbales: And there was a multitude of the men that were
appoynted to the seruice and ministration:
2 Of the sonnes of Asaph, Zacur, Ioseph, Nathania, and Asarela that wayted on
Asaph which prophecied according to the commaundement of the king.
3 Of Ieduthun: the sonnes of Ieduthun, Gedeliahu, Zeri, Iesaiahu, Hasabiahu, and
Mathathiahu, sixe, vnder the handes of their father Ieduthun, which prophecied
with a harpe, for to geue thankes & prayses vnto the Lorde.
4 Of Heman: the sonnes of Heman, Bucciahu, Matthaniahu, Uzziel, Zebuel,
Ierimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliatha, Geddalthi, Romanthi Ezer, Iosbekasa,
Malothi, Hothir, and Mahazioth.
5 All these were the sonnes of Heman which was ye kinges sear in the wordes of
God, to lyft vp the horne of the regall dignitie: And God gaue to Hema
foureteene sonnes, and three daughters.
6 All these also were at the hand of their father, singing in the house of the
Lord, with cymbales, psalteries, and harpes, when Asaph, Ieduthun, and Heman
executed the seruice in the house of God at the kinges commaundement.
7 And the multitude of them with their brethre that were instruct in the songes
of the Lorde, euen all that were cunning, were two hundred fourescore and eyght.
8 And they cast lottes among them selues how they should waite, aswel for the
small as for the great, for the scholler aswell as for the schoolemaister.
9 And the first lot in Asaph fell to Ioseph, the second to Gedaliahu with his
brethren and sonnes, which men were twelue.
10 The third fell to Zacur with his sonnes and brethren, being twelue persons.
11 The fourth, to Izri with his sonnes and brethren, twelue persons.
12 The fifth to Nathaniahu with his sonnes and brethren, twelue persons.
13 The sixt to Bucciahu with his sonnes and brethren, twelue persons.
14 The seuenth to Iesrarela with his sonnes and brethren, twelue persons.
15 The eyght to Iesaiahu with his sonnes and brethren, twelue persons.
16 The ninth to Mathaiahu with his sonnes and brethren, twelue persons.
17 The tenth to Semei with his sonnes and brethren, twelue persons.
18 The eleuenth to Azareel with his sonnes and brethren, twelue persons.
19 The twelfth to Hazabia with his sonnes and brethren, twelue persons.
20 The thirteenth to Subael with his sonnes and brethren twelue persons.
21 The foureteenth, to Mathathiahu with his sonnes and brethren, twelue persons.
22 The fifteenth to Ieremoth with his sonnes and brethren, twelue persons.
23 The sixteenth to Hananiahu with his sonnes and brethren, twelue persons.
24 The seuenteenth to Iosbekasa with his sonnes & brethren, twelue persons.
25 The eyghteenth to Hanani with his sonnes and brethren, twelue persons.
26 The nineteenth to Malothi with his sonnes and brethren, twelue persons.
27 The twenteeth to Eliaiha with his sonnes and brethren, twelue persons.
28 The twentie and one to Hothir with his sonnes and brethren, twelue persons.
29 The twentie & two to Geddalthi with his sonnes and brethren, twelue persons.
30 The twentie and three to Mahazioth with his sonnes and brethren, twelue
persons.
31 The twentie and foure to Romamthi Ezer with his sonnes and brethren, twelue
persons.

Chapter 26

1 These are the deuisions of the porters. Among the Corethites, Meselemiahu, the
sonne of Kore of the children of Asaph.
2 And the sonnes of Meselemiahu were these: Zachariahu the eldest, Iedihel the
second, Zebadiahu the third, and Iahniel the fourth,
3 Elam the fifth, Iehohanan the sixt, and Eiloenai the seuenth.
4 The sonnes of Obed Edom, Semeia the eldest, Iehosabad the second, Ioah the
third, Sacar the fourth, and Nathanael the fifth,
5 Ammiel the sixth, Issachar the seuenth, Peulthai the eyght, for God blessed
him.
6 And vnto Semeia, his sonne, were sonnes borne, that ruled in the house of
their father: for they were men of might.
7 The sonnes of Semeia, Othni, Rephael, Obed, and Elzabad, and his brethren were
strong men, Elihu and Samachiahu.
8 All these were of the children of Obed Edom: they and their children, and
their brethren, actiue men and of strength to do seruice, euen threescore and
two of Obed Edom.
9 And Meselemiahu had sonnes and brethren, actiue men, eyghteene.
10 The sonnes of Hosa of the children of Merari, Simri the chiefe, & though he
was not the eldest, yet his father set him in the chiefest place:
11 Helkiahu the second, Tebaliahu the third, and Zechariahu the fourth: all the
sonnes and brethren of Hosa were thirteene.
12 Among these was deuided the office of the portership, that they shoulde be
auncient men, to wayte with their brethren, when they ministred in the house of
the Lorde.
13 And they cast lottes betweene the great and small, after the housholde of
their fathers, for euery gate.
14 And the lot on the eastsyde fell vpon Selemiahu: And for Zachariahu his sonne
(which was a wyfe counsailour) they cast lottes, and his lot came out toward the
north.
15 And Obed Edoms lot fell to the south: And for his sonnes fell the houses of
Asuppim.
16 For Shuppim and Hosa toward the west, with the gate Shallecheth by the paued
streate that goeth vpward, one watch being ouer against an other.
17 In the east were sixe Leuites, and toward the north foure a day, toward the
south foure a day, and toward Asuppim two and two.
18 In Parbar toward the west two at the going vp, and two in Pharbar.
19 These are the deuisions of the porters among the sonnes of Koreh, & among the
sonnes of Merari.
20 And of the Leuites, Ahiah had the ouersight of the treasures of the house of
God, & of the treasures of the dedicate thinges.
21 As concerning the sonnes of Laadan, which were the children of the Gersonites
of Laadan, came auncient fathers, euen of Laadan there came Gersuni, and
Iehieli.
22 The sonnes of Iehieli, Zetham, and Ioel his brother, which were ouer the
treasures of the house of the Lorde.
23 Of the Amramites also and Izaharites, Hebronites, and Ozielites.
24 And Subael the sonne of Gersom the sonne of Moyses, was a ruler ouer the
treasures.
25 And of his brethren the sonnes of Eliezer was Rahabiahu, whose sonne was
Iesaiahu, whose sonne was Ioram, whose sonne was Zichri, whose sonne was
Selomith.
26 Which Selomith & his brethren were ouer all the treasures of the dedicate
thinges, which Dauid the king, and the auncient fathers, the captaynes ouer
thousandes and hundredes, and the captaynes of the hoast had dedicated,
27 Out of the spoyles wonne in battailes, they did dedicate to maynetayne the
house of the Lorde.
28 And all that Samuel the sear, & Saul the sonne of Cis, and Abner the sonne of
Ner, and Ioab the sonne of Zaruia, had dedicated, and whosoeuer had dedicated
any thing, it was vnder the hand of Selomith and of his brethren.
29 Of the Izaharites was Chenaniahu and his sonnes appoynted to the busynesse
withoutfoorth ouer Israel: for they were officers and iudges.
30 And of the Hebronites, Hasabiahu and his brethren, men of actiuitie, a
thousand and seuen hundred, were officers among them of Israel beyond Iordane
westward, in al busynesse belonging to God, and seruice of the king.
31 Among the Hebronites was Iedia the chiefest, euen a prince among the
Hebronites and fathers of his kinred: And in the fourtith yere of the kingdome
of Dauid, they were sought for, and there were founde among them men of
actiuitie at Iazer in Gilead.
32 And his brethren were men of actiuitie, euen two thousand and seuen hundred
auncient fathers: whom king Dauid made rulers ouer the Rubenites, Gadites, and
ouer the halfe tribe of Manasse, for euery matter pertayning to God, and for the
kinges busynesse.

Chapter 27

1 The children of Israel, after the number of them, ye auncient heads and
captaynes of thousandes and hundredes, and their officers that serued the king
by dyuers courses, which came in and went out moneth by moneth, throughout all
the monethes of the yere: And in euery course were twentie and foure
thouthousand.
2 Ouer the first course for the first moneth, was Iasoboam the sonne of Zabdiel,
and in his course were twentie and foure thousand.
3 And the chiefest of all the captaynes of the hoast for the first moneth, was
of the children of Pharez.
4 Ouer the course of the second moneth, was Dodai an Ahohite, & in his course
was Mikloth a ruler, his helper: and in his course were twentie and foure
thousand.
5 The chiefe captayne of the third hoast for the third moneth, was Banaiahu the
sonne of Iehoiada the hie priest, and in his course were twentie and foure
thousand.
6 This is that Banaiahu which was most mightie among thirtie, and aboue thirtie:
And in his part was Amizabad his sonne.
7 The fourth captayne for the fourth moneth, was Asael the brother of Ioab, and
Zabadaia his sonne after him, and in his course were twentie & foure thousand.
8 The fifth captayne for the fifth moneth, was Samhut the Iezrahite, and in his
course were twentie and foure thousand.
9 The sixt captayne for the sixt moneth, was Ira the sonne of Ickes a Therkuite,
and in his course were twentie and foure thousand.
10 The seuenth captayne for the seuenth moneth, was Helez the Pelonite, of the
children of Ephraim, and in his course were twentie and foure thousand.
11 The eyght captayne for the eyght moneth, was Sibbechai an Husathite of ye
kynrede of Zarhi, & in his course were twentie and foure thousand.
12 The ninth captayne for the ninth moneth, was Abiezer an Anathothite of the
sonnes of Iemini, and in his course were twentie and foure thousand.
13 The tenth captayne for the tenth moneth, was Maharai the Netophatite of the
Zarahites, & in his course were twentie and foure thousand.
14 The eleuenth captayne for the eleuenth moneth, was Banaia the Pirathonite of
the children of Ephraim, and in his course were twentie and foure thousand.
15 The twelfth captayne for the twelfth moneth, was Heldai the Netophatite of
Othoniel, and in his course were twentie and foure thousand.
16 And the rulers ouer the tribes of Israel were these: Among the Rubenites, was
Eliezer the sonne of Zichri: Among the Simeonites also, was Saphathiahu the
sonne of Maacha.
17 Among the Leuites, Hasabia the sonne of Kemuel: Among the Aaronites, Zadok.
18 Among them of Iuda, Elihu of the brethren of Dauid: Among them of Issachar,
Omri the sonne of Michael.
19 Among them of Zabulon, Iesmaiahu the sonne of Obadiahu: Among the of
Nephthali, Ierimoth ye sonne of Azriel.
20 Among the children of Ephraim, Hosea the sonne of Azariahu: In the halfe
tribe also of Manasse, Ioel the sonne of Pedaiahu.
21 Of the halfe tribe of Manasse in Gilead, Iiddo the sonne of Zachariahu: Among
them of Beniamin, Iaasiel the sonne of Abner.
22 Among them of Dan, Azarel the sonne of Ieroham. These are the lordes of the
tribes of Israel.
23 But Dauid toke not the number of them vnder twentie yeres, because the Lorde
saide he would encrease Israel lyke vnto the starres of the skye.
24 And Ioab the sonne of Zaruia began to number: but he finished it not, because
that there fell wrath for it against Israel, neither was the number put into the
cronicles of king Dauid.
25 Ouer the kinges treasures was Azmaueth the sonne of Adiel: And ouer the
treasures of the fieldes, in the cities, and villages, and castels, was
Iehonathan the sonne of Uzziahu.
26 And ouer the workemen in the fieldes that tilled the grounde, was Ezri the
sonne of Chelub.
27 And the ouersight of the vineyardes, had Semei the Ramathite: Ouer the
encrease also of the vineyardes, & ouer the winesellers, was Sabdi the
Zaphonite.
28 And ouer the oliue trees and mulberie trees that were in the valleyes, was
Baal Hanan the Gederite: And ouer the treasure of oyle, was Ioas.
29 Ouer the oxen that fed in Saron, was Setrai the Saronite: And ouer the oxen
that were in the valleyes, was Saphat the sonne of Adlai.
30 Ouer the cammels, Obil the Ismaelite: And ouer the asses, was Iehdeiahu the
Meronothite.
31 Ouer the sheepe was Iazez the Hagerite: All these were the rulers of the
substaunce of king Dauid.
32 And Iehonathan Dauids vncle, a man of counsell and of vnderstanding, was a
scribe, and Iehiel the sonne of Hachmoni was with ye kinges sonnes instructing
them.
33 And Ahitophel was of the kinges counsell: And Husai the Arachite was the
kinges companion.
34 And next to Ahitophel was Iehoiada the sonne of Banaiahu, and Abiathar: and
the captayne of the kinges warre, was Ioab.

Chapter 28

1 And Dauid gathered all the lordes of Israel, the lordes of the tribes, the
lordes of the companies that ministred to the king by course, ye captaines ouer
the thousandes and ouer the hundredes, & the lordes that had the ouersight ouer
all the substaunce and possession of Dauid, & of his sonnes, with the
chamberlaynes, & al the mightie and valiaunt, and all actiue men, vnto
Hierusalem.
2 And king Dauid stoode vp vpon his feete, and sayde: Heare me my brethren and
my people, I had in myne heart to builde an house of rest, for the arke of the
couenaunt of the Lorde, and for the footestoole of our God, and had made redie
for the building
3 But God saide vnto me: thou shalt not builde an house for my name, because
thou hast ben a man of warre, and hast shed blood.
4 Moreouer the Lorde God of Israel chose me before all the house of my father,
to be king ouer Israel for euer: for in Iuda would he choose a captaine, & of
the householde of Iuda is the house of my father, & among the sonnes of my
father he had a lust to me to make me king ouer all Israel.
5 And of all my sonnes (for the Lorde hath geuen me many sonnes) he hath chosen
Solomon my sonne, to sit vpon the seate of the kingdome of the Lorde in Israel.
6 And he saide vnto me: Solomon thy sonne he shall builde me an house and
courtes: I haue chosen him to be my sonne, and I will be his father.
7 I wyll stablishe his kingdome for euer, if he wyll be strong to do my
commaundementes and my lawes, as it goeth this day.
8 Nowe therefore in the sight of all Israel the congregation of the Lorde, and
in the audience of our God, keepe and seeke for all the commaundementes of the
Lorde your God, that ye may enioy a good lande, and leaue inheritaunce for your
children after you for euer.
9 And thou Solomon my sonne, knowe thou the God of thy father, and serue him
with a pure heart and with a wyllyng minde: For the Lord searcheth al heartes,
and vnderstandeth all the immaginations of thoughtes: And if thou seeke him, he
wyll be founde of thee: but if thou forsake him, he wyll cast thee of for euer.
10 Take heede now, for the Lorde hath chosen thee to builde him an house of a
sanctuarie: Be strong therefore & play the man.
11 And Dauid gaue Solomon his sonne the paterne of the porche, and of the houses
that longed thereto, of the storehouses, vpper chambers, inner parlours, and of
the house of the mercie seate:
12 And the example of all that he had in his minde for the courtes of the house
of the Lorde, and for all the celles rounde about, for the treasures of the
house of God, and for the treasures of the dedicate thinges:
13 For the deuisions of the priestes and Leuites that wayted by course, and for
al the workemanship that should serue for the house of the Lorde, and for all
the vessels that shoulde serue in the house of the Lorde:
14 For golde, and for the waight of golde, for all vessels of sundry
ministrations, for all maner of vessels of siluer in waight, and for all vessels
whatsoeuer purpose they serued vnto:
15 The waight of golde for the candelstickes, and the golde for their lampes,
with the waight for euery candelsticke and for the lampes thereof: And for the
candelstickes of siluer by waight, both for the candelsticke & also for her
lampes, according to the diuersitie of the vse of euery candelsticke.
16 And by wayght he gaue golde for the tables of shewe bread, euen for euery
table, and likewyse siluer for the tables of siluer.
17 And pure golde for the fleshehookes, cuppes, and drinking pots: and pure
golde in wayght for basons, euen for euery bason: and likewyse siluer by waight,
for euery bason of siluer.
18 And for the aulter of incense, pure golde by waight, and golde for the
patterne of the charret of the Cherubs that stretched out their winges and
couered the arke of the couenaunt of the Lorde.
19 All he sayde was geuen me by wryting of the hande of the Lorde, which made me
vnderstand al the workemanship of the patterne.
20 And Dauid said to Solomon his sonne: be strong & of good courage, & do
manfullye, feare not nor be faint hearted, for ye lord God, euen my God, is with
thee, & he shall not faile thee, nor forsake thee, vntill thou hast finished al
ye worke that must serue for the house of the Lorde.
21 Beholde, the priestes and Leuites are deuided in companies for all maner of
seruice that pertayneth to the house of God, they are with thee for all maner of
workmanship, and so are al that excel in wysedome, for any maner of seruice:
thou hast also the princes and all the people who ly at thy commaundement.

Chapter 29

1 And Dauid the king saide vnto all the congregation: God hath specially chosen
Solomon my sonne which is yet young & tender, & the worke is great: for the
house shall not be for man, but for the Lorde God.
2 Moreouer, I haue prepared with all my might for the house of my God, golde for
vessels of golde, siluer for them of siluer, brasse for thinges of brasse, iron
for thinges of iron, & wood for thynges of wood, and onix stones, and stones to
be set, glistering stones, and of diuers colours, & al maner of precious stones,
& marble stones in great aboundaunce.
3 And because I haue lust to the house of my God, I haue of myne owne proper
good of golde and siluer which I haue geuen to the house of my God, beside all
that I haue prepared for the holy house,
4 Euen three thousand talentes of golde of Ophir, and seuen thousand talentes of
tried siluer, to ouer laye the walles of the house withall.
5 The golde for thinges of golde, siluer for them of siluer, and for all maner
of worke by the handes of artificers: And whosoeuer is wylling, may this day
consecrate his hande vnto the Lorde.
6 And so the auncient fathers and the lordes of the tribes of Israel, the
captaynes of thousandes and hundredes, with the lordes that were rulers ouer the
kinges worke, were willing,
7 And gaue for the seruice of the house of God, fiue thousand talentes of golde,
and ten thousand peeces of golde, and ten thousand talentes of siluer, &
eyghtteene thousand talentes of brasse, and one hundred thousand talentes of
iron.
8 And they with whom precious stones were founde, gaue them to the treasure of
the house of the Lord by the hand of Iehiel the Gersonite.
9 And the people reioyced when they were so wylling to geue their goodes, and
with a perfect heart they offered wyllingly to the Lord: And Dauid the king
reioyced with great gladnesse.
10 And Dauid blessed the Lorde before all the congregation, and sayde: Blessed
be thou Lorde God of Israel, our father from euer and for euer.
11 Thyne O Lorde is greatnesse, and power, glory, victorie, and prayse: for all
that is in heauen and in earth is thyne, and thyne is the kingdome O Lorde, and
thou excellest aboue all, euen as the head of all.
12 And richesse and honour come of thee, and thou raignest ouer all, and in
thyne hande is power & strength, and in thyne hand it is to make great and to
geue strength vnto all.
13 And nowe our God we thanke thee, and prayse thy glorious name.
14 But who am I? and what is my people? that we should enforce our selues to
geue these thinges so willingly? But all thinges come of thee, & of that which
we receaued at thyne hand, we haue geuen thee.
15 For we be but straungers before thee, and soiourners, as were al our fathers:
Our dayes on the earth also are but as a shadowe, and there is none abiding.
16 O Lorde our God, all this stuffe that we haue prepared to builde thee an
house for thy holy name, commeth of thyne hand, and is all thyne.
17 I wot also my God that thou tryest the heartes, and hast pleasure in
vnfaynednesse, & in the vnfaonednesse of myne heart I haue wyllingly offered al
these thinges: And now haue I seene thy people which are founde here to offer
vnto thee wyllyngly, and with gladnesse.
18 O Lorde God of Abraham, Isahac, and of Israel our fathers, keepe this for
euer in the desire of the thoughtes of the heart of thy people, & prepare their
heartes vnto thee.
19 And geue vnto Solomon my sonne a perfect heart, to keepe thy commaundementes,
thy testimonies, & thy statutes, and to do all, and builde the house, for the
which I haue made prouision.
20 And Dauid saide to all the congregation: Now blesse the Lorde your God. And
all the congregation blessed the Lorde God of their fathers, and bowed downe
their heades, and worshipped the Lorde and the king.
21 And they offered offringes vnto the Lorde: And on the morowe after the saide
day, they offred burnt offringes vnto the Lorde, euen a thousand young oxen, a
thousand rammes, and a thousand sheepe, with their drinke offrings: Many
sacrifices offred they for all Israel,
22 And did eate & drinke before the Lord the same day with great gladnesse: And
they made Solomon the sonne of Dauid king the second time, and annoynted him
prince before the Lorde, and Zadoc to be the hie priest.
23 And Solomon sate on the seate of the Lorde, and was king in steade of Dauid
his father, and prospered: and all they of Israel obeyed him.
24 And all the lordes and men of power, and all the sonnes of king Dauid,
submitted them selues, & were vnder king Solomon.
25 And the Lorde magnified Solomon in dignitie in the sight of all them of
Israel, and gaue him so glorious a kingdome, as no king had before him in
Israel.
26 And so Dauid the sonne of Isai raigned ouer all Israel.
27 And the space that he raigned ouer Israel, was fouretie yeres: Seuen yeres
raigned he in Hebron, and thirtie and three yeres raigned he in Hierusalem.
28 And he dyed in a good age, ful of dayes, riches, and honour: and Solomon his
sonne raigned in his steade.
29 The actes of Dauid the king first and last, beholde they are written in the
booke of Samuel the sear, and in the booke of Nathan the prophete, and in the
booke of Gad the sear:
30 With all his kingdome, and power, and times, that went ouer him, & ouer all
Israel, and ouer all the kingdomes of the earth.


2 Chronicles

Chapter 1

1 And Solomon the sonne of Dauid waxed strong in his kingdome, and the Lord his
God was with him, and magnified him in dignitie.
2 And Solomon spake vnto all Israel, to the captaynes ouer thousandes, to the
captaynes ouer hundredes, to the iudges, and to euery officer in all Israel, and
to the auncient fathers.
3 And so Solomon and all the congregation with him went to the hie place that
was at Gibeon: for there was the tabernacle of the congregation of God, which
Moyses the seruaunt of the Lorde made in the wyldernesse.
4 But the arke of God had Dauid brought from Kiriathiarim, into the place which
Dauid had prepared therfore: For he had pitched a tent for it at Hierusalem.
5 Moreouer, the brasen aulter that Bezaleel the sonne of Uri the sonne of Hur
had made, was there before the tabernacle of the Lorde: And Solomon and the
congregation went to visite it.
6 And Solomon gat vp there before the Lord, to the brasen aulter that was before
the tabernacle of the congregation, and offered a thousand burnt sacrifices vpon
it.
7 And the same night did God appeare vnto Solomon, and said vnto him: Aske what
I shall geue thee.
8 And Solomon saide vnto God: Thou hast shewed great mercie vnto Dauid my
father, and hast made me to raigne in his steade.
9 Now therefore, O Lorde God, let thy promise which thou madest vnto Dauid my
father, be true: For thou hast made me king ouer a people which is lyke the dust
of the earth in multitude:
10 Wherefore geue me now wysedome and knowledge, that I may be able to go in and
out before this people: for who els can iudge this people that is so great?
11 And God saide to Solomon: Because this was in thyne heart, and because thou
hast not asked treasure and riches, and honour, & the liues of thyne enemies,
neither yet long lyfe, but hast asked wysedome and knowledge for thy selfe, to
iudge my people ouer which I haue made thee king:
12 Wysedome and knowledge is graunted vnto thee, and I will geue thee treasure,
& riches, and glory: so that among the kinges that haue ben before thee, or
after thee, none was or shalbe lyke thee.
13 And so Solomon came from the high place that was at Gibeon to Hierusalem from
the tabernacle of the congregation, and raigned ouer Israel.
14 And Solomon gathered charets and horsemen: and he had a thousand and foure
hundred charets, & twelue thousand horsemen, whom he bestowed in the charet
cities, and with the king at Hierusalem.
15 And the king made siluer and golde at Hierusalem as plenteous as stones, and
Cedar trees made he as plentie as the Mulbery trees that growe in the valleyes.
16 Also Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, & fine linnen: The kinges
marchautes receaued the fine linnen for a price.
17 They came also and brought out of Egypt a charet for sixe hundred peeces of
siluer, euen an horse for an hundred and fiftie: And so brought they horses for
all the kinges of the Hethites, and for the kinges of Syria, by their owne
hande.

Chapter 2

1 And Solomon determined to buylde an house for the name of the Lord, and an
house for his kingdome.
2 And Solomon tolde out threescore and ten thousande men to beare burthens, and
fourescore thousand men to hewe stones in the mountayne, and three thousand and
sixe hundred to ouersee them.
3 And Solomon sent to Hiram the king of Tyre, saying: As thou diddest deale with
Dauid my father, and diddest send him Cedar wood to buyld him an house to dwell
in euen so deale with me:
4 Behold I buylde an house for the name of the Lorde my God, to offer vnto him
holy thinges, & to burne sweete incense, and to set shewe bread before him
continually, to offer burnt sacrifices of the morning and euening on the Sabbath
dayes, in the firste day of euery newe moone, and in the solempne feastes of the
Lorde our God: for it is an ordinaunce to be continually kept of Israel.
5 And the house which I buylde shalbe great: for great is our God aboue all
gods.
6 But who is able to buylde him an house? when that heauen and heauen aboue all
heauens is not able to receaue him, what am I then that should buyld him an
house? nay, but euen to burne sacrifice before him shall this buylding be.
7 Sende me nowe therefore a cunning man, that can worke in golde and siluer, in
brasse and iron, in purple, crymosin, yelowe silke, & that can skyll to graue
with the cunning men that are with me in Iuda and Hierusalem, whom Dauid my
father dyd prepare.
8 Sende me also Cedar trees, pine trees, and algume trees, out of Libanon: For I
wot that thy seruauntes can skill to hewe timber in Libanon: and behold my men
shalbe with thyne,
9 That they may prepare me timber enough: For the house whiche I am determined
to buylde, shalbe wonderfull great.
10 And behold, for the vse of thy seruauntes the cutters and hewers of timber, I
haue geuen twentie thousande quarters of beaten wheat, and twentie thousand
quarters of barlye, and twentie thousande battes of wine, and twentie thousande
battes of oyle.
11 And Hiram ye king of Tyre aunswered in writing, whiche he sent to Solomon:
Because the Lorde hath loued his people, therefore hath he made thee king ouer
them.
12 And Hiram sayde moreouer: Blessed be the Lorde God of Israel whiche made
heauen & earth, & that hath geuen Dauid the king a wise sonne, and one that hath
descretion, prudence, and vnderstanding, to buyld an house for the Lord, and a
palace for his kingdome.
13 And now I haue sent a wise man, and a man of vnderstanding, whom my father
Hiram dyd vse:
14 The sonne of a woman of the daughters of Dan, and his father was a man of
Tyre, and he can skil to worke in gold and siluer, in brasse and iron, in stone
and timber, in purple and yelowe silke, in fine whyte and crymosin, and can
graue sundry maner of grauinges, and to finde out diuers maner of subtill worke
that shalbe set before hym, with thy cunning men, and with the cunning men of my
lorde Dauid thy father.
15 Nowe therefore, the wheate and barlye, oyle and wine, which my lorde hath
spoken of, let him sende vnto his seruauntes:
16 And we will cut wood in Libanon as much as thou shalt neede, and wil bring it
to thee in flotes by sea to Iapho, from whence thou mayest cary them to
Hierusalem.
17 And Solomon numbred all the straungers that were in the lande of Israel,
after the number of them whom his father Dauid had numbred: And they were founde
an hundred fiftie and three thousand, and sixe hundred.
18 And he set threescore and ten thousande to beare burthens, and fourescore
thousande to hewe stones in the mountayne, and three thousande & sixe hundred
officers to set the people a worke. The temple of the Lorde, and the porche are
buylded, with other things thereto belonging.

Chapter 3

1 And Solomon began to buylde the house of the Lorde at Hierusalem in mount
Moria where the Lorde appeared vnto Dauid his father, euen in the place that
Dauid prepared in the thresshing floore of Ornan the Iebusite.
2 And he began to buylde in the seconde day of the seconde moneth, the fourth
yere of his raigne.
3 And these are the patternes whereby Solomon was instruct to buylde the house
of God: The length was threescore cubites after the olde measure, and the
breadth twentie cubites.
4 And the porche that was before the length in the front, according to the
breadth of the house, was twentie cubites, and the heyght was an hundred and
twentie cubites: and he ouerlayed it on the inner syde with pure golde.
5 And the greater house he seeled with firre tree, whiche he ouerlayed with the
best golde, and graued thereto paulme trees and chaynes.
6 And he ouerlayed the house with precious stone beautyfully: And the golde was
golde of Paruaim.
7 The house I say the beames, postes, walles, and doores therof, ouerlayed he
with golde, and graued Cherubs on the walles.
8 And he made the house most holy: whose length was twentie cubites like to the
breadth of the house, and the breadth therof was also twentie cubites: and he
ouerlayed it with good golde, euen with sixe hundred talentes.
9 And the wayght of the nayles of golde was fiftie sicles: and he ouerlayed the
vpper chambers with golde.
10 And in the house most holy he made two Cherubims of image worke, like
children, and ouerlayed them with gold.
11 And the wynges of the Cherubs were twentie cubites long: The one wyng was
fiue cubites, reaching to the wall of the house: and the other wyng was likewise
fiue cubites, reaching to the wyng of the other Cherub.
12 And euen so the one wyng of the other Cherub was fiue cubites, reaching to
the wall of the house: and the other wyng was fiue cubites also, and reached to
the wyng of the other Cherub.
13 So that the wynges of the sayde Cherubs were stretched out twentie cubites:
and they stoode on their feete, and loked inwardes.
14 And he made a fore hanging of yelow silke, purple, crymosin, and fine white,
& caused the pictures of Cherubs to be brodred theron.
15 And he made before the house two pillers of thirtie and fiue cubites high,
and the head that was aboue on the top of euery one of them was fiue cubites,
16 And he made chaynes of wreathe worke for the quier, & put them on the heades
of the pillers: and made an hundred pomegranates, and put them on the chaynes.
17 And he reared vp the pillers before the temple, one on the right hande, and
the other on the left: and called the right Iachin, and the left Boaz.

Chapter 4

1 And he made an aulter of brasse, twentie cubites long, and twentie cubites
broade, and ten cubites hie.
2 And he cast a brasen lauatorie of ten cubites from brym to brym, rounde in
compasse, and fiue cubites hie: and a line of thirtie cubites dyd compasse it
round about.
3 And vnder it was the fashion of oxen, whiche dyd compasse it rounde about:
with ten cubites dyd they compasse the lauatorie rounde about, and there were
two rowes of oxen whiche were cast lyke molten worke.
4 And it stoode also vpon twelue oxen: three loked towarde the north, three
towarde the west, three toward the south, and three toward the east: and the
lauatorie was set vpon them, and all their backes were towarde the lauatorie.
5 And the thyckest of it was an hande breadth, and the brym like the brym of a
cuppe, with floures of lilies: and it receaued and helde three thousande battes.
6 And he made ten lauers, and put fiue on the right hand, and fiue on the left,
to washe and clense in them such thinges as they offered for a burnt offring:
But the great lauatorie was for the priestes to washe in.
7 And he made ten candelstickes of gold, according to the patterne that was geue
of them, and put them in the temple, fiue on the right hande, and fiue on the
left.
8 And he made also ten tables, and put them in the temple, fiue on the right
side, and fiue on the left: And he made an hundred basens of golde.
9 And he made the court of the priestes, and the great court, and doores to it,
and ouerlayde the doores of them with brasse.
10 And he set the great lauatorie on the right side of the east ende, ouer
against the south.
11 And Hiram made pottes, shouels, and basens, & finished the worke that he was
appoynted to make for king Solomon in the house of God.
12 The two pillers, and the bowles, and the pommels on the toppe of the two
pillers, and the two wreathes to couer the two bowles of the pommels whiche were
on the toppe of the pillers,
13 And foure hundred pomegranates on the two wreathes: two rowes of pomegranates
on one wreath to couer the two bowles of the pomels.
14 And he made two bottomes, and lauers made he vpon the bottomes.
15 The great lauatorie, and twelue oxen vnder it.
16 Pottes also, shouels, and fleshhokes: and all these vessels dyd Hiram his
father make to king Solomon for the house of the Lord, of bright brasse.
17 In the playne of Iordane did the king cast them, euen in the clay grounde
that is betweene Socoth and Zaredatha.
18 And Solomon made al these vessels in great aboundaunce: for the weyght of
brasse coulde not be reckened.
19 And Solomon made al the vessels that were for the house of God, the golden
aulter also, & the tables to set the shewe bread vpon.
20 Moreouer, the candelstickes with their lampes, to burne after the maner
before the quier, and that of precious golde.
21 And the floures, and the lampes, and the snoffers made he of golde, and that
perfect golde.
22 And the dressing knyues, basens, spoones, and censers of pure golde: And the
doore of the temple, and the inner doores within the place most holy, and the
inner doores of the temple were gilted.

Chapter 5

1 And so all the worke that Solomon made in the house of the lord was finished:
And Solomon brought in all the thinges that Dauid his father had dedicated, with
the siluer and golde, and al the iewels, and put them among the treasures of the
house of God.
2 Then Solomon gathered the elders of Israel together, and all the heades of the
tribes and auncient fathers of the children of Israel, vnto Hierusalem, to bring
the arke of the couenaunt of the Lorde out of the citie of Dauid, whiche is in
Sion.
3 Wherefore all the men of Israel resorted vnto the king in the feast, euen in
the seuenth moneth.
4 And all the elders of Israel came, and the Leuites toke vp the arke.
5 And the priestes & the Leuites brought away the arke of the tabernacle of ye
congregatio, & al the holy vessels that were in the tabernacle, and they bare
them.
6 And king Solomon & all the congregation of Israel that were assembled vnto him
before the arke, offered sheepe and oxen, so many that they coulde not be tolde
nor numbred for multitude.
7 And the priestes brought the arke of the appoyntment of the Lorde vnto his
place, euen into the quier of the temple within the place most holy, and set it
vnder the wynges of the Cherubs,
8 So that the Cherubs stretched out their wynges ouer the place of the arke, and
the Cherubs couered both the arke and her barres aboue on hye.
9 And the barres of the arke were so long, that the heades of the barres were
seene without the arke within the quier, but not without: and there the arke
remayned vnto this day.
10 But there was nothing in the arke saue the two tables which Moyses put therin
at Horeb, when the Lord made a couenaunt with the children of Israel after they
were come out of Egypt.
11 And it fortuned, that when the priestes were come out of the holy place (for
all the priestes that were present, were sanctified, and did not then wayte by
course)
12 That both the Leuites and the singers, vnder Asaph, Heman, and Ieduthun, were
appoynted to sundry offices with their children and brethren, and were arayed in
fyne whyte, hauing cymbales, psalteries, and harpes, and stoode at the east ende
of the aulter, and by them an hundred and twentie priestes blowing with
trumpets:
13 And the trumpet blowers and the singers so agreed, that it seemed but one
voyce in praysing & thanking the Lorde: And when they lift vp their voyce with
the trumpets, cymbales, and other instrumentes of musicke, and when they praysed
the Lord, How that he is good, and that his mercie lasteth euer: the house of
God was filled with a cloude,
14 So that the priestes coulde not endure to minister by the reason of the
cloude: For the maiestie of the Lorde had filled the house of God.

Chapter 6

1 Then Solomon sayde: The Lord hath spoken, howe that he wil dwell in the darcke
cloude.
2 And I haue buylt thee an house of habitation for thee, and a place for thy
dwelling for euer.
3 And the king turned his face and blessed the whole congregation of Israel, &
all the congregation of Israel stoode.
4 And he sayde: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which hath with his handes
fulfilled it that he spake with his mouth to my father Dauid, saying:
5 Since the day that I brought my people out of the lande of Egypt, I chose no
citie among all the tribes of Israel to buylde an house in, that my name might
be there, neither chose I any man to be a ruler ouer my people Israel:
6 Sauing that I haue chosen Hierusalem, that my name might be there, and haue
chosen Dauid to be ouer my people Israel.
7 And when it was in the heart of Dauid my father to buylde an house for the
name of the Lorde God of Israel,
8 The Lorde sayde to Dauid my father: Forasmuch as it was in thyne heart to
buylde an house for my name, thou diddest well that thou thoughtest in thyne
heart.
9 Notwithstanding, thou shalt not buyld the house: but thy sonne which is
proceeded out of thy loynes, he shall buylde an house for my name.
10 The Lorde therefore hath made good his saying that he hath spoken: and I am
rysen vp in the roome of Dauid my father, and am set on the seate of Israel, as
the Lorde promised, and haue buylt an house for the name of the Lord God of
Israel.
11 And in it haue I put the arke wherein is the couenaunt of the Lorde that he
made with the children of Israel.
12 And the king stoode before the aulter of the Lorde in the presence of all the
congregation of Israel, and stretched out his handes:
13 (For now Solomon had made a brasen scaffold of fyue cubites long, and fyue
cubites brode, and three of heyght, and had set it in the middes of the great
courte, and vpon it he stoode and kneeled downe vpon his knees before al the
congregation of Israel, and stretched out his handes towarde heauen,)
14 And sayde: O Lorde God of Israel, there is no god like thee in heauen and
earth, which kepest couenaunt & shewest mercie vnto thy seruauntes that walke
before thee with al their heartes.
15 Thou whiche hast kept with thy seruaunt Dauid my father the thinges that thou
promisedst him, thou saydest it with thy mouth, & hast fulfilled it with thyne
handes, as it is to see this day.
16 And nowe Lorde God of Israel, kepe with thy seruaunt Dauid my father the
thinges that thou promisedst him, saying, Thou shalt in my sight not be without
a man that shall sit vpon the seate of Israel, so that thy children take heede
to their wayes to walke in my lawe, as thou hast walked before me.
17 And nowe Lord God of Israel, let thy saying be true whiche thou spakest vnto
thy seruaunt Dauid.
18 (And wil God in verie deede dwel with men on earth? Beholde, heauen and
heauen aboue all heauens do not contayne thee, howe much lesse the house which I
haue buylded?)
19 Let it be thy pleasure therfore to turne to the prayer of thy seruaunt and to
his supplication O Lorde my God, to hearken vnto the voyce and prayer whiche thy
seruaunt prayeth before thee,
20 And let thyne eyes be open towarde this house day & night, ouer this place
wherof thou hast sayde that thou wouldest put thy name there, to hearken vnto
the prayer whiche thy seruaunt prayeth in this place.
21 Hearken vnto the prayers of thy seruaunt and of thy people Israel, which they
pray in this place: heare thou I say, out of thy dwelling place, euen out of
heauen, heare, and be mercifull.
22 If a man sinne against his neyghbour, and take an oth agaynst hym and make
him to sweare, and they both come before thyne aulter in this house:
23 Then heare thou from heauen, and do and iudge thy seruauntes, that thou
rewarde the vngodly & recompence hym his way vpon his head, and iustifie the
righteous, and geue him according to his righteousnes.
24 And if thy people Israel be put to the worse before the enemie, because they
haue sinned against thee: Yet if they turne & geue thankes vnto thy name, and
make intercession, and pray before thee in this house:
25 Then heare thou from heauen, and be merciful vnto the sinne of thy people
Israel, and bryng them againe vnto the lande which thou gauest to them and to
their fathers.
26 When heauen is shut vp, and there be no rayne, because they haue sinned
against thee: yet if they pray in this place, and confesse thy name, and repent
from their sinne for the which thou chastenest them:
27 Then heare thou in heauen, and be merciful vnto the sinne of thy seruauntes &
of thy people Israel, and guyde thou them into the good way to walke in, and
send rayne vpon thy lande whiche thou hast geuen vnto thy people for an
inheritaunce.
28 And if ther be dearth in the land, or pestilence, corruption, or blasting of
corne, grashoppers, or caterpillers, or that their enemies besiege them in the
cities of their land, or whatsoeuer plage or sickenesse it be:
29 Then what supplications and prayers soeuer shalbe made of any man and of all
thy people Israel, which shall know euery man his owne sore, and his owne
griefe, & shall stretche out their handes towarde this house:
30 Thou shalt heare from heauen, euen from thy dwelling place, and shalt be
mercifull, and geue euery man according vnto all his wayes, euen as thou doest
know euery mans heart: (for thou only knowest the heartes of the children of
men,)
31 That they may feare thee, & walke in thy wayes as long as they liue, in ye
land which thou gauest vnto our fathers.
32 Moreouer, the straunger whiche is not of thy people Israel, if he come from a
farre lande for thy great names sake, and thy mightie hande, and thy stretched
outarme: If they come I say, and pray in this house:
33 Thou shalt heare from heauen, euen from thy dwelling place, and shalt do
according to all that the straunger calleth to thee for: That all people of the
earth may knowe thy name, and feare thee as doth thy people Israel, and that
they may knowe how that in this house whiche I haue buylt, thy name is called
vpon.
34 If thy people go out to warre against their enemies by the way that thou
shalt sende them, and they pray to thee in the way towarde this citie whiche
thou hast chosen, euen toward the house which I haue buylt for thy name:
35 Then heare thou from heauen their supplication and prayer, and helpe them in
their right.
36 If they sinne against thee (as there is no man but he doth sinne) and thou be
angry with them, and deliuer them ouer before their enemies, and they take them
and carie them away captiues vnto a lande farre or neare:
37 Yet if they repent in their heart in the lande where they be in captiuitie,
and turne, and pray vnto thee in the land of their captiuitie, saying, We haue
sinned, we haue done euyll and wickedly:
38 And turne againe to thee with all their heart and all their soule in the
lande of their captiuitie where they kepe them in bondage, and so pray towarde
their land whiche thou gauest vnto their fathers, euen toward the citie which
thou hast chosen, & toward the house whiche I haue buylt for my name:
39 Then heare thou from heauen, euen from thy dwelling place, their supplication
and their prayer, and iudge their cause, and be mercifull vnto thy people which
haue sinned against thee.
40 Now my God, let thine eyes be open, and thyne eares attent vnto the prayer
that is made in this place.
41 Nowe vp O Lorde God into thy resting place, thou and the arke of thy
strength: O Lorde God, let thy priestes be clothed with health, & let thy
sainctes reioyce in goodnesse.
42 O Lord God, turne not away the face of thyne annoynted: remember the mercies
whiche thou hast promised to Dauid thy seruaunt.

Chapter 7

1 And when Solomon had made an ende of praying, there came downe fire from
heauen, and consumed the burnt offring and the sacrifices: & the house was
filled with the glorie of the Lorde,
2 And the priestes coulde not go into the house of the Lorde, because the glorie
of the Lord had filled the lordes house.
3 And when al the children of Israel saw howe the fire and the glorie of the
Lord came downe vpon the house, they fell downe flat vpon their faces to the
earth vpon the pauement, and worshipped and confessed vnto the lord, That he is
gracious, and that his mercie lasteth euer.
4 And the king and all the people offered sacrifices before the Lorde.
5 And king Solomon offered a sacrifice of twentie and two thousande oxen, and an
hundred and twentie thousande sheepe: and so the king and all the people
dedicated the house of God.
6 And the priestes wayted on their offices, & the Leuites had the instrumentes
of musicke of the Lord, which king Dauid had made to confesse vnto the Lord,
that his mercie lasteth euer, Dauid praysing God by the: And the priestes blew
with trumpettes before them, and all they of Israel stoode.
7 Moreouer, Solomon halowed the middle of the court that was before the house of
the Lorde, for there he offred burnt offringes: & the fat of the peace
offringes, because the brasen aulter which Solomon had made, was not able to
receaue the burnt offringes, and the meate offringes, and the fat.
8 So at the same time Solomon kept a feast of seuen dayes, and al they of Israel
with him, an exceeding great congregation, euen from the entring in of Hamath
vnto the riuer of Egypt.
9 And in the eyght day they made an assemblie: For they kept the dedication of
the aulter seuen dayes, & the feast seuen dayes.
10 And the three and twentie day of the seuenth moneth he let the people depart
into their tentes glad and mery in heart, for the goodnesse that the Lorde had
shewed to Dauid and to Solomon, and to Israel his people.
11 And so Solomon finished the house of the Lorde, and the kinges house: and all
that came in his heart to make in the house of the Lorde, & in his owne house,
went prosperously forwarde.
12 And the Lorde appeared to Solomon by night, and sayd to him: I haue heard thy
petition, and haue chosen this place for my selfe to be an house of sacrifice.
13 If I shut vp heauen that there be no rayne, or if I commaund the locustes to
deuour the lande, or if I sende pestilence among my people:
14 And if they that are of my people, among whom my name is called vpon, do
humble them selues, and make intercession, and seke my presence, and turne from
their wicked wayes: then will I heare from heauen, and be mercifull to their
sinne, and will heale their lande.
15 And from hencefoorth myne eyes shalbe open, and myne eares attent vnto the
prayer that is made in this place.
16 And therfore nowe I haue chosen and sanctified this house, that my name may
be there for euer: and myne eyes and myne heart shalbe there perpetually.
17 And if thou wilt walke before me, as Dauid thy father walked, to do all that
I haue commaunded thee, and shalt obserue my statutes and my lawes:
18 Then will I stablishe the seate of thy kingdome, according as I made the
couenaunt with Dauid thy father, saying: Thou shalt not be without a man to be
ruler in Israel.
19 But and if ye turne away, and forsake my statutes & my commaundementes which
I haue set before you, and shall go and serue other gods, and worship them:
20 Then will I plucke them vp by the rootes, out of my lande whiche I haue geuen
them, and this house whiche I haue sanctified for my name, will I cast out of my
sight, and will make it to be a prouerbe and a iest among all nations.
21 And this house whiche is most high, shalbe an astonishement to euery one that
passeth by, and shal say: Why hath the Lorde dealt on this fashion with this
lande, and with this house?
22 And they shal aunswere: Because they forsoke the Lorde God of their fathers
which brought them out of the lande of Egypt, and caught holde on other gods,
and worshipped them, and serued them: euen therefore hath he brought all this
euyll vpon them.

Chapter 8

1 And it fortuned, that after twentie yeres, when Solomon had buylt the house of
the Lorde and his owne house:
2 He buylt the cities that Hiram gaue hym, and put of the children of Israel in
them.
3 And Solomon went to Hamath Zoba, and strengthed it.
4 And he buylt Thadmor in the wildernesse, & repaired all the store cities which
were in Hamath.
5 And he buylt Bethhoron the vpper, and Bethhoron the neather, strong cities,
hauing walles, gates, and barres:
6 And Baalah, and al the store cities that Solomon had, and all the charet
cities, and the cities of the horsmen, and euery pleasaunt place that Solomon
had last to buyld in Hierusalem & Libanon, and throughout all the land of his
dominion.
7 And all the people that were left of the Hethites, Amorites, Pherezites,
Heuites and Iebusites, whiche were not of the children of Israel,
8 But were the children of them whiche were left after them in the lande, and
were not consumed of the children of Israel, them dyd Solomon make to pay
tribute, vntill this day.
9 But of the children of Israel dyd Solomon make no bondemen for his worke: but
they were men of warre, and rulers, and great lordes with him, and captaynes
ouer his charets and horsemen.
10 And king Solomons officers that ouersawe and ruled the people, were two
hundred and fiftie.
11 And Solomon brought the daughter of Pharao out of the citie of Dauid, into
the house that he had buylded for her: For he sayde, My wyfe shall not dwel in
the house of Dauid king of Israel, for it is holy, because that the arke of the
Lorde is come vnto it.
12 Then Solomon offred burnt offringes vnto the Lorde on the aulter of the
Lorde, whiche he had buylt before the porche:
13 Doyng euery thing in his due time, and offering according to the commaundemet
of Moyses, in the Sabbathes, new moones, and solempne feastes, three times in
the yere, that is to say in the feast of sweete bread, in the feast of weekes,
and in the feast of tabernacles.
14 And Solomon set the sortes of priestes to their offices as Dauid his father
had ordered them, and the Leuites in their watches, for to prayse and minister
before the priestes day by day, and the porters by course at euery gate: for so
had Dauid the man of God commaunded.
15 And they omitted not the commaundement of the king vnto the priestes and
Leuites, concerning any maner of thing, and concerning the treasures.
16 For Solomon made prouision for the charges, from the first day that the
foundation of the house of the Lorde was layed, till it was finished, that the
house of the Lorde was perfect.
17 Then went king Solomon to Ezion Gaber, and to Eloth at the sea side in the
lande of Edom.
18 And Hiram sent hym by the handes of his seruauntes, shippes, and seruauntes
that had knowledge of the sea: and they went with the seruauntes of Solomon to
Ophir, and caryed thence foure hundred and fyftie talentes of golde, and brought
it to king Solomon.

Chapter 9

1 And when the queene of Saba hearde of the fame of Solomon, she came to proue
him in hard questions at Hierusalem, with a verie great companie, with camels
that bare spices, and plentie of golde, and precious stones: And when she was
come to Solomon, she communed with him of all that she had in her heart.
2 And Solomon soyled her all her questions: and there was not one word hyd from
Solomon, which he tolde her not.
3 And when the queene of Saba had seene the wisdome of Solomon, and the house
that he had buylt,
4 And the meate of his table, the sitting of his seruauntes, and the standing of
his wayters, their apparell, his butlars, their apparell, his goyng vp by the
whiche he went into the house of Lord: there was no more spirite in her.
5 And she sayde to the king: The saying which I hearde in myne owne lande of
thyne actes and of thy wisdome, is true.
6 I beleued not the wordes of them, vntill I came and myne eyes had seene it:
And beholde, the one halfe of thy wysdome was not tolde me: for thou exceedest
the same that I hearde.
7 Happy are thy men, and happy are these thy seruauntes which stand before thee
alway, and heare thy wysdome.
8 Blessed be the Lorde thy God, whiche had lust to thee, to set thee king on his
seate, that thou mightest be king for the Lord thy God: because thy God loueth
Israel and hath delyte to make them continue euer, therefore made he thee king
ouer them, to do right and equitie.
9 And she gaue the king an hundred and twentie talentes of golde, and of spices
exceeding great aboundaunce, and precious stones: neither was ther any more such
spyce as the queene of Saba gaue king Solomon.
10 And the seruauntes of Hiram and the seruauntes of Solomon which brought gold
from Ophir, brought also Algume wood and precious stones.
11 And the king made of the Algume wood stayres in the house of the Lorde and in
the kinges palace, & harpes, and psalteries for singers: And there was none such
wood seene before in the land of Iuda.
12 And king Solomon gaue to the queene of Saba euery pleasant thing that she
asked, besides that which she had brought vnto the king: And so she turned and
went away to her owne lande with her seruauntes.
13 The waight of golde that came to Solomon in one yere, was sixe hundred
threescore and sixe talentes of golde:
14 Besides that which chapmen & marchauntes brought: and all the kinges of
Arabia and rulers of that countrey brought golde and siluer to Solomon.
15 And king Solomon made two hundred tarkets of beaten golde: and sixe hundred
sicles of beaten golde were spet vpon one target.
16 And three hundred shieldes made he of beaten golde, & one shielde cost three
hundred peeces of golde: and the king put them in the house that was in the
forest of Libanon.
17 And the king made a great seate of yuory, & ouerlayde it with pure golde.
18 And there were sixe steps to the seate, with a footestoole of golde fastened
to the seate: and pommels on eche syde of the sitting place, and two lions
standing by the pommels.
19 And twelue lions stoode on the one side and on the other vpon the sixe
steppes: so that there was no such worke made in any kingdome.
20 And all the drinking vessels of king Solomon were of golde, and al the
vessels of the house that was in the forest of Libanon were of precious golde:
for siluer was counted nothing worth in the dayes of Solomon.
21 For the kinges shippes went to Tharsis with the seruauntes of Hiram, euery
three yeres once came the shippes to Tharsis, and brought golde, siluer, yuorie,
and apes, and pecockes.
22 And king Solomon passed all the kinges of the earth, in richesse & wysedome.
23 And all the kinges of the earth sought the presence of Solomon, to heare his
wysedome that God had put in his heart.
24 And they brought euery man his present, vessels of siuer, & vessels of golde,
rayment, harnesse, spises, horses, and mules, and whatsoeuer might be gotten
yere by yere.
25 And Solomon had foure thousand stalles for horses, and charrettes, and twelue
thousand horsemen: whom he bestowed in the charet cities, and some were with the
king at Hierusalem.
26 And he raigned ouer all the kinges that were from Euphrates, vnto the lande
of the Philistines, and to the border of Egypt.
27 And the king made siluer in Hierusalem as plenteous as stones, and Cedar
trees as plenteous as ye Mulberie trees that growe in the valleys:
28 And they brought vnto Solomon horses, out of Egypt, and out of all landes.
29 The rest of the actes of king Solomon first and last, are they not written in
the sayings of Nathan the prophete, and in the prophecie of Ahiah the Silonite,
and in the visions of Iddo the sear of visions against Ieroboam the sonne of
Nabat?
30 And Solomon raigned in Hierusalem vpon all Israel fouretie yeres.
31 And Solomon slept with his fathers: and they buried him in the citie of Dauid
his father, & Rehoboam his sonne raigned in his steade.

Chapter 10

1 And Rehoboam went to Sichem: for to Sichem were all Israel come together to
make him king.
2 And when Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat (which was fled into Egypt from the
presence of Solomon the king) heard it, he returned out of Egypt.
3 And they sent and called him: And so Ieroboam and all they of Israel, came and
communed with Rehoboam, saying:
4 Thy father layde a greeuous yoke vpon vs: nowe therefore remit thou somewhat
of the greeuous seruice of thy fafather, & of his heauy yoke that he put vpon
vs, and we wyll serue thee.
5 And he saide to them: Come againe vnto me after three dayes. And the people
departed.
6 And king Rehoboam counsailed with the elders that had stande before Solomon
his father while he yet lyued, and he saide: what counsaile geue ye me, to
aunswere this people againe?
7 And they tolde him, saying: If thou be kinde to this people, and shewe thy
selfe lowlie to them, and speake louyng wordes to them, they wyll be thy
seruauntes for euer.
8 But he left the counsaile which the elders gaue him, and toke counsaile with
the young men that were growen vp with him, and that stoode in his presence.
9 And he saide vnto them: What aduise geue ye, that we may aunswere this people,
which haue communed with me, saying, Abate somewhat of the yoke which thy father
did put vpon vs?
10 And the young men that were growen vp with him, spake vnto him, saying, Thus
shalt thou aunswere the people that speake to thee, saying: Thy father made our
yoke heauy, but make thou it somewhat lighter for vs: Thus shalt thou say vnto
the, My litle finger, shalbe heauier then my fathers loynes.
11 For where my father put a heauy yoke vpon you, I will put more to your yoke:
My father chastised you with whyppes, but I wyll chastise you with scourges.
12 And so Ieroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam the third day, as the
king bade, saying, Come againe to me the third day.
13 And the king aunswered them cruelly: and king Rehoboam left the counsaile of
the aged men,
14 And aunswered them after the aduise of the young men, saying: My father made
your yoke greeuous, and I wyll adde thereto: my father chastised you with
whyppes, but I wyll chastise you with scourges.
15 And so the king hearkened not vnto the people: but the occasion came of God,
that the Lorde might make good his saying which he spake by the hand of Ahia the
Silonite to Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat.
16 And when all they of Israel saw that the king woulde not agree vnto them, the
people aunswered the king, saying: What portion haue we in Dauid? For we haue no
inheritaunce in the sonne of Isai: Euery man to his tent oh Israel, and nowe
Dauid, see to thyne owne house. And so all Israel gat them to their tentes:
17 So that Rehoboam raigned ouer no mo of the children of Israel then dwelt in
the cities of Iuda.
18 Then king Rehoboam also sent Haduram that was ruler ouer the tribute, and the
children of Israel stoned him with stones, that he dyed: But king Rehoboam made
speede to get him vp to his charet, to flee to Hierusalem.
19 And they of Israel rebelled against the house of Dauid vnto this day.

Chapter 11

1 And when Rehoboam was come to Hierusalem, he gathered of the house of Iuda and
Beniamin, nine score thousand chosen men of warre, to fight against Israel, & to
bring the kingdome againe to Rehoboam.
2 And the worde of the Lorde came to Semiahu the man of God, saying:
3 Speake vnto Rehoboam the sonne of Solomon king of Iuda, & to all them of
Israel that are in Iuda and Beniamin, and say:
4 Thus saith the Lord, Ye shall not go vp nor fight against your brethren:
returne euery man to his house, for this thing is done of me. And they obeyed
the wordes of the Lorde, and returned from going against Ieroboam.
5 And Rehoboam dwelt in Hierusalem, and built strong cities in Iuda.
6 He built vp Bethlehem, & Etam, and Thekoa,
7 Bethzur, Socho, and Adullam,
8 Gath, and Maresa, and Ziph,
9 Adurahim, Lachis, and Azecah,
10 Zoraa, Aialon, and Hebron, which is in Iuda and Beniamin, strong cities.
11 And he repaired the strong holdes, and put captaynes in them, and store of
vittaile, and wine, and oyle:
12 And in all cities he put shieldes and speares, & made them exceeding strong,
hauing Iuda and Beniamin on his syde.
13 And the priestes and the Leuites that were in all Israel, resorted to him out
of all their coastes.
14 For the Leuites left their suburbes, and their possession, and came to Iuda
and Hierusalem: For Ieroboam and his sonnes had cast them out from ministring
vnto the Lorde.
15 And he ordayned him priestes for the high places, for the deuils, and for the
calues which he had made.
16 And after the Leuites, there went out all the tribes of Israel, such as
submitted their heartes to seeke the Lord God of Israel, and came to Hierusalem
to offer vnto the Lorde God of their fathers.
17 And so they strengthed the kingdome of Iuda, & made Rehoboam the sonne of
Solomon mightie three yeres long: for three yeres they walked in the way of
Dauid and Solomon.
18 And Rehoboam toke him Mahalath the daughter of Ierimoth the sonne of Dauid to
wyfe, and Abihail the daughter of Eliab the sonne of Isai.
19 Which bare him children, Ieus, Samaria, and Zaham.
20 And after her he toke Maacha the daughter of Absolon, which bare him Abia,
Atthai, Ziza, and Selomith.
21 And Rehoboam loued Maacha the daughter of Absolo aboue al his wyues and
concubines: for he toke eyghteene wyues and threescore concubines, and begat
twentie and eyght sonnes & threescore daughters.
22 And Rehoboam made Abia the sonne of Maacha, the chiefe ruler among his
brethren: for he thought to make him king.
23 And he played wyselie, and scattered all his children throughout al the
countryes of Iuda and Beniamin vnto euery strong citie, and he gaue them
aboundaunce of vittaile, and obtayned many wyues.

Chapter 12

1 And it came to passe, that when Rehoboam had stablished the kingdome & became
mightie, he forsooke the law of the Lorde, and all Israel with him.
2 And it fortuned, that in the fifth yere of king Rehoboam, Sesac the king of
Egypt came vp against Hierusalem, because they had transgressed against the
Lorde,
3 With twelue hundred charettes, and threescore thousand horsemen: And the
people wer without number that came with him out of Egypt, Lubim, Suckim, and
the blacke Moores.
4 And he toke the strong cities in Iuda, and came to Hierusalem.
5 Then came Semeia the prophete to Rehoboam and to the Lordes of Iuda that were
gathered together within Hierusalem for Sesac, and saide vnto them: Thus saith
the Lorde, Ye haue left me, and therefore haue I also left you in the handes of
Sesac.
6 Whereupon the lordes of Israel and the king humbled themselues, and said: The
Lorde is righteous.
7 And when the Lorde saw that they submitted them selues, the worde of the Lorde
came to Semeia, saying: They submit them selues, therefore I wyl not destroye
them, but I wyll deliuer them somewhat, and my wrath shall not be powred out
vpon Hierusalem by the hand of Sesac.
8 Neuerthelesse, they shalbe his seruauntes: to knowe what difference is
betweene my seruice and the seruice of the kingdomes of the worlde.
9 And so Sesac king of Egypt came to Hierusalem, & toke away the treasures of
the house of the Lorde, and the treasures of the kinges house, he toke euen all:
and he carryed away the shieldes of golde which Solomon made.
10 In steade of which, king Rehoboam made shieldes of brasse, and committed them
to the handes of the chiefe of the garde, & that kept the entraunce of the
kinges house.
11 And it came to passe, that when the king entred into the house of the Lorde,
the garde came and fet them, & brought them againe vnto the gard chamber.
12 And when he humbled himselfe, the wrath of the Lorde turned from him, that he
woulde not destroy altogether: and in Iuda all was well.
13 And so king Rehoboam waxed mightie, & raigned in Hierusalem: And Rehoboam was
one and fourtie yeres olde when he began to raigne, and he raigned seuenteene
yeres in Hierusalem, the citie which the Lorde had chosen out of all the tribes
of Israel to put his name there: And his mothers name was Naama, an Ammonitesse.
14 And he did euill, because he prepared not his heart to seeke the Lorde.
15 The actes also of Rehoboam first and last, are they not written in the
sayinges of Semeia the prophete, & of Iddo the sear, which noted the genealogie?
And there was warre alway betweene Rehoboam and Ieroboam.
16 And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried in the citie of Dauid,
and Abia his sonne raigned in his steade.

Chapter 13

1 The eyghteenth yere of king Ieroboam began Abia to raigne ouer Iuda.
2 And he raigned three yeres in Hierusalem: (His mothers name also was
Michaiahu, the daughter of Uriel of Gibea:) And ther was warre betweene Abia and
Ieroboam.
3 And Abia set the battaile in aray with the armie of valiaunt men of warre, eue
foure hundred thousand chosen men: And Ieroboam set him selfe in aray to fight
agaynst hym with eyght hundred thousand pickt men, which were strong, and men of
armes.
4 And Abia stoode vp vpon Zemaraim, an hill which is in mount Ephraim, and
saide: Heare me thou Ieroboam and al Israel.
5 Do not you knowe how that the Lord God of Israel gaue the kingdome ouer them
of Israel to Dauid for euer, euen to him and to his sonnes, with a salted
couenaunt?
6 And Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat the seruaunt of Solomon the sonne of Dauid is
risen vp, and hath rebelled against his lorde.
7 And there gathered to him lewde men, the children of Belial, and preuailed
against Rehoboam the sonne of Solomon, when Rehoboam was young and tender
hearted, and could not stand before them.
8 And now ye say, that ye be able to preuaile against the kingdome of the Lord,
which is in the hande of the sonnes of Dauid, and ye be a great multitude, and
haue the golden calues which Ieroboam made you for gods.
9 And haue ye not cast out the priestes of the Lorde the sonnes of Aaron and the
Leuites, and haue made you priestes after the maner of the nations of other
landes? so that whosoeuer commeth & consecrateth his hande with a young oxe and
seuen rammes, the same may be a priest of them that are no gods.
10 But we belong vnto the Lorde our God whom we haue not forsaken, and the
priestes are the sonnes of Aaron which minister vnto the Lorde, and the Leuites
wayte vpon their office.
11 They burne vnto the Lorde euery morning and euening burnt sacrifices, and
sweete incense: the shewe bread set they in order vpon a pure table, and prepare
the candelsticke of golde with the lampes of the same to burne euer at eue: And
truly we kept the watch of the lord our God, but ye haue forsaken him.
12 And beholde, God him selfe is our captayne, and his priestes blowe with the
trumpettes and crie alarum against you. O ye children of Israel, fight not
against the Lorde God of your fathers: for it wyll not prosper with you.
13 But for all that, Ieroboam conuayed men priuyly about, to come behinde the:
and so they were before Iuda, and the layers in wayte were behinde them.
14 And when they of Iuda loked about, beholde the battaile was before and
behinde, and they cryed vnto the Lorde, and the priestes blewe with the
trumpettes,
15 And the men of Iuda gaue a showte: And as the men of Iuda showted, it came to
passe that God smote Ieroboam and all Israel before Abia and Iuda.
16 And the children of Israel fled before Iuda, and God delyuered them into
their hande.
17 And Abia and his people slue a great slaughter of them: There fell downe
wounded of Israel fiue hundred thousand chosen men.
18 And so the children of Israel were brought vnder at that time, & the children
of Iuda preuayled, because they leaned vnto the Lorde God of their fathers.
19 And Abia folowed after Ieroboam, and toke cities from him, Bethel with the
townes belonging thereto, Iesana with the townes that belonged thereto, and
Ephron with her townes.
20 And Ieroboam recouered no strength againe in the dayes of Abia: And the Lorde
plagued him, and he dyed.
21 But Abia waxed mightie, and maryed foureteene wiues, and begat twentie and
two sonnes, and sixteene daughters.
22 The rest of the actes of Abia, his maners and his sayinges, are written in
the story of the prophete Iddo.

Chapter 14

1 So Abia slept with his fathers, and they buryed him in the citie of Dauid, and
Asa his sonne raigned in his steade, in whose dayes the lande was in quietnesse
ten yeres.
2 And Asa did that was good & right in the eyes of the Lorde his God.
3 For he toke away straunge aulters and the high places, and brake downe the
images, and cut downe the groues:
4 And commaunded Iuda to seeke the Lorde God of their fathers, and to do
according to the lawe and commaundement.
5 And he put away out of all the cities of Iuda the high places & the images: &
the kingdome was quiet before him.
6 And he built strong cities in Iuda, because the lande was in rest, and he had
no warre in those yeres: for the Lorde had geuen him rest.
7 Therefore he saide vnto Iuda: let vs builde these cities, & make about them
walles, towres, gates, and barres, for the lande is yet in rest before vs:
because we haue sought the Lorde our God, we haue sought him, and he hath geuen
vs rest on euery side. And so they built, and it prospered with them.
8 And Asa had an armie of men that bare shieldes and speares out of Iuda three
hundred thousand, & out of Beniamin that bare shieldes & drewe bowes two hundred
and fourescore thousand: all these were valiaunt men.
9 And there came out against them Zarah the blacke Morian with an hoast of ten
hundred thousand, & three hundred charettes, & came as farre as Maresa.
10 And Asa went out before him, and they ioyned the battaile in the valley of
Zephata, beside Maresa.
11 And Asa cryed vnto the Lorde his God, and saide: Lorde, it is no harde thing
with thee to helpe with many or them that haue no power: Helpe vs therfore O
Lorde our God, for we trust to thee, and in thy name we go against this
multitude: Thou art the Lord our God, and no man shall preuaile against thee.
12 So the Lord smote the blacke Moores before Asa and Iuda, and the blacke
Moores fled.
13 And Asa & the people that was with him, folowed after them vnto Gerar: And
the blacke Moores hoast was ouerthrowen, that there was none of them left, but
were destroyed before the Lord and before his hoast: And they caryed away a
mightie great pray.
14 And they smote all the cities rounde about Gerar, for the feare of the Lorde
came vpon them: And they spoyled all the cities, & there was exceeding much
spoyle in them.
15 They smote also the tentes of cattaile, and caryed away plentie of sheepe and
camels, and returned to Hierusalem,

Chapter 15

1 And the spirite of God came on Azaria the sonne of Obed,
2 And he went out to meete Asa, and said vnto him: Heare me Asa, and al Iuda and
Beniamin, the Lorde is with you, while ye be with him: and when ye seeke him, he
wyll be founde of you: and againe when ye forsake him, he also wyll forsake you.
3 Nowe for a long season Israel hath ben without the true God, and without
priestes to teache, and without law.
4 And when any man in his trouble did turne vnto the Lorde God of Israel and
sought him, he was found of them.
5 And in that time there was no peace to him that did go out and in, but great
sedition was there among all the inhabiters of the earth.
6 And nation was destroyed of nation, and citie of citie: for God did moue all
aduersitie among them.
7 Play ye therefore the men, and let not your handes slacke: for your worke shal
be rewarded.
8 And when Asa heard those wordes, and the prophecie of Azaria the sonne of Obed
the prophete, he toke courage, and put away the abhominable idols out of all the
lande of Iuda and Beniamin, and out of the cities which he wan in mount Ephraim,
and renued the aulter of the Lorde that was before the porche of the Lorde.
9 And he gathered al Iuda and Beniamin, and the straungers with them, out of
Ephraim, Manasse, & Simeon: For there fell many to him out of Israel, when they
sawe that the Lord his God was with him.
10 So they assembled together at Hierusale the third moneth, the fifteenth yere
of the raigne of Asa.
11 And they offered vnto the Lorde the same time of the spoyle which they had
brought, seuen hundred oxen, and seuen thousand sheepe.
12 And they made a couenaunt to seeke the Lorde God of their fathers, with all
their heart, and all their soule.
13 And whosoeuer woulde not seeke the Lorde God of Israel, shoulde dye for it,
whether he were small or great, man or woman.
14 And they sware vnto the Lorde with a loude voyce, showting and blowing with
trumpettes and shawmes.
15 And all they in Iuda reioyced at the oth: for they had sworne vnto the Lord
with all their heart, & sought him with all their lust, and he was found of
them: And the Lorde gaue them rest rounde about on euery syde.
16 And king Asa put Maacha his mother out of aucthoritie, because she had made
an abhominable idol in a groue: And Asa broke downe her idol, & stamped it, &
burnt it at the brooke Cedron.
17 But al the high places were not taken away out of Israel, though the heart of
Asa was perfect all his dayes.
18 And he brought into the house of God the thinges that his father had
dedicate, and that he him selfe had dedicate: euen siluer, and golde, and
iewels.
19 And there was no more warre vnto the thirtie and fiue yere of the raigne of
Asa.

Chapter 16

1 In the thirtie and sixth yere of the raigne of Asa, came Baasa king of Israel
against Iuda, & built Rama, to the intent that he would let none passe out or in
to Asa king of Iuda.
2 And Asa set out golde and siluer out of the treasures of the house of the
Lord, & out of the kings house, and sent to Benhadad king of Syria that dwelt at
Darmesec, and saide:
3 There is a confederation betweene me and thee, betweene my father and thyne:
beholde I haue sent thee siluer and golde, that thou wilt come & breake thyne
appoyntment with Baasa king of Israel, that he may departe from me.
4 And Benhadad graunted vnto king Asa, and sent the captaynes of his armies to
the cities of Israel: and they smote Iion, Dan, and Abelmaim, & all the strong
cities of Nephthali.
5 And when Baasa heard this, he left building of Rama, and let his worke ceasse.
6 And then Asa the king toke all Iuda, and caryed away the stones and timber of
Rama wherewith Baasa was a building, and he built therewith Geba and Mispah.
7 At that time Hanani the sear came to Asa king of Iuda, and saide vnto him:
Because thou hast trusted in the king of Syria, and not rather put thy trust in
the Lord thy God, therfore is the hoast of the king of Syria escaped out of
thine hande.
8 Had not the blacke Moores and Lubim an exceeding great hoast, with many
charettes and horsemen? And yet because thou trustedst in the Lorde, he
deliuered them into thyne hande.
9 For the eyes of the Lorde beholde all the earth, to strength them that are of
perfect heart toward him: Herein thou hast done foolishly, and therefore from
hencefoorth thou shalt haue warre.
10 And so Asa was wroth with the sear, and put him into a prison house, for he
was displeased with him because of this thing: And Asa destroyed certaine of the
people the same season.
11 And beholde, these deedes of Asa first and last, are written in the booke of
the kinges of Iuda and Israel.
12 And Asa in the thirtie and ninth yere of his raigne fell sicke in his feete,
and that his disease continued very long: And in his sickenesse he sought not
the lord, but phisitions.
13 And Asa slept with his fathers, and dyed in the fourtie and one yere of his
raigne.
14 And they buried him in his owne sepulchre which he had made for himselfe in
the citie of Dauid, and layde him in the bed which he had filled with diuers
kindes of spices, & sweete odours made by the craft of the appothecaries: and
burnt very much spice about him.

Chapter 17

1 And Iehosaphat his sonne raigned in his steade, and preuailed against Israel.
2 And he put souldiers in all the strong cities of Iuda, and set rulers in the
lande of Iuda, and in the cities of Ephraim which Asa his father had wonne.
3 And the Lorde was with Iehosaphat, because he walked in the olde wayes of his
father Dauid, and sought not Baalim,
4 But sought the Lorde God of his father, and walked in his commaundementes, and
not after the doinges of Israel.
5 And the Lorde stablished the kingdome in his hande, & all they that were in
Iuda brought him presentes, so that he had aboundaunce of richesse and honour.
6 And he lyft vp his heart vnto the wayes of the Lorde, and he put downe yet
more of the high places and groues out of Iuda.
7 In the third yere of his raigne he sent to his lordes, euen to Benhail,
Obadia, Zacharia, Nethanel, and to Michaiahu, that they shoulde teache in the
cities of Iuda:
8 And with them he sent Leuites, euen Semeiahu, Nethaniahu, Zebadiahu, Asael,
Semiramoth, Iehonathan, Adoniahu, Tobiahu, & Tob adoniahu, & with them Elisama,
and Iehoram, priestes.
9 And they taught in Iuda, and had the booke of the lawe of God with them, and
went about throughout all the cities of Iuda, and taught the people.
10 And the feare of the Lorde fell vpon all the kingdomes of the landes that
were rounde about Iuda, and they fought not against Iehosaphat.
11 And some of the Philistines brought Iehosaphat giftes, and tribute siluer,
and therto the Arabians brought him cattaile, euen seuen thousand and seuen
hundred rammes, and seuen thousand and seuen hundred hee goates.
12 And so Iehosaphat prospered, and grew vp an hie: And he built in Iuda castels
and cities of store.
13 And he had great substaunce in the cities of Iuda: but the men of armes and
strongest souldiers were in Hierusalem.
14 And these are the offices of them in the house of their fathers: the
captaines ouer thousandes in Iuda, Adna the captayne, and with him of fighting
men three hundred thousand.
15 And next to his hand was Iehohanan a captayne, and with him two hundred and
fourescore thousand.
16 And next him was Amazia the sonne of Zichri, which of his owne good wyll
offered him selfe vnto the Lorde, and with him two hundred thousand mightie men
of warre.
17 And of the children of Beniamin, Eliada a man of might, and with him armed
men with bowe and shielde two hundred thousand.
18 And next him was Iehosabad, and with him an hundred and fourescore thousand,
that were prepared for the warre.
19 These wayted on the king, besides those which the king put in the strong
cities throughout all Iuda.

Chapter 18

1 And Iehosaphat had aboudaunce of richesse and honour, and ioyned affinitie
with Ahab.
2 And after certayne yeres he went downe to Ahab to Samaria: And Ahab slue many
sheepe and oxen for him and for the people that he had with him, and entreated
him to go vp with him vnto Ramoth in Gilead.
3 And Ahab king of Israel saide vnto Iehosaphat king of Iuda: wylt thou go with
me to Ramoth in Gilead? And he aunswered him: I wyll be as thou, and my people
shall be as thyne and we wyll go with thee to the warre.
4 And Iehosaphat saide vnto the king of Israel: Seke counsel I pray thee at the
worde of the Lorde this same day.
5 Therfore the king of Israel gathered together of prophetes foure hundred men,
& saide vnto them: Shall we go to Ramoth in Gilead to fight, or should I ceasse?
And they saide: Go vp, & God shall deliuer it into the kinges hand.
6 But Iehosaphat saide: Is there yet here neuer a prophete more of the Lordes,
that we myght aske of him?
7 And the king of Israel said vnto Iehosaphat: There is yet one man by who we
may aske the Lorde: but I hate him, for he neuer prophecieth me good, but alway
euill, and the same is Michea the sonne of Iemla. And Iehosaphat sayde, Let not
the king say so.
8 And the king of Israel called one of his chamberlaynes, and sayde: Fetch
hyther quickly Michea the sonne of Iemla.
9 And the king of Israel and Iehosaphat king of Iuda, sate eyther of them on his
seate in their apparell, in a thresshing floore beside the gate of Samaria, & al
the prophetes prophecied before the.
10 And one Zedekia the sonne of Chanaana had made him hornes of iron, and sayde,
thus sayth the Lorde: With these thou shalt pushe Syria, vntill they be brought
to naught.
11 And all the prophetes prophecied euen so, saying, Go vp to Ramoth in Gilead,
& it shall prosper with thee: for the Lord shall deliuer it into the hand of the
king.
12 And the messenger that went to call Michea, spake to him, saying: Behold, the
wordes of the prophetes speake good to the king with one assent: let thy wordes
therefore I pray thee be like one of theirs, that thou speake that whiche is
pleasaunt.
13 And Michea sayde: As the Lorde liueth, euen what my God sayth, that wil I
speake.
14 And when he was come to the king, the king sayd vnto him: Michea, should we
go to Ramoth in Gilead to fight, or leaue of? And he sayd: Go vp, & al shalbe
well, and they shalbe deliuered into your hande.
15 And the king sayde to him: So and so many times do I charge thee that thou
say nothing but the trueth to me in the name of the Lorde.
16 Then he sayd: I did see all them of Israel scattered in the mountaynes, as
sheepe that haue no sheephard: And the Lorde sayde, These haue no maister, let
them returne euery man therfore to his house in peace.
17 And the king of Israel said vnto Iehosaphat: Did I not tel thee, that he
would not prophecie good vnto me, but euyll?
18 But he said againe, Therfore heare ye the word of the Lord: I saw the Lord
sit vpon his seate, and all the companie of heauen stoode on his right hande and
on his left.
19 And the Lord sayd: Who shall deceaue Ahab king of Israel, that he may go vp
and be ouerthrowne at Ramoth in Gilead? And one sayde this, another that.
20 And there came out a spirite, & stoode before the Lorde, and sayde: I will
deceaue him. And the Lorde sayde vnto him, Wherin?
21 And he sayde: I wil go out and be a lying spirite in the mouth of all his
prophetes. And the Lord sayd, Thou shalt deceaue him, and shalt preuayle: go
out, and do euen so.
22 And nowe therfore behold the Lorde hath put a lying spirite in the mouthes of
all these thy prophetes, and the Lord hath spoken euyll against thee.
23 And Zedekia the sonne of Chanaana went to, and smote Michea vpon the cheeke,
& sayde: By what way went the spirite of the Lorde from me, to speake with thee?
24 And Michea sayd: Beholde, thou shalt see the day whe thou shalt go fro
chamber to chamber, for to hyde thy selfe.
25 And the king of Israel sayd: Take ye Michea, and bring him to Amon the
gouerner of the citie, & to Ioas the kinges sonne.
26 And ye shall say, thus sayth the king: Put this felowe in the prison house,
and feede him with bread of affliction and water of trouble, vntil I come againe
in peace.
27 And Michea said: If thou come againe in peace, then hath not the Lord spoken
by me. And he sayde: Hearken to ye people euery one of you.
28 And so the king of Israel and Iehosaphat the king of Iuda, went vp to Ramoth
in Gilead.
29 And the king of Israel sayde vnto Iehosaphat, I must chaunge me when I go to
the battell: but see that thou haue thyne owne apparel vpon thee. And the king
of Israel chaunged him selfe, and they came to the battel.
30 But the king of Syria had commaunded the captaynes of the charets that were
with him, saying: See that ye fight not against small or great, saue against the
king of Israel only.
31 And when the captaynes of the charets saw Iehosaphat, they sayd, It is ye
king of Israel: And therfore they compassed about hym to fight. But Iehosaphat
cried out, and the Lord helped him, and God chased them away from him.
32 For it came to passe, that when the captaynes of the charets perceaued that
it was not the king of Israel, they turned backe againe from him.
33 And a certayne man drewe a bow with all his might, and smote the king of
Israel beweene the ioyntes of his habergin, and he sayde to his charetman: Turne
thyne hand, that thou mayst carie me out of the hoast, for I am wounded.
34 And the battel increased that day: Howbeit the king of Israel caused his
charet to stand still against the Syrians vntill euen: And about the time of the
sunne goyng downe, he died.

Chapter 19

1 And Iehosaphat the king of Iuda came home againe in peace to Hierusalem.
2 And Iehu the sonne of Hanani the sear went out to meete him, and sayd to king
Iehosaphat: Wouldest thou helpe the vngodly, and loue them that hate the Lorde?
Therfore is wrath come downe vpon thee from before the Lorde:
3 Neuerthelesse, there are some good actes founde in thee, in that thou hast
hewen downe the groues out of the lande, and hast prepared thyne heart to seke
God.
4 And Iehosaphat dwelt at Hierusalem, and turned and went out to the people from
Beerseba to mount Ephraim, and brought them againe vnto the Lorde God of their
fathers.
5 And he set iudges in the lande throughout all the strong cities of Iuda, citie
by citie:
6 And sayde to the iudges, Take heede what ye do: for ye execute not the
iudgementes of man, but of God, whiche is with you in the iudgement.
7 Wherfore now let the feare of the Lord be vpon you, and take heede, & be doyng
the thing that pleaseth hym for there is no vnrighteousnes with the Lorde our
God, that he shoulde haue any respect of persons, or take rewardes.
8 Moreouer, in Hierusalem did Iehosaphat set of the Leuites, & of the priestes,
and of the auncient fathers, ouer Israel in the iudgement and cause of the Lord:
And they returned againe to Hierusale.
9 And he charged them, saying, Thus shal ye do in the feare of the Lord
faythfully, and with a pure heart:
10 What cause soeuer come to you of your brethren that dwell in their cities,
betweene blood and blood, betweene lawe and commaundemet, betweene statutes and
ordinaunces: ye shall warne them that they trespasse not against ye Lorde, and
so wrath come vpon you and your brethren: Thus do, & ye shal not offende.
11 And beholde, Amaria the hie priest is among you in all matters of the Lorde,
and Zebadia the sonne of Ismael, a ruler of the house of Iuda for all the kinges
matters: There be officers of the Leuites also before you, Take courage to you
therfore, and be doyng manfully and the Lorde shalbe with such as be good.

Chapter 20

1 After this also, it fortuned that the children of Moab and the children Ammon,
& with them other of the Ammonites came against Iehosaphat to battell.
2 And there came some that told Iehosaphat, saying: There commeth a great
multitude against thee from the other side of the sea, and out of Syria, and
behold they be in Hasason Thamar, which is Engadi.
3 And Iehosaphat feared, & set him selfe to seke the Lorde: and proclaymed
fasting throughout all Iuda.
4 And they that were in Iuda gathered the selues together to aske counsel of the
Lord: And they came out of al the cities of Iuda, to make intercession to ye
lord.
5 And Iehosaphat stoode betweene the congregation of Iuda & Hierusalem in the
house of ye Lord before the new court,
6 And sayd: O Lord God of our fathers, art not thou God in heauen, and raignest
not thou on all the kingdomes of the Heathen, and in thyne hande is power and
might, and there is no man that is able to withstande thee?
7 Art not thou our God, whiche diddest cast out the inhabiters of this lande
before thy people Israel, & gauest it to the seede of Abraham thy louer for
euer?
8 And they dwelt therin, and haue buylt thee a teple therin for thy name,
saying:
9 If euyll come vpon vs, as the sword of iudgement, pestilence or hunger: then,
if we stande before this house in thy presence (for thy name is in this house)
and crye vnto thee in our tribulation, heare thou, and helpe.
10 And nowe beholde the children of Ammon and Moab, and mount Seir, by whom thou
wouldest not let them of Israel go when they came out of the lande of Egypt, but
they departed from them, and destroyed them not:
11 See howe they rewarde vs, to come for to cast vs out of thy possession whiche
thou hast geuen vs to inherite.
12 O our God, wilt thou not iudge them? for we haue no might against this great
companie that commeth against vs: neither wote we what to do, but our eyes be
vnto thee.
13 And all Iuda stoode before the Lorde, with their young ones, their wiues, and
their children.
14 And there was Iahaziel the sonne of Zacharia, the sonne of Banaia, the sonne
of Iehiel, the sonne of Matthania, a Leuite, of the sonnes of Asaph, & vpon hym
came the spirite of the Lorde euen in the middes of the congregation:
15 And he sayd, Hearken all Iuda, and ye inhabiters of Hierusalem, and thou king
Iehosaphat, thus sayth the Lorde vnto you: Be not afrayd nor faynt hearted by
reason of this great multitude: for the battell is not yours, but Gods.
16 To morow go ye downe against them: behold they come vp by the clift of Ziz,
and ye shall finde them at the ende of the brooke before the wildernesse of
Ieruel
17 Ye shall not neede to fight in this battell: but steppe foorth and stand, and
beholde the helpe of the Lorde whiche is with you: feare not, nor let your
heartes fayle you O ye of Iuda and of Hierusalem: To morowe go out against them
for, the Lord wilbe with you.
18 And Iehosaphat bowed his face to the earth, and all Iuda and the inhabiters
of Hierusalem fel before the Lord, worshipping the Lorde.
19 And the Leuites of the children of the Caathites, & of the children of the
Corahites, stoode vp to prayse the Lorde God of Israel with a loud voyce on hie.
20 And when they arose early in the morning, they gat them out vnto the
wildernesse of Thekoa, and as they went out, Iehosaphat stoode and sayd, Heare
me O Iuda, and ye inhabiters of Hierusalem: Put your trust in the Lorde your
God, that ye may be founde faythfull: Geue credence to his prophetes, and so
shall ye prosper.
21 When he had consulted with the people, and set some to sing vnto the Lorde,
and to prayse him in the beautie of holinesse, and to go out before the armie,
and to say, Prayse the Lorde, for his mercie lasteth euer.
22 And when they began to shout and to prayse, the Lord layde ambushementes
against the children of Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir, whiche were come against
Iuda: And they were ouerthrowen with strokes among theselues.
23 For the children of Ammon and Moab, rose against the inhabiters of mount
Seir, and they slue and destroyed them: And when they had made an end of the
inhabiters of Seir, euery one helped to destroy another among them selues.
24 And when Iuda came towarde Mispah in the wildernesse, they loked vnto the
multitude: and beholde, they were dead carcasses fallen to the earth, and none
escaped.
25 And when Iehosaphat and his people came to take away the spoyle of them, they
founde among them aboundaunce of goods, rayment, & pleasaunt iewels, which they
toke for them selues, more then they could cary away: so that they were three
dayes in gathering of the spoyle, it was so much.
26 And the fourth day they assembled in the valley of blessing, for there they
blessed the Lord: And therfore they called the name of the same place the valley
of blessing, vnto this day.
27 And so all the men of Iuda and Hierusale returned with Iehosaphat their head,
for to go againe to Hierusalem with gladnesse: for the Lord had made them to
reioyce ouer their enemies.
28 And they came to Hierusalem with psalters and harpes, & shawmes, euen vnto
the house of the Lorde.
29 And the feare of God fell on the kingdomes of all landes, when they had heard
that the Lorde fought against the enemies of Israel.
30 And so the realme of Iehosaphat was in tranquillitie, and his God gaue him
rest on euery side.
31 And Iehosaphat raigned vpon Iuda, and was thirtie & fiue yeres olde when he
began to raigne, & he raigned twentie and fiue yeres in Hierusalem: And his
mothers name was Azuba the daughter of Silhi.
32 And he walked in the way of Asa his father, and bowed not therfrom, doyng
that which was right in the sight of the Lorde.
33 Howbeit the high places were not taken away: for the people had not yet
prepared their heartes vnto the God of their fathers.
34 The rest of the actes of Iehosaphat first and last, behold they are written
among the sayinges of Iehu the sonne of Hanani, which noted them in the booke of
the kinges of Israel.
35 After this did Iehosaphat king of Iuda ioyne himselfe with Ahaziahu king of
Israel, whose mind was to do wickedly.
36 He coupled him selfe with him, to make shippes to go to Tharsis: And they
made the shippes in Ezion Gaber.
37 And Eliezer the sonne of Dodauah of Maresa prophesied against Iehosaphat,
saying: Because thou hast ioyned thy selfe with Ahaziahu, ye lord hath broken
thy workes. And the shippes were broke that they were not able to go to Tharsis.

Chapter 21

1 Iehosaphat also slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the
citie of Dauid: and Iehoram his sonne raigned in his steade.
2 And he had brethren whiche were the sonnes of Iehosaphat, Azaria, Iehiel,
Zacharia, Azariahu, Michael, and Sephatiahu: All these are the sonnes of
Iehosaphat king of Iuda.
3 And their father gaue the many great giftes of gold and siluer, and other
speciall substaunce, with strong cities in Iuda: but the kingdome gaue he to
Iehoram, for he was the eldest.
4 And Iehoram rose vp against the kingdome of his father, and preuayled, and
slue all his brethren with the sworde, and diuers of the lordes of Israel.
5 Iehoram was thirtie and two yeres olde when he began to raigne, and he raigned
eyght yeres in Hierusalem.
6 And he walked in the way of the kinges of Israel, like as dyd the house of
Ahab, for he had the daughter of Ahab to wife: and he wrought euyll in the eyes
of the Lorde.
7 Howbeit the Lord woulde not destroy the house of Dauid, because of the
couenaunt that he had made with Dauid, as he promised to geue a light to hym and
to his sonnes for euer.
8 In his dayes the Edomites rebelled when they were vnder the dominion of Iuda,
and made them selues a king.
9 And Iehoram went foorth with his lordes, and all his charets were with him:
and he rose vp by night, and smote the Edomites, which compassed him in, and the
captaynes of the charets.
10 But Edom rebelled still, so that they woulde not be vnder the hande of Iuda
vnto this day: That same time also dyd Libna depart from being vnder his hande,
because he had forsaken the Lord God of his fathers.
11 Moreouer, he made high places in the mountaynes of Iuda, & caused the
inhabiters of Hierusalem to commit fornication, and prouoked Iuda to idolatrie.
12 And there came a writing to him from Elia the prophete, saying, Thus sayth
the Lord God of Dauid thy father: Because thou hast not walked in the wayes of
Iehosaphat thy father, and in the wayes of Asa king of Iuda:
13 But walkedst in the wayes of the kinges of Israel, and hast made Iuda and the
dwellers of Hierusalem to go a whoring like to the whordome of the house of
Ahab, and hast slayne thy brethren, euen thy fathers house, whiche were better
then thou:
14 Beholde, with a great plague will the Lorde smite thy folke, thy children,
thy wyues, and all thy goods:
15 And thou shalt suffer great payne, euen a disease of thy bowels, vntill thy
guttes fall out, by reason of thy sicknes day by day.
16 And so the Lorde stirred vp against Iehoram the spirite of the Philistines,
and the Arabians that were besyde the blacke Moores.
17 And they came vp into Iuda, and wasted it, & caried away all the substaunce
that was found in the kinges house, and his sonnes, and his wyues: so that there
was neuer a sonne left hym, saue Iehohahaz, which was the youngest among his
sonnes.
18 And after all these thinges, the Lorde smote him in his bowels with an
incurable disease.
19 And it came to passe, that in processe of time, euen after the ende of two
yeres, his guttes fell out in his sicknes, and so he died of very euyll
diseases: And they made no burning for him, lyke the burning of his fathers.
20 When he began to raigne he was thirtie and two yeres olde, and raigned in
Hierusalem eyght yeres, and liued wretchedly: howebeit they buried him in the
citie of Dauid, but not among the sepulchres of the kinges.

Chapter 22

1 And the inhabiters of Hierusalem made Ahaziahu his young sonne king in his
stead: For the men of warre that came with the hoast of the Arabians, had slayne
all his eldest sonnes: And so Ahaziahu the sonne of Iehoram king of Iuda was
made king.
2 Two & fourtie yeres old was he when he began to raigne, and he raigned one
yere in Hierusalem: His mothers name was Athaliahu, the daughter of Amri.
3 And he walked also in the wayes of the house of Ahab: for his mother by her
counsel enticed him to do wickedly.
4 Wherfore he dyd that which was euyll in the sight of the Lord, as dyd they
that were of the house of Ahab: for they were his counselers after the death of
his father, to his destruction.
5 And he walked after their counsel, and went with Iehoram sonne of Ahab king of
Israel, to fight against Hazael king of Syria at Ramoth in Gilead: and the
Syrians smote Iehoram.
6 And he returned to be healed in Iezrahel, of the woundes whiche were geuen him
at Rama, whe he fought with Hazael king of Syria: and Ahaziahu the sonne of
Iehoram king of Iuda, went downe to see Iehoram the sonne of Ahab at Iezrahel,
because he was diseased.
7 At it came of God that Ahaziahu shoulde be dispised for his comming to
Iehoram: for when he was come, he went out with Iehoram against Iehu the sonne
of Nimsi, whom ye Lord had annointed to destroy the house of Ahab.
8 And so it came to passe, that when Iehu was executing iustice vpon the house
of Ahab, and had founde the lordes of Iuda and the sonnes of the brethren of
Ahaziahu that wayted on Ahaziahu, he slue them.
9 And he sought Ahaziahu: & they caught him where he was hid in Samaria, and
brought him to Iehu, and when they had slayne him, they buried him: because said
they, he is the sonne of Iehosaphat, whiche sought the Lorde with all his heart:
And the house of Ahaziahu had no powre to kepe still the kingdome.
10 But when Athaliahu the mother of Ahaziahu sawe that her sonne was dead, she
arose and destroyed all the kinges seede in the kinred of the house of Iuda.
11 And Iehosabeth the daughter of the king, toke Ioas the sonne of Ahaziahu, and
stale him from among the kinges sonnes that were slayne, & put him and his nurse
in a priuie chamber: and so Iehosabeth the daughter of king Iehoram the wyfe of
Iehoiada the priest, and the sister of Ahaziahu hid him from Athaliahu, that he
was not slayne.
12 And so he was with them hyd in the house of God sixe yeres: and Athaliahu
raigned ouer the lande.

Chapter 23

1 And in the seuenth yere Iehoiada beyng bolde, toke the captaynes of hundredes,
Azariah the sonne of Iehoram, & Ismael the sonne of Iehohanan, Azariahu the
sonne of Obed, Maasiahu the sonne of Adaiahu, & Elisaphat the sonne of Zichri, &
made a bonde with them.
2 And they went about in Iuda, and gathered the Leuites out of all the cities of
Iuda, & the auncient fathers of Israel, and they came to Hierusalem.
3 And all the congregation made a bonde with the king in the house of God, and
he sayd vnto them: Beholde, the kinges sonne must raigne, as the Lorde hath
sayde of the children of Dauid.
4 This is it therfore that ye shal do: The thirde part of you shall on the
Sabbath come to the priestes, Leuites, & kepers of the porches,
5 And another thirde part shalbe by the kinges house, and another thirde part
shalbe at the gate of the foundation: and al the people shalbe in the courtes of
the house of the Lorde.
6 But there shal none come into the house of the Lorde, saue the priestes and
they that minister vnto the Leuites, they shall go in, for they are holy: but
all the people shal kepe the watch of the Lord.
7 And the Leuites shall compasse the king round about, and euery man shall haue
his weapon in his hand: and what other man soeuer doth come into the house of
the Lorde he shalbe slayne: and let them be with the king when he commeth in and
when he goeth out.
8 And the Leuites and all Iuda dyd according to al thinges that Iehoiada the
priest had commaunded, and toke euery man his men that came in on the Sabbath,
with them that went out on the Sabbath day: neither did Iehoiada the priest let
the companies depart.
9 And Iehoiada the priest deliuered to the captaynes of hundredes, speares,
shieldes, and bucklers, that had parteyned to king Dauid, and were in the house
of God.
10 And he set all the people (euery man hauing his weapon in his hande) from the
right side of the temple to the lift side of the temple, along by the aulter and
the temple, rounde about the king.
11 And they brought out the kinges sonne, and put vpon him the crowne, and the
testimonie, and made him king: and Iehoiada and his sonnes annoynted him, and
sayde, God saue the king.
12 When Athaliahu hearde the noyse of the people running, and praysing the king,
she came to the people into the house of the Lorde.
13 And she loked, and beholde the king stoode in his place at the entring in,
and the lordes and the trumpettes were by the king, and all the people of the
lande reioysed, blowing with trumpets, and the singers were with instrumentes of
musicke, and such as could sing prayse: But Athaliahu rent her clothes, and
sayde, Treason, treason.
14 And Iehoiada the priest went out to the captaynes of hundredes that were
gouernours of the hoast, and sayde vnto them, Haue her foorth of the ranges: &
whoso foloweth her, let him be slayne with the sword. For the priest sayd, that
they should not slay her in the house of the Lorde.
15 And they layde handes on her till she was come to the entring of the horse
gate beside the kinges house, and there they slue her.
16 And Iehoiada made a bond betweene him and al the people and the king, that
they shoulde be the Lordes people.
17 And all the people went to the house of Baal, and destroyed it, and brake his
aulters and his images, and slue Mathan the priest of Baal before the aulters.
18 And Iehoiada put the officers for the house of the Lord, vnder the hand of
the priestes and Leuites, as Dauid had distributed them in the house of the
Lord, to offer burnt offeringes vnto the Lord, as it is written in the lawe of
Moyses, with reioysing and singing, as it was ordeyned by Dauid.
19 And he set porters by the gates of the house of the Lord, that none which was
vncleane in any thing shoulde enter in.
20 And he toke the captaynes of hundredes, and all the nobles, and the
gouernours of the people, and al the folke of the lande, and caused the king to
come downe out of the house of the Lorde, and they came through the hye gate
into the kinges house, & set the king vpon the seate of the kingdome.
21 And all the people of the land reioysed, and the citie was in tranquilitie
after that they had slayne Athaliahu with the sworde.

Chapter 24

1 Ioas was seuen yeres olde when he began to raigne, & he raigned fourtie yeres
in Hierusalem: His mothers name also was Zibia of Beerseba.
2 And Ioas dyd that whiche was right in the sight of the Lorde all the dayes of
Iehoiada the priest.
3 And Iehoiada toke him two wyues, and he begat sonnes and daughters.
4 And it chaunced after this, that Ioas was minded to renue the house of the
Lorde.
5 And he gathered together the priestes and the Leuites, and sayde to them: Go
out vnto the cities of Iuda, and gather of all Israel money to repaire the house
of your God from yere to yere, and see that ye haste the thing: Howebeit the
Leuites were slacke.
6 And the king called Iehoiada that was the chiefest, & sayd vnto him: Why
requirest thou not of the Leuites to bring in out of Iuda and Hierusalem the
collection of money, according to the commaundement of Moyses the seruaunt of
the Lorde, and of the congregation of Israel for the tabernacle of witnesse?
7 For wicked Athaliahu and her children brake vp the house of God, and all the
thinges that were dedicate for the house of the lord, did they bestow for
Baalim.
8 And at the kinges commaundement they made a chest, and set it without at the
gate of the house of the Lorde:
9 And made a proclamation through Iuda & Hierusalem, to bring in to the Lord the
taxation of money that Moyses the seruaunt of God set vpon Israel in the
wildernesse.
10 And the lordes and al the people reioysed, and brought in, & cast into the
chest vntill it was full.
11 And it fortuned, that at the same time they brought in the chest vnto them
whiche were in the kinges businesse by the hand of the Leuites, and when they
sawe that there was much money, the kinges scribe, and one appoynted by the hye
priest, came, and emptied the chest, and toke it, and caried it to his place
agayne. Thus they dyd day by day, and gathered much money.
12 And the king and Iehoiada gaue it to such as dyd the labour and worke in the
house of the Lorde, and hired masons and carpenters to repaire the house of the
Lorde, and so dyd they artificers in iron and brasse to mende the house of the
Lorde.
13 And so the workmen wrought, and the worke mended through their handes: and
they made the house of God as it ought to be, and strengthed it.
14 And when they had finished it, they brought the rest of the money before the
king and Iehoiada, and therwith were made vessels for the house of the Lorde,
euen vessels to minister withall, and to serue for burnt offringes chargers and
spoones, vessels of golde and siluer: And they offered burnt offringes in the
house of the Lord continually all the dayes of Iehoiada.
15 But Iehoiada waxed olde, and dyed full of dayes: for an hundred and thirtie
yeres olde was he when he died.
16 And they buried him in the citie of Dauid among the kinges, because he dealt
well with Israel, and with God and with his house.
17 And after the death of Iehoiada, came the lordes of Iuda and made obeysaunce
to the king: And the king hearkened vnto them.
18 And so they left the house of the Lorde God of their fathers, and serued
groues and idoles, and then came the wrath of God vpon Iuda and Hierusalem for
this their trespaces sake.
19 And he sent prophetes to them, to bring the againe vnto the Lord, & they
testified vnto them: but they woulde not heare.
20 And the spirite of God came vpon Zacharia the sonne of Iehoiada the priest,
which stoode by the people, and sayd vnto them, thus sayth God: Why transgresse
ye the commaundementes of the Lorde, that ye can not prosper? For because ye
haue forsaken the Lord, he also hath forsaken you.
21 And they conspired against him, and stoned him with stones at the
commaundement of the king, euen in the court of the house of the Lorde.
22 And so Ioas the king remembred not ye kindnesse whiche Iehoiada his father
had done to him, but slue his sonne: And when he died, he sayde, The Lorde loke
vpon it, and require it.
23 And when the yere was out, it fortuned that the hoast of Syria came vp
against him, and they came against Iuda and Hierusalem, and destroyed all the
lordes of the people from among the people, and sent all the spoyle of them vnto
the king to Damascon.
24 For the Syrians came with a small companie of men, and the Lorde deliuered a
verie great hoast into their hande, because they had forsaken the Lord God of
their fathers: And they gaue sentence against Ioas.
25 And when they were departed from him, they left him in great diseases: and
his owne seruauntes conspired against him for the blood of the children of
Iehoiada the priest, and slue hym on his bed, and he died: and they buried him
in the citie of Dauid, but not in the sepulchres of the kinges.
26 And these are they that conspired against him: Zabad the sonne of Simeath an
Ammonite, & Iehosabad the sonne of Simrith a Moabite.
27 And his sonnes, & the summe of the taxe that was raysed in his time, and the
repairing of the house of God, beholde they are written in the storie of the
booke of the kinges: and Amaziahu his sonne raigned in his steade.

Chapter 25

1 Amaziahu was twentie and fiue yeres olde when he began to raigne, and he
raigned twentie and nine yeres in Hierusale: His mothers name was Iehoadan, of
Hierusalem.
2 And he dyd that which is right in the sight of the Lorde, but not with a
perfect heart.
3 And assoone as he was setled in the kingdome, he slue his seruauntes that had
killed the king his father.
4 But he slue not their children, because it is written thus in the lawe and
booke of Moyses, where the Lorde commaunded, saying: The fathers shall not dye
for the children, neither shall the children dye for the fathers, but euery man
shall dye for his owne sinne.
5 And Amaziahu gathered Iuda together, and made them captaynes ouer thousandes
and ouer hundredes, according to the houses of their fathers throughout all Iuda
and Beniamin: And he numbred them from twentie yeres olde and aboue, and found
among them three hundred thousande chosen men, able to go to battell, and that
could handle speare and shield.
6 He hired also an hundred thousande strong fighting men out of Israel for an
hundred talentes of siluer.
7 And there came a man of God to him, and sayde, O king, let not the armie of
Israel come with thee: for the Lorde is not with Israel, to wit with al the
children of Ephraim.
8 But if thou wilt needes be saytlesse: come on, and take the battell in hande,
and God shall make thee fall before the enemie: For God hath power to helpe, and
to cast downe.
9 And Amaziahu saide to the man of God: What shal we do then for the hundred
talentes which I haue geuen for the hoast of Israel? The man of God aunswered:
The Lorde is able to geue thee much more then they be.
10 And Amaziahu separated them, to wit the armie that was come to him out of
Ephraim, to go home againe: Wherefore they were exceeding wroth with Iuda, &
returned home in great anger.
11 And Amaziahu toke heart, and caried out his people, and went to the salt
valley, and smote of the children of Seir ten thousand.
12 And other ten thousand did the children of Iuda take alyue, & caried them
vnto the top of a rocke, and cast them downe from the top of the rocke, that
they all to burst.
13 But the souldiers of the armie which Amaziahu sent away that they should not
go with his people to battaile, fell vpon the cities of Iuda from Samaria vnto
Bethron, and smote three thousand of them, and toke much spoyle.
14 And it chaunced after that Amaziahu was come from the slaughter of the
Edomites, he brought the gods of the children of Seir, and set them vp to be his
gods, and bowed him selfe before them, and burned incense vnto them.
15 Wherfore the Lorde was wroth with Amaziahu, & sent vnto him a prophete, which
saide vnto him: Why hast thou sought the gods of the people which were not able
to delyuer their owne people out of thyne hande?
16 And it chaunced, that as ye prophete talked with him, the king saide vnto
him: Haue men made thee of the kinges counsel: Ceasse, why wylt thou be beaten?
And the prophete ceassed, and said: I am sure that God is minded to destroy
thee, because thou hast done this, and agreest not vnto my counsell.
17 Then Amaziahu king of Iuda toke aduise, and sent to Ioas the sonne of
Iehoahaz the sonne of Iehu king of Israel, and said: Come, that we way see
either other.
18 And Ioas king of Israel sent to Amaziahu king of Iuda, saying: A thistle that
is in Libanon, sent to a Cedar tree of Libanon, saying, Geue thy daughter to my
sonne to wyfe: And there came a wylde beast of Libanon, and trode downe the
thistle.
19 Thou sayest: Loe, thou hast smitten the Edomites, & thyne heart maketh thee
proude to glorifie thy selfe: Now therefore byde at home, why doest thou prouoke
vnto euyll, that thou mayest perishe, both thou and Iuda with thee?
20 But Amaziahu woulde not hearken to him: for it came of God, euen to delyuer
them into the hande of their enemies, because they sought counsell at the gods
of Edom.
21 And so Ioas the king of Israel came vp, and they sawe either other both he
and Amaziahu king of Iuda, at Bethsames which is in Iuda.
22 And Iuda was put to the worse before Israel, and they fled euery man to his
tent.
23 And Ioas the king of Israel toke Amaziahu king of Iuda the sonne of Ioas the
sonne of Iehoahaz at Bethsames, and brought him to Hierusalem, and tare the wall
of Hierusalem (from the gate of Ephraim, vnto the gate that was ouer against it)
foure hundred cubites.
24 And he toke away also all the golde and siluer, and all the iewels that were
founde in the house of God with Obed Edom, and the treasures of the kinges
house, and the young wardes, and returned to Samaria.
25 And Amaziahu the sonne of Ioas king of Iuda, lyued after the death of Ioas
sonne of Iehoahaz king of Israel fifteene yere.
26 The rest of the actes of Amaziahu first and last, are they not written in the
booke of the kinges of Iuda and Israel.
27 And after the time that Amaziahu did turne away from the Lorde, they
conspired treason against him in Hierusalem: and when he was fled to Lachis,
they sent to Lachis after him, and slue him there:
28 And brought him vp with horses, and buryed him with his fathers in the citie
of Iuda.

Chapter 26

1 Then all the people of Iuda toke Uzzia, which was sixteene yeres olde, & made
him king in the roome of his father Amaziahu.
2 And he built Eloth, and brought it againe to Iuda, after that the king was
layde to sleepe with his fathers.
3 Sixteene yeres olde was Uzzia when he began to raigne, and he raigned fiftie
and two yeres in Hierusalem: His mothers name also was Iecholia, of Hierusalem.
4 And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lorde, according to all as
did his father Amaziahu.
5 And it came to passe that he sought God in the dayes of Zachariahu, who had
vnderstanding in the visions of God: And as long as he sought the Lorde, God
made him to prosper.
6 And he went to battaile against the Philistines, and brake downe the wall of
Geth, and the wall of Iabne, and the wall of Asdod, & built cities about Asdod
and among the Philistines.
7 And God holpe him against the Philistines and against the Arabians that dwelt
in Gur baal and Hamehunim.
8 And the Ammonites gaue tribute to Uzzia, & his name spread abrode euen to the
entring in of Egypt: for he played the man exceedingly.
9 Moreouer, Uzzia built towres in Hierusalem by the corner gate, and by the
valley gate, and at the turning of the wall, and made them strong.
10 And he built towres in the wildernesse, and digged many welles: For he had
much cattaile in the valleyes & playnes, plowmen and vinedressers in the
mountaines and in Charmel: for he loued husbandry.
11 And Uzzia had an hoast of fighting men, that went out to warre in the armie,
according to the number of their office, vnder the hande of Ieiel the scribe,
and Maasiahu the ruler, and vnder the hand of Hananiahu, which was one of the
kinges lordes.
12 And the whole number of the auncient fathers and of the men of might, were
two thousand and sixe hundred.
13 And vnder the hand of them was the armie of the men of warre, euen three
hundred and seuen thousand, and fiue hundred that made warre with the power of
an armie, helping the king against the enemies.
14 And Uzzia prouided them throughout all the hoast, shieldes, speares, helmets,
haberginnes, bowes, and slinges for to cast stones.
15 And he made subtyll engins in Hierusalem, which he inuented and layed on the
towres and corners, to shoote arrowes and great stones withall: And his name
spread farre abrode, because he had prepared to him selfe marueylous strength.
16 But in his strength his heart arose to his destruction: For he transgressed
against the Lorde his God, and went into the temple of the Lorde to burne
incense vpon the aulter of incense.
17 And Azariahu the priest went in after him, and with him fourescore priestes
of the Lorde, that were valiaunt men:
18 And they stoode by Uzzia the king, and saide vnto him: It parteyneth not to
thee Uzzia to burne incense vnto the Lorde, but to the priestes the children of
Aaron, that are consecrated for to offer incense: Come therfore out of the
sanctuary, for thou hast trespassed, and it is no worship to thee before the
Lorde God.
19 And Uzzia was wroth, & had incense in his hande to burne it, and so while he
had indignation against the priestes, the leprosie sprang in his forehead before
the priestes in the house of the Lorde, euen beside the incense aulter.
20 And Azariahu the chiefe priest, with al the other priestes, loked vpon him,
and beholde he was become a leaper in his forehead, and they vexed him thence:
and he was fayne to go out, because the Lorde had smytten him.
21 And Uzzia the king continued a leper vnto the day of his death, & dwelt
seuerall in an house being a leper and shut out of the house of the Lorde: and
Iotham his sonne had the gouernauce of the kinges house, and iudged the people
of the lande.
22 The rest of the actes of Uzzia first and last, did Isai the prophete the
sonne of Amos write.
23 And so Uzzia slept with his fathers, and they buried him with his fathers in
the fielde of the buriall which was beside the sepulchres of the kinges: for
they saide, he is a leper: And Iotham his sonne raigned in his steade.

Chapter 27

1 Iotham was fiue and twentie yeres olde when he began to raigne, and he raigned
sixteene yeres in Hierusalem: His mothers name also was Ierusa, the daughter of
Zadoc.
2 And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lorde, in all poyntes as
did his father Uzzia, saue that he came not into the temple of the Lorde: and
the people did yet wickedly.
3 He built the hie gate of the temple of the Lorde, and on the wall (where the
house of ordinauce was) he built much.
4 Moreouer, he built cities in the mountaines of Iuda, and in the wood countrey
he built castels and towres.
5 He fought with the king of the children of Ammon, and preuailed against them:
And the children of Ammon gaue him the same yere an hundred talentes of siluer,
& ten thousand quarters of wheate, and ten thousand of barlye: So much did the
children of Ammon geue him the second yere, and the third also.
6 So Iotham became mightie, because he directed his way before the Lorde his
God.
7 The rest of the actes of Iotham, and all his warres, & his conuersation, loe
they are written in the booke of the kinges of Israel and Iuda.
8 He was twentie and fiue yeres olde when he began to raigne, and raigned
sixteene yeres in Hierusalem.
9 And Iotham slept with his fathers, and they buryed him in the citie of Dauid:
and Ahaz his sonne raigned in his steade.

Chapter 28

1 Ahaz was twentie yeres olde when he began to raigne, and raigned sixteene
yeres in Hierusalem, and he did not that which is right in the sight of the
Lorde, as did his father Dauid:
2 For he walked in the wayes of the kinges of Israel, & made moulten images for
Baalim.
3 He offered incense in the valley of the sonne of Hinnon, and burnt his
children in fire, after the abhominations of the heathen whom the Lorde cast out
before the children of Israel.
4 He offered also and burnt incense in the high places, and on mountaynes, and
vnder euery greene tree.
5 Wherefore the Lorde his God delyuered him into the hande of the king of the
Syrians, which beat him, and caryed away a great multitude of his captiue, and
brought them to Damascon: And he was deliuered into the hand of the king of
Israel, which smote him with a great slaughter.
6 For Pekah the sonne of Remaliahu slue in Iuda an hundred and twentie thousand
in one day, which were all fighting men: and that because they had forsaken the
Lord God of their fathers.
7 And Zichri a mightie man of Ephraim slue Maasiahu the kinges sonne, and Africa
the gouernour of the house, and Elcana that was next to the king.
8 And the children of Israel toke prisoners of their brethren two hundred
thousand women, sonnes, and daughters, and caryed away much spoyle of them, and
brought the spoyle to Samaria.
9 But there was a prophet of the Lordes, whose name was Obed: and he went out
before the hoast that came to Samaria, & saide vnto them: Beholde, because the
Lorde God of your fathers is wroth with Iuda, he hath deliuered them into your
hande, and ye haue slaine them with cruelnesse, that reacheth vp to heauen.
10 And nowe ye purpose to keepe vnder the children of Iuda and Hierusalem, and
to make them bondmen and bondwomen: And do ye not lade your selues with sinne in
the sight of the Lord your God?
11 Now heare me therefore, and deliuer the captiues againe which ye haue taken
of your brethren: for els shall the great wrath of God be vpon you.
12 Wherfore certayne of the heads of the children of Ephraim, as Azariahu the
sonne of Iehohanan, Berechiahu the sonne of Mesillemoth, and Iehezkiahu the
sonne of Sallum, & Amasa the sonne of Hadlai, stoode vp against them that came
from the warre,
13 And saide vnto them, Bryng not in the captiues hither: for where as we haue
offended toward God alredy, ye entende to adde more to our sinnes and trespasse:
For our trespasse is great alredie, and there is a fierce wrath against Israel.
14 And vpon that, the men of armes left the captiues and the spoyle before the
lordes and all the congregation:
15 And the men that were now rehearsed by name, rose vp, and toke the prisoners,
and with the spoyle clothed all that were naked among them, & arayed them, &
shoed them, and gaue them to eate and to drinke, and annoynted them, and carryed
al that were feeble of them vpon asses, & brought them to Iericho the citie of
Paulme trees, to their brethren: and then they returned to Samaria againe.
16 At that same time did king Ahaz send vnto the kinges of the Assyrians, to
haue helpe of them.
17 And the Edomites came againe, and slue some of Iuda, and caryed away
captiues.
18 And the Philistines inuaded the cities in the lowe countrey, and toward the
south of Iuda: and toke Bethsames, and Aialon, and Gederoth, and Socho with the
townes longing thereto, and Thimna with the townes of the same, Gimso and the
townes thereof, and dwelt there.
19 For the Lorde brought Iuda lowe, because of Ahaz king of Iuda, which made
Iuda naked, & transgressed sore against the Lorde.
20 And Thilgath Pilneser king of the Assyrians came vpon him, and troubled him
rather then strengthed him.
21 For Ahaz toke away a portion out of the house of the Lorde, and out of the
kinges house, and out of the lordes houses, and gaue vnto the king of the
Assyrians: and yet it helped him not.
22 And in the very time of his tribulation, did king Ahaz trespasse yet more
against the Lorde.
23 For he offered vnto the gods of them of Damascon, which beat him: and he
sayd, Because the gods of the kinges of Syria helpe them, therefore wyll I offer
to them, that they may helpe me also: But they were his destruction, and the
destruction of all Israel.
24 And Ahaz gathered together the vessels of the house of God, & brake them, and
shut vp the doores of the house of the Lorde, and made him aulters in euery
corner of Hierusalem.
25 And in all the cities of Iuda he made high places to burne incense vnto other
gods, and angred the Lorde God of his fathers.
26 The rest of his actes, and his workes first and last, beholde they are
written in the booke of the kinges of Iuda and Israel.
27 And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the citie of
Hierusalem: but brought him not vnto the sepulchres of the kinges of Israel: and
Hezekia his sonne raigned in his steade.

Chapter 29

1 Hezekia began to raigne when he was fiue and twentie yeres olde, and he
raigned nine & twentie yeres in Hierusalem: And his mothers name was Abia, the
daughter of Zachariahu.
2 And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lorde, in all poyntes as
did Dauid his father.
3 He opened the doores of the house of the Lorde in the first yere and first
moneth of his raigne, and repaired them.
4 And he brought in the priestes and the Leuites, and gathered them together
into the east streate,
5 And saide vnto them: Heare me ye Leuites, and now be sanctified and halow the
house of the Lorde God of your fathers, bring filthynesse out of the holy place.
6 For our fathers haue trespassed, and done euill in the eyes of the Lorde our
God, and haue forsaken him, and turned away their faces from the habitation of
the Lord, and turned their backes on it.
7 And beside that, they haue shut vp the doores of the porche, and quenched the
lampes, and haue neither burnt incense, nor offered burnt offringes in the holy
place vnto the God of Israel.
8 Wherefore the wrath of the Lorde fell on Iuda & Hierusalem, and he hath
brought them to trouble to be wondred on, & to be hissed at, euen as ye see with
your eyes.
9 For loe, our fathers were ouerthrowen with the sword, and our sonnes, our
daughters, and our wyues were caried away captiue for the same cause.
10 And now it is in myne heart to make a couenaunt with the Lord God of Israel,
that he may turne away his heauy indignation from vs.
11 Now therefore my sonnes, be not negligent: for the Lorde hath chosen you to
stande before him, and for to minister and serue him, and to burne incense.
12 Then the Leuites arose, Mahath the sonne of Amasai, and Ioel the sonne of
Azariahu of the children of the Caathites: And of the sonnes of Merari, Cis the
sonne of Abdi, and Azariahu the sonne of Iahalelel: And of ye sonnes of the
Gersonites, Ioah the sonne of Simma, and Eden the sonne of Ioah:
13 And of the sonnes of Elizaphan, Simri and Iehiel: And of the sonnes of Asaph,
Zechariahu and Matthaniahu:
14 And of the sonnes of Heman, Iehiel, and Simei: And of the sonnes of Ieduthun,
Semaia and Uzziel.
15 And they gathered their brethren, and purified them selues, and came
according to the commaundement of the king and the wordes of the Lord for to
clense the house of the Lorde:
16 And the priestes went into the inner partes of the house of the Lord to
clense it, and brought out all the vnclennesse that they founde in the temple of
the Lorde, into the court of the house of the Lorde: And the Leuites toke it, to
cary it out into the brooke Cedron.
17 They began the first day of the first moneth to purifie, and the eyght day of
the moneth came they to the porche of the Lorde: So they sanctified the house of
the Lorde in eyght dayes, and in the sixteenth day of the first moneth they made
an end.
18 And they went in to Hezekia the king, and saide: We haue clensed all the
house of the Lorde, the aulter of burnt offring with all his vessels, and the
shew bread table with all his apparell:
19 And all the vessels which king Ahaz did cast aside, when he raigned, &
transgressed, them we haue prepared and sanctified, and beholde they are before
the aulter of the Lorde.
20 And Hezekia the king rose earlye, and gathered the lordes of the citie, and
went vp to the house of the Lorde.
21 And they brought seuen oxen, seuen rammes, seuen sheepe, and seuen hee
goates, to be a sinne offring for the kingdome, for the sanctuary, and for Iuda:
And he commaunded the priestes the sonnes of Aaron, to offer them on the aulter
of the Lorde.
22 And they slue the oxen, and the priestes receaued the blood and sprinckled it
on the aulter: likewyse when they had slaine the rammes, they sprinckled the
blood vpon the aulter: They slue also the sheepe, and they sprinckled the blood
vpon the aulter.
23 And then they brought foorth the hee goates for the sinne offering before the
king and the congregation, & put their handes vpon them.
24 And the priestes slue them, and with the blood of them they clensed the
aulter, to make satisfaction for all Israel: for the king comaunded that the
burnt offering and the sinne offering shoulde be made for all Israel.
25 And set the Leuites in the house of the Lorde with cymbales, psalteries, and
harpes, according to the commaundement of Dauid and of Gad the kinges sear, and
Nathan the prophete: For so was the commaundement of the Lord through the hande
of his prophetes.
26 And the Leuites stoode, hauing the instrumentes of Dauid: and the priestes
helde the trumpettes.
27 And Hezekia commaunded to offer the burnt offring vpon the aulter: And when
the burnt offring began, the song of the Lorde began also, and the trumpettes,
with the instrumentes that were ordayned by the hand of Dauid king of Israel.
28 And all the congregation worshipped, singing a song, and blowyng with the
trumpettes, and all this continued vntill the burnt offring was finished.
29 And when they had made an end of offering, the king and all that were present
with him, bowed them selues, and worshipped.
30 And Hezekia the king and the lordes, spake to the Leuites to prayse the Lord
with the wordes of Dauid & of Asaph the sear: And they sang prayses with
gladnesse, and the other bowed them selues, and worshipped.
31 And Hezekia aunswered, and saide: Now ye haue consecrated your handes to the
Lorde: go to therefore, and bryng the sacrifices and thanke offeringes into the
house of the Lorde. And the congregation brought in the sacrifices & thank
offeringes, and burnt offringes, as many as were of a free liberall heart.
32 And the number of the burnt offringes which the congregation brought, was
threescore and ten oxen, an hundred rammes, & two hundred sheepe: which were all
for the burnt offering of the Lorde.
33 And there were dedicated sixe hundred oxen, and three thousand sheepe.
34 And the priestes were to fewe to flay al the burnt offringes: but their
brethren the Leuites did helpe them, till they had ended the worke, & vntil the
priestes were sanctified: For the Leuites were purer hearted to be sanctified,
then the priestes.
35 And therto ye burnt offringes were many, with the fat of the peaceoffringes,
& the drinke offringes, that belong to the burnt offring: And so the seruice
parteyning to the house of the Lorde, was finished.
36 And Hezekia reioyced, and all the people, that God had made the folke so
readie, & that the thing was so soone done.

Chapter 30

1 And Hezekia sent to all Israel and Iuda, and wrote letters to Ephraim and
Manasse, that they shoulde come to the house of the lorde at Hierusalem, and
offer passouer vnto the Lorde God of Israel.
2 And the king helde a counsell with his lordes, and all the congregation of
Hierusalem, to kepe the feast of passouer in the second moneth:
3 For they coulde not kepe it at that time, because the priestes were not
sanctified sufficiently, neither was the people gathered together to Hierusalem.
4 And the thing pleased the king and all the congregation.
5 And they decreed that it shoulde be proclaymed throughout all Israel from
Beerseba to Dan, that they shoulde come & holde the feast of Passouer vnto the
Lord God of Israel at Hierusalem: For they had not done it of a great season, as
it was written.
6 So the postes went with letters of the king and of his lordes throughout all
Israel & Iuda, and at the commaundement of the king they sayde: Ye children of
Israel, turne againe vnto the Lorde God of Abraham, Isahac, and Israel, and he
wyll returne to the remnaunt that are escaped of you out of the hande of the
kinges of the Assyrians.
7 And be not ye lyke your fathers and your brethren, which trespassed against
the Lorde God of their fathers, which gaue them vp to be destroyed, as ye see.
8 And now be not ye stiffe necked lyke as were your fathers: but yeelde your
selues vnto the Lord, and enter into his holy place which he hath sanctified for
euer, and serue the Lord your God, and the fiercenesse of his wrath shall turne
away from you.
9 For if ye turne againe vnto the Lorde, then shall your brethren and your
children finde compassion in the presence of them that toke them captiue, and
they shall come againe vnto this lande: For the Lorde your God is gratious and
mercifull, and wyll not turne away his face from you, if ye conuert vnto him.
10 And so the postes went from citie to citie in the lande of Ephraim & Manasse,
euen vnto Zabulon: but they laughed them to scorne, and mocked them.
11 Neuerthelesse, yet diuers of Aser, Manasse, and of Zabulon, submitted them
selues, and came to Hierusalem.
12 And the hande of God was in Iuda, and he gaue them one heart to do the
commmaundement of the king and of the rulers, according to the worde of the
Lorde.
13 And there assembled to Hierusalem much people, and there was present a
mightie great congregation, to hold the feast of sweete bread in the second
moneth.
14 And they arose, and remoued the aulters that were in Hierusalem: And all the
aulters for incense did they away, and cast them into the brooke Cedron.
15 And they slue Passouer the foureteenth day of the second moneth: And the
priestes and Leuites which were ashamed, sanctified them selues, and brought in
the burnt offringes into the house of the Lorde.
16 And they stoode in their office after their maner and according to the lawe
of Moyses the man of God: And the priestes sprinckled the blood, which they
receaued of the hande of the Leuites.
17 For there were many in the congregation that were not sanctified, and
therefore the Leuites had the charge of the killing of the Passouer for euery
one that was not cleane, to sanctifie him vnto the Lorde.
18 For many of the people, and very many out of Ephraim, Manasse, Isachar, and
Zabulon, were not clensed, and yet did eate Passour against the lawe appoynted:
but Hezekia prayed for them, saying, The good Lorde be mercifull toward euery
one
19 That prepareth his heart to seeke the Lorde God, the God of his fathers:
though he be not clensed accordyng to the purification of the sanctuarie.
20 And the Lorde heard Hezekia, and healed the people.
21 And the children of Israel that were present at Hierusalem, held the feast of
sweete bread seuen dayes, with great gladnes: and the Leuites & the priestes
praysed the Lorde day by day, singing with loude instrumentes vnto the lord.
22 And Hezekia spake comfortablie vnto all the Leuites that had good knowledge
to sing vnto the Lorde: and they did eate throughout that feast seuen dayes
long, and offered peace offringes, and thanked the Lorde God of their fathers.
23 And the whole assemblie toke counsel to do so other seuen dayes: & they helde
those seuen dayes with gladnesse:
24 For Hezekia king of Iuda, did geue to the congregation a thousand young oxen,
and seuen thousand sheepe: And the lordes gaue out to the congregation a
thousand oxen, & ten thousand sheepe, and a great number of the priestes were
sanctified.
25 And all the congregation of Iuda, with the priestes & Leuites, and all the
congregation that came out of Israel, & the straungers that came out of the
lande of Israel, & that dwelt in Iuda, reioyced.
26 And there was great gladnesse in Hierusalem: For since the time of Solomon
the sonne of Dauid king of Israel, there was no such ioy in Hierusalem.
27 And the priestes and the Leuites arose, and blessed the people: and their
voyce was heard of the Lorde, and their prayer came vp vnto heauen his holy
dwelling place.

Chapter 31

1 And when all these thinges were finished, all they of Israel that were present
in the cities of Iuda, went out and brake the images, and cut downe the idol
groues, and all to brake the high places and aulters throughout al Iuda and
Beniamin, in Ephraim also and Manasse, vntil they had vtterly destroyed them
all: And all the children of Israel returned euery man to his possessions, and
to their owne cities.
2 And Hezekia appoynted sundry companies of the priestes and Leuites after the
diuersitie of their ministrations, euery man according to his office both
priestes and Leuites, for the burnt offering and peace offringes, to minister
and to geue thankes and praise in the gates of the hoast of the Lorde.
3 And the kinges portion of his substaunce that he gaue, were dayly burnt
offringes in the morning and euening, and burnt offringes for the Sabbath dayes,
newe moones, & solempe feastes, according as it is written in the lawe of the
Lorde.
4 And he bade the people that dwelt in Hierusalem, to geue a parte to the
priestes and Leuites, that they might substancially applie them selues to the
lawe of the Lorde.
5 And assoone as the kinges commaundement came abrode, the children of Israel
brought aboudance of first fruites, of corne, wine, oyle, hony, and of all maner
of fruites of the fielde, & the tythes of all maner of thinges brought they in
plenteously.
6 And the children of Israel and Iuda that dwelt in the cities of Iuda, they
also brought in the tithes of oxen and sheepe, & other holy tithes which were
consecrate vnto the Lorde their God, they did offer and brought them all by
heapes.
7 In the third moneth, they began to lay the heapes in maner of a foundation,
and finished them in the seuenth moneth.
8 And when Hezekia and the lordes came and sawe the heapes, they blessed the
Lorde, and his people Israel.
9 And Hezekia questioned with the priestes and the Leuites concerning the
heapes.
10 And Azaria the chiefe priest of the house of Zador, aunswered him and saide:
Since the people began to bryng the heaue offringes into the house of the Lorde,
we also haue had inough to eate, there remayned so much: for the Lorde hath
blessed his people, and this heape is left.
11 And Hezekia bade prepare the chambers in the house of the Lord: And they did
prepare them,
12 And caried in the first fruites, the tithes, and the dedicate thinges
faithfully: ouer which Chonaniahu the Leuite had the rule, and Semei his brother
next to him:
13 And Iehiel, Azariahu, Nahath, Asael, Ierimoth, Iosabad, Eliel, Iesmachiahu,
Mahath, and Banaiahu, were ouerseres ordayned by Chonaniahu, & Semei his brother
was an officer of Hezekia the king, & Azariahu was the ruler of the house of
God.
14 And Core the sonne of Imna the Leuite, and porter of the east doore, had the
ouersight of the thinges that were offered of a free wyll vnto God, & were geuen
in maner seuerally vnto the lord, and ouer the thinges most holy.
15 And vnder his hand were Eden, Miniamin, Iesua, Semeiahu, Amariahu, and
Sechaniahu in the cities of the priestes appoynted of their fidelitie to geue to
their brethren their portions, aswell to the small as to the great.
16 Beside their generation, beyng males, from three yeres old and vpwarde, euen
vnto euery one that entereth into the house of the Lord, they should geue day by
day, for their ministration, and for their geuing attendaunce, and for their
diuers waytinges by course,
17 Both to the generation of the priestes and Leuites throughout the housholde
of their fathers, from twentie yeres and aboue, to wayte when their courses
came:
18 And to the families of all their babes, wynes, sonnes and daughters through
all the congregation: For vpon the fidelitie of them were the holy thinges
bestowed.
19 And to the children of Aaron the priestes whiche were in the fieldes and
suburbes of their cities, citie by citie, the men whose names were expressed
afore, shoulde geue portions, euen to all the males among the priestes, and to
all the Leuites, according to their number.
20 And of this maner did Hezekia throughout all Iuda: & wrought it that is good,
and right and true before the Lorde his God.
21 And in al the workes that he began, for seruice of the house of God, for the
lawe, & for the commaundementes, he sought his God: and that did he with all his
heart, and prospered.

Chapter 32

1 After that these deedes were faythfully done, Sennacherib king of the
Assyrians came, and entred into Iuda, & compassed the strong cities, and thought
to winne them for him selfe.
2 And so when Hezekia sawe that Sennacherib was come, and that he was purposed
to fight against Hierusalem,
3 He toke counsell with his lordes and men of might, to stop the water of the
fountaynes without the citie: And they dyd helpe him.
4 For there gathered many of the people together, and stopt all the welles, and
the broke that ran through the middes of the land, saying: Why shall the kinges
of the Assyrians come and finde much water?
5 And Hezekia went to lustyly, and buylt vp the wall where it was broken, and
made ordinaunce vpon the towres, and to the other wall without, and repaired
Millo in the citie of Dauid, and made many dartes and shieldes.
6 And he set captaynes of warre ouer the people, and gathered them together to
him in the large streete of the gate of the citie, and spake gentylly to them,
saying:
7 Plucke vp your heartes and be strong: be not afrayde nor discouraged for the
king of the Assyrians, & for all the multitude that he hath with hym: for there
be mo with vs then with hym.
8 With him is an arme of flesh: but with vs is the Lord our God for to helpe vs,
and to fight our battayles. And the people toke a courage through the wordes of
Hezekia king of Iuda.
9 After this did Sennacherib king of the Assyrians send of his seruauntes to
Hierusalem (but he him selfe remayned beside Lachis, hauing all his power with
him) vnto Hezekia king of Iuda, and vnto all Iuda that were at Hierusalem,
saying,
10 Thus saith Sennacherib king of the Assyrians: wherin do ye trust O ye that
dwell in Hierusalem which is besieged?
11 Doth not Hezekia entice you to geue ouer your selues vnto death, hunger, and
thirst, saying: The Lord our God shall ryd vs out of the hand of the king of the
Assyrians?
12 Hath not the same Hezekia put downe his hye places and his aulters, &
commaunded Iuda and Hierusalem, saying, Ye shall worship before one aulter, and
burne incense vpon the same?
13 Knowe ye not what I and my fathers haue done vnto the people of all landes?
Were the gods of the people of other landes, able or mightie to saue their
landes out of my hande?
14 Which of all the gods of those nations that my fathers destroyed, could
deliuer his people out of my hande? And shall your God be able to deliuer you
out of my hande?
15 Wherfore nowe let not Hezekia deceaue you, nor persuade you of this fassion,
nor yet beleue him: For as no god among all nations and kingdomes, was able to
rid his people out of my hand and out of the hand of my fathers: Howe much lesse
shall your gods be able to kepe you out of my hande?
16 And yet mo thinges did his seruauntes speake against the Lorde God, and
against his seruaunt Hezekia.
17 And Sennacherib also wrote a letter to rayle on the Lord God of Israel, and
spake against him, saying: As the gods of the nations of other landes haue not
ben able to deliuer their people out of my hande: euen so shal not the God of
Hezekia deliuer his people out of my hande.
18 And they cried with a loude voyce in the Iewes speach vnto the people of
Hierusalem that were on the wall, to feare them, and to make them faynt hearted,
and that they might so take the citie.
19 And they spake against the God of Hierusalem, as against the gods of the
nations of the earth, whiche were the workes of the handes of men.
20 But Hezekia the king, and the prophet Esai the sonne of Amos prayed against
that blasphemie, and cried vp to heauen.
21 And the Lord sent an angel, which destroyed all the men of warre and the
lordes and captaynes of the hoast of the king of the Assyrians, that he turned
his face againe with shame towarde his owne lande: And when he was come into the
house of his god, they that came of his owne body slue him there with the
sworde.
22 And so the Lorde saued Hezekia and the inhabiters of Hierusalem out of the
hand of Sennacherib the king of the Assyrians, and from the hande of all other,
and mayntayned them on euery side.
23 And many brought offeringes vnto the Lorde to Hierusalem, and presentes to
Hezekia king of Iuda: so that he was magnified in the sight of all nations from
thence foorth.
24 In those dayes Hezekia was sicke to the death, and prayed vnto the Lorde:
which aunswered him, and shewed him a wonderfull miracle.
25 But Hezekia dyd not againe vnto God according to it that he had shewed him:
for his heart arose, & there came wrath vpon hym, and vpon Iuda and Hierusalem.
26 Notwithstanding Hezekia submitted him selfe after that his heart was risen
vp, he and the inhabiters of Hierusalem: and the wrath of the Lorde came not
vpon them in the dayes of Hezekia.
27 And Hezekia had exceeding much riches and honour: And he gat him treasures of
siluer and gold, pretious stones, and spices, shieldes, and of all maner
pleasaunt iewels:
28 And made store houses for the fruites of corne, for wine and oyle, and
stalles for all maner of beastes, and foldes for sheepe.
29 And he made him cities, & had of sheepe and oxen great aboundaunce: For God
had geuen him substaunce exceeding much.
30 This same Hezekia stopped the vpper water springes of Gihon, and brought them
downe to the west side of the citie of Dauid: And Hezekia prospered in all his
workes.
31 And when the princes of Babylon sent vnto him ambassadours, to enquire of the
wonder that chaunced in the lande, God left him, to trye him, and that all that
was in his heart might be knowen.
32 The rest of the deedes of Hezekia, and his goodnes, beholde they are written
in the vision of Esai the prophet the sonne of Amoz, in the booke of the kinges
of Iuda and Israel.
33 And Hezekia slept with his fathers, and they buried hym in the most worthy
place of the sepulchres of the sonnes of Dauid, and all Iuda and the inhabiters
of Hierusalem dyd him worship at his death: and Manasse his sonne raigned in his
steade.

Chapter 33

1 Manasse was twelue yeres olde when he began to raigne, and he raigned fiftie
and fiue yeres in Hierusalem:
2 But dyd euyll in the sight of the Lorde, like vnto the abhominations of the
heathen whom the Lord cast out before the children of Israel.
3 For he went to, and buylt the high places whiche Hezekia his father had broken
downe: And he reared vp aulters for Baalim, and made groues, and worshipped all
the hoast of heauen, and serued them.
4 And he buylt aulters in the house of the Lorde, where as the Lord yet had
sayd, In Hierusale shal my name be for euer.
5 And he buylded aulters for all the hoast of heauen, in the two courtes of ye
house of the Lorde.
6 And he burnt his children in fire in the valley of the sonne of Hinnon: He was
a sorcerer, he regarded the crying of birdes, vsed inchauntmentes, and
mayntayned workers with spirites and sears of fortunes, and wrought much euyll
in the sight of the Lorde to anger hym withall.
7 And he put the carued image and an idol whiche he had made, in the house of
God: Of which house, God had sayd to Dauid and to Solomon his sonne, In this
house and in Hierusalem whiche I haue chosen afore all the tribes of Israel will
I put my name for euer.
8 Neither will I make the foote of Israel to remoue any more out of the land
whiche I haue ordeyned for your fathers, yf so be that they wil be diligent and
do all that I haue commaunded them in all the law and statutes, and ordinaunces
by the hande of Moyses.
9 And so Manasse made Iuda and the inhabiters of Hierusalem to erre, and to do
worse then the heathen whom the Lord destroyed before the children of Israel.
10 And the Lord spake to Manasse and to his people: but they woulde not regarde.
11 Wherfore the Lord brought vpon them the captaynes of the hoast of the king of
the Assyrians, whiche toke Manasse in holde, and bounde him with chaynes, and
caried him to Babylon.
12 And when he was in tribulation, he besought the Lord his God, and humbled him
selfe exceedingly before the God of his fathers,
13 And made intercession to him: and God was intreated of him, and hearde his
prayer, and brought him againe to Hierusalem into his kingdome: and then Manasse
knewe that the Lorde was God.
14 After this he buylt a wall without the citie of Dauid on the west side of
Gion, in the valley, as they came to the fishe gate, and round about Ophel, &
brought it vp of a very great heyght, and put captaynes of warre in all the
strong cities of Iuda.
15 And he toke away straunge gods and images out of the house of God, and all
the aulters that he had buylt in the mount of the house of God and Hierusalem,
and cast them out of the citie.
16 And he prepared the aulter of the Lord, and sacrifised thereon peace
offeringes and thanke offeringes, and charged Iuda to serue the Lorde God of
Israel.
17 Neuerthelesse, the people dyd offer stil in the high places, howbeit vnto the
Lorde their God only.
18 The rest of the actes of Manasse, and his prayer vnto his God, & the wordes
of the sears that spake to him in the name of the Lorde God of Israel, behold
they are written in the sayinges of the kinges of Israel.
19 And his prayer, and howe that he was hearde, and all his sinnes, and his
trespasse, and the places where he made high places and set vp groues and images
before he was meekened, beholde they are written among the sayinges of the
sears.
20 And Manasse slept with his fathers, & they buried him in his owne house, and
Amon his sonne raigned in his roome.
21 Amon was two and twentie yeres old when he began to raigne, and raigned two
yeres in Hierusalem.
22 But he did euill in the sight of the Lord, like as dyd Manasse his father:
for Amon sacrifised to all the carued images whiche Manasse his father had made,
and serued them.
23 And submitted not him selfe before the Lorde, as Manasse his father had
meekened him selfe: but Amon trespassed greatly.
24 And his owne seruauntes conspired against him, and slue him in his owne
house.
25 But the people of the lande slue al them that had conspired against king
Amon: and the same people of the lande made Iosia his sonne king in his roome.

Chapter 34

1 Iosia was eyght yeres olde when he began to raigne, and he raigned in
Hierusalem thirtie and one yeres.
2 And he dyd that whiche was right in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the
wayes of Dauid his father, and bowed neither to the right hand nor to the left.
3 In the eyght yere of his raigne, when he was yet a childe, he began to seke
after the God of Dauid his father: And in the twelfth yere he began to purge
Iuda & Hierusalem from the high places, groues, carued images, and images of
metall.
4 And they brake downe the aulters of Baalim euen in his presence: and other
images that were in greater honour then they, he caused to be destroyed: And the
groues, carued images, and images of metall he brake and made dust of them, and
strowed it vpon the graues of them that had offered vnto them.
5 And he burnt the bones of the priestes vpon the aulters of them, and clensed
Iuda and Hierusalem:
6 And euen so did he in the cities of Manasse, Ephraim, Simeon, vnto Nephthali,
and in the wildernesse of them rounde about,
7 He plucked asunder the aulters & the groues, & did beate the images & stampe
them to powder, and cut downe all the idoles throughout all the lande of Israel,
and returned to Hierusalem againe.
8 In the eyghtenth yere of his raigne, when he had purged the lande and the
temple, he sent Saphan the sonne of Azaliahu, and Maasiah the gouernour of the
citie, and Ioah the sonne of Ioahaz the recorder, to repaire the house of the
Lorde his God.
9 And when they came to Helkiah the hie priest, they deliuered the money that
was brought into the house of God, whiche the Leuites that kept the entryes had
gathered of the hand of Manasse and Ephraim, and of all that yet remayned in
Israel, and of all Iuda and Beniamin, and they returned to Hierusalem.
10 And they put it in the handes of the workmen that had the ouersight of the
house of the Lorde, & they gaue it to the labourers that wrought in the house of
the Lorde, to repaire and mende the house.
11 Euen to masons and carpenters gaue they it, to get hewed stone, & timber for
couples and for beames of the houses which ye kinges of Iuda had destroyed.
12 And the men did the worke faythfully: And the ouersears of them to courage
them forward, were Iahath and Obadiahu Leuites of the children of Merari: and
Secharia and Mesullam of the children of the Caathites, and other of the
Leuites, whiche all could skill of instrumentes of musicke.
13 And ouer the bearers of burthens, and ouer all that wrought in whatsoeuer
worckmanship it were, were there scribes, officers, & porters of the Leuites.
14 And when they brought out the money that was brought into the house of the
Lorde, Helkia the priest founde the booke of the law of the Lorde geuen by
Moyses.
15 And Helkia aunswered and sayd to Saphan the scribe: I haue found the booke of
the law in the house of the Lord. And Helkia gaue the booke to Saphan.
16 And Saphan caried the booke to the king, and brought the king word againe,
saying: All that was committed to thy seruauntes, that do they.
17 And they haue gathered together the money that was founde in the house of the
Lord, and haue deliuered it into the handes of the ouersears of the worke, and
to the handes of the worckmen.
18 And then Saphan the scribe shewed the king, saying, Helkia the priest hath
geuen me a booke: and Saphan read in it before the king.
19 And it fortuned, that when the king had heard the wordes of the lawe, he tare
his clothes:
20 And the king commaunded Helkia and Ahikam the sonne of Saphan and Abdon the
sonne of Micah, and Saphan the scribe, and Asaa a seruaunt of the kinges,
saying:
21 Go and enquire of the Lord for me and for them that are left in Israel and
Iuda, concerning the wordes of the booke that is founde: For great is the wrath
of the Lord that is fallen vpon vs, because our fathers haue not kept the worde
of the Lorde, to do after all that is written in this booke.
22 And Helkia and they that the king had appoynted went to Hulda a prophetisse,
the wyfe of Sallum, the sonne of Thecuath, the sonne of Hasra, keper of the
wardrope (for she dwelt in Hierusalem within the seconde wall:) & so they
communed with her.
23 She aunswered them, Thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel: Tell ye the man that
sent you to me,
24 Euen thus sayth the Lorde: Beholde, I will bring euyll vpon this place, and
vpon the inhabiters thereof, euen al the curses that are written in the booke
whiche they haue read before the king of Iuda:
25 Because they haue forsaken me, and haue offred vnto other gods, to anger me
with all maner workes of their handes: therfore is my wrath set on fire against
this place, and shall not be quenched.
26 And as for the king of Iuda which sent you to enquire of the Lord, so shal ye
say vnto him: thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel, concerning the wordes whiche
thou hast hearde.
27 Because thyne heart did melt, and thou diddest meeke thy selfe before God
when thou heardest his wordes against this place, and against the inhabiters
thereof, and humbledst thy selfe before me, and tarest thy clothes, and weepedst
before me: that haue I heard also, sayth the Lorde.
28 Behold, I wil take thee to thy fathers, and thou shalt be put in thy graue in
peace, and thyne eyes shall not see all the mischiefe that I will bring vpon
this place, and vpon the inhabiters of the same. And they brought the king worde
againe.
29 Then the king sent and gathered together all the elders of Iuda and
Hierusalem:
30 And the king went vp into the house of the Lorde, and all the men of Iuda,
and the inhabiters of Hierusalem, and the priestes and Leuites, and all the
people great and smal, and the king did reade in their eares all the wordes of
the booke of the couenaunt that was founde in the house of the Lorde.
31 And the king stoode at his standing, and made a couenaunt before the Lorde,
to folowe the Lorde, and to kepe his commaundementes, his witnesse, and his
statutes, with all his heart, and with al his soule, and to fulfill the wordes
of the appoyntment written in the sayd booke.
32 And he set in their roome all them that were founde in Hierusalem and
Beniamin: and the inhabiters of Hierusalem did according to the couenaunt of the
Lorde God of their fathers.
33 And Iosia put away all maner of abhominations out of all landes that
parteyned to the children of Israel, and brought in all that were founde in
Israel, to worship and to serue the Lorde their God: And they turned not aside
from after the Lorde God of their fathers, as long as he liued.

Chapter 35

1 And Iosia helde the feast of passouer vnto the Lorde in Hierusalem, & they
slue passouer in the fourteenth day of the first moneth.
2 And he set the priestes in their offices, and ayded them in the seruice of the
house of the Lorde,
3 And sayd vnto the Leuites that taught all Israel, and were sanctified vnto the
Lorde: Put the holy arke in the house whiche Solomon the sonne of Dauid king of
Israel dyd buylde, it shalbe no more a burden vpon your shoulders: But now serue
the Lord your God, and his people Israel:
4 And prepare your selues by your auncient housholdes, and companies, according
to the writing of Dauid king of Israel, and the writing of Solomon his sonne:
5 And stand in the holy place, according to the deuision of the auncient
housholdes of your brethren the children of the people, and after the deuision
of the auncient housholdes of the Leuites:
6 Kill passouer, and sanctifie your selues, & prepare your brethren, that they
may do according to the word of the Lord by the hande of Moyses.
7 And Iosia gaue to the people flockes of sheepe and kiddes all for passouer,
and for al that were present, thirtie thousande by tale, and three thousande
oxen: and these were euen of the kinges substaunce.
8 And his lordes gaue willingly both vnto the people and to the priestes, and
vnto the Leuites: Helkia also, Zacharia, and Iehiel, rulers of the house of God,
gaue vnto the priestes for passouer offeringes two thousande and sixe hundred
sheepe, and three hundred oxen.
9 Conania, and Semeiahu, & Nathanael his brethren, & Hasabiah, and Iehiel, and
Iosabad, rulers of the Leuites, gaue vnto the Leuites passouer offeringes euen
fiue thousande sheepe and fiue hundred oxen.
10 And so the seruice was prepared, and the priestes stoode in their places, &
the Leuites in their distinct companies, at the kinges commaundement:
11 And they slue passouer, and the priestes sprinckled the blood with their
hande, and the Leuites pulled of the skinnes of the beastes.
12 And they set away the burnt offeringes, to geue them vnto the people that
were deuided be auncient houses, and that they shoulde offer vnto the Lorde,
like as is written in the booke of Moyses: And so dyd they with the oxen also.
13 And they dressed the passouer with fire, as the maner was: And the other
dedicate beastes sodde they in pottes, caldrons, and pannes, and deuided them
among all the people.
14 And afterward they made redy for them selues and for the priestes: for the
priestes the children of Aaron were busied in offring of burnt offringes and the
fat vntill night: therfore the Leuites prepared for them selues and for the
priestes the sonnes of Aaron.
15 And the singers the children of Asaph stoode in their standing, according to
the commaundement of Dauid, and Asaph, Heman, and Ieduthun the kinges sear: and
the porters wayted at euery gate, and might not depart from their seruice: for
their brethren the Leuites prepared for them.
16 And so all the seruice of the Lord was prepared the same day, to offer
passouer, and to offer burnt offeringes vpon the aulter of the Lord, according
to the commaundement of king Iosia,
17 And the children of Israel that were present, kept the passouer the same
time, and the feast of sweet bread seuen dayes.
18 And there was no passouer like to that kept in Israel from the dayes of
Samuel the prophete, neither did al the kinges of Israel holde such a passeouer
feast as dyd Iosia, and the priestes and Leuites, and all Iuda and Israel that
were present, and the inhabiters of Hierusalem.
19 This passouer was holden in the eyghteenth yere of the raigne of Iosia.
20 After all this when Iosia had prepared the temple, Necho king of Egypt came
vp to fight against Charcamis beside Euphrates: and Iosia went out against him.
21 Whiche sent messengers to hym, and said: What haue I to do with thee thou
king of Iuda? Be not thou against thy selfe this day, for my warre is against
another house, and God bad me make hast: Leaue of therfore & meddle not with God
which is with me, lest he destroy thee.
22 Neuerthelesse Iosia would not turne his face from him, but rather toke aduise
to fight with hym, and hearkened not vnto the wordes of Necho out of the mouth
of God, and came to fight in the valley of Mageddo.
23 And the shooters shot dartes at king Iosia: And the king sayde to his
seruauntes, Carie me away, for I am sore wounded.
24 His seruauntes therefore had hym out of that charet, and put him in another
charet that they had: And when they had brought him to Hierusalem, he died, and
was buried in the sepulchre of his fathers: And all Iuda and Hierusalem mourned
for Iosia.
25 And Ieremia lamented Iosia, and all singing men and singing women mourned for
Iosias in their lamentations to this day, and made the same lamentations an
ordinaunce in Israel: and beholde they are written in the lamentations.
26 The rest of the actes of Iosia and his goodnes whiche he did folowing in the
writing of the lawe of the Lorde,
27 And his sayinges first and last, behold they are written in the booke of the
kinges of Israel and Iuda.

Chapter 36

1 And the people of the lande toke Iehoahaz the sonne of Iosia, and made hym
king in his fathers steade in Hierusalem.
2 And Iehoahaz was twentie & three yeres olde when he began to raigne, and he
raigned three monethes in Hierusalem.
3 And the king of Egypt put him downe at Hierusalem, and merced the lande in an
hundreth talentes of siluer, and a talent of golde.
4 And the king of Egypt made Eliakim his brother king vpon Iuda and Hierusalem,
and turned his name to Iehoiacim: and Necho toke Iehoahaz his brother, and
caried him to Egypt.
5 Iehoiacim was twentie and fiue yeres old when he began to raigne, & he raigned
aleuen yeres in Hierusalem, and he did euil in the sight of the Lord his God.
6 Against him came vp Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and bounde hym with two
chaynes, to cary him to Babylon.
7 The king Nabuchodonosor also caried of the vessels of the house of the Lord to
Babylon, and put them in his temple at Babylon.
8 The rest of the actes of Iehoiacim, and his abhominations which he did, and
that which was found vpon him, behold they are written in the booke of the
kinges of Israel and Iuda: and Iehoiacin his sonne raigned in his steade.
9 And Iehoiacin was eyght yeres olde when he began to raigne, and he raigned
three monethes and ten dayes in Hierusalem, and dyd euyll in the sight of the
Lorde.
10 And when the yere was out, king Nabuchodonosor sent and fet him to Babylon
with the goodly vessels of the house of the Lorde, and made Zedekia his fathers
brother king ouer Iuda and Hierusalem.
11 Zedekia was one and twentie yeres old when he began the raigne, and raigned
aleuen yeres in Hierusalem.
12 And he dyd euyl in the sight of the Lord his God, and humbled not him selfe
before Ieremia the prophete, at the mouth of the Lorde.
13 And he rebelled against king Nabuchodonosor, which had receaued an oth of him
by God: but he was stifnecked, and to hard hearted to turne vnto the Lord God of
Israel.
14 Moreouer, all the chiefe of the priestes and the people trespassed
wonderfully after all maner of abominations of the heathen, and polluted the
house of the Lorde which he had halowed in Hierusalem.
15 And the Lorde God of their fathers sent to them by his messengers, rising vp
betimes, and sending: for he had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling
place.
16 But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his wordes, and misvsed
his prophetes, vntill the wrath of the Lorde arose against his people, and till
there was no remedie.
17 And so he brought vpon them the king of Chaldee, which slue their young men
with the sword in their holy temple, and spared neither young man, mayden, old
man, nor him that stowped for age: He gaue them all into his hande.
18 And all the vessels of the house of God, both great and small, and the
treasures of the house of the Lorde, and the treasures of the king, and of his
lordes: all these caryed he to Babylon.
19 And they burnt the house of God, and brake downe the wal of Hierusalem, and
burnt all the pallaices thereof with fire, and destroyed all the goodly iewels
therof.
20 And the rest that had escaped the sword, caried he to Babylon: where they
were bondmen to him & his children, vntill the time that Persia had the Empire:
21 To fulfill the worde of the Lord by the mouth of Ieremia, vntill the lande
had her pleasure of her Sabbathes: for as long as she lay desolate, she kept
Sabbath, vntil threescore and ten yeres were fulfilled.
22 And the first yere of Cyrus king of Persia (when the worde of the Lorde
spoken by the mouth of Ieremia was finished) the Lorde stirred vp the spirite of
Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdome,
and that by wryting, saying:
23 Thus sayth Cyrus king of Persia, All the kingdomes of the earth hath the
Lorde God of heauen geuen me, & hath charged me to buylde hym an house in
Hierusalem, that is in Iuda: Wherfore whosoeuer is among you of all his people,
the Lorde his God be with him, and let hym go vp.


Ezra

Chapter 1

1 In the first yere of Cyrus king of Persia (that the worde of the Lord spoken
by the mouth of Ieremia might be fulfilled) the Lorde stirred vp the spirite of
Cyrus king of Persia, that he caused to be proclaymed throughout all his empyre,
and to be written, saying,
2 Thus saith Cyrus the king of Persia: The Lorde God of heauen hath geuen me all
the kingdomes of the earth, and hath commaunded me to build him an house at
Hierusalem, which is in Iuda.
3 Whosoeuer nowe among you is of his people, the Lord his God be with him, and
let him go vp to Hierusalem in Iuda, and builde the house of the Lorde God of
Israel, he is the God that is at Hierusalem.
4 And whosoeuer remayneth yet in any maner of place where he is a straunger, let
the men of that place helpe him with siluer and golde, with good and cattaile,
beside that which they willingly offer for the house of God that is at
Hierusalem.
5 Then gat vp the principall fathers of Iuda and Beniamin, and the priestes and
Leuites, and all they whose spirite God had raysed to go vp and to builde the
house of the Lorde which is at Hierusalem.
6 And all they that were about them, strengthed their hande with vessels of
siluer & golde, with goodes, and cattaile, and iewels, besides all that was
wyllingly offered.
7 And king Cyrus brought foorth the vessels of the house of the Lord: which
Nabuchodonosor had taken out of Hierusalem, and had put in the house of his God.
8 Those did Cyrus the king of Persia bryng foorth by the hande of Michridates
the treasurer, & numbred them vnto Sesbazer the prince of Iuda.
9 And this is the number of them: thirtie chargers of golde, a thousand chargers
of siluer, twentie and nine kniues:
10 Thirtie basons of golde, and of other siluer basons foure hundred & ten: and
of other vessels a thousand.
11 Al the vessels of golde and siluer were fiue thousand and foure hundred: All
these did Sesbazer cary away with them that came vp out of the captiuitie of
Babylon, vnto Hierusalem.

Chapter 2

1 These are the children of the prouince, that went vp out of the captiuitie,
whom Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon had caried away vnto Babylon: & came
againe vnto Hierusalem and into Iuda euery one vnto his citie.
2 They that came with Zorobabel are these: Iesua, Nehemiah, Saraiah, Rehelaia,
Mardochai, Bilsan, Mispar, Biguai, Rehum, Baana. This is the number of the men
of the people of Israel:
3 The children of Pharos, two thousand an hundred seuentie and two.
4 The children of Sephatia, three hundred seuentie and two.
5 The children of Arath, seuen hundred seuentie and fiue.
6 The children of the captaine of Moab, of the children of Iesua and Ioab, two
thousand eyght hundred and twelue.
7 The children of Elam, a thousand two hundred fiftie and foure.
8 The children of Zathu, nine hundred and fouretie and fiue.
9 The children of Zaccai, seuen hundred and threescore.
10 The children of Bani, sixe hundred fouretie and two.
11 The children of Bebal, sixe hundred twentie and three.
12 The children of Asgad, a thousand two hundred twentie and two.
13 The children of Adonicam, sixe hundred sixtie and sixe.
14 The childre of Beguai, two thousand fiftie and sixe.
15 The children of Adin, foure hundred fiftie and foure.
16 The children of Ater of Hezekia, ninetie and eyght.
17 The children of Bezai, three hundred twentie and three.
18 The children of Iora, an hundred and twelue.
19 The children of Hasum, two hundred twentie and three.
20 The children of Gebbar, ninetie & fiue.
21 The children of Bethlehem, an hundred twentie and three.
22 The men of Netopha, fiftie and sixe.
23 The men of Anathoth, an hundred twentie and eyght.
24 The children of Asinaueth, fouretie and two.
25 The children of Kiriathiarim, euen the children of Cephira and Beeroth, seuen
hundred fouretie and three.
26 The children of Harama and Geba, sixe hundred twentie and one.
27 The men of Michmas, an hundred twentie and two.
28 The men of Bethel and Hay, two hundred twentie and three.
29 The children of Nebo, fiftie and two.
30 The children of Magbis, an hundred fiftie and sixe.
31 The childre of the other Elam, a thousand two hundred fiftie and foure.
32 The children of Harim, three hundred and twentie.
33 The children of Lodhadid and Ono, seuen hundred twentie and fiue.
34 The childre of Iericho, three hundred fouretie and fiue.
35 The children of Senaa, three thousand sixe hundred and thirtie.
36 The priestes: of the children of Iedaia of the house of Iesua, nine hundred
seuentie and three.
37 The children of Immer, a thousand fiftie and two.
38 The children of Phashur, a thousand two hundred fouretie and seuen.
39 The children of Arim, a thousand and seuenteene.
40 The Leuites: the children of Iesua & Cadmiel, of the children of Hodauia,
seuentie and foure.
41 The singers: the children of Asaph, an hundred twentie and eyght.
42 The children of the doore kepers, the children of Sallum, the children of
Ater, the children of Talmon, the children of Accub, the children of Hatita, the
children of Sobai, altogether an hundred thirtie and nine.
43 The Nethinims: the children of Ziha, the children of Asupha, the children of
Tabaoth,
44 The children of Ceros, the children of Siaa, the children of Padon,
45 The children of Lebana, the children of Hagaba, the children of Accub,
46 The children of Hagab, the children of Semlai, the children of Hanan,
47 The children of Giddel, the children of Gahar, the children of Reaia,
48 The children of Razin, the children of Necoda, the children of Gasam,
49 The children of Uzza, the children of Paseah, the children of Besai,
50 The children of Asna, the children of Mehunim, the children of Nephusim,
51 The children of Bacbuc, the children of Hacupa, the children of Harhur,
52 The children of Bazluth, the children of Mehida, the children of Harsa,
53 The children of Barcos, the children of Sisara, the children of Thamah,
54 The children of Neziah, the children of Hatipha.
55 The children of Solomons seruautes, the children of Sotai, the children of
Sophereth, the children of Peruda,
56 The children of Iaala, the children of Darcon, the children of Giddel,
57 The children of Sephatiah, the children of Hattil, the children of Pochereth
Hazbaim, the children of Ami.
58 All the Nethinims, and the children of Solomons seruauntes, were altogether
three hundred ninetie and two.
59 And these went vp from Thelmelah, and from Thelharsa, Cherub, Addon, and
Immer: but they coulde not discerne their fathers house & their seede, whether
they were of Israel.
60 The children of Delata, the children of Tobia, the children of Necoda, sixe
hundre fiftie and two.
61 And of the children of the priestes: the children of Habaia, the children of
Accoz, the childre of Berzillai, which toke one of the daughters of Berzillai
the Gileadite to wyfe, and was called after their name.
62 These sought their euidence among them that had the regester of birth, and
were not founde therein, therefore were they put from the priesthood.
63 And Hathirsatha said vnto them that they should not eate of the most holy,
till there rose vp a priest to weare Urim and Thummim.
64 The whole congregation together, was fouretie & two thousand, three hundred
and threescore:
65 Beside their seruauntes and maydens, of whom there were seuen thousand three
hundred thirtie and seuen: And there were among them two hundred singing men and
women.
66 Their Horses were seuen hundred thirtie and sixe: their Mules two hundred
fouretie and fiue,
67 And their Camels foure hundred thirtie and fiue: their Asses sixe thousand
seuen hundred and twentie.
68 And certaine of the chiefe fathers, when they came to the house of the Lorde
at Hierusalem, they offred them selues wylling for the house of God, to set it
vp in his place:
69 And gaue golde after their habilitie, vnto the treasure of the worke, euen
threescore and one thousand peeces, and fiue thousand pounde of siluer, and an
hundred priestes garmentes.
70 So the priestes, and the Leuites and certaine of the people, and the singers,
and the porters, and the Nethinims dwelt in their cities, and all Israel in
their cities.

Chapter 3

1 And when the seuenth moneth came, and the childre of Israel were now in their
cities, the people came together euen as one man to Hierusalem.
2 And there stoode vp Iesua the sonne of Ioseder, and his brethren the priestes,
and Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel and his brethren, and builded the aulter of
the God of Israel, to offer burnt offeringes thereon, as it is written in the
law of Moyses the man of God.
3 And the aulter set they vpon his sockets: for there was a fearefulnesse among
them, because of the people of those countries, therefore they offered burnt
offeringes theron vnto the lorde, euen burnt offeringes in the morning and at
euening.
4 And they helde the feast of tabernacles as it is written, and offered burnt
sacrifices dayly, according to the number and custome, day by day.
5 Afterwarde they offered dayly burnt offringes also, and in the new moones, and
in al the feast dayes that were consecrated vnto the Lord, and for all them
which did of their owne free wyll offer vnto the Lorde.
6 From the first day of the seuenth moneth, began they to offer burnt sacrifices
vnto the Lord: euen when the foundation of the temple of the Lorde was not yet
layde.
7 They gaue money also vnto the masons and carpenters, and meate and drincke,
and oyle vnto them of Sidon and of Tyre, to bring the Cedar timber from Libanus
by sea vnto Ioppa, according to the graunt that they had of Cyrus the king of
Persia.
8 In the second yere of their comming vnto the house of God at Hierusalem in the
second moneth, began Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel, and Iesua the sonne of
Iosedec, and the remnaunt of their brethren, the priestes and Leuites, and all
they that were come out of the captiuitie vnto Hierusalem: and appoynted the
Leuites from twentie yeres olde and aboue, to see that the worke of the house of
the Lorde went forwarde.
9 And Iesua stoode with his sonnes and brethren, and Cadmiel with his sonnes &
the children of Iuda together, to set forwarde the workmen of the house of God,
euen the childre of Henadad, with their children, and their brethren the
Leuites.
10 And when the builders layed the foundation of the temple of the Lorde, they
appoynted the priestes in their araye with trumpettes, and the Leuites the
children of Asaph with cymbales, to prayse the Lorde after the maner of Dauid
king of Israel.
11 And they sang together when they gaue prayse and thankes vnto the lorde,
Because he is gracious, and because his mercie endureth for euer vpon Israel:
And all the people showted loude in praysing the Lorde, because the foundation
of the house of the Lord was layd.
12 Many also of the priestes & Leuites and chiefe fathers, and auncient men
which had seene the first house, when the foundation was layde before their
eyes, wept with a loude voyce, and many showted aloude with ioy:
13 So that the people coulde not discerne the ioyfull sounde & gladnesse, from
the noyse of the weeping among the people: for the people showted with a loude
crye, and the noyse was heard farre of.

Chapter 4

1 But the aduersaries of Iuda and Beniamin, heard that the children of the
captiuitie builded the temple vnto the Lorde God of Israel:
2 And they came to Zorobabel and to the principall fathers, and saide vnto them:
We wyll builde with you, for we seeke the Lorde your God, as ye do, and we haue
done sacrifice vnto him since the time of Asor Hadon the king of Assur which
brought vs vp hither.
3 And Zorobabel, and Iesua, and the other auncient fathers of Israel, sayde vnto
them: It can not be, that you and we together shoulde builde the house vnto our
God: for we our selues wyll builde alone vnto the Lorde our God of Israel, as
Cyrus the king of Persia hath commaunded vs.
4 And it came to passe, that the folke of the lande discouraged the people of
Iuda, & troubled them as they were building:
5 And hyred counsellers against them, to hinder their deuice as long as Cyrus
the king of Persia liued, vntil the raigne of Darius king of Persia.
6 And in the raigne of Ahasuerus, euen at the beginning of his raigne, wrote
they vnto him a complaynt against the inhabiters of Iuda and Hierusalem.
7 And in the dayes of Artaxerxes, wrote Mithridach, Tabel, and the other of his
counsell, vnto Artaxerxes the king of Persia with faire wordes: And the writing
of the letter was in the Syrians speache, and interpreted in the language of the
Syrians:
8 Rehum the recorder, and Samsai the scribe wrote a letter from Hierusalem to
Artaxerxes the king, as it foloweth.
9 Then Rehum the recorder, and Samsai the scribe, and other of their company,
they of Dina, of Apharsath, of Tharpelai, of Persia, of Arache, of Babylon, of
Susan, of Deha, of Elan,
10 And other of the people whom the great & noble Asnappar brought ouer, and set
in the cities of Samaria, and other that are nowe beyond the water, and
Cheeneth.
11 This is the copie of the letter that they sent vnto king Artaxerxes: Thy
seruauntes, and the men that are nowe beyond the water, and Cheeneth.
12 Be it knowen vnto the king that the Iewes which came vp from thee to vs, are
come vnto Hierusalem, a citie seditious and froward, and builde the same, and
set vp the walles thereof, and lay the foundations.
13 Be it knowen now vnto the king, that if this citie be builded, and the walles
made vp againe, then shal not they geue toule, tribute, and custome, & the
kinges profite shall incurre damage.
14 And now in the meane season we haue destroyed the temple, and woulde no
longer see the kinges dishonour, therefore sent we out also and certified the
king,
15 That it may be sought in the booke of the cronicles of thy progenitours, and
so shalt thou finde in the booke of the cronicles, and perceaue that this citie
is seditious and noysome vnto the kinges and landes, and that they cause other
also among them to rebell of olde: and for the same cause was this citie
destroyed.
16 Therfore do we certifie the king, that if this citie be builded againe, and
the walles thereof made vp, thou shalt hereafter haue no portion beyond the
water.
17 Then sent the king an aunswere vnto Rehum the recorder and Samsai the scribe,
and to the other of their companions that dwell in Samaria, and vnto the other
that were beyond the water in Selam and Cheeth.
18 The letter which ye sent vnto vs, hath ben openly read before me.
19 And I haue commaunded to make searche, and it is found that this citie of
olde hath made insurrection against kinges, and that rebellion and sedition hath
ben committed therein.
20 There haue ben mightie kinges also at Hierusalem, which haue raigned ouer all
countreys beyond the water: and toule, tribute, and custome was geuen vnto them,
21 Geue ye nowe therefore commaundement, that the same men be forbidden, and
that the citie be not builded againe, till I haue geuen another commaundement.
22 Take heede now that ye be not negligent to do this: for why should the king
haue harme there through?
23 Nowe when the copie of king Artaxerxes letter was read before Rehum & Simsai
the scribe, and their companyons, they went vp in all the haste to Hierusalem
vnto the Iewes, and forbad them with violence and power.
24 Then ceassed the worke of the house of God at Hierusalem, and continued so
vnto the second yere of Darius king of Persia.

Chapter 5

1 The prophetes Aggens, and Zachari the sonne of Iddo, prophecied vnto the Iewes
that were in Iuda and Hierusalem in the name of the God of Israel, eue vnto
them.
2 Then gat vp Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel, and Iesua the sonne of Iosedec,
and began to builde the house of God at Hierusalem: and with them were the
prophetes of God, which helped them.
3 At the same time came to them Thathanai which was captaine beyond the water,
and Stharbuzanai, and their companions, and saide thus vnto them: Who hath
commaunded you to builde this house, & to make vp these walles?
4 Then saide we vnto them after this maner: What are the names of the men that
make this building?
5 But the eye of their God was vpon the elders of the Iewes, that they could not
cause them to ceasse, till the matter was brought to Darius: and then they
aunswered by letters thereunto.
6 This is the copie of the letter that Thathanai which was captayne beyond the
water, & Stharbuzanai, & the counsailours of Apharsath which were beyond the
water, sent vnto king Darius.
7 And the matter that they sent vnto him, was written thus within the letter:
Unto Darius the king, all peace.
8 Be it knowen vnto the king that we went into the prouince of Iurie to the
house of the great God, which is builded with mightie great stones, and beames
are layde in the walles, and the worke goeth fast foorth, and prospereth in
their handes.
9 Then asked we the elders, and saide vnto them as it foloweth: Who commaunded
you to builde this house, and to make vp the walles thereof?
10 We asked their names also, that we might certifie thee, and write the names
of the men that were their rulers.
11 But they aunswered vs with these wordes, and saide: We are the seruauntes of
him that is God of heauen and earth, and builde the house that was builded of
olde and many yeres ago, which the great king of Israel builded, and set vp.
12 But after our fathers had prouoked the God of heauen vnto wrath, he gaue them
ouer into the hande of Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon & of the Chaldees,
which brake downe this house, and caried the people away captiue vnto Babylon.
13 But in the first yere of Cyrus the king of Babylon, the same king Cyrus gaue
commaundement concerning this house of God, that it shoulde be built againe.
14 And the vessels of golde and siluer of the house of God which Nabuchodonosor
toke out of the temple that was at Hierusalem, and brought them into the temple
at Babylon: those did Cyrus the king take out of the temple at Babylon, and they
were deliuered vnto one Sasbazar by name, whom he made captaine,
15 And saide vnto him: Take these vessels, and go thy way, and set them in the
temple that is at Hierusalem, and let the house of God be builded in his place.
16 Then came the same Sasbazar, and layed the foundation of the house of God
which is at Hierusalem: Since that time also vntill nowe hath it ben in
building, and yet is it not finished.
17 Now therefore if it please the king, let there be searche made in the kinges
librarie which is there at Babylon, whether it haue ben king Cyrus commaundement
that this temple of God at Hierusalem shoulde be builded: and let the king send
his minde concerning the same matter.

Chapter 6

1 Then comaunded king Darius: & they made searche in the librarie, eue in the
place where they layed vp the treasure at Babylon:
2 And there was found in a coffer in the palace that is in the prouince of the
Medes, a volume: and therein was it thus written as a memoriall.
3 In the first yere of king Cyrus, gaue the same king Cyrus commaundement
concerning the house of God at Hierusalem, that the same house should be builded
in the place where they offer the sacrifices, & to ioyne the walles together of
threescore cubites heyght, and threescore cubites breadth.
4 Three rowes of rough stones, and one rowe of newe timber: and the expences
shalbe geuen of the kinges house.
5 And let the golde and siluer vessels of the house of God, which Nabuchodonosor
toke out of the temple at Hierusalem and brought vnto Babylon, be restored, and
brought againe vnto the temple at Hierusalem to their place in the house of God.
6 Now therefore thou Thathanai captaine beyond the water, & Stharbuzanai, and
your counsailers, and Aphersechei which are beyond the water, get ye away from
them.
7 Let the worke of the house of this God alone, that the captaine of the Iewes
and their elders may builde the house of God in his place.
8 I haue commaunded what ye shall do to the elders of Iuda for the building of
the house of God, that of the kinges goodes, euen of the tribute beyond the
water, foorthwith expences be geuen vnto the men, that they be not hindred.
9 And if they haue neede of calues, rammes, and lambes for the burnt offering of
the God of heauen, wheate, salte, wine, and oyle, after the custome of the
priestes at Hierusalem, let the same be geuen them dayly without any delay:
10 That they may haue to offer sweete sauours vnto the God of heauen, & pray for
the kinges lyfe, and for his children.
11 And such a commaundement haue I geuen, that what man soeuer he be that
altereth this word, there shall a beame be taken from his house, and set vp, and
he shalbe hanged thereon, & his house shalbe made a dounghill for the same
thing.
12 And the God that set his name there, destroy all kinges and people that put
to their hande to aulter and to breake downe the house of God which is at
Hierusalem. I Darius haue made a decree, that this be done with speede.
13 Then Thathanai the captaine of the countrey beyond the water, & Stharbuzanai,
with their counsailours, according to that which king Darius had sent, so they
did speedyly their diligence.
14 And the elders of the Iewes builded, and they prospered through the
prophecying of Aggeus the prophete and Zachari the sonne of Iddo, and they
builded, and they finished it according to the commaundement of the God of
Israel, and after the commaundement of Cyrus and Darius & Artaxerxes, kinges of
Persia.
15 And this house was finished the third day of the moneth Adar, euen in the
sixt yere of the raigne of king Darius.
16 And the childre of Israel, the priestes, the Leuites, and the other children
of the captiuitie, helde the dedication of this house of God with ioy:
17 And offered at the dedication of this house of God an hundred oxen, two
hudred rammes, foure hudred lambes: and for the reconciling of all Israel twelue
hee goates, according to the number of the tribes of Israel:
18 And set the priestes in their sundry courses, and the Leuites in their diuers
offices, to minister vnto God at Hierusalem, as it is written in the booke of
Moyses.
19 And the children of the captiuitie held Passouer vpon the foureteenth day of
the first moneth.
20 For the priestes and Leuites were purified all together, & killed Passouer
for all the children of the captiuitie, and for their brethren the priestes, and
for them selues.
21 And the children of Israel which were come againe out of captiuitie, and all
such as had seperated them selues vnto them from the filthinesse of the heathen
of the lande, to seeke the Lorde God of Israel, did eate,
22 And helde the feast of vnleauened bread seuen dayes with ioy: For the Lorde
had made them glad, and turned the heart of the king of Assur vnto them, to
strengthen their handes in the worke of the house of God, euen the God of
Israel.

Chapter 7

1 After these thinges, ther was in the raigne of Artaxerxes king of Persia, one
Esdras the sonne of Saraia, the sonne of Asaria, the sonne of Helkia,
2 The sonne of Sallum, the sonne of Zador, the sonne of Ahitob,
3 The sonne of Amaria, the sonne of Asaria, the sonne of Meraioth,
4 The sonne of Zeraia, the sonne of Uzzi, the sonne of Bucci,
5 The sonne of Abisua, the sonne of Phinehes, the sonne of Eleasar, the sonne of
Aaron the chiefe priest.
6 This Esdras also went vp from Babylon, and was a perfect scribe in the law of
Moyses which the Lorde God of Israel did geue: And the king gaue him al that he
required, according to the hand of the Lorde his God which was vpon him.
7 And there went vp certaine of the children of Israel, of the priestes,
leuites, singers, porters, and of the Nethinims vnto Hierusalem, in the seuenth
yere of king Artaxerxes.
8 And he came to Hierusalem in the fifth moneth, euen in the seuenth yere of the
king.
9 For vpon the first day of the first moneth, began he to go vp from Babylon:
and on the first day of the fifth moneth came he to Hierusalem, according to the
good hand of his God that was vpon him.
10 For Esdras prepared his heart to seeke the law of the Lorde, and to do it,
and to teache the preceptes and iudgementes in Israel.
11 And this is the copie of the letter that king Artaxerxes gaue vnto Esdras the
priest, and scribe, which was a writer of the wordes and commaundementes of the
Lorde, and of his statutes ouer Israel.
12 Artaxerxes a king of kinges, vnto Esdras the priest and scribe of the law of
the God of heauen, peace and salutation.
13 I haue commaunded that all they of the people of Israel, and of the priestes
and Leuites in my realme, which are minded of their owne good wyll to go vp to
Hierusalem, go with thee:
14 And therfore art thou sent of the king and of his seuen counsailers, to
visite Iuda and Hierusalem, according to the law of thy God, which is in thy
hande:
15 And that thou shouldest take with thee siluer and golde which the king and
his counsailers offer of their owne good wyll vnto the God of Israel, whose
habitation is at Hierusalem:
16 And all the siluer and golde that thou canst finde in al the countrey of
Babylon, with it that the people offer of their owne good wyll, and the priestes
geue wyllingly for the house of their God which is at Hierusalem:
17 That thou mayst bye diligently with the same money, oxen, rammes, and lambes,
with their meate offringes and drinke offringes, & thou shalt offer them vpon
the aulter of the house of your God which is at Hierusalem.
18 And looke what lyketh thee and thy brethren to do with the remnaunt of the
siluer and golde, that do after the wyll of your God.
19 And the vessels that are geuen thee for the ministration in the house of thy
God, those deliuer thou before God at Hierusalem.
20 And whatsoeuer thing more shalbe nedefull for the house of thy God which is
necessary for to spend, thou shalt receaue the charges out of the kinges
treasure house.
21 I king Artaxerxes haue commaunded all the treasures beyond the water, that
loke what soeuer Esdras the priest and scribe in the law of the God of heauen
requireth of you, that ye fulfill the same speedylie,
22 Untill an hundred talentes of siluer, and till an hundred quarters of wheate,
and till an hundred battes of wine, and till an hundred vattes of oyle, & salt
without measure.
23 Whatsoeuer also is by the commaundement of the God of heauen, let the same be
done without any delay for the house of the God of heauen, that he be not wroth
against the realme, & against the king and his children.
24 And we certifie you, that ye haue no aucthoritie to require taxing and
custome and yerely rentes, vpon any of the priestes, leuites, singers, porters,
Nethinims, and ministers in the house of his God.
25 And thou Esdras, after the wysdome of thy God that is in thyne hande, set
iudges and arbitrers by my aucthoritie to iudge all the people that is beyond
the water, euen all such as know the law of thy God: and them that knowe it not,
those see that ye teache.
26 And whosoeuer wyll not fulfill the lawe of thy God, and the kinges lawe, let
him haue his iudgement without delay, whether it be vnto death, or to be rooted
out, or to be condempned in goodes, or to be put in prison.
27 Blessed be the Lorde God of our fathers, which so had inspired the kinges
heart, to garnishe the house of the Lord that is at Hierusalem:
28 And hath enclined mercie vnto me in the presence of the king and his
counsailers, and before all the kinges high estates: And I was comforted euen as
the hande of the Lord my God was vpon me, and so gathered I the heades of Israel
together, that they might go vp with me.

Chapter 8

1 These are now the principall fathers of them, and this is the register of them
that went vp with me from Babylon, what time as king Artaxerxes raigned.
2 Of the children of Phinehes, Gersom: of the children of Ithamar, Daniel: of
the children of Dauid, Hattus:
3 Of the children of Zechania, among the children of Pharos, Zachari & with him
were numbred an hundred and fiftie men.
4 Of the childre of the captaine of Moab, Elioenai the sonne of Zerahia, & with
him two hundred men.
5 Of the children of Zechania the sonne of Iahasiel, and with him three hundred
men.
6 Of the children of Adin, Abed the sonne of Ionathan, and with hym fiftie men.
7 Of the children of Elam, Isai the sonne of Athalia, and with hym seuentie men.
8 Of the children of Saphatia, Zebadia the sonne of Michael, and with hym
fourescore men.
9 Of the children of Ioab, Obadia the sonne of Iehiel, and with him two hundred
and eyghteene men.
10 Of the children of Selomith, the sonne of Iosephia, and with hym an hundred
and threescore men.
11 Of the children of Bebai, Zachari the sonne of Bebai, and with hym twentie
and eyght men.
12 Of the children of Asgad, Iohanan the sonne of Hakatan, and with hym an
hundred and ten men.
13 Of the children of Adonicam that were the last, whose names are these:
Eliphelet, Iehiel, and Samaiah, & with them threescore men.
14 Of the children of Biguai, Uthai, and Zabud, & with them seuentie men.
15 And I gathered them together by the water that runneth towarde Ahaua, and
there abode we three dayes: And I loked among the people and the priestes, and
founde there none of the children of Leui.
16 Then sent I to Eliezer, to Ariel, Semeia, Elnachan, Iarib, Elnathan, Nathan,
Zacharia, and to Mesullam, the rulers, and to Ioiarib and Elnathan, which were
men of vnderstanding.
17 And to those gaue I commaundement vnto Iddo the chiefest at Casphia, and I
told them what they should say vnto Iddo & to his brethren the Nethinims at
Casphia, that they shoulde cause the ministers of the house of our God to come
vnto vs.
18 And through the good hande of our God vpon vs, they brought vs a very wyse
man from among the children of Moholi the sonne of Leui the sonne of Israel, and
Sarabia with his sonnes and his brethren, euen eyghteene.
19 And Hasabia and with him Isai of the children of Merari, with his brethren,
and their sonnes, twentie.
20 And of the Nethinims whom Dauid and the princes gaue to minister vnto the
Leuites, two hundred and twentie of Nethininis: which al were named by name.
21 And euen there at the water beside Ahaua I proclaymed a fast, that we might
humble our selues before our God, and seke of hym a right way for vs, and for
our children, and for all our substaunce.
22 For I was ashamed to require of the king souldiers and horsemen, to helpe vs
against the enemie in the way: for we had spoken vnto the king, saying: The
hande of our God is vpon all them that seke him in goodnesse, & his power and
wrath is against all them that forsake hym.
23 So we fasted, and besought our God for this, and he was entreated of vs.
24 And I toke out twelue of the chiefe priestes, Sarabia, and Hasabia, and ten
of their brethren with them,
25 And wayed them the siluer and golde, and vessels that were appoynted for the
house of our God, whiche the king and his consaylers, and his lordes, and al
Israel that were there at hand, had geuen together.
26 And I wayed vnto their hande sixe hundred and fiftie talentes of siluer, and
in siluer vessels an hundred talentes, and in golde an hundred talentes:
27 Twentie basons of gold of a thousand drammes, and two costly vessels of good
brasse, as cleare as golde.
28 And I sayde vnto them: Ye are consecrate vnto the Lord, like as the vessels
are holy also: and the gold and siluer are geuen of a good wil vnto the Lord God
of your fathers.
29 Watch ye, and kepe them: for ye shall way them downe before the chiefe
priestes, and Leuites, and auncient fathers of Israel at Hierusalem, in the
treasuries of the house of the Lorde.
30 Then toke the priestes and Leuites the wayed siluer and golde, and vessels,
to bring it to Hierusalem vnto the house of our God.
31 And we brake vp from the water of Ahaua on the twelfth day of the first
moneth, to go vnto Hierusalem: and the hande of our God was vpon vs, and
deliuered vs from the hande of the enemies, and of such as layed wayte for vs by
the way.
32 And we came to Hierusalem, and abode there three dayes.
33 But on the fourth day was the siluer and gold and vessels wayed in the house
of our God by the hande of Meremoth the sonne of Uria the priest, and with him
was Eleazar the sonne of Phinehes, and with them was Iosabad the sonne of Iesua,
and Noadia the sonne of Bennoi the Leuites.
34 According to the number and weyght of euery one, was the wayght all written
vp at the same time.
35 And the children of the captiuitie, which were come out of captiuitie, offred
burnt offringes vnto the God of Israel, twelue bullockes for all Israel, ninetie
and sixe rammes, seuentie and seuen lambes, twelue hee goates for sinne offering
all to the burnt offering of the Lorde.
36 And they deliuered the kinges commission vnto the kinges officers, and to the
captaynes that were beyonde the water: And they promoted the people, and the
house of God.

Chapter 9

1 When these thinges were done, the rulers came to me, and sayde: The people of
Israel, and the priestes & Leuites are not separated from the people of the
landes, as touching their abhominations: namely of the Chanaanites, Hethites,
Pherezites, Iebusites, Ammonites, Moabites, Egyptians, and Amorites.
2 For they haue taken the daughters of the same to them selues and to their
sonnes, and the holy seede is mixed with the nations of the landes, & the hand
of the princes and rulers hath ben principall in the trespasse.
3 And when I heard this saying, I rent my clothes and my garment, & pluckt of
the heere of my head & of my beard, and sate mourning.
4 And there resorted vnto me all such as feared the wordes of the God of Israel,
because of the transgression of the people of the captiuitie: And I sat mourning
vntill the euening sacrifice.
5 And about the euening sacrifice I arose vp from my heauinesse, and rent my
clothes and my rayment, and fell vpon my knees, and spread out my handes vnto
the Lorde my God,
6 And sayde: My God, I am ashamed, and dare not lift vp myne eyes vnto thee my
God: for our wickednesses are growen ouer our head, and our trespasse is waxed
great vnto the heauen.
7 Since the time of our fathers haue we ben in great trespasse vnto this day,
and because of our wickednesses haue we and our kinges and our priestes ben
deliuered into the hande of the kinges of the nations, vnto the sworde, into
captiuitie, into a spoyle, and into confusion of face, as it is to see this day.
8 And nowe for a litle space grace hath ben shewed from the Lorde our God, in
causing a remnaunt to escape, and in geuing vs a nayle in his holy place, that
our God may light our eyes, and geue vs a litle lyfe to take breath in our
bondage:
9 For we were bondmen, and yet our God hath not forsaken vs in our bondage, but
hath enclined mercie vnto vs in the sight of the king of Persia, to geue vs lyfe
to set vp the house of our God, and to redresse the desolation therof, and to
geue vs a wall in Iuda and Hierusalem.
10 And nowe O our God, what shall we say after this? for we haue forsaken thy
commaundementes,
11 Whiche thou hast commaunded by thy seruauntes the prophetes, saying: The
lande vnto which ye go to possesse, it is an vncleane lande, because of the
filthinesse of the people of the landes, whiche with their abhominations haue
made it full of vncleannesse on euery syde.
12 Therfore shal ye not geue your daughters vnto their sonnes, and their
daughters shall ye not take vnto your sonnes, nor seke their peace and wealth
for euer: that ye may be strong and enioy the goodnesse of the lande, and that
ye and your children may haue the inheritaunce of it for euermore.
13 And after that all these thinges are come vpon vs because of our euyll deedes
and great trespasses, seyng that thou our God hast stayed vs from beyng beneath
for our iniquities, and hast geuen vs such deliuerance:
14 Shoulde we returne to breake thy commaundementes, and ioyne in affinitie with
the people of these abhominations? wouldest not thou be angry towardes vs till
thou hadst consumed vs, so that there should be no remnaunt, nor any escaping?
15 O Lorde God of Israel, thou art righteous, for we remayne yet escaped, as it
is to see this day: Beholde also, in thy presence are we in our trespasses, &
because of it may we not stand before thee.

Chapter 10

1 And when Esdras prayed after this maner, and knowledged, wept, and lay before
the house of God, there resorted vnto hym out of Israel a very great
congregation, of men, and women, and children: and the people wept very sore.
2 And Sechania the sonne of Iehiel, one of the children of Elam, aunswered, and
sayde vnto Esdras: We haue trespassed against our God, & haue taken straunge
wyues of the people of the lande: Yet nowe there is hope in Israel concerning
this thing.
3 For nowe we will make a couenaunt with our God, and put away all the wiues and
such as are borne of them, according to the counsel of the Lorde: and we wil be
in the feare of the commaundementes of our God, that we may do according to the
lawe.
4 Get thee vp, for this matter belongeth vnto thee, we also will be with thee:
be of good comfort therfore, and do it.
5 Then rose Esdras, and toke an oth of the chiefe priestes and Leuites, and of
all Israel, that they should do according to this worde: And they sware.
6 And Esdras rose vp from before the house of God, and went into the chamber of
Iohanan the sonne of Eliasib: and when he came thyther, he dyd eate no bread,
nor dronke water: for he mourned, because of the transgression of the people
that had ben in captiuitie.
7 And they caused a proclamation to go throughout Iuda & Hierusalem vnto al them
of the captiuitie, that they shoulde gather them selues together vnto
Hierusalem:
8 And that whosoeuer came not within three dayes, according to the deuice of the
rulers and elders, all his substaunce should be forfayted, and he should be put
out from the congregation of them of the captiuitie.
9 Then all the men of Iuda and Beniamin gathered them selues together vn-
Hierusalem within three dayes, euen the twentith day of the nynth moneth: & all
the people sate in the streete of the house of God, and trembled, because of
this matter, and for the rayne.
10 And Esdras the priest stoode vp, and sayd vnto them: Ye haue transgressed, &
haue taken straunge wyues, to make the trespasse of Israel yet more.
11 Confesse now therfore vnto the Lord God of our fathers, and do his pleasure:
and separate your selues from the people of the lande, and from the straunge
wyues.
12 And all the congregation aunswered, and sayde with a loude voyce: It shalbe
so, and we will do as thou hast sayde.
13 But the people are many, and it is a rayny weather, & the people are to faynt
to tary without in the streete, neither is this a worke of one day or two: for
we haue offended very sore in this thing.
14 Let our rulers stande therefore in all the congregation, and let al them
which haue taken straunge wyues in our cities come at the time appoynted, and
let the elders of euery citie and their iudges be with them, till the fierce
wrath of our God for this matter be turned from vs.
15 Then were appoynted Ionathan the sonne of Asahel, and Iahasia the sonne of
Thecua ouer this matter: & Mesullam and Sabathai the Leuites helped them.
16 And the children of the captiuitie dyd euen so: And Esdras the priest, and
the auncient heads through the house of their fathers, all men of great fame,
separated themselues, & sate them downe in the first day of the tenth moneth to
examine the matter.
17 And vntill the first day of the first moneth they were finishing the
businesse, with al the men that had taken straunge wyues.
18 And among the children of the priestes there were men found that had taken
straunge wiues, namely among the children of Iesua, the sonne of Iosedec, and of
his brethren, Maasia, and Eliezer, Iarib, and Gedalia.
19 And they gaue their handes that they woulde put away their wiues: and they
that had trespassed, gaue a ramme for their trespasse.
20 And among the children of Immer: Hanani, and Zebadia.
21 Among the children of Harim: Maasia, Elia, Semeia, Iehiel, and Uzziah.
22 Among the children of Pashur: Elioenai, Maasia, Ismael, Nethanel, Iosabad,
and Elasah.
23 Among the Leuites: Iosabad, Semei, and Celaia (whiche same is Celitah)
Phathaiah, Iuda, and Eliezer.
24 Among the singers also, Eliasib: And among the porters, Sellum, and Telem,
and Uri.
25 And of Israel: Among the children of Pharos, Remeia, Iesia, Melchia, Miamin,
Eliezer, Melchia, & Banaiah.
26 Among the children of Elam: Mathama, Zacharia, Iehiel, Abdi, Ierimoth, and
Elia.
27 Among the children of Zatthu: Elioenai, Eliasib, Mathania, Ierimoth, Zabad,
and Aziza.
28 Among the children of Bebai: Iehohanan, Hanania, Zabbai, and Athalai.
29 Among the children of Bani: Mesullam, Malluch, Adaiah, Iasub, Saal, and
Ieramoth.
30 Among the children of the captayne of Moab: Adna, Chelal, Benaia, Maasia,
Mathania, Besalel, Bennui, & Manasse.
31 Among the children of Harim: Eliezer, Isuah, Melchiia, Semeia, and Simeon,
32 Beniamin, Malluch, and Semariah.
33 Among the children of Hasum: Matthenai, Mathatha, Zabad, Eliphelet, Ieremai,
Manasse, and Semei.
34 Among the children of Bani: Maadai, Amram, and Uel,
35 Banea, Badaia, Cheliau,
36 Uaniah, Maremoth, Eliasib,
37 Mathaniah, Mathanai, Iasi,
38 Bani, Bennui, and Semei,
39 Selemia, Nathan, Adaiah,
40 Machnadebai, Sasai, Sarai,
41 Asarel, Selennahu, and Semariah,
42 Sallum, Amaria, and Ioseph.
43 Among the children of Nebo, Iehiel, Mathathia, Zabad, Zabina, Iadau, Ioel,
and Banaia.
44 All these had taken straunge wyues, and among the same there were some that
had children by the wyues.


Nehemiah

Chapter 1

1 The wordes of Nehemiah the sonne of Hachalia. In the moneth Chisleu, in the
twentie yere, as I was in the castell at Susan,
2 Came Hanani, one of my brethren, he and the men of Iuda: and I asked them howe
the Iewes dyd that were deliuered and escaped from the captiuitie, and howe it
went at Hierusalem.
3 And they sayde vnto me: The remnaunt that are left of the captiuitie there in
the lande, are in great affliction and rebuke: the wall of Hierusalem also is
broken downe, and the gates thereof are burnt with fire.
4 And when I hearde these wordes, I sat downe and wept, and mourned certayne
dayes, and fasted and prayed before the God of heauen,
5 And sayde: O Lorde God of heauen, thou great and terrible God, thou that
kepest couenaunt and mercie for them that loue thee & obserue thy
commaundementes:
6 Let thyne eares hearken I beseche thee, and let thyne eyes be open, that thou
mayest heare the prayer of thy seruaunt, whiche I pray nowe before thee day and
night for the children of Israel thy seruauntes, and knowledge the sinnes of the
children of Israel which we haue sinned against thee: I and my fathers house
haue sinned,
7 We haue greeuously sinned against thee, and haue not kept thy commaundementes,
statutes, and iudgementes, whiche thou commaundedst thy seruaunt Moyses.
8 I beseche thee call to remembraunce the worde that thou commaundedst thy
seruaunt Moyses, and saydest, Ye will transgresse, and I will scatter you abrode
among the nations:
9 But if ye turne vnto me, and kepe my commaundementes, & do them: though ye
were cast out vnto the vttermost part of heauen, yet wil I gather you from
thence, and will bring you vnto the place that I haue chosen, to set my name
there.
10 They are thy seruauntes and thy people, whom thou hast deliuered through thy
great power, and in thy mightie hande.
11 O Lorde I besech thee, let thyne eare hearken to the prayer of thy seruaunt,
and to the prayer of thy seruauntes, whose desire is to feare thy name: and let
thy seruaunt prosper this day, and graunt him mercie in the sight of this man.
For I was the kinges butler.

Chapter 2

1 It came to passe, that in the moneth Nisan in the twentith yere of king
Arthaxerxes, the wine stoode before him: and I toke vp the wine, and gaue it
vnto the king: And I had not ben before heauy in his presence.
2 And the king sayde vnto me: Why lokest thou so sadly, seyng thou art not
sicke? It is nothing els, but that thou art heauy hearted. And I was sore
afrayde,
3 And sayde vnto the king, God saue the king for euer: Howe shoulde I not loke
sadly, when the citie and place of my fathers burials lye waste, and the gates
therof are consumed with fire?
4 And the king sayde vnto me: What is then thy request? I made my prayer also to
the God of heauen,
5 And sayd vnto the king: If it please the king, and if thy seruaunt haue founde
fauour in thy sight, sende me vnto Iuda vnto the citie of my fathers burialles,
that I may buylde it.
6 And the king sayd vnto me (the queene his wyfe sitting by him:) Howe long shal
thy iourney continue, and when wilt thou come againe? And it pleased the king to
sende me, and I set him a time,
7 And sayde vnto the king: If it please the king, let hym geue me letters to the
captaynes whiche are beyonde the water, that they may conuay me ouer, till I
come into Iuda:
8 And letters vnto Asaph the lorde of the kinges wood, that he may geue me
timber to make beames for the gates of the palace which is harde by the house,
and for the walles of the citie, and for the house that I shall enter into. And
the king gaue me according to the hande of my God which was good vpon me.
9 And when I came to the captaynes beyonde the water, I gaue them the kinges
letters: And the king had sent captaynes of the armie and horsemen with me.
10 Sanaballat also the Horonite, and Tobia a seruaunt the Ammonite hearde of it,
& it greeued them sore, that there was come a man which sought the wealth of the
children of Israel.
11 And I came to Hierusalem, and was there three dayes,
12 And I gat me vp in the night season, and a fewe men with me, neither tolde I
any man what God had geuen me in my heart to do at Hierusalem: and there was not
one beast with me, saue it that I rode vpon.
13 And I departed in the night by the valley port, before the dragon well, and
to the doung port, & considered the walles of Hierusalem howe they were broken
downe, and the portes therof consumed with the fire.
14 And I went ouer vnto the well port, and to the kinges conduite, and there was
no roome for the beast that was vnder me to passe.
15 Then went I on in the night by the brooke side, and considered the wall, and
turned backe, and came home againe by the valley port.
16 And the rulers knewe not whyther I went or what I dyd: neither dyd I as yet
tel it vnto the Iewes, to the priestes, to the noble men, to the rulers, and to
the other that laboured in the worke.
17 Afterwarde sayde I vnto them: Ye see the miserie that we are in, howe
Hierusalem lyeth waste, and howe the gates thereof are burnt with fire: come
therefore, and let vs buylde vp the wall of Hierusalem, and that we be no more a
rebuke.
18 Then I tolde them of the hand of my God that it was gratious ouer me, and the
kinges wordes that he had spoken vnto me: And they sayde, Let vs get vp and
buylde. And they strengthed their handes to good.
19 But when Sanaballat the Horonite, and Tobia the seruaunt an Ammonite, and
Gesem the Arabian hearde it, they laughed vs to scorne, & despised vs, and
sayde: What is this that ye do? Will ye fall away from the king?
20 Then aunswered I them, and sayde: The God of heauen, he it is that hath
graunted vs prosperitie, and we his seruauntes will get vp and buylde: As for
you, ye haue no portion, nor right, nor remembraunce in Hierusalem. The number
of them that buylded the walles.

Chapter 3

1 And Eliasib the hye priest gat him vp with his brethre the priestes, and they
buylded the sheepe gate: they repaired it, and set vp the doores of it: euen
vnto the towre Mea repaired they it, and vnto the towre of Hananeel.
2 Next vnto him also buylded the men of Iericho: And beside him buylded Sachur
the sonne of Amri.
3 But the fishe port did the children of Asnaa buyld, which also layed the
beames therof, and set on the doores, lockes, and barres of it.
4 And next vnto them buylded Meremoth the sonne of Uria, the sonne of Hakoz: and
next vnto them buylded Mesullam the sonne of Berachia, the sonne of Mesesabel:
and next vnto them buylded Zadoc the sonne of Baana.
5 And next vnto hym buylded they of Thekoa: But the great men that were among
them put not their neckes to the worke of their Lorde.
6 The olde gate buylded Iehoiada the sonne of Paseah, & Mesullam the sonne of
Besodia, they layed the beames therof, and set on the doores, lockes, & barres
of it.
7 Next vnto them buylded Melatiah of Gibeon, and Iadon of Merona, men of Gibeon
and of Mispah, vnto the throne of the duke which was beyond the riuer.
8 Next vnto him buylded Uzziel the sonne of Harhaiah of the goldesmythes: Next
vnto hym also buylded Hananiah the sonne of Harakahim, and they repaired
Hierusalem vnto the brode wall.
9 Next vnto them buylded Raphaiah the sonne of Hur, the ruler of the halfe part
of Hierusalem.
10 Next vnto him buylded Iedaia the sonne of Harumaph ouer against his house:
and next vnto him buylded Hattus the sonne of Hasabnia.
11 But Melchia the sonne of Harim, and Hasub the sonne of the captayne of Moab
buylded the other peece, and the towre beside the fornaces.
12 Next vnto hym buylded Sallum the sonne of Hallohes, the ruler of the halfe
part of Hierusalem, he & his daughters.
13 The valley gate buylded Hanun, and the citezins of Zanoa: They buylded it,
and set on the doores, lockes, and barres thereof, and a thousande cubites on
the wall, vnto the doung port.
14 But the doung port buylded Melchiah the sonne of Rechab, the ruler of the
fourth part of Beth acharem: he repaired it, and set on the doores, lockes, and
barres thereof.
15 But the wel gate repaired Sallum the sonne of Cholhosah, the ruler of the
fourth part of Mispah: He buylded it, and couered it, and set on the doores,
lockes and barres thereof: and the wall vnto the poole Siloah by the kinges
garden, and vnto the steppes that go downe from the citie of Dauid.
16 After him buylded Nehemiah the sonne of Asbok, the ruler of the halfe parte
of Bethzur, vntill the other side ouer against the sepulchres of Dauid, and to
the poole that was repaired, and vnto the house of the mightie.
17 After him buylded the Leuites, Rehuin the sonne of Bani: and next vnto him
buylded Hasabia the ruler of the halfe part of Keilah in his quarter.
18 After him buylded their brethren Bauai the sonne of Henadad the ruler of the
halfe part of Keilah.
19 And after him buylded Ezer the sonne of Iesua the ruler of Mispah the other
peece, harde ouer against the goyng vp to the house of ordinaunce that was in
the corner.
20 Againe, after him brake foorth Baruch the sonne of Zachai of indignation, and
repaired the other peece from the turning corner, vnto the doore of the house of
Eliasib the hie priest.
21 After him also buylded Merimoth the sonne of Uria, the sonne of Haccos, the
other peece, from the doore of the house of Eliasib, euen as long as the house
of Eliasib extended.
22 After him buylded the priestes, the men of the playne.
23 After him buylded Beniamin and Hasub ouer against their house: and after him
wrought Asaria the sonne of Maasia the sonne of Anania by his house.
24 After hym also buylded Bennui the sonne of Henadad the other peece, from the
house of Azaria vnto the turning of the wall and vnto the corner.
25 After him buylded Pala the sonne of Usai, ouer against the corner and the
high towre whiche lyeth out ouer from the kinges house, that was beside the
court of the prison: After him Phadaia the sonne of Pharos.
26 As for the Nethinims they dwelt in the strong hold vnto the water gate toward
the east, and to the towre that lyeth out.
27 After him buylded they of Thekua the other peece ouer against the great towre
that lyeth outwarde, vnto the wall of the strong holde.
28 But from aboue the horse gate foorth buylded the priestes, euery one ouer
against his house.
29 And after them buylded Zadoc the sonne of Immer ouer against his house: After
him buylded also Semeia ye sonne of Sechania the keper of the east gate.
30 After him buylded Hanania the sonne of Selemia, and Hanun the sonne of Zalaph
the sixt, the other peece: And after him buylded Mesullam the sonne of Barachia
ouer against his store house.
31 After him buylded Melchia the goldsmithes sonne vnto the house of the
Nithinims and of the marchauntes, ouer against the gate Mephkad, and to the
parlour in the corner.
32 And betweene the parlour of the corner vnto the sheepegate, buylded the
goldesmithes, and the marchauntes.

Chapter 4

1 But when Sanaballat hearde that we buylded the wall, he was wroth in him
selfe, and toke great indignation, and mocked the Iewes:
2 And sayde before his brethren and the souldiers of Samaria: what do these
impotent Iewes? will the heathen suffer them? shall they offer? shal they
perfourme it in one day? shal they make the stones whole againe that are brought
to dust and brent?
3 And Tobiah the Ammonite was beside him, and sayde: Though they buyld, yet if a
foxe go vp, he shall breake downe their stony wall.
4 Heare O thou our God, for we are despised, turne their shame vpon their owne
head, & geue them ouer into despising in the lande of their captiuitie.
5 Couer not their wickednesse, and let not their sinne be put out in thy
presence: for they haue prouoked the buylders.
6 And so buylded we the wall, and it was ioyned whole together vnto the halfe
heyght thereof: And the people were minded to labour.
7 But when Sanaballat, and Tobiah, and the Arabians, Ammonites, and Asdodites,
heard that the walles of Hierusalem were made vp, & that the breaches began to
be stopped, they were very wroth,
8 And conspired all together to come and fight against Hierusalem, and to make
an hinderaunce therin.
9 Neuerthelesse, we made our prayer vnto our God, and set watchmen by them day
and night, because of them.
10 And Iuda sayde: The strength of the bearers is feeble, and there is yet much
more morter, and we are not able to buylde on the wall.
11 And our aduersaries sayde: They shall not knowe, neither see, till we come in
the middes among them, and slay them, and cause the worke to ceasse.
12 But when the Iewes which dwelt beside them, came, they told vs as good as ten
times, that in all places where ye go vnto, they are appoynted to fal vpon vs.
13 Therefore set I the people after their kinredes, with their swordes, speares,
and bowes, beneath in the lowe places behinde the wall vpon the toppes of the
stones.
14 And I loked, and gat me vp, and sayde vnto the chiefe men, to the rulers, and
to the other people, Be not ye afrayde of them: but thinke rather vpon the great
Lorde whiche ought to be feared, and fight for your brethre, your sonnes, your
daughters, your wiues, & your houses.
15 Neuerthelesse, when our enemies heard that we had gotten worde of it, God
brought their counsell to naught: and we turned all againe to the wall, euery
one vnto his labour.
16 And from that time foorth, the halfe part of the young men dyd the labour,
and the other halfe part of them helde the speares, shieldes, bowes, and
brestplates: and the rulers stoode behinde all the house of Iuda.
17 They which buylded on the wall and they that bare burthens, and those that
laded them, with one hande did euery one his worke, and with the other helde his
weapon.
18 For euery one that buylded had his sword girded by his thingh, and so buylded
they: And he that blewe the trumpet was beside me.
19 And I saide vnto the principall men, to the rulers, and to the other people:
The worke is great and large, & we are seperated vpon the wall one farre from
another.
20 Loke in what place therefore ye heare the noyse of the trumpet, resort ye
thither vnto vs, and our God shall fight for vs:
21 And we wil be labouring in the worke. And the halfe part of them helde their
speares from the morning spring, tyll the starres came foorth.
22 And at the same time saide I vnto the people: Let euery one with his seruaut
lodge within Hierusalem, that in the night season we may watch, and labour on
the day time.
23 As for me and my brethren, my seruauntes, and the men of the watch which
folowed me, we put neuer of our clothes, saue onely because of the wasshing.

Chapter 5

1 And there arose a great complaynt of the people and their wyues against their
brethre the Iewes.
2 For there were some that saide, Our sonnes and daughters and we are very many:
therefore wyll we take corne for them, that we may eate and liue.
3 Some also there were that saide: Let vs set our landes, vineyardes, and houses
to pledge, and take vp corne in the dearth.
4 But some there were that saide: We haue borowed money for the kinges tribute,
and that vpon our landes & vineyardes.
5 And now our fleshe is as the fleshe of our brethren, and our children as their
children: and loe we bring into subiection our sonnes and our daughters as
seruauntes, and some of our daughters are subdued vnto bondage alredie, and no
strength is there in our handes to redeeme them, and other men haue our landes
and vineyardes.
6 And when I heard their complaynt and such wordes, it displeased me sore.
7 And I aduised so in my minde, that I rebuked the counsellers and the rulers,
and saide vnto them: Euery one of you layeth great burdens vpon his brother. And
I brought a great congregation against them,
8 And saide vnto them: We after our habilitie haue redeemed our brethren the
Iewes, which were solde vnto the heathen: And wyll you sell your brethre againe,
and shall they be solde vnto vs? Then held they their peace, and coulde finde
nothing to aunswere.
9 And Nehemia saide, It is not good that ye do: Ought ye not to walke in the
feare of our God, because of the rebuke of the heathen that are our enemies?
10 I and my brethren, and my seruauntes, do lende them money and corne: I pray
you let vs leaue of this burden.
11 Therefore this same day I pray you see that ye restore them their landes
againe, their vineyardes, olyue gardens, and their houses, and remit the hundred
parte of the money, of the corne, wine, and oyle that ye haue exacted of them.
12 Then saide they: We wyll restore them againe, & wyll require nothing of them,
and wyll do as thou hast spoken. And I called the priestes, and tooke an oth of
them that they should do so.
13 And I shooke my lappe and saide: God shake out euery man after the same maner
from his house & laboure that maintaineth not this worde, euen thus be he shaken
out, and voyde. And all the congregation saide, Amen, and praysed the Lorde: And
the people did according to this promise.
14 And from the time foorth that the king committed vnto me to be captayne of
them that were in the lande of Iuda, euen from the twentie yere, vnto the
thirtie & two yere of king Artaxerxes, that is twelue yeres, I with my brethre
liued not of such sustinaunce as was geuen to a captayne.
15 For the olde captaynes that were before me, had ben chargeable vnto the
people, and had taken of them bread & wine, beside fouretie sicles of siluer,
yea and their seruauntes had oppressed the people: But so did not I, and that
because of the feare of God.
16 But I laboured also in the worke vpon the wall, and we bought no lande: and
all my seruauntes came thither together vnto the worke.
17 Moreouer, there were at my table an hundred and fiftie of the Iewes and
rulers, which came vnto me from among the heathen that are about vs.
18 And there was prepared for me dayly an oxe and sixe chosen sheepe, and birdes
were prepared for me: and euer once in ten dayes wine for all in aboundance: Yet
required not I the liuing of a captayne, for the bondage was greeuous vnto the
people.
19 Thinke vpon me my God vnto the best, according to all that I haue done for
this people.

Chapter 6

1 And when Sanaballat, Tobia, and Gesem the Arabian, and the other of our
enemies, heard that I had builded the wall, and that there were no mo gappes
therein: (howebeit at the same time had I not hanged the doores vpon the gates,)
2 Sanaballat and Gesem sent vnto me, saying: Come, that we may meete & take
counsel together in the villages that are in the playne of the citie Ono.
Neuerthelesse, they thought to do me euill.
3 And I sent messengers vnto them, saying: I haue a great businesse to do, and I
can not come downe: Why should the worke ceasse, whilest I leaue it and come
downe to you?
4 Howbeit, they sent vnto me as good as foure times after the same maner: And I
gaue them the same aunswere.
5 Then sent Sanaballat his seruaunt againe vnto me the fift time, with an open
letter in his hande,
6 Wherein was written: It is tolde the heathen, and Gesem hath saide it, that
thou and the Iewes thinke to rebel: for the which cause thou buildest the wall,
that thou mayst be their king, according to these wordes:
7 And hast ordayned the prophetes to preache of thee at Hierusalem, and to say,
He is king of Iuda. And now shall this come to the kinges eares: come now
therefore, and let vs take our counsell together.
8 And I sent vnto him, saying: There is no such thing done as thou sayest, for
thou fainest them out of thyne owne heart.
9 For they were all minded to make vs afrayde, saying, They shall withdrawe
their handes from their worke, that it shall not be finished: Nowe therefore
strengthen thou my hande.
10 And I came vnto the house of Semaia the sonne of Delaia, the sonne of
Mehetabeel, & he had shut him selfe within, and saide: Let vs come together in
the house of God, euen vnto the middest of the temple, & shut the doores of the
temple, for they wyll come to slay thee, yea euen in the night wyll they come to
put thee to death.
11 And I saide: should any such man as I flee? Who is, that being as I am, wyll
go into the temple to saue his life? I wil not go in.
12 And loe, I perceaued that God hath not sent him, but that he pronounced this
prophecie against me: For Tobia and Sanaballat had hired him for money.
13 Therfore was he hyred, that through feare I should so do, & sinne, that they
might haue an euill report of me to lay to my charge.
14 My God, thinke thou vpon Tobia and Sanaballat according vnto these their
workes, and on the prophetisse Noadia, and the other prophetes that would haue
put me in feare.
15 And the wall was finished on the twentie and fifth day of the moneth Elul, in
fiftie and two dayes.
16 And when all our enemies hearde thereof, all the heathen that was about vs
were afrayd, and their courage fayled them: For they perceaued that this worke
came of our God.
17 And at the same time were there many of the chiefe of Iuda whose letters
wente vnto Tobia, and againe from Tobia vnto them.
18 For there were many in Iuda that were sworne vnto him: for he was the sonne
in lawe of Sechania, the sonne of Arah, and his sonne Iehonathan had the
daughter of Mesullam the sonne of Barachia,
19 And they spake good of him before me, and tolde him my wordes: and Tobia sent
letters to put me in feare.

Chapter 7

1 Now when the wall was builded, I hanged on the doores also, and the porters,
singers, and Leuites, were appoynted:
2 And I commaunded my brother Hanani, and Hanania the ruler of the castle at
Hierusalem, (for he was a faithfull man, and feared God more then did many
other)
3 And saide vnto them: Let not the gates of Hierusalem be opened vntil the sunne
be whot: and while they stand by, let them shut the doores & barre them. And we
appoynted certaine citezins of Hierusalem to be watchmen, euery one to keepe his
watch, and euery one to be ouer against his house.
4 As for the citie, it was large of roome, and great, but the people were fewe
therein, and the houses were not builded.
5 And God gaue me in myne heart that I gathered together the principal men, and
the officers, & the people, to number them: and I founde a register of the
number of them which came vp before, and founde written therein,
6 These are the sonnes of the lande that went vp from the captiuitie that was
caried away, whom Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon had brought away, and came
againe to Hierusalem and Iuda, euery one vnto his citie.
7 They which came with Zorobabel are these: Iesua, Nehemia, Asariah, Raamia,
Nahamani, Mardochee, Belsan, Mesperath, Beguai, Nahum, and Baanah. This is the
number of the men of the people of Israel:
8 The children of Pharaos, were two thousand an hundred seuentie and two.
9 The children of Saphatia, three hundred seuentie and two.
10 The children of Arah, sixe hundred fiftie and two.
11 The children of the captayne of Moab among the children of Iesua & Ioab, two
thousand eyght hundred and eighteene.
12 The children of Elam, a thousand two hundred fiftie and foure.
13 The children of Zathua, eyght hundred fouretie and fiue.
14 The children of Zachai, seuen hundred and threescore.
15 The children of Bannui, sixe hundred fouretie and eyght.
16 The children of Bebai, sixe hundred twentie and eyght.
17 The children of Asgad, two thousand three hundred twentie and two.
18 The children of Adonicam, sixe hundred threescore and seuen.
19 The children of Beguai, two thousand threescore and seuen.
20 The children of Adin, sixe hundred fiftie and fiue.
21 The children of Ater of Hezekia, ninetie and eyght.
22 The children of Hasem, three hundred twentie and eyght.
23 The children of Bezai, three hundred twentie and foure.
24 The children of Hariph, an hundred and twelue.
25 The children of Gibeon, ninetie and fiue.
26 The men of Bethlehem and Nethophah, an hundred fourescore and eyght.
27 The men of Anathoth, an hundred twentie and eyght.
28 The men of Bethasmaueth, fouretie and two.
29 The men of Kariathiarim, Cephira, and Beeroth, seuen hundred fouretie and
three.
30 The men of Ramah and Geba, sixe hundred twentie and one.
31 The men of Michmas, an hundred twentie and two.
32 The men of Bethel and Ai, an hundred twentie and three.
33 The men of the other Nebo, fiftie and two.
34 The childre of the other Elam, a thousand two hundred fiftie and foure.
35 The children of Harim, three hundred and twentie.
36 The children of Iericho, three hundred fourtie and fiue.
37 The children of Lodhadid and Ono, seuen hundred twentie and one.
38 The children of Senaa, three thousand nine hundred and thirtie.
39 The priestes: The children of Iedaia, of the house of Iesua, nine hundred
seuentie and three.
40 The children of Immer, a thousand fiftie and two.
41 The children of Phashur, a thousand two hundred fourtie and seuen.
42 The children of Harim, a thousand and seuenteene.
43 The Leuites: The children of Iesua of Cadmiel and of the children of Hodiiah,
seuentie and foure.
44 The singers: The children of Asaph, an hundred fourtie and eyght.
45 The porters: The childre of Sallum, the children of Ater, the children of
Talmon, the children of Accub, the children of Hatita, the children of Sobai,
altogether an hundred thirtie & eyght.
46 The Nethinims: The children of Siha, the children of Hasupha, the children of
Tebbaoth,
47 The children of Ceros, the children of Sia, the children of Phadon,
48 The children of Lebanah, the children of Hagaba, the children of Salmai,
49 The children of Hanan, the children of Giddel, the children of Gaher,
50 The children of Reaiah, the children of Resin, the children of Necodah,
51 The children of Gazzam, the children of Uzza, the children of Phasea,
52 The children of Besai, the children of Meunim, the children of Nephussim,
53 The children of Bacbuc, the children of Hacupha, the children of Harhur,
54 The children of Baslith, the children of Mehida, the children of Harsa,
55 The children of Barcos, the children of Sisera, the children of Thamah,
56 The children of Nesiah, the children of Hatipha,
57 The childre of Solomons seruautes, the children of Sotai, the children of
Sophereth, the children of Pharida,
58 The children of Iaala, the children of Darcon, the children of Giddel,
59 The children of Sephatiath, the childre of Hattil, the children of Phochereth
of Sabaim, the children of Amon.
60 All these Nethinims and the children of Solomons seruauntes, were three
hundred ninetie and two.
61 And these went vp also from Thelniela: Thelharsa, Cherub, Addon, and Immer:
but they could not shew their fathers house, nor their seede, and that they were
of Israel.
62 The children of Dalaiah, the children of Tobia, and the children of Necoda,
sixe hundred fourtie and two.
63 And of the priestes: the children of Habaiah, the children of Haccos, the
childre of Barzillai, which toke one of ye daughters of Barzillai the Gileadice
to wyfe, and was named after their name.
64 These sought their writing in the register of their generation, but they were
not founde: therfore they were put from the priesthood.
65 And Athirsatha saide vnto them that they shoulde not eate of the most holy,
tyll there came vp a priest which should were Urim and Thunimim.
66 And so the whole congregation together, was fourtie and two thousande three
hundred and threescore,
67 Beside their seruauntes and maydens, of whom there were seuen thousand three
hundred thirtie and seuen: And they had two hundred fourtie and fiue singing men
and women.
68 Their horses seuen hundred thirtie and sixe: and their Mules two hundred
fourtie and fiue:
69 The Camels foure hundred thirtie and fiue: sixe thousand seuen hundred and
twentie Asses.
70 And certaine of the auncient fathers gaue vnto the worke: Athirsatha gaue to
the treasure a thousand peeces of golde, fiftie basons, fiue hundred and thirtie
priestes garmentes.
71 And some of the chiefe fathers gaue vnto the treasure of the worke, twentie
thousand peeces of gold, & two thousand and two hundred pounde of siluer.
72 And the other people gaue twentie thousand peeces of golde, and two thousand
pound of siluer, and threescore and seuen priestes garmentes.
73 And the priestes and Leuites, the porters, and the singers, and the other of
the people, and the Nethinims, and all Israel, dwelt in their cities: And whe
the seuenth moneth came, the children of Israel were in their cities.

Chapter 8

1 And all the people gathered them selues together as one man, in the streete
that was before the water gate, and they saide vnto Esdras the scribe, that he
should fetch the booke of the law of Moyses, which the Lorde commaunded to
Israel.
2 And Esdras the priest brought the law before the congregation both of men &
women, and all that could vnderstand did hearken vnto it vpon the first day of
the seuenth moneth.
3 And he read therein in the streete that was before the water gate, from the
morning vntill the noone day, before men and women that did hearken to it: and
the eares of all the people were inclined vnto the booke of the law.
4 And Esdras the scribe stoode vpon a pulpet of wood which they had made for the
preaching, and beside him stoode Mathathia, Sema, & Anaiah, Uriah, Helkia, &
Maaseiah, on his right hande: and on his left hand stoode Pedaia, Misael, &
Melchia, & Hasum, Hasabadana, Zachari, and Mesullam.
5 And Esdras opened the booke before all the people, (for he stoode aboue al the
people:) and when he opened it, all the people stoode vp.
6 And Esdras praysed the Lorde the great God: And all the people aunswered,
Amen, Ame, lifting vp their handes, and bowed them selues and worshipped the
Lord falling downe vpon their faces to the grounde.
7 And Iesua, Bani, Serebiah, Iamin, Accub, Sebbethai, Hodaia, Maasia, Celita,
Azariah, Iozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah, & the Leuites caused the people to geue heede
vnto the law: and the people stoode in their place.
8 And they read in the booke of the lawe of God distinctly, and gaue the sense,
and caused them to vnderstand the reading.
9 And Nehemia which is Athirsatha, and Esdras the priest and scribe, and the
Leuites that caused the people to take heede, said vnto al the people, This day
is holy vnto the Lorde your God, be not ye sory, and weepe not: For all the
people wept when they heard the wordes of the lawe.
10 And he saide vnto them: Go your way, and eate the fat, and drinke the sweete,
and send part vnto them also that haue not prepared for them selues, for this
day is holy vnto our Lorde: be not ye sory therefore, for the ioy of the Lorde
is your strength.
11 And the Leuites stilled all the people, and saide: Holde your peace, for the
day is holy, be not sad therefore.
12 And all the people went their way to eate, and to drinke, & to sende part
vnto other, and to make great mirth, because they had vnderstand the wordes that
were declared vnto them.
13 And on the next day were gathered together the chiefe fathers among all the
people, and the priestes, and leuites, vnto Esdras the scribe, that they might
vnderstand the wordes of the law.
14 And they founde written in the lawe which the Lorde had commaunded by Moyses,
that the children of Israel should dwell in boothes in the feast of the seuenth
moneth:
15 And that they should cause it to be declared and proclaymed in all their
cities, and throughout Hierusalem, saying: Go foorth vnto the mount and fetch
Olyue brauches, Pine braunches, Myrtel braunches, Palme braunches, & braunches
of the thicke tree, to make boothes, as it is written.
16 And so the people went foorth, and fet them and made them boothes, euery one
vpon the roofe of his house, and in their courtes, and in the courtes of the
house of God, and in the streete by the water gate, and in the streete of the
port of Ephraim.
17 And all the congregation of them that were come againe out of the captiuitie,
made boothes, & sat vnder the boothes: for since the time of Iosua the sonne of
Nun, vnto this day, had not the children of Israel done so: And there was very
great gladnesse.
18 And euery day from the first day vnto the last, read Esdras in the booke of
the lawe of God: And seuen dayes held they the feaste, and on the eyght day they
gathered together, according vnto the maner.

Chapter 9

1 In the twentie and fourth day of this moneth, came the children of Israel
together againe, with fasting, and sackeclothes, and earth vpon them,
2 And they that were of the seede of Israel, were separated from all the
straunge children, and stoode & knowledged their sinnes, & the wickednes of
their fathers:
3 And stoode vp in their place, & read in the booke of the law of the Lorde
their God foure times on the day, and they knowledged and worshipped the Lord
their God foure times on the day.
4 Then stoode vpon the stayres of the Leuites, Iesua, Bani, Cadmiel, Sabaniah,
Bunni, Serebiah, Bani, and Chanani, and cryed loude vnto the Lorde their God:
5 And the Leuites, Iesua, and Cadmiel, Bani, and Hasabnia, Serebiah, and Hodia,
Sebania, and Phathahia, sayde: Stand vp, and prayse the Lorde your God for euer,
and let thankes be geue vnto the name of thy glory, which excelleth all thankes
geuing and prayse.
6 Thou art Lorde alone, thou hast made heauen and the heauen of all heauens with
all their hoast, the earth and all thinges that are therein, the sea & all that
is therin, & thou preseruest them al, & the hoast of heauen worshippeth thee.
7 Thou art, O Lorde, the God that hast chosen Abraham, and broughtest him out of
Ur in Chaldea, and calledst him Abraham:
8 And foundest his heart faithfull before thee, & madest a couenaunt with him,
to geue vnto his seede the lande of the Chanaanites, Hethites, Amorites,
Pherezites, Iebusites, and Gergesites, and hast made good thy wordes: for thou
art righteous,
9 And hast considered the miserie of our fathers in Egypt, and heard their
complaynt by the red sea:
10 And shewed tokens and wonders vpon Pharao and all his seruauntes, and on all
the people of his lande: For thou knowest that they were presumptuous and cruell
against them: and so madest thou thee a name as it is this day.
11 And the red sea diddest thou deuide in sunder before them, so that they went
through the middest of the sea drye shod: and their persecuters threwest thou
into the deepe, as a stone in the mightie waters:
12 And leddest them on the day time in a cloudie piller, and on the night season
in a piller of fyre, to shewe them light in the way that they went.
13 Thou camest downe also vpon mount Sinai, and speakest vnto them from heauen,
and gauest them right iudgementes, true lawes, good commaundementes and
statutes:
14 And declaredst vnto them thy holy Sabbath, and commaundedst them preceptes,
ordinaunces, and lawes, by the hande of Moyses thy seruaunt:
15 And gauest them bread from heauen when they were hungry, and broughtest
foorth water for them out of the rocke when they were thirstye, and promysedst
them that they should go in and take possession of the lande ouer which thou
haddest lyft vp thyne hand for to geue them.
16 But they and our fathers were proud and hardnecked, so that they folowed not
thy commaundementes:
17 And woulde not obey, neither were mindeful of the wonders that thou diddest
for the: but hardened their neckes, and had in their heades to returne to their
bondage by their rebellion: But thou O God of mercies, gracious, and full of
compassion, of long suffering, and of great mercie, yet forsookest them not.
18 Moreouer, when they had made them a moulten calfe, and saide. This is thy God
that brought thee out of the lande of Egypt, and did blasphemies:
19 Yet forsookest thou them not in the wildernesse, according to thy great
mercies: And the cloudy piller departed not from them on the day time to leade
the the way, neither the piller of fire in the night season, to shewe them light
in the way by which they should go.
20 And thou gauest them thy good spirite to enfourme them, and withheldest not
thy Manna from their mouth, and gauest them water when they were thirstie.
21 Fourtie yeres long didst thou feede them in the wildernesse, so that they
lacked nothing: their clothes waxed not olde, and their feete swelled not.
22 And thou gauest them kingdomes and nations, and scatteredst them into
corners: so they possessed the lande of Sehon and the lande of the king of
Hesebon, and the lande of Og king of Basan.
23 And their children multipliedst thou as the starres of heauen, and broughtest
them into the lande whereof thou haddest spoken to their fathers, that they
should go into it, and haue it in possession.
24 And the children went in, and possessed the lande, and thou subduedst before
them the inhabiters of the lande, euen the Chanaanites, and gauest them into
their handes, with their kinges and the people of the lande, that they might do
with them what they would.
25 And they wanne their strong cities, and a fat lande, and toke possession of
houses that were full of all maner of goodes, welles digged out, vineyards,
oliue gardens, & many fruiteful trees: and they did eate, and were filled, and
became fat, and liued in pleasure through thy great goodnesse.
26 Neuerthelesse, they were disobedient, and rebelled against thee, and cast thy
law behinde their backes, & slue their prophetes, which exhorted them earnestly
that they might bring them againe vnto thee, and did great blasphemies.
27 Therefore thou gauest them ouer into the hand of their enemies that vexed
them: And in the time of their trouble whe they cryed vnto thee thou heardest
them from heauen, and through thy great mercie thou gauest them sauiours which
helped them out of the hande of their enemies.
28 But when they came to rest, they turned backe againe to do euill before thee:
therefore leftest thou them in the hande of their enemies, so that they had the
dominion ouer them: And when they conuerted, & cryed vnto thee, thou heardest
them from heauen, and many times hast thou deliuered them according to thy great
mercie,
29 And testifiedst vnto them, that thou mightest bring them againe vnto thy
lawe: Notwithstanding, they were proude, and hearkened not vnto thy
commaundementes, but sinned in thy lawes, which if a man do, he shall lyue in
them: and turned the shoulder away, and were stiffenecked, and would not heare.
30 Yet many yeres diddest thou forbeare them, and testifiedst vnto them through
thy spirite, euen by the hand of thy prophetes, and yet would they not heare:
therefore gauest thou them into the hand of the nations of the landes.
31 And for thy great mercies sake, thou hast not vtterly consumed them, neither
forsaken them: for thou art a gratious and mercifull God.
32 Now therfore our God, thou great God mightie and terrible, thou that kepest
couenaunt and mercie, regarde not a litle al the trauaile that hath come vnto
vs, and our kinges, our princes, our priestes, our prophetes, and our fathers,
and all the people since the time of the kinges of Assur, vnto this day.
33 And truely thou art iust in al that thou hast brought vpon vs, for thou hast
done right: As for vs, we haue ben vngodly,
34 And our kinges, and our princes, our priestes, and our fathers, haue not done
thy lawe, nor regarded thy commaundementes, and thy earnest exhortations,
wherewith thou hast exhorted them,
35 And they haue not serued thee in their kingdome, and in thy great goodnesse
that thou gauest them, and in the large and plenteous lande which thou gauest
before them, and haue not conuerted from their wicked workes.
36 Beholde, we are in bondage this day, and so is the lande that thou gauest
vnto our fathers to eate the fruites and goodnesse thereof, beholde there are we
bondmen.
37 And great is the increase of it vnto the kinges whom thou hast set ouer vs
because of our sinnes, and they haue dominion ouer our bodies and cattaile, euen
as they wyll them selues: and we are in great trouble.
38 Now because of all this make we a sure couenaunt and write it, & our princes,
leuites, and priestes, seale vnto it.

Chapter 10

1 The sealers were, Nehemiah that is Athirsatha the sonne of Hachaliah, and
Sedecias,
2 Seraiah, Azariah, Irmeiah,
3 Pashur, Amariah, Malachiiah,
4 Hattus, Sebeniah, Malluch,
5 Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah,
6 Daniel, Ginethon, Baruch,
7 Mesullam, Abiiah, Miiamin,
8 Maaziah, Bilgai, Semaiah: these were priestes.
9 The Leuites were, Iesua the sonne of Azaniah, Bennui among the children of
Henadad, and Cadmiel.
10 And their brethren, Sebaniah, Hodiiah, Celita, Pelaiah, Hanan,
11 Micha, Rehob, Hasabiah,
12 Zacchur, Serebiah, Sebaniah,
13 Hodiiah, Bani, Beninu.
14 The heads of the people were, Pharos the captayne of Moab, Elam, Zatthu,
Bani,
15 Bunni, Azgad, Bebai,
16 Adoniiah, Biguai, Adin,
17 Ater, Hizciiah, Azur,
18 Hodiiah, Hasum, Besai,
19 Hariph, Anathoth, Nebai.
20 Magpias, Mesullam, Hezir,
21 Mesesabel, Sadoc, Iaddua,
22 Phelatia, Hanan, Anaaia,
23 Hosea, Hanania, Hasub,
24 Halohes, Phaleha, Sobek,
25 Rehum, Hasebna, Maasia,
26 Ahia Aanan, and Anan,
27 Malluch, Harim, and Baana:
28 And the other people, the priestes, Leuites, porters, singers, Nethinims, and
all they that had separated them selues from the people of the landes vnto the
law of God, with their wyues, their sonnes, and their daughters, & as many as
could vnderstand,
29 And their lordes that had rule of the, receaued it for their brethren: And
they came to sweare, & to binde them selues with an oth to walke in gods lawe,
which was geuen by Moyses the seruaunt of God, and that they would obserue and
do according vnto all the commaundementes, iudgementes, and statutes of the
Lorde our God:
30 And that we woulde not geue our daughters vnto the people of the lande,
neither to take their daughters for our sonnes.
31 And if the people of the land brought ware on the Sabbath, and all maner
vitailes to sell, that we would not take it of them on the Sabbath and on the
holy dayes, and that we would let the seuenth yere be free, and the debtes of
euery person.
32 And we decreed a statute vpon our selues, to geue yerely the third part of a
sicle to the ministration in the house of our God,
33 To the shewe bread, to the dayly meate offering, to the dayly burnt offering,
of the Sabbathes, of the new Moones, and feaste dayes, and to the thinges that
were sanctified, & to the offringes of attonement, to reconsile Israel withal,
and to all the busines in the house of our God.
34 And we cast the lot among the priestes, Leuites, and the people, for the
offering of the wood, to be brought vnto the house of our God from yere to yere,
after the houses of our fathers, that it might be brent at times appoynted vpon
the aulter of the Lorde God, as it is written in the lawe:
35 And to bring the first fruites of our land, and the firstlinges of our
fruites of all trees yere by yere vnto the house of the Lorde.
36 And the first borne of our sonnes, and of our cattel, (as it is written in
the law) and the firstlinges of our oxen and of our sheepe, whiche we shoulde
bring to the house of our God vnto the priestes that minister in the house of
our God.
37 And that we shoulde bring the first fruites of our dough and our heaue
offeringes, and the fruites of all maner of trees, of wine also and of oyle,
vnto the priestes to the chestes of the house of our God, and the tythes of our
lande vnto the Leuites, that the Leuites might haue the tythes in all the cities
of our ministration.
38 And the priest the sonne of Aaron shalbe with the Leuites when the Leuites
take tythes: so that the Leuites shall bring vp the tythes of their tythes vnto
the house of our God, to the store houses and to the treasure houses.
39 For the children of Israel and the children of Leui shall bring vp the heaue
offeringes of the corne, wine, and oyle, vnto the store houses, there as are the
vessels of the sanctuarie and the priestes that minister, and the porters and
singers, and we will not forsake the house of our God.

Chapter 11

1 And the rulers of the people dwelt at Hierusalem: The other people also cast
lottes, that among ten one part should go to Hierusalem into the holy citie to
dwell, and nyne partes to be in the cities.
2 And the people thanked all the men that were willing to dwel at Hierusale.
3 These are the heades of the prouince that dwelt in Hierusalem, and in the
cities of Iuda, euery one in his possession, and in their cities: they of
Israel, the priestes, Leuites, the Nethinims, & the children of Solomons
seruauntes.
4 And at Hierusalem dwelt certayne of the children of Iuda, and of Beniamin: Of
the children of Iuda, Athaiah, the sonne of Uzzia, the sonne of Zacharia, the
sonne of Amaria, the sonne of Saphatia, the sonne of Mahalaleel, of the children
of Phares.
5 And Maasia the sonne of Baruch, the sonne of Chol Hosa, the sonne of Hasaia,
the sonne of Adaia, the sonne of Ioiarib, the sonne of Zacharia, the sonne of
Siloni.
6 All these were the children of Phares that dwelt at Hierusalem, euen foure
hundred three score and eyght valiaunt men.
7 These are the children of Beniamin: Salu the sonne of Mesullam, the sonne of
Ioed, the sonne of Pedaia, the sonne of Colaia, the sonne of Masia, the sonne of
Ithiel, the sonne of Isai.
8 And after hym Gabai, Sellai, nine hundred and twentie and eyght.
9 And Ioel the sonne of Zichri had the ouersight of them: and Iuda the sonne of
Senua was the second ouer the citie.
10 Of the priestes: Iedatah the sonne of Ioiarib, Iachin,
11 Saraiah the sonne of Helkia, the sonne of Mesullam, the sonne of Zador, the
sonne of Meraioth, the sonne of Achitob, was chiefe in the house of God,
12 And their brethren that dyd the worke in the temple, eyght hundred and
twentie and two: And Adaia the sonne of Ieroham, the sonne of Pelaliah, the
sonne of Amzi, the sonne of Zachari, the sonne of Phashur, the sonne of Malchia,
13 And his brethren chiefe among the fathers, two hundred and fourtie & two: And
Amasai the sonne of Azrael, the sonne of Ahasai, the sonne of Moselemoth, the
sonne of Immer,
14 And their brethren valiaunt men, an hundred and twentie and eyght: And their
ouersear was Zabdiel a sonne of one of the great men.
15 Of the Leuites: Semeia the sonne of Hasub, the sonne of Azarikam, the sonne
of Hasabia, the sonne of Buni,
16 And Sabathai, and Iosabad of the chiefe of the Leuites, had the ouersight of
the outwarde businesse of the house of God.
17 And Mathania, the sonne of Micha, the sonne of Zabdi, the sonne of Asaph, was
the principall to begin the thankesgeuing and prayer: and Bacbucia the seconde
among his brethren, and Abda the sonne of Sammua, the sonne of Galal, the sonne
of Ieduthun.
18 All the Leuites in the holy citie, were two hundred foure score and foure.
19 And the porters Accub and Talmon, and their brethren that kept the portes,
were an hundred and seuentie and two.
20 As for the residue of Israel, of the priestes and Leuites, they were in al
the cities of Iuda, euery one in his inheritaunce.
21 And the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel, and Ziha and Gispa were set ouer the
Nethinims.
22 The ouersear of the Leuites at Hierusalem was Azzi, the sonne of Bani, the
sonne of Hasabia, the sonne of Matthania, the sonne of Micha: Of the children of
Asaph, singers were ouer the busines in the house of God:
23 For it was the kinges commaundement concerning them, that the singers should
deale faythfully euery day, as was according.
24 And Pathaia the sonne of Mesebazel of the children of Zerah the sonne of
Iuda, was next the king in al matters concerning the people.
25 And in the villages in their landes, some of the children of Iuda that were
without in the townes of their land dwelt at Kiriath arba, and in the villages
therof: and in Dibon and in the villages therof, and at Iecabzeel and in the
villages therof:
26 At Iesua, Moladath, Bethphalet:
27 In the towne of Sual, Beerseba, and in the villages therof:
28 At Siklag, and Moconah, and the villages therof:
29 And at En rimmon, Zarah, Ierimuth,
30 Zonoa, Odollam, & in their villages, at Lachis, and in the fieldes therof: at
Aseka, and in the villages therof, and they dwelt from Beerseba vnto the valley
of Hinnom.
31 The children also of Beniamin from Geba, dwelt at Machmas, Aia, Bethel, and
in their villages,
32 And at Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah,
33 Hazor, Ramah, Gethaim,
34 Hadid, Zeboim, Neballath,
35 Lod, and Ono, in the carpenters valley.
36 And the Leuites had possession both in Iuda and in Beniamin.

Chapter 12

1 These are the priestes and Leuites that went vp with Zorobabel the sonne of
Salathiel: and with Iesua, Saraia, Ieremia, and Esdras,
2 Amaria, Malluch, Hattus,
3 Sechania, Rehum, Merimoth,
4 Iddo, Genthon, Abia,
5 Miamin, Madaia, Belga,
6 Semaia, Ioiarib, Iedaia,
7 Salu, Amok, Helkia, and Iedaia: These were the heades among the priestes and
their brethren in the dayes of Iesua.
8 The Leuites were these: Iesua, Bennui, Cadmiel, Sarebia, Iuda, and Mathania,
whiche was ouer the office of thankesgeuing, he and his brethren.
9 Bacbucio, and Hanni, and their brethren, were about them in the watches.
10 Iesua begat Ioakim, Ioakim also begat Eliasib, and Eliasib begat Ioiada:
11 Ioiada begat Ionathan, and Ionathan begat Iaddua.
12 In the dayes of Ioakim were these the chiefe fathers among the priestes:
vnder Saraia, Maraia: vnder Ieremi, Hanania:
13 Under Esdras, Mesullam: vnder Amaria, Iehoanan:
14 Under Milico, Ionathan: vnder Sebania, Ioseph:
15 Under Horim, Adna: vnder Maraioth, Helka:
16 Under Iddo, Zacharie: vnder Genthon, Mesullam:
17 Under Abia, Zichri: vnder Miniamin, and Moadia, Piltat:
18 Under Belga, Sammua: vnder Semaia, Iehonathan:
19 Under Ioiarib, Mathenai: vnder Iadaia, Uzzi:
20 Under Selai, Kellai: vnder Amok, Eber:
21 Under Helchia, Hasabia: vnder Iadaia, Nathanael.
22 And in the time of Eliasib, Ioiada, Iohanan, and Iadua, were the chiefe
fathers among the Leuites & the priestes written, in the raigne of Darius the
Persian.
23 The children of Leui the principall fathers, were written in the cronicles,
vntill the time of Ionathan the sonne of Eliasib.
24 And these were the chiefe among the Leuites: Hasabia, Serebia, and Iesua the
sonne of Cadmiel, and their brethren in their presence, to geue prayse and
thankes, according as Dauid the man of God had ordeyned it, one watch ouer
against another.
25 Mathania, Bacbukia, Obadia, Mesullam, Talmon, and Accub, were porters in the
watch at the thresholdes of the gates.
26 These were in the dayes of Ioiakim the sonne of Iesua, the sonne of Iosedec,
and in the dayes of Nehemia the captayne, & of the priest Esdras the scribe.
27 And in the dedication of the wall at Hierusalem they fought the Leuites out
of all their places, that they might be brought to Hierusalem, to kepe the
dedication and gladnesse with thankesgeuinges, & singing, with cymbales,
psalteries, and harpes.
28 And the children of the singers gathered them selues together from euery
side, out of the playne countrey about Hierusalem, and from the villages of
Nethophathi,
29 From the house of Gilgal, and out of the countreys of Geba, and Asmaueth: for
the singers had buylded them villages round about Hierusalem.
30 And the priestes and Leuites were purified, & clensed the people, & the
gates, and the wall.
31 And I brought the princes of Iuda vpon the wall, and appoynted two great
quyers of men to geue thankes, whiche went on the right hande of the wall
towarde the doung gate.
32 And after them went Hosaia, and halfe of the princes of Iuda,
33 And Asaria, Esdras, and Mesullam,
34 Iuda, Beniamin, Semeia, & Ieremi,
35 And certayne of the priestes children, with trumpettes: namely Zacharie the
sonne of Ionathan, the sonne of Semeia, the sonne of Mathania, the sonne of
Michaia, the sonne of Zaccur, the sonne of Asaph,
36 And his brethren, Semeia, Asarael, Melalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nathanael, and
Iuda, and Hanani, with the musicall instrumentes of Dauid the man of God: And
Esdras the scribe went before them.
37 And beside the wel gate, they went vp ouer against them vpon the steppes of
the citie of Dauid at the goyng vp of the wall, beyonde the house of Dauid, vnto
the water gate eastwarde.
38 The other quyer of them that gaue thankes went ouer against them, and I after
them, and the halfe part of the people vpon the wall beyond the fornace gate,
vntill the brode wall,
39 And beyonde the port of Ephraim, and beyonde the old gate, beyonde the fishe
gate, and the towre of Hananeel, & the towre of Mea, euen vnto the sheepe gate
and they stoode still in the prison gate.
40 And so stoode the two quyers of them that gaue thankes in the house of God,
and I, & the halfe of the rulers with me.
41 And the priestes, namely Eliakim, Maasia, Miniamin, Michaia, Elionai,
Zachari, & Hanania, with trumpettes:
42 And Maasia, Semeia, Eleaser, Uzzi, Ichohanan, Melchiah, Elam, & Ezer: And the
singers sange loude, hauing Iesrahiah for their ouerfear.
43 And the same day they offered great sacrifices, and reioyced: for God had
geuen them great gladnesse, so that both the wiues & children were ioyfull, &
the mirth of Hierusale was hearde farre of.
44 At the same time were the men appoynted ouer the treasure houses, wherin were
the heaue offeringes, the firstlinges, and the tythes, that they shoulde gather
them out of the fieldes about the cities, to distribute them vnto the priestes
and Leuites according to the lawe: for Iuda was glad of the priestes and Leuites
that serued.
45 And there stoode and wayted vpon the office of their God, whiche is a pure
office, both the singers and porters, after the commaundement of Dauid, and of
Solomon his sonne:
46 For in the time of Dauid and Asaph, of olde were the chiefe singers founded &
the songes of prayse and thankesgeuing vnto God.
47 In the time of Zorobabel and Nehemia, did all they of Israel geue portions
vnto the singers and porters euery day his portion: and they gaue tythes vnto
the Leuites, & the Leuites gaue tythes againe vnto the children of Aaron.

Chapter 13

1 And that day dyd they read in the booke of Moyses in the audience of the
people, and therein was founde written, that the Ammonites, & Moabites shoulde
neuer come into the congregation of God,
2 Because they met not the children of Israel with bread and water, but hired
Balaam against them that he should curse them: and our God turned the curse into
a blessing.
3 Nowe when they had hearde the law, they separated from Israel euery one that
had mixt him selfe therin.
4 And before this had the priest Eliasib the ouersight of the treasurie of the
house of our God, and he was kynsman vnto Tobia,
5 And had made hym a great chamber, and there had they afore time layed the
offringes, frankencence, vessels, and the tythes of corne, wine, and oyle
according to the commaundementes geuen to the Leuites, singers and porters, and
the heaue offringes of the priestes.
6 But in all this time was not I at Hierusalem: for in the two and thirtie yere
of Artaxerxes king of Babylon, came I vnto the king, & after certayne dayes
obtayned I licence of the king to come to Hierusalem.
7 And I gat knowledge of the euyll that Eliasib dyd for Tobia, in that he had
made hym a chamber in the court of the house of God,
8 And it greeued me sore: therefore I cast foorth all the vessels of the house
of Tobia out of the chamber:
9 And commaunded them to clense the chambers, and thyther brought I againe the
vessels of the house of God, with the meate offring, and the incense.
10 And I perceaued that the portions of the Leuites had not ben geuen them, and
that euery one was fled to his land, euen the Leuites and singers that executed
the worke.
11 Then reproued I the rulers, and sayd: Why is the house of God forsaken? And I
gathered them together, and set them in their place.
12 Then brought all Iuda the tythes of corne, and wine, and oyle, vnto the
treasure.
13 And I made treasures ouer the treasure, euen Selemiah the priest, and Zadoc
the scribe, and of the Leuites, Phadaia: and vnder their hand was Hanan the
sonne of Zacur, the sonne of Mathania: for they were counted faythful, and their
office was to distribute the portions vnto their brethren.
14 Thinke vpon me O my God herein, and wype not out my mercie that I haue shewed
on the house of my God, and on the offices therof.
15 And the same time sawe I in Iuda some treading wine presses on the Sabbath,
and bringing in sheues, and which laded asses also with wine, grapes, and
figges, and all burthens, and brought them into Hierusalem vpon the Sabbath day:
And I rebuked them earnestly the same day that they solde the vitayles.
16 There dwelt men of Tyre also therein, which brought fish and all maner of
ware, and solde on the Sabbath vnto the childre of Iuda, euen in Hierusalem.
17 Then reproued I the rulers in Iuda, & sayd vnto them: What euyl thing is this
that ye do, & breake the Sabbath day?
18 Dyd not your fathers euen thus, and our God brought all this plague vpon vs,
and vpon this citie? And ye make the wrath more yet vpon Israel, in that ye
breake the Sabbath?
19 And when the portes of Hierusalem began to be darke in the euening before the
Sabbath, I commaunded to shut the gates, and charged that they should not be
opened till after the Sabbath: and some of my seruauntes set I at the gates,
that there shoulde no burthen be brought in on the Sabbath day.
20 Then remayned the chapmen and marchauntes once or twyse ouer night without
Hierusalem with all maner of wares.
21 Then reproued I them sore, and sayde vnto them: Why tary ye all night about
the wall? If ye do it once againe, I will lay handes vpon you: From that time
foorth came they no more on the Sabbath.
22 And I said vnto the Leuites, that they should clense them selues, and that
they shoulde come and kepe the gates, to halowe the Sabboth day: Thinke vpon me
O my God concerning this also, and spare me, according to thy great mercie.
23 In those dayes also sawe I Iewes that maried wyues of Asdod, of Ammon, and of
Moab,
24 And their children spake halfe in the speach of Asdod, and could not speake
in the Iewes language, but according to the language of the one people and of
the other people.
25 Then I reproued them, and cursed them, and smote certayne men of them, and
made them bare: and toke an oth of them by God, Ye shall not geue your daughters
vnto their sonnes, neither shall ye take their daughters vnto your sonnes, or
for your selues.
26 Dyd not Solomon the king of Israel sinne by these thinges? and yet among many
heathen was there no king like him, which was deare vnto his God, & God made hym
king ouer all Israel: and yet neuerthelesse outlandishe women caused him to
sinne.
27 Shall we then obey vnto you to do al this great euyll, and to transgresse
against our God, and marie straunge wyues?
28 And one of the children of Iehoiada the sonne of Eliasib the hye priest, was
the sonne in law of Sanaballat the Horonite: but I chased him from me.
29 O my God, thinke thou vpon them that defile the presthod, and the couenaunt
of the presthod and of the Leuites.
30 Thus clensed I them from all such as were outlandishe, and appoynted the
courses of the priestes and Leuites, euery one in his office:
31 And to offer the wood at times appoynted, and the first fruites: Thinke thou
vpon me O my God for the best.


Esther

Chapter 1

1 
2 Euen in those dayes when the king Ahasuerus sate on his seate royall, which
was in Susan the chiefe citie:
3 In the third yere of his raigne, he made a feast vnto all his princes &
seruauntes: and the mightie men of Persia and Media, the captaynes also and
rulers of his countreys were before hym.
4 And he shewed the richesse and glorie of his kingdome, and the glorious
worship of his greatnesse many dayes long, euen an hundred and fourescore dayes.
5 And when these dayes were expired, the king made a feast vnto al the people
that were in Susan the chiefe citie, both vnto great & small, seuen dayes long,
in the court of the garden by the kinges palace.
6 Where there hanged white, greene, and yelowe clothes, fastened with cordes of
fine silke and purple, in siluer ringes, vpon pillers of marble stones: The
benches also were of golde and siluer made vpon a pauement of greene, white,
yelowe, and blacke marble.
7 And they dranke in vessels of gold, and chaunged vessel after vessel, and
royal wine in aboundaunce, according to the power of the king.
8 And the drinking was by an order, none might compell: for so the king had
appoynted to all the officers of his house, that they shoulde do according to
euery mans pleasure.
9 And the queene Uasthi made a feast also for the women in the palace of
Ahasuerus.
10 And on the seuenth day when the king was mery after the wine, he commaunded
Nehuma, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, Abagthan, Zethar, and Charchas, the seuen
chamberlayns that did seruice in the presence of king Ahasuerus,
11 To fetch the queene Uasthi with the crowne regall into the kinges presence,
that he might shewe the people & princes her fairenesse: for she was beautifull.
12 But the queene Uasthi would not come at the kinges worde by his
chamberlaynes: Then was the king very wroth, and his indignation kindled in hym.
13 And the king spake to the wyse men which knewe the times (for so was the
kinges maner towardes all that knewe the lawe and the iudgementes:
14 And the next vnto hym were, Carsena, Sethar, Admata, Thersis, Mares, Marsena,
and Memuchan, the seuen princes of Persia and Media, whiche sawe the kinges
face, and sate the first in the kingdome.)
15 What, shall we do vnto the queene Uasthi according to the lawe, because she
dyd not according to the worde of the king Ahasuerus whiche he commaunded by his
chamberlaynes?
16 And Memuchan aunswered before the king & the princes: The queene Uasthi hath
not onely done euyll against the king, but also against all the princes, and
against all the people that are in all the prouinces of king Ahasuerus.
17 For this deede of the queene shall come abrode vnto all women, so that they
shall despise their husbandes before their eyes, and shall say: The king
Ahasuerus commaunded Uasthi the queene to be brought in before hym, but she
woulde not come.
18 And so shal the princesses in Persia and Media say lykewise this day vnto al
the kinges princes when they heare of this deede of the queene: thus shal there
arise to much despitefulnesse and wrath.
19 If it please the king, let there go a commaundement from hym, and let it be
written according to the lawes of the Persians and Medians, and not to be
transgressed, that Uasthi come no more before king Ahasuerus, and let the king
geue her royal estate vnto an other that is better then she.
20 And when this commaundement of the king which shalbe made, is published
throughout all his empire whiche is great, all women shall holde their husbandes
in honour both among great and small.
21 Thus saying pleased the king and the princes, and the king did according to
the worde of Memucan.
22 For he sent letters foorth into all the kinges prouinces, into euery lande
according to the wryting therof, and to euery people after their language, that
euery man shoulde be lorde in his owne house: and this to be published after the
language of his people.

Chapter 2

1 After these actes, when the displeasure of king Ahasuerus was nowe alayed, he
thought vpon Uasthi, & what she had done, & what was decreed against her.
2 Then sayde the kinges seruauntes that ministred vnto hym: Let there be faire
young virgins sought for the king,
3 And let the king appoynt officers in all the prouinces of his empire, that
they should bring together al the faire young virgins vnto Susan the head citie
to the womens buylding, vnder the hande of Hegai the kinges chamberlayne that
kept the women, to geue them their apparell:
4 And that the mayden which pleased the king, should be queene in Uasthis
steede. And this pleased the king, and he did so.
5 In the citie of Susan there was a certayne Iewe, whose name was Mardocheus,
the sonne of Iair, the sonne of Semei, the sonne of Cis, a man of Iemini,
6 Which was caryed away from Hierusalem with the captiuitie, when Iekonia the
king of Iuda was led away, whom Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon caryed
thence:
7 And he norished Hadassa (that is Esther) his vncles daughter: for he had
neither father nor mother, and she was a faire and beautifull mayden, whom
Mardocheus (when her father & mother were dead) receaued for his owne daughter.
8 So when the kinges commaundement and commission was published, and many
maydens were brought together into the citie of Susan vnder the hand of Hegai,
Esther was brought also vnto the kinges house vnder the hande of Hegai the keper
of the women.
9 And the mayden pleased hym, and she founde fauour in his sight: and he caused
ornamentes to be geuen her speedyly, and such thinges as belonged to her, and
appoynted her seuen comely maydens out of the kinges house, & fauoured both her
and her gentlewomen singularly in the house of the women.
10 But Esther shewed not her people and her kinred: for Mardocheus had charged
her that she shoulde not tell it.
11 And Mardocheus walked euery day before the court of the womens house, that he
might knowe howe Esther did, and what shoulde become of her.
12 And when the appoynted time of euery mayden came that she shoulde go in to
the king Ahasuerus, after that she had ben twelue monethes according to the
mauer of the women (for so were the dayes of their purification accomplissed,
sixe monethes with oyle of mirre, and sixe monethes with sweete odoures, and in
the purifiyng of the women:
13 And thus went the maydens vnto the king) whatsoeuer she required, that must
be geuen her to go with her out of the womens buylding vnto the kinges palace.
14 In the euening she went, and on the morowe she returned into the seconde
house of the women abyding vnder the hande of Saasgaz the kinges chamberlayne,
which kept the concubines: And she came in vnto the king no more, except it
pleased the king to haue her, and that she were called by name.
15 Nowe when the course came of Esther the daughter of Abihail, the vncle of
Mardocheus (which had receaued her as his owne daughter) that she shoulde come
in vnto the king, she desired nothing but what Hegai the kinges chamberlayne the
keper of the women saide: And Esther found fauour in the sight of all them that
loked vpon her.
16 And Esther was taken vnto king Ahasuerus into his house royall, in the tenth
moneth (which is the moneth Tebeth) in the seuenth yere of his raigne.
17 And the king loued Esther aboue all the women, and she found grace and fauour
in his sight more then all the virgins, so that he set the crowne of the
kingdome vpon her head, and made her queene in steede of Uasthi.
18 And the king made a great feast vnto all his princes and seruauntes, whiche
feast was because of Esther, and caused the prouinces to be in quietnesse, &
gaue giftes, as became the royaltie of a king.
19 And when the virgins were gathered together the seconde time, Mardocheus sate
in the kinges gate.
20 And as yet had not Esther shewed her kinred & her people, according as
Mardocheus had bidden her: for Esther dyd after the worde of Mardocheus, like as
if she had ben yet vnder his gouernaunce.
21 At the same time (whyle Mardocheus sate in the kinges gate) two of ye kinges
chamberlaynes, Bigthan and Theres, which kept the doore, were wroth, and sought
to lay their handes on the king Ahasuerus:
22 Whereof also Mardocheus gat knowledge, and tolde it vnto queene Esther, and
Esther certified the king therof in Mardocheus name.
23 And when inquisition was made, it was founde so, and they were both hanged on
tree: and it was written in the Chronicles before the king.

Chapter 3

1 After these actes, dyd king Ahasuerus promote Haman the sonne of Amadatha the
Agagite, and set hym on hie, and set his seate aboue all the princes that he had
with hym.
2 And al the kinges seruauntes that were in the kinges gate, bowed their knees,
and reuerenced Haman, for the king had so commaunded concerning hym: But
Mardocheus bowed not the knee, neither dyd hym reuerence.
3 Then the kinges seruauntes whiche were in the kinges gate, said vnto
Mardocheus: Why transgressest thou the kinges commaundement?
4 And though they spake this dayly vnto hym, yet woulde he not heare them,
therfore they tolde Haman, that they might see howe Mardocheus matters woulde
stande, for he had tolde them that he was a Iewe.
5 And when Haman sawe that Mardocheus bowed not the knee vnto him, nor dyd
reuerence vnto hym, he was full of indignation,
6 And thought it to litle to lay handes onely on Mardocheus, for they had shewed
him the nation of Mardocheus: wherefore he sought to destroy all the Iewes that
were throughout the whole empire of Ahasuerus, and that were of the nation of
Mardocheus.
7 In the first moneth (that is, the moneth Nisan) in the twelfth yere of king
Ahasuerus, they cast Phur, that is a lot, before Haman from day to day, and from
moneth to moneth to the twelfth moneth, that is, the moneth Adar.
8 And Haman sayde vnto king Ahasuerus: There is here a people scattred abrode,
and dispearsed among all people in all the prouinces of thyne empire, and their
lawes are diuers from all people, and do not after the kinges lawes, therefore
it is not the kinges profite to suffer them after this maner.
9 If it please the king, let it be written that they may be destroyed: and so
wyll I waye downe ten thousand talents of siluer by the handes of them that haue
the charge of this busines, to bring it into the kinges treasurie.
10 And the king toke his ring from his hand, & gaue it vnto Haman the sonne of
Amadatha the Agagite, the Iewes enemie.
11 And the king saide vnto Haman: Let the siluer be thyne, & do with that people
as it pleaseth thee.
12 Then were the kinges scribes called on the thirteenth day of the first
moneth, & there was written according as Haman commaunded vnto all the kinges
officers, and to the captaynes that were ouer euery prouince, and to the rulers
of euery people in the countryes on euery side according to the writing therof,
and to euery nation after their language, in the name of king Ahasuerus was it
writen, and sealed with the kinges ring.
13 And the letters were sent by postes into all the kinges prouinces, to roote
out, to kill, and to destroy all Iewes both young and olde, children and women
in one day namely vpon the thirteenth day of the twelfth moneth (which is the
moneth Adar) & to spoyle the as a pray.par
14 This was the summe of the writing, that there should be a commaundement geuen
in al prouinces, and published vnto all people, that they should be redy against
the same day.
15 And the postes went in all the haste according to the kinges commaundement,
and in Susan the chiefe citie was the commaundement deuised: And the king and
Haman sate and dranke, when in the meane time the citie of Susan was disquieted.

Chapter 4

1 When Mardocheus perceaued all that was done, he rent his clothes, and put on
sackecloth with asshes, and went out into the middest of the citie, and cryed
loude and lamentably,
2 And came before the kinges gate: but he might not enter within the kinges
gate, because he had sackcloth on.
3 And in all prouinces, countries, and places, as farre as the kinges worde &
commaundement extented, there was great lamentatio among the Iewes, fasting,
weeping, and mourning, and many lay in sackeclothes and in asshes.
4 So Esthers maydens and her chamberlaynes, came and told it her: Then was the
queene exceedingly astonied, and she sent rayment that Mardocheus shoulde put
on, and lay the sackcloth from him: But Mardocheus would not take them.
5 Then called Esther Hathach one of the kinges chamberlaines which stoode before
her, and gaue him a commaundement vnto Mardocheus, to know what it was wherefore
he did so.
6 So Hathach went foorth to Mardocheus, vnto the streete of the citie which was
before the kinges gate:
7 And Mardocheus tolde him of al that had come vnto him, & of ye summe of siluer
that Haman had promised to waye downe into the kinges treasurie, because of the
Iewes if he would destroy them.
8 And he gaue him the copie of the kinges commaundement that was deuised at
Susan to destroy them, that he might shewe it vnto Esther, and to speake to her,
and charge her that she should go in vnto the king, & make her prayer and
supplication vnto him for her people.
9 And when Hathach came in, he tolde Esther the wordes of Mardocheus.
10 And againe Esther spake vnto Hathach and commauded him to say vnto
Mardocheus:
11 All the kinges seruauntes, & the people in the prouinces of the king knowe,
that whosoeuer commeth within the courte vnto the king, whether it be man or
woman, which is not called, the comaundement is, that the same shall dye, except
the king holde out the golden septer vnto him, for then he shall lyue: As for
me, I haue not ben called to come in vnto the king now this thirtie dayes.
12 And they certified Mardocheus of Esthers wordes.
13 And Mardocheus bad say againe vnto Esther: Thinke not with thy selfe that
thou shalt escape in the kinges house more then all the Iewes.
14 For if thou holdest thy peace at this time, then shall the Iewes haue helpe
and deliueraunce out of an other place, and thou and thy fathers house shalbe
destroyed: And who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdome for this causes
sake?
15 Esther bad them geue Mardocheus this aunswere:
16 Go thou thy way, and gather together all the Iewes that are founde at Susan,
and fast ye for me, that ye eate not and drinke not in three dayes neither day
nor night, I and my maydens wyll fast likewyse: and so wyll I go in to the king,
which thing yet is contrary to the commaundement: and if I perishe, I perishe.
17 So Mardocheus went his way, and did according to al that Esther had
commaunded him.

Chapter 5

1 And on the third day it came to passe, that Esther put on her royall apparell,
and stoode in the court of the kinges palace within, ouer against ye kinges
house: and the king sat vpon his royall seate in the kinges palace ouer against
the gate of the house.
2 And when the king sawe Esther the queene standing in the court, she founde
grace in his sight: And the king held out the golden scepter that was in his
hand: So Esther stept foorth and touched the top of the scepter.
3 Then saide the king vnto her: What wylt thou queene Esther? and what requirest
thou? aske euen the halfe of the empire, and it shalbe geuen thee.
4 And Esther aunswered: If it please the king, let the king and Haman come this
day vnto the banket that I haue prepared for him.
5 And the king saide: Cause Haman to make haste, that he may do as Esther hath
saide. So the king and Haman came to the banket that Esther had prepared.
6 And the king saide vnto Esther at the banket of wine: What is thy petition,
that it may be geuen thee? And what requirest thou? If it be euen the halfe of
the empire, it shall be done.
7 Then aunswered Esther, and said: My petition and desire is,
8 If I haue founde grace in the sight of the king, and if it please the king to
geue me my petition, and to fulfil my request, then let the king and Haman come
to the banket that I shall prepare for the: and so wyl I do to morowe, as the
king hath saide.
9 Then went Haman foorth the same day ioyfull and mery in his minde: But when
the same Haman sawe Mardocheus in the kinges gate, that he stoode not vp nor
moued for him, he was ful of indignation at Mardocheus.
10 Neuerthelesse, Haman refrained him selfe, and when he came home he sent and
called for his friendes and Zares his wyfe.
11 And Haman tolde them of the glory of his riches, and the multitude of his
children, and all the thinges wherein the king had promoted him so greatly, and
how that he had set him aboue the princes and seruauntes of the king.
12 Haman saide moreouer: Yea, Esther the queene did let no man come in with the
king vnto the bancket that she had prepared, except me: and to morowe am I
bidden vnto her also with the king.
13 But in all this am I not satisfied, as long as I see Mardocheus the Iewe
sitting at the kinges gate.
14 Then saide Zares his wyfe and all his friendes vnto him: Let them make a
galous of fiftie cubites hie, and to morowe speake thou vnto the king that
Mardocheus may be hanged thereon: then go thou in meryly with the king vnto the
banket. And Haman was well content withall, and caused the galous to be made.

Chapter 6

1 The same night coulde not the king sleepe, and he commaunded to bring the
chronicles and stories: and they were read before the king.
2 Then it was founde written howe Mardocheus had tolde that Bigthana & Theres
the kinges two chamberlaynes which kept the thresholdes, sought to laye handes
on king Ahasuerus.
3 And the king saide: What honour and dignitie hath ben geuen to Mardocheus
therfore? Then saide the kinges seruautes that ministred vnto him: There is
nothing at all done for him.
4 And the king saide: Who is in the court? (for Haman was come into the court
without before the kinges house, that he might speake vnto the king to hang
Mardocheus on the tree that he had prepared for him.)
5 And the kinges seruauntes saide vnto him: Beholde, Haman standeth in the
court. And the king saide: let him come in.
6 And when Haman came in, the king saide vnto him: what shalbe done vnto the man
whom the king would faine bring vnto worship? (Haman thought in his heart: Whom
desireth the king to bring vnto worship more then me?)
7 And Haman aunswered the king: Let the man whom the king pleaseth to bring vnto
worship, be brought hither,
8 That he may be arayed with the royall garmentes which the king vseth to weare,
and the horse that the king rydeth vpon, and that the crowne royall may be set
vpon his head:
9 And let this rayment and horse be deliuered vnder the hande of one of the
kinges most noble princes, that they may aray the man withal whom the king is
disposed to bring to honour, and cary him vpon the horse through the streete of
the citie, and proclayme before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the
king pleaseth to bring to honour.
10 And the king saide to Haman: Make haste, and take as thou hast saide the
rayment and the horse, and do euen so vnto Mardocheus the Iewe that sitteth
before the kinges gate, and let nothing faile of all that thou hast spoken.
11 Then toke Haman the rayment and the horse, and arayed Mardocheus, and brought
him on horsebacke through the streete of the citie, and proclaymed before him,
Euen this shall it be done vnto the man whom the king is disposed to honour.
12 And Mardocheus came againe to the kinges gate: but Haman gat him home in all
the haste mourning, and his head couered,
13 And tolde Zares his wyfe and all his friendes euery thing that had befallen
him. Then saide his wise men and Zares his wyfe vnto him: If it be Mardocheus of
the seede of the Iewes, before who thou hast begun to fall, thou shalt not
preuaile against him, but shalt surely fall before him.
14 And whyle they were yet talking with him, came the kinges chamberlaynes, &
caused Haman to make hast to come vnto the banket that Esther had prepared.

Chapter 7

1 And the king and Haman came to bancket with the queene Esther.
2 And the king saide againe vnto Esther on the seconde day at the bancket of
wine: What is thy petition queene Esther, that it may be geuen thee? And what
requirest thou? if it be euen to the halfe of the empire, it shalbe done.
3 And Esther the queene aunswered, and saide: If I haue found grace in thy sight
O king, and if it please the king, then graunt me my lyfe at my desire, and my
people for my petitions sake.
4 For we are solde I and my people to be destroyed, to be slaine, and to
perishe: And would God that we were solde to be bondmen and bondwomen, then
would I holde my tongue: although the enemie coulde not recompence the kinges
losse.
5 The king Ahasuerus aunswered and saide vnto queene Esther: Who is he? And
where is he, that dare presume in his minde to do after that maner?
6 And Esther saide: the enemie and aduersarie is this wicked Haman. Then Haman
was exceedingly afrayde before the king and the queene.
7 And the king arose from the bancket and from the wine in his displeasure, and
went into the palace garden: And Haman stoode vp, and besought queene Esther for
his lyfe: for he saw that there was a mischiefe prepared for him of the king
alreadie.
8 And when the king came againe out of the palace garde into the place where
they dranke wine: Haman had layde him vpon the bed that Esther sate vpon. Then
saide the king: wil he force the queene also before me in the house? As soone as
that worde went out of the kinges mouth, they couered Hamans face.
9 And Harbona one of the chamberlaynes that stoode before the king, said:
Beholde, there standeth yet a galous in Hamans house, fiftie cubites hye, which
he had made for Mardocheus, that spake good for the king. Then the king saide,
Hang him thereon.
10 So they hanged Haman on the galous that he had made for Mardocheus: Then was
the kinges wrath pacified.

Chapter 8

1 The same day did king Ahasuerus geue the house of Haman the Iewes enemie vnto
queene Esther, and Mardocheus came before the king: for Esther tolde what he was
vnto her.
2 And the king toke of his ring which he had taken from Haman, and gaue it vnto
Mardocheus. And Esther sette Mardocheus ouer the house of Haman.
3 And Esther spake yet more before the king, and fel downe at his feete weping,
and besought him that he would put away the wickednesse of Haman the Agagite,
and his deuice that he had imagined against the Iewes.
4 And the king held out the golden scepter toward Esther. Then rose Esther, and
stode before the king,
5 And saide: if it please the king, and if I haue founde grace in his sight, and
if it be acceptable before the king, and I please him, then let it be writte,
that the letters of the deuise of Haman the sonne of Hamadatha the Agagite may
be called againe, which letters he wrote to destroy the Iewes which are in all
the kinges prouinces.
6 For how can I suffer and see the euill that shall come vnto my people? or how
can I beare and loke vpon the destruction of my kindred?
7 And the king Ahasuerus saide vnto queene Esther, and to Mardocheus the Iewe:
Beholde, I haue geuen Esther the house of Haman, whom they haue hanged vpon a
tree, because he layde hand vpon the Iewes.
8 Write ye also for the Iewes as it lyketh you, in the kinges name, and seale it
with the kinges ring: For the writinges that were written in the kinges name,
and sealed with the kinges ring, durst no man disanul.
9 Then were the kinges scribes called at the same time, euen in the thirde
moneth (that is the moneth Siuan) on the three and twentie day thereof, and it
was written according to all as Mardocheus commauded vnto the Iewes, and to the
princes, to the debuties and captaynes in the prouinces which are from India
vnto Ethiopia, namely an hundred twentie and seuen prouinces, vnto euery
prouince according to the writing thereof, and vnto euery people after their
speach, and to the Iewes according to their writing and language.
10 And he wrote in the king Ahasuerus name, & sealed it with the kinges ring,
and by postes that rode vpon horses, and swyft young Mules, sent he the
writinges,
11 Wherin the king graunted the Iewes in what cities soeuer they were, to gather
themselues together, and to stand for their lyfe, and for to roote out, to slay
and to destroy all the power of the people and prouince that woulde trouble
them, both children and women, and to spoyle their goodes:
12 Upon one day in all the prouinces of king Ahasuerus, namely vpon the
thirteenth day of the twelfth moneth, which is the moneth Adar.par
13 The summe of the writing was, how there shoulde be a commaundement geuen in
all and euery prouince, and published among all people, and that the Iewes
should be redy against that day, to auenge them selues on their enemies.
14 And so the postes that rode vpon the swyft Horses and Mules, made haste with
all speede to execute the kinges word: and the commaundement was deuised in
Susan the chiefe citie.
15 And Mardocheus went out from the king in royall apparell, of yelowe and
white, & with a great crowne of golde, being arayed with a garment of silke and
purple: and the citie of Susan reioysed and was glad.
16 And vnto the Iewes there was come light and gladnesse, ioy and worship.
17 In all prouinces and cities into what places soeuer the kinges word and
commaundement reached, there was ioy and mirth, a feaste and good dayes among
the Iewes: insomuch, that many of the people in ye lande became Iewes, for the
feare of the Iewes came vpon them.

Chapter 9

1 In the twelfth moneth (that is the moneth Adar) vpo the thirteenth day of the
same, when the kinges worde and commaundement drue neare to be put in execution,
in the day that the enemies of the Iewes hoped to haue power ouer the, it turned
contrary: for the Iewes had rule ouer them that hated them.
2 For then gathered the Iewes together in their cities within all the prouinces
of king Ahasuerus, to lay hande on such as woulde do them euill, and no man
could withstand them: for the feare of them was come ouer all people.
3 And all the rulers in the prouinces, and princes, and deputies, and officers
of the king, promoted the Iewes: for the feare of Mardocheus came vpon them.
4 For Mardocheus was great in the kinges house, & the reporte of him was noysed
in all the prouinces: for this man Mardocheus waxed greater and greater.
5 Thus the Iewes smote all their enemies with the stroke of the sword, and
slaughter, and destruction, & did what they would vnto their enemies.
6 And at Susan the chiefe citie slue the Iewes, & destroyed fiue hundred men.
7 And slue Pharsandatha, Dalphon, Asphatha,
8 Phoratha, Adalia, Aridatha,
9 Pharmastha, Arisai, Aridai, and Uaizatha,
10 The ten sonnes of Haman the sonne of Hamadata the enemie of the Iewes: but on
his goodes they layed no handes.
11 At the same time was the king certified of the number of those that were
slaine in the citie of Susan.
12 And the king saide vnto queene Esther: The Iewes haue slaine and destroyed
fiue hundred men in the citie of Susan, and the ten sonnes of Haman: What haue
they done thinkest thou in other landes of the king? And what is thy petition,
that it may be geuen thee? or what requirest thou more to be done?
13 Esther aunswered: If it please the king, let him suffer the Iewes which are
in Susan, to morow also to do according vnto this dayes decree, that they may
hang Hamans ten sonnes vpon the tree.
14 And the king charged to do so: and the decree was deuised at Susan, and they
hanged Hamans ten sonnes.
15 For the Iewes that were in Susan gathered them selues together, vpon the
fourteenth day of the moneth Adar, and slue three hundred men at Susan: but on
their goodes they layed no handes.
16 As for the other Iewes that were in the kinges prouinces, they came together
and stoode for their liues, & had rest from their enemies, & slue of their
enemies seuentie and fiue thousand: howbeit they layed no handes on their
goodes.
17 This they did on the thirteenth day of the moneth Adar, & on the fourteenth
day of the same moneth rested they, which day they held with feasting and
gladnesse.
18 But the Iewes that were at Susan came together both on the thirteenth day and
on the fourteenth: and on the fifteenth day of the same they rested, and held
that day with feasting & gladnesse.
19 And therefore the Iewes that dwelt in the villages and vnwalled townes, held
the fourteenth day of the moneth Adar with gladnesse and feasting, and kept holy
day, and euery one sent preasentes vnto his neighbour.
20 And Mardocheus wrote these wordes, and sent letters vnto all the Iewes that
were in all the prouinces of king Ahasuerus, both nie and farre:
21 That they should make a lawe among the selues, & holde the fourteenth &
fifteenth day of the moneth Adar, yerely.
22 As the dayes wherein the Iewes came to rest from their enemies, and as a
moneth wherein their paine was turned to ioy, and their sorowe into a ioyful
day: and that in those dayes they should make feastes and gladnesse, and one to
send giftes vnto another, and to distribute vnto the poore.
23 And the Iewes promised to do as they had begunne, and as Mardocheus had
written vnto them:
24 Because Haman the sonne of Hamadatha the Agagite all the Iewes enemie, had
deuised against the Iewes how he might destroy them, and caused to cast Phur
(that is a lot) for to consume them, & to bring them to naught.
25 But when Esther came before the king, he commaunded by letters that his
wicked deuice which he imagined against the Iewes, should be turned vpon his
owne head, and that he and his sonnes should be hanged on the tree.
26 For the which cause they called these dayes Phurim, because of the name of
the lot, and because of all the wordes of this writing, and what they themselues
had seene, & what had come vnto them:
27 And the Iewes ordayned, and toke it vpon them and their seede, and vpon all
such as ioyned them selues vnto them, that they would not misse but obserue
these two dayes yerely, according as they were written and appoynted in their
season,
28 And that these dayes are to be remembred and to be kept of childers children
among al kinredes in all landes and cities: In these dayes of Phurim which are
not to be ouerslipt among ye Iewes, and the memoriall of them ought not to
perishe from their seede.
29 And queene Esther the daughter of Abihail & Mardocheus the Iewe, wrote with
all aucthoritie to confirme this second writing of Phurim.
30 And he sent the letters vnto all the Iewes, to the hundred twentie and seuen
prouinces of the empire of Ahasuerus, with wordes of peace and trueth:
31 To confirme these dayes of Phurim in their time appoynted, according as
Mardocheus the Iewe and Esther the queene had appoynted them: and they bound
their soule and their seede to fasting and prayer.
32 And the decree of Esther confirmed these wordes of Phurim, and was written in
the booke.

Chapter 10

1 And the king Ahasuerus layed tribute vpon the land, & vpon the iles of the
sea.
2 And all the actes of his power and of his might, & the declaration of the
dignitie of Mardocheus wherwith the king magnified him, be they not written in
the bookes of ye chronicles of the kinges of Medes and Persia?
3 For Mardocheus the Iewe, was the second next vnto king Ahasuerus, and great
among the Iewes, and accepted among the multitude of his brethren, as one that
seeketh the wealth of his people, and speaketh peaceably for all his seede.


Job

Chapter 1

1 In the lande of Hus there was a man whose name was Iob, & the same was a
perfect and iust man, one that feared God and eschued euill.
2 And he had seuen sonnes and three daughters.
3 His substaunce also was seuen thousand sheepe, and three thousand camels, fiue
hundred yoke of oxen, and fiue hundred shee asses, and a very great householde:
so that he was one of the most principall men among all them of the east
countrey.
4 And his sonnes went and banquetted in their houses euery one his day, and sent
for their three sisters to eate and drinke with them.
5 And when the dayes of their banquetting were gone about, Iob sent and
sanctified them, and gat vp early and offered for euery one a burnt offring: For
Iob saide, It may be that my sonnes haue done some offence, & haue ben
vnthankfull to God in their heartes. Thus did Iob euery day.
6 And vpon a day when the children of God came and stoode before the lord, Satan
came also among them.
7 And the Lorde saide vnto Satan Whence comest thou? Satan aunswered the Lorde
and saide: From compassing the earth to and fro, & from walking through it.
8 And the Lorde saide vnto Satan: Hast thou not considered my seruaunt Iob, how
there is none lyke him in the earth? a perfect and a iust man, one that feareth
God, and eschueth euill?
9 Satan aunswered, and saide vnto the Lorde: Doth Iob feare God for naught?
10 Hast thou not preserued him and his house, and al that he hath on euery side?
Thou hast blessed the worke of his handes, and his possession is encreased in
the lande.
11 But laye thyne hand now vpon him, and touche all that he hath, and he shall
curse thee to thy face.
12 And the Lorde saide vnto Satan: Lo, all that he hath be in thy power, only
vpon him selfe see that thou lay not thine hand. And Satan went foorth from the
presence of the Lorde.
13 And vpon a certayne day, when his sonnes and daughters were eating and
drinking wine in their eldest brothers house,
14 There came a messenger vnto Iob, and sayde: The oxen were plowing and the
asses feeding beside them:
15 And the Sabees came violently, and toke them away, yea they haue slayne thy
seruauntes with the edge of the sword: and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.
16 While he was yet speaking, there came another, and sayde: The fire of God is
fallen from heauen, and hath brent vp thy sheepe and seruauntes, and consumed
them: and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.
17 And whyle he was yet speaking there came another, and sayde: The Caldees made
out their bandes, and fel vpon the camels, and haue caried them away, yea and
slayne thy seruauntes with the sworde: and I only am gotten away alone to tell
thee.
18 And whyle he was yet speaking there came an other, and sayde: Thy sonnes and
thy daughters were eating and drincking wine in their eldest brothers house,
19 And behold there came a mightie great wind from beyond the wildernesse, and
smote the foure corners of the house, whiche fell vpon thy children, and they
are dead: and I am gotten away alone to tell thee.
20 Then Iob stoode vp, and rent his clothes, & shaued his head, fell downe vpon
the ground, worshipped,
21 And sayde: Naked came I out of my mothers wombe, & naked shall I turne
thyther againe: The Lorde gaue & the Lord hath taken away, blessed be the name
of the Lorde.
22 In all these thinges dyd Iob not offende, nor charged God foolishly.

Chapter 2

1 And on a day the children of God came and stoode before the Lorde, and Satan
came also among the, and stoode before the Lorde.
2 And the Lorde sayde vnto Satan: From whence commest thou? Satan aunswered the
Lorde, and sayd: I haue gone about the lande, walked thorow it.
3 And the Lorde sayde vnto Satan: Hast thou not considered my seruaunt Iob? howe
there is none like vnto hym in the earth, a perfect and a iust man? one that
feareth God, and eschueth euil, & continueth still in his vprightnesse, although
thou mouedst me against hym, to destroy him without cause.
4 And Satan aunswered the Lord, and sayd, Skinne for skinne, yea a man wil geue
al that euer he hath for his life.
5 But lay thyne hande nowe vpon hym, and touch once his bone and his fleshe, and
he shall curse thee to thy face.
6 And the Lord sayde vnto Satan: Lo, he is in thyne hand, but saue his lyfe.
7 So went Satan foorth from the presence of the Lorde, and smote Iob with sore
byles, from the sole of his foote vnto his crowne.
8 And he toke a potsharde to scrape hym: and he sat downe among the asshes.
9 Then sayd his wyfe vnto him: Doest thou continue yet in thy perfectnesse?
curse God, and dye.
10 But he sayde vnto her, Thou speakest like a foolish woman: shal we receaue
good at the hande of God, and not receaue euyll? In all these thinges did not
Iob sinne with his lippes.
11 Nowe when Iobs three friendes heard of all the trouble that came vpon him,
they came euery one fro his owne place namely Eliphas the Themanite, Bildad the
Suhite, and Zophad the Naamathite: for they were agreed together to come to
shewe their compassion vpon him, and to comfort hym.
12 So when they lift vp their eyes a farre of, they knew him not: then they
cryed and wept, and euery one of them rent his clothes, and sprinckled dust vpon
their heades in the ayre.
13 They sate them downe by him also vpon the grounde seuen dayes & seuen
nightes, and none spake a worde vnto him: for they sawe that his greefe was very
great.

Chapter 3

1 After this opened Iob his mouth, and cursed his day,
2 And Iob aunswered, and sayde:
3 Let the day perishe wherin I was borne, and the night in the whiche it was
sayd, There is a man childe conceaued.
4 The same day be turned to darknesse, and not regarded of God from aboue,
neither let the light shyne vpon it:
5 But let it be stayned with darknesse and the shadowe of death, let the dimme
cloude fall vpon it, whiche may make it terrible as a most bitter day.
6 Let the darke storme ouercome that night, and let it not be ioyned vnto the
dayes of the yere, nor counted in the number of the monethes.
7 Desolate be that night, and without gladnesse.
8 Let them that curse the day, and that be redy to rayse vp mourning, geue it
also their curse.
9 Let the starres of that night be dimme thorowe darkenesse of it, let it loke
for light, but haue none, neither let it see the dawning of the day:
10 Because it shut not vp the doores of my mothers wombe, nor hyd sorowe from
myne eyes.
11 Alas why died I not in the birth? why dyd not I perishe assoone as I came out
of my mothers wombe?
12 Why set they me vpon their knees? why gaue they me sucke with their brestes?
13 Then should I nowe haue lyen stil, I shoulde haue slept, and ben at rest,
14 Lyke as the kinges and lordes of the earth, which haue buylded them selues
speciall places,
15 Or as the princes that haue had golde, and their houses full of siluer:
16 Or why was not I hyd, as a thing borne out of tune, either as young children
which neuer sawe the light?
17 There must the wicked ceasse from their tyrannie, and there such as laboured
valiauntly be at rest:
18 There the prisoners rest together, they heare no more the voyce of the
oppressour:
19 There are small and great, and the seruaunt is free from his maister.
20 Wherefore is the light geuen to hym that is in miserie? & lyfe vnto them that
haue heauy heartes?
21 Whiche long for death and finde it not, though they search more for it than
for treasures:
22 Which reioyce exceedingly, and be glad when they can finde the graue,
23 From whom their endes are hyd, and consealed by God?
24 For my sighes come before I eate, and my roringes are powred out like the
water:
25 For the thing that I feared is come vpon me, and the thing that I was afrayde
of is happened vnto me,
26 Was I not happy? Had I not quietnesse? Was I not in rest? And nowe commeth
such miserie vpon me.

Chapter 4

1 And Eliphas the Themanite aunswered, & sayde:
2 If we assay to come with thee, wilt thou be discontent? But who can withhold
him selfe from speaking?
3 Beholde, thou hast ben an instructer of many, & hast strenghtned the weery
handes:
4 Thy wordes haue set vp him that was falling, thou hast refreshed the weake
knees.
5 But nowe it is come vpon thee, and thou art greeued: it toucheth thee, and
thou art troubled.
6 Was not thy feare according to thy hope? and the perfectnesse of thy wayes
according to thy expectation?
7 Consider I pray thee who euer perished beyng an innocent? or when were the
godly destroyed?
8 For as I haue proued by experience, they that plow iniquitie & sow
wretchednesse, reape the same.
9 With the blast of God they perishe, with the breath of his nostrels are they
consumed away.
10 The roring of the lion, and the voyce of the lion, and the teeth of the lions
whelpes are pulled out.
11 The lion perisheth for lake of pray, & the lions whelpes are scattered
abrode.
12 But wheras a thing was hyd from me, yet myne care hath receaued a litle
therof.
13 In the thoughtes and visions of the night when sleepe commeth on men,
14 Feare came vpon me & dread, which made all my bones to shake.
15 The winde passed by before my presence, and made the heeres of my fleshe to
stande vp.
16 He stoode thereon and I knewe not his face, an image there was before myne
eyes, and in the stilnesse hearde I a voyce.
17 Shall man be more iust then God? or shall a man be purer then his maker?
18 Beholde, he founde not trueth in his seruauntes, and in his angels there was
folly:
19 Howe much more in them that dwel in houses of clay, and whose foundation is
but dust, which shall be consumed as it were with a moth?
20 They shalbe smitten from the morning vnto the euening: yea they shall perishe
for euer, when no man regardeth them.
21 Is not their royaltie gone away with them? they shall dye truely, and not in
wysdome.

Chapter 5

1 Crye I pray thee, if there be any that will aunswere thee, & loke thou vpon
any of the holy.
2 As for the foolish ma, wrathfulnesse killeth him, and enuie slayeth the
ignorant.
3 I haue seene my selfe when the foolish was deepe rooted, and sodenly I cursed
his habitation.
4 His children were without prosperitie, and they were slayne in the gate, and
there was no man to deliuer them.
5 His haruest was eaten of the hungrie, & taken from among the thornes, and the
thurstie drunke vp their labour: It is not the earth that bringeth foorth
iniquitie,
6 Neither commeth sorowe out of the ground:
7 But man is borne vnto labour, like as the sparkes flee vp out of the hot
coles,
8 But I woulde aske counsell at the Lorde, and talke with God?
9 Whiche doth great thinges and vnsearcheable, and maruels without number.
10 He geueth rayne vpon the earth, and powreth water vpon the streetes,
11 To set vp them that be of lowe degree, and that those which are in heauinesse
may be exalted to saluation.
12 He destroyeth the deuices of the subtyll, so that their handes are not able
to perfourme that which they do enterprise.
13 He compasseth the wise in their owne craftinesse, & maketh foolishe the
counsell of the wicked.
14 They runne into darknesse by fayre day, and grope at the noone day as in the
night.
15 But he deliuereth the poore from the sworde, from their threatninges, and
from the violence of the mightie.
16 He is the hope of the poore, & the mouth of the wicked shalbe stopped.
17 Behold, blessed is the man whom God correcteth, therefore refuse not thou the
chastening of the almightie:
18 For be maketh a wounde and he healeth: he smiteth, and his hande maketh whole
againe.
19 He shall deliuer thee in sixe troubles, & in the seuenth there shall no euil
come to thee.
20 In hunger he shall saue thee from death, and when it is warre, from the power
of the sworde.
21 Thou shalt be hyd from the scourge of the tongue, & when destruction commeth
thou shalt not neede to feare.
22 In destruction and dearth thou shalt be mery, and shalt not be afrayde of the
beastes of the earth.
23 For the stones of the land shalbe confederate with thee, and the beastes of
the fielde shalbe at peace with thee.
24 And thou shalt knowe that thy dwelling place shalbe in rest, and thou shalt
visite thy habitation, & shalt not sinne.
25 Thou shalt see also that thy seede shall be great, and thy posteritie as the
grasse vpon the earth.
26 Thou shalt come also to thy graue in a full age, like a corne sheafe cut
downe in due season.
27 Lo, this we our selues haue proued by experience, and euen thus it is:
Hearken thou to it also, that thou mayest take heede to thy selfe.

Chapter 6

1 But Iob aunswered, and sayde:
2 O that my complaynt were truely wayed, and my punishment layde in the
balaunces together:
3 For nowe it woulde be heauier then the sande of the sea: and this is the
cause, that my wordes fayle me.
4 For the arrowes of the almightie are vpon me, the poyson therof hath drunke vp
my spirite, and the terrible feares of God are set against me.
5 Doth the wild asse rore when he hath grasse? or loweth the oxe when he hath
fodder inough
6 That which is vnsauerie, shall it be eaten without salt? or is there any taste
in the whyte of an egge?
7 The thinges that sometime I might not away withel, are nowe my meate for very
sorowe.
8 O that I might haue my desire, and that God woulde graunt me the thing that I
long for:
9 O that God would begin and smite me, that he would let his hand go and take me
cleane away:
10 Then shoulde I haue some comfort, yea I woulde desire him in my payne that he
would not spare, for I wil not be against the wordes of the holy one.
11 For what powre haue I to endure? And what is myne end, that my soule might be
patient?
12 Is my strength the strength of stones? or is my fleshe of brasse?
13 Is it not so that there is in me no helpe? & that my substaunce is taken from
me?
14 He that is in tribulation, ought to be comforted of his neyghbour: but the
feare of the almightie is cleane away.
15 Myne owne brethren passe ouer by me as the water brooke, & as the ouerflowing
of waters, whiche do hastly go away,
16 Whiche are blackish be reason of the ice, and wherin the snowe is hyd.
17 Which when they haue passed by do vanishe, and when the heate commeth they
fayle out of their place.
18 They depart from the course of their wonted chanell to other places, they
runne in vayne and perishe.
19 They that went to The man considered them, and they that went to Saba wayted
for them.
20 But they were confounded in their hope, they came thyther and were ashamed.
21 Euen such truely are ye, nowe that ye see my miserie ye are afrayde.
22 Did I desire you to bring vnto me, or to geue me any of your substaunce?
23 To deliuer me from the enemies hand, or to saue me from the hande of the
tyrauntes?
24 Teache me, and I will hold my tong: and wherin I haue erred; cause me to
vnderstande.
25 How strong are the wordes of trueth? and which of you can rebuke or reproue
them?
26 Do ye imagine to reproue wordes, that the talke of the afflicted shoulde be
as the winde?
27 Ye fall vpon the fatherlesse, and digge a pit to ouerthrowe your owne frende.
28 And therfore be content, & loke now vpon me, and I will not lye before your
face.
29 Turne I pray you, be indifferent iudges: turne agayne, and ye shall see myne
vngiltinesse,
30 whether there be any vnrighteousnes in my tongue, or vayne wordes in my
mouth.

Chapter 7

1 Is ther not an appoynted time to man vpon earth? Are not his dayes also like
the dayes of an hired seruaunt?
2 For like as a bonde seruaunt desireth the shadowe, and as an hyreling woulde
fayne haue the rewarde of his worke:
3 Euen so haue I laboured whole monethes long in vayne, and many a carefull
night haue I tolde.
4 When I layde me downe to sleepe, I sayde, O when shall I arise? and measuring
the euening, I am euen full with tossing to and fro vnto the dawning of the day.
5 My fleshe is clothed with wormes and dust of the earth: my skinne is withered
and become horrible.
6 My dayes passe ouer more spedyly then a weauers shuttle, and are spent without
hope.
7 O remember that my lyfe is but a winde, and that myne eye shall no more see
pleasures:
8 Yea and the eye that hath seene me, shal see me no more: for yer thou fasten
thyne eye vpon me, I come to naught.
9 The cloude is consumed and vanished away: so he that goeth downe to the graue
shall come no more vp,
10 Nor turne againe into his house, neither shall his place knowe him any more.
11 Therfore I wil not spare my mouth, but I will speake in the trouble of my
spirite, and muse in the bitternesse of my mynde.
12 Am I a sea or a whale fish, that thou kepest me so in prison?
13 When I say, My bed shal comfort me, I shall haue some refreshing by talking
to my selfe vpon my couch:
14 Then fearest thou me with dreames, & makest me so afrayde through visions,
15 That my soule wisheth rather to perishe and die, then my bones to remayne.
16 I can see no remedy, I shall liue no more: O spare me then, for my dayes are
but vanitie.
17 What is man that thou doest magnifie him? and that thou settest thy heart
vpon him?
18 Thou visitest him early and euery day, euery moment doest thou trie him.
19 Why goest thou not fro me, nor lettest me alone, so long till I may swalowe
downe my spyttle?
20 I haue offended, what shall I do vnto the, O thou preseruer of men? Why hast
thou set me as a marke against thee, so that I am a burden to my selfe?
21 Why doest thou not pardon my trespasses, and take away myne iniquitie?
Behold, nowe must I sleepe in the dust, and if thou sekest me to morowe in the
morning, I shal not be.

Chapter 8

1 Then aunswered Bildad the Suhite, & said:
2 Howe long wilt thou talke of such thinges? howe long shall the wordes of thy
mouth be as a mightie wind?
3 Doth God paruert the thing that is lawfull? or doth the almightie destroy the
thing that is right?
4 For seyng that thy sonnes sinned against him, did not he send them into the
place of their iniquitie?
5 If thou wouldest nowe resorte vnto God be times, and make thy prayer to the
almightie,
6 If thou wouldest liue a pure and godly life: shoulde he not awake vp vnto thee
immediatly, and make the habitation of thy righteousnesse prosperous?
7 In so much that wherin so euer thou haddest litle afore, thou shouldest haue
nowe great aboundaunce.
8 Enquire I pray thee of the former age, and search diligently among their
fathers:
9 (For we are but of yesterday, and consider not that our dayes vpon earth are
but a shadowe.)
10 Shall not they shew thee, and tel thee, yea and gladly confesse the same, and
vtter the wordes of their heart?
11 May a rushe be greene without moystnesse? or may the grasse growe without
water?
12 No, but whilste it is nowe in his greennesse, though it be not cut downe, yet
withereth it before any other hearbe:
13 So are the pathes of al that forget God, and the hypocrites hope shall come
to naught.
14 His confidence shalbe destroyed, and his trust shalbe a spiders webbe.
15 He shal leane vpon his house, but it shal not stande: he shall holde him fast
by it, yet shall it not endure.
16 It is a greene tree before the sunne, & shooteth foorth the braunches ouer
his garden.
17 The rootes thereof are wrapped about the fountayne, and are folden about the
house of stones.
18 If any plucke it from his place, and it denie, saying, I haue not seene thee:
19 Behold it will reioyce by this meanes, if it may growe in another mould.
20 Beholde, God will not cast away a vertuous man, neither wil he helpe the
vngodly.
21 Thy mouth shall he fill with laughing, and thy lippes with gladnesse.
22 They also that hate thee shalbe clothed with shame, & the dwelling of the
vngodly shall come to naught.

Chapter 9

1 Iob aunswered, and sayde,
2 I knowe it is so of a trueth: For how may a man compared vnto God be
iustified?
3 If he wil argue with hym, he can not aunswere hym one thing of a thousande.
4 He is wyse in heart and mightie in strength: who hath ben fearce against hym,
and hath prospered?
5 He translateth the mountaynes, or euer they be aware it is he that
ouerthroweth them in his wrath.
6 He remoueth the earth out of her place, that the pillers therof shake withall.
7 He commaundeth the sunne, and it ryseth not: he closeth vp the starres as
vnder a signet.
8 He hym selfe alone spreadeth out the heauens, and goeth vpon the waues of the
sea.
9 He maketh the Waynes of heauen, the Orion, the seuen starres, and the secret
places of the south.
10 He doth great thinges & vnsearcheable, yea and wonders without number.
11 Lo, when he goeth by me, I shal not see hym, and when he passeth, I shall not
perceaue hym.
12 If he be hastie to take away, who wil make him restore it? or who will say
vnto hym, what doest thou?
13 God will not withdraw his anger, and the most mightie helpes do stowpe vnder
hym:
14 Howe much lesse shall I aunswere him? or howe shoulde I finde out my wordes
with him?
15 For though I were righteous, yet might I not geue him one word againe, but
mekely submit my selfe to hym as my iudge.
16 If I had called vpon hym, and he had aunswered me, yet woulde I not beleue
that he hearde my voyce:
17 He troubleth me so with the tempest, and woundeth me out of measure without a
cause,
18 He will not suffer me to take my breath, but filleth me with bitternesse.
19 If men will speake of strength, lo he is strong: if men will speake of
iudgement, who shall bring me in to pleade?
20 If I will iustifie my selfe, myne owne mouth shall condempne me: if I will
put foorth my selfe for a perfect man, he shall proue me a wicked doer.
21 For though I be an innocent and my conscience cleare, yet am I weery of my
lyfe.
22 This is one poynt, and therefore I sayd, He destroyeth both the perfect and
vngodly.
23 And though he slay sodaynly with the scourge, yet will he laugh at the
punishment of the innocent.
24 As for the worlde it is geuen ouer into the hande of the wicked, and he shall
couer the faces of the iudges therof: if not, where is he, or who is he that can
shewe the contrarie?
25 My dayes are more swyft then a runner, they are gone & haue seene no good
thing.
26 They are passed away as the shippes that be good vnder sayle, & as the eagle
that fleeth to the pray.
27 If I say, I will forget my complayning, I will ceasse from my wrath, and
comfort my selfe:
28 Then am I afrayde of all my sorowes, for I knowe that thou wilt not iudge me
innocent.
29 If I be wicked, why then labour I in vayne?
30 If I washe my selfe with snowe water, and make myne handes neuer so cleane at
the well:
31 Yet shalt thou dippe me in the myre, and mine owne clothes shal defile me.
32 For he that I must geue aunswere vnto, and with whom I go to the lawe, is not
a man as I am:
33 Neither is there any dayesman to lay his hande betweene vs.
34 Let hym take his rodde away from me, yea let hym make me no more afrayde of
him,
35 And then shall I aunswere hym without any feare: but because I am not so, I
holde me still.

Chapter 10

1 My soule is cut of though I lyue, I wil powre out my coplaynte against my
selfe, and will speake out of the very heauinesse of my soule.
2 I will say vnto God: O do not condempne me, but shewe me wherefore thou
contendest so with me?
3 Thinkest thou it welldone to oppresse me? to cast me of beyng the workes of
thy handes? and to mayntayne the counsell of the vngodly?
4 Hast thou fleshy eyes? or doest thou loke as a man loketh?
5 Or are thy dayes as the dayes of man? and thy yeres as mans yeres?
6 That thou makest such inquisition for my wickednes, and searchest out my
sinne?
7 Whereas thou knowest whether I shall do wickedly or no, and that none can
deliuer me out of thyne hande.
8 Thy handes haue made me, & fashioned me altogether rounde about, wilt thou
then destroy me?
9 Remember I besech thee that thou madest me as the moulde of the earth, and
shalt bring me into dust againe.
10 Hast thou not powred me as it were milke, & turned me to cruddes like cheese?
11 Thou hast couered me with skinne and fleshe, and ioyned me together with
bones and sinnowes.
12 Thou hast graunted me life, and done me good: and thy visitation hath
preserued my spirite.
13 Thou hast hyd these thinges in thyne heart yet I am sure that thou remembrest
this thing.
14 If I dyd sinne, thou haddest an eye vnto me, and shalt not pronounce me
innocent from myne offence.
15 If I haue done wickedly, wo is me therefore: If I haue done righteously, yet
dare I not lift vp my head, so full am I of confusion, and see myne owne
miserie.
16 And let it increase, hunte me as a lion, & returne and shew thy selfe
maruaylous vpon me.
17 Thou bringest freshe witnesse against me, and thy wrath increasest thou vpon
me: diuers and many are the plagues that I am in.
18 Wherfore hast thou brought me out of the wombe? O that I had perished, and
that no eye had seene me,
19 And that I were as though I had not ben, but brought from the wombe to the
graue.
20 Are not my dayes fewe? Let him then leaue of fro me, and let me a lone, that
I may comfort my selfe a litle,
21 Afore I go thyther from whence I shall not turne againe, euen to the lande of
darknesse and shadowe of death:
22 Yea a lande as darke as darknesse it selfe, and into the shadowe of death
where is none order, but the light is there as darknesse.

Chapter 11

1 Then aunswered Sophar the Naamathite, and sayde;
2 Shoulde not he that maketh many wordes be aunswered? Shoulde he that bableth
much be commended therin?
3 Shoulde thy lies make men holde their peace, and when thou mockest others
shall no man make thee ashamed?
4 For thou hast sayde, my doctrine is pure, and I am cleane in thyne eyes.
5 But O that God woulde speake, and open his lippes against thee:
6 That he might shewe thee the secretes of wysdome, howe thou hast deserued
double according to right: Know therfore that God hath forgotten thee for thyne
iniquitie.
7 Art thou able to finde out the secretes of God? Or wilt thou attayne to the
perfectnesse of the almightie?
8 It is hier then heauen, what art thou able to do? deeper then the hel, how
wilt thou then knowe it?
9 The measure of it is longer then the earth, and broder then the sea.
10 Though he turne all thinges vpsyde downe, close them in, gather them
together, who will turne hym from his purpose?
11 For it is he that knoweth vayne men, he seeth their wickednesse also, shoulde
he not then consider it?
12 Yet vayne man would be wyse, though man newe borne is lyke a wilde asses
coulte.
13 If thou preparedst thyne heart, and liftedst vp thyne handes towarde hym:
14 If thou wouldest put away the wickednes whiche thou hast in hande, so that no
vngodlinesse dwell in thy house:
15 Then mightest thou lift vp thy face without shame, & then shouldest thou be
sure and haue no neede to feare.
16 Then shouldest thou forget thy miserie, and thinke no more vpon it, then vpon
the waters that runne by.
17 Then should thy lyfe be as cleare as the noone day, thou shouldest shine
forth, and be as the morning.
18 Then mightest thou be bolde because there is hope, and take thy rest quietly,
as compassed with a trenche.
19 Then mightest thou lye downe and none to make thee afrayde, yea many one
should make suite vnto thee.
20 As for the eyes of the vngodly they shall faile, and they shal not escape:
and their hope shalbe sorowe of minde.

Chapter 12

1 So Iob aunswered, & saide:
2 Then no doubt ye are the men alone, and wysdome shall perishe with you.
3 But I haue vnderstanding aswell as ye, and am not inferior to you: Yea who
knoweth not these thinges?
4 I am as one mocked of his neighbour, who calleth vpon God, & he heareth him:
The iust & the vpright is laughed to scorne.
5 Being as alight despised in the heartes of the riche, and as one redy to fall.
6 The houses of robbers are in wealth and prosperitie, and they that
maliciouslie meddle against God dwell without care, in those thinges that God
hath geuen richely with his hande.
7 Aske the cattaile, and they shall enfourme thee: the foules of the ayre, and
they shall tell thee.
8 Or the encrease of the earth, and it shall shew thee: or the fishes of the
sea, and they shall certifie thee.
9 What is he but he knoweth that the hande of the Lorde made all these?
10 In whose hande is the soule of euery liuing thing, and the breath of all
mankinde.
11 Haue not the eares pleasure in hearing? and the mouth in tasting the thing
that it eateth?
12 Among olde persons there is wysedome, and in age is vnderstanding.
13 Yea, with God is wysdome and strength, it is he that hath counsell and
foreknowledge.
14 Beholde if he breake downe a thing, who can set it vp againe? yf he shut a
thing, who wyll open it?
15 Beholde, if he withholde the waters, they drye vp: yf he let them go, they
destroy the earth.
16 With him is strength and wysdome: both the deceauer and he that is deceaued
are his.
17 He carieth away the wyse men as it were a spoyle, and bringeth the iudges out
of their wittes.
18 He taketh away the subiection of the people from their kinges, and girdeth
their loynes with a bonde.
19 He leadeth away the great men into captiuitie, and turneth the mightie vpside
downe.
20 He stoppeth the mouth of them that speake trueth, & disapoynteth the aged of
their reason.
21 He powreth contempt vpon princes, and maketh the strength of the mightie
weake.
22 Loke what lyeth hid in darkenesse he declareth it openly, and the very
shadowe of death bringeth he to light.
23 He both increaseth the people and destroyeth them, he maketh them to
multiplie, and diminisheth them.
24 He taketh away the hearte of them that be heades of ye people of the earth,
and causeth them to wander in the wildernesse out of the way.
25 They grope in the darke without light, and he maketh them to stacker like a
drunken man.

Chapter 13

1 Lo, all this haue I seene with mine eye, heard with mine eare, and vnderstande
it.
2 What ye knowe, that same do I know also, neither am I inferior vnto you.
3 Neuerthelesse, I talke with the almightie, and my desire is to commune with
God.
4 As for you, ye are workmaisters of lyes, and vnprofitable phisitians
altogether.
5 Woulde God ye kept your tongue, for then might ye be taken for wise men.
6 Now heare my reasoning, and ponder the argument of my lippes.
7 Wyll you speake wickedlie for gods defence and talke deceitfully for his
cause?
8 Wyll ye accept the person of him? or wyll ye contende for God?
9 Shall that helpe you when he calleth you to reckening? For as one man mocketh
an other, so do ye mocke him.
10 He shall punishe you, and reproue you, if ye do secretly accept any person.
11 Shall not his excellencie make you afrayde? Shall not his terrible feare fall
vpon you?
12 Your remembraunce is lyke vnto a sparke, and your bodies lyke the claye.
13 Holde your tongues for my sake, that I also may speake, and my sorowe shalbe
the lesse.
14 Wherefore do I beare my fleshe in my teeth, and put my soule in myne handes?
15 Lo, though he slay me, yet wyl I trust in him: but I wyll reproue myne owne
wayes in his sight.
16 He shalbe my saluation: for there may no hypocrite come before him.
17 Heare diligently my wordes, and ponder my sayinges with your eares.
18 Beholde, now haue I prepared my iudgement, and knowe that I shalbe founde
righteous.
19 What is he that wyll go to lawe with me? if I now holde my tongue I dye.
20 Neuerthelesse, graunt me two thinges, and then wyll I not hide my selfe from
thee:
21 Withdrawe thyne hande from me, and let not the fearefull dreade of thee make
me afrayde.
22 Then call, and I wyll aunswere: or let me speake, and geue me then an
aunswere.
23 How many are my misdeedes and sinnes? let me knowe my transgressions and
offences.
24 Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and holdest me for thyne enemie?
25 Wylt thou breake a leafe driuen to and fro, and wilt thou pursue the drye
stubble?
26 For thou layest sharply to my charge, and punishest me for the sinnes of my
youth.
27 Thou puttest my feete also in the stockes, and lokest narowly vnto all my
pathes, and makest the print thereof in the heeles of my feete:
28 And I as a rotten thing do consume away, as a garment that is moth eaten.

Chapter 14

1 Man that is borne of woman, hath but a short time to lyue, and is full of
miserie.
2 He commeth vp, and is cut downe like a floure: He fleeth as it were a shadow,
and neuer continueth in one state.
3 Doest thou open thyne eyes vpon such one, and bringest me into thy iudgement?
4 Who can make it cleane that commeth of an vncleane thing? no bodye.
5 The dayes of man surely are determined, the number of his monethes are knowen
onely vnto thee, thou hast appoynted him his bondes which he can not go beyonde.
6 Go from him, that he may rest vntill his day come which he loketh for, lyke as
an hireling doth.
7 For if a tree be cut downe, there is some hope yet that it wyll sproute and
shoote foorth the braunches againe.
8 Though the roote of it be waxen olde, and the stocke thereof be dead in the
grounde:
9 Yet when it getteth the sent of water, it wyll budde and bring foorth bowes,
lyke as a tree that is planted.
10 But as for man, when he is dead, perished, and consumed away, what becommeth
of him?
11 As the waters passe from the sea, and as the flood decayeth and dryeth vp:
12 So man after he is asleepe ryseth not, he shall not wake tyll the heauens be
no more, nor rise out of his sleepe.
13 O that thou wouldest hide me in the graue, & keepe me secret vntyl thy wrath
were past, and to appoynt me a time wherein thou mightest remember me.
14 May a dead man lyue againe? All the dayes of my lyfe wyll I wayte still, till
my chaunging shall come.
15 Thou shalt call me and I shall aunswere thee, despise not thou the worke of
thyne owne handes.
16 For now thou numbrest all my goinges, and geuest no delay vnto my sinne.
17 Myne iniquitie is sealed vp as it were in a bagge, and thou addest
punishement vnto my wickednesse.
18 The mountaines fal away at the last, the rockes are remoued out of their
place.
19 The waters pearse through the very stones by litle & litle, the floodes washe
away the grauell and earth: so shalt thou destroy the hope of man.
20 Thou preuaylest still against him, so that he passeth away: thou chaungest
his estate and puttest him from thee.
21 And whether his children come to worship or no, he can not tell: And if they
be men of lowe degree, he knoweth not.
22 But while his fleshe is vpon him, it must haue sorowe: and his soule shall
mourne within him.

Chapter 15

1 Then aunswered Eliphaz the Themanite, and saide:
2 Shall a wyse mans aunswere be as the winde, and fill a mans belly as it were
with the winde of the east?
3 Shall he reproue with a worde that is nothing worth, & speake the thinges
which can do no good?
4 Surely thou hast cast of feare, and restrainest prayer before God.
5 For thy mouth setteth forth thyne owne iniquitie, seeing thou hast chosen the
tongue of the craftie.
6 Thyne owne mouth condempneth thee, and not I: yea, thyne owne lippes shape an
aunswere against thee.
7 Art thou the first man that euer was borne? or wast thou made before the hils?
8 Hast thou heard the secret counsell of God? and doest thou restraine wysdome
to thee?
9 What knowest thou, that we knowe not? And what vnderstandest thou, but we can
the same?
10 With vs are both olde and aged men, yea such as haue liued longer then thy
father.
11 Thinkest thou it a small thing of the consolations of God? with thee is a
lying worde.
12 Why doth thyne heart so bewitche thee? And wherefore winckest thou with thyne
eyes,
13 That thy minde is so pufte vp against God, and lettest such wordes go out of
thy mouth?
14 What is man, that he should be cleane? and he which is borne of a woman,
whereby he might be righteous?
15 Beholde he doth not trust his sainctes, yea, the very heauens are not cleane
in his sight:
16 How much more then an abhominable and vyle man, which drincketh wickednesse
like water.
17 I will tel thee, heare me, and I will shewe thee that I haue seene:
18 Which wyse men haue tolde, and haue not hid that which they receaued from
theyr fathers:
19 Unto whom alone the earth was geue, and no straunger went among them.
20 The vngodly soroweth all the dayes of his lyfe as it were a woman with
childe, and the number of a tirauntes yeres is vnknowen.
21 A feareful sounde is euer in his eares, and when he is in peace, the
destroyer shall come vpon him.
22 He beleueth neuer to be deliuered out of darknesse: for the sworde is alwayes
before his eyes.
23 He wandreth abrode for bread where it is, knowing that the day of darkenesse
is redie at his hande.
24 Trouble and anguishe wil make him afrayde, and compasse him about, as is a
king in the middest of an armie.
25 For he hath stretched out his hande against God, and armed him selfe against
the almightie.
26 He runneth proudly vpon him, & with a stiffe necke fighteth he against him.
27 Where as he couereth his face with fatnesse, and maketh his body well lyking.
28 Therefore shall his dwelling be in desolate cities, and in houses which no
man inhabiteth, but are become heapes of stones.
29 He shall not be riche, neither shall his substaunce continue, neither shal
the prosperitie thereof be prolonged vpon earth.
30 He shall neuer depart out of darkenesse, the flame shal drye vp his branches,
with the blast of ye mouth of God shall he be taken away.
31 He beleeueth not that he erreth in vanitie, and yet vanitie shalbe his
recompence.
32 He shal perishe afore his time be worne out, and his braunche shall not be
greene.
33 He shalbe plucked of as an vntimely grape from the vine, and shall let his
floure fall as the oliue doth.
34 For the congregation of hypocrites shalbe desolate, and the fire shall
consume the houses of such as are greedie to receaue giftes.
35 He conceaueth trauaile, and beareth vanitie, and their body bringeth foorth
disceyte.

Chapter 16

1 Iob aunswered, & saide:
2 I haue oft times heard such thinges: miserable geuers of comfort are ye all
the sort of you.
3 Shall not vaine wordes come yet to an ende? Or what maketh thee bolde so to
aunswere?
4 I coulde speake as ye do also: but would God that your soule were in my soules
steade, then could I frame wordes for you, and shake my head at you:
5 I shoulde comfort you with my mouth, & releasse your paine with the talking of
my lippes.
6 For all my wordes my sorowe wyll not ceasse: And though I holde my tongue,
what am I eased?
7 But now that God hath sent me aduersitie, thou hast troubled al my
congregation.
8 And that thou hast filled me with wrinckles my fleshe is recorde, and my
leanenesse ryseth vp against me and beareth witnes thereof in my face.
9 His wrath hath torne me he hateth me, & gnasheth vpon me with his teeth: myne
enemie loketh fiercely vpon me with his eyes.
10 They haue opened their mouthes wide vpon me, and smitten me vpon the cheeke
dispitefully, they gather the selues together against me.
11 God hath shut me vp with the vngodly, and deliuered me into the handes of the
wicked.
12 I was in wealth, but he hath brought me to nought: he hath taken me by the
necke, he hath all to shaken me, and set me as a marke for him selfe.
13 His archers compasse me rounde about, he woundeth my raines, and doth not
spare, my bowels hath he powred vpon the grounde.
14 He hath geuen me one wounde vpon an other, and is fallen vpon me lyke a
giaunt.
15 I haue sowed a sackecloth vpon my skinne, and wallowed my head in the dust.
16 My face is withered with weeping, & in mine eyes is the shadowe of death.
17 Howbeit there is no wickednesse in my handes, but my prayer is cleane.
18 O earth couer not thou my blood, and let my crying finde no roome.
19 For lo, my witnesse is in heauen, and he that knoweth me, is in the height.
20 My friendes geue me many wordes to scorne, and myne eye powreth out teares
vnto God.
21 O that a body might pleate with God, as one man doth with an other:
22 Yet the number of my yeres is come, and the way that I must go is at hand,
from whence I shall not turne againe.

Chapter 17

1 My breath is corrupt, my dayes are shortened, I am harde at deathes doore.
2 Froward men are with me, and myne eye must continue in the bitternesse of
them.
3 O deliuer me, and loke out one to be my suretie in thy sight: what is he that
knoweth who wyll promise for me?
4 For thou hast withholden their heartes from vnderstanding, therefore shalt
thou not set them vp on hie.
5 He that speaketh flatterie to his friend, the eyes of his children shall
fayle.
6 He hath made me a byworde of the people, where as afore I was their ioy.
7 Myne eye is dimme for very heauinesse, and all my strength is lyke a shadowe.
8 Vertuous men therefore shall well consider this, and the innocent shal take
part against the hypocrite.
9 The righteous also wyll kepe his way, and he that hath cleane handes wyll euer
be stronger and stronger.
10 As for al you, turne you and get you hence I pray you seeing I can not finde
one wyse man among you.
11 My dayes are past, and my counsailes and thoughtes of my heart are vanished
away,
12 Chaunging the night into day, and the light approching into darkenesse.
13 Though I tary neuer so much, yet the graue is my house, & I haue made my bed
in the darke.
14 I saide to corruption, thou art my father, and to the wormes, you are my
mother and my sister.
15 Where is then now my hope? or who hath considered the thing that I loke for?
16 These shall go downe with me into the pit, and lye with me in the dust.

Chapter 18

1 Then aunswered Bildad the Suhite, and saide:
2 When wyll ye make an ende of your wordes? Marke well, and then we wyll speake.
3 Wherfore are we counted as beastes, and reputed so vyle in your sight?
4 He destroyeth him selfe with his anger: Shall the earth be forsaken, or any
stone remoued out of his place because of thee?
5 Yea, the light of the vngodly shalbe put out, and the sparke of his fire shall
not shine.
6 The light shall be darke in his dwelling, and his candle shall be put out with
him.
7 The steppes of his strength shalbe restrayned, and his owne counsaile shall
cast him downe:
8 For his feete are taken as it were in the net, & he walketh vpon the snares.
9 The grinne shall take him by the heele, and it shall catche him that is
thirstie of blood.
10 The snare is layde for him in the grounde, and a pitfall in the way.
11 Fearefulnesse shall make him afraide on euery side, and shall driue him to
his feete.
12 Hunger shalbe his strength, and destruction shalbe redye at his side.
13 It shall eate the strength of his owne skinne, euen the first borne of death
shall eate his strength.
14 His hope shalbe rooted out of his dwelling, and shall bring him to the king
of feare.
15 Other men shall dwell in his house, and it shalbe none of his, and brimstone
shall be scattered vpon his habitation.
16 His rootes shalbe dryed vp beneath, and aboue shall his braunche be cut
downe.
17 His remembraunce shall perishe from the earth, and he shall haue no name in
the streete.
18 They shall driue him from the light into darkenesse, and chaste him cleane
out of the worlde.
19 He shall neither haue children nor kinsfolkes among his people, no nor any
posteritie in his dwellinges.
20 They that come after him, shalbe astonyed at his day, and they that go before
shalbe afrayde.
21 Such are now the dwellinges of the wicked, and this is the place of him that
knoweth not God.

Chapter 19

1 Iob aunswered, and saide:
2 How long wyll ye vexe my soule, and trouble me with wordes?
3 Lo, ten times haue ye reproched me, and are not ashamed, but haue laughed me
to scorne.
4 Be it that I haue erred in deede, myne errour then remaineth with my selfe.
5 But if ye wyll aduaunce your selues against me, and rebuke me for the shame
that is come vpon me:
6 Know this then, that it is God which hath ouerthrowe me, and hath compassed me
with his net.
7 If I complaine of the violence that is done vnto me, I cannot be heard: and if
I crye, there is no sentence geuen with me.
8 He hath hedged vp my way that I can not passe, and he hath set darkenesse in
my pathes.
9 He hath spoyled me of myne honour, and taken the crowne away from my head.
10 He hath destroyed me on euery side and I am gone: my hope hath he taken away
as a tree pluckt vp by the roote.
11 His wrath is kindled against me, he taketh me as though I were his enemie.
12 His men of warre come together, which made their way ouer me, and besieged my
dwelling rounde about.
13 He hath put my brethren farre away from me, and myne acquaintaunce are also
become straungers vnto me.
14 Myne owne kinsefolkes haue forsaken me, and my best acquainted haue forgotten
me.
15 The seruauntes and maydens of myne owne house toke me for a straunger, and I
am become as an aliaunt in their sight.
16 I called my seruaunt, and he gaue me no aunswere: no though I prayed him with
my mouth.
17 Myne owne wyfe might not abyde my breath, though I prayed her for the
children sake of myne owne body.
18 Yea, the young men despised me, and when I rose they spake euill vpon me.
19 All my most familiers abhorred me: and they whom I loued best, are turned
against me.
20 My bone cleaueth to my skinne and to my fleshe, onely there is left me the
skinne about my teeth.
21 Haue pitie vpon me, haue pitie vpon me, O ye my friendes, for the hande of
God hath touched me.
22 Why do ye persecute me as God doth and are not satisfied with my fleshe?
23 O that my wordes were now written, O that they were put in a booke,
24 And grauen with an iron penne in leade, or in stone, to continue.
25 For I am sure that my redeemer saueth, and he shall rayse vp at the latter
day them that lye in the dust.
26 And though after my skinne the wormes destroy this body, yet shall I see God
in my fleshe:
27 Whom I my selfe shall see, and myne eyes shall beholde, and none other for
me, though my raines are consumed within me.
28 But ye saide, why is he persecuted? and there was a deepe matter in me.
29 But beware of the sworde: for the sword wylbe auenged of wickednesse, and be
sure that there is a iudgement.

Chapter 20

1 Then aunswered Sophar the Naamathite, and saide:
2 For the same cause do my thoughtes compell me to aunswere, and therefore, make
haste.
3 I haue sufficiently heard the checking of my reproofe, therefore the spirite
of myne vnderstanding causeth me to aunswere.
4 Knowest thou not this of olde, and since God plaged man vpon earth,
5 That the gladnesse of the vngodlie hath ben short, and that the ioy of
hypocrites continued but the twinckling of an eye?
6 Though he be magnified vp to the heauen, so that his head reacheth vnto the
cloudes:
7 Yet at a turne he perisheth for euer, insomuch that they which haue seene him,
shall say, Where is he?
8 He shall vanishe as a dreame, so that he can no more be founde, and shal passe
away as a vision in the night.
9 So that the eye which sawe him before, shal haue no more sight of him, and his
place shall know him no more.
10 His children shalbe faine to agree with the poore, and his handes shall
restore their goodes.
11 From his youth his bones are full of pleasures, but now shall it lye downe
within him in the earth.
12 When wickednesse was sweete in his mouth, he hyd it vnder his tongue.
13 That he fauoured, that would he not forsake, but kept it close in his throte.
14 The bread that he did eate, is turned to the poyson of serpentes within his
bodye.
15 The riches that he deuoured shall he parbreake againe: for God shall drawe
them out of his belly.
16 He shall sucke the gall of serpentes, and the adders tongue shall slay him:
17 So that he shall no more see the ryuers and brookes of hony and butter.
18 The thing he hath laboured for, shall he restore, and shall not eate of it:
great trauaile shall he make for riches, but he shall not enioy them.
19 And why? he hath oppressed the poore, and not helped them: houses hath he
spoyled, and not builded them.
20 Because he could not perceaue when his belly was well, through his greedie
desire he shall not escape.
21 There shall none of his meate be left, therefore shall no man loke for his
goodes.
22 When he had plenteousnesse of euery thing, yet was he poore, though he was
helped on euery side.
23 And it shall come to passe, that wherewith he purposed to fill his belly, God
shall powre the furie of his wrath theron, and shall cause his indignation to
raigne vpon him, and vpon his meate.
24 He shall flee from the iron weapon, and the bowe of steele shall strike him
through.
25 The arowe is taken foorth and gone out of the quiuer, and a glistering sword
through the gall of him: so feare shall come vpon him.
26 All darknesse shalbe hid in their secrete places, an vnkindled fire shal
consume him: and loke what remaineth in his house, it shalbe destroyed.
27 The heauen shal declare his wickednesse, and the earth shall take part
against him.
28 The substaunce that he hath in his house, shalbe taken away and perishe in
the day of the Lordes wrath.
29 This is the portion that the wicked man shal haue of God, and the heritage
that he may loke for of God, because of his wordes.

Chapter 21

1 Iob aunswered, and saide:
2 O heare diligently my wordes, and that shalbe in steede of your consolations,
3 Suffer me that I may speake, and when I haue spoken mocke on.
4 Is it for mans sake that I make this disputation? Which if it were so, shoulde
not my spirite then be in sore trouble?
5 Marke me well and be abashed, and lay your hande vpon your mouth.
6 For when I consider my selfe I am afrayde, and my fleshe is smitten with
feare.
7 Wherefore do wicked men liue, come to their olde age, and increase in
richesse?
8 Their children lyue in their sight, and their generation before their eyes.
9 Their houses are safe from all feare, and the rod of God is not vpon them.
10 Their bullocke gendreth and that not out of time, their cowe calueth and is
not vnfruitfull.
11 They sende foorth their children by flockes, & their sonnes leade the daunce.
12 They beare with them tabrets and harpes, and reioyce in the sounde of the
organs.
13 They spend their dayes in wealthines, but sodainely they go downe to the
graue.
14 They say also vnto God: Go from vs, we desire not the knowledge of thy wayes.
15 Who is the almightie that we should serue him? And what profite should we
haue if we should pray vnto him?
16 Lo, there is vtterly no goodnesse in their hande, therefore wyll I not haue
to do with the counsaile of the vngodly.
17 How oft shall the candell of the wicked be put out, and their destruction
come vpon them? O what sorowe shall God geue them for their part in his wrath?
18 Yea, they shalbe euen as hay before the winde, and as chaffe that the storme
carieth away.
19 God wyll lay vp the sorowe of the father for his children: & when he
rewardeth him, he shall know it.
20 Their owne miserie shal they see with their eyes, and drinke of the fearefull
wrath of the almightie.
21 For what careth he for his house after his death, when the number of his
monethes is cut short?
22 Seeing God hath the highest power of all, who can teache him any knowledge?
23 One dyeth in his full strength, being in all ease and prosperitie,
24 His breastes are full of milke, and his bones runne full of marowe.
25 Another dyeth in the bitternes of his soule, and neuer eateth with pleasure.
26 They shall sleepe both alyke in the earth, and the wormes shall couer them.
27 Beholde, I know what ye thinke, yea and the subtiltie that ye imagine against
me.
28 For ye say where is the princes palace? and where is the dwelling of the
vngodly?
29 Haue ye not asked them that go by the way? Doubtlesse ye cannot denie their
tokens,
30 That the wicked is kept vnto the day of destruction, and the vngodly shalbe
brought foorth to the day of wrath.
31 Who dare declare his way to his face? who wil rewarde him for that he doth?
32 Yet shall he be brought to his graue, and dwell among the heape of the dead.
33 Then shal the slymie valley be sweet vnto him, all men also must folowe him,
as there are innumerable gone before him.
34 Howe vayne then is the comfort that ye geue me, seyng falshood remayneth in
all your aunsweres?

Chapter 22

1 So Eliphas the Themanite gaue aunswere, and sayde:
2 May a man be profitable vnto God, as he that is wise may be profitable vnto
him selfe?
3 Is it any aduauntage to the almightie that thou art righteous? or shall it
profite him that thou makest thy wayes perfect?
4 Is he afrayde to reproue thee, and to step foorth with thee into iudgement?
5 Is not thy wickednesse great, and thy vngratious deedes innumerable?
6 For thou hast taken the pledge from thy brother for naught, and robbed the
naked of their clothing.
7 To such as were weery, hast thou geuen no water to drinke, & hast withdrawen
bread from the hungrie.
8 But the mightie man had the earth, and he that was in auctoritie dwelt in it.
9 Thou hast sent wydowes away emptie, and the armes of the fatherlesse were
broken.
10 Therefore art thou compassed about with snares, & sodenly vexed with feare.
11 Shouldest thou then see no darknesse? shoulde not the water fludde run ouer
thee?
12 Is not God on high in the heauen? beholde the heyght of the starres how hie
they are.
13 Wilt thou therfore say, Tushe, howe should God know? can he iudge through the
darke cloude?
14 Tushe, the cloudes couer him that he may not see, and he walketh on the top
of heauen.
15 Hast thou marked the way of the world, wherin wicked men haue walked?
16 Whiche were cut downe out of time, and whose foundation was as an ouerflowing
ryuer.
17 Whiche sayd vnto God, Go from vs: and asked what the almightie coulde do for
them?
18 He filled their houses with good things: but the counsell of the vngodly be
farre from me.
19 The righteous sawe it and were glad, and the innocent laughed them to scorne.
20 Is our substaunce bewen downe? As for the remnaunt of them the fire hath
consumed.
21 Therefore reconcile thee vnto God, and be at peace: so shall all thinges
prospere with thee right well.
22 Receaue I pray thee the lawe at his mouth, and lay vp his wordes in thyne
heart.
23 For if thou wilt turne to the almightie, thou shalt be buyld vp, and put all
vnrighteousnes from thy dwelling.
24 Thou shalt lay vp golde as plentyful as the dust, and the golde of Ophir as
the flyntes of the riuers.
25 Yea almightie God his owne selfe shalbe thy defence, and thou shalt haue
plentie of siluer.
26 Then shalt thou haue thy delite in the almightie, and lift vp thy face vnto
God.
27 Then shalt thou make thy prayer vnto him, and he shall heare thee, and thou
shalt kepe thy promises.
28 Thou shalt also decree a thing, and he shall establishe it vnto thee, and the
light shall shine in thy wayes.
29 When the wicked be cast downe, thou shalt say, I am lifted vp: and God shall
saue the humble person.
30 The innocent shal deliuer the Ilande: it shalbe preserued by the purenesse of
thyne handes.

Chapter 23

1 Iob aunswered, & said:
2 Though my talke be this day in bitternesse, and my plague greater then my
groning.
3 O that I might know him, and finde him, and that I might come before his
seate:
4 I woulde pleade my cause before hym, and fill my mouth with argumentes:
5 I woulde knowe what aunswere he woulde geue me, and vnderstande what he woulde
say vnto me.
6 Will he pleade against me with his great power? No, but he will make me the
stronger.
7 There the righteous might dispute with him, so shoulde I be deliuered for euer
from my iudge.
8 Behold, though I go forwarde I find him not: If I go backwarde, I can get no
knowledge of hym:
9 If I go on the left side where he doth his worke, I can not attayne vnto him:
Againe, if I go on the right side, he hydeth him selfe that I can not see hym.
10 But as for my way, he knoweth it, and tryeth me, that as the gold I may come
foorth.
11 My foote doth kepe his path, his hie way haue I holden, and will not go out
of it.
12 I will not forsake the commaundement of his lippes, I haue esteemed the
wordes of his mouth more then myne appoynted foode.
13 He is still at one poynt, and who can turne him? he doth as him listeth, and
bringeth to passe what he will.
14 He perfourmeth the thing that is appoynted for me, and many such thinges doth
he.
15 This is the cause that I shrinke at his presence, so that when I consider
him, I am afrayde of hym.
16 For God maketh my heart softe, and the almightie putteth me in feare.
17 Because I am not cut of before the darkenesse, neither hath he couered the
cloude fro my face.

Chapter 24

1 Considering then that there is no time hyd from the almightie, how happeneth
it that they which know him do not regarde his dayes?
2 For some men remoue the landemarkes, robbe men of their cattell, and feede of
the same:
3 They driue away the asse of the fatherlesse, and take the wydowes oxe for a
pledge:
4 They cause the poore to turne out of the way, so that the poore of the earth
hyde them selues together.
5 Beholde, as wilde asses in the desert go they foorth to their worke, & ryse
betimes to spoyle: Yea the very wildernesse ministreth foode for them & their
children.
6 They reape the corne fielde that is not their owne, and let the vineyarde of
the vngodly alone.
7 They cause the naked to lodge without garment, and without couering in the
colde.
8 They are wet with the showres of the mountaynes, and embrace the rocke for
want of a couering.
9 They plucke the fatherlesse from the brest, and take the pledge from the
poore.
10 They let hym go naked without clothing, and haue taken away the sheafe of the
hungrie.
11 The poore are fayne to labour in their oyle mylles, yea and to treade in
their wyne presses, and yet to suffer thirst.
12 Men out of the citie crye vnto the Lord with sighing, the soules of the
slayne also crye out, yet God regardeth not their complaynt.
13 Where as they are conuersaunt among them that abhorre the light, they know
not his way, nor continue in his pathes.
14 The murtherer ryseth early and killeth the poore and needy, and in the night
is as a thiefe?
15 The eye of the adulterer wayteth for the darkenesse, & sayth, There shall no
eye see me: and disguiseth his face.
16 In the darke they digge through houses, whiche they marked for them selues in
the day time: they knowe not the light.
17 The morning is to them euen as the shadow of death: if one know them, they
are in the terrours of the shadowe of death,
18 The vngodly is swyft vpon the water: their portion shalbe cursed in the
earth, and he shall not beholde the way of the vineyardes.
19 As the drye grounde and heate consume the snowye waters: so shall the graue
the sinners.
20 The pitifull man shall forget hym, he shalbe sweete to the wormes, he shalbe
no more remembred, & his wickednesse shalbe broken as a tree.
21 He hath oppressed the barren that can not beare, and vnto the wydow hath he
done no good.
22 He drue the mightie after hym with his power, and when he was gotten vp no
man was sure of lyfe.
23 And though they gaue him to be in safetie, yet his eyes are vpon their wayes.
24 They are exalted for a litle, but shortly are gone, brought to pouertie, and
taken out of the way, yea and vtterly pluckt of, as the eares of corne.
25 Is it not so? Who will then reproue me as a lyer, and say that my wordes are
nothing worth? Bildad proueth that no man is cleane nor without sinne before
God.

Chapter 25

1 Then aunswered Bildad the Suhite, and sayde:
2 Is there power and feare with him aboue, that maketh peace sitting in his
hyghnesse?
3 Is there any number of his armies, and vpon whom shal not his light arise?
4 But how may a man compared vnto God, be iustified? or how can he be cleane
that is borne of a woman?
5 Beholde, the moone shyneth nothing in comparison to him, and the starres are
vncleane in his sight.
6 Howe much more then man that is but corruption, and the sonne of man which is
but a worme?

Chapter 26

1 Iob aunswered, and sayde:
2 Who hast thou helped? Him that is without strength? sauest thou the arme that
hath no strength?
3 Where is the counsayle that thou shouldest geue him which hath no wisdome?
Hast thou shewed the way of right lyuing?
4 To whom hast thou spoken these wordes? who made the breath to come out of thy
mouth?
5 Are not dead thinges shapen vnder the waters, and thinges by the waters side?
6 He is naked before him, and the very destruction it selfe can not be hyd out
of his sight.
7 He stretcheth out the noorth ouer the emptie place, and hangeth the earth vpon
nothing.
8 He byndeth the water in his cloudes, & the cloude is not broken vnder them.
9 He holdeth backe the face of his throne, and spreadeth his cloude before it.
10 He hath compassed the waters with certayne boundes, vntill the day and night
come to an ende.
11 The very pillers of heauen tremble and quake at his reproofe.
12 He stilleth the sea with his power, and through his wysdome smyteth he the
strength therof.
13 His spirite hath garnished the heauens, & his hand hath made the crooked
serpent.
14 Lo, this is now a short summe of his wayes: but howe litle a portion heare we
of hym? who can vnderstande the thunder of his power?

Chapter 27

1 And Iob proceeded and went foorth in his parable, saying,
2 As God lyueth whiche hath taken away my iudgement, and the almightie that hath
vexed my minde:
3 Whyle my breath is in me, and the winde that God hath geuen me is in my
nostrels,
4 My lippes shall talke of no vanitie, and my tongue shall speake no disceite.
5 God forbyd that I should graunt your cause to be right: As for me, vntill myne
end come will I neuer go fro myne innocentie.
6 My righteous dealing kepe I fast, which I will not forsake: my heart shal not
reproue me of my dayes.
7 Therfore myne enemie shalbe founde as the vngodly, and he that taketh part
against me, as the vnrighteous.
8 For what hope hath the hypocrite though he haue great good, if God take away
his soule?
9 Will God heare his crye, when trouble commeth vpon him?
10 Hath he such pleasure and delite in the almightie, that he dare alway call
vpon God?
11 I wil teache you in the name of God, and the thing of the almightie will I
not kepe from you.
12 Behold, all ye your selues haue seene it, why then do ye thus vanishe in
vanitie?
13 Saying: This is the portion that the wicked haue of God, and the heritage
that tyrauntes shall receaue of the almightie.
14 If he get many children, they shall perishe with the sworde, and his
posteritie shall haue scarcenesse of bread.
15 His remnaunt shalbe buried in death, and his widowes shall not weepe.
16 Though he heape vp siluer as the dust, and prepare rayment as the clay:
17 He may well prepare it, but the godly shall put it on, and the innocent shall
deale out the money.
18 He buyldeth his house as the moth, & as a booth that the watchman maketh.
19 When the riche man sleepeth, he shall not be gathered to his fathers, they
opened their eyes, and he was gone.
20 Terrour taketh holde vpon hym as a water fludde, and the tempest stealeth him
away in the night season.
21 A vehement east winde caryeth him hence, and he departeth: a storme hurleth
him out of his place.
22 God shal cast vpon him, and not spare, though he woulde fayne flee out of his
hande.
23 Then clap men their handes at hym, and hisse at him out of his place.

Chapter 28

1 There is a place wher siluer is brought out of, and where golde is tryed,
2 Where yron is digged out of the grounde, & stones resolued to metall.
3 The darkenesse shall once come to an ende: he can seke out the grounde of all
thinges, the stones, the darke, and the shadowe of death.
4 He causeth the fluddes to breake out against the inhabitant, and the waters
forgotten of the foote, beyng hygher then man, are gone away.
5 Out of the same earth commeth bread, and vnder it as it were fire is turned
vp.
6 The stones of it are a place of Saphires, and the dust of it is golde.
7 There is a way that the birdes knowe not, that no vultures eye hath seene:
8 Wherin the lions whelpes walke not, and where no lion commeth.
9 There putteth he his hande vpon the stonie rockes, and ouerthroweth the
mountaynes by the rootes.
10 Riuers flowe out of the rockes, & loke what is pleasaunt, his eye seeth it.
11 He bindeth the fluddes that they do not ouerflow: and the thing that is hid
bringeth he to light.
12 Where then is wysdome founde? and where is the place of vnderstanding?
13 Ueryly no man can tell howe worthy a thing she is, neither is she found in
the lande of them that lyue.
14 The deepe sayth, She is not in me: the sea sayth, She is not with me.
15 She can not be gotten for golde, neither may the price of her be bought with
any siluer.
16 No wedges of gold of Ophir, no precious Onix stones, no Saphires may be
valued with her.
17 No, neither golde nor christall shall be equall vnto it, nor her exchaunge
shalbe for the plate of fine golde.
18 No mention shalbe made of Corall nor of the Gabis: for wisdome is more
precious then pearles.
19 The Topas of Ethiopia shall not be equall vnto it, neither shall it be valued
with the wedge of pure golde.
20 Whence then commeth wysdome? and where is the place of vnderstanding?
21 She is hid from the eyes of all men liuing, yea & from the foules of the
ayre.
22 Destruction and death say, We haue hearde the fame therof with our eares.
23 But God seeth her way, and knoweth her place.
24 For he beholdeth the endes of the worlde, and loketh vpon all that is vnder
heauen.
25 When he wayed the windes and measured the waters:
26 When he made a decree for the rayne, and a way for the lightninges of the
thunder:
27 Then dyd he see her, then declared he her, prepared her, and knewe her.
28 And vnto man he sayd: To feare the Lorde is wysdome, and to forsake euyll is
vnderstanding.

Chapter 29

1 So Iob proceeded and went foorth in his parable, saying:
2 O that I were as I was in the monethes by past, and in the daies when God
preserued me:
3 When his light shined vpon my head, when I went after the same light and
shining, euen through the darknesse:
4 As it stoode with me when I was young, when God prospered my house:
5 When the almightie was yet with me, when my children stoode about me:
6 When my wayes ranne ouer with butter, and when the stonie rockes gaue me
riuers of oyle:
7 When I went out to the gate, euen to the iudgement seate, and when I prepared
my seate in the streete:
8 The young men saw me and hid them selues, and the aged arose, and stoode vp.
9 The princes left of their talking, and layed their hand to their mouth:
10 The mightie kept still their voyce, and their tongue cleaued to the roofe of
their mouth.
11 When the eare heard me, it blessed me: & when the eye sawe me, it gaue
witnesse to me:
12 For I deliuered the poore when he cryed, and the fatherlesse, and hym that
had none to helpe hym.
13 The blessing of him that was redy to perishe came vpon me, and I caused the
widowes heart to reioyce.
14 And why? I put vpon me righteousnesse, which couered me as a garment, and
equitie was my crowne.
15 I was an eye to the blinde, and a foote to the lame.
16 I was a father to the poore: and when I knewe not the cause, I sought it out
diligently.
17 I brake the iawes of the vnrighteous man, and pluckt the spoyle out of his
teeth.
18 Then I sayde, I shall die in my nest: and I shall multiplie my dayes as the
sande.
19 For my roote was spread out by the waterside: and the deawe lay vpon my
corne.
20 Myne honour encreased more and more, & my bow was euer the stronger in my
hande.
21 Unto me men gaue eare, me they regarded, and with scilence they taried for my
counsell.
22 After my woordes they replied not, and my talke dropped vpon them.
23 They wayted for me as for the raine: and gaped vpon me, as the grounde doeth
to receaue the latter shoure.
24 When I laughed, they beleued it not, & the light of my countenaunce would
they not put out.
25 When I agreed vnto their way, I was the chiefe, and sate as a king with his
armie about him: and when they were in heauinesse, I was their comfortour.

Chapter 30

1 But nowe they that are younger then I haue me in derision: yea euen they whose
fathers I would haue thought scorne to haue set with the dogges of my cattell.
2 For wherto might the strength of their handes haue serued me? for the time was
but lost among them.
3 For very miserie and hunger they fled into the wildernesse, a darke place,
horrible and waste,
4 Plucking vp nettles among the busshes, and the iuniper rootes for their meate.
5 And when they were dryuen foorth, men cryed after them as it had ben afafter a
thiefe.
6 Their dwelling was in the cleftes of brookes, yea in the caues and dennes of
the earth.
7 Among the busshes went they about crying, and vnder the thornes they gathered
them selues together.
8 They were the children of fooles and vyllaynes, which are more vile then the
earth.
9 Now am I their song, & am become their yesting stocke.
10 They abhorre me and flee farre from me, and stayne my face with spittle.
11 Because God hath loosed my corde and humbled me, they haue loosed the bridle
before me.
12 Upon my right hande ryse the young men against me, they haue hurt my feete,
treading vpon me as vpon the wayes of their destruction.
13 My pathes haue they cleane marred, it was so easye for them to do me harme,
that they needed no man to help them.
14 They fell vpon me, as it had ben the breaking in of waters, and came in by
heapes to destroy me.
15 Feare is turned vpon me, and they pursue my soule as the wind, and my health
passeth away as a cloude.
16 Therfore is my soule now powred out vpon me, and the dayes of my trouble haue
taken hold vpon me.
17 My bones are pearsed through in the night season, and my sinewes take no
rest.
18 For the vehemencie of sorowe is my garment chaunged, whiche compasseth me
about as the coller of my coote.
19 He hath cast me into the myre, and I am become like asshes and dust.
20 When I crie vnto thee, thou doest not heare me: and though I stande before
thee, yet thou regardest me not.
21 Thou art become myne enemie, and with thy violent hande thou takest part
against me.
22 In times past thou diddest set me vp on hye, to be caried as it were aboue
the wynde, but nowe hast thou geuen me a very sore fall.
23 Sure I am that thou wilt bryng me vnto death, euen to the lodging that is due
vnto all men liuing.
24 Notwithstanding, thou wilt not stretch out thyne hand against him that is in
the graue: shal men crie out against him that is in destruction?
25 Dyd not I weepe with hym that was in trouble? Had not my soule compassion
vpon the poore?
26 Yet neuerthelesse, where as I loked for good, euyll came vnto me: & where I
wayted for light, there came darkenesse.
27 My bowels seethe in me without rest, for the dayes of my trouble are come
vpon me.
28 I went mourning without heate, I stoode vp in the congregation, & communed
with them.
29 But nowe I am a brother of dragons, and a felowe of Estriches.
30 My skinne vpon me is turned to blacke, and my bones are brent with heate.
31 My harpe is turned to mourning, and my organs into the voyce of them that
weepe.

Chapter 31

1 I made a couenaunt with myne eyes: why then should I loke vpon a mayden?
2 For how great a portion shall I haue of God? and what inheritaunce from the
almightie on hye?
3 Is not destruction to the wicked? and straunge punishement to the workers of
iniquitie?
4 Doth not he see my wayes, and tell all my goynges?
5 If I haue walked in vanitie, or if my feete haue runne to disceaue:
6 Let me be wayed in an euen balaunce, that God may see myne innocencie.
7 If my steppe hath turned out of the way, & myne heart walked after myne eyes,
and if any blot haue cleaued to my handes:
8 Then shall I sowe, and an other eate: yea my posteritie shalbe cleane rooted
out.
9 If my heart haue ben deceaued by a woman, or if I haue layde wayte at my
neyghbours doore:
10 Then let my wife grinde vnto an other man, and let other men lye with her.
11 For this is a wickednesse, and sinne that is worthy to be punished:
12 Yea a fire that vtterly should consume and roote out all my increase.
13 If I euer thought scorne to do right vnto my seruauntes & maydens, when they
had any matter against me:
14 When God will sit in iudgement, what shall I do? & when he will visite me,
what aunswere shal I geue him?
15 He that fashioned me in my mothers wombe, made he not him also? were we not
both shapen a like in our mothers bodies?
16 If I denied the poore of their desire, or haue caused the eyes of the wydow
to wayte in vayne:
17 If I haue eaten my morsell alone, that ye fatherlesse hath not eaten therof:
18 (For from my youth it hath growen vp with me as with a father, and from my
mothers wombe I haue ben guyde to the wydowe)
19 If I haue seene any perishe for want of clothing, or any poore for lake of
rayment:
20 If his loynes haue not blessed me, because he was warmed with the fleece of
my sheepe:
21 If I haue lift vp mine hand against the fatherlesse, when I sawe that I might
helpe him in the gate:
22 Then let myne arme fall fro my shoulder, and myne arme holes be broken from
the bone.
23 For I haue euer feared the vengeaunce and punishment of God, and knewe very
well that I was not able to beare his burthen.
24 Haue I put my trust in golde? or haue I sayde to the wedge of golde, thou art
my confidence?
25 Haue I reioyced because my power was great, and because my hande gat so much?
26 Dyd I euer greatly regarde the rysing of the sunne? or had I the goyng downe
of the moone in great reputation?
27 Hath my heart medled priuyly with any disceite? or did I euer kisse myne owne
hande?
28 (That were a wickednesse worthy to be punished: for then shoulde I haue
denyed the God that is aboue.)
29 Haue I euer reioyced at the hurt of myne enemie? or was I euer glad that any
harme happened vnto him? Oh, no.
30 I neuer suffred my mouth to sinne, by wishing a curse to his soule.
31 Dyd not the men of myne owne housholde say, Who shall let vs to haue our
belly full of his fleshe?
32 The straunger dyd not lodge in the streete, but I opened my doores vnto him
that went by the way.
33 Haue I kept secrete my sinne, and hyd myne iniquitie, as Adam dyd?
34 Though I coulde haue made afeard a great multitude, yet the most contemptible
of the families dyd feare me: so I kept scilence, and went not out of the doore.
35 O that I had one which woulde heare me: beholde my signe in the whiche the
almightie shal aunswere for me, though he that is my contrarie partie hath
written a booke against me.
36 Yet will I take it vpon my shoulder, & as a garlande binde it about my head.
37 I will tell hym the number of my goinges, & go vnto him as to a prince.
38 But if case be that my lande crye against me, or that the forowes thereof
make any complaynt:
39 If I haue eaten the fruites therof vnpayed for, yea if I haue greeued the
soules of the maisters therof:
40 Then let thystles growe in steede of my wheate, and cockle for my barlye.

Chapter 32

1 So these three men ceassed to aunswere Iob, because he held him selfe a
righteous man.
2 But Elihu the sonne of Barachel the Buzite, of the kinred of Ram, was very
sore displeased at Iob, because he called hym selfe iust before God.
3 And with Iobs three friendes he was angry also, because they had founde no
reasonable aunswere, and yet condempned Iob.
4 Nowe taried Elihu, till they had ended their comunication with Iob: for why?
they were elder then he.
5 So when Elihu sawe that these three men were not able to make Iob aunswere, he
was miscontent.
6 Therfore Elihu the sonne of Barachel the Buzite aunswered, and sayde:
Considering that I am young, and ye be men of age, I was afrayde, and durst not
shewe foorth my mynde.
7 For I thought thus within my selfe: It becommeth old men to speake, and the
aged to teache wysdome.
8 Euery man no doubt hath a mynde, but it is the inspiration of the almightie
that geueth vnderstanding.
9 Great men are not alway wyse, neither doth euery aged man vnderstande the
thing that is lawfull:
10 Therefore I say, heare me, and I wil shewe you also myne vnderstanding.
11 For when I had wayted till ye made an end of your talking, and hearde your
wysdome, what argumentes ye made in your communication,
12 Yea when I had diligently pondred what ye sayde, I found not one of you that
made any good argument against Iob, that directly could make aunswere vnto his
wordes,
13 Lest ye should say: We haue found out wisdome, God shall cast hym downe, and
no man.
14 He hath not spoken vnto me, and I wil not aunswere hym as ye haue done.
15 For they were so abashed, that they coulde not make aunswere, nor speake one
worde.
16 When I had wayted (for they spake not, but stoode still and aunswered no
more:)
17 Then aunswered I in my turne, and I shewed myne opinion.
18 For I am full of matter, and the spirite within me compelleth me.
19 Beholde, my belly is as the wine, whiche hath no vent, lyke the newe bottels
that bruste.
20 Therfore will I speake, that I may haue a bent: I will open my lippes, and
make aunswere.
21 I will regarde no maner of person, no man will I spare.
22 For if I woulde go about to please men, I knowe not howe soone my maker would
take me away.

Chapter 33

1 Wherefore heare my wordes O Iob, and hearken vnto all that I will say:
2 Behold, I haue now opened my mouth, my tongue hath spoken in my throte.
3 My heart doth order my wordes aright, and my lippes talke of pure wysedome.
4 The spirite of God hath made me, and the breath of the almightie hath geuen me
my lyfe.
5 If thou canst then geue me aunswere, prepare thy selfe and stande before me
face to face.
6 Beholde, before God I am euen as thou: for I am fashioned & made euen of the
same molde.
7 Beholde, my terrour shall not feare thee, neither shall my hande be heauy vpon
thee.
8 Now hast thou spoken in myne eares, & I haue heard the voyce of thy wordes:
9 I am cleane without any fault, I am innocent, & there is no wickednesse in me.
10 But lo, he hath piked a quarell against me, and taketh me for his enemie.
11 He hath put my foote in the stockes, and looketh narowlye vnto all my pathes.
12 Behold, in this hast thou not done right, I wil make aunswere vnto thee, that
God is greater then man.
13 And why doest thou then striue against him? for he shall not geue the
accomptes of all his wordes.
14 For God speaketh once or twise, and yet man vnderstandeth it not.
15 In dreames and visions of the night, when slumbring commeth vpon men that
they fall asleepe in their beddes,
16 He roundeth them in the eares, and sealeth their correction:
17 That he may withdrawe man from euyll enterprises, and deliuer hym from pride,
18 And kepe his soule from the graue, and his life from the sworde.
19 He chasteneth hym with sickenesse vpon his bedde, he layeth sore punishement
vpon his bones:
20 So that his lyfe may away with no bread, and his soule abhorreth to eate any
dayntie meate:
21 In so much that his body is cleane consumed away, and his bones appeare which
before were not seene.
22 His soule draweth vnto the graue, and his lyfe to death.
23 Now yf there be a messenger, one among a thousande, sent for to speake vnto
man, and to shew him the right way:
24 Then the Lord is mercifull vnto him, and sayth, He shalbe deliuered, that he
fall not downe to the graue: for I am sufficiently reconciled.
25 Then shal his fleshe be as freshe as a childes, and shal returne as in the
dayes of his youth.
26 He shall pray vnto God, and he will be fauorable vnto him, and he shall see
his face with ioy, for he will render vnto man his righteousnesse.
27 A respect hath he vnto men, let man then say, I haue offended, I did
vnrighteously, & it hath done me no good:
28 Yea he hath deliuered my soule from destruction, and my lyfe shall see the
light.
29 Lo all these worketh God alway with man:
30 That he bring backe his soule from the graue to the light, yea the light of
the lyuing.
31 Marke wel O Iob, and heare me: hold thee still, and I will speake.
32 But if thou hast any thing to say, then aunswere me, and speake: for I desire
to iustifie thee.
33 If thou hast nothing, then heare me, and hold thy tongue, and I shall teache
thee wysdome.

Chapter 34

1 Elihu proceeding in his aunswere, sayde:
2 Heare my wordes O ye wise men, hearken vnto me ye that haue vnderstanding:
3 For the eare discerneth wordes, and the mouth tasteth the meates.
4 As for iudgement, let vs seke it out among our selues, that we may knowe what
is good.
5 And why? Iob hath sayd, I am righteous, and God hath taken away my iudgement.
6 In my right I shoulde be a lyer: my wounde is incurable without my fault.
7 Where is there such a one as Iob, that drinketh vp scornefulnesse like water?
8 Which goeth in the companie of wicked doers, and walketh with vngodly men?
9 For he hath sayde, It profiteth a man nothing that he shoulde walke with God.
10 Therfore hearken vnto me ye that haue vnderstanding: farre be it from God
that he shoulde meddle with wickednesse, & farre be it from the almightie that
he shoulde meddle with vnrighteous dealing.
11 For he shall rewarde man after his workes, and cause euery man to finde
according to his wayes.
12 Sure it is that God wil not do wickedly, neither wyll the almightie paruert
iudgement.
13 Who ruleth the earth but he? or who hath placed the whole world?
14 If he set his heart vpon man and gather vnto hym selfe his spirite and his
breath,
15 All fleshe shall come to naught at once, and all men shall turne againe vnto
dust.
16 If thou nowe haue vnderstanding, heare what I say, and hearken to the voyce
of my wordes:
17 May he be a ruler that loueth not right? or may he that is a very innocent
man do vngodly?
18 Is it reason that thou shouldest say to the king, Thou art wicked, or thou
art vngodly, and that before the princes?
19 God hath no respect vnto the persons of the lordly, and regardeth not the
riche more then the poore: for they be al the worke of his handes.
20 In the twinckling of an eye shall they dye, and at midnight when the people
and the tirantes rage, then shall they perishe, & be taken away without handes.
21 For his eyes loke vpon the wayes of man, and he seeth all his goinges.
22 There is no darkenesse nor shadowe of death that can hide the wicked doers
from him.
23 For God wil not lay vpon man more then he hath sinned, that he should enter
into iudgement with him.
24 He shall destroy the mightie without seeking, and shall set other in their
steede.
25 Therefore shall he declare their workes: he shall turne the night, and they
shalbe destroyed.
26 The vngodly doth he punishe openly,
27 Because they tourned backe from him, and would not consider all his wayes:
28 Insomuch that they haue caused the voyce of the poore to come vnto him, and
now he heareth the complaint of such as are in trouble.
29 When he geueth quietnesse, who can make trouble? and when he hydeth his face,
who can beholde him? whether it be vpon nations, or vpo one man onely:
30 Because the hypocrite doth raigne, because the people are snared.
31 Surely of God onely it can be saide, I haue pardoned, I wyll not destroy.
32 If I haue gone amisse, enfourme thou me: If I haue done wrong, I wyll leaue
of.
33 Wyll he perfourme the thing through thee? for thou hast reproued his
iudgement, thou also hast thyne owne minde, and not I: But speake on what thou
knowest.
34 Let men of vnderstanding tell me, and let a wyse man hearken vnto me.
35 Iob hath not spoken of knowledge, neither were his wordes according to
wysdome.
36 O father, let Iob be well tryed, because he hath aunswered for wicked men:
37 Yea aboue his sinne he doth wickedly, triumpheth among vs, and multiplieth
his wordes against God.

Chapter 35

1 Elihu spake moreouer and saide:
2 Thinkest thou it right that thou sayest, I am more righteous then God?
3 For thou sayest: what aduauntage wyll it be vnto thee, and what profite shall
I haue of my sinne?
4 Therefore wyll I geue aunswere vnto thee, aud to thy companions with thee.
5 Loke vnto the heauen and beholde it, consider the cloudes which are hyer then
thou.
6 If thou hast sinned, what hast thou done against him? If thyne offences be
many, what hast thou done vnto him?
7 If thou be righteous, what geuest thou him? or what wyll he receaue of thyne
hande?
8 Thy wickednesse may hurt a man as thou art, and thy righteousnesse may profite
the sonne of man.
9 They which are oppressed crye out vpon the multitude, yea they crye out for
the power of the mightie:
10 But none sayth, Where is God that made me? and that geueth vs occasion to
praise him in the night?
11 Which teacheth vs more the the beastes of the earth, and geueth vs more
wysdome then the foules of heauen.
12 If any such complaine, no man geueth aunswere, and that because of the
wickednesse of proude tirauntes.
13 For God wyll not heare vanitie, neither wyll the almightie regarde it.
14 Although thou sayest to God thou wylt not regarde it: yet iudgement is before
him, trust thou in him.
15 But now because his anger hath not visited, neither called men to accompt
with great extremitie:
16 Therefore doth Iob open his mouth but in vaine, & he maketh many wordes
without knowledge.

Chapter 36

1 Elihu also proceeded, and saide:
2 Holde thee still a litle, & I shall shew thee what I haue yet to speake on
gods behalfe.
3 I wyll open vnto thee yet farre higher knowledge, and wil ascribe
righteousnesse vnto my maker.
4 And truely my wordes shall not be vaine, seeing he is with thee that is
perfect in knowledge.
5 Beholde, the great God casteth away no man, for he him selfe is mightie in
power and wysdome.
6 As for the vngodly he shall not preserue him, but shall helpe the poore to
their right.
7 He shal not turne his eyes away from the righteous, but as kinges shal they be
in their throne, he shal stablish them for euer, and they shalbe exalted.
8 But if they be layde in chaynes, or bounde with the bondes of trouble,
9 Then wyll he shew them their worke, & their sinnes which haue ouercome them.
10 He with punishing and nurturing of them, roundeth them in the eares, warneth
them to leaue of from their wickednesse, and to amende.
11 If they now wyll take heede & serue him, they shal weare out their dayes in
prosperitie, and their yeres in pleasure.
12 But if they wil not hearken, they shal go through the sworde, and perishe or
euer they be aware.
13 As for hypocrites in heart, they shall heape vp wrath for them selues for
they call not vpon him, though they be his prisoners.
14 Thus shal their soule perishe in foolishnes, and their lyfe among the
fornicatours.
15 The poore shall he deliuer out of his affliction, and rounde them in the eare
when they be in trouble.
16 Euen so would he take thee out of the straite place, into a brode place in
the which there is no straitnes: yea, & make thy table quiet replenished with
fatnesse.
17 Neuerthelesse, thou hast commended the iudgement of the vngodly, and euen
such a iudgement & sentence shalt thou suffer.
18 And seeing there is wrath with God, beware lest he take thee away in thy
wealth, & all that thou hast to redeeme thee can not deliuer thee.
19 Thinkest thou that he wyll regarde thy riches? he shall not care for golde,
nor for all them that excell in strength.
20 Spend not the night in carefull thoughtes, how he destroyeth some, and
bringeth other in their place.
21 But beware that thou turne not aside to wickednesse and sinne, which hitherto
thou hast chosen more then affliction.
22 Beholde, God is of a mightie hie power: Where is there such a guide and lawe
geuer as he?
23 Who wyll reproue him of his way? Who wil say vnto him, Thou hast done wrong?
24 Remember that thou do magnifie his worke which men do praise,
25 All men see it, yea men do beholde it a farre of.
26 Beholde, so great is God that he passeth our knowledge, neither can the
number of his yeres be searched out.
27 Sometime he restrayneth the rayne, and againe he sendeth rayne by his
cloudes:
28 Which rayne the cloudes do droppe, and let fall aboundantly vpon men.
29 Who can consider the spreadinges out of his cloudes, the coueringes of his
tabernacle?
30 Behold, he doth stretch his light vpon it, and couereth the bottome of the
sea.
31 For by these gouerneth he his people, and geueth them aboundance of meate.
32 With the cloudes he hydeth the light, and at his commaundement it breaketh
out:
33 Which dashing vpon the next cloudes, shew tokens of wrath.

Chapter 37

1 At this also my heart is astonied, and moued out of his place.
2 Heare then the sounde of his voyce, & the noyse that goeth out of his mouth.
3 He directeth it vnder the whole heauen, and his light vnto the endes of the
worlde.
4 A roring voyce foloweth it: for his glorious maiestie geueth a thuder clappe,
& he will not stay whe his voyce is heard.
5 God thundreth marueylously with his voyce, great thinges doth he which we can
not comprehend.
6 He commaundeth the snow, and it falleth vpon earth: he geueth the rayne a
charge, and the showres haue their strength and fall downe.
7 With the force of the rayne he shutteth men vp, that all men may knowe his
workes.
8 The beastes creepe into their dennes, and remaine in their places.
9 Out of the south commeth the tempest, and colde out from the north winde.
10 At the breath of God the hoare frost is geuen, and the brode waters are
frosen.
11 He maketh the cloudes to labour in geuing moystnesse, and againe with his
light he dryueth away the cloude.
12 He turneth the heauens about by his gouernement, that they may do whatsoeuer
he commaundeth them vpon the whole worlde.
13 Whether it be for punishment, or for his lande, or to do good to them that
seeke him.
14 Hearken vnto this O Iob, stand still, and consider the wonderous workes of
God.
15 Didst thou know when God disposed them? & caused the light of his cloudes to
shine?
16 Hast thou knowen the varietie of the cloudes, and the wonderous workes of him
which is perfect in knowledge?
17 And how thy clothes are warme, when the lande is stil through the south
winde?
18 Hast thou helped him to spreade out the heauens which are strong and bright
as a loking glasse?
19 Teache vs what we shall saye vnto him: for we are vnmeete to frame our talke
because of darkenesse.
20 Shall it be tolde him what I saye? Shall man speake when he shalbe destroyed?
21 For men see not the light that shineth in the cloudes: but the winde passeth
and cleanseth them.
22 The faire weather commeth out of the north, the prayse thereof is to God who
is terrible.
23 It is the almightie, we can not finde him out: he is excellent in power and
iudgement, and aboundaunt in iustice: he afflicteth not.
24 Let men therefore feare him: for there shall no man see him that is wyse in
his owne conceit.

Chapter 38

1 Then aunswered the Lorde vnto Iob out of the whirle winde, and saide:
2 What is he that darkeneth his counsaile by wordes without knowledge?
3 Girde vp thy loynes lyke a man: for I wyl question with thee, see thou geue me
a direct aunswere.
4 Where wast thou when I layed the foundations of the earth? Tell playnely, if
thou hast vnderstanding.
5 Who hath measured it, knowest thou? or who hath spread the lyne vpon it?
6 Whereupon are the foundations set? or who layed the corner stone thereof?
7 Where wast thou when the morning starres praysed me together, and all the
children of God reioyced triumphantly?
8 Who shut the sea with doores, when it brake foorth as out of the wombe?
9 When I made the cloudes to be a covering for it, and swadled it with the
darke:
10 When I gaue it my commaundement, making doores and barres for it,
11 Saying, Hitherto shalt thou come, but no further: and here shalt thou laye
downe thy proude and hie waues.
12 Hast thou geue the morning his charge since thy dayes, and shewed the day
spring his place,
13 That it might take holde of the corners of the earth, and that the vngodly
might be shaken out of it.
14 They are fashioned as is the clay with the seale, and all stand vp as a
garment.
15 The vngodly shall be disapointed of their light, and the arme of the proude
shalbe broken.
16 Camest thou euer into the grounde of the sea, or walkedst in the lowe corners
of the deepe?
17 Haue the gates of death ben opened vnto thee? or hast thou seene the doores
of the shadowe of death?
18 Hast thou also perceaued how brode the earth is? If thou hast knowledge of
all this:
19 Then shewe me the way where light dwelleth, & where is the place of
darkenesse?
20 That thou shouldest receaue it in the boundes thereof, and know the pathes to
their houses.
21 Knewest thou afore thou wast borne how olde thou shouldest be?
22 Wentest thou euer into the treasures of the snow, or hast thou seene the
secrete places of the hayle,
23 Which I haue prepared against the time of trouble, against the time of
battaile and warre?
24 By what way is the light parted? and into what land breaketh the east winde?
25 Who deuideth the waters into diuers chanels? or who maketh a way for the
lightening and thunder,
26 To cause it to rayne on the earth where no man is, and in the wildernesse
where none inhabiteth?
27 To satisfie the desolate and waste grounde, and to cause the budde of the
hearbe to spring foorth.
28 Who is the father of the rayne? or who hath begotten the droppes of the
deawe?
29 Out of whose wombe came the yce? Who hath gendred the coldnesse of the ayre?
30 That the waters are hidde as with a stone, and lye congealed aboue the deepe.
31 Wylt thou hinder the sweete influences of the seuen starres? or loose the
bandes of Orion?
32 Canst thou bring foorth Mazzaroth in their time? canst thou also guide
Arctutus with his sonnes?
33 Knowest thou the course of heauen, that thou mayest set vp the ordinaunce
thereof vpon the earth?
34 Moreouer, canst thou lift vp thy voyce to the cloudes, that they may powre
downe a great rayne vpon thee?
35 Canst thou send the lightninges also, that they may go their way, and be
obedient vnto thee, saying, Lo here are we?
36 Who hath put wysdome in the reynes? or who hath geuen the heart
vnderstanding?
37 Who numbreth the cloudes in wysdome? who stilleth the vehement waters of the
heauen?
38 To cause the earth to grow into hardnesse, & the clots to cleaue fast
together?
39 Wylt thou hunt the pray for the lion? or fill the appetite of the lions
whelpes,
40 When they couche in their places, and tarie in the couert to lye in wayte?
41 Who prouideth meate for the rauen, when his young ones crye vnto God, and
flee about for lacke of meate?

Chapter 39

1 Knowest thou the time whe the wylde goates bring foorth their young among the
stonye rockes? or layest thou wayte when the hindes vse to calue?
2 Canst thou number the monethes that they go with young? or knowest thou the
time when they bring foorth?
3 They lye downe, they calue their young ones, and they are deliuered of their
trauaile and paine:
4 Yet their young ones grow vp, and waxe fatte through good feeding with corne:
They go foorth, and returne not againe vnto them.
5 Who letteth the wylde asse to go free? or who looseth the bondes of the wylde
mule?
6 Euen I which haue geuen the wyldernesse to be their house, and the vntilled
land to be their dwelling.
7 They force not for the multitude of people in the citie, neither regarde the
crying of the driuer:
8 But seeke their pasture about the mountaines, and folowe the greene grasse.
9 Wyll the vnicorne do thee seruice, or abide still by thy cribbe?
10 Canst thou binde the yoke about the vnicorne in the forowe, to make him plowe
after thee in the valleyes?
11 Mayst thou trust him because he is strong, or commit thy labour vnto him?
12 Mayst thou beleue him that he wyll bring home thy corne, or carry any thing
vnto thy barne?
13 Gauest thou the faire winges vnto the pecockes, or winges and fethers vnto
the Estriche?
14 For she leaueth her egges in the earth, and heateth them in the dust.
15 She remembreth not that they might be troden with feete, or broken with some
wilde beaste.
16 So harde is she vnto her young ones as though they were not hers, and
laboureth in vaine without any feare.
17 And that because God hath taken wysdome from her, & hath not geuen her
vnderstanding.
18 When her time is that she fleeth vp on hie, she careth neither for the horse
nor the ryder.
19 Hast thou geue the horse his strength, or learned him to ney coragiously?
20 Canst thou make him afrayde as a grashopper? where as the stoute neying that
he maketh is fearefull.
21 He breaketh the grounde with the hooffes of his feete, he reioyceth
cherefully in his strength, and runneth to meete the harnest men.
22 He layeth aside all feare, his stomacke is not abated, neither starteth he
backe for any sworde.
23 Though the quiuers rattle vpon him, though the speare and shielde glister:
24 Yet rusheth he in fiercely beating the grounde, he thinketh it not the noyse
of the trumpettes:
25 But when the trumpettes make most noyse, he saith, tushe, for he smelleth the
battaile a farre of, the noyse of the captaines and the shouting.
26 Commeth it through thy wysdome that the Goshauke flieth toward the south?
27 Doth the Egle mount vp, and make his nest on hye at thy comaundement?
28 He abydeth in stony rockes, and dwelleth vpon the hye toppes of moutaines:
29 From whence he seeketh his praye, and loketh farre about with his eyes.
30 His young ones also sucke vp blood: and where any dead body lyeth, there is
he.

Chapter 40

1 Moreouer the Lorde spake vnto Iob, and saide:
2 Shall he whom the almightie wyl chasten, contend with him? Should not he which
disputeth with God, geue him an aunswere?
3 Then Iob aunswered the Lorde, saying:
4 Beholde, I am vyle, what shall I aunswere thee, therefore I wyll laye my hande
vpon my mouth.
5 Once haue I spoken, but I wyll saye no more: yea twyse, but I wyl proceede no
further.
6 Then aunswered the Lorde vnto Iob out of the whirle winde, and saide:
7 Girde vp thy loynes now lyke a man: I wyll demaunde of thee, and make thou
aunswere.
8 Wylt thou disanul my iudgement? or wylt thou condempne me, that thou mayst be
righteous?
9 Is thy power then lyke the power of God? maketh thy voyce a sounde as his
doth?
10 Decke thy selfe now with excellencie and maiestie, and araye thy selfe with
beautie and glory:
11 Cast abrode the indignation of thy wrath, and beholde euery one that is
proude, and abase him:
12 Loke on euery one that is arrogant, and bring him lowe, & destroy the wicked
in their place:
13 Hide them in the dust together, and couer their faces in secrete:
14 Then wyll I confesse vnto thee also, that thyne owne right hande shall saue
thee.
15 Beholde the beaste Behemoth, who I made with thee, which eateth haye as an
oxe:
16 Lo how his strength is in his loynes, and what power he hath in the nauil of
his body.
17 When he wyll, he spreadeth out his tayle lyke a Cedar tree, all his sinowes
are stiffe.
18 His bones are lyke pipes of brasse, yea his bones are lyke staues of iron.
19 He is the chiefe of the wayes of God, he that made him wyl make his sword to
approche vnto him.
20 Surely the mountaines bring him foorth grasse, where all the beastes of the
fielde take their pastime.
21 He resteth him in the shade, in the couerte of the reede and fennes.
22 The trees couer him with their shadowe, and the wyllowes of the brooke
compasse him about.
23 Beholde, he drinketh vp whole ryuers and feareth not, he thinketh that he can
drawe vp Iordane into his mouth.
24 He taketh it with his eyes, and yet the hunter putteth a bridle into his
nose.

Chapter 41

1 Canst thou drawe out Leuiathan with an hooke, or binde his tongue with a
corde?
2 Canst thou put a hooke in the nose of him, or bore his iawe through with a
naule?
3 Wyl he make many faire wordes with thee thinkest thou or flatter thee?
4 Wyll he make a couenaunt with thee? or wilt thou take him for a seruaunt for
euer?
5 Wylt thou take thy pastime with him as with a birde, wilt thou binde him for
thy maydens?
6 That thy companions may make a refection of him: or shall he be parted among
the marchauntes?
7 Canst thou fil the basket with his skin? or the fishe panier with his head?
8 Laye thyne hande vpon him, remember the battaile, and do no more so.
9 Beholde his hope is in vaine: for shall not one perishe euen at the sight of
him?
10 No man is so fierce that dare stirre him vp: Who is able to stande before me?
11 Or who hath geuen me any thyng aforehande, that I may rewarde him againe? All
thinges vnder heauen are myne.
12 I wyll not keepe secrete his great strength, his power, nor his comely
proportion.
13 Who can discouer the face of his garment? or who shall come to him with a
double brydle?
14 Who shall open the doores of his face? for he hath horrible teeth round
about.
15 His scales are as it were strong shieldes, so fastened together as if they
were sealed:
16 One is so ioyned to another, that no ayre can come in:
17 Yea, one hangeth so vpon another, & sticketh so together, that they can not
be sundred.
18 His neesinges make a glistering like fyre, and his eyes lyke the morning
shine.
19 Out of his mouth go torches, and sparkes of fire leape out.
20 And out of his nostrels there goeth a smoke, lyke as out of an hotte seething
pot, or caldron.
21 His breath maketh the coles burne, and the flambe goeth out of his mouth.
22 In his necke ther remaineth strength, and nothing is to labourous for him.
23 The members of his body are ioyned so strait one to another, and cleaue so
fast together, that he cannot be moued.
24 His heart is as hard as a stone, and as fast as the stythie that the smyth
smiteth vpon.
25 When he goeth the mightie are afraide, and feare troubleth them.
26 If any man drawe out a sword at him, it shall not hurt him: there may neither
speare, laueling, nor brestplate abide him.
27 He setteth asmuch by iron as by a strawe, and asmuch by brasse as by a rotten
sticke.
28 He starteth not away from him that bendeth the bowe: & as for sling stones he
careth asmuch for stouble as for the.
29 He counteth the dartes no better then a strawe, he laugheth him to scorne
that shaketh the speare.
30 Sharpe stones are vnder him lyke potsheardes, and he lyeth vpon sharpe
thinges as vpon the soft myre.
31 He maketh the deepe to boyle lyke a pot, and stirreth the sea together lyke
an oyntment.
32 He maketh the path to be seene after him, and he maketh the deepe to seeme
all hoarie.
33 Upon earth there is no power lyke vnto his: for he is so made that he feareth
not.
34 He beholdeth all the hye thinges, he is a king ouer all the children of
pride.

Chapter 42

1 Then Iob aunswered the Lord, and saide:
2 I know that thou hast power ouer all thinges, and that there is no thought hid
vnto thee.
3 For who can keepe his owne counsaile so secrete but it shalbe knowen?
Therefore haue I spoken that I vnderstoode not, euen the thinges that are to
wonderfull for me, and passe myne vnderstanding.
4 O hearken thou vnto me also, and let me speake: aunswere vnto the thing that I
wyll aske thee.
5 I haue heard of thee by the hearing of the eare, but nowe myne eye seeth thee.
6 Wherefore I geue myne owne selfe the blame, and take repentaunce in the dust
and asshes.
7 Now when the Lorde had spoken these wordes vnto Iob, it came to passe that the
Lorde saide to Eliphas the Themanite: I am displeased with thee, and thy two
friendes: for ye haue not spoken of me the thyng that is right, lyke as my
seruaunt Iob hath done.
8 Therefore take you now seuen oxen, and seuen rammes, and go to my seruaunt
Iob, and offer vp for your selues a burnt offring, and my seruaunt Iob shall
pray for you: him wyll I accept, and not deale with you after your foolishnesse,
in that ye haue not spoken of me the thing which is right, lyke as my seruaunt
Iob hath done.
9 So Eliphas the Themanite, and Bildad the Suhite, and Sophar the Naamathite,
went and did according as the Lorde commaunded them: the Lorde also accepted the
person of Iob,
10 And the Lorde tourned the captiuitie of Iob when he prayed for his friendes:
Yea the Lorde gaue Iob twyse as much as he had afore.
11 And then came there vnto him all his brethren, all his sisters, and all they
that had ben of his acquaintaunce afore, and did eate bread with him in his
house, and had compassion on him, and comforted him ouer all trouble that the
Lorde had brought vpon him: euery man also gaue him a certaine summe of money,
and a iewell of golde.
12 So the Lorde blessed the last dayes of Iob more then the first: for he had
fourteene thousand sheepe, sixe thousand camels, a thousand yoke of oxen, and a
thousand she asses:
13 He had seuen sonnes also, and three daughters.
14 The first daughter called he Iemima, the second Kezia, and the third
Kerenhapuch.
15 In al the land were no women found so faire as the daughters of Iob: and
their father gaue them inheritaunce among their brethren.
16 After this liued Iob an hundred and fourtie yeres: so that he sawe his
children, and his childrens children into the fourth generation.
17 And so Iob dyed, being olde, and of a perfect age.


Psalms

Psalm 1

1 Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsell of the vngodly: nor
standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seate of the scornefull.
2 But his delight is in the lawe of God: and in God his lawe exerciseth himselfe
day and night.
3 And he shalbe lyke a tree planted by the waters syde, that bryngeth foorth her
fruite in due season: and whose leafe wythereth not, for whatsoeuer he doth it
shall prosper.
4 As for the vngodly it is not so with them: but they are like the chaffe which
the winde scattereth abrode.
5 Therefore the vngodly shall not be able to stande in the iudgement: neither
the sinners in the congregation of the righteous.
6 For God knoweth the way of the righteous: and the way of the vngodly shall
perishe.

Psalm 2

1 Why do the Heathen so furiously rage together? and why do the people imagine a
vayne thing?
2 The kynges of the earth stande vp: and the rulers take counsell together
against god, and against his annointed.
3 Let vs breake say they their bondes a sunder: and cast away their cordes from
vs.
4 He that dwelleth in heauen wyll laugh them to scorne: the Lorde wyll haue them
in derision.
5 Then wyll he speake vnto them in his wrath: and he wyll astonie them with
feare in his sore displeasure.
6 Saying euen I haue annointed him my kyng: vpon my holy hyll of Sion.
7 I wyll declare the decree, God sayde vnto me: thou art my sonne, this day I
haue begotten thee.
8 Desire of me, and I wyll geue thee the heathen for thyne inheritaunce: and the
vttermost partes of the earth for thy possession.
9 Thou shalt bruise them with a rod of iron: and breake them in peeces like a
potters vessell.
10 Wherfore be you nowe wel aduised O ye kinges: be you learned ye that are
iudges of the earth.
11 Serue ye God in feare: and reioyce ye with a trembling.
12 Kisse ye the sonne lest that he be angrye, and so ye perishe from the way, if
his wrath be neuer so litle kindled: blessed are all they that put their trust
in hym.

Psalm 3

1 A psalme of Dauid when he fled from the face of Absalom his sonne. O God howe
are myne enemies increased? many do ryse vp against me.
2 Many say of my soule: there is no saluation for it in God. Selah.
3 But thou O God art a buckler for me: thou art my worship, and the lifter vp of
my head.
4 I dyd call vpon God with my voyce, and he hearde me out of his holy hyll.
Selah.
5 I layde me downe and slept: and I rose vp agayne, for God sustayned me.
6 I wyll not be afrayde of ten thousandes of the people: that haue set them
selues against me rounde about.
7 Arise vp O God, saue thou me O my Lorde: for thou hast smitten all myne
enemies vpon the cheeke bone, thou hast broken the teeth of the vngodly.
8 Saluation is of God: thy blessing is vpon thy people. Selah.

Psalm 4

1 To the chiefe musition on Neginoth, a psalme of Dauid. Heare me when I call O
God of my righteousnesse: thou hast set me at libertie when I was in distresse.
2 O ye sonnes of men, how long wyll ye go about to bryng my glory to confusion?
ye loue vanitie, ye seeke after lyes. Selah.
3 For ye must know that God hath chosen to him selfe a godly man: God wyl heare
when I call vnto hym.
4 Be ye angry, but sinne not: commune with your owne heart in your chaumber, and
be styll. Selah.
5 Offer the sacrifice of righteousnesse: and put your trust in God.
6 There be many that say, who wyll shewe vs any good? O God lift thou vp the
light of thy countenaunce vpon vs.
7 Thou hast put gladnesse in my heart: since the time that their corne and wine
increased.
8 I wyll lay me downe in peace and take my rest: for thou God only makest me to
dwell in safetie.

Psalm 5

1 To the chiefe musition vpon Nehiloth, a psalme of Dauid. Geue eare vnto my
wordes O God: vnderstande thou my pensifnesse.
2 Hearken thou vnto the voyce of my crying my kyng and my Lorde: for vnto thee I
wyll make my prayer.
3 Thou shalt heare my voyce betymes O God: I wyll early in the morning direct a
prayer vnto thee, and I wyll looke for helpe from thee.
4 For thou art the Lorde that hath no pleasure in wickednesse: neither can any
euyll dwell with thee.
5 Suche as be foolishe, can not stande in thy sight: thou hatest all workers of
iniquitie.
6 Thou wilt destroy them that make a lye: God wyll abhorre both the
bloodthirstie and deceiptfull man.
7 As for me I wyll come into thyne house, trusting in the multitude of thy
mercy: and in thy feare I will humble my selfe in thyne holy temple.
8 Leade me O God in thy righteousnesse, because of myne enemies: make thy way
playne before my face.
9 For no trueth is in their mouth, their inwarde partes are very wickednesse:
their throte is an open sepulchre, they flatter with their tongue.
10 Destroy thou them O Lord, let them perishe through their owne counsailes:
cast them out in the multitude of their vngodlinesse, for they haue rebelled
against thee.
11 And all they that trust in thee wyll reioyce, they wyll triumph for euer,
because thou defendest them: and they that loue thy name, wyll be ioyfull in
thee.
12 For thou O God wylt blesse the righteous: and thou wylt compasse hym about
with beneuolence, as with a shielde.

Psalm 6

1 To the chiefe musition on Neginoth vpon eyght, a psalme of Dauid. O God rebuke
me not in thine indignation: neither chasten me in thy wrath.
2 Haue mercy on me O God, for I am weake: O God heale me, for my bones be very
sore.
3 My soule also is greatly troubled: but O God howe long shall I be in this
case?
4 Turne thee O God, and deliuer my soule: Oh saue me for thy mercies sake.
5 For in death no man remembreth thee: and in the graue who can acknowledge
thee?
6 I am weerie of my groning: I washe my bed euery nyght, and I water my coutche
with my teares.
7 Mine eye is almost put out through griefe: and worne out through all mine
enemies.
8 Away from me all workers of iniquitie: for God hath hearde the voyce of my
weeping.
9 God hath hearde my petition: God wyll receaue my prayer.
10 All myne enemies shalbe confounded and sore vexed: they shalbe turned backe,
they shalbe put to shame sodainlye.

Psalm 7

1 Siggaion of Dauid, whiche he song vnto God in the busines of Chus, the sonne
of Iemini. O God my Lord, in thee I haue put my trust: saue me from all them
that do persecute me, and deliuer thou me.
2 Lest he like a Lion seasoneth on my soule: teareth it in peeces, hauyng no
rescue.
3 O God my Lord, if I haue done any such thing: or if there be any wickednesse
in my handes.
4 If I haue done euyll vnto hym that had peace with me: and if I haue not
deliuered hym that is without a cause myne aduersarie?
5 Then let myne enemie persecute my soule and take me: yea, let hym put me to
death, and lay myne honour in the dust. Selah.
6 Arise O God in thy wrath, and stand thou vp agaynst the rage of myne enemies:
stirre thou for me according to the iudgement whiche thou hast geuen.
7 And so shall the congregation of the people come about thee: for their sakes
therfore place thy selfe on high.
8 God wyll iudge the people: geue thou sentence with me O God according to my
righteousnesse, and according to my perfection that is within me.
9 My desire is, that ye wickednesse of the vngodly may come to an ende: and that
thou wouldest assist the iust, who art the tryer of heartes and of reynes, O
most righteous Lorde.
10 My buckler is with God: who preserueth them that be vpright in heart.
11 The Lorde is a righteous iudge: and the Lorde is prouoked to anger euery day.
12 If the wicked wyll not turne, he wyll whet his sworde: bende his bowe, and
haue it in a redinesse to shoote
13 He hath prepared hym instrumentes of death: he hath ordayned his arrowes
agaynst them that be persecutors.
14 Beholde, he wyll be in trauayle of a mischiefe, for he hath conceaued a
labour: but yet he shall be brought to bed of a falsehood.
15 He hath made a graue and digged it: but he hym selfe wyll fall into the pit
whiche he hath made.
16 For his labour shall come vpon his owne head: and his wickednesse shall fall
vpon his owne pate.
17 I wyll prayse God accordyng to his ryghteousnesse: & I wyll sing psalmes vnto
the name of the most high God.

Psalm 8

1 To the chiefe musition vpon Gittith, a psalme of Dauid. O God our Lorde, howe
excellent is thy name in all the earth? for that thou hast set thy glory aboue
the heauens.
2 Out of the mouth of very babes and sucklinges thou hast layde the foundation
of thy strength for thyne aduersaries sake: that thou mightest styll the enemie
and the auenger.
3 For I will consider thy heauens, euen the workes of thy fingers: the moone and
the starres whiche thou hast ordayned.
4 What is man that thou art myndfull of him? and the sonne of man that thou
visitest hym?
5 Thou hast made hym somthyng inferiour to angels: thou hast crowned him with
glory and worship.
6 Thou makest hym to haue dominion of the workes of thy handes: and thou hast
put all thinges in subiection vnder his feete,
7 All sheepe and oxen, & also the beastes of the fielde:
8 the foules of the ayre, and the fishe of the sea, and whatsoeuer swymmeth in
the seas.
9 O God our Lorde: howe excellent great is thy name in all the earth?

Psalm 9

1 To the chiefe musition at the death of Labben, a psalme of Dauid. I wyl prayse
God with all myne heart: I wyl recite all thy marueylous workes.
2 I wyll be glad & reioyce in thee: I wyll sing psalmes vnto thy name, O thou
most hyest.
3 For that myne enemies are returned backwarde: are fallen and perished at thy
presence.
4 For that thou hast geuen iudgement in my ryght and cause: thou that iudgest
right, hast sit in the throne of iudgement.
5 Thou hast rebuked the Heathen, and destroyed the vngodly: thou hast abolished
their name for euer and euer.
6 O thou enemie thou thoughtest to bryng vs to a perpetuall desolation: and to
destroy our cities, so that there shoulde remayne no memory of them.
7 But God wyll sit for euer: he hath prepared his throne for iudgement.
8 For he wyll iudge the world in iustice: and minister iudgement vnto the people
in righteousnesse.
9 God also wyll be a refuge for the oppressed: euen a refuge in tyme of trouble.
10 And they that knowe thy name wyll put their trust in thee: for thou O God
hast neuer fayled them that seeke thee.
11 Sing psalmes vnto God abiding at Sion: declare his notable actes among the
people.
12 For he maketh inquisition of blood: he remembreth it, and forgetteth not the
complaynt of the poore.
13 Haue mercy on me O God: consider the trouble whiche I suffer of them that
hate me, lift me vp from the gates of death.
14 That I may shewe all thy prayses within the gates of the daughter of Sion:
and reioyce in thy saluation.
15 The Heathen are sunke downe into the pit that they made: their owne foote is
snared in the same net whiche they had layde priuily for other.
16 God is knowen by the iudgement that he hath executed: the vngodly is trapped
in ye worke of his owne handes, this ought to be considered alwayes. Selah.
17 The wicked shalbe turned vnto hell: and all people that forget God.
18 But the poore shall not alway be forgotten: neither shall the hope of the
humble afflicted, perishe for euer.
19 Aryse vp O God, let not man preuaile: let the Heathen in thy sight be iudged.
20 Put them in feare O God: that the Heathen may knowe them selues to be but
men. Selah.

Psalm 10

1 Why standest thou so farre of O God? why hidest thee in the tyme of trouble?
2 The vngodly of a wylfulnesse persecuteth the poore: but euery one of them
shalbe taken in the craftie wylines that they haue imagined.
3 For the vngodly prayseth according to his owne heartes desire: and blessing
the couetous, he blasphemeth God.
4 The vngodly looketh so proudly as though he cared for none at all: neither is
the Lorde in all his thoughtes.
5 His wayes are alwayes greeuous, but thy iudgementes are farre aboue out of his
sight: and therfore he snuffeth at all his enemies.
6 He hath sayde in his heart, tushe, I can not be remoued: for I can not be
touched at any tyme with harme.
7 His mouth is full of cursing, and of deceate, and of fraude: vnder his tongue
is labour and mischiefe.
8 He sitteth lurkyng in theeuishe corners of the streates: and priuily in
lurking dennes he doth murther the innocent, he eyeth diligently hym that is
weake.
9 He lieth in wayte lurking as a Lion in his denne: he lyeth in wayte lurkyng,
that he may violently carry away the afflicted, he doth carry away violentlye
the afflicted, in halyng hym into his net.
10 He croucheth and humbleth him selfe: so that a number of the that be weake,
fall by his myght.
11 He sayeth in his heart, tushe, the Lord hath forgotten: he hydeth away his
face, and he wyll neuer see it.
12 Aryse vp O Lorde God: lift vp thine hande, forget not the afflicted.
13 Wherefore shoulde the wicked blaspheme the Lorde: whyle he sayeth in his
heart, that thou wylt not call to accompt?
14 Surely thou hast seene this for thou beholdest labour and spite: that thou
mayest take the matter into thy hands, he that is weake leaueth it for thee, for
thou art the helper of the fatherlesse.
15 Breake thou the power of the vngodly and malitious: searche thou out his
vngodlynes, and thou shalt finde none afterwarde in him.
16 God is king for euer and euer: but the Heathen shall perishe out of the
lande.
17 O God, thou hast hearde the desire of the afflicted: and thou wylt settle
their heart.
18 Thou wylt be attentiue with thyne eare, to geue iudgement for the fatherlesse
and oppressed: so no man in the earth shall once go about hereafter to do them
violence.

Psalm 11

1 To the chiefe musition, a psalme of Dauid. In God I put my trust: howe say ye
then to my soule, that she shoulde flee as a byrde from your hyll.
2 For lo, the vngodly haue bende their bowe: and nocked their arrowes with the
string, redy to shoote priuily at them whiche are vpright in heart.
3 For if the foundations shalbe caste downe: what must the righteous do?
4 But God is in his holy temple, Gods throne is in heauen: his eyes looke downe,
his eye liddes tryeth the chyldren of men.
5 God wyll trye the righteous: but his soule abhorreth the vngodly, and hym that
delighteth in wickednes.
6 Upon ye vngodly he wyl rayne snares, fire and brimstone: and tempestious
stormes shalbe their portion to drinke.
7 For God most righteous, loueth righteousnes: his countenaunce wyll beholde the
iust.

Psalm 12

1 To the chiefe musition vpon (an instrument) of eyght stringes, a psalme of
Dauid. Saue thou me O God, for there is not one godly man left: for the
faythfull are diminished from among the chyldren of men.
2 Euery one vseth vayne talke with his neyghbour: and speaketh with a double
heart out of flatteryng lippes.
3 God wyll cut away all flatteryng lippes: and the tongue that speaketh great
thinges.
4 Whiche say, we wyll preuayle with our tongue: our lippes are our owne, who is
Lorde ouer vs?
5 For the calamities of the oppressed, for the deepe sighyng of the poore, I
wyll nowe vp sayeth God: and I wyll put in safetie, hym whom the wicked hath
snared.
6 The wordes of God be wordes pure, as the siluer tryed in a furnace of earth:
and purified seuen times.
7 Wherfore thou wylt kepe the godly, O God: thou wylt preserue euery one of them
from this generation for euer.
8 The vngodly walke on euery side: when the worst sort be exalted amongst the
chyldren of men.

Psalm 13

1 To the chiefe musition, a Psalme of Dauid. Howe long wylt thou forget me O
God, for euer? howe long wilt thou hyde thy face from me?
2 Howe long shall I seke counsayle in my soule, and be so vexed in mine heart
euery day? howe long shall myne enemie triumph ouer me?
3 Loke downe and heare me O God my Lorde: lighten myne eyes, lest that I sleepe
in death.
4 Lest myne enemie say, I haue preuayled agaynst hym: lest they that trouble me
reioyce yf I shoulde be remoued.
5 But I repose my trust in thy mercie, and my heart is ioyfull in thy saluation:
6 I wyll syng to God, because he hath rewarded me.

Psalm 14

1 To the chiefe musition, a Psalme of Dauid. The foole hath sayde in his heart
there is no God: they haue corrupted them selues and done an abhominable worke,
there is not one that doth good.
2 God loked downe from heauen vpon the children of men: to see yf there were any
that did vnderstande and seke after the Lorde.
3 But they are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become abhominable:
there is none that doth good, no not one.
4 Do not all the workers of iniquitie know, deuouryng my people as though they
deuoured bread: that they call not vpon God?
5 Hereafter they shalbe taken with a great feare: for the Lorde is in the
generation of the righteous.
6 As for nowe ye make a mocke at the counsayle of the poore: because he reposeth
his trust in God.
7 Who shall geue saluation vnto Israel: out of Sion? When God will deliuer his
people out of captiuitie: then wyll Iacob reioyce, and Israel be glad.

Psalm 15

1 O God, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? who shall rest vppon thy holy hyll?
2 Euen he that leadeth an vncorrupt life: and doth the thyng that is iust, and
speaketh the trueth from his heart.
3 He that backbyteth not with his tongue: nor doth any euil to his felowe, nor
rayseth a slaunder vpon his neyghbour.
4 He that dispiseth in his eyes the reprobate: and honoureth them that feare
God. He that hath sworne to his owne hurt: and yet wyll not go from his oth.
5 He that geueth not his money vpon vsurie: nor taketh rewarde agaynst the
innocent. He that doth these thynges: shall neuer at any tyme be remoued.

Psalm 16

1 The golden psalme of Dauid. Preserue me O Lorde: for I haue reposed my trust
in thee.
2 Thou hast sayde O my soule vnto God, thou art my Lorde: my weldoing can do
thee no good.
3 But all my delyght is to do good vnto the saintes that are in the earth: and
vnto such as excell in vertue.
4 As for them that runne after another God they shall haue great trouble: I wyll
not offer their drynke offerynges of blood, neither wyll I make mention of their
names within my lyppes.
5 O God, thou thy selfe art the portion of myne inheritaunce and of my cup: thou
wylt mayntayne my lot.
6 My lot is fallen vnto me in a pleasaut grounde: I haue a goodly heritage.
7 I wyll prayse God who gaue me counsayle: my reines also do instruct me in the
nyght season.
8 I haue set God alwayes before me: for he is on my ryght hande, therfore I
shall not be remoued.
9 Wherfore my heart is glad: my glory reioyceth, my fleshe also shall rest in a
securitie.
10 For thou wylt not leaue my soule in hell: neither wylt thou suffer thyne holy
one to see corruption.
11 Thou wylt cause me to knowe the path of lyfe: in thy presence is the fulnesse
of ioy, and at thy right hand there be pleasures for euermore.

Psalm 17

1 A prayer of Dauid. Heare thou O God of iustice, be attentiue vnto my
complaynt: geue eare vnto my prayer, not proceeding out of fayned lyppes.
2 Let iudgement come foorth for me from thy face: and let thine eyes loke vpon
equitie.
3 Thou hast proued myne heart, thou hast visited it in the nyght season: thou
hast tryed me, and founde no wickednesse, for I purposed that nothyng shoulde
scape my mouth.
4 As touchyng other mens workes: through the wordes of thy lyppes I haue kept me
from the way of the violent.
5 O holde thou vp my goynges in thy pathes: that my footesteppes slyp not.
6 I call vpon thee O God, for thou wilt heare me: incline thine eare to me,
hearken vnto my wordes.
7 Shewe thy marueylous louyng kindnesse: thou that art the sauiour of them that
trust in thee, from such as ryse vp agaynst thy ryght hande.
8 Kepe me as the apple of an eye, hyde me vnder the shadowe of thy wynges: from
the face of the vngodly that go about to destroy me, from myne enemies that
compasse me rounde about to take away my soule.
9 They haue inclosed them selues in their owne fat: with their mouth they speake
proude thynges.
10 They haue nowe compassed me on euery syde where our way lyeth: they toote
with their eyes to ouerthrow me downe on the grounde.
11 His doynges be lyke a lions that is greedy to take a pray: and as a lions
whelpe lurkyng in secrete places.
12 Aryse O God, preuent his commyng, make hym to bowe: delyuer thou my soule
from the vngodly which is thy sworde.
13 Deliuer thou me O God from men which be thy hande: from men, from the worlde,
whose portion is in this lyfe, whose bellyes thou fyllest with thy priuie
treasure.
14 Whose children haue aboundaunce: & they leaue enough of that they haue
remaynyng to their babes.
15 But as for me, I will beholde thy face in ryghteousnesse: I shalbe satisfied
when I awake vp after thy lykenesse.

Psalm 18

1 To the chiefe musition the seruaunt of God, and of Dauid who spake vnto God
the wordes of this song in the day that God deliuered him from the hande of all
his enemies, and from the hande of Saul: And he sayde. I wyll entirely loue thee
O God my strength,
2 God is my stony rocke & my fortresse, and my delyuerer: my Lorde, my castell
in whom I wyll trust, my buckler, the horne of my saluation, & my refuge.
3 I wyll call vpon God, who is most worthy to be praysed: so I shall be safe
from myne enemies.
4 The panges of death haue compassed me about: and the outragiousnes of the
wicked haue astonyed me with feare.
5 The panges of a graue haue compassed me about: the snares of death ouertoke
me.
6 But in this my distresse I dyd call vppon God, and I made my complaynt vnto my
Lorde: he hearde my voyce out of his temple, and my crye came before his face,
euen vnto his eares.
7 The earth trembled and quaked: the very foundations of the hylles tottered and
shooke, because he was wroth.
8 In his anger a smoke ascended vp: and a fire out of his mouth dyd cosume, and
euery cole therof dyd set a fire.
9 He bowed the heauens also, and he came downe: and it was darke vnder his
feete.
10 He ridde vpon the Cherub, and he dyd flee: he came fleeyng vpon the wynges of
the wynde.
11 For his secrete place he dyd put darkenesse: and for his pauilion rounde
about hym, he dyd put darknesse of waters in cloudes of the ayre.
12 His cloudes, haylestones, and coles of fire: fell downe before hym after
lyghtnyng.
13 God also thundred out of heauen: and the most hyghest made his voyce to
sounde, haylestones, and coles of fire.
14 He shot out his arrowes, and scattered them: he cast foorth much lyghtnynges,
and destroyed them.
15 And the bottomes of waters appeared, and the foundations of the rounde worlde
were discouered at thy chidyng, O God: at the blast of the breath of thine
anger.
16 He hath sent downe from aboue to fetch me: he hath taken me out of many
waters.
17 He hath deliuered me from my strong enemie: and from them which hate me, for
they were to stout for me.
18 They preuented me in the day of my trouble: but God was vnto me a sure stay.
19 He brought me also foorth into a place of libertie: he brought me foorth,
because he had a fauour vnto me.
20 God rewarded me after my righteous dealyng: accordyng to the cleannesse of
myne handes he recompensed me.
21 Because I had kept the wayes of God: and had not wickedly shronke from my
God.
22 For all his lawes were before me: and I reiected none of his commaundementes
from me.
23 And I was sounde & pure towardes hym: and I was weery lest I shoulde offende
hym with my wickednesse.
24 Therfore hath God rewarded me after my righteous dealyng: and accordyng to my
cleannesse of my handes in his syght.
25 With the holy thou wylt be holy: with a perfect man thou wylt be perfect.
26 With the cleane thou wylt be cleane: and with the frowarde thou wylt be
frowarde.
27 For thou hast saued the people oppressed: and thou hast brought downe the
hygh lokes of the proude.
28 Thou also hast lyghtened my candell: God my Lorde hath made my darknesse to
be lyght.
29 For in thee I haue discomfited an hoast of men: and with the helpe of my
Lorde I haue skipped ouer the wall.
30 The way of the Lorde is a perfect way, the worde of God is tryed in the fire:
he is a shielde vnto all them that put their trust in hym.
31 For who is a Lorde besides God: or who hath any strength besides our Lorde?
32 It is God that hath gyrded me with valiauntnesse of warre: and he hath made
my way playne.
33 He hath made my feete lyke Hartes feete: and he hath set me vp on hygh.
34 He hath taught my handes to fyght: and myne armes to breake a bowe of steele.
35 Thou hast geuen me the shielde of thy saluation: thy ryght hande also hath
helde me vp, and through thy great gentlenesse I haue increased.
36 Thou hast made me roomth inough for to go on: so that my feete haue not
slypt.
37 I haue pursued myne enemies and onertaken them: neither dyd I returne backe
vntyll I had destroyed them.
38 I smote them downe, and they are not able to aryse: they haue taken such a
fall vnder my feete.
39 Thou hast gyrded me with strength vnto battayle: thou hast made them to bowe
downe vnder me who haue rysen vp agaynst me.
40 Thou hast geuen me myne enemies neckes: and I haue destroyed them that hated
me.
41 They cryed, but there was none to saue them: they cryed vnto God, but he dyd
not heare them.
42 I dyd beat them to powder, like vnto dust in a wynde: I haue brought them as
lowe as durt in the streates.
43 Thou hast deliuered me from sedition of the people, and thou hast made me
head of the heathen: a people whom I haue not knowen serueth me,
44 assoone as they hearde of me, they obeyed me.
45 Children of a straunger haue made a lie vnto me: the heartes of the children
of a straunger hath fayled them, and they feared in their strong holdes.
46 God lyueth, and he is my strength most worthy of blisse: and the Lorde of my
saluation ought to be magnified.
47 It is God that hath geuen me power to take auengeaunce: and he hath subdued
the people vnder me.
48 It is he that is the aucthour of my deliuerie from myne enemies: and he hath
set me vp aboue them that rose agaynst me, he hath ridde me from the wicked man.
49 For this cause I wyll acknowledge thee O God among the gentiles: and syng
psalmes vnto thy name.
50 Who hath wonderfull oft deliuered his kyng: and he hath done mercifully vnto
Dauid his annoynted, and vnto his seede for euermore.

Psalm 19

1 To the chiefe musition, a psalme of Dauid. The heauens declare the glorie of
God: and the firmament sheweth his handy worke.
2 A day occasioneth talke therof vnto a day: and a night teacheth knoweledge
vnto a nyght.
3 No language, no wordes, no voyce of theirs is hearde:
4 yet their sounde goeth into all landes, and their wordes into the endes of the
worlde.In them he hath set a tabernacle for the sunne:
5 which commeth foorth as a bridegrome out of his chamber, and reioyceth as a
giaunt to runne his course.
6 His settyng foorth is from the vtmost part of heauen, and his circuite vnto
the vtmost part therof: and there is nothing hyd from his heat.
7 The lawe of God is perfect, conuerting the soule: the testimonie of God is
sure, and geueth wisdome vnto the simple.
8 The statutes of God are right, and reioyce the heart: the commaundement of God
is pure, and geueth light vnto the eyes.
9 The feare of God is sincere, & endureth for euer: the iudgementes of God are
trueth, they be iust in all poyntes.
10 They are more to be desired then golde, yea then much fine golde: they are
also sweeter then hony and the hony combe.
11 Moreouer, by them thy seruaunt is well aduertised: and in kepyng of them
there is a great rewarde.
12 Who can knowe his owne errours? Oh cleanse thou me from those that I am not
priuie of.
13 Kepe thy seruaunt also from presumptuous sinnes let them not raigne ouer me:
so I shall be perfect & voyde from all haynous offence.
14 Let the wordes of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart be acceptable in
thy sight O God: my strength and my redeemer.

Psalm 20

1 To the chiefe musition, a psalme of Dauid. God heare thee in the day of
trouble: the name of the Lorde of Iacob defende thee.
2 Let him sende thee helpe from the sanctuarie: and ayde thee out of Sion.
3 Let him remember all thy offeringes: and turne into asshes thy burnt
sacrifices. Selah.
4 Let him graunt thee thy heartes desire: and accomplishe all thy deuice.
5 We wyll reioyce in thy saluation, and triumph in the name of our Lorde: for
God wyll perfourme all thy petitions.
6 Nowe I knowe that God wyll saue his annoynted, he wyll heare him from his
heauenly sanctuarie: there is saluation in the mightinesse of his right hande.
7 Some put their trust in chariotes, and some in horses: but we wyll remember
the name of God our Lorde.
8 They shalbe made to bowe and fall: but we shall arise, and stande vpright.
9 Saue thou O God: that the king may heare vs in the day when we call.

Psalm 21

1 To the chiefe musition, a psalme of Dauid. The kyng ought to reioyce in thy
strength O God: and he ought to be exceedyng glad of thy saluation.
2 Thou hast geuen him his heartes desire: and hast not denied him the request of
his lippes. Selah.
3 For thou hast preuented him with good blessinges: and hast set a crowne of
pure golde vpon his head.
4 He asked life of thee, and thou gauest him long dayes: euen for euer and euer.
5 His honour is great through thy saluation: thou hast layde glorie and great
worship vpon him.
6 For thou hast placed him to be blessinges for euer: and hast made him glad
with the ioy of thy countenaunce.
7 Because the king trusteth in God, and in the mercie of the most highest: he
shal not miscarie.
8 Thine hande wyll finde out all thine enemies: thy right hande wyll finde out
them that hate thee.
9 Thou wilt make them like a burnyng furnace in tyme of thy furie: God wyll
destroy them in his wrath, and fire shall consume them.
10 Thou wilt roote their fruite out of the earth: and their seede from among the
children of men.
11 For they intended mischiefe agaynst thee, and imagined a craftie deuice: but
they coulde not bring it to passe.
12 Therfore thou wilt put them to flight: and direct thine arrowes agaynst their
faces.
13 Be thou exalted O God accordyng to thine owne might: so we wyll sing, and
with psalmes we wyll prayse thy power.

Psalm 22

1 To the chiefe musition of the mornyng hinde, a psalme of Dauid. My God, my
God, why hast thou forsaken me? why art thou so farre from my health, and from
the wordes of my complaynt?
2 O my God I crye all the day tyme, and in the night season, and I ceasse not:
but thou hearest not.
3 And yet thou most holy: sittest to receaue the prayers of Israel.
4 Our fathers hoped in thee: they trusted in thee, & thou didst deliuer them.
5 They called vpon thee, and they were helped: they did put their trust in thee,
and they were not confounded.
6 But as for me I am a worme and no man: a very scorne of men, and an outcast of
the people.
7 All they that see me, laugh me to scorne: they do make a mowe, and nod their
head at me.
8 Saying he referreth all to God, loking that God wyll deliuer him and rescue
him: for he delighteth only in him.
9 But thou art he that tokest me out of my mothers wombe: thou causedst me to
trust in thee, suckyng my mothers breastes.
10 I haue ben left vnto thee euer since I was borne: thou art my God euen from
my mothers wombe.
11 O go not far fro me, for trouble is harde at hande: and there is none to
helpe me.
12 Many oxen are come about me: fat bulles of Bashan close me in on euery syde.
13 They gape vpon me with their mouthes: as it were a rampyng and a roryng lion.
14 I am as it were into water resolued, and all my bones are out of ioynt: my
heart also is like waxe melted in the middest of my bowels.
15 My strength is dried vp like a potsheard, & my tongue cleaueth to my gummes:
and thou hast brought me into the dust of death.
16 For dogges are come about me, the assemble of the wicked lay siege agaynst
me: they haue pearced my handes and my feete, I may tell all my bones.
17 I may tell all my bones. They stande staring & gasing vpon me:
18 they part my garmentes among them, and they cast lottes vpon my vesture.
19 But be not thou farre from me O God: thou art my strength, make haste to
helpe me.
20 Delyuer my soule from the sworde: and my dearlyng from the dogges pawes.
21 Saue me from the Lions mouth: delyuer me from the hornes of the Unicornes.
22 I wyll declare thy name vnto my brethren: I wyll prayse thee in the middest
of the congregation.
23 Saying prayse ye God ye that feare hym: glorifie hym all ye of the seede of
Iacob, and stande in awe of hym all ye of the seede of Israel.
24 For he hath not dispised nor abhorred the affliction of the poore: he hath
not hyd his face from hym, but he hearde hym when he cryed vnto hym.
25 My prayse shalbe of thee in the great congregation: I wyll perfourme my vowes
in the syght of them that feare hym.
26 The poore shall eate, and be satisfied: they that seeke after God shall
prayse hym, your heart shall lyue for euer.
27 All the endes of the worlde shall remember them selues and be turned vnto
God: and all the kinredes of the nations shall worshyp before thy face.
28 For the kingdome is Gods: and he is the gouernour ouer the nations.
29 All such as be fat vpon the earth shall eate and worshyp: all they that go
downe in to the dust shall knele before hym, although he preserued not his owne
lyfe.
30 The posteritie shall serue hym: they shalbe counted vnto the Lorde for a
generation.
31 They wyll come and declare his righteousnesse vnto a people that shalbe
borne: for he hath done it.

Psalm 23

1 A psalme of Dauid. God is my sheephearde, therfore I can lacke nothyng:
2 he wyll cause me to repose my selfe in pasture full of grasse, and he wyll
leade me vnto calme waters.
3 He wyll conuert my soule: he wyll bring me foorth into the pathes of
righteousnesse for his name sake.
4 Yea though I walke through the valley of the shadowe of death, I wyll feare no
euyll: for thou art with me, thy rodde and thy staffe be the thynges that do
comfort me.
5 Thou wylt prepare a table before me in the presence of myne aduersaries: thou
hast annoynted my head with oyle, and my cup shalbe brymme full.
6 Truely felicitie and mercie shal folowe me all the dayes of my lyfe: and I
wyll dwell in the house of God for a long tyme.

Psalm 24

1 A psalme of Dauid. The earth is Gods and all that therin is: the worlde, &
they that dwell therin.
2 For he hath laide the foundation of it vpon the seas: and he hath set it sure
vpon the fluddes.
3 Who shal ascende into the hyll of God? or who shall ryse vp in his holy place?
4 Euen he that hath cleane handes, and a pure heart: & that hath not taken his
soule in vayne, nor sworne disceiptfully.
5 He shall receaue a blessyng from God: and ryghteousnesse from the Lorde of his
saluation.
6 This is the generation of them that seke hym: euen of them that seke thy face
in Iacob. Selah.
7 Lyft vp your heades O ye gates, and be ye lyft vp ye euerlastyng doores and
the kyng of glorie shall enter in.
8 Who is this kyng of glorie? it is God both strong & mightie, it is God mightie
in battayle.
9 Lyft vp your heades (O ye gates) and be you lyft vp ye euerlastyng doores: and
the kyng of glorie shall enter in.
10 Who is this kyng of glorie? euen the God of hostes, he is the kyng of glorie.
Selah.

Psalm 25

1 I lyft vp my soule vnto thee O God,
2 I put my trust in thee my Lorde: let me not be confounded, neither let myne
enemies triumph ouer me.
3 Yea, let not all them that hope in thee be put to shame: let them be put to
shame who without a cause do trayterously transgresse.
4 Make me to knowe thy wayes O God, and teache me thy pathes:
5 leade me foorth in thy trueth and teache me, for thou art the Lorde of my
saluation, I haue wayted for thee al the day long.
6 Call to remembraunce O God thy tender mercies & thy louyng kindnesse: for they
haue ben for euer.
7 Oh remember not thou the sinnes and offences of my youth: but accordyng to thy
mercie euen of thy goodnesse O God remember me.
8 Gratious and ryghteous is God: therfore he wyll teache sinners in the way.
9 He wyll guide the meke in iudgement: and teache the humble his way.
10 All the pathes of God are mercie and trueth: vnto such as kepe his couenaunt
and his testimonies.
11 Pardon thou therfore for thy name sake O God my wickednesse: for it is very
great.
12 What man is he that feareth God? God wyll teache hym in the way that he shall
choose.
13 His soule shall rest all nyght at ease: and his seede shall inherite the
lande.
14 The secrete of God is among them that feare hym: and he wyll make knowen vnto
them his couenaunt.
15 Myne eyes be alwayes turned vnto God: for he wyll take my feete out of the
net.
16 Turne thy face vnto me, and haue mercie vpon me: for I am desolate and in
miserie.
17 The sorowes of myne heart are encreased: O bryng thou me out of my distresse.
18 Loke thou vpon myne aduersitie and vpon my labour: and forgeue me all my
sinne.
19 Consider myne enemies, for they do multiplie: and they beare a tirannous hate
against me.
20 O kepe my soule and deliuer me, lest I shalbe confounded: for I haue put my
trust in thee.
21 Let integritie and vprighteous dealing kepe me safe: for I haue wayted after
thee.
22 O God redeeme Israel: out of all his aduersities.

Psalm 26

1 Of Dauid. Iudge thou me O God, for I haue walked in my perfection: my trust
also hath ben in God therfore I shall not fall.
2 Examine me O God and proue me: trye out my reynes and my heart.
3 For thy louing kindnes is before mine eyes: and I wyll walke in thy trueth.
4 I haue not sit in company with vayne persons: neither haue I entred once
acquaintaunce with dissemblers.
5 I haue hated the congregation of the malitious: and I wyll not sit amongst the
vngodly.
6 I haue wasshed my handes in innocencie: and so I haue gone about thine aulter
O God.
7 That in a publique confession I myght heare: and set foorth all thy wonderous
workes.
8 O God, I haue loued the habitation of thine house: and the place where thine
honour dwelleth.
9 O gather not my soule with sinners: nor my life with bloodie men.
10 In whose handes is wickednes: and their right hande is full of gyftes.
11 But as for me I wyll walke in my perfection: O redeeme me, and be mercyfull
vnto me.
12 My foote standeth vpon a playne grounde: therfore I wyll blesse God in the
congregations.

Psalm 27

1 God is my lyght and saluation, whom then shall I feare? God is the strength of
my life, of whom then shall I be afraide?
2 When the malitious approched neare vnto me for to eate vp my fleshe: mine
enemies and foes stumbled and fell.
3 Though an hoast of men were layde in campe against me, yet shall not mine
heart be afraide: and though there rose vp warre against me, yet I wyll put my
trust in this.
4 I haue desired one thyng of God, whiche once agayne I wyll earnestly require:
euen that I may dwell in the house of God all the dayes of my life, to beholde
the beautifulnes of God, and to seeke it in his temple.
5 For in the time of aduersitie he shall hide me in his tabernacle: yea in the
secrete place of his pauilion he shall hide me, and set me vp vpon a rocke of
stone.
6 And nowe he shall lift vp my head aboue mine enemies rounde about me: therfore
I wyll offer in his tabernacle a sacrifice of great ioy, I wyll sing and prayse
God with psalmes.
7 Hearken vnto my voyce O god, when I crye vnto thee: haue mercy vpon me and
heare me.
8 My heart hath sayde vnto thee according to this thy commaundement seeke ye my
face: thy face O God wyll I seeke.
9 O hide not thou thy face from me, nor cast thy seruaunt away in a displeasure:
thou hast ben my succour, leaue me not, neither forsake me O Lorde of my
saluation.
10 For my father and mother forsoke me: and God did take me vp.
11 Teache me thy way O God: and leade me in a right path, because of mine
enemies.
12 Deliuer me not into mine aduersaries handes: for there are false witnesses
rysen vp against me, and such as speake wrong.
13 If I had not beleued veryly to see the goodnes of God in the lande of the
liuing: their spite had kylled me.
14 Attende thou therfore vpon God, be of a good courage, and he will comfort
thine heart: I say attende thou vpon God.

Psalm 28

1 Vnto thee I crye O God my strength, make not as though thou were deafe at me:
lest if thou holdest thy peace, I become like them that go downe into the graue.
2 Heare the voyce of my humble petitions when I crye vnto thee: when I holde vp
my handes towarde thy holy place where thy arke is.
3 Take me not away with the vngodlye, and with the workers of iniquitie: whiche
speake of peace to their neighbours, but mischiefe is in their heartes.
4 Rewarde them accordyng to their deedes: and according to the wickednes of
their owne inuentions. Recompence them after the worke of their handes: pay them
home that they haue deserued.
5 For they geue not their minde to vnderstande the doynges of God and the worke
of his handes: therefore he wyll breake them downe, and not buylde them vp.
6 Blessed be God: for he hath hearde the voyce of mine humble petitions.
7 God is my strength and my shielde, my heart hath trusted in him, and I am
helped: therefore my heart skippeth for ioy, and in my song I wyll prayse hym.
8 God is their strength: and the strength that saueth his annoynted.
9 O saue thy people, and geue thy blessing vnto thine inheritaunce: feede them
and exalt them for euermore.

Psalm 29

1 A tribute vnto God O ye sonnes of princes: attribute vnto God glory and
strength.
2 Geue to God glory due vnto his name: worship God with holy honour.
3 The voyce of God is aboue waters: it is the Lorde of glory that thundreth, it
is God that ruleth the sea.
4 The voyce of God is with power: the voyce of God is with honour.
5 The voyce of God breaketh the Cedar trees: yea God breaketh the Cedars of
Libanus.
6 And he maketh them to skip like a calfe: Libanus also and Sirion like a young
vnicorne.
7 The voyce of God casteth out flambes of fire:
8 the voyce of God maketh the wyldernesse to tremble, God maketh the wyldernesse
of Cades to tremble.
9 The voyce of God maketh Hindes to cast their calfe, and maketh woods to be
bare: therefore euery man setteth foorth his glory in his temple.
10 God sitteth in the flud: and God wil sit king for euer.
11 God wyll geue strength vnto his people: God wyll blesse his people in peace.

Psalm 30

1 A psalme whiche is a song of the dedication of the house of Dauid. I wyll
exalt thee O God, for thou hast exalted me: and hast not made my foes to triumph
ouer me.
2 O God my Lord I cryed vnto thee: and thou hast healed me.
3 Thou God hast raysed vp my soule from the graue: thou hast preserued my life
from them that go downe into ye pit.
4 Sing psalmes vnto god ye his saintes: and make your confession vnto the
remembraunce of his holynes.
5 For a litle short time passeth in his anger, a life is spente in his good
wyll: at euening weeping shall begin the night, but ioy commeth in the morning.
6 And in my prosperitie I saide, I shall neuer haue a fal:
7 thou God of thy goodnes hadst made my hyll so strong.
8 Neuerthelesse, when thou dydst turne thy face, I was troubled: then I cryed
vnto thee O God, then made I my humble prayers to thee my Lorde.
9 Saying what profite is there in my blood when I go downe to the pit? shal the
dust geue thankes vnto thee? or shall it declare thy trueth?
10 Heare me O God, and haue mercy vppon me: O God be thou my helper.
11 And foorthwith thou hast turned my mourning into dauncing: thou hast put of
my sackcloth, and gyrded me with gladnes.
12 Therfore my glory shal sing psalmes vnto thee and not ceasse: O God my Lorde
I wyll prayse thee for euer.

Psalm 31

1 To the chiefe musition, a psalme of Dauid. In thee O God I haue put my trust,
let me neuer be confounded: deliuer me in thy righteousnes.
2 Bowe downe thine eare to me, make hast to deliuer me: be vnto me a strong
rocke and a house of defence, that thou mayest saue me.
3 For thou art my strong rocke and fortresse: euen for thy name sake conduct me,
and direct me.
4 Take me out of the net that they haue layde priuily for me: for thou art my
strength.
5 Into thy hande I commende my spirite: for thou hast redeemed me O God the
Lorde of trueth.
6 I haue hated them that obserue superstitious vanities: and my trust hath ben
in God.
7 I wyll be glad and reioyce in thy louing kindnes: for that thou hast
considered my trouble, and hast knowen my soule in aduersities.
8 Thou hast not shut me vp into the hande of the enemie: but hast set my feete
in a large roome.
9 Haue mercy vpon me O God, for I am in distresse: mine eye, my soule, and my
belly be consumed for very heauinesse.
10 For my life is wasted with sorow, and mine eares with mourning: my strength
fayleth me because of mine iniquitie, and my bones are putrified.
11 I became a reprofe among al mine enemies, but especially among my neighbours:
and they of mine acquaintaunce were afraide of me, and they that dyd see me
without, conueyed them selues quickly fro me.
12 I became cleane forgotten as a dead man out of minde: I became like a broken
vessell.
13 For I haue hearde the villanie of the multitude, and feare was on euery side
me: whyle they conspired together against me, and toke their counsell to take
away my life.
14 But my hope hath ben in thee O God: I haue sayd thou art my Lorde.
15 My time is in thy hande, deliuer me from the hande of mine enemies: and from
them that persecute me.
16 Cause thy countenaunce to shine vppon thy seruaunt: saue me for thy mercies
sake.
17 Let me not be confounded O God, for I haue called vpon thee: let the vngodlye
be put to confusion, and be put to scilence in the graue.
18 Let the lying lippes be put to scilence: which speake against ye righteous
greeuous thinges with disdaine & contempt.
19 Howe plentifull is thy goodnes which thou hast layde vp for them that feare
thee? and whiche thou hast prepared for them that put their trust in thee before
the sonnes of men.
20 Thou hydest them priuily in thyne owne presence from the raginges of all men:
thou kepest them secretly as in a tabernacle from the strife of tongues.
21 Blessed be God: for he hath shewed me marueylous great kindnes in a strong
citie.
22 And when I fled with al haste, I said I am cast out of the sight of thine
eyes: neuerthelesse, thou heardest the voyce of my prayer when I cryed vnto
thee.
23 Loue God all ye his saintes: for God preserueth them that are faythfull, and
rewardeth most aboundauntly the proude doer.
24 All ye that put your trust in God be ye of a good courage: and he wyll
comfort your heart.

Psalm 32

1 A wyse instruction of Dauid. Blessed is he whose wickednes is forgeuen: and
whose sinne is couered.
2 Blessed is ye man vnto whom God imputeth no vnrighteousnes: & in whose spirit
there is no guile.
3 For whyle I helde my tongue: my bones consumed away through my dayly roaring.
4 For thy hande is heauie vpon me day and night: and my moysture is like the
drouth in sommer. Selah.
5 Therfore I haue made knowen my faultes vnto thee, and my righteousnes haue I
not hid: I sayd I will confesse my wickednes vnto God, and thou forgauest the
vnrighteousnes of my sinne. Selah.
6 For this shall euery one that is godly make his prayer vnto thee in the time
when thou mayest be founde: so that in the great water fluddes they shal not
come nye hym.
7 Thou art my refuge, thou wylt preserue me from trouble: thou wylt compasse me
about with songes of deliueraunce. Selah.
8 I will geue thee wise instructions, and teach thee in the way wherin thou
shalt go: & I wil guyde thee with mine eye.
9 Be ye not lyke a horse or lyke a mule whiche haue no vnderstanding: whose
mouthes must be holden with bit and brydle, lest they fall vpon thee.
10 Great plagues remaine for the vngodly: but who so putteth his trust in God,
mercy imbraceth him on euery side.
11 Be glad in God, & reioyce O ye righteous: be ioyfull also all ye that be
vpright of heart.

Psalm 33

1 Reioyce in God O ye righteous: for prayse becommeth well the iust.
2 Confesse it to god with the harpe: sing psalmes vnto hym with the viall, and
with the instrument of ten stringes.
3 Sing vnto him a new song: do it cunningly, make a sweete noyse with your
musicall instrumentes alowde.
4 For the word of God is right: and euery worke of his done in fayth.
5 He loueth righteousnes & iudgement: the earth is ful of the goodnes of God.
6 By the worde of God are the heauens made: and all the hoastes of them by the
breath of his mouth.
7 He gathereth the waters of the sea together as it were vpon an heape: and
layeth vp the deepe as treasures.
8 Let all the earth feare God: let all they that dwell in the worlde stande in
awe of him.
9 For he spake and it was: he commauded, and it was brought to passe.
10 God bringeth the counsell of the Heathen to naught: and maketh the deuises of
the people to be of none effect.
11 The counsayle of God shall endure for euer: and the thoughtes of his heart
from generation to generation.
12 Blessed is the nation that hath God to be their Lorde: that people hath he
chosen to be an inheritaunce for him.
13 God looketh downe from heauen, and beholdeth all the chyldren of men
14 from the place where he resteth: he eyeth diligently euery dweller on the
earth.
15 He fashioneth their heartes together: he vnderstandeth al their workes.
16 A king is not saued by the multitude of an hoast: a man of great myght
escapeth not by much strength.
17 A horse for to saue is vanitie: and he can deliuer none by his great
strength.
18 Beholde, the eye of God is vpon them that feare hym: and vpon them that
wayteth after his mercy.
19 To deliuer their soules from death: and to preserue their liues in dearth.
20 Our soule wayteth after God: he is our ayde and shielde.
21 For our heart shall reioyce in him: because we haue put our trust in his holy
name.
22 Let thy louing kindnes O God be vppon vs: like as we haue put our trust in
thee.

Psalm 34

1 Of Dauid when he chaunged his behauiour before Abimelech, whiche droue him
away, and he departed. I wyll alway blesse God: his prayse shall euer be in my
mouth.
2 My soule shal glory in God: the humble shall heare therof and be glad.
3 Magnifie God with me: and let vs exalt his name all together.
4 Carefully I sought God, & he hearde me: yea he deliuered me out of all my
feare.
5 Let them turne their eyes on him, and make speede to come vnto hym: and their
faces shall not be ashamed.
6 Lo this same poore man hath cryed: and God hath hearde hym, and saued hym out
of all his troubles.
7 The angell of God campeth rounde about them that feare hym: and deliuereth
them.
8 O taste and see how gracious God is: blessed is the man that trusteth in him.
9 Feare God ye that be his saintes: for they that feare him lacke nothing.
10 Young Lions do lacke and suffer hunger: but they whiche seeke God, shall want
no maner of thing that is good.
11 Come ye chyldren and hearken vnto me: I will teache you the feare of God.
12 What man is he that listeth to liue: and woulde fayne see good dayes.
13 Kepe thy tongue from euill: and thy lippes that they speake no guyle.
14 Eschewe euill & do good: seeke peace and ensue it.
15 The eyes of God are ouer the righteous: and his eares are open vnto their
prayers.
16 The countenaunce of God is against them that do euill: to roote out the
remembraunce of them from of the earth.
17 The righteous crye, and God heareth them: and deliuereth them out of all
their troubles.
18 God is nye vnto them that are of a contrite heart: and saueth such as be of
an humble spirite.
19 Great are the troubles of the righteous: but God deliuereth him out of all.
20 He kepeth all his bones: so that no one of them is broken.
21 Malice shal put the vngodly to death: and they that hate the righteous,
shalbe brought to naught.
22 God redeemeth the soules of his seruauntes: and al they that put their trust
in him, shall not be brought to naught.

Psalm 35

1 Of Dauid. Pleade thou my cause O God, with them that striue with me: and fight
thou agaynst them that fight against me.
2 Lay hand vppon a shielde & buckler: and stande vp to helpe me.
3 Bryng foorth the speare, and stop the way against them that persecute me: say
vnto my soule, I am thy saluation.
4 Let them be confounded and put to shame that seeke after my soule: let them be
turned backe and brought to cofusion, that imagine mischiefe for me.
5 Let them be as dust before the winde: and let the angell of God scatter them.
6 Let their way be darke and slipperie: & let the angell of God persecute them.
7 For without a cause they haue priuily layde for me a pit full of their nettes:
without a cause they haue made a digyng vnto my soule.
8 Let a sodayne destruction come vpon hym vnawares: and his net that he hath
layde priuily catch hym selfe, let him fall into it with his owne destruction.
9 And my soule shalbe ioyfull in God: it shall reioyce in his saluation.
10 All my bones shall say, God who is lyke vnto thee? whiche deliuerest the
poore from hym that is to strong for him: yea the poore and him that is in
miserie, from him that spoyleth him.
11 False witnesse did rise vp: they layde thinges to my charge that I know not.
12 They rewarded me euill for good: to the great discomfort of my soule.
13 Neuerthelesse, when they were sicke I did put on sackcloth: I afflicted my
soule with fasting, and my prayer returned into myne owne bosome.
14 I kept them company whersoeuer they went, as though they had ben my frende or
brother: I went heauyly, as one that mourned for his mother.
15 But in mine aduersitie they reioysed and gathered them together: yea, the
very abiectes came together against me, yer I wyst they rented me a peeces and
ceassed not.
16 With hypocrites, scoffers, and parasites: they gnashed vpon me with their
teeth.
17 Lorde howe long wylt thou looke vpon this: O deliuer my soule from their
raginges, and my dearling from Lions whelpes.
18 So I wyll confesse it vnto thee in a great congregation: I will prayse thee
among muche people.
19 O let not my deceiptfull enemies triumph ouer me: let them not winke with an
eye, that hate me without a cause.
20 For they speake not peace: but they imagine deceiptfull wordes agaynst them
that liue quietly in the lande.
21 They gaped vpon me with their mouthes: and said this is well, this is wel,
our eye hath seene.
22 Thou hast seene this O God, holde not thy tongue then: go not farre from me O
Lorde.
23 Stirre thou and awake O my God and my Lorde: to iudge my cause and
controuersie.
24 Iudge me according to thy righteousnesse O God my Lorde: and let them not
triumph ouer me.
25 Let them not say in their heart, it is as we woulde haue it: neither let them
say, we haue deuoured hym.
26 Let them be put to confusion & shame all together that reioyce at my trouble:
let them be clothed with rebuke and dishonour that exalt them selues against me.
27 Let them triumph with gladnesse and reioyce that be delighted with my
righteousnesse: let them say alwayes, blessed be God whiche hath pleasure in the
prosperitie of his seruaunt.
28 And my tongue shalbe talking of thy righteousnesse: and of thy prayse all the
day long.

Psalm 36

1 To the chiefe musition, seruaunt to the God of Dauid. The wickednes of the
vngodly speaketh in the middest of my heart: that there is no feare of the Lorde
before his eyes.
2 For he flattereth him selfe in his owne sight: so that his iniquitie is found
worthy of hatred.
3 The wordes of his mouth are vnrighteous and full of deceipt: he hath left of
to behaue him selfe wisely & to do good.
4 He imagineth mischiefe vpon his bed, & setteth him selfe in no good way:
neither doth he abhorre any thing yt is euil.
5 Thy mercy O God reacheth vnto heauen: and thy faythfulnes vnto the cloudes.
6 Thy righteousnes is like the mountaynes of God: thy iudgementes are a great
deapth, thou sauest both man and beast O God.
7 How excellent is thy mercy O Lord: therefore the chyldren of men shall put
their trust vnder the shadowe of thy winges.
8 They shalbe satisfied with the plenteousnesse of thy house: and thou shalt
geue them drinke out of the riuer of thy delicates.
9 For with thee is the fountaine of lyfe: and in thy light shall we see light.
10 O continue foorth thy louing kindnesse vnto them that knowe thee: and thy
righteousnes vnto them that are of an vpright heart.
11 O let not the foote of pryde reache vnto me: and let not the hande of the
vngodly make me to moue out of my place
12 There be the workers of iniquitie fallen: they are cast downe, and shall not
be able to rise vp.

Psalm 37

1 Of Dauid. Fret not thy selfe because of the vngodly: neither be thou enuious
against the euyll doers.
2 For they shall soone be cut downe like the grasse: and be withered euen as the
greene hearbe.
3 Put thou thy trust in God, and be doing good: dwell in the land, and feede in
trueth.
4 Delight thou also in God: and he shall geue thee thy heartes desire.
5 Commit thy way vnto God: and put thy trust in hym, and he shall bryng it to
passe.
6 He shall make thy righteousnesse appeare as cleare as the light: and thy iust
dealing as the noone tyde.
7 Holde thee still in God, and wayte paciently vpon him: fret not thy selfe at
him whose way doth prosper, at the man that doth abhominations.
8 Leaue of from wrath, and let go displeasure: fret not thy selfe, lest thou be
moued to do euill.
9 For the malitious doers shalbe rooted out: and they that paciently wayte after
God, they shall inherite the lande.
10 Looke at them yet a litle whyle, and the vngodly shalbe cleane gone: thou
shalt looke after his place, and he shall not be there
11 But the meeke spirited shall possesse the earth: and shalbe delighted in the
aboundaunce of peace.
12 The vngodly busieth his head all against the iust: and gnasheth vpon him with
his teeth.
13 The Lorde shall laugh him to scorne: for he seeth that his day is comming.
14 The vngodly haue drawen out the sworde, and haue bended their bowe: to cast
downe the poore and needie, and to slay such as be of right conuersation.
15 But their sworde shal go thorow their owne heart: & their bow shalbe broken.
16 A small thing that the righteous hath: is better then great riches of ye
vngodly.
17 For the armes of the vngodly shalbe broken: and God vpholdeth the righteous.
18 God knoweth the dayes of them that be perfect: and their inheritaunce shall
endure for euer.
19 They shall not be confounded in the perilous tyme: and in the dayes of dearth
they shall haue inough.
20 As for the vngodly they shall perishe, and the enemies of God shall consume
as the fat of lambes: yea, euen with the smoke they shall vanishe away.
21 The vngodly boroweth and payeth not agayne: but the righteous geueth
mercifully and liberally.
22 Suche as be blessed of God shall possesse the lande: and they that be cursed
of hym, shalbe rooted out.
23 The pathes of man is directed by God: and his way pleaseth.
24 Though he fall, he shall not be vndone: for God vpholdeth him with his hande.
25 I haue ben a young chylde, and nowe I am olde: and yet sawe I neuer the
righteous forsaken, nor his seede begyng bread.
26 The righteous is euer mercifull and lendeth: and his seede is blessed.
27 Flee from euill & do good: and dwell for euer.
28 For God loueth iudgement, he forsaketh not his saintes: they are preserued
for euermore, but the seede of the vngodlye shalbe rooted vp.
29 The righteous shal inherite the land: and dwell therin for euer.
30 The mouth of the righteous is exercised in wysdome: and his tongue wyll be
talking of iudgement.
31 The lawe of his God is in his heart: therfore his feete shall not slide.
32 The vngodly spyeth the righteous: and seeketh occasion to slay hym.
33 God wyll not leaue him in his hande: nor suffer hym to be condemned when he
is iudged.
34 Wayte thou on God & kepe his way, and he wyll promote thee, that thou mayest
possesse the lande: when the vngodly shalbe cut of, thou shalt see it.
35 I my selfe haue seene the vngodly in great power: and florishing lyke a
greene bay tree.
36 And he vanished away, so that he could be no more seene: I sought hym, but he
coulde no where be founde.
37 Marke hym that is perfect, and beholde him that is iust: for the ende of
suche a man is peace.
38 As for wicked transgressours, they shalbe destroyed all together: and the
ende of the vngodly shalbe rooted vp at the last.
39 But saluation of the righteous commeth of God: whiche is also their strength
in time of trouble.
40 And God wyll ayde them and deliuer them, he wyl deliuer them from the
vngodly: and he wyll saue them, because they put their trust in him.

Psalm 38

1 A psalme of Dauid to reduce in remembraunce. Rebuke me not O God in thyne
anger: neither chasten me in thy heauie displeasure.
2 For thyne arrowes sticke fast in me: and thy hande presseth me sore.
3 There is no helath in my flesh through thy displeasure: neither is there any
rest in my bones by reason of my sinne.
4 For my manyfolde wickednes is gone ouer my head: and like a sore burthen is to
heauie for me to beare.
5 My woundes stinke and are corrupt: through my foolishnes.
6 I am become crooked, and am exceedingly pulled downe: I go a mourning all the
day long.
7 For my loynes are filled with heate: and there is no whole part in my body.
8 I am feeble and sore smitten: I haue rored for the very disquietnesse of my
heart.
9 Lorde thou knowest all my desire: and my gronyng is not hyd from thee.
10 My heart panteth, my strength hath fayled me: and the lyght of myne eyes is
gone from me.
11 My louers and my neygbours dyd stande on the other syde lokyng vpon my
plague: and my kinsmen stoode a farre of.
12 They also that sought after my lyfe layde snares for me: and they that went
about to do me euyll, talked of wickednesse, and imagined deceipt all the day
long.
13 As for me, as one deafe I woulde not heare: and I was as one that is dumbe
who coulde not open his mouth.
14 I became euen as a man that heareth not: and who hath no replies in his
mouth.
15 For on thee O God I haue wayted: thou shalt aunswere for me O Lorde my God.
16 For I sayde heare me lest that they shoulde triumph on me: who auaunce them
selues greatly agaynst me when my foote doth slyp.
17 Because I am disposed to a haltyng: and my sorowe is euer in my syght.
18 Because I confesse my wickednesse: and am sory for my sinne.
19 But myne enemies lyuyng without payne are mightie: & they that hate me
wrongfully are increased in number.
20 They also that rewarde euyl for good are agaynst me: because I folowe the
thyng that is good.
21 Forsake me not O God: O my Lorde be not thou farre fro me.
22 Haste thee to helpe me: O Lorde my saluation.

Psalm 39

1 To the chiefe musition Ieduthun, a psalme of Dauid. I sayde to my selfe I wyll
take heede to my wayes, that I offende not in my tongue: I wyll kepe my mouth as
it were with a brydell, whylest the vngodly is in my syght.
2 I became dumbe through scilence, I helde my peace from speakyng of good
wordes: but the more was my sorowe increased.
3 My heart was hotte within me, and whyle I was thus musyng the fire kyndled:
and at the last I spake with my tongue.
4 O God make me to knowe mine ende, and the number of my dayes: that I may be
certified howe long I haue to lyue.
5 Behold thou hast made my dayes as it were an hand breadth long, & mine age is
euen as nothing before thee: truely euery man is al together vanitie. Selah.
6 Truely man walketh in a vayne shadowe, truely he and all his do disquiet them
selues in vayne: he heapeth vp riches, & can not tel who shal vse them.
7 And nowe Lord what wayte I after? truely my hope is euen in thee.
8 Delyuer me from all my offences: and make me not a rebuke vnto the foolishe.
9 I became dumbe, and opened not my mouth: for it was thy doyng.
10 Take thy plague away from me: I am euen consumed by the meanes of thy heauy
hande.
11 Thou doest chasten man, rebukyng him for sinne: thou as a moth doest consume
his excellencie, for in very deede euery man is but vanitie. Selah.
12 Heare my prayer O God, and geue eares to my crying, holde not thy peace at my
teares: for I am a strauger with thee, and a soiourner as all my fathers were.
13 Oh spare me a litle, that I may recouer my strength: before I go hence, and
be no more seene.

Psalm 40

1 To the chiefe musition, a psalme of Dauid. I wayted patiently vpon God, and he
enclined vnto me his eare: and heard my crying.
2 He brought me also out of an horrible pyt, out of the dirtie mire: and set my
feete vpon a rocke, and directed my goynges.
3 And he hath put a newe song in my mouth: euen a thankesgeuyng vnto our Lorde.
4 Many shall see it, and feare: and shall put their trust in God.
5 Blessed is the man that hath set his hope in God: and turned not vnto the
proude, and to such as decline to lyes.
6 O God my Lord, great are thy wonderous workes which thou hast done: & none can
count in order thy benefites towarde vs, yf I woulde declare them and speake of
them, they shoulde be mo then I am able to expresse.
7 Thou wouldest haue no sacrifice or offeryng, but thou hast opened myne eares:
thou hast not required burnt offerynges and sacrifice for sinne.
8 Then sayde I, lo I am come: in the booke of thy lawe it is written of me that
I shoulde fulfyll thy wyll O my God, I am content to do it, yea thy lawe is
within the middest of my brest.
9 I haue declared thy righteousnes in a great congregatio: lo I wil not refraine
my lippes O God thou knowest it.
10 I haue not hyd thy ryghteousnesse within my heart: my talkyng hath ben of thy
trueth and of thy saluation. I haue not concealed thy louyng mercie and trueth:
from the great congregation.
11 Withdrawe not thou thy mercie from me O God: let thy louyng kyndnesse and thy
trueth alway preserue me.
12 For innumerable troubles are come about me, my sinnes haue taken such holde
vpon me that I am not able to loke vp: yea they are mo in number then the heeres
of my head, & my heart hath fayled me.
13 O God let it be thy pleasure to deliuer me: make haste O God to helpe me.
14 Let them be ashamed and confounded together that seke after my soule to
destroy it: let them be dryuen backwarde & be put to rebuke that wyshe me euyll.
15 Let them be desolate in recompence of their shame: that say vnto me, fye vpon
thee, fye vpon thee.
16 Let all those that seeke thee be glad and ioyfull in thee: and let such as
loue thy saluation, say alway God be magnified.
17 As for me I am afflicted and needye, but God careth for me: thou art my ayde
and delyuerer, O my God make no long tarying.

Psalm 41

1 To the chiefe musition, a psalme of Dauid. Blessed is he that considereth ye
poore: God wyll delyuer hym in the tyme of trouble.
2 God wyll preserue hym & kepe him aliue: he shalbe blessed vpon the earth, and
thou O God wylt not deliuer him into the wyll of his enemies.
3 God wyll comfort hym when he lyeth sicke vpon his bed: thou O God wylt turne
vpside downe all his bed in his sicknesse.
4 I sayde, O God be mercifull vnto me: heale my soule, for I haue sinned agaynst
thee.
5 Myne enemies speake euyl of me: when shall he dye, and his name perishe?
6 But yf any of them came to visite me, he spake vanitie: his heart conceaued
vngodlynesse within hym selfe, & when he came foorth a doores he vttered it.
7 All they that hated me whispered together: they imagined euyl agaynst me.
8 They sayde some great mischiefe is lyghted vpon hym: and he that lyeth sicke
on his bed, shall ryse vp no more.
9 Yea besides this, euen myne owne friende whom I trusted: which dyd also eate
of my bread, hath kicked very much agaynst me.
10 But be thou mercifull vnto me O God: rayse me vp agayne, and I shall rewarde
them.
11 By this I knowe thou fauouredst me: in that myne enemie doth not triumph
agaynst me.
12 And when I am in my best case, thou vpholdest me: and thou wylt set me before
thy face for euer.
13 Blessed be God the Lorde of Israel: worlde without ende, Amen, Amen.

Psalm 42

1 To the chiefe musition a wise instruction of the sonnes of Corach. Lyke as the
Hart brayeth for water brookes: so panteth my soule after thee O God.
2 My soule is a thirst for the Lorde, yea euen for the lyuyng Lorde: when shall
I come to appeare before the face of the Lorde?
3 My teares haue ben my meate day and nyght: whyle they dayly say vnto me where
is nowe thy God.
4 And I powred out of me my very heart, remembryng this howe that before tyme I
haue passed with a great number, bringyng the vnto the house of the Lord: with a
voyce of ioy & prayse, & with a company that kept holy day.
5 Why art thou so discouraged O my soule, & why art thou so vnquiet within me?
attende thou vpon the Lorde, for I will yet acknowledge him only to be a present
saluation.
6 My Lorde, my soule is discouraged within me: because I remember thee from the
lande of Iordane, and from the litle hyll Hermonim.
7 One deepe calleth another at the noyse of thy water pypes: all thy waues and
stormes are gone ouer me.
8 God wyll graunt his louing kindnesse on the day tyme: and in the nyght season
I wyll syng of hym, and make my prayer vnto the Lorde of my lyfe.
9 I wyll say vnto the Lorde of my strength: why hast thou forgotten me, why go I
thus heauyly through the oppression of myne enemie?
10 It was as a sworde in my bones, when myne enemies dyd cast me in the teeth:
in saying dayly vnto me, where is nowe thy Lorde?
11 Why art thou so discouraged O my soule, & why art thou so vnquiet within me?
attende thou vpon the Lorde, for I wil yet acknowledge him to be only my present
saluation, and my Lorde.

Psalm 43

1 Iudge me O Lorde, and debate my cause with an vnnaturall people: oh delyuer me
from the deceiptfull and wicked man.
2 For thou art the Lord of my strength: why hast thou reiect me, and why go I
thus heauyly through the oppression of myne enemie.
3 Sende foorth thy light and thy trueth: that they may leade me and direct me
vnto thy holy hyll, & to thy tabernacles.
4 And I wyll go vnto the aulter of the Lorde, euen vnto the Lorde of my ioy &
gladnesse: and vpon the harpe I will acknowledge thee O Lorde my Lord.
5 Why art thou so discouraged O my soule, & why art thou so vnquiet within me?
attende thou vpon the Lorde, for I wyll yet acknowledge hym to be only my
present saluation, & my Lorde.

Psalm 44

1 To the chiefe musition, a wise instruction of the sonnes of Corach. We haue
hearde with our eares O Lorde: our fathers haue tolde vs what workes thou hast
done in their daies in the olde tyme.
2 Howe thou hast driuen out the heathen with thy hande and planted them in: howe
thou hast destroyed the nations & placed them.
3 For they gat not the lande in possession through their owne sworde: neither
was it their owne arme that saued them. But thy ryght hande, and thine arme, &
the lyght of thy countenaunce: because thou hadst a fauour vnto them.
4 Thou art my kyng O Lorde: commaunde that Iacob be saued.
5 Through thee we wyll ouerthrowe our enemies: and in thy name we wyll treade
them vnder that ryse vp agaynst vs.
6 For I wyll not trust in my bowe: and it is not my sworde that can saue me.
7 But it is thou that sauest vs from our enemies: and thou puttest them to
confusion that hate vs.
8 We make our boast of God all the day long: and we wyll confesse thy name for
euer. Selah.
9 But nowe thou art farre of, and thou puttest vs to confusion: neither goest
thou foorth with our armies.
10 Thou makest vs to turne away backwarde from the enemie: so that they which
hate vs, do make vs a spoyle vnto them.
11 Thou hast delyuered vs as sheepe to be eaten: and thou hast scattered vs
among the heathen.
12 Thou hast solde thy people for naught: and thou hast taken no money for them.
13 Thou hast made vs a rebuke to our neighbours: to be laughed to scorne and had
in derision of them that are rounde about vs.
14 Thou hast made vs to be a fable among the heathen: and to be such that the
people shake their head at vs.
15 My confusion is dayly before me, and the shame of my face couereth me:
16 for to heare the voyce of the slaunderer & blasphemer, and for to see the
enemie and the auenger.
17 And though all this be come vpon vs: yet we do not forget thee, nor shewe our
selues to be false in thy couenaunt.
18 Our heart is not turned backe, neither our steppes be declined out of thy
pathes:
19 no not when thou hast smitten vs in the place of dragons, and couered vs with
the shadowe of death.
20 If we had forgotten the name of our Lorde, and holden vp our handes to any
straunge god:
21 woulde not God searche it out? for he knoweth the very secretes of the heart.
22 For thy sake also are we kylled all the day long: and are counted as sheepe
appoynted to be slayne.
23 Stirre vp O Lorde, why slepest thou? awake & be not absent from vs for euer:
24 wherfore hydest thou thy face, and forgettest our miserie and tribulation?
25 For our soule is brought lowe vnto the dust: our belly cleaueth vnto the
grounde.
26 Aryse vp thou our ayde, and redeeme vs: for thy louyng kindnesse sake.

Psalm 45

1 To the chiefe musition (on the instrument) Sosannim (to be song of the)
children of Corach. A song of loue, geuyng wise instructions. My heart is
endityng of a good matter: I wyll dedicate my workes vnto the king, my tongue is
as the penne of a redy writer.
2 Thou art fayrer then the children of men, full of grace are thy lippes:
because the Lorde hath blessed thee for euer.
3 Girde thee with thy sworde vpon thy thygh O thou most mightie: that is with
thy glorie and thy maiestie.
4 Prosper thou with thy maiestie, ryde on the worde of trueth and of affliction
for ryghteousnesse sake: and thy ryght hande shall teache thee terrible thynges.
5 Thyne arrowes are sharpe: a people the kynges enemies shall submit in heart
them selues vnto thee.
6 Thy throne O Lorde endureth for euer and euer: the scepter of ryghteousnesse
is the scepter of thy kyngdome.
7 Thou hast loued iustice and hated vngodlynesse: wherfore the Lorde euen thy
Lorde hath annoynted thee with the oyle of gladnesse more then thy felowes.
8 All thy garmentes smell of Myrre, Aloes, and Cassia, out of the iuorie
palaces: wherby they haue made thee glad.
9 Kynges daughters are amongst thy honourable women: vpon thy ryght hande
standeth the queene in a vesture of golde of Ophir.
10 Hearken O daughter and consider, encline thine eare: forget also thine owne
people and thy fathers house.
11 So shall the kyng haue pleasure in thy beautie: for he is thy Lorde, and
worship thou hym.
12 And the daughter of Tyre shall come with a present: the riche among the
people shall make their earnest prayer before thee.
13 The kynges daughter is all glorious within: her clothyng is of wrought golde.
14 She shalbe brought vnto the kyng in rayment of needle worke: the virgins that
folowe her and her company shalbe brought vnto thee.
15 With ioy and gladnesse shall they be brought: and shal enter into the kinges
palace.
16 In steade of thy fathers, thou shalt haue children: whom thou mayst make
princes in all landes.
17 I wyll remember thy name from one generation vnto another: therfore shall the
people prayse thee worlde without ende.

Psalm 46

1 To the chiefe musition, a song (to be song) of the children of Corach vpon
Alamoth. The Lorde is our refuge & strength: a helpe very easyly founde in
troubles.
2 Therfore we wyll not feare though the earth be transposed: and though the
hilles rushe into the middest of the sea.
3 Though the waters thereof rage and swell: and though the mountaynes shake at
the surges of the same. Selah.
4 Yet the fludde by his ryuers shall make glad the citie of God: the holy place
of the tabernacles of the most hyghest.
5 God is in the myddest of her, therfore she can not be remoued: the Lorde wyll
helpe her, and that ryght early.
6 The heathen make much a do, and the kyngdomes are moued: but God shewed his
voyce, and the earth melted away.
7 The God of hoastes is with vs: the Lorde of Iacob is our refuge. Selah.
8 O come hither and beholde the workes of God: what distructions he hath brought
vpon the earth.
9 He maketh warres to ceasse in all the worlde: he breaketh the bowe, & knappeth
the speare in sunder, and burneth the charettes in the fire.
10 Be styll then, and knowe that I am the Lorde: I wyll be exalted among the
heathen, I wyll be exalted in the earth.
11 The God of hoastes is with vs: the Lorde of Iacob is our refuge. Selah.

Psalm 47

1 To the chiefe musition, a psalme (to be song) of the children of Corach. Clap
your handes all ye people: make a noise vnto the Lorde with a ioyfull voyce.
2 For God is hygh and terrible: he is the great king vpon all the earth.
3 He wyll subdue the people vnder vs: and the nations vnder our feete.
4 He hath chosen for vs our inheritaunce: the glorie of Iacob who he loued.
Selah.
5 The Lorde ascendeth in a triumph: and God with the sounde of a trumpet.
6 Syng psalmes to the Lorde, syng psalmes: syng psalmes to our kyng, sing
psalmes.
7 For the Lorde is kyng of all the earth: syng psalmes all you that haue skyll.
8 God raigneth ouer the heathen: God sitteth vpon his holy throne.
9 The princes of the people are assembled together for to be the people of the
God of Abraham: for the shieldes of the earth be Gods, who is hyghly exalted.

Psalm 48

1 A song, the psalme of the children of Corach. Great is God, and hyghly to be
praysed: in the citie of our Lorde, his holy hyll.
2 The hyll of Sion is fayre in situation, and the ioy of the whole earth: vpon
the north syde lyeth the citie of the great king.
3 God is well knowen in her palaces: as a most sure refuge.
4 For lo kinges did assemble, and passe by together:
5 they them selues sawe it, lykewyse they marueyled, they were astonyed with
feare, and sodenly in haste they were gone away.
6 A feare came there vpon them and sorowe: as vpon a woman in her childe
trauayle.
7 Thou didst breake the shippes of the sea: through the east wynde.
8 Lyke as we haue hearde, so haue we seene in the citie of God of hoastes: in
the citie of our Lorde, God vpholdeth the same for euer. Selah.
9 O Lorde we haue wayted: for thy louyng kindnesse in the myddest of thy temple.
10 O Lorde, accordyng to thy name, so is thy prayse vnto the worldes ende: thy
ryght hande is full of iustice.
11 Mount Sion shall reioyce, and the daughters of Iuda shalbe glad: because of
thy iudgementes.
12 Compasse about Sion, and go rounde about her: and tell the towres therof.
13 Marke well her bulwarkes, beholde her hygh palaces: that ye may tell it to
your posteritie.
14 For this God is our God for euer and euer: he wyll be our guide vnto death.

Psalm 49

1 To the chiefe musition, a psalme of the children of Corach. Heare this all ye
people: geue eare all ye that dwell in the worlde.
2 As well lowe as high: riche and poore, one with another.
3 My mouth shall vtter wisdome: the cogitations of myne heart wyll bryng foorth
knowledge.
4 I wyll encline myne eare to a parable: I wyll open my darke sentence vpon a
harpe.
5 Wherfore shoulde I feare in euyll dayes? the wickednesse of my heeles then
would compasse me round about.
6 There be some that put their trust in their goodes: and boast them selues in
the multitude of their riches.
7 But no man at all can redeeme his brother: nor geue a raunsome vnto God for
hym.
8 For the redemption of their soule is very costly, and must be let alone for
euer:
9 yea though he lyue long and see not the graue.
10 For he seeth that wyse men dye: and that the foole and ignoraunt perishe
together, and leaue their riches for other.
11 And yet they thynke that their houses shall continue for euer, and that their
dwellyng places shall endure from one generation to another: therfore they call
landes after their owne names.
12 Neuerthelesse, man can not abyde in such honour: he is but lyke vnto bruite
beastes that perishe.
13 This their way is their foolishnesse: yet their posteritie prayse their
saying. Selah.
14 They shalbe put into a graue dead as a sheepe, death shall feede on them: but
the ryghteous shall haue dominion of them in the mornyng, their beautie shall
consume away, hell shall receaue them from their house.
15 But God wyll delyuer my soule from the place of hell: for he wyll receaue me.
Selah.
16 Be not thou afrayde though one be made riche: or yf the glorie of his house
be encreased.
17 For he shall cary nothyng away with hym when he dyeth: neither shall his
pompe folowe after hym.
18 For whyle he lyued he counted him selfe an happy man: and so long as thou
doest well vnto thy selfe, men wyll speake good of thee.
19 But he shal folowe the generations of his fathers: and shall neuer see lyght.
20 A man is in an honourable state, but he wyll not vnderstande it: he is lyke
herein vnto bruite beastes that perishe.

Psalm 50

1 A psalme of Asaph. The most mightie Lorde God hath spoken: and called the
earth from the rysyng vp of the sunne, vnto the goyng downe therof.
2 Out of Sion: hath the Lorde appeared in perfect beautie.
3 Our Lorde commeth, and he wyll not kepe scilence: there goeth before hym a
consumyng fire, and a mightie tempest is sturred rounde about hym.
4 He calleth from aboue the heauen and the earth: that he may iudge his people.
5 Gather my saintes together vnto me: those that haue made a couenaunt with me
with sacrifice.
6 And the heauens shall declare his ryghteousnesse: for God is iudge hym selfe.
Selah.
7 Heare O my people, and I wil speake: I my selfe wyll testifie vnto thee O
Israel, I am the Lorde, euen thy Lorde.
8 I wyll not reproue thee because of thy sacrifices, or for thy burnt
offerynges: for that they be not alway before me.
9 I wyll take no bullocke out of thy house: nor goates out of thy foldes.
10 For all the beastes of the forest are myne: and so are the cattel vpon a
thousande hylles.
11 I knowe all the foules vpon the mountaynes: and the wylde beastes of the
fielde are at my commaundement.
12 If I be hungry, I wyll not tell thee: for the whole worlde is myne, and all
that is therin.
13 Thinkest thou that I will eate bulles fleshe: and drynke the blood of goates?
14 Offer vnto God prayse: and pay thy vowes vnto the most hyghest.
15 And call vpon me in the tyme of trouble: I wyll heare thee, and thou shalt
glorifie me.
16 But the Lorde sayd vnto the vngodly: why doest thou preache my lawes, and
takest my couenaunt in thy mouth?
17 Seyng that thou hatest discipline: and hast cast my wordes behynde thee.
18 When thou sawest a thiefe, thou dydst consent vnto hym: and thou hast ben
partaker with the adulterers.
19 Thou hast let thy mouth speake wickednesse: and with thy tongue thou hast set
foorth deceipt.
20 Thou sattest and spakedst agaynst thy brother: yea and hast slaundered thine
owne mothers sonne.
21 These thynges hast thou done and I helde my tongue, thou thoughtest that I am
euen such a one as thou thy selfe art: but I wyll reproue thee, and I wyll set
foorth in order before thine eyes all that thou hast done.
22 Consider this I pray you, ye that forget the Lorde: lest I plucke you away,
and there be none to delyuer you.
23 Who so offereth vnto me thankes and prayse, he honoureth me: and to hym that
ordereth his conuersation ryght, I wyll shewe the saluation of God.

Psalm 51

1 To the chiefe musition, a psalme of Dauid when the prophete Nathan came vnto
hym after he was gone in to Bethsabe. Haue mercie on me O Lorde accordyng to thy
louyng kindnesse: accordyng vnto the multitudes of thy mercies wype out my
wickednesse.
2 Washe me throughly from myne iniquitie: and clense me from my sinne.
3 For I do acknowledge my wickednesse: and my sinne is euer before me.
4 Agaynst thee, only agaynst thee I haue sinned and done this euyll in thy
sight: that thou mightest be iustified in thy saying, and founde pure when thou
art iudged.
5 Beholde, I was ingendred in iniquitie: and in sinne my mother conceaued me.
6 Neuerthelesse, lo thou requirest trueth in the inwarde partes of me: &
therfore thou wylt make me learne wisdome in the secrete part of myne heart.
7 Purge thou me with hyssop and I shalbe cleane: washe thou me, and I shalbe
whyter then snowe.
8 Make thou me to heare some ioy and gladnesse: let the bones reioyce which thou
hast broken.
9 Turne thy face from my sinnes: and wype out all my misdeedes.
10 Make thou vnto me a cleane heart O Lorde: and renue thou a ryght spirite
within me.
11 Cast me not away from thy presence: and take not thy holy spirite from me.
12 Geue me agayne the comfort of thy saluation: and confirme me with a free
wyllyng spirite.
13 Then wyll I teache thy wayes vnto the wicked: and sinners shalbe conuerted
vnto thee.
14 Deliuer me from blood O Lorde, the Lorde of my saluation: and my tongue shall
sing with a ioyfull noyse of thy iustice.
15 O Lorde open thou my lippes: and my mouth shall set foorth thy prayse.
16 For thou desirest no sacrifice, els I would geue it thee: thou delightest not
in a burnt offering.
17 Sacrifices for God is a mortified spirite: O Lorde thou wylt not despise a
mortified and an humble heart.
18 Be thou beneficiall vnto Sion, according to thy gracious good wyll: buylde
thou the walles of Hierusalem.
19 Then shalt thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteousnes, with burnt
offeringes and oblations: then wyll they offer young bullockes vpon thyne
aulter.

Psalm 52

1 To the chiefe musition, a wyse instruction of Dauid, when Doeg the Edomite
came to Saul and tolde him, saying: Dauid is come to the house of Achimelek. Why
boastest thy self thou tiraunt of mischiefe? the goodnes of God dayly endureth.
2 Thy tongue imagineth wickednes: and deceaueth like a sharpe raser.
3 Thou hast loued vngratiousnes more then goodnes: and to talke of falshood more
then of righteousnes. Selah.
4 Thou hast loued to speake all wordes that may do hurt: O thou deceiptfull
tongue.
5 Therfore the Lord wyll destroy thee for euer: he wyll take thee and plucke
thee out of thy dwelling, and roote thee out of the lande of the liuing. Selah.
6 The righteous also shall see this: and they wyll be afraide and laugh hym to
scorne.
7 Saying lo this is the man that put not the Lorde to be his strength: but
trusted vnto the multitude of his riches, and strengthed him selfe in his
wickednesse.
8 As for me I am lyke a greene oliue tree in the house of the Lorde: my trust is
in the tender mercy of the Lorde for euer and euer.
9 I will alway confesse it vnto thee, for that thou hast done it: and I wyll
hope in thy name, for it is good in the sight of thy saintes.

Psalm 53

1 To the chiefe musition vpon Mahalah, a wise instruction of Dauid. The foole
hath sayde in his heart there is no God: they haue corrupted them selues, & haue
made their wickednes abhominable, he is not that doeth good.
2 The Lorde looked downe from heauen vpon the chyldren of men: to see if there
were any that did vnderstand and seeke after the Lorde.
3 But they dyd all go out of the way, they dyd altogether become abhomible:
there was also none that would do good, no not one.
4 Wyll not the workers of iniquitie vnderstande, eating vp my people as if they
eated bread: that they do not call vpon God?
5 They shalbe greatly there afraide where no cause of feare is: for the Lord
wyll breake the bones of hym that besiegeth thee, thou wylt put them to shame,
because the Lorde hath despised them.
6 Who is he that wyll geue saluation vnto Israel out of Sion? when the Lord wyll
reduce his people out of captiuitie, Iacob wyll reioyce, and Israel wyll be
glad.

Psalm 54

1 To the chiefe musition vpon Neginoth, a wyse instruction of Dauid, when the
Ziphims came and sayd vnto Saul, hath not Dauid hyd him selfe amongst vs? Saue
me O Lorde for thy name sake: iudge me accordyng to thy mightie power.
2 Heare my prayer O Lord: and hearken vnto the wordes of my mouth.
3 For straungers are rysen vp against me: and tirauntes whiche haue not the
Lorde before their eyes, seeke after my soule. Selah.
4 Behold, God is an ayde vnto me: the Lorde is with them that vpholde my soule.
5 He wyll rewarde euyll vnto mine enemies: destroy thou them according to thy
trueth.
6 I wyll sacrifice vnto thee with a true wyllyng heart: I wyll confesse thy name
O God, because it is good.
7 For he hath deliuered me out of all my trouble: and mine eye hath seene
auengaunce vpon mine enemies.

Psalm 55

1 To the chiefe musition vpon Neginoth, a wise instruction of Dauid. O Lorde
geue eare vnto my prayer: and hide not thy selfe from my petition.
2 Take heede vnto me, and heare me: I can not choose but mourne in my prayer,
and make a noyse.
3 Deliuer me from the voyce of the enemie, and from the present affliction of
the wicked: for they are minded to do me mischiefe, and are set malitiously
against me.
4 My heart trembleth within me: and the feare of death is fallen vpon me.
5 Fearefulnes and trembling are come vpon me: and an horrible dread hath
ouerwhelmed me.
6 And I sayde, O that I had wynges like a doue: for then woulde I flee away, and
be at rest.
7 Lo, then woulde I fleeing get me away farre of: and remayne in the
wyldernesse. Selah.
8 Then woulde I make hast to escape: from the stormie wynde, and from the
tempest.
9 Destroy their tongues O Lorde, and deuide them: for I haue seene oppression
and strife in the citie.
10 They do compasse it day and night within the walles: mischiefe also and
labour, are in the midst of it.
11 Malice is in the midst of it: disceipt and guyle go not out of her streates.
12 Truely he was not mine enemie that hath done me this dishonour, for then I
coulde haue borne it: neither was he one that seemed to hate me that dyd
magnifie hym selfe against me, for then I woulde haue hyd my selfe from him.
13 But it was euen thou whom I esteemed as my selfe: my guyde, and myne owne
familier companion.
14 We delighted greatly to conferre our secretes together: we walked deuoutly in
the house of God felowe lyke.
15 Let death sodainly come vpon them, let them go downe quicke into hell: for
wickednes is in their dwellinges and among them.
16 As for me I wyll crye vnto the Lord: and God wyll saue me.
17 In the euening and morning, and at noone day wyll I pray, and that most
instantly: and he wyll heare my voyce.
18 He hath redeemed my soule through peace from the battayle that was against
me: for there were many with me.
19 The Lorde who sitteth a ruler from the beginning, wyll heare me and afflict
them, Selah: forsomuche as there is no chaunge in them, and for that they do not
feare God.
20 He layde his handes vpon such as be at peace with him: and he brake his
couenaunt.
21 The wordes of his mouth were softer then butter, yet warre was in his heart:
his wordes were smother then oyle, and yet be they very swordes.
22 O cast thy burthen vpon God, and he wyll vpholde thee: he wyll not suffer at
any time the righteous to moue.
23 And as for them: thou O Lorde wylt hurle headlong into the pit of
destruction. The bloodthirstie and deceiptfull men shal not liue out halfe their
dayes: neuerthelesse I wyll put my full trust in thee.

Psalm 56

1 To the chiefe musition as concerning the dumbe doue in a farre countrey, the
golden psalme of Dauid, when the Philistines toke him in Geth. Be mercifull vnto
me O Lorde: for man goeth about to deuour me, he dayly fyghtyng, oppresseth me.
2 Myne enemies are dayly in hande to swalowe me vp: for they be many that fight
against me, O thou most highest.
3 Neuerthelesse at all times as I am afraide: I put my whole trust in thee.
4 In the Lord I wyll prayse his word: in the Lorde I haue put my trust, and I
wyll not feare what flesh can do vnto me.
5 My wordes dayly put me to sorow: all that they do imagine, is to do me euill.
6 They flocke together, they kepe them selues close: they marke my steppes, that
they may lye in wayte for my soule.
7 Shall they escape for their wickednes? O Lorde in thy displeasure cast downe
headlong this people.
8 Thou hast numbred my flittinges, thou hast put my teares in thy bottell: are
not these thinges noted in thy booke?
9 Whensoeuer I call vpon thee, then shall myne enemies be put to flight: this I
know, for the Lorde is on my side.
10 In the Lord I wyll prayse the word: In God I wyll prayse the worde.
11 In the Lorde I put my trust: I wyll not be afraide what man can do vnto me.
12 O Lorde, thy vowes be vpon me: vnto thee wyll I geue thankes & praise.
13 For thou hast deliuered my soule from death, and my feete from falling: that
I may walke before the Lorde in the light of the liuing.

Psalm 57

1 To the chiefe musition (to be song lyke vnto the song beginning) destroy not,
a golden psalme of Dauid, when he fled from Saul into the caue. Be mercifull
vnto me O Lorde, be mercifull vnto me: for my soule trusteth in thee, and vnder
the shadowe of thy wynges wyll I trust, vntyll this tiranny be ouerpast.
2 I wyll call vnto the most high Lorde: euen vnto the Lord that wil perfourme
the cause which I haue in hande.
3 He wyll sende from heauen, and saue me from the reproofe of him that woulde
deuour me vp, Selah: the Lorde wyll sende foorth his mercie and trueth.
4 My soule is among Lions, and I lye among those that are set on fire: among the
children of men whose teeth are speares and arrowes, and their tongue a sharpe
sword.
5 Exalt thy selfe O God aboue the heauen: thy glory is aboue all the earth.
6 They haue prepared a net for my feete, that some man might presse downe my
soule: they haue digged a pit before me, and are fallen into the midst of it
them selues. Selah.
7 My heart is redy O Lorde, my heart is redy: I wyll sing, and prayse thee in
singing of psalmes.
8 Bestirre thee O my glory, bestirre thee O Lute and Harpe: I my selfe wil
bestirre me right early in the morning.
9 I wyll prayse thee O Lorde among the people: and I wyll sing psalmes vnto thee
among the nations.
10 For the greatnes of thy mercie reacheth vnto the heauens: and thy trueth vnto
the cloudes.
11 Exalt thy selfe O Lord aboue the heauens: let thy glory be aboue al the
earth.

Psalm 58

1 To the chiefe musition, destroy not, a golden psalme of Dauid. O ye that
consult together, pronounce ye truely the thing that is iust? O ye sonnes of men
iudge you according to equitie?
2 Nay, rather ye imagine mischiefe in your heart: your handes waygh as in a
ballaunce wickednes vpon the earth.
3 The vngodly are straungers euen from their mothers wombe: assoone as they be
borne, they go astray and speake a lye.
4 They haue poyson within them lyke to the poyson of a serpent: they be lyke the
deafe adder that stoppeth her eares,
5 and wyll not heare the voyce of charmers, though he be neuer so skilfull in
charming.
6 Breake their teeth O Lorde in their mouthes: smite a sunder the chawe bones of
Lions O God.
7 Let them be dissolued as into water, let them come to naught of them selues:
and when they shoote their arrowes, let them be as broken.
8 Let them creepe away lyke a snayle that foorthwith consumeth to naught: or
lyke the vntimely fruite of a woman, let them not see the sunne.
9 As a greene thorne kindled with fyre, goeth out before your pottes be made
whot: euen so let a furious rage bring him to naught.
10 The righteous wyll reioyce when he seeth the vengeaunce: he wyll washe his
foote steppes in the blood of the vngodly.
11 And euery man shall say, veryly there is a rewarde for the righteous:
doubtlesse there is a God that iudgeth in the earth.

Psalm 59

1 To the chiefe musition, destroy not, a golden psalme of Dauid, when Saul sent,
and they did watch the house to kill him. Deliuer me from myne enemies O Lorde:
defende me fro them that rise vp against me.
2 Deliuer me from the workers of iniquitie: and saue me from the blood thirstie
men.
3 For lo, they lye in wayte for my soule: men of power are gathered together
against me who haue committed no wickednes nor fault O God.
4 When no fault is done, they runne and set them selues in order: arise to meete
me and beholde.
5 And thou O God Lorde of hoastes, Lorde of Israel: awake to visite all Heathen,
and be not mercifull vnto all them that offend of malice. Selah.
6 They go to and from at euening: they barke lyke a dogge, and runne about
through the citie.
7 Behold they speake with their mouth, swordes are in their lippes: for say they
who doth heare vs?
8 But thou O God wylt haue them in derision: thou wylt laugh all Heathen to
scorne.
9 I wyl reserue his strength for thee: for thou O Lorde art my refuge.
10 My mercifull Lord wyll preuent me: the Lord will let me see my desire vpon
mine enemies.
11 Slay them not, lest my people forget it: but in thy stoutnes scatter them
like vagaboundes, and put them downe O God our defence.
12 The wordes of their lippes be the sinne of their mouth: O let them be taken
in their pryde, for they speake nothing but curses and lies.
13 Consume them in thy wrath, consume them that nothing of them remayne: and let
them knowe that it is the Lord that ruleth in Iacob, & vnto the endes of the
worlde. Selah.
14 And let them gad vp and downe at euening: let them barke lyke a dogge, and go
about the citie.
15 Let them runne here and there for meate: and go to bed if they be not
satisfied.
16 As for me I wyll sing of thy power, and wyll prayse thy louing kindnes
betimes in the morning: for thou hast ben my defence and refuge in the day of my
trouble.
17 Unto thee O my strength will I sing psalmes: for thou O Lorde art my refuge,
and my mercyfull Lorde.

Psalm 60

1 To the chiefe musition vpon Susan Eduth, a golden psalme of Dauid, for to
teache: (made) when he fought against Mesopotamia and Syria of Stobah, and when
Ioab turned backe and slue twelue thousande Edomites in the salt valley.) O
Lorde thou hast cast vs out, thou hast dispearsed vs, thou art displeased: O
turne thee vnto vs agayne.
2 Thou hast made the land to tremble, thou hast cleft it asunder: heale the
breaches therof, for it is redy to fall downe.
3 Thou hast made thy people see heauie thinges: thou hast geuen vs wyne to
drinke, that maketh vs tremble.
4 But to suche as feare thee: thou hast geuen a banner to be lyfted vp on high
for the trueth sake. Selah.
5 Therfore that thy beloued may be deliuered: helpe me with thy right hand, and
heare me.
6 The Lorde hath spoken in his holynes (whereof I wyll reioyce) this: I wyll
deuide Sichem, and measure the valley of Sucoth.
7 Gilead shalbe myne, and Manasses shalbe myne: Ephraim also shalbe the strength
of my head, and Iuda my law geuer.
8 Moab shalbe my washpot: ouer Edom I wyll cast my shoe, Philistea be thou glad
of me.
9 Who wyll leade me into the stong citie? who wyll bring me into Edom?
10 Hast not thou remoued vs from thence O Lorde? and wylt not thou O Lorde go
out with our hoastes?
11 Geue vs ayde against trouble: for the sauing helpe of man is but vayne.
12 Thorowe the Lorde we wyll do valiaunt actes: for he him selfe wyll treade
downe our enemies.

Psalm 61

1 To the chiefe musition vpon Neginoth of Dauid. Heare my crying O Lorde: geue
eare vnto my prayer.
2 From the endes of the earth I wyll call vnto thee when my heart is in
heauines: oh set me vp on the rocke that is higher then I.
3 For thou hast ben my hope: and a strong towre for me against the face of the
enemie.
4 I wyll dwell in thy tabernacle for euer: my trust shalbe vnder the couering of
thy wynges. Selah.
5 For thou O Lorde hast hearde my vowes: and hast geuen an heritage vnto those
that feare thy name.
6 Thou wilt adde dayes vnto the kings dayes: and his yeres shalbe a generation
and a generation.
7 He shall dwell before the Lorde for euer: O appoynt thy louing mercy and
faithfulnes, that thei may preserue him.
8 So wyll I sing psalmes vnto thy name: that I may day by day perfourme my
vowes.

Psalm 62

1 To the chiefe musition vpon Iudethun, a psalme of Dauid. My soule truly only
stayeth vpon the Lorde: for of him commeth my saluation.
2 He onlye is my rocke and my sauing helpe: he is my refuge, so that I can not
be remoued greatly.
3 Howe long wyll ye imagine mischiefe against euery man? ye shalbe slayne all
the sort of you: ye shalbe as a tottering wall, and like a broken hedge.
4 They deuise only howe to thrust him from his promotion: they delight in a lye,
they blesse with their mouth, and curse with their heart. Selah.
5 Neuerthelesse O my soule, stay thou only vpon the Lorde: for my confidence is
in him.
6 He only is my rocke and my sauing helpe: he is my refuge, so that I can not be
remoued.
7 In the Lorde is my health and my glory: my trust is in the Lorde the fortresse
of my force.
8 O ye people, put your trust in hym alway: powre out your heartes before him,
for the Lorde is our hope. Selah.
9 As for the chyldren of men, they be onlye but vanitie, the chyldren of lordes
be but a lye: vpon the wayghtes they be altogether lighter then vanitie in
selfe.
10 O trust not in wrong dealing and spoyling: geue not your selues vnto vanitie,
if riches encrease, set not your heart vpon them.
11 The Lord spake it once, but I haue hearde it twise, that power and mercy
belongeth to thee O Lorde God:
12 for thou rewardest euery man according to his worke.

Psalm 63

1 A psalme of Dauid when he was in the wyldernesse of Iuda. O Lorde thou art my
Lorde: early in the morning I do seeke thee. My soule thirsteth for thee: my
fleshe also longeth after thee in a baren and drye lande where no water is.
2 To see thee euen so as I haue seene thee in the sanctuary: that I might
beholde thy power and glory.
3 For thy louing kindnes is better then life itselfe: my lippes shall prayse
thee.
4 As long as I liue I wyll blesse thee on this maner: and in thy name I wyll
lyft vp my handes.
5 My soule is satisfied euen as it were with mary and fatnes: and my mouth
prayseth thee with ioyfull lippes.
6 Haue I not remembred thee in my bed: and thought vpon thee when I was waking?
7 Because thou hast ben my helper: therfore vnder the shadowe of thy wynges do I
reioyce.
8 My soule cleaueth fast vnto thee: thy right hande hath vpholden me.
9 And they that seeke my soule to oppresse it: shall go vnder the earth.
10 Euery one of them shalbe killed with the edge of a sworde: and they shalbe a
portion for Foxes.
11 But the king shal reioyce in the Lord, al they shal glory that sweare by him:
for the mouth of all them that speake a lye, shalbe stopped.

Psalm 64

1 To the chiefe musition, a psalme of Dauid. O Lorde heare my voyce in my
prayer: preserue my life from feare of the enemie.
2 Hyde me from the secrete counsayles of the malitious: from the conspiracie of
the workers of iniquitie.
3 Who haue whet their tongue lyke a sword: who haue drawne their arrow, euen a
bitter worde.
4 That they may priuily shoote at hym which is perfect: they do sodenly shoote
at hym and feare not.
5 They courage them selues in mischiefe: and comune among them selues how they
may lay snares, and say, who shall see them?
6 They searche out howe to do wrong, they put in practise fully that they haue
diligently searched out: yea euen the secretes and bottome of euery one of their
heartes.
7 But the Lorde wyll sodenly shoote at them with a swyft arrowe: their plagues
shalbe apparaunt.
8 Yea they shall cause their owne tongues to be a meanes for to destroy the
selues: insomuch that who so seeth them, shal desire to flee away from them
9 And all men that see it shall say, this hath God done: for they shall well
perceaue that it is his worke.
10 The righteous wyll reioyce in God, and put his trust in hym: and all they
that be vpright hearted wylbe glad.

Psalm 65

1 To the chiefe musition, the psalme of Dauid, a song. O Lorde thou wylt be
greatly praysed in Sion: and vnto thee shal vowes be perfourmed
2 Thou that hearest a prayer: vnto thee shall all fleshe come.
3 My misdeedes haue preuayled against me: oh be thou mercifull vnto our wicked
transgressions.
4 Blessed is the man whom thou choosest and receauest vnto thee: he shall dwell
in thy court, and we shalbe satisfied with the goodnes of thy house, euen of thy
holy temple.
5 Thou wylt heare vs, doyng wonderfull thinges in righteousnes O Lorde of our
saluation: thou art the hope of all endes of the earth, and of them that dwell
farre of at the sea coast.
6 Thou art he who in his strength setleth fast the mountaines: and is gyrded
about with power.
7 Who stilleth the raging of the sea, and the noyse of his waues: and the vprore
of the people.
8 They also that dwel in the vtmost partes of the earth be afrayde at thy
signes: thou makest them reioyce at the going foorth of the morning and euenyng.
9 Thou visitest the earth, and thou makest it ouerflowne, thou enrichest it
greatly: the riuer of God is full of water, thou preparest their corne, for so
thou ordaynest it.
10 Thou waterest her forowes, thou breakest downe her hillockes: thou makest it
soft with the drops of rayne, and blessest the increase of it.
11 Thou crownest the yere with thy goodnes: and thy cloudes drop fatnes.
12 They drop vpon the dwellinges of the wyldernesse: and hilles be compassed
with ioy.
13 The downes be couered with sheepe: the valleys stande thicke with corne so
that they showte for ioy and also sing.

Psalm 66

1 To the chiefe musition, a song (whiche is) a psalme. Declare you ioyfull vnto
the Lorde all ye of the earth:
2 sing psalmes vnto the glory of his name, geue glory to his maiestie.
3 Say vnto the Lorde, oh howe wonderfull art thou in thy workes: thorow the
greatnes of thy power thyne enemies shalbe founde liers vnto thee.
4 For all they of the worlde shall worship thee, and sing psalmes vnto thee:
they shall sing psalmes vnto thy holy name. Selah.
5 Come hither and beholde the workes of the Lorde: howe wonderfull he is in his
doing towarde the chyldren of men.
6 He turneth the sea into drye lande, so that they went thorowe the water on
foote: there dyd we reioyce in him.
7 He ruleth with his power for euer, his eyes beholdeth the gentiles: such as be
rebels shal not come to promotion. Selah.
8 O ye people blesse your Lorde: and make the voyce of his praise to be heard.
9 Who preserueth our soule in life: and suffereth not our feete to slip.
10 For thou O Lord hast proued vs: thou hast tryed vs, like as siluer is tryed.
11 Thou broughtest vs into the snare: and layde trouble vpon our loynes.
12 Thou sufferedst men to ride ouer our heades: we went through fire and water,
and yet thou broughtest vs out into a pleasaunt place.
13 I wyll go into thy house with burnt offeringes: and I wyll pay thee my vowes
14 whiche I promised with my lippes, and spake with my mouth when I was in
trouble.
15 I wyll offer vnto thee fat burnt sacrifices, with the incense of rammes: I
will offer bullockes and goates. Selah.
16 O come hither, & hearken: and I wil tell all you that feare the Lorde, what
he hath done for my soule.
17 I called vnto hym with my mouth: and I exalted him with my tongue.
18 If I had inclined vnto wickednes in my heart, the Lorde woulde not haue
hearde me:
19 but the Lorde hath hearde me, & considered the voyce of my prayer.
20 Blessed be the Lorde which hath not reiected my prayer: nor turned his mercye
from me.

Psalm 67

1 To the chiefe musition vpon Neginoth, a psalme (whiche is) a song. The Lord be
mercyfull vnto vs and blesse vs: and cause the light of his coutenaunce to shine
vpon vs. Selah.
2 That thy way may be knowen vpon the earth: thy saluation among all nations.
3 Then wyll the people prayse thee O Lorde: yea all the people wyll prayse thee.
4 The Gentiles will reioyce & triumph: for thou wylt iudge the people, and
gouerne the gentiles vpon the earth, according to equitie. Selah.
5 The people will prayse thee O Lord: all the people wyll prayse thee.
6 Then shall the earth bryng foorth her increase: and the Lorde our Lord will
geue vs his blessing.
7 The Lorde will blesse vs: and all the endes of the worlde shall feare him.

Psalm 68

1 To the chiefe musition, a psalme of Dauid, which is a song. In case the Lorde
woulde aryse, his enemies woulde be scattered: and they that hate hym woulde
flee from his face.
2 Lyke as the smoke vanisheth, so wylt thou cause them to vanishe away: and lyke
as water melteth at the fire, so wyll the vngodly perishe at the presence of the
Lorde.
3 But the ryghteous must be glad, and reioyce before the Lorde: they shall not
stande styll for myrth.
4 Syng vnto the Lorde, syng psalmes vnto his name: magnifie hym that rideth vpon
the heauens as it were vpon an horse in his name euerlastyng, and reioyce before
his face.
5 He is a father of the fatherlesse, and the iudge of widdowes: he is the Lord
in his holy habitation.
6 He is the Lord that maketh those that dwell alone to haue a familie: and
bryngeth prisoners out of the stockes.
7 But rebelles did inhabite a dry ground O Lorde, when thou wentest foorth
before the people: when thou wentest through the wyldernesse. Selah.
8 The earth shoke, and the heauens dropped at the presence of the Lorde: euen
Sinai it selfe shoke at the presence of the Lorde, Lorde of Israel.
9 Thou O Lorde dydst cause rayne to fall at thy gratious pleasure: and when
thine inheritaunce was weery, thou dydst hearten it.
10 Thy flocke dwelleth there: for thou O Lorde doest of thy goodnesse prepare
for the poore.
11 The Lorde gaue the worde: great was the company of the preachers.
12 Kynges with their armies dyd flee: they dyd flee, and the ornament of an
house deuided the spoyle.
13 Though ye haue lyen among the pottes: yet shall ye be as the wynges of a doue
that is couered with siluer, and hath her fethers as yelowe as golde.
14 When the almightie scattered kynges in it: it was as whyte as snowe in
Salmon.
15 As the hyll of Basan, so is Gods hill: euen an hygh hyll, as the hyll of
Basan.
16 Why skyp you so the high hylles? this is the Lordes hyll in the which it
pleaseth hym to dwell, yea God wyll abyde in it for euer.
17 The charettes of the Lorde are twentie thousande, euen thousandes of angels:
and the Lorde is among them in holy Sinai.
18 Thou wenst vp on high, thou hast led captiuitie captiue, thou hast receaued
gyftes for men: yea euen for those that be disobedient, that God the Lorde myght
dwell among them,
19 Blessed be the Lorde who day by day powreth his benefites vpon vs: and is God
of our saluation. Selah.
20 The Lorde is our Lorde for to saue vs: and all maner of wayes for death
pertayneth to God the Lorde.
21 God wyll wounde the head of his enemies: and the heary scalpe of hym who
goeth on styll in his wickednesse.
22 The Lorde hath sayde, I wyll bryng my people agayne out from Basan: I wyll
bryng them agayne out from the deepe of the sea.
23 That thy footes and the tongue of thy dogges: may be made redde in the blood
of the enemies by his meanes.
24 They do well see O Lorde thy goynges: thy goynges in the sanctuarie my Lorde
and kyng.
25 The singers go before, the minstrelles folowe after: in the myddest are the
damselles playing with the timbrelles.
26 In the congregations they do blesse the Lorde: the God of the fountayne of
Israel.
27 There is litle Beniamin their ruler, & the princes of Iehuda their counsell:
the princes of Zabulon and the princes of Nepthali.
28 Thy Lord hath ordeyned thy strength: establishe the thing O Lorde that thou
hast wrought in vs.
29 For thy temple sake at Hierusalem: kynges wyll bryng presentes vnto thee.
30 Put to rebuke the companie of speare men, a multitude of bulles amongest the
people lyke vnto calues: vntyll that they brought vnder foote come with peeces
of siluer for tribute, scatter the people that delyght in warre.
31 Then shal princes come out of Egypt: Ethiopia in all haste shall stretch out
her handes vnto the Lorde.
32 Sing vnto the Lord O ye kingdomes of the earth: O syng psalmes vnto the
Lorde. Selah.
33 Who rydeth vpon the most hyghest eternall heauens: lo he sendeth out a
mightie voyce in his voyce.
34 Acknowledge the Lorde to be mightie: his maiestie is ouer Israel, & might in
the cloudes.
35 O Lorde thou art terrible out of thy holy places: the God of Israel geueth
myght and strength vnto his people, Blessed be the Lorde.

Psalm 69

1 To the chiefe musition vpon Sosanim (a psalme) of Dauid. Saue me O Lorde: for
waters haue entred in vnto my soule.
2 I am ouer the head in deepe myre where I feele no grounde: I plunge in deepe
waters where the streame ouerwhelmeth me.
3 I am weery of crying, my throte is drye: my syght fayleth me through the long
attendaunce that I haue geuen vpon my Lorde.
4 They that hate me without a cause are mo then the heeres of my head: they that
are myne enemies and woulde destroy me giltlesse are mightie, I payde them the
thynges that I neuer toke.
5 God thou knowest my folly: and my faultes are not hyd from thee.
6 Let not them that trust in thee O Lorde God of hoastes, be for my cause
ashamed: let not those that seke thee, be through me confounded O Lorde of
Israel.
7 For thy sake haue I suffered reprofe, shame hath couered my face:
8 I am become a straunger vnto my brethren, euen an aliaunt vnto my mothers
children.
9 For the zeale of thine house hath euen eaten me: and the rebukes of them that
rebuked thee, are fallen vpon me.
10 And I wept chastenyng my soule with fastyng: and that was turned to my
reproofe.
11 Also I put on sackcloth for my garment: and they iested at me.
12 They that sit in the gate speake agaynst me: and they that drynke strong
drynke make songes vpon me.
13 But I make my prayer vnto thee O God in an acceptable tyme: heare me O Lord
in the multitude of thy mercie, according to the trueth of thy saluation.
14 Take me out of the myre, that I sincke not: oh let me be delyuered from them
that hate me, & out of the deepe waters.
15 Let not the water fludde drowne me, neither let the deepe swalowe me vp: &
let not the pyt shut her mouth vpon me.
16 Heare me O God, for thy louyng kindnesse is comfortable: turne thee vnto me
accordyng vnto the multitude of thy mercies.
17 And hyde not thy face from thy seruaunt, for I am in trouble: O haste thee
and heare me.
18 Draw nigh vnto my soule & redeeme it: for myne enemies sake oh redeeme me.
19 Thou hast knowen my reproofe, my shame, and my dishonour: myne aduersaries
are all in thy syght.
20 Reproofe hath broke my heart a peeces, I am full of heauinesse: I loked for
some to haue pitie on me, but there was none, and for some that shoulde comfort
me, but I coulde fynde none.
21 They gaue me for meate, gall to eate: and when I was thirstie, they gaue me
vineger to drynke.
22 Let their table be as a snare before them: and in steade of aboundaunce of
peace, let it be a meanes of destruction.
23 Let their eyes be blynded that they see not: and euer bowe downe their
loynes.
24 Powre out thine indignation vpon them: and let thy wrathfull displeasure take
holde of them.
25 Let their habitation be desolate: and let no man dwell in their tabernacles.
26 For they persecute hym whom thou hast smitten: and they talke of the griefe
of them whom thou hast wounded.
27 Let them fall from one wickednesse to another: and let them not enter into
thy ryghteousnesse.
28 Let them be wyped out of the booke of the lyuyng: and not to be written among
the ryghteous.
29 As for me I am afflicted and in heauinesse: thy sauing helpe O Lorde shal
defende me.
30 I wyll prayse the name of the Lorde with a song: and magnifie hym with a
solemne confession.
31 And it wyll please God: better then a bullocke that hath hornes and hoofes.
32 The humble wyll consider this and be glad, such as seke after God: and your
soule shall lyue.
33 For God heareth the poore: & dispiseth not his prisoners.
34 Let heauen and earth prayse hym: the sea and all that moueth therin.
35 For the Lorde wyll saue Sion, and builde the cities of Iehuda: that men may
dwel there and haue it in possession.
36 The posteritie also of his seruauntes shall inherite it: and they that loue
his name shall dwell therin.

Psalm 70

1 To the chiefe musition (a psalme) of Dauid, to reduce in remembraunce. Haste
thee O Lorde to delyuer me: make haste to helpe me O God.
2 Let them be ashamed and confounded that seke after my soule: let them be
turned backwarde and be put to confusion that wishe me euyll.
3 Let them be returned backwarde: for a rewarde of their shamyng other which
say, there, there.
4 But let all those that seke thee be ioyfull and glad in thee: and let all such
as delight in thy saluation say alway, the Lorde be magnified.
5 As for me I am poore and in miserie, hasten thee vnto me O Lorde: thou art my
ayde and my delyuerer, O God make no long tarying.

Psalm 71

1 In thee O God I haue put my trust, let me neuer be put to confusion:
2 ridde me and deliuer me in thy ryghteousnesse, incline thine eare vnto me, and
saue me.
3 Be thou my strong holde whervnto I may alway resort: thou hast geuen a charge
to saue me, for thou art my house of defence, and my castell.
4 Delyuer me O my Lorde out of the hande of the vngodly: out of the hande of the
vnryghteous and cruell man.
5 For thou O Lorde God art the thyng that I long for: thou art my hope euen from
my youth.
6 Through thee haue I ben mayntayned euer since I was borne: thou art he that
toke me out of my mothers wombe, my praise shalbe alway of thee.
7 I am become as it were a monster vnto many: but my sure trust is in thee.
8 Oh let my mouth be fylled: with thy prayse and glorie all the day long.
9 Cast me not away in the tyme of age: forsake me not when my strength fayleth
me.
10 For myne enemies speake against me: and they that lay awayte for my soule
take their counsayle together.
11 They say, the Lorde hath forsaken hym: do you persecute hym and take hym, for
there is none to delyuer hym.
12 Go not farre from me O Lorde: haste thee O my Lorde to helpe me.
13 Let them be confounded, let them be brought to naught that are agaynst my
soule: let them be couered with shame and dishonour that seke to do me euyll.
14 As for me I wyll patiently wayte alway: and I wyll prayse thee more and more.
15 My mouth shall dayly speake of thy ryghteousnesse and saluation: for I knowe
no ende therof.
16 I wyll go foorth in the strength of the Lorde God: and I wyll only make
mention of thy ryghteousnesse.
17 Thou O God hast taught me from my youth: and hytherto I can well declare thy
wonderous workes.
18 Wherfore whylest I am olde and am gray headed: O Lorde forsake me not, vntyll
I haue shewed thy arme vnto this generation, and thy power to all them that are
yet for to come.
19 And vntyll I haue exceedyngly exalted O Lorde thy ryghteousnesse: for great
thynges are they that thou hast done, O Lorde who is lyke vnto thee?
20 Which hast made me to feele many great troubles and aduersities: yet
returnyng thou hast reuyued me, yea returnyng thou hast caused me to come out
from the bottome of the earth.
21 Thou hast brought me to greater honour then I had before: & thou returnyng
hast comforted me on euery syde.
22 Therfore I wyll confesse vnto thee thy trueth O Lorde, playing vpon an
instrument of musicke: vnto thee I wyl syng psalmes vpon the harpe O thou most
holy God of Israel.
23 My lyppes wyll be ioyfull when I syng vnto thee: and so wyll my soule which
thou hast redeemed.
24 My tongue also shal talke of thy righteousnesse all the day long: for they
are confounded and brought vnto shame that seke to do me euyll.

Psalm 72

1 Of Solomon. O God geue vnto the kyng thy iudgementes: and thy ryghteousnesse
vnto the kynges sonne.
2 Then he wyll iudge thy people accordyng vnto iustice: and thy afflicted
accordyng to equitie.
3 The mountaynes also and hylles: shall bryng peace to the people by the meanes
of ryghteousnesse.
4 He wyll iudge the afflicted amongst the people: he wyll saue the children of
the poore, and subdue the oppressour.
5 They wyll feare thee as long as the sunne and moone shyneth: from one
generation to another.
6 He wyll come downe lyke the rayne into a fleece of wooll: euen as the droppes
that water the earth.
7 In his dayes the ryghteous wyll florishe: and there shalbe aboundaunce of
peace so long as the moone endureth.
8 His dominion also shalbe from the one sea to the other: and from the fludde
vnto the ende of the earth.
9 They that dwell in the wildernesse shal kneele before him: his enemies shal
licke the dust.
10 The kyng of Tharsis and of the Iles shall offer presentes: the kynges of
Sheba & Seba shall bring giftes.
11 All kynges wyll worshyp hym: all nations wyll do hym seruice.
12 For he wyll delyuer the poore when he cryeth: and the afflicted and hym that
hath no helper.
13 He wyll haue compassion vpon the poore and needy: and he wyll preserue the
soules of the poore.
14 He wyll delyuer their soules from deceipt and oppression: and their blood
shalbe in his syght.
15 He wyll lyue, and he wyll geue to the poore of the golde of Sheba: and he
wyll pray alwayes for hym, and dayly he wyll blesse hym.
16 A handfull of corne shall be sowed in the earth vpon the toppe of hylles: and
the fruite therof shall make a noyse lyke Libanus, and shall florishe in the
citie lyke grasse vpon the earth.
17 His name shall endure for euer, his name shalbe spread abrode to the world so
long as the sunne shall shyne: all nations shalbe blessed in hym, and shall call
hym blessed.
18 Blessed be God the Lorde: the Lorde of Israel which only doth wonderous
thynges.
19 And blessed be the name of his maiestie for euer: and all the earth shalbe
fylled with his maiestie. Amen, Amen.
20 Here endeth the prayers of Dauid the sonne of Isai.

Psalm 73

1 A psalme of Asaph. Truely the Lorde is very good vnto Israel: vnto such as
haue a cleane heart.
2 Neuerthelesse, my feete were almost gone from me: my steppes had almost slypt.
3 For I enuied at the case of the foolishe: I sawe the wicked flowe in all kynde
of prosperitie.
4 For there be no bondes of death that can holde them: and the galaries of their
houses be strong.
5 They come in no misfortune lyke other folke: neither are they plagued lyke
other men.
6 And this is the cause that pride compasse them rounde about: and crueltie
couereth them as a garment.
7 Their eyes stande out for fatnesse: and the cogitations of their heartes do
passe from them.
8 They make other dissolute, they speake oppression with iniurie: they talke
proudely and presumptuously.
9 For they stretch foorth their mouth vnto the heauen: and their tongue goeth
through the worlde.
10 Therfore God his people turneth thither: and there is drawen vnto them waters
in a full cuppe.
11 And they say, howe shoulde God perceaue it? is there knowledge in the most
hyghest?
12 Lo these vngodly and fortunate in the worlde: do possesse riches.
13 Truely I haue cleansed my heart in vayne: and wasshed my handes in
innocencie.
14 All the day long I haue ben scourged: and chastened euery mornyng.
15 If I shoulde say that I woulde iudge after this sort: lo then I shoulde
condempne the generation of thy children.
16 Therfore I considered howe I might vnderstande this: but it was to paynefull
in myne eyes.
17 Untyll I went vnto the sanctuarie of God: and vnderstood the ende of them.
18 Truely thou doest set them in slippery places: and castest them downe
headlong for to be destroyed.
19 Oh howe be they brought to a destruction euen vpon a sodayne: they faynt,
they consume away for very dread.
20 They be as a dreame to a man after he is once waked: O Lorde thou wylt cause
their image to be dispised in the citie.
21 Ueryly thus was my heart inflamed: thus was my reynes pricked.
22 So foolishe was I and voyde of vnderstanding: I was euen a bruite beast
before thee.
23 Neuerthelesse I am alway with thee: for thou hast holden me by my ryght
hande.
24 Thou hast guyde me with thy counsayle: and after that thou receauedst me with
glorie.
25 Whom haue I in heauen but thee? and there is none vpon earth that I desire
besides thee.
26 My fleshe and my heart fayleth: but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for euer.
27 For lo, they that kepe them selues a loofe from thee shall perishe: thou
destroyest euery one that committeth fornication agaynst thee.
28 But it is good for me to come neare vnto God: wherfore I put my trust in thee
O Lorde God, that I may declare all thy workes.

Psalm 74

1 A wise instruction (to be song) of Asaph. O Lorde wherfore dost thou forsake
vs altogether? wherfore breaketh foorth thy anger agaynst the sheepe of thy
pasture.
2 Remember thy congregation, thou hast possest it nowe a long tyme: thou hast
redeemed the rodde of thine inheritaunce, euen mount Sion wherein thou dwellest.
3 Lyft vp thy feete for to destroy vtterly euery enemie: which hath done euyll
in thy sanctuarie.
4 Thyne aduersaries roare in the myddest of thy congregations: and set vp their
banners for signes of victorie.
5 He that hewed tymber afore out of thicke woddes for to builde the temple: was
esteemed as one offeryng a present to God aboue.
6 But nowe they breake downe into peeces all the carued worke therof: with axes
and hammers.
7 They haue set fire on thy holy places: they haue defiled the dwellyng place of
thy name castyng it downe to the groud.
8 Yea, they sayde in their heartes, let vs make hauocke of them altogether: thus
haue they burnt vp all the houses of God in the lande.
9 We see not our ensignes, there is not one prophete more: no not one is there
amongst vs that vnderstandeth our case.
10 O Lorde shall the aduersarie do this dishonour continually? shall the enemie
blaspheme thy name for euer?
11 Why withdrawest thou thy hande, yea thy right hande? consume them, drawing it
out of thy bosome.
12 Truely God is my kyng of olde: who worketh saluation in the myddest of the
earth.
13 Thou didst deuide the sea through thy power: thou brakest the heades of the
dragons in the waters.
14 Thou smotest the heades of Leuiathan in peeces: and gauest hym to be meate
for the people in wildernesse.
15 Thou broughtest out fountaynes and waters out of the harde rockes: thou
dyddest drye vp mightie waters.
16 The day is thine, & the nyght is thine: thou hast prepared the light & the
sunne.
17 Thou hast set all the borders of the earth: thou hast ordeyned summer and
wynter.
18 Remember this O God, the enemie hath dishonoured: and the foolishe people
hath blasphemed thy name.
19 O deliuer not the soule of thy turtle doue vnto a wylde beast: forget not the
congregation of the poore for euer.
20 Loke vpon the couenaunt: for darknesse of the earth hath replenisshed houses
with iniquitie.
21 O let not the simple go away ashamed: but let the afflicted & needy geue
prayse vnto thy name.
22 Arise O Lord, mayntayne thine owne cause: remember the dishonour that the
foolishe man doth vnto thee dayly.
23 Forget not the voyce of thine enemies: the mutteryng of them that hate thee
ascendeth vp continually.

Psalm 75

1 To the chiefe musition, destroy not; the psalme of Asaph, a song. We do
confesse it vnto thee O lord, we do confesse it: for thy wonderous workes do
declare thy name to be at hande.
2 When I shall take tyme fyt for the purpose: I wyll iudge accordyng vnto ryght.
3 The earth wasteth and all the inhabitours therof: I haue vpholded the pyllours
of it. Selah.
4 I sayd vnto fooles deale not so madly: & to the vngodly set not vp your horne.
5 Set not vp your horne an high: and speake not with a stiffe necke.
6 Because promotion commeth neither from the east nor from the west: nor yet
from the south.
7 For God is the iudge: it is he that putteth downe one, and setteth vp another.
8 For in the hande of God there is a cup, and the wine is redde: it is full
mixt, and he powreth out the same. But the vngodly of the earth do wring out:
and drynke the dregges therof.
9 As for me I wyll euer set foorth in wordes the Lorde: I wyll sing psalmes to
the God of Iacob.
10 And I wyll breake all the hornes of the vngodly: but the hornes of the
ryghteous shalbe exalted.

Psalm 76

1 To the chiefe musition in Neginoth, the psalme of Asaph, a song. In Iurie is
God knowen: his name is great in Israel.
2 At Shalem is his tabernacle: and his dwellyng in Sion.
3 There he brake the arrowes of the bowe: the shielde, the sworde, and the
battayle. Selah.
4 Thou art honourable: and of more puissaunce then the mountaynes of robbers.
5 The hygh couragious stomackes are spoyled, they haue slept their slepe: and
the valiaunt souldiours coulde not finde their owne handes.
6 At thy rebuke O God of Iacob: both the charet and horse be brought to naught.
7 Thou, euen thou art dreadfull: and who may stande in thy syght when thou
begynnest to be angry?
8 Thou causest thy iudgement to be hearde from heauen: then the earth trembleth,
and is styll.
9 When God ariseth to iudgement: and to helpe all the afflicted vpon the earth.
Selah.
10 The fearcenesse of man shall turne to thy prayse: and the remnaunt of the
fearcenesse thou wylt restrayne.
11 Make vowes vnto God your Lorde, & perfourme them all ye that be rounde about
hym: bryng presentes vnto hym that is dreadfull.
12 He abateth the spirite of princes: he is dreadfull to the kynges of the
earth.

Psalm 77

1 To the chiefe musition vpon Ieduthun, a psalme of Asaph. My voyce was vnto the
Lorde, and I cryed: my voyce was vnto the Lord, and he hearkened vnto me.
2 In the tyme of my trouble I sought the Lorde: my hande all the nyght catched &
ceassed not, my soule refused comfort.
3 I called to remembraunce God, and I was disquieted: I conferred with my selfe,
and my spirite was wrapped in pensiuenesse. Selah.
4 Thou dydst kepe the watche of mine eies: I was amased & coulde not speake.
5 I dyd thynke vpon the dayes past: and on the yeres of the olde worlde.
6 I called to remembraunce my psalme, song on the musicall instrument in the
nyght tyme: I communed with myne owne heart, & searched out my spirites.
7 What, wyll the Lorde forsake me for euer? wyll he be no more intreated to be
fauourable?
8 Is his mercie cleane gone for euer? and is his promise made from one
generation to another, come vtterly to an ende.
9 Hath God forgotten to be gratious? and will he shut vp his louing kindnesse in
displeasure? Selah.
10 And I sayde, this is my death: but the ryght hande of the most hyghest may
graunt me yeres.
11 I dyd call to remebraunce the workes of God almightie: for thy wonders done a
great whyle a goe came into my mynde.
12 I also gaue my selfe to muse of all thy workes: and I talked of all thy
actes.
13 Thy way O Lorde is in holynesse: who is so great a God as the Lorde?
14 Thou art the God that doth wonders: thou hast made thy power knowen among the
people.
15 Thou hast redeemed thy people with a mightie arme: the sonnes of Iacob and
Ioseph. Selah.
16 The waters sawe thee O God, the waters sawe thee, they feared: yea the
depthes of them moued out of their place.
17 Thicke cloudes powred downe rayne, thinne cloudes gaue a noyse: and thine
arrowes went abrode into al corners.
18 The sounde of thy thunder was rounde about the sky: the lightnynges shone
through the worlde, the earth quaked and trembled.
19 Thy way is in the sea, and thy pathes in the great waters: and thy
footesteppes are not knowen.
20 Thou dydst leade thy people lyke sheepe: by the hande of Moyses and Aaron.

Psalm 78

1 A wise instruction of Asaph. Heare my lawe O my people: enclyne your eares
vnto the wordes of my mouth.
2 I wyll open my mouth in a parable: I wyll declare harde sentences of the olde
tyme past.
3 Which we haue hearde and knowen: and such as our fathers haue tolde vs.
4 We wyll not hyde them from their children: nay we wyll set foorth in wordes to
the generation to come, the prayses of God, and his myght and wonderfull workes
that he hath done.
5 For he reuiued a statute in Iacob, and gaue Israel a lawe: in the whiche he
commaunded our forefathers to teache their children.
6 To the intent the posteritie shoulde knowe it, and children whiche shalbe
borne: that they shoulde ryse vp and declare it to their children.
7 That they shoulde put their trust in God, and not forget the workes of God:
but kepe his commaundementes.
8 And that they be not as their forefathers were a rebellious and a mutable
generation: a generation that directed not their heart aright, and whose spirite
cleaued not stedfastly vnto God.
9 Like as the children of Ephraim, which beyng harnessed & carying bowes: turned
their backes in the day of battayle.
10 They kept not the couenaunt of God: and they woulde not walke in his law.
11 But they forgat his workes: and his wonders which he had shewed them.
12 Marueylous thinges dyd he in the sight of their fathers: in the land of
Egypt, in the fielde of Zoan.
13 He deuided the sea and let them go thorowe: he made the waters to stande as
on an heape.
14 In the day time also he led them with a cloude: and all the night through
with a light of fire.
15 He cloued the harde rockes in the wildernes: & gaue them drinke therof, as it
had ben out of the great deepe waters.
16 He brought running streames out of a stonie rocke: and caused waters to gushe
downe, like as out of riuers.
17 Yet for all this they sinned still against hym: so that they prouoked the
most hyghest in the wildernesse.
18 And they temped god in their heartes: in requiring meate for their lust.
19 They spake against God: they said, can God prepare a table in the
wildernesse?
20 Beholde, he hath smytten the stonie rocke, and waters haue gushed out, and
streames haue flowed out aboundantly: but can he likewise geue bread, can he
prouide fleshe for his people?
21 Wherefore God hearde them, he was wroth, a fire was kindled in Iacob: and
there arose vp heauy displeasure against Israel.
22 Because they beleued not in the Lord: nor did put their trust in his
saluation.
23 And yet he commaunded the cloudes aboue: and opened the doores of heauen.
24 He raigned downe Manna also vpon them, that they shoulde eate: and gaue them
corne from heauen.
25 So man dyd eate the bread of angels: he sent them meate inough.
26 He remoued the east winde from vnder the heauen: and through his power he
brought in the south winde.
27 He rained fleshe vpon them as thycke as dust: and fethered foules like as the
sande of the sea.
28 He let it fall among their tentes: euen rounde about their pauilions.
29 So they dyd eate and were wel filled, for he gaue them their owne desire:
neuerthelesse they were not alienated from their lust.
30 But whyle the meate was yet in their mouthes, the heauy wrath of God came
vpon them, and slue the welthyest of them: and made the chosen men of Israel to
stoupe.
31 For all this they sinned still: and beleued not his wonderous workes.
32 Therfore their dayes dyd he consume in vanitie: & their yeres in a short
troublous time.
33 When he slue them, they sought hym: they repented them, and made God their
morninges worke.
34 And they remembred that the Lorde was their rocke: & that the Lorde most
hyghest was their redeemer.
35 Neuerthelesse they dyd but flatter him with their mouth: and they made hym a
lye with their tongue.
36 For their heart was not vpright with him: neither continued they faythfull in
his couenaunt.
37 Yet for all that he beyng most merciful: cleane pardoned all their misdeedes,
and destroyed them not.
38 Yea many a tyme he dyd much for to represse his anger: and neuer woulde
suffer his whole rage to breake out.
39 For he considered that they were but fleshe, and that they were euen a winde
that passeth away & cometh not againe.
40 How oft dyd they prouoke hym in the wildernes: & greeued hym in the desert?
41 They turned backe and tempted the Lorde: and prescribed boundes to the most
holy God of Israel.
42 They thought not of his hande: in the day when he redeemed them from the
enemie.
43 Howe he had wrought his miracles in Egypt: and his wonders in the fielde of
Zoan.
44 For he turned into blood their riuers & fluddes: so that they might not
drinke.
45 He sent amongst them all kind of flyes who dyd eate them: and frogges who
destroyed them.
46 He gaue their fruites vnto the caterpiller: & their labour to the grashopper.
47 He destroyed their vines with hayle stones: and their wilde figge trees with
the harde frost.
48 He smote their cattell also with haylestones: and their flockes with thunder
boltes.
49 He cast vpon them the rage of his furie, anger, disdayne, and trouble: by
sending foorth euill angels amongst them.
50 He made away to his indignation, & spared not their soule from death: he gaue
their lyfe to be subiect to the pestilence.
51 And he smote all the first borne of Egypt: the first fruites of concupiscence
in the pauilions of Cham.
52 But as for his owne people, he led them foorth like sheepe: and conducted
them through the wildernesse like a flocke of cattell.
53 He brought them out safely that they shoulde not feare: and ouerwhelmed their
enemies with the sea.
54 And brought them within the borders of his sanctuarie: euen to this mountayne
which his right hand purchased.
55 He dyd cast out the heathen also before them: he caused their land to be
deuided among the for an heritage, & made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their
tentes.
56 Neuerthelesse, they tempted and displeased the most hyghest Lorde: & kept not
his testimonies.
57 They turned backewarde, and they went astray like their forefathers: they
started aside like a bowe that breaketh.
58 For they stirred hym to anger with their hygh places: and prouoked him to
ielousie with their carued images.
59 When the Lorde hearde this, he was wroth: & toke sore displeasure at Israel.
60 So that he forsoke the tabernacle in Silo: the pauilion wherin he dwelt
amongst men.
61 He deliuered his force into captiuitie: and his glorie into the enemies
hande.
62 He gaue also his people ouer to the sword: and was wroth with his
inheritaunce.
63 Fire consumed his young men: and his maydens were not maryed.
64 His priestes were slayne with the sworde: and his wydowes made no
lamentation.
65 But the Lorde awaked as though he had slept: like a giaunt making a
triumphant noyse after wine.
66 He smote his enemies in the hynder parts: & put them to a perpetual shame.
67 He refused the tabernacle of Ioseph: and chose not the tribe of Ephraim.
68 But he chose the tribe of Iuda: euen the hill of Sion which he loued.
69 And there he buylded his temple on high: and layde the foundation of it like
a grounde euer to continue.
70 He chose also Dauid his seruaunt: and toke hym away from the sheepefoldes.
71 As he was folowing the ewes great with young he toke hym: that he might feede
Iacob his people, and Israel his inheritaunce.
72 So he fed them according to the simplicitie of his heart: and guided them by
the discretion of his handes.

Psalm 79

1 A psalme of Asaph. O Lord, the heathen are come into thyne inheritaunce: they
haue defiled thy holy temple, they haue made Hierusale an heape of stones
2 They haue geuen the dead bodies of thy seruauntes to be meate vnto the foules
of the ayre: and the fleshe of thy saintes vnto the beastes of the lande.
3 They haue shed their blood like water on euery syde of Hierusalem: and there
is none to burie them.
4 We are become an open shame vnto our neyghbours: a very scorne and derision
vnto them that are rounde about vs.
5 O God, howe long wylt thou be angry? shall thy ielousie burne lyke fire for
euer?
6 Powre out thine indignation vpon the Heathen that haue not knowen thee: and
vpon the kingdomes that haue not called vpon thy name.
7 For they haue deuoured Iacob: and layde waste his dwelling place.
8 O remember not against vs sinnes that be past, with all speede let thy tender
mercy preuent vs: for we are brought very lowe.
9 Helpe vs O Lord of our saluation for the glory of thy name: deliuer vs, and be
mercyfull vnto our sinnes for thy names sake.
10 Wherefore do the Heathen say, where is nowe their God? let the vengeaunce of
thy seruauntes blood that is shed, be openly knowen amongst the Heathen in our
sight.
11 Let the sorowfull sighing of the prisoners come before thee, accordyng vnto
the greatnes of thy power: preserue thou those that are appoynted to dye.
12 And rewarde thou our neighbours seuen folde into their bosome: their
blasphemie wherewith they haue blasphemed thee O God.
13 So we who be thy people and sheepe of thy pasture wyll confesse thee for
euer: and we wyll alway set foorth in wordes thy prayse, from generation to
generation.

Psalm 80

1 To the chiefe musition, vpon Sosannim Eduth, a psalme of Asaph. Heare O thou
shephearde of Israel, thou that leadest Ioseph lyke a sheepe: and thou that
sittest vpon the Cherubims, shew thy gratious presence.
2 Before Ephraim, Beniamin, and Manasses: stirre vp thy strength, and come for
to saue vs.
3 Turne vs agayne O Lorde: shewe the light of thy countenaunce, and we shalbe
saued.
4 O God, Lorde of hoastes: howe long wylt thou be angry at the prayer of thy
people?
5 Thou feedest them with the bread of teares: and geuest them plenteously teares
to drinke.
6 Thou hast made vs a strife vnto our neighbours: and our enemies laugh vs to
scorne.
7 Turne vs agayne thou Lorde of hoastes: shewe the light of thy countenaunce,
and we shalbe saued.
8 Thou dydst translate a vine out of Egypt: thou didst cast out the Heathen, and
planted it.
9 Thou madst roome before it: thou causedst it to take roote, and it hath filled
the lande.
10 The hilles were couered with her shadowe: and goodly high Cedar trees with
her bowes.
11 She stretched out her braunches vnto the sea: and her bowes vnto the riuer.
12 Why hast thou then broken downe her hedge: that all they whiche go by plucke
of her grapes?
13 The wylde bore out of the wood rooteth it vp: and the wylde beast of the
fielde deuoureth it.
14 Turne thee agayne thou God of hoastes I pray thee: loke downe from heauen,
beholde and visite this vine
15 and vineyarde that thy ryght hande hath planted, and the young braunche which
thou hast fortified for thy selfe.
16 It is brent with fire and cut downe: they shall perishe at the rebuke of thy
countenaunce.
17 Let thy hande be vpon the man of thy right hande: and vpon the sonne of man
whom thou hast fortified for thyne owne selfe.
18 And so we wyll not go backe from thee: thou shalt reuiue vs, and we wyll call
vpon thy name.
19 Turne vs agayne O God, Lorde of hoastes: shewe the light of thy countenaunce,
and we shalbe saued.

Psalm 81

1 To the chiefe musition vpon Gittith, of Asaph. Sing we meryly vnto the Lorde
our strength: make a chearefull noyse vnto the Lorde of Iacob.
2 Take the psalterie: bryng hyther the tabret, the merie harpe, with the lute.
3 Blowe vp the trumpet in the newe moone, euen in the time appointed: and vpon
our solempne feast day.
4 For this was made a statute for Israel: and a lawe of the God of Iacob.
5 This he ordayned in Ioseph for a testimonie, when he came out of the lande of
Egypt: where I hearde a tongue whiche I knewe not.
6 I eased his shoulder from the burthen: and his handes ceassed from making
pottes.
7 Thou calledst vpon me in troubles, and I deliuered thee: I hearde thee out of
the middest of a thunder, I proued thee also at the waters of strife. Selah.
8 Then I sayd heare O my people: and I wyll geue thee a charge O Israel in
protesting vnto thee.
9 If thou wylt hearken vnto me, there shall be no straunge God in thee: neither
shalt thou geue worship to any other Lorde beside me.
10 I am God thy Lorde which brought thee out of the land of Egypt: open thy
mouth wyde, and I wyll fill it.
11 But my people woulde not heare my voyce: and Israel would not obey me.
12 So I gaue them vp vnto the wicked cogitations of their owne heartes: and I
did let them folowe their owne imaginations.
13 O that my people woulde haue hearkened vnto me: O that Israel had walked in
my wayes.
14 I should soone haue tamed their enemies: and turned myne hande against their
aduersaries.
15 The haters of God shoulde haue ben founde liers: and their time should haue
endured for euer.
16 He woulde haue fed them also with the finest wheate flowre: and I would haue
satisfied thee with honie out of the stonie rocke.

Psalm 82

1 A psalme of Asaph. God standeth in the congregation of God: he iudgeth in the
midst of God.
2 Howe long wyll ye geue wrong iudgement: and accept the persons of the vngodly?
Selah.
3 Iudge ryght vnto the poore and fatherlesse: dispatch according to iustice
suche as be afflicted and in necessitie.
4 Deliuer the poore and outcast: saue them from the hande of the vngodly.
5 They knowe nothyng, they vnderstande nothing: they walke on styll in
darknesse, wherfore all the foundations of the earth be out of course.
6 I haue sayde ye are gods: and ye all are chyldren of the most highest.
7 But ye shall dye lyke as a man doth: and princes them selues shall fall away
lyke as other do.
8 Arise O God, and iudge thou the earth: for thou shalt take all Heathen to
thine inheritaunce.

Psalm 83

1 A song, the psalme of Asaph. Holde not thy tongue O Lorde: kepe not styll
scilence, refraine not thy selfe O Lorde.
2 For beholde, thyne enemies make an vprore: and they that hate thee, haue
lifted vp their head.
3 They haue deuised shrewde counsell against thy people: and they haue consulted
against thyne, whom thou defendest.
4 They haue said, come, and let vs roote them out, that they be no more a
people: and that the name of Israel may be no more in remembraunce.
5 For they haue conspired all in one minde: & are confederate against thee.
6 The pauilions of Edom and the Ismaelites: of Moab, and Hagerites,
7 Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalec: the Philistines with the inhabitauntes of Tyre.
8 Assur also is ioyned vnto them: they were a great ayde to the chyldren of Lot.
Selah.
9 But do thou vnto them, as vnto Midian: as vnto Sisera, as vnto Iabin at the
brooke Kishon.
10 Whiche perished at Ein Dor: and became as the doung of the earth.
11 Make them, their princes, and al their captaynes: lyke Oreb, and lyke Zeeb,
and lyke Salmunna.
12 Whiche sayd, let vs take to our selues: the houses of God in possession.
13 O my Lorde, make them lyke vnto a wheele: and as chaffe before the winde.
14 Lyke as a fire that burneth vp the wood: and as the flambe that consumeth the
mountaynes.
15 Persecute them euen so with thy tempest: and make them afrayde with thy
storme.
16 Make shame to appeare in their faces: that they may seeke thy name O God.
17 Let them be confounded and astonied with feare euer more & more: let them be
put to shame, and perishe.
18 And let them knowe that thou in thy name God eternall art only: O thou the
most highest ouer all the earth.

Psalm 84

1 To the chiefe musition vpon Gittith, a psalme of the sonnes of Corach. O how
amiable are thy dwellinges: thou God of hoastes?
2 My soule hath a desire and a longing to enter into the courtes of God: my
heart and my flesh leapeth with ioy for to go to the liuing Lorde.
3 Yea the sparowe hath founde her an house, and the swallowe a nest: where she
may lay her young: euen thy aulters O God of hoastes, my king & my Lord.
4 Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they wyll be alway praysyng thee.
Selah.
5 Blessed is that man whose strength is in thee: thy wayes are in their heart.
6 They iourneying through the vale of teares: (yea when euery cesterne at their
name is filled with water) do accept it for a fayre pleasaunt well.
7 They wyl set forward from a stoute courage to a stoute courage: that the God
of Gods may be seene of them in Sion.
8 O God Lorde of hoastes heare my prayer: geue eare O God of Iacob. Selah.
9 Beholde O Lorde our shielde: and loke vpon the face of thyne annointed.
10 For one day in thy courtes, is better then a thousande els where: I had
rather be a doore keper in the house of my God, then to dwell in large
tabernacles of vngodlynes.
11 For God the Lorde is a sunne and a shielde: God geueth grace and worship, he
withholdeth no good thyng from them that liue in any perfection.
12 O God of hoastes: blessed is the man that putteth his trust in thee.

Psalm 85

1 To the chiefe musition, a psalme of the sonnes of Corach. O God, thou art
become gracious vnto thy land: thou hast brought Iacob agayne home out of
captiuitie.
2 Thou hast forgeuen the wickednes of thy people: and couered all their sinnes.
Selah.
3 Thou hast taken away al thy displeasure: and turned thy selfe from thy
wrathfull indignation.
4 Turne vs O God of our saluation: and let thyne anger ceasse from vs.
5 Wilt thou be displeased at vs for euer? and wylt thou stretche out thy wrath
from one generation to another,
6 Wylt thou not turne agayne and reuiue vs: that thy people may reioyce in thee?
7 Shew vs thy louing kindnes O God: and graunt vs thy saluation.
8 I wyll hearken what God the Lord saith: for he speaketh peace vnto his people
& to his saintes, that they turne not agayne to folly.
9 For truely his saluation is nye them that feare him: insomuch that glory
dwelleth in our earth.
10 Mercy and trueth are met together: righteousnes and peace haue kissed eche
other.
11 Trueth shall bud out of the earth: and ryghteousnes shall looke downe from
heauen.
12 Yea, God shall geue all that is good: and our earth shall geue her encrease.
13 Euery man shall cause righteousnes to go before him: and he shall direct his
steppes in the way.

Psalm 86

1 A prayer of Dauid. Bow downe thine eare O God, and heare me: for I am poore
and in miserie.
2 Preserue thou my soule, for I am holy: my God saue thy seruaunt that putteth
his trust in thee.
3 Be mercifull vnto me O God: for I do call dayly vpon thee.
4 Comfort the soule of thy seruaunt: for vnto thee O Lord do I lift vp my soule.
5 For thou Lorde art good and gracious: and of great mercy vnto all them that
call vpon thee.
6 Geue eare O God vnto my prayer: and be attentiue vnto the voyce of my humble
petitions.
7 I call vpon thee in the day of my trouble: for thou hearest me.
8 Among the gods there is none like vnto thee O Lorde: there is not one that can
do as thou doest.
9 All nations whom thou hast made, shall come and worship thee O Lorde: and
shall glorifie thy name.
10 For thou art great and doest wonderous thinges: thou art God alone.
11 Teache me thy way O God, and I wyll walke in thy trueth: make my heart all
one with thyne, that it may feare thy name.
12 I wyll acknowledge thee O Lorde my God with all my heart: and I wyl glorifie
thy name for euer.
13 For great is thy mercy towarde me: and thou hast deliuered my soule from the
lowest part of hell.
14 O God, the proude are rysen against me: a companie of outragious
naughtipackes haue sought after my soule, and haue not set thee before their
eyes.
15 But thou O Lorde art a God full of compassion and mercy: long yet thou be
angry, plenteous in goodnes and trueth.
16 Turne thy face vnto me, and haue mercy vpon me: geue thy strength vnto thy
seruaunt, and helpe the sonne of thine handmayde.
17 Shewe some good token of thy fauour towardes me, that they whiche hate me may
see it and be ashamed: because thou God hast helped me, and comforted me.

Psalm 87

1 A psalme, the song of the sonnes of Corach. God loueth the gates of Sion more
then all the dwellynges of Iacob: for her foundations are vpon the holy hilles.
2 for her foundations are vpon the holy hilles.
3 Uery excellent thinges are spoken of thee: O thou citie of God. Selah.
4 I wyll make mention amongst those that knowe me, of Egypt and Babylon: behold
also of Palestina and Tyre, with Ethiopia, and it shalbe sayde suche a man is
borne there.
5 But of Sion it shalbe reported, that very many be borne in her: and the most
highest him selfe shall establishe her.
6 God wyll number in the register of the people: euery one that is borne there.
Selah.
7 And the singers aswell as the players of instrumentes: yea al my fountaines
are in thee.

Psalm 88

1 A song, the psalme of the sonnes of Corach, to the chiefe musition vpon
Mahalath Leannoth, a wise instruction of Heman the Ezrahite. O God the Lorde of
my saluation, I crye day and night before thee:
2 let my prayer enter into thy presence, encline thyne eare vnto my crying.
3 For my soule is full of miserie: and my life toucheth the graue.
4 I am counted as one of them that go downe vnto the pit: and I am nowe become a
man that hath no strength.
5 I am free among the dead: like such as beyng kylled lye in a graue, whom thou
remembrest no more, and are cut away from thy hande.
6 Thou hast layde me in the lowest pit: in darknes and in deepenes.
7 Thyne indignation sore presseth me: and thou hast vexed me with all thy
stormes. Selah.
8 Thou hast put away myne acquaintaunce farre from me, and made me to be
abhorred of them: I am shut vp, I can not get foorth.
9 My sight fayleth through my affliction O God: I haue called dayly vpon thee, I
haue stretched out mine handes vnto thee.
10 Wylt thou worke a miracle amongst the dead? or shal the dead rise vp againe
and acknowledge thee? Selah.
11 Shall thy louing kindnes be talked of in the graue? or thy faythfulnes in
destruction?
12 Shall thy wonderous workes be knowen in the darke? and thy righteousnes in
the lande of forgetfulnes?
13 But vnto thee do I crye O God: and my prayer commeth early in the morning
before thee.
14 O God, why abhorrest thou my soule: and why hidest thou thy face from me?
15 I am in miserie, I labour euen from my youth with the panges of death: I haue
suffered thy terrours, and I am styll in doubt.
16 Thyne indignation hath gone ouer me: and thy terrours haue vndone me.
17 They came rounde about me dayly lyke water: and compassed me altogether on
euery syde.
18 Thou hast put a way farre from me my frende and neighbour: thou hast hid mine
acquaintaunce out of sight.

Psalm 89

1 A wyse instruction of Ethan the Ezrachite. I wyll sing alwayes of the mercy of
God: with my mouth I wyll make knowen thy trueth from one generation to another.
2 For I sayde, mercy shall for euer endure: thou hast established thy trueth in
the heauens.
3 I haue made a couenaunt with my chosen: I haue sworne vnto Dauid my seruaunt.
4 I wyll establishe thy seede for euer: and buylde vp thy throne from generation
to generation. Selah.
5 O God, the very heauens shall confesse thy wonderous workes: and thy trueth in
the congregation of saintes.
6 For who is he in the cloudes that shal matche God: and who is like vnto God
amongst the children gods?
7 God is very terrible in the assemblie of saintes: and to be feared aboue al
them that are about him.
8 O God, Lorde of hoastes, who is like vnto thee a most mightie Lorde: and thy
trueth is on euery side thee.
9 Thou rulest the ragyng of the sea: when her waues aryse, thou delayest them.
10 Thou hast brought Egypt in so bad a case as if it were wounded: thou hast
scattered thyne enemies abrode with thy mightie arme.
11 The heauens are thine, the earth also is thine: thou hast layde the
foundation of the rounde worlde, and of all the plentie that is therin.
12 Thou hast made the north and the south: Tabor and Hermon do reioyce in thy
name.
13 Thou hast a mightie arme: thy hand is strong, and thy right hand is exalted.
14 Iustice and iudgement is the foundation of thy throne: mercy and trueth shall
go before thy face.
15 Blessed is the people that knoweth a triumphant noyse: O God, they shall
walke in the light of thy countenaunce.
16 They shall make them selues merie dayly in thy name: and in thy righteousnes
they shall exalt them selues.
17 For thou art the glory of their strength: and in thy louing kindnes thou wylt
lift vp our hornes.
18 For our shielde is of God: and our king is of the most holy of Israel.
19 Thou hast spoken somtimes in visions vnto thy saintes: and hast sayde, I haue
added ayde vpon the mightie, I haue exalted one chose out of the people.
20 I haue founde Dauid my seruaunt: I haue annoynted him with myne holye oyle.
21 Therfore my hande shalbe assured vnto him: and mine arme shall strengthen
hym.
22 The enemie shal not be able to do him violence: the sonne of wickednesse
shall not afflict hym.
23 I wyll breake into peeces his foes before his face: and ouerthrowe them that
hate hym.
24 My trueth also and my mercy shalbe with hym: and in my name shall his horne
be exalted.
25 I wyll set also his dominion in the sea: and his right hande in the fluddes.
26 He shall make inuocation vnto me: saying thou art my father O my God, and my
fortresse of saluation.
27 And I will make him my first borne: in higher state then kinges of the earth.
28 My mercy wyll I kepe for hym euermore: and my couenaunt shal stand fast with
hym.
29 His seede also wyll I make to endure for euer: and his throne as the dayes of
heauen.
30 But if his chyldren forsake my lawe, and walke not in my iudgement:
31 if they breake my statutes, and kepe not my commaundementes,
32 I will then visite their transgressions with a rodde: and their wickednesse
with stripes.
33 Neuerthelesse, my louyng kyndnesse I wyll not take vtterly from hym: I wyl
not breake my promise with hym.
34 I wyll not violate my couenaunt: nor alter the thyng that is gone out of my
lyppes.
35 I haue sworne once by my holynesse: that I wyll not speake an vntrueth vnto
Dauid.
36 His seede shall endure for euer: and his throne shalbe as the sunne before
me.
37 And as the moone which shall continue for euermore: and shalbe a faithful
witnesse in heauen. Selah.
38 But thou hast abhorred & forsake thine annoynted: & art sore displeased at
him.
39 Thou hast broken the couenaunt of thy seruaunt: thou hast disgraced his
crowne, castyng it on the grounde.
40 Thou hast ouerthrowe all his walles: and broken downe his strong holdes.
41 All they that go by the way spoyle hym: he is become a rebuke vnto his
neyghbours.
42 Thou hast exalted the ryght hande of his enemies: and made all his
aduersaries to reioyce.
43 Thou hast turned the harde edge of his sworde: and thou hast not lifted him
vp in the battayle.
44 Thou hast brought his noble estate to an ende: and hast cast his throne downe
to the grounde.
45 Thou hast shortened the dayes of his youth: and thou hast couered him with
shame. Selah.
46 O God howe long wylt thou hyde thy selfe? for euer? shall thy wrath burne
lyke fire?
47 Remember what I am, howe short my tyme is of lyfe: wherfore hast thou created
in vayne all the sonnes of men?
48 What man is he that lyueth and shall not see death? can he delyuer his owne
soule from the hande of hell? Selah.
49 Lorde where are become thy former olde louyng kyndnesses: which thou dydst
sweare vnto Dauid by thy fayth that thou wouldest perfourme.
50 Remember O Lorde the dishonour * of thy seruauntes: I beare in my bosome the
dishonour of all people that be mightie.
51 Who beyng thine enemies O God do dishonour: who do dishonour the footsteppes
of thine annoynted.
52 Blessed be God for euermore: so be it, and so be it.

Psalm 90

1 A prayer of Moyses the man of God. Lorde thou hast ben our habitation: from
one generation to another generation.
2 Before the moutaynes were brought foorth, or euer the earth & the worlde were
made: thou art God both from euerlastyng, and also vntyll euerlastyng.
3 Thou turnest man most miserable euen vnto dust: thou sayest also, O ye
children of men returne you into dust.
4 For a thousande yeres in thy syght are but as yestarday that is past: and as a
watch in the nyght.
5 Thou makest them to flowe away, they are a sleepe: they be in the morning as
an hearbe that groweth.
6 In the mornyng it florisheth and groweth vp: in the euenyng it is cut downe
and wythered.
7 For we be consumed through thy displeasure: and we are astonyed through thy
wrathfull indignation.
8 Thou hast set our misdeedes before thee: and our sinnes wherof we be not
priuie, in the lyght of thy countenaunce.
9 For all our dayes do passe in thine anger: we spende our yeres as in speaking
a worde.
10 The dayes of our yeres be in all threescore yeres and tenne, and yf through
strength of nature men come to foure score yeres: yet is their iolitie but
labour and care, yea moreouer it passeth in haste from vs, and we flee from it.
11 Who regardeth the force of thy wrath? for euen there after as a man feareth
thee, so feeleth he thy displeasure.
12 Make vs to knowe so our dayes, that we number them: and we wyll frame a heart
vnto wisdome.
13 Turne agayne O God (what, for euer wylt thou be angry?) and be gratious vnto
thy seruauntes.
14 Replenishe vs early in the mornyng with thy mercie: and we wyll crye out for
ioy, and be glad all the dayes of our lyfe.
15 Make vs mery accordyng to the dayes that thou hast afflicted vs: and
accordyng to the yeres wherin we haue suffred aduersitie.
16 Let thy worke appeare in thy seruauntes: and thy glory in their children.
17 And let the glorious maiestie of the Lorde our God be vpon vs: and prosper
thou the worke of our handes vpon vs, O prosper thou our handy worke.

Psalm 91

1 Whosoeuer sitteth vnder the couer of the most highest: he shal abide vnder the
shadowe of the almightie.
2 I wyll say vnto God, thou art my hope and my fortresse: my Lorde, in whom I
wyll trust.
3 For he wyll delyuer thee from the snare of the hunter: and from the noysome
pestilence.
4 He wyll couer thee vnder his wynges, & thou shalt be safe vnder his fethers:
his faythfulnesse shalbe thy shielde and buckler.
5 Thou shalt not be afrayde of any terrour of the nyght: nor of any arrowe that
sleeth by day,
6 Nor of any pestilence that walketh in the darknesse: nor of any deadly fyt
that destroyeth at hygh noone.
7 A thousande shall fall beside thee, and ten thousande at thy ryght hande: but
it shall not come nygh thee.
8 Thou only with thine eyes shalt beholde: & see the rewarde of the vngodly.
9 For thou O God art my hope: thou hast set thine habitation very hygh.
10 There shall no euyll lyght on thee: neither shall any plague come nye thy
dwellyng.
11 For he wyll geue his angels charge ouer thee: to kepe thee in all thy wayes.
12 They wyll beare thee in their handes: that thou hurt not thy foote agaynst a
stone.
13 Thou shalt set thy foote vppon the Lion and Adder: the young Lion and the
Dragon thou shalt treade vnder thy feete.
14 Because he hath set greatly his loue vpon me, therfore wyll I deliuer hym: I
wyll set hym vp out of all daunger, because he hath knowen my name.
15 He shall call vpon me, and I wyll heare hym: yea I am with hym in trouble, I
wyll deliuer hym, and bryng hym to honour.
16 I wyll satisfie hym with a long lyfe: and I wyll cause hym to see my
saluation.

Psalm 92

1 A Psalme, the song for the sabbath day. It is a good thyng to confesse vnto
God: and to syng psalmes vnto thy name O thou most hyghest.
2 To set foorth in wordes thy louyng kyndnesse early in the mornyng: and thy
trueth in the nyght season.
3 Upon an instrument of ten strynges, and vpon the Lute: vpon the Harpe with a
solemne sounde.
4 For thou God hast made me glad thorowe thy workes: I do reioyce in the workes
of thy handes.
5 O God howe glorious are thy workes? thy thoughtes are very depe.
6 An vnwise man doth not consider this: and a foole doth not vnderstande it.
7 Wheras the vngodly do bud vp greene as the grasse, and wheras all workers of
iniquitie do florishe: that they notwithstandyng shalbe destroyed for euer and
euer.
8 But thou O God: art the most highest for euermore.
9 For lo, thine enemies O God, lo thine enemies shall perishe: & all the workers
of wickednesse shalbe destroyed.
10 But my horne shalbe exalted lyke the horne of an vnicorne: for I am annoynted
with excellent oyle.
11 And myne eye shall see those that lye in wayte for me: myne eare shall heare
the malitious persons that rise vp agaynst me.
12 The ryghteous shall florishe lyke a paulme tree: and shall spread abroade
like a Cedar in Libanus.
13 Such as be planted in the house of God: shall florishe in the courtes of our
Lorde.
14 They shall styll bryng foorth fruite in their age: they shalbe fat and
florishyng.
15 For to set foorth in wordes that God is vpright: he is my rocke, and no
iniquitie is in hym.

Psalm 93

1 God raigneth, he is clothed with a glorious maiestie, God is clothed with
strength: he hath girded hym selfe, he hath made the worlde so sure that it can
not be moued.
2 Euer since the worlde began, thy throne hath ben set sure: thou art from
euerlastyng.
3 The fluddes are risen O God, the fluddes haue lyft vp their noyse: the fluddes
haue lyft vp their waues.
4 God which is on high, is more puissaut then the noyse of many waters: then the
mightie waues of the sea.
5 Thy testimonies are most certayne: holynesse is an ornament to thine house O
God in all tymes.

Psalm 94

1 O God the Lord of all auengeaunce: the Lorde of all auengeaunce shewe thy
glorious maiestie.
2 Be exalted O thou iudge of the world: and rewarde the proude after their
deseruyng.
3 O God howe long shall the vngodly: howe long shall the vngodly triumph?
4 All such as be workers of iniquitie: they babble, they prate shoutly, they
make boastes of them selues.
5 They oppresse thy people O God: and they afflict thine heritage.
6 They murther the wyddowe and the straunger: & put the fatherlesse to death.
7 And they say, tushe the Lorde seeth it not: neither doth the God of Iacob
vnderstande it.
8 Understande ye vnwyse among the people: O ye fooles, when wyll ye be well
aduised?
9 He that hath planted the eare, shall he not heare? yf he shapeth the eye,
shall he not see?
10 He that chasteneth the heathen, shall not he punishe? it is he that teacheth
man knowledge.
11 God knoweth the thoughtes of man: that they are but vanitie.
12 Blessed is the man O Lorde, whom thou wylt chasten: and whom thou wylt
instruct in thy lawe.
13 That thou mayest geue hym patience in tyme of aduersitie: vntyll the pyt be
digged vp for the vngodly.
14 For God wyll not reiect his people: neither wil he forsake his inheritaunce.
15 For iudgement shalbe reduced vnto iustice: and after it shall all such as be
vpryght of heart be iudged.
16 Who will ryse vp with me agaynst the malicious? or who wyll take my part
agaynst workers of wickednesse?
17 If God had not ben an ayde vnto me: it had not fayled much but my soule had
dwelled in silence.
18 But when I sayde my foote hath slypped: thy mercy O God helde me vp.
19 In the multitude of my cogitations from the bottome of my heart: thy
comfortes dyd recreate my soule.
20 Shall the seate of wickednesse haue any thyng to do with thee: which seate
maketh wrong to be enacted for a law?
21 They flocke together agaynst the soule of the ryghteous: and condemne the
innocent blood.
22 But God is to me a refuge: and my Lorde is the rocke of my confidence.
23 And he wyll recompence them their wickednesse, and destroy them in their owne
malice: God our Lorde wyll destroy them.

Psalm 95

1 Come let vs syng vnto God: let vs make an heartie reioysyng with a loude voyce
vnto the rocke of our saluation.
2 Let vs make speede to come before his face with a confession: let vs expresse
vnto hym outwardly a heartie gladnesse with syngyng of psalmes.
3 For God is a great Lorde: and a great kyng aboue all gods.
4 In his hande are all the deepe corners of the earth: and the hygh toppes of
hylles be his also.
5 The sea is his, and he made it: and his handes fashioned the drye lande.
6 Come, let vs worshyp and fall downe: let vs kneele before the face of God our
maker.
7 For he is our Lorde: and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheepe of
his hande.
8 To day yf ye wyll heare his voyce harden not your heartes as in the tyme of
contention: as in the day of temptation in the wildernesse.
9 When your fathers tempted me, proued me: yea after they had seene my worke.
10 Fourtie yeres long was I greeued with that generation: and I sayde this
people erreth in heart, and they haue not knowen my wayes.
11 Unto whom I sware in my wrath: that they shoulde not enter at all into my
rest.

Psalm 96

1 Syng you vnto God a newe song: sing ye vnto God all that be in the earth.
2 Syng ye vnto God and blesse his name: set foorth in wordes from day to day his
saluation.
3 Declare his glory amongst the heathen: and his wonderous actes amongst all the
people.
4 For God is great and worthy of all prayse: he is more to be feared then all
gods.
5 As for all the gods of the heathen they be but idoles: and it is God that made
the heauens.
6 Honour and maiestie be before hym: power and excellentnesse be in his
sanctuarie.
7 Geue vnto God O ye families of the people: geue vnto God glorie & power.
8 Geue vnto God glorie due vnto his name: bryng an offeryng, and come into his
courtes.
9 Worshyp you God in the maiestie of holynesse: be you in dread of his face all
that be in the earth.
10 Set it foorth in wordes among the heathen that God raigneth: and that the
worlde is set of a sure foundation, it shall not be remoued, he wyll iudge the
people accordyng to equitie.
11 The heauens shall reioyce, and the earth be glad: the sea shall make a noyse
and all that is therin.
12 The fielde shalbe ioyfull and all that is in it: then shall all the trees of
the wood reioyce before the face of God.
13 For he commeth, for he commeth to iudge the earth: he will iudge the world
accordyng to iustice, and the people accordyng to his trueth.

Psalm 97

1 God raigneth, the earth shalbe glad: the multitude of the Iles shalbe glad
therof.
2 Cloudes and thicke darknesse are rounde about hym: iustice and iudgement are
the habitation of his throne.
3 There goeth a fire before his face: and burneth his enemies on euery syde.
4 His lightninges gaue a lyght vnto the worlde: the earth sawe it and trembled.
5 The hylles melted lyke waxe at the presence of God: at the presence of the
Lorde of the whole earth.
6 The heauens haue declared his iustice: and all the people haue seene his
glorie.
7 Confounded be all they that do seruice vnto carued images: and that do glorie
in idols, but O gods, you all shall worshyp hym.
8 Sion hearde of it, and reioyced: and the daughters of Iuda be glad, because of
thy iudgementes O God.
9 For thou art a God hygher then all that are in the earth: thou art exalted
farre aboue all gods.
10 You that loue God, hate the thyng which is euyll: he preserueth the soules of
his saintes, he wyll delyuer them from the hande of the vngodly.
11 There is sowen a lyght for the ryghteous: and gladnesse for such as be
vpryght of heart.
12 Reioyce in God O ye ryghteous: and prayse hym at the remembraunce of his
holynesse.

Psalm 98

1 A psalme. Syng vnto God a newe song: for he hath done marueylous thynges. With
his owne right hande and with his holy arme: he hath gotten to hym selfe the
victorie.
2 God hath declared his saluation: he hath openly shewed his iustice in the
syght of the heathen.
3 He hath remembred his mercie and trueth towarde the house of Israel: and all
the endes of the worlde haue seene the saluation of our Lorde.
4 Shewe your selues ioyfull vnto God all ye in the earth: make a ioly noyse,
reioyce you chearfully, & syng psalmes.
5 Syng psalmes vnto God playing vpon an harpe: vpon an harpe, and with the
sounde of a psalterie.
6 Shewe your selues ioyfull before the kyng eternall: with trumpettes and sounde
of shawmes.
7 Let the sea make a noyse, and that is within it: the rounde worlde, and they
that dwell therin.
8 Let the fluddes clappe their handes: and let the hylles be ioyfull altogether
before the face of God.
9 For he commeth to iudge the earth: he wyll iudge the worlde accordyng to
iustice, & the people accordyng to equitie.

Psalm 99

1 God raigneth, the people be in a rage: he sitteth betweene the Cherubims, the
earth quaketh.
2 God is great in Sion: and high aboue all people.
3 They shall prayse thy name great & dreadfull: for it is holy, and a kynges
power that loueth iudgement.
4 Thou hast ordeyned all thynges accordyng to equitie: thou hast caused
iudgement and iustice to be in Iacob.
5 Magnifie God our Lorde: and kneele downe before his footstoole, for it is
holy.
6 Moyses & Aaron among his priestes, and Samuel among such as call vpon his
name: these called vpon God, and he hearde them.
7 He spake vnto them out of the cloudy pyller: for they kept his testimonies,
and the lawe that he gaue them.
8 O God our Lord thou heardest them, O Lorde thou didst forbeare them: and thou
tokest auengement for their owne inuentions.
9 Magnifie God our Lorde, and kneele downe before his holy hyll: for God our
Lorde is holy.

Psalm 100

1 A psalme for to confesse. Be ye ioyfull in God all that be in the earth:
2 serue God with gladnesse, and come before his face with a ioyfull noyse.
3 Be ye sure that God is the Lorde, it is he that hath made vs, and not we our
selues: we are his people and the sheepe of his pasture.
4 Go your way into his gates with thankesgeuyng, and into his courtes with
prayse: be thankfull vnto hym and blesse his name.
5 For God is gratious, his mercie is euerlastyng: and his trueth endureth from
generation to generation.

Psalm 101

1 A psalme of Dauid. I will sing of mercie and iudgement: I wyll syng vnto thee
O God psalmes.
2 I wyll endeuour my selfe to be fully instructed in the way of perfectnesse:
when thou wylt come vnto me, I wil go vp and downe in the middest of my house in
the perfectnesse of my heart.
3 I wyll neuer set before myne eyes any deuillishe thyng: I wyll detest to do
the worke of transgressours, it shall take no holde of me.
4 A frowarde heart shall depart from me: I wyll not once knowe any euyll.
5 I will destroy him who priuily slaundereth his neighbour: I wyll not suffer
hym who hath a proude loke and a great stomacke.
6 Myne eyes shalbe vpon such in the lande as haue a true meanyng, that they may
sit with me: he that leadeth a perfect lyfe shall minister vnto me.
7 There shall no deceiptfull person haue any seate in my house: he that telleth
lyes shall not tary long in my syght.
8 I wyll euery mornyng destroy all the vngodly in the lande: that I may roote
out from the citie of God all workers of wickednesse.

Psalm 102

1 A prayer of the afflicted when he was ouerwhelmed, and when he did powre out
his petition before the face of God. Heare my prayer O God: and let my crying
come in vnto thee.
2 Hyde not thy face from me in the day of my distresse: encline thine eare vnto
me, heare me spedyly in the day that I call.
3 For my dayes are consumed away like smoke: and my bones are burnt vp as though
they were a firebrande.
4 My heart is smitten downe and wythered lyke grasse: because I did forget to
eate my bread.
5 Through the noyse of my gronyng: my bones wyll scase cleaue to my fleshe.
6 I am become lyke a Pellicane of the wildernesse, and like an Owle that is in
the desert:
7 I watch, and am as it were a sparrowe that sitteth alone vpon the house toppe.
8 Myne enemies reuile me all the day long: and they that are in a rage against
me, make their oth by me.
9 For I haue eaten asshes as it were bread, and mingled my drynke with weepyng,
10 because of thine indignation and wrath: for thou hast set me vp, and cast me
downe.
11 My dayes fade away lyke a shadowe: and I am wythered lyke grasse.
12 But thou O God endurest for euer: and thy remembraunce throughout all
generations.
13 Thou wylt aryse vp, thou wylt haue compassion vpon Sion: for it is tyme that
thou haue mercie vpon her, for the tyme appoynted is come.
14 For thy seruauntes be well affected towarde her stones: and it pitieth them
to see her in the dust.
15 And the heathen wyll feare thy name O God: and all the kynges of the earth
thy glorious maiestie.
16 For God wyll buylde vp Sion: to be seene in his glorious maiestie.
17 He wyll regarde the prayer of the humble destitute of all helpe: and he wyll
not dispise their prayer.
18 This shalbe written for those that come after: and the people which shalbe
borne, shall prayse the Lorde.
19 For he hath loked downe from his high sanctuarie: out of heauen did God
beholde the earth.
20 That he might heare the mourninges of such as be in captiuitie: and delyuer
the children of death.
21 That they may declare the name of God in Sion: and his prayse at Hierusalem.
22 When people were gathered together, & kyngdomes to serue God:
23 he afflicted my strength in the way, he shortened my dayes.
24 But I say, O my God take me not away in the middest of myne age: as for thy
yeres, they endure throughout all generations.
25 Thou hast before tyme layde the foundation of the earth: and the heauens are
the worke of thy handes.
26 They shall perishe, but thou wylt remayne styll: they all shall waxe olde as
doth a garment, and as a vesture thou wylt chaunge them, and they shalbe
chaunged.
27 But thou art, and thy yeres can not fayle:
28 the children of thy seruauntes shal dwell, and their seede shalbe maynteyned
in thy syght.

Psalm 103

1 Blesse God O my soule: and all that is within me prayse his holy name.
2 Blesse God O my soule: and forget not all his benefites.
3 Who forgeueth all thy wickednesse: and healeth all thine infirmities.
4 Who redeemeth thy lyfe from destruction: and crowneth thee with mercie and
louyng kyndnesse.
5 Who satisfieth thy mouth with good thynges: causyng thy youth lyke an Egles to
be renued.
6 God executeth iustice and iudgement: for all them that are oppressed with
wrong.
7 He made his wayes knowen vnto Moyses: his workes vnto the children of Israel.
8 God is full of compassion and pitie: loth to be angry, and exceedyng great in
mercie.
9 He vseth not to continue in chydyng: neither reserueth he his anger for euer.
10 He dealeth not with vs accordyng to our sinnes: nor rewardeth vs according to
our wickednesse.
11 For accordyng to the hyghnesse of heauen aboue the earth: his mercie
preuayleth to them that feare hym.
12 Loke howe farre distaunt the east is from the west: so farre a sunder setteth
he our sinnes from vs.
13 Yea lyke as a father pitieth his owne children: euen so is God mercifull vnto
them that feare hym.
14 For he knoweth wherof we be made: he remembreth that we are but dust.
15 The dayes of man are as the dayes of an hearbe: he florisheth as a flowre in
the fielde.
16 For the winde passeth ouer it, and it is no more seene: and the place therof
knoweth it no more.
17 But the mercifull goodnesse of God endureth for euer and euer, vpon them that
feare hym: and his righteousnesse vpon childers children.
18 Euen vpon such as kepe his couenaunt: and thinke vpon his commaundementes to
do them.
19 God hath prepared his seate in heauen: and his kyngdome ruleth ouer all.
20 Blesse God O ye his angels mightie in operation: who fulfyll his worde in
hearkening vnto the voyce of his word.
21 Blesse God all ye his hoastes: you his ministers that do his pleasure.
22 Blesse God all you his workes in all places of his dominion: O my soule
blesse thou God.

Psalm 104

1 My soule blesse thou God: O God my Lord thou art become exceeding great, thou
hast put on glory and maiestie.
2 Who is decked with light as it were with a garment: spreadyng out the heauens
like a curtayne.
3 Who seeleth his vpper chaumbers with waters: and maketh the cloudes his
charriot, and walketh vpon the wynges of the wynde.
4 He maketh his angels spirites: and his ministers a flaming fire.
5 He hath layde the earth sure vpon her foundations: that it can neuer moue at
any tyme.
6 Thou coueredst it with the deepe, lyke as with a garment: the waters stande
vpon the hilles.
7 At thy rebuke they flee: at the noyse of thy thunder they bluster downe apace.
8 The hilles mount aloft: and the valleys settle downe beneath vnto the place
where thou hast layde a foundation for them.
9 Thou hast set them their boundes which they shall not passe: neither shall
they returne agayne to couer the earth.
10 Who also causeth the springes which runne betweene the hilles: to flowe into
the riuers.
11 All beastes of the fielde drinke therof: and the wylde asses quench their
thirst.
12 The foules of the ayre haue their habitation nigh vnto them: singing out of
the midst of the bowes of trees.
13 He watereth the hilles from aboue: the earth is replenished with the fruite
of thy workes.
14 He causeth grasse to growe for cattell: and hearbes for the vse of man.
15 That he may bryng foorth foode out of the earth: both wine that maketh glad
the heart of man, and oyle to make hym haue a chearefull countenaunce, & also
bread to strengthen mans heart.
16 The trees of God be satisfied: euen the Cedars of Libanus which he hath
planted.
17 Wherin the birdes make their nestes: in the fyrre trees the storke buyldeth.
18 The high hilles are a refuge for goates: and so are the stonie rockes for
conies.
19 He hath made the moone for certayne seasons: and the sunne knoweth his goyng
downe.
20 Thou makest darknes and it is night: wherein all the beastes of the forrest
do go abrode.
21 The Lions do roare after a pray: and in seeking their meate of God.
22 When the sunne ariseth, they recoyle backe: and lay them downe to rest in
their dennes.
23 Man goeth foorth to his worke: and to do his seruice vntyll the euening.
24 O God howe manyfolde are thy workes? thou hast made them al in wisdome, the
earth is ful of thy ryches.
25 So is the sea it selfe large and wyde in compasse: wherein are thinges
creeping innumerable, both small and great beastes.
26 There go the shippes, and there is that Leuiathan: whom thou hast made to
take his pastime therin.
27 These wayte all vpon thee: that thou mayest geue them meate in due season.
28 When thou geuest it them, they gather it: and when thou openest thyne hand,
they are filled with that which is good.
29 When thou hydest thy face, they are troubled: when thou takest away their
spirite, they dye, and are turned agayne to their dust.
30 When thou sendest out thy spirite, they be recreated: and thou reuiuest the
face of the earth.
31 The glorious maiestie of God shal endure for euer: God wyll reioyce in his
workes.
32 He beholdeth the earth, & it trembleth: he toucheth the hilles, and they
smoke.
33 I wyll syng vnto God as long as I liue: I will sing psalmes vnto my Lord so
long as I shall be.
34 My meditations of hym shalbe very pleasaunt: for all my ioy shalbe in God.
35 As for sinners they shalbe consumed out of the earth: and the vngodly shall
come to an ende, blesse thou God O my soule, and prayse you the Lorde.

Psalm 105

1 Confesse you it vnto God, call vppon his name: cause the people to vnderstande
his deuises.
2 Sing vnto hym, sing psalmes vnto him: talke you of all his wonderous workes.
3 Glary ye in his holy name: let the heart of them reioyce that do seeke God.
4 Seeke God and his strength: seeke his face euermore.
5 Remember the meruaylous workes that he hath done: his wonders, and the
iudgementes of his mouth.
6 O ye seede of Abraham his seruaunt, ye his chosen chyldren of Iacob:
7 he is God our Lord, his iudgementes are in all the earth.
8 He hath ben mindfull alwayes of his couenaunt (for he promised a worde to a
thousande generations:)
9 euen of his couenaunt that he made with Abraham, and of his othe vnto Isaac.
10 And he appointed the same vnto Iacob for a law: and to Israel for an
euerlasting couenaunt.
11 Saying, vnto thee I wyll geue the lande of Chanaan: the lot of your
inheritaunce.
12 When they were a fewe men in number, and had ben straungers but a litle whyle
in it:
13 and when they went from one nation to another, from one kingdome to another
people.
14 He suffred no man to do them wrong: yea he reproued euen kynges for their
sakes.
15 Touche not mine annoynted: and triumph not ouer my prophetes.
16 Moreouer he called for a famine vpon the lande: and he made all maner of
foode to fayle.
17 But he had sent a man before them: euen Ioseph, who was solde to be a bonde
seruaunt.
18 Whose feete they dyd hurt in the stockes: the iron entred into his soule.
19 Vntill the tyme came that his cause was knowen: the worde of the Lorde tryed
hym.
20 The king sent and caused hym to be let go: yea the prince of the people
opened a way foorth for hym.
21 He made him Lorde of his house: and ruler of all his substaunce.
22 That he might enfourme his princes according to his minde: and teache his
senatours wysdome.
23 Israel also came into Egypt: & Iacob was a straunger in the lande of Cham.
24 And he encreased his people exceedinglye: and made them stronger then their
enemies.
25 Whose heart so turned that they hated his people: and dealt subtilly with his
seruauntes.
26 Then he sent Moyses his seruaunt, and Aaron whom he had chosen:
27 they did their message, workyng his signes among them, and wonders in the
lande of Cham.
28 He sent darknes, & it was darke: and they went not from his wordes.
29 He turned their waters into blood: and slue their fishe.
30 Their lande brought foorth frogges: yea euen in their kinges chaumbers.
31 He spake the worde, and there came a swarme of all maner of flyes: and of
lyce in all their quarters.
32 He gaue them haylestones for rayne: and flambes of fire in their lande.
33 He smote their vines also & figge trees: and he destroyed the trees that were
in their coastes.
34 He spake the worde, and the grashoppers came: & caterpillers innumerable.
35 And they did eate vp all the grasse in their lande: and deuoured the fruite
of their grounde.
36 He smote al the first borne in their land: euen the first fruites of all
their concupiscence.
37 He also brought them foorth with siluer and golde: there was not one feeble
person in their tribes.
38 Egypt was glad at their departing: for they were smytten with dread of them.
39 He spred out a cloude to be a couering: and fire to geue light in the night
season.
40 The people required and he brought quayles: and he filled them with the bread
of heauen.
41 He opened the rocke of stone and the waters flowed out: so that streames
ranne in drye places.
42 For he remembred his holy worde: spoken vnto Abraham his seruaunt.
43 And he brought foorth his people with gladnes: and his chosen with a ioyfull
noyse.
44 And he gaue them the landes of the Heathen, and they toke to inheritaunce the
labours of the people.
45 To the intent that they shoulde kepe his statutes: and obserue his lawes.
Prayse ye the Lorde.

Psalm 106

1 Prayse ye the Lorde. Confesse you it vnto god, for he is gratious: and his
mercy endureth for euer.
2 Who can expresse the valiaunt actes of God: who can publishe abrode all his
prayse?
3 Blessed are they that kepe iudgement: and do iustice at all times.
4 Remember me O God according to the fauour that thou bearest vnto thy people: O
visite me with thy saluation.
5 That I may see the felicitie of thy chosen, that I may reioyce at the gladnes
of thy people: and that I may glorie with thyne inheritaunce.
6 We haue sinned with our fathers: we haue done amisse and dealt wickedly.
7 Our fathers did not well consider thy wonders in Egypt, neither did they
remember thy manifolde great goodnes: but they rebelled at the sea, euen at the
red sea.
8 Neuerthelesse, he saued them for his names sake: that he myght make his power
to be knowen.
9 And he rebuked the red sea, and it was dryed vp: so he led them through the
deepe, as through a wyldernesse.
10 And he saued them from the hande of suche as hated them: & redeemed them from
the hande of the enemie.
11 As for their aduersaries the waters ouerwhelmed them: there was not one of
them left remayning.
12 Then beleued they his wordes: and song prayse vnto him.
13 But within a very short whyle they forgat his workes: they woulde not wayte
for his counsell.
14 And they were taken with a great lust in the wyldernesse: and they tempted
God in the desert.
15 And he gaue them their desire: and sent leannes withal into their soule.
16 They enuied also at Moyses in the tentes: and at Aaron the saint of God.
17 So the earth opened and swalowed vp Dathan: and couered the company of
Abiram.
18 And the fire was kindled in their company: the flambe brent vp the vngodly.
19 They made a calfe in Horeb: and worshipped the moulten image.
20 Thus they turned their glory: into the similitude of a calfe that eateth hay.
21 They forgat God their sauiour, who had done so great thynges in Egypt:
22 wonderous workes in ye land of Cham, and terrible thinges at the red sea.
23 Wherfore he appointed to destroy them, had not Moyses his chosen stand in the
breache before hym: to turne away his wrathful indignation, lest he should
destroy them.
24 Yea they thought scorne of the lande most to be desired: they gaue no credite
vnto his worde.
25 But they murmured in their tentes: they would not hearken vnto the voyce of
God.
26 Then lift he vp his hand against them, to geue them an ouerthrowe in the
wildernesse:
27 to geue their seede an ouerthrowe amongst the nations, and to scatter them in
sundry landes.
28 They ioyned them selues vnto Baal Peor: they also did eate of the sacrifices
of the dead.
29 And they prouoked the Lorde vnto anger with their owne inuentions: and a
plague fell mightily amongst them.
30 Then stoode vp Phinehes, he executed iustice: and so the plague ceassed.
31 And that was imputed vnto hym for righteousnesse: in generation and
generation for euermore.
32 They also prouoked God at the waters of strife: and all was not well with
Moyses for their sakes.
33 For they had caused an alteration to be of his spirite: so that he spake
vnaduisedly with his lippes.
34 Moreouer, they destroyed not the Heathen: as God commaunded them.
35 But they were mingled amongst the Heathen: and learned their workes.
36 Insomuch that they dyd seruice vnto their idols: whiche were to the a snare.
37 Yea they sacrifised their sonnes: and their daughters vnto deuils.
38 And they shed innocent blood, euen the blood of their sonnes and of their
daughters: whom they sacrifised vnto the idols of Chanaan, and the lande was
defiled with blood.
39 Thus were they stayned with their owne workes: and went a whoryng with their
owne inuentions.
40 Therfore was the wrath of God kindeled against his people: insomuch that he
abhorred his owne inheritaunce.
41 And he gaue them ouer into the hand of the Heathen: and they that dyd hate
them, were lordes ouer them.
42 Their enemies oppressed them: and brought them into subiection vnder their
hande.
43 Many a time dyd God deliuer them, but they rebelled against hym with their
owne inuentions: and were brought downe for their wickednes.
44 Neuerthelesse, he did beholde them in their aduersitie: in geuing eare to
their complaint.
45 And he remembred his couenaunt: and repented, according to the multitude of
his mercies.
46 Yea he made all those that led them away captiue: to pitie them.
47 Saue vs O God our Lorde, and gather vs from among the Heathen: that we may
geue thankes to thy holy name, and glory of thy prayse.
48 Blessed be God the Lord of Israel from world to world without end: and let
all people say, so be it. Prayse ye the Lord.

Psalm 107

1 Confesse you it vnto God: for he is gratious, and his mercy endureth for euer.
2 Let such as God did redeme speake: whom he hath redeemed from the hande of the
enemie.
3 And whom he gathered out of the landes: from the east and from the west, from
the north and from the south.
4 They went astray out of the way in solitarines and in wildernes, and found no
citie to dwell in:
5 they were hungry and thirstie, their soule fainted in them.
6 And they cry vnto god in their trouble: who deliuereth them from their
distresse.
7 And he leadeth them foorth by the right way: that they might go to the citie
inhabited.
8 O that men would confesse vnto God his louyng kindnesse: and his marueylous
actes done to the chyldren of men.
9 For he satisfieth the greedie soule: and filleth the hungry soule with
goodnes.
10 Suche as sit in darknesse and in the shadowe of death: beyng fast bounde in
miserie and iron.
11 Because they went from the wordes of the Lorde: and lightly regarded the
counsayle of the most highest.
12 Therfore he humbled their heart thorowe heauines: they fall downe, and there
is none to helpe them.
13 And they cry vnto god in their trouble: who deliuereth the out of their
distresse.
14 For he bringeth them out of darknesse and out of the shadowe of death: and
breaketh their bondes in sunder.
15 O that men would confesse vnto God: his louing kindnes and his marueylous
actes done to the chyldren of men.
16 For he breaketh the gates of brasse: & smyteth the barres of iron in sunder.
17 Foolish men are plagued for their mischeuous wayes: & for their wickednes.
18 Their soule abhorreth all maner of meate: and they be euen harde at deathes
doore.
19 And they crye vnto God in their trouble: who deliuereth them out of their
distresse.
20 he sendeth his worde & healeth them: and he maketh them to scape safe from
their corruptnes.
21 O that men would confesse vnto God: his louing kindnes and his marueylous
actes done to the chyldren of men.
22 And that they would offer vnto him sacrifices of thankes geuing: and set
foorth in wordes his workes with a ioyfull noyse.
23 Such as go downe to the sea in ships and folowe their busines in great
waters:
24 they see the workes of God, and his wonders in the deepe.
25 For he commaundeth and causeth a stormie winde to arise: and he lifteth vp on
high his waues.
26 Then they ascende vp to heauen, and come downe agayne to the deepe: so that
their soule melteth away through trouble.
27 They reele to and fro, and they do stacker like a drunken man: and their
wysdome fayleth them.
28 And they cry vnto god in their trouble: who deliuereth the out of their
distresse.
29 For he maketh the storme to ceasse: so that the waues therof are still.
30 Then be they glad because they are at rest: and he bringeth them to the hauen
where they woulde be.
31 O that men would confesse vnto god: his louyng kyndnes and meruaylous actes
done to the chyldren of men.
32 And that they would exalt him in the congregation of the people: and prayse
him in the consistorie of the aged.
33 He turneth fluddes into a wildernes: and waterspringes into a drye grounde.
34 He maketh a fruitfull grounde barren: for the wickednes of them that dwell
therein.
35 Contrary he reduceth a wyldernes into a standing water: and a drye ground
into water springes.
36 And he setteth there the hungry: and they buylde them a citie to dwell in.
37 And they sowe their lande and plant vineyardes: and they yelde vnto them
aboundant store of fruites.
38 He blesseth them, so that they multiplie exceedingly: and he suffereth not
their cattle to decrease.
39 But when they do fall from God, they are diminished & brought low: through
oppression, calamitie, & griefe of minde.
40 He bringeth princes into contempt: & he maketh them to wander in a
wildernesse where there is no way at all.
41 Yet he exalteth the poore out of miserie: and geueth him housholdes equall to
flockes of cattell.
42 The righteous will marke this and reioyce: and the mouth of all wickednesse
shalbe stopped.
43 Whosoeuer is wyse, he wyll both obserue these thinges: and also well consider
the louing kindnesse of God.

Psalm 108

1 A song, the psalme of Dauid. My heart is redye O Lorde: I wyll sing & prayse
thee in singing of psalmes, yea my glory also is redie.
2 Bestirre thee O lute and harpe: I my selfe wil bestirre me right early in the
morning.
3 I wyll prayse thee O God among the people: I wyll sing psalmes vnto thee among
the nations.
4 For the greatnes of thy mercy reacheth vnto the heauens: and thy trueth vnto
the cloudes.
5 Exalt thy selfe O Lord aboue the heauens: and let thy glory be aboue all the
earth.
6 That thy beloued may be deliuered: saue me with thy right hande, and heare
thou me.
7 The Lorde hath spoken this in his holynes (whereof I wyll reioyce:) I wyll
deuide Sichem, and measure the valley of Sucoth.
8 Gilead shalbe myne, and Manasses shalbe mine: Ephraim also shalbe the strength
of my head, and Iuda my law geuer.
9 Moab shalbe my washpot: ouer Edome I wyll cast my shoe, vpon Philistea I wyll
triumph.
10 Who wyll leade me into the strong citie? who wyll bring me into Edom?
11 Hast not thou remoued vs from thence? and wylt not thou O Lorde go out with
our hoastes?
12 Geue vs ayde against trouble: for the sauing helpe of man is but vayne.
13 Through the Lorde wyll we do valiaunt actes: for he him selfe will treade
downe our enemies.

Psalm 109

1 To the chiefe musition, a psalme of Dauid. Holde not thy tongue: O thou the
Lorde of my prayse.
2 For the mouth of the vngodly and the mouth of the deceiptfull is opened vpon
me: they haue spoken against me with a false tongue.
3 And they haue compassed me about with hatefull wordes: and fought against me
without a cause.
4 For the loue that I bare vnto them, they are become mine aduersaries: but I
geue my selfe vnto prayer.
5 Thus haue they rewarded me euyll for good: and hatred for my good wyll.
6 Set thou an vngodly man to be ruler ouer him: and let Satan stande at his
right hande.
7 When sentence is geuen vpon hym, let him be condemned: and let his prayer be
turned into sinne.
8 Let his dayes be fewe: and let another take his office.
9 Let his chyldren be fatherlesse: and his wyfe a wydowe.
10 Let his children be vagaboundes and go a begging: and let them seeke foode
out of their barren groundes.
11 Let the extortioner bryng into his snare all that he hath: and let straungers
spoyle his labour.
12 Let there be no man to shewe hym any gentlenes: nor to haue compassion vpon
his fatherlesse children.
13 Let his posteritie come to destruction: and in the next generation let his
name be cleane put out.
14 Let the wyckednes of his fathers be had in remembraunce in the sight of God:
and let not the sinne of his mother be wyped away.
15 Let them be alway before God: that he may roote out the memorial of them from
the earth.
16 Because that he remembred not to do good: but he persecuted the afflicted and
poore man, and hym whose heart was broken with sorow, that he might take his
life from hym.
17 His delight was in cursing, and it shal happen vnto him: he loued not
blessing, therfore it hath ben farre from him.
18 He clothed hym selfe with cursing, as with his garment: and it hath entred
into his bowels like water, and like oyle into his bones.
19 Let it be vnto hym as the garment that he is wrapt in: and as the gyrdle that
he is alway gyrded withall.
20 Let this rewarde be from God vnto myne aduersaries: and vnto those that
speake euill against my soule.
21 But thou O God my Lorde, do vnto me according vnto thy name: for sweete is
thy mercy.
22 Deliuer me, for truely I am afflicted: and I am poore, and my heart is
wounded within me.
23 I passe away like a vading shadowe: and I am dryuen from place to place lyke
the grashopper.
24 My knees are weake through fasting: my fleshe is dryed vp for want of
fatnesse.
25 I am become also a reproche vnto them: they gase vpon me and they shake their
head.
26 Helpe me O my Lorde: oh saue me according to thy mercy.
27 And let the know how that this is thy hande: & that thou O God hast done it.
28 They will curse, but thou wylt blesse: they wyl rise vp against me but let
them be confounded, and thy seruaunt wyll reioyce.
29 Let mine aduersaries be clothed with shame: & let them couer the selues with
their owne cofusion, as with a garment.
30 As for me I will greatly prayse God with my mouth: and I wyll prayse hym
among the multitude.
31 For he wyll stande at the right hande of the poore: to saue him from the
iudges of his soule.

Psalm 110

1 A psalme of Dauid. God sayd vnto my Lorde: sit thou on my right hande, vntyll
I make thyne enemies thy footestoole.
2 God wyll sende the scepter of his power out of Sion: rule thou in the midst of
thyne enemies.
3 Thy people wyll be very wyllyng in the time of shewing thy most mightie power
with a beautifull holynes: the deawe of thy byrth is to thee from the wombe as
from the morning.
4 God sware and he wyll not repent: thou art a priest for euer after the order
of Melchisedec.
5 The Lorde at thy right hande: wyll wounde euen kinges in the day of his wrath.
6 He wyll iudge the Heathen: he wyll fill euery place with dead bodyes, he wyll
smyte the head of a great countrey.
7 He wyll drinke of the swyft running brooke in the way: therfore he wyll lift
vp his head.

Psalm 111

1 Prayse ye the Lorde. I wyll prayse God with my whole heart: in the
congregation and assemblie of righteous men.
2 Great are the workes of God: sought out of all them that haue pleasure therin.
3 His worke is glory and maiestie: and his righteousnes endureth for euer.
4 The merciful and gratious God: hath so left a remembraunce of his meruaylous
workes.
5 He hath geuen meate vnto them that feare him: he wyll euer be myndfull of his
couenaunt.
6 He hath declared vnto his people the force of his workes: in geuing them the
inheritaunce of the Heathen.
7 The workes of his handes are veritie and iudgement: all his commaundementes
are true.
8 They be set sure for euer and euer: they are done in trueth and equitie.
9 He did sende redemption vnto his people: he hath commaunded his couenaunt to
be for euer, holy and terrible is his name.
10 The beginning of wysdome is the feare of God: all they haue a good
vnderstanding that do his commaundements, the praise of it endureth for euer.

Psalm 112

1 Prayse ye the Lorde. Blessed is the man that feareth God: he hath great
delight in his commaundementes.
2 His seede shalbe mightie vpon the earth: the generation of them that dwell
vprightly, shalbe blessed.
3 Riches and plenteousnes shalbe in his house: and his righteousnes endureth for
euer.
4 There ariseth vp light in the darknes: vnto them that deale vprightly he is
merciful, and louing, and righteous.
5 A good man is mercyfull and lendeth: he wyll guyde his wordes with discretion.
6 For he shalbe neuer moued: and the righteous shall be had in an euerlasting
remembraunce.
7 He wyll not be afraide of any euyll tidinges: his heart is setled, he beleueth
in God.
8 His heart is strengthened, he will not feare: vntyll he seeth a mischiefe to
fall vpon his enemies.
9 He hath distributed abrode, he hath geuen to the poore: his righteousnes
remayneth for euer, his horne shalbe exalted with glory.
10 The vngodly shall see it, and it wyll greeue hym, he wyll gnashe with his
teethe and consume away: the desire of the vngodly shall perishe.

Psalm 113

1 Prayse ye the Lorde. Prayse God ye seruauntes: prayse ye the name of God.
2 Blessed be the name of God: from this time foorth for euermore.
3 The name of God is to be praysed: from the rising vp of the sunne, vnto the
goyng downe of the same.
4 God is high aboue all Heathen: and his glory aboue the heauens.
5 Who is like vnto God our Lord that dwelleth on hygh aboue all:
6 and yet humbleth him selfe to beholde the thinges that are in heauen and in
earth?
7 He rayseth vp the simple out of the dust: and lyfteth vp the poore from the
dounghyll.
8 For to make him sit with the princes: euen with the princes of his people.
9 He maketh the barren woman to kepe house: and to be a ioyful mother of
children. Prayse ye the Lorde.

Psalm 114

1 When Israel came out of Egypt: & the house of Iacob from among the barbarous
people.
2 Iuda was his holynesse: and Israel his dominion.
3 The sea sawe that and fled: Iordane was driuen backe.
4 The mountaynes skypped lyke rammes: and the litle hilles like young lambes.
5 What ayleth thee O thou sea that thou fleddest? and thou Iordane that thou
wast driuen backe?
6 Ye mountaines what ayled you that ye skipped lyke rammes: and ye litle hilles
like young lambes?
7 Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lorde: at the presence of the Lorde
of Iacob.
8 Whiche turned the harde rocke into a standing water: and the flint stone into
a springing well of waters.

Psalm 115

1 Geue praise not vnto vs O God, not vnto vs, but vnto thy name: for thy louing
mercy, and for thy truethes sake.
2 Wherfore shal the Heathen say: where is nowe their God?
3 Truely our Lorde is in heauen: he hath done whatsoeuer pleased him.
4 Their idols are siluer and gold: euen the workes of mens handes.
5 They haue a mouth and speake not: they haue eyes and see not.
6 They haue eares and heare not: they haue noses and smell not.
7 They haue handes and handle not, they haue feete and walke not: and they vtter
no sounde out of their throtes.
8 They that make them are lyke vnto them: euery one that putteth his trust in
them.
9 But Israel trust thou in God: he is their ayde and their shielde.
10 Ye house of Aaron trust you in God: he is their ayde and their shielde.
11 Ye that feare God, trust ye in God: he is their ayde and their shielde.
12 God hath ben myndfull of vs, he wyll blesse vs: he wyll blesse the house of
Israel, he wyll blesse the house of Aaron.
13 He wyll blesse those that feare God: the small with the great.
14 God wyll encrease you more and more: both you and also your children.
15 Ye are the blessed of God: which made heauen and earth.
16 The heauen, the heauen I say is Gods: and he hath geuen the earth vnto the
children of men.
17 The dead prayse not thee O Lorde: neither all they that go downe into the
place of scilence.
18 But we wyll prayse the Lord: from this tyme foorth for euermore. Prayse ye
the Lorde.

Psalm 116

1 I haue loued: because God hath hearde my voyce and my prayers.
2 Because he hath enclined his eare vnto me: therfore I wyll call vpon hym as
long as I lyue.
3 The snares of death compassed me rounde about: and the paynes of hell toke
holde on me. I founde anguishe and heauinesse,
4 but I called vpon the name of God: saying O God, I beseche thee deliuer my
soule
5 Gratious is God and ryghteous: our Lorde is mercifull.
6 God gardeth the simple: I was brought to the extremitie, and he preserued me.
7 Returne O my soule vnto thy rest: for God hath rewarded thee.
8 For thou O Lorde hast deliuered my soule from death: myne eyes from teares,
and my feete from fallyng.
9 I wyll walke before the face of God: in the lande of the lyuyng.
10 I beleued, therfore I wyll speake: I was sore afflicted,
11 insomuch that I said in my rashnesse euery man is a lyer.
12 What rewarde shal I geue vnto God: for all the benefites that he hath done
vnto me?
13 I wyll take the cuppe of saluation: and I wyll call vpon the name of God.
14 I wyll pay my vowes nowe vnto God: in the presence of all his people.
15 The death of his saintes: is precious in the eyes of God.
16 It is euen so O God, for I am thy seruaunt and the sonne of thy handemayde:
thou hast loosed my bondes in sunder.
17 I wyll offer vnto thee the sacrifice of thankesgeuyng: and I wyll call vpon
the name of God.
18 I wyll pay my vowes vnto God in the sight of all his people:
19 in the courtes of Gods house, euen in the myddest of thee O Hierusalem.
Prayse ye the Lorde.

Psalm 117

1 O prayse God all ye heathen: prayse hym all ye nations.
2 For his mercifull kyndnesse is euer more and more towarde vs: and the trueth
of God endureth for euer. Prayse ye the Lorde.

Psalm 118

1 O confesse you it vnto God, for he is gratious: and his mercie endureth for
euer.
2 Let Israel nowe confesse: that his mercie endureth for euer.
3 Let the house of Aaron nowe confesse: that his mercie endureth for euer.
4 Let them nowe that feare God: confesse that his mercie endureth for euer.
5 I called vpon the Lorde beyng in distresse: and the Lorde hath hearde me at
large.
6 God is with me: I wyll not feare what man can do vnto me.
7 God is with me amongst them that ayde me: therfore I shall see my desire vpon
them that hate me.
8 It is better to trust in God: then to put any confidence in man.
9 It is better to trust in God: then to put any confidence in princes.
10 All nations compassed me rounde about: but I trusted in the name of God that
I shoulde destroy them.
11 They kept me in on euery syde, they kept me in I say on euery syde: but I
trusted in the name of God that I shoulde destroy them.
12 They swarmed about me lyke bees, and they be extinguished as the fire made of
thornes: for I trusted in the name of God that I should destroy them.
13 Thou hast thrust sore at me, that I might fall: but God dyd ayde me
14 The Lorde is my strength and my song: and he is become my saluation.
15 The voyce of a ioyfull noyse & of saluation is in the dwellynges of the
ryghteous: saying the ryght hande of God bryngeth mightie thynges to passe.
16 The ryght hande of God is on hygh: the right hande of God bryngeth mightie
thynges to passe.
17 I shall not as yet dye, but I shal liue: and I wyll declare the workes of the
Lorde.
18 The Lorde hath greatly chastened me: but he hath not geuen me ouer vnto
death.
19 Open me the gates of ryghteousnesse, I wyll enter in by them: that I may geue
thankes vnto the Lorde.
20 This is the gate of God: the ryghteous shall enter in by it.
21 I wyll thanke thee for that thou hast heard me: and art become my saluation.
22 The same stone which the buylders refused: is become the head stone of the
corner.
23 This was the doyng of God: and it is marueylous in our eyes.
24 This is the day whiche God hath made: we wyll reioyce and be glad in it.
25 O God I pray thee nowe saue vs: O God I pray thee nowe geue vs prosperous
successe.
26 Blessed be he that commeth in the name of God: we do blesse you out of the
house of God.
27 It is the Lord God who hath geuen vs lyght: bynde a sacrifice with cordes
vnto the hornes of the aulter.
28 Thou art my Lorde, and I wyll confesse it vnto thee: thou art my Lorde and I
wyll magnifie thee.
29 O confesse you it vnto God, for he is gratious: and his mercie endureth for
euer.

Psalm 119

1 Aleph. Blessed are those that be perfect in the way: walkyng in the lawe of
God.
2 Blessed are they that kepe his testimonies: they seke hym with their whole
heart.
3 Truely they walke in his wayes: who do no wickednesse.
4 Thou hast geuen charge: that we shoulde diligently kepe thy commaundementes.
5 I wishe that my wayes were directed: for to kepe thy statutes.
6 I shall take then no shame: when I haue regarde vnto all thy commaundementes.
7 I wyll confesse it vnto thee with an vpryght heart: when I shall haue learned
the iudgementes of thy ryghteousnesse.
8 I wyll kepe thy statutes: wherfore forsake me not for any long tyme.
9 Beth Wherby shall a young man refourme his way: euen in guiding it accordyng
to thy worde.
10 I haue sought thee with my whole heart: suffer me not to swarue from thy
commaundementes.
11 I haue hyd thy wordes within my heart: for this ende, that I shoulde not
sinne agaynst thee.
12 Blessed art thou O God: teache me thy statutes.
13 I haue declared with my lyppes: all the iudgementes of thy mouth.
14 I am delighted in the way of thy testimonies: as in all maner of riches.
15 I wyll study thy commaundementes: and I wyll consider thy wayes.
16 My delyght shalbe in thy statutes: and I wyll not forget thy worde.
17 Gimel Rewarde thy seruaunt, let me lyue: and I wyll kepe thy worde.
18 Open thou myne eyes: and I will beholde the wonderous thynges of thy lawe.
19 I am a straunger vpon earth: hyde not thy commaundementes from me.
20 My soule faynteth: for the very feruent desire that it hath alwaye vnto thy
iudgementes.
21 Thou hast rebuked those that be proude and cursed: who do erre from thy
commaundementes.
22 Withdrawe from me reproche and contempt: for that I haue kept thy
testimonies.
23 Yea princes dyd syt and speake agaynst me: but thy seruaunt did geue hym
selfe to the meditation of thy statutes.
24 Yea thy testimonies are my delyght: and my counsaylers.
25 Daleth My soule cleaueth to the dust: reuiue thou me accordyng to thy worde.
26 I haue made a declaration to thee of my wayes, and thou heardest me: O teache
me thy statutes.
27 Make me to vnderstande the way of thy commaundementes: and I wyll geue my
selfe to the meditation of thy wonderous workes.
28 My soule melteth away for very heauinesse: comfort thou me accordyng to thy
worde.
29 Take from me the way of falshood: & witsafe me worthy to haue thy lawe.
30 I haue chosen the way of trueth: & I haue layde thy iudgementes before me.
31 I haue stuck fast vnto thy testimonies: O God confounde me not.
32 I wyll runne the way of thy commaundementes: when thou shalt set my heart at
libertie.
33 He Teache me O God the way of thy statutes: and I wyll kepe it vnto the ende.
34 Geue me vnderstanding, & I wil kepe thy law: yea I wyll kepe it with my whole
heart.
35 Leade me in the path of thy comaundementes: for therin is my delyght.
36 Encline myne heart vnto thy testimonies: and not to couetousnesse.
37 Turne away myne eyes, lest they beholde vanitie: cause me to lyue in thy way.
38 Make thy worde more euident vnto thy seruaunt: who is geuen to thy feare.
39 Take away the reproche that I am afraide of: for thy iudgemetes are good.
40 Behold I haue coueted after thy commaundementes: cause me to lyue in thy
ryghteousnesse.
41 Vau Let thy louing mercie also come vnto me O God: euen thy saluation,
accordyng to thy worde.
42 And I shall aunswere to hym that layeth thy worde to me for a reproche: for
in thy worde I haue put my trust.
43 Take not the worde of trueth vtterly out of my mouth: for my hope is in thy
iudgementes.
44 And I wyll alway kepe thy lawe: yea for euer and euer.
45 And I wyll walke in a large scope: for I seke thy commaundementes.
46 I wyll also speake of thy testimonies before kinges: & I will not be ashamed.
47 And my delyght shalbe in thy commaundementes: which I haue loued.
48 And I wyll lyft vp my handes vnto thy commaundementes which I haue loued: &
my study shalbe in thy statutes.
49 Zain Be myndfull of thy promise made vnto thy seruaunt: wherin thou hast
caused me to put my trust.
50 That same is my comfort in my affliction: for thy worde maketh me to lyue.
51 The proude haue had me exceedingly in derision: yet I haue not shrinked from
thy lawe.
52 For I called to remembraunce thy iudgementes from the begynnyng of the worlde
O God: and so I comforted my selfe.
53 An extreme vnnaturall heat hath assayled me, because of the vngodly: who
transgresse thy lawe.
54 Thy statutes haue ben my songes: in the house of my pilgrimages.
55 I haue thought vpon thy name O God in the nyght season: and I haue kept thy
lawe.
56 This came to passe for me: because I kept thy commaundementes.
57 Heth Thou art my portion O God: I haue purposed to kepe thy lawe.
58 I made myne humble petition to thy face with my whole heart: be mercifull
vnto me according vnto thy word.
59 I haue considered mine owne wayes: and I haue turned my feete vnto thy
testimonies.
60 I made haste and I made no delay: for to kepe thy commaundementes.
61 The vngodly haue tangled me in their snares: but I haue not forgotten thy
lawe.
62 I wyll ryse at midnight to confesse me vnto thee: because of thy ryghteous
iudgementes.
63 I am a companion of all them that feare thee: and kepe thy commaundementes.
64 The earth O God is replenished with thy louyng kyndnesse: O teache me thy
statutes.
65 Teth O God thou hast dealt gratiouslye with thy seruaunt: according vnto thy
worde.
66 Learne me the good taste & cunning: for I haue beleued thy commaundementes.
67 Before I felt affliction I swarued out of the way: but nowe I kepe thy word.
68 Thou art good and beneficiall: teache me thy statutes.
69 The proude haue forged a false tale agaynst me: but I wyll kepe thy
commaundementes with my whole heart.
70 Their heart is as fat as brawne: but my delyght hath ben in thy lawe.
71 It is good for me that I am brought into miserie: by that meanes I shall
learne thy statutes.
72 The lawe of thy mouth is dearer vnto me: then thousandes of golde & siluer.
73 Iod Thy handes haue made me and fashioned me: geue me vnderstanding, and I
will learne thy comaundementes.
74 They that feare thee, shall see me, & reioyce: because I haue geuen earnest
attendaunce vnto thy worde.
75 I know O God that thy iudgementes are iustice: and that thou hast caused me
ryghtfully to be afflicted.
76 I beseche thee let thy louing kindnesse be a meanes to comfort me: accordyng
to thy worde spoken vnto thy seruaunt.
77 Let thy pitifull mercies come vnto me, that I may lyue: for thy lawe is my
delyght.
78 Let the proude be confounded, for they haue falsly reported me: but I wyll
study thy commaundementes.
79 Let such as feare thee and knowe thy testimonies: returne vnto me.
80 Let myne heart be perfectly set in thy statutes: that I be not ashamed.
81 Caph My soule hath faynted after thy saluation: I geue earnest attedaunce
vnto thy worde.
82 Myne eyes haue faynted after thy worde: whylest I say, when wilt thou comfort
me.
83 For I am become like a bottel hanged in the smoke: yet I do not forget thy
statutes.
84 Howe many are the dayes of thy seruaunt? when wilt thou geue iudgement
agaynst them that persecute me?
85 The proude haue digged pittes for me: which is a thing not done accordyng to
thy lawe.
86 All thy commaundementes are the trueth it selfe: they wrongfully persecute
me, O be thou my ayde.
87 They had almost made an ende of me vpon the earth: but I forsoke not thy
commaundementes.
88 Make me to lyue accordyng to thy pietie: and I wyll kepe the testimonies of
thy mouth.
89 Lamed O God: thy worde endureth for euer in heauen.
90 Thy trueth appeareth to euery generation: thou hast layde the foundation of
the earth, and it shall continue.
91 All thynges continue this day accordyng to thine ordinaunce: for all thinges
be thy seruauntes.
92 If my delight had not ben in thy lawe: I shoulde haue perished in myne
affliction.
93 I wyll neuer forget thy commaundementes: for through them thou hast reuiued
me.
94 I am thine, saue me: for I haue diligently studied thy commaundementes ouer.
95 When the vngodly layde wayte for me to destroy me: I endeuoured my selfe to
vnderstande thy testimonies.
96 I see an ende of euery thing be it neuer so perfect: but thy commaundement is
exceedyng large.
97 Mem Howe greatly do I loue thy lawe? my study is all the day long in it.
98 Thou hast made me wyser then myne enemies through thy commaundementes: for
they are euer with me.
99 I am able to geue better instruction then all they that were my teachers: for
thy testimonies are my study.
100 I am made to vnderstande more then the aged can: because I kept thy
commaundementes.
101 I haue rstrayned my feete from euery euyll way: that I may kepe thy worde.
102 I haue not shrinked from thy iudgementes: for thou didst teache me.
103 Howe sweete are thy wordes vnto my throte: truely they be sweeter then hony
is to my mouth.
104 Through thy commaundementes I get vnderstandyng: therfore I hate all wayes
of falshood.
105 Nun Thy worde is a candell vnto my feete: and a lyght vnto my pathes.
106 I haue made an oth (which I wil ratifie) for to kepe thy iuste iudgementes.
107 I am troubled aboue measure: quicken me O God accordyng vnto thy worde.
108 Let the freewyll offerynges of my mouth please thee O God: and teache me thy
iudgementes.
109 My soule is alway in my hande: yet I do not forget thy lawe.
110 The vngodly haue layde a snare for me: but yet I swarued not from thy
commaundementes.
111 I haue claymed thy testimonies as myne heritage for euer: for they are the
very ioy of myne heart.
112 I haue applyed myne heart for to fulfyll thy statutes: euen to the worldes
ende.
113 Samech I hate hygh subtile deuices: and I do loue thy lawe.
114 Thou art my refuge and my shield: I geue earnest attendaunce vnto thy worde.
115 Auoyde from me ye malicious persons: and I wyll kepe the commaundementes of
my Lorde.
116 Strengthen me in thy worde and I shall lyue: and make me not ashamed of my
hope.
117 Holde thou me vp and I shalbe safe: and I will loke gladly vpon thy statutes
alwayes.
118 Thou hast troden vnder foote all them that go astray from thy statutes: for
their crafty deuice is but falshood.
119 Thou hast dispatched out of the way all the vngodly of the earth lyke
drosse: therfore I loue thy testimonies.
120 My fleshe trembleth for feare of thee: and I am afrayde of thy iudgementes.
121 Ain I haue executed iudgement and iustice: wherfore leaue me not to such as
do offer me wrong.
122 For thy owne goodnesse sake take thy seruaunt vnto thy protection: let not
the proude oppresse me with wrong.
123 Myne eyes haue faynted with lokyng for thy saluation: and for the worde of
thy ryghteousnesse.
124 Deale with thy seruaunt accordyng vnto thy owne louyng kyndnesse: and teache
me thy statutes.
125 I am thy seruaunt, graunt me vnderstandyng: that I may knowe thy
testimonies.
126 It is tyme for me to do for Gods cause: for they haue brought thy lawe
almost to nothyng.
127 Therfore I loue thy commaundementes: aboue golde and precious stone.
128 Therfore I take all thy commaundementes euery one of them to be ryght: & I
vtterly hate all wayes of falshood.
129 Pe Thy testimonies contayne wonderfull thinges: therfore doth my soule kepe
them.
130 The first entering of thy wordes will illuminate: geuyng vnderstanding euen
vnto the simple.
131 I opened my mouth and panted: for I bare a great affection to thy
commaundementes.
132 Loke thou vpon me and be mercifull vnto me: as thou vsest to do vnto those
that loue thy name.
133 Direct my steppes in thy worde: and so shall no wickednesse haue dominion
ouer me.
134 Redeeme me from the fraudulent dealyng of men: and I wyll kepe thy
commaundementes.
135 Make the lyght of thy countenaunce shyne vpon thy seruaunt: and teache me
thy statutes.
136 Ryuers of waters gushe out of myne eyes: because men kepe not thy lawe.
137 Sade O God: thou art iust and vpryght in thy iudgementes.
138 Thou hast commaunded the iustice and the veritie of thy testimonies: to be
obserued very strayghtly.
139 My zeale hath consumed me: because myne aduersaries haue forgotten thy
wordes.
140 Thy worde is purified to the vttermost: and thy seruaunt loueth it.
141 I am small and of no reputation: yet I do not forget thy comaundementes.
142 Thy ryghteousnesse is an euerlastyng righteousnesse: & thy lawe is the
trueth.
143 Trouble and griefe haue taken holde vpon me: yet thy commaundementes be my
delyght.
144 The righteousnesse of thy testimonies is euerlastyng: make me to vnderstande
them and I shall lyue.
145 Coph I haue called with my whole heart, heare me O God: I wyll kepe thy
statutes.
146 I haue called vpon thee, saue me: and I wyll kepe thy testimonies.
147 I haue preuented other in the dawnyng of the day, and I cryed vnto thee: for
I geue earnest attendaunce vnto thy wordes.
148 Myne eyes haue preuented the nyght watches: that my study might be wholy in
thy wordes.
149 Heare my voyce accordyng to thy louing kindnesse: make me to lyue O God
after thy iudgementes.
150 They that mynde to do an act of mischiefenesse, do drawe nye vnto me: they
are farre from thy lawe.
151 But thou art nye at hande O God: and all thy comaundementes be trueth.
152 As concernyng thy testimonies: I haue knowen long since that thou hast made
them to last for euer.
153 Resh Beholde myne affliction & deliuer me: for I haue not forgotten thy
lawe.
154 Defende thou my cause & redeeme me: make me to lyue accordyng vnto thy
worde.
155 Saluation is farre from the vngodly: for they study not thy statutes.
156 Thy mercies be manifolde O God: make me to liue accordyng to thy
iudgementes.
157 There be many that do persecute me and be myne aduersaries: yet I do not
swarue from thy testimonies.
158 I sawe transgressours, and I was greeued at the heart: because they kept not
thy lawe.
159 Beholde howe I loue thy commaundementes: quicken me O God accordyng to thy
louyng kindnesse.
160 The beginning of thy word is trueth: and all the iudgementes of thy
ryghteousnesse endure for euermore.
161 Shin Princes haue persecuted me without a cause: but my heart hath stoode in
awe of thy wordes.
162 I am as glad of thy worde: as he that fyndeth a great bootie.
163 That which is false I hate and abhorre: but thy lawe I do loue.
164 I do prayse thee seuen tymes euery day: for loue of the iudgementes of thy
iustice.
165 They that loue thy lawe shall haue great prosperitie: and nothyng shall
offende them.
166 Lorde, I haue wayted after thy saluation: and I haue done thy
commaundementes.
167 My soule hath kept thy testimonies: and I haue loued them exceedyngly.
168 I haue kept thy commaundementes and testimonies: for all my wayes are before
thee.
169 Tau Let my crye O God approche neare vnto thy face: make me to vnderstande
euery thyng accordyng vnto thy worde.
170 Let my supplication come before thee: deliuer me accordyng to thy worde.
171 My lippes shall powre out thy prayse: when thou hast taught me thy statutes.
172 My tongue shall syng of thy worde: for all thy commaundementes are
ryghteousnesse.
173 Let thyne hande be redie for to ayde me: for I haue chosen thy
commaundementes.
174 I haue longed for thy saluation O God: and thy lawe is my whole delight
175 Let my soule lyue, and it shall prayse thee: and thy iudgementes shalbe an
ayde vnto me.
176 I haue gone astray lyke a lost sheepe: oh seke out thy seruaunt, for I haue
not forgotten thy commaundementes.

Psalm 120

1 A song of high degrees. When I was in trouble I called vpon God: and he hearde
me.
2 Deliuer my soule O God from false lyppes: & from a deceiptful tongue.
3 What doth a deceiptfull tongue vnto thee? what good bryngeth it thee?
4 So much as sharpe arrowes of a strong man in thy sydes: with Iuniper coales
powred on thy head.
5 Wo be vnto me that am constrayned to be conuersaunt in Mesech: and to dwell
among the tentes of Cedar.
6 My soule hath dwelt long: with hym that hateth peace.
7 I am a man of peace: but because I do speake therof, they prepare them selues
to battayle.

Psalm 121

1 A song of high degrees. I will lift vp myne eyes vnto the hilles: from whence
my helpe shall come.
2 My helpe commeth from God: who hath made heauen and earth.
3 He wyll not suffer thy foote to moue: he wyll not sleepe that kepeth thee.
4 Beholde, he that kepeth Israel: wyll neither slumber nor sleepe.
5 God hym selfe is thy keper: God is thy defence vpon thy ryght hande.
6 The sunne shal not hurt thee by day: neither the moone by nyght.
7 God wyll preserue thee from all euill: he wyll preserue thy soule.
8 God wyll preserue thy goyng out and thy commyng in: from this tyme foorth for
euermore.

Psalm 122

1 A song of high degrees of Dauid. I was glad when they sayde vnto me: we wyll
go into the house of God.
2 Our feete shall stande in thy gates: O Hierusalem.
3 Hierusalem is builded: as a citie that is well vnited together in it selfe.
4 For the tribes do go vp thyther, euen the tribes of the Lorde: which is a
testimonie vnto Israel for to prayse the name of God.
5 For there is ordeyned the seate for iudgement: euen the seate of the house of
Dauid.
6 Pray for the peace of Hierusalem: they shall prosper that loue thee.
7 Peace be within thy walles: and plenteousnesse within thy palaces.
8 For my brethren and companions sakes: I wyll wyshe peace to be within thee.
9 Yea because of the house of God our Lord: I wyll procure to do thee good.

Psalm 123

1 A song of high degrees. I lyft vp myne eyes vnto thee: who dwellest in heauen.
2 Beholde, as the eyes of seruauntes loke vnto the hande of their maisters, and
as the eyes of a mayden vnto the hande of her maistresse: euen so our eyes wayte
vpon God our Lorde vntyll he haue mercie vpon vs.
3 Haue mercy vpon vs O God, haue mercy vpon vs: for we haue suffered enough of
dispite.
4 Our soule is filled with the scornefull reprofe of the wealthy: and with the
dispitefulnes of the proude.

Psalm 124

1 A song of high degrees, of Dauid. If God him selfe had not ben of our side
Israel may now say:
2 if God him self had not ben of our side when men rose vp against vs,
3 Then they had swalowed vs vp quicke: when their wrath was so inflamed against
vs.
4 Then the waters had drowned vs: the running streame had flowed ouer our soule.
5 Then the waters of the proude: had flowed ouer our soule.
6 But blessed be God, whiche hath not geuen vs ouer for a pray vnto their teeth.
7 Our soule is escaped, euen as a byrde out of the snare of the fouler: the
snare is broken, and we be escaped.
8 Our helpe is in the name of God: who hath made heauen and earth.

Psalm 125

1 A song of high degrees. They that put their trust in God be as the mount Sion:
whiche may not be remoued but must stande fast for euer.
2 As for Hierusalem, hilles be rounde about it: and God is rounde about his
people from this tyme foorth for euermore.
3 For the scepter of the vngodly shall not rest vpon the lot of the righteous:
lest the righteous put their handes vnto wickednes.
4 Be beneficiall O God: vnto those that be good and vpright in their heart.
5 And such as do wander in their owne peruersnes, those God will cause to walke
with the workers of wickednes: so peace shalbe vpon Israel.

Psalm 126

1 A song of high degrees. When God shall cause them of Sion that were led into
captiuitie for to returne: we shalbe as men that dreamed.
2 Then shall our mouth be filled with a laughter: and our tongue with a ioyfull
noyse. Then shall suche as be amongst the Heathen say: God hath brought great
thinges to passe, that he myght do for them.
3 God hath brought great thinges to passe for vs: we be made merie.
4 Make vs O God that be led into captiuitie: for to returne as riuers into the
south.
5 They that sowe in teares: shall reape in ioy.
6 He that goeth foorth on his way, and wepyng beareth pretious seede: shall
doubtlesse returning, come againe with a ioyfull noyse, bryngyng his sheaues
with hym.

Psalm 127

1 A song of high degrees (made) for Solomon. If GOD wyll not buylde the house,
they labour in vayne that buylde it: if God kepe not the citie, the watchman
waketh in vayne.
2 Is it is a vayne thing for you that ye make haste to ryse vp early, that ye
make delayes to take rest, eatyng the bread of sorowes: euen so he geueth sleepe
to his welbeloued.
3 Beholde, chyldren be the inheritage of God: and the fruite of the wombe is a
rewarde.
4 Like as arrowes be in the hande of the strong: euen so are the chyldren of
youth.
5 Happy is the man that hath filled his quiuer with them: they shall not be
ashamed when they speake with their enemies in the gate.

Psalm 128

1 A song of high degrees. He is blessed whatsoeuer he be that feareth God:
walking in his waies.
2 For thou shalt eate the labours of thine handes: thou shalt be happy, and all
shall go well with thee.
3 Thy wyfe shalbe as a fruitfull vine: vpon the sides of thyne house. Thy
chyldren shalbe like oliue braunches: rounde about thy table.
4 Beholde, for thus shall the man be blessed: that feareth God.
5 God wyll blesse thee out of Sion: and thou shalt see Hierusalem in prosperitie
all the dayes of thy lyfe.
6 Yea thou shalt see thy chylders chyldren: and peace vpon Israel.

Psalm 129

1 A song of high degrees. Israel may now say: they haue troubled me often from
my youth vp.
2 They haue troubled me often from my youth vp: but they haue not preuayled
against me.
3 The plowemen plowed vpon my backe: they made long forrowes.
4 But God who is iust: hath cut a peeces the snares of the vngodly.
5 All they that beare an euyll wyll to Sion: shalbe confounded, and be made to
turne backe from it.
6 They shall be as the grasse growing vpon the house toppes: whiche withereth
afore that it be shot foorth to his growth.
7 Whereof the mower fylleth not his hande: neither he that byndeth vp the
sheaues his armes full.
8 And they which go by, say not so much as the blessing of God be vpon you: we
blesse you in the name of God.

Psalm 130

1 A song of high degrees. Out of the deepe I haue called vnto thee O God: O
Lorde heare my voyce.
2 Let thine eares be attentiue: vnto the voyce of my petition for grace.
3 If thou O God wylt marke what is done amisse: O Lorde who can abide it?
4 For there is pardon of sinne with thee: that thou mayest be feared.
5 I haue wayted for God, my soule haue wayted for hym: and I haue reposed my
trust in his worde.
6 My soule lifteth more after God, then watchmen do after the morning: I say
more then watchmen do after the mornyng.
7 Israel ought to trust in God, for there is mercy with God: and there is
plenteousnes of redemption with him.
8 And he wyll redeeme Israel: from all his sinnes.

Psalm 131

1 A song of high degrees (made) of Dauid. O God I am not hygh mynded, I haue no
proude lokes: I haue not vsed to walke in greater & waightier matters then I
ought to do.
2 Nay I haue restrayned my soule, and kept it lowe like a chylde that is weaned
from his mother: yea my soule is within me as a weaned chylde.
3 O Israel repose thou thy trust in God: from this time foorth for euermore.

Psalm 132

1 A song of high degrees. O God be mindfull of Dauid: with all his affliction.
2 Who swore vnto God: who made a vowe vnto the most mightie Lorde of Iacob.
3 Saying I wyll not enter into the tabernacle of my house: nor get vp into my
bed.
4 I wyll not suffer myne eyes to slepe: nor myne eye liddes to slumber.
5 Untill I finde out a place for the temple of God: an habitation for the most
mightie Lorde of Iacob.
6 Beholde, we hearde it to be at Ephratha: we founde it in the fieldes of the
forest.
7 We wyll go into his tabernacle: and fall downe on our knees before his
footestoole.
8 Aryse O God for to come into thy resting place: thou and the arke of thy
strength.
9 Let thy priestes be clothed with righteousnes: and let thy saintes make a
ioyfull noyse.
10 For thy seruaunt Dauids sake: turne not away from the face of thyne
annoynted.
11 God hath sworne for a trueth vnto Dauid, and he wyll not go from it: I wyll
place vpon thy throne some of the fruite of thy body.
12 If thy chyldren wyll kepe my couenaunt and my testimonies whiche I wyll
teache them: their chyldren also shall sit vpon thy throne for euermore.
13 For God hath chosen to be in Sion: he had a desire that it might be an
habitation for hym.
14 This is sayeth he my rest for euer: heare I wyll dwell, for I haue a desire
to it.
15 I wyll aboundauntly powre my blessinges vpon her victuals: and I wyll
satisfie her poore with bread.
16 I wyll clothe her priestes with saluation: and her saintes shall make an
exceeding ioyfull noyse.
17 I will make there the horne of Dauid to bud vp: I wyll ordayne a light for
mine annoynted.
18 I wyll clothe his enemies with shame: but his crowne shall florishe vppon hym
selfe.

Psalm 133

1 A song of high degrees (made) of Dauid. Beholde howe good and howe pleasaunt a
thing it is: that brethren dwel together in vnitie.
2 It is lyke vnto a pretious oyntment powred vpon the head, which runneth downe
vpon the beard, euen vpon Aarons beard: which also runneth downe vpon the
skyrtes of his garmentes.
3 It is also like vnto the deawe of Hermon: whiche falleth downe vpon the hyll
of Sion. For God hath commaunded his blessing: and life euerlasting to be where
is suche concorde.

Psalm 134

1 A song of high degrees. Beholde, blesse God all ye the seruauntes of God: who
in the nyght tyme remayne in the house of God.
2 Lyft vp your holy handes: and blesse God.
3 God who made heauen and earth: blesse thee out of Sion.

Psalm 135

1 Prayse ye the Lorde, prayse ye the name of God: prayse it ye seruauntes of
God.
2 Ye that stande in the house of God: in the courtes of the house of our Lord,
3 Prayse ye the Lorde, for God is gratious: sing psalmes vnto his name, for it
is pleasaunt.
4 For the Lorde hath chosen Iacob vnto hym selfe: and Israel for his owne
possession.
5 For I knowe that God is great: and that our Lorde is aboue all gods.
6 God doth whatsoeuer pleaseth hym in heauen and in earth: in the sea, and in
all deepe places.
7 He causeth cloudes to ascende from the lowest part of the earth: he maketh it
to lighten when it rayneth, he bringeth wyndes out of his treasure houses.
8 He smote the first borne of Egypt: aswell of beast as of man.
9 He sent tokens and wonders into the mydst of thee O Egypt: against Pharao and
all his seruauntes.
10 He smote many nations: and slue mightie kinges.
11 Sihon king of the Amorites, and Og the king of Bashan: and all the kingdomes
of Chanaan.
12 And he gaue their lande for an inheritaunce: euen for an heritaunce to Israel
his people.
13 Thy name O God endureth for euer: there wil be a remembraunce of thee O God,
from one generation to another.
14 For God wyll iudge his people: and he will be pacified beyng displeased with
his seruauntes.
15 As for the idols of the Heathen they are but siluer and golde: the worke of
mens handes.
16 They haue a mouth and speake not: they haue eyes but they see not.
17 They haue eares and they heare not: yea there is no breath in their mouth.
18 They that make them are lyke vnto them: and euery one that putteth his trust
in them.
19 Blesse God ye the house of Israel: blesse God ye the house of Aaron.
20 Blesse God ye the house of Leui: ye that feare God, blesse God.
21 Blessed be God out of Sion: who dwelleth at Hierusalem. Prayse ye the Lorde.

Psalm 136

1 Confesse you it vnto the Lord, for he is gratious: and his mercy endureth for
euer.
2 Confesse you it vnto the God of Gods: for his mercy endureth for euer.
3 Confesse you it vnto the Lorde of Lordes: for his mercy endureth for euer.
4 Who onlye doth great wonders: for his mercy endureth for euer.
5 Who by his excellent wysdome made the heauens: for his mercy endureth for
euer.
6 Who layde out the earth aboue the waters: for his mercy endureth for euer.
7 Who hath made great lightes: for his mercy endureth for euer.
8 The sunne to rule in the day: for his mercy endureth for euer.
9 The moone and the starres to gouerne in the night: for his mercy endureth for
euer.
10 Who smote Egypt with their first borne: for his mercy endureth for euer.
11 And brought out Israel from among them: for his mercy endureth for euer.
12 With a mightie hande and a stretched out arme: for his mercy endureth for
euer.
13 Who deuided the red sea in partes: for his mercy endureth for euer.
14 And made Israel to passe through the myddest of it: for his mercy endureth
for euer.
15 He ouerthrewe Pharao and his hoast in the red sea: for his mercy endureth for
euer.
16 Who led his people through the wyldernesse: for his mercy endureth for euer.
17 Who smote great kinges: for his mercye endureth for euer.
18 And he slue mightie kynges: for his mercy endureth for euer.
19 Sihon kyng of the Amorites: for his mercy endureth for euer.
20 And Og the kyng of Bashan: for his mercy endureth for euer.
21 And he gaue away their lande for an heritage: for his mercy endureth for
euer.
22 For an heritage vnto Israel his seruaunt: for his mercy endureth for euer.
23 Who remembred vs when we were brought lowe: for his mercy endureth for euer.
24 And he deliuered vs from our aduersaries: for his mercy endureth for euer.
25 Who geueth foode vnto all creatures: for his mercy endureth for euer.
26 Confesse you it vnto the Lord of heauen: for his mercy endureth for euer.

Psalm 137

1 By the waters of Babylon we sat downe there: also we wept when we remembred
Sion.
2 We hanged our harpes on the Salon trees: in the mydst of it.
3 For there they that led vs away captiue required of vs some matter of a song:
and for our waylynges myrth, saying sing vs one of the songes of Sion.
4 He aunswered howe can we sing one of the songes of God: in another lande
besides our owne?
5 If I forget thee O Hierusalem: let my right hande forget her cunning.
6 Let my tongue cleaue to the roofe of my mouth, if I do not remember thee: yea
if I preferre not thee O Hierusalem aboue my most myrth.
7 Remember the chyldren of Edom in the day of Hierusalem: they sayde, downe with
it, downe with it, euen to the grounde.
8 O daughter of Babylon who must lye wasted: happy shall he be that rewardeth
thee as thou hast serued vs.
9 Blessed shall he be: that taketh & throweth thy litle children against the
stone.

Psalm 138

1 Of Dauid. I wyll geue thankes vnto thee O God with my whole heart: I wyll sing
psalmes vnto thee before the gods.
2 I wyll make my lowe obeysaunce towarde thy holy temple: and I wyll prayse thy
holy name in respect of thy louing kindnesse and trueth. For thou hast magnified
thy name: and thy worde aboue all thinges.
3 In the day of myne aduersitie I called vpon thee, and thou heardest me: thou
enduedst my soule more and more with strength.
4 All the kinges of the earth will prayse thee O God: for they haue hearde the
wordes of thy mouth.
5 Yea they wyll sing of the wayes of God: for great is the glory of God.
6 For though God be on high: yet he will haue respect vnto the lowly, and he
wyll knowe the proude a farre of.
7 If I shall walke in the midst of trouble, thou wylt make me to liue: thou wylt
stretche foorth thyne hande vpon the furiousnes of mine enemies, and thy right
hande shall saue me.
8 God wyll finishe that he hath begun by me: O God thy louing kindnesse endureth
for euer, thou wylt not forsake the workes of thyne owne handes.

Psalm 139

1 To the chiefe musition, a psalme of Dauid. O God thou hast searched me to the
quicke: and thou hast knowen me.
2 Thou knowest my downe sitting & myne vprising: thou vnderstandest my thoughtes
long before they be.
3 Thou compassest about my path, and my iourney into all coastes: and thou vsest
all my wayes.
4 For there is not a word in my tongue: but beholde thou O Lorde knowest it
altogether.
5 Thou hast fashioned me behinde and before: and layde thyne hande vpon me.
6 The knowledge that thou hast of me is marueylous: it is so high that I can not
attayne vnto it.
7 Whyther can I go from thy spirite: or whyther can I flee away from thy face?
8 If I ascende vp into heauen, thou art there: if I lay me downe in hell, thou
art there also.
9 If I take the wynges of the morning: and go to dwell in the vttermost part of
the sea.
10 Euen there also thy hande shall leade me: and thy right hande shall holde me.
11 And yf I say peraduenture the darknesse shall couer me: and the night shalbe
day for me,
12 Truely the darknesse shall not darken any thing from thee, and the night
shalbe as lyghtsome as the day: darknesse and lyght to thee are both a lyke.
13 For thou hast my reynes in thy possession: thou didst couer me in my mothers
wombe.
14 I wyll confesse it vnto thee, for that thy doynges are to be dreaded, I am
made after a marueylous sort: thy workes be marueylous, and that my soule
knoweth ryght well.
15 The substaunce of my body was not hyd from thee: when I was made in secrete
and fashioned with distinct members in my mothers wombe.
16 Thyne eyes dyd see me when I was most imperfect: and in thy booke were
written euery day of them wherin the partes of my body were shaped, and no one
of them were knowen vnto thee.
17 Howe pretious be thy cogitations towardes me O God? howe greatly be the summe
of them increased?
18 I go about to count them, I fynde that they are mo in number then the sande:
and yet whyle I am wakyng I am styll with thee.
19 For truely thou wylt slay O Lord the wicked man: and the blood thirstie men
to whom I euer say depart ye from me.
20 Who do speake vnto thee in guilefull maner: thou art O God exalted in vayne
to thyne enemies.
21 Do not I hate them O God that hate thee? and am not I greeued with those that
rise vp agaynst thee?
22 Yea I hate them from the bottome of myne heart: euen as though they were myne
enemies.
23 Searche me to the quicke O Lorde, and knowe thou myne heart: proue me and
knowe thou my thoughtes.
24 And loke well yf there be any way of peruersnesse in me: and then leade me in
the way of the worlde.

Psalm 140

1 To the chiefe musition, a Psalme of Dauid. Delyuer me O God from the euyll
man: and preserue me from the outragious man.
2 Who in heart imagine mischiefes: and set forwarde to warre euery day.
3 They haue sharpened their tongue lyke a serpent: Adders poyson is vnder their
lippes. Selah.
4 Kepe me O God from the handes of the vngodly: preserue me from the outragious
man, who haue deuised to thrust my feete from me.
5 The proude haue layde a snare for me, and spread a net abroade with coardes in
the high wayes: they haue set trappes for me. Selah.
6 I haue sayde vnto God, thou art my Lorde: heare the voyce of my prayers O God.
7 O Lorde God the strength of my saluation: thou hast couered my head in the day
of battayle.
8 Graunt not vnto the vngodly his desires O God: bryng not to passe his
mischeuous imagination lest they shoulde be made to proude. Selah.
9 Let the labour of his owne lippe couer him: who is head of them that compasse
me about.
10 Let hotte coales be burnyng vpon them: he wyll cast them downe into the fire
into deepe pittes, that they may neuer rise vp agayne.
11 A man full of tongue can not prosper vpon the earth: euyll shall hunt the
outragious person to ouerthrowe him.
12 I am sure that God wyll dispatche the cause of the afflicted: and he wyll
geue iudgement for the needy.
13 Truely the ryghteous wyll confesse it vnto thy name: they that deale
vprightlye shall dwell before thy face.

Psalm 141

1 A Psalme of Dauid. O God I call vpon thee, haste thee vnto me: geue eare vnto
my voyce whylest I crye vnto thee.
2 Let my prayer be directed before thy face as an incense: let the liftyng vp of
mine handes be an euenyng sacrifice.
3 Set a watch O God before my mouth: and kepe the doore of my lippes.
4 Inclyne not myne heart to any euyll thyng, wherby I myght commit any vngodly
act with men that be workers of iniquitie: and let me not eate of their
delicates.
5 I wishe that the ryghteous woulde smite me and reproue me: for it is louing
kyndnesse. But let not pretious baulmes breake mine head: for as yet euen my
prayer is agaynst their wickednesse.
6 Let their iudges be thrust downe headlong from a rocke: then they wyll heare
my wordes, for they be sweete.
7 Our bones lye scattered vpon the graues mouth: lyke as when one breaketh and
heweth wood vpon the earth.
8 For mine eyes loke vnto thee O God the Lorde: in thee is my trust, cast not my
soule out of me.
9 Kepe me from the snare which they haue layde foorth for me: and from the
trappes of them that be workers of iniquitie.
10 Let the vngodly fall together into their owne nettes: but let me in the meane
season alwayes escape them.

Psalm 142

1 The wise instruction of Dauid, a prayer when he was in the caue. I cryed vnto
God with my voyce: euen vnto God I dyd make my supplication.
2 I powred out before his face my cogitations: and I made a declaration of my
trouble before his face.
3 When my spirite was ouerwhelmed within me, thou knewest my path: in the way
wherein I walked they haue priuily layde a snare for me.
4 When I loked vpon my ryght hande and sawe rounde about me there was no man
that woulde knowe me: I had no place to flee vnto, and no man cared for my
soule.
5 I cryed vnto thee O God, and sayde: thou art my hope and my portion in the
lande of the lyuyng.
6 Consider my complaynt, for I am brought very lowe: deliuer me from my
persecutours, for they are to strong for me.
7 Bryng my soule out of prison, that I may prayse thy name: the ryghteous shal
compasse me rounde about, because thou hast thus rewarded me.

Psalm 143

1 A Psalme of Dauid. Heare my prayer O God, geue eare vnto my desire: hearken
vnto me for thy trueth sake, for thy ryghteousnesse sake.
2 And enter not into iudgement with thy seruaunt: for in thy syght no man lyuyng
can be iustified.
3 For the enemie hath persecuted my soule, he hath smitten my lyfe downe to the
grounde: he hath layde me in darknesse as men that haue ben long dead.
4 And my spirite is ouerwhelmed within me: and my heart is desolate in the midst
of me.
5 I call to remembraunce the tyme long past: I muse vpon euery act of thine, I
exercise my study on the worke of thy handes.
6 I stretche foorth myne handes vnto thee: my soule as a thirstie lande gaspeth
vnto thee. Selah.
7 Make speede, hearken vnto me O God, my spirite waxeth faynt: hyde not thy face
from me, for I am lyke vnto them that go downe into the pyt.
8 Cause me to heare of thy louyng kindnesse betymes in the mornyng: for in thee
is my trust. Make me to knowe the way that I shoulde walke in: for I lyft vp my
soule vnto thee.
9 Delyuer me O God from myne enemies: I hyde my selfe with thee.
10 Teache me to do the thyng that pleaseth thee, for thou art my Lorde: let thy
good spirite leade me foorth vnto the lande of ryghteousnesse.
11 For thy names sake O God thou wilt cause me to lyue: and for thy
righteousnesse sake thou wilt bryng my soule out of trouble.
12 And of thy goodnesse thou wylt restrayne myne enemies: and destroy all them
that be aduersaries to my soule, for I am thy seruaunt.

Psalm 144

1 Of Dauid. Blessed be God my rocke: who teacheth my handes to warre, and my
fingers to fyght.
2 My holynesse and my fortresse, my refuge, and my only deliuerer: my buckler,
in hym I haue put my trust, who subdueth my people vnder me.
3 O God, what is man that thou doest knowe hym? what is the sonne of man that
thou doest thynke of hym?
4 Man is lyke a thyng of naught: his dayes be lyke a shadowe that passeth away.
5 Bowe thy heauens O God and come downe: touche the mountaynes and they shall
smoke.
6 Cast out terrible lightninges and feare them: shoote out thyne arrowes and
consume them.
7 Sende downe thine hand from aboue: deliuer me and take me out of the great
waters, from the hande of the children of an other deuotion then I am.
8 Whose mouth vttereth vanitie: and their ryght hande is a ryght hande of
falshood.
9 O Lorde I wyll syng a newe song vnto thee: and I wyll syng psalmes vnto thee
vpon a Lute, and vpon an instrument of ten strynges.
10 Who geueth victorie vnto kynges: who redeemeth Dauid his seruaunt from peryll
of the sworde.
11 Redeeme me and deliuer me from the hande of the children of an other deuotion
then I am: whose mouth vttereth vanitie, and their ryght hande is a ryght hande
of falshood.
12 That our sonnes may growe vp in their youth as young plantes: that our
daughters may be as corners stones grauen after the fashion as a palace is.
13 That the corners of our houses may be fylled, yeeldyng foorth all maner of
stoore: that our cattell may bring foorth thousandes, yea ten thousandes in our
streates.
14 That our oxen may be strong to labour that there be no decay: no leadyng into
captiuitie, and no complaynyng in our streates.
15 Happy are the people that be in such a case: blessed is the people who haue
God for their Lorde.

Psalm 145

1 The prayse of Dauid. I will magnifie thee O Lord my king: and I wyll blesse
thy name for euer and euer.
2 I wyll blesse thee euery day: and I wyll prayse thy name for euer and euer.
3 Great is God and most worthy to be praysed: and his greatnesse can not be
searched out.
4 One generation shal praise thy workes vnto another: and they shall declare thy
mightie power.
5 I wyll set foorth in wordes the glorious maiestie of thy excellentnesse: and
thy wonderous workes.
6 I wyll also declare thy greatnesse: so that men shall speake of the force of
thy terrible actes.
7 They shall vtter out of their mouth a memoriall of thyne aboundaunt kyndnesse:
and they shall syng of thy ryghteousnesse.
8 God is gratious and mercifull: loth to be angry, and great in louing
kindnesse.
9 God is good vnto euery man: and his mercie is ouer all his workes.
10 All thy workes shall confesse it vnto thee O God: and thy saintes shall
blesse thee.
11 They shal shewe the glorie of thy kingdome: and talke of thy power.
12 That they may make knowen to the children of men his manifolde power: & the
glorious maiestie of his kingdome.
13 Thy kingdome is an euerlasting kingdome: and thy dominion endureth throughout
all ages.
14 God vpholdeth all such as fall: and lyfteth vp all those that be bowyng
downewarde.
15 The eyes of all wayte vpon thee: and thou geuest them their meate in due
season.
16 Thou openest thyne hande: and thou satisfiest the desire of euery thing
liuing.
17 God is righteous in all his wayes: and holy in all his workes.
18 God is nye vnto all them that call vpon hym: vnto all such as call vpon hym
in trueth.
19 He wyll fulfyll the desire of them that feare hym: he will also heare their
crye, and he wyll saue them.
20 God preserueth all those that loue him: but he wyll bring to nothyng such as
be vngodly.
21 My mouth shall speake the prayse of God: and all fleshe shall blesse his holy
name for euer and euer.

Psalm 146

1 Prayse ye the Lord, prayse thou God O my soule, whylest I lyue I wyll prayse
God: I wyll syng psalmes vnto my Lorde so long as I shalbe.
2 Put not your trust in princes nor in the sonne of man: in whom there is no
saluation.
3 His spirite shall depart out of hym, he shall turne agayne to his earth: at
that day all his thoughtes shall perishe.
4 Blessed is he vnto whom the God of Iacob is an ayde: his trust is in God his
Lorde.
5 Who made heauen and earth, the sea and all that therin is: who mainteyneth the
trueth for euer.
6 Who executeth iudgement for those that are oppressed with wrong: who geueth
foode to the hungry.
7 God looseth those that be bounde: God geueth syght to the blynde.
8 God rayseth them vp that are falling: God loueth the ryghteous.
9 God taketh strangers into his custodie, he releeueth the fatherlesse and the
widdowe: as for the way of the vngodlye he turneth it vpsyde downe.
10 God thy Lorde shall raigne O Sion, to the worldes ende: throughout all
generations. Prayse ye the Lorde.

Psalm 147

1 Prayse ye the Lorde, for it is a good thyng: sing psalmes vnto our Lorde, for
it is a pleasaunt thing, his praise is to be desired.
2 God buildeth vp Hierusalem: he wyll gather together the Israelites that were
banished.
3 He healeth those that are broken in heart: he wrappeth vp their sorowes.
4 He counteth the number of the starres: he geueth vnto them all names.
5 Great is our Lorde, and great is his power: his vnderstandyng is infinite.
6 God setteth vp the meeke: he bringeth the vngodly downe to the grounde.
7 Syng ye vnto God with a confession: syng psalmes vpon the Harpe vnto our
Lorde.
8 Who couereth the heauen with cloudes: who prepareth rayne for the earth, who
maketh grasse to growe vppon the mountaynes.
9 He geueth vnto cattell their foode: euen vnto Rauens which call for it.
10 He hath no pleasure in the strength of an horse: he delighteth not in the
legges of a man.
11 God delyghteth in them that feare him: and in them that put their trust in
his mercie.
12 Prayse God O Hierusalem: prayse thy Lorde O Sion.
13 For he maketh fast the barres of thy gates: he blesseth thy children within
thee.
14 He maketh peace in thy borders: he fylleth thee with good corne.
15 He sendeth foorth his commaundement vpon the earth: his word runneth very
swiftly.
16 He geueth snowe so whyte as wooll: he scattereth the hoare frost like asshes.
17 He casteth foorth his yse lyke fragmentes: who is able to abide his frost?
18 He sendeth foorth his worde and melteth them: he bloweth with his winde, and
the waters flowe.
19 He declareth his worde vnto Iacob: his statutes & ordinaunces vnto Israel.
20 He hath not dealt so with euery nation: neither haue they the knowledge of
his iudgementes. Prayse ye the Lorde.

Psalm 148

1 Prayse ye the Lorde, prayse ye God out of heauen: prayse ye hym on hygh aboue.
2 Prayse hym all ye his angels: prayse hym all ye his hoast.
3 Prayse ye hym sunne and moone: praise hym all ye starres that geue lyght.
4 Prayse ye hym all ye heauens: and ye waters that be aboue the heauens.
5 Euen they shoulde prayse the name of God: for he commaunded, and they were
created.
6 He hath set them sure for euer and euer: he hath geuen them a lawe which shall
not be broken.
7 Prayse ye God from the earth: ye dragons and all deepes.
8 Fire and hayle, snowe and vapours: stormie wynde fulfyllyng his worde.
9 Mountaynes and all hylles: fruitfull trees and all Cedars.
10 Beastes and all cattell: wormes and fethered foules.
11 Kynges of the earth and all people: princes and all iudges of the earth.
12 Young men and maydens, olde men with children,
13 shoulde prayse the name of God: for his name only is most excellent, and his
maiestie aboue earth and heauen.
14 He hath exalted the horne of his people: the prayse of all his saintes, euen
of the children of Israel, a people that is most nye vnto him. Prayse ye the
Lord.

Psalm 149

1 Prayse ye the Lorde, syng vnto God a newe song: he ought to be praysed in the
congregation of saintes.
2 Israel shoulde reioyce in his maker: the children of Sion shoulde be ioyfull
in their kyng.
3 They shoulde prayse his name in a daunce: they shoulde sing psalmes vnto hym
vpon a tabret and a harpe.
4 For God hath a pleasure in his people: he wyll beautifie the afflicted with
saluation.
5 The saintes shalbe ioyful with glory: they shal expresse a ioyfull noyse in
their beddes.
6 The hygh promotions of the Lorde shalbe in their mouth: and a two edged sworde
in their handes.
7 That they may take auengement of the heathen: and correction of the nations.
8 That they may bynde their kynges in chaynes: and their nobles with iron
fetters.
9 That they may execute the iudgement prescribed: this honour shalbe to all his
saintes. Prayse ye the Lorde.

Psalm 150

1 Prayse ye the Lorde, prayse ye the Lord in his sanctuarie: praise ye him in
the firmament of his power.
2 Prayse ye hym in his strength: prayse ye hym in his excellent greatnesse.
3 Prayse ye hym in the sounde of a trumpet: prayse ye hym vpon a Lute and an
Harpe.
4 Prayse ye hym with a tabret and a daunce: prayse ye him vpon the stringes and
vpon the Organes.
5 Prayse ye hym vpon the well tuned Cimbales: prayse ye hym vpon the loude
Cimbales.
6 Euery thyng that draweth breath: ought to prayse the Lorde. Prayse ye the
Lorde.


Proverbs

Chapter 1

1 The prouerbes of Solomon the sonne of Dauid, kyng of Israel:
2 To learne wisdome and instruction, & to perceaue the wordes of vnderstandyng,
3 To receaue the instruction of wisdome, iustice, iudgement, and equitie:
4 To geue wyt vnto the simple, and that the young men myght haue knowledge and
vnderstandyng.
5 The wise man wyll geue eare, and wyll come by more wisdome, and he that is
endued with vnderstanding shal attayne vnto wise counsayles.
6 To vnderstande a parable, and the interpretation therof, the wordes of the
wise, and their darke speaches.
7 The feare of the Lorde is the begynnyng of knowledge: but fooles dispise
wisdome and instruction.
8 My sonne, heare thy fathers doctrine, & forsake not the lawe of thy mother:
9 For they shalbe an encrease of grace vnto thy head, and as a chayne about thy
necke.
10 My sonne, if sinners entice thee, consent not vnto them.
11 If they say, come with vs, let vs lay wayte for blood, and lurke priuily for
the innocent without a cause:
12 Let vs swallowe them vp lyke the graue quicke and whole, as those that go
downe into the pit:
13 So shall we finde all maner of costly riches, and fill our houses with
spoyles:
14 Cast in thy lot among vs, and let vs all haue one purse.
15 My sonne, walke not thou with them, refrayne thy foote from their wayes.
16 For their feete runne to euyll, and are hasty to shed blood.
17 But as in vayne, the nette is layde foorth before the birdes eyes:
18 So these lay wayte for the blood of them, and lye priuily for their liues.
19 Such are the wayes of euery one that is greedie of gayne, who taketh away the
life of the owner therof.
20 Wisdome cryeth without, and putteth foorth her voyce in the streetes:
21 She calleth before the congregation in the open gates, and sheweth her wordes
through the citie, saying:
22 O ye children, howe long wyll ye loue childishnesse? howe long wyll the
scorners delite in scornyng, and the vnwise hate knowledge?
23 O turne you at my correction: lo I wyll expresse my mynde vnto you, and make
you vnderstande my wordes.
24 Because I haue called, and ye refused, I haue stretched out my hande, and no
man regarded:
25 But all my counsels haue ye dispised, and set my correction at naught:
26 Therfore wyll I also laugh at your destruction, and mocke you, when the thyng
that ye feare commeth vpon you,
27 Euen when the thyng that ye be afraide of falleth in sodenly like a storme,
and your miserie lyke a tempest, yea when trouble and heauinesse commeth vpon
you.
28 Then shall they call vpon me, but I wyll not aunswere: they shall seeke me
early, but they shall not finde me:
29 And that because they hated knowledge, and did not choose the feare of the
Lorde,
30 They woulde none of my counsayle, but dispised all my correction.
31 Therfore shall they eate of the fruite of their owne way, and be fylled with
their owne inuentions.
32 For the turnyng away of the vnwise shall slay them, and the prosperitie of
fooles shall destroy them.
33 But whoso hearkeneth vnto me, shal dwell safely, and be sure from any feare
of euyll.

Chapter 2

1 My sonne, if thou wylt receaue my wordes, and lay vp my commaundementes within
thee,
2 That thou wylt encline thine eares vnto wisdome: applye thine heart then to
vnderstandyng.
3 For if thou cryest after wisdome, and cryest for knowledge:
4 If thou seekest for her as for siluer, and searchest for her as for treasures:
5 Then shalt thou vnderstand the feare of the Lorde, and finde the knowledge of
God.
6 For the Lorde geueth wisdome, out of his mouth commeth knowledge and
vnderstandyng.
7 He stirreth vp health for the righteous: and defendeth them that walke
vprightly,
8 That they may kepe the right path: and he preserueth the way of such as do
serue him with godlinesse.
9 Then shalt thou vnderstande righteousnesse, and iudgement, and equitie, yea
and euery good path.
10 When wisdome entreth into thine heart, and thy soule deliteth in knowledge:
11 Then shall counsayle preserue thee, and vnderstandyng shall kepe thee,
12 That thou mayest be deliuered from the euyll way, and from the man that
speaketh frowarde thynges:
13 From such as leaue the wayes of righteousnesse, to walke in the wayes of
darknesse:
14 Which reioyce in doyng naught, and delite in the wickednesse of the euyll:
15 Whose wayes are croked, and they frowarde in their pathes.
16 That thou mayest be deliuered also from the straunge woman, and from her that
is not thine owne, which geueth sweete wordes,
17 Forsaketh the husbande of her youth, & forgetteth the couenaunt of her God.
18 For her house is enclined vnto death, and her pathes vnto hell.
19 All they that go in vnto her, come not agayne, neither take they holde of the
way of lyfe.
20 Therfore walke thou in the way of such as be vertuous, & kepe the pathes of
the righteous.
21 For the iust shal dwell in the lande, and they that be perfect shall remayne
in it.
22 But the vngodly shall be cut of from the earth: and the wicked doers shalbe
rooted out of it.

Chapter 3

1 My sonne, forget not thou my lawe, but see that thine heart kepe my
commaundementes:
2 For they shal prolong the dayes and yeres of thy lyfe, and bryng thee peace.
3 Let mercie and faithfulnesse neuer go from thee: binde them about thy necke,
and write them in the tables of thyne heart:
4 So shalt thou finde fauour and good vnderstandyng in the sight of God and men.
5 Put thy trust in God with all thine heart: & leane not vnto thine owne wit:
6 In all thy wayes acknowledge him, and he shall order thy goynges.
7 Be not wise in thine owne conceipt: but feare the Lorde, and depart from
euyll:
8 So shall thy nauell be whole, and thy bones strong.
9 Honour the Lorde with thy substaunce, and with the firstlynges of all thyne
encrease:
10 So shall thy barnes be filled with plenteousnesse, and thy presses shall
flowe ouer with sweete wine.
11 My sonne refuse not the chastening of the Lorde, neither faynt when thou art
corrected of hym:
12 For whom the Lorde loueth, him he chasteneth, and yet deliteth in him, euen
as a father in his owne sonne.
13 Well is hym that findeth wysdome, and getteth vnderstandyng:
14 For the marchaundise of it, is better then the marchaundise of siluer, and
the gayne therof is better then golde.
15 She is more worth then pretious stones: and all the thinges that thou canst
desire, are not to be compared vnto her.
16 In her right hande is long life, and in her left hande riches and honour.
17 Her wayes are pleasaunt wayes, and all her pathes are peaceable.
18 She is a tree of lyfe to them that lay holde vpon her: and blessed is he that
kepeth her fast.
19 With wysdome hath the Lorde layde the foundation of the earth, and thorow
vnderstanding hath he stablished the heauens.
20 Thorow his knowledge the deapthes are broken vp, and the cloudes droppe downe
the deawe.
21 My sonne, let not these thinges depart from thyne eyes, but kepe wysdome and
vnderstanding:
22 So they shall be lyfe vnto thy soule, and grace vnto thy mouth.
23 Then shalt thou walke safely in thy way, and thy foote shall not stumble.
24 If thou sleepest, thou shalt not be afraide: but shalt take thy rest, and
sleepe sweetely.
25 Thou shalt not be afraide of any sodayne feare, neither for the violent
rushing in of the vngodly when it commeth.
26 For the Lorde shall stande by thy side, & kepe thy foote that thou be not
taken.
27 Withdraw no good thyng from them that haue nede, so long as thyne hande is
able to do it.
28 Say not vnto thy neyghbour, go thy way and come agayne, and to morowe wyll I
geue thee: where as thou hast nowe to geue hym.
29 Intende no hurt against thy neyghbour, seing he hopeth to dwell in rest by
thee.
30 Striue not with any man without a cause, where as he hath done thee no harme.
31 Folowe not a wicked man, and chose none of his wayes:
32 For the Lord abhorreth the froward: but his counsayle is among the righteous.
33 The curse of the Lord is in the house of the vngodly: but he blesseth the
dwellinges of the righteous.
34 As for the scornfull, doth he not laugh them to scorne? but he geueth grace
vnto the lowly.
35 The wyse shall haue honour in possession: but shame is the promotion that
fooles shall haue.

Chapter 4

1 Heare O ye chyldren a fatherly instruction, & take good heede, that ye may
learne vnderstanding.
2 For I haue geuen you a good doctrine, forsake not ye my lawe.
3 For when I my selfe was my fathers deare sonne, and tenderly beloued of my
mother:
4 He taught me also and sayde vnto me, let thyne heart receaue my wordes, kepe
my commaundementes and thou shalt liue.
5 Get thee wysdome, and get thee vnderstanding: forget not the wordes of my
mouth, and shrinke not from them.
6 Forsake her not, and she shall preserue thee, loue her, and she shall kepe
thee.
7 The chiefe poynt of wysdome, is to possesse wysdome: and before all thy goodes
to get thee vnderstanding.
8 Make much of her, and she shall promote thee, yea if thou embrace her, she
shall bryng thee vnto honour:
9 She shal beautifie thy head with manyfolde graces, and garnishe thee with a
crowne of glory.
10 Heare my sonne, and receaue my wordes, and the yeres of thy life shalbe many.
11 I haue shewed thee the way of wysdome, & led thee into the right pathes.
12 So that if thou goest in them, there shall no straitnesse hinder thee: & when
thou runnest, thou shalt not fall.
13 Take fast holde of doctrine, and let her not go: kepe her, for she is thy
life.
14 Come not in the pathe of the vngodlye, and walke not in the way of the
wicked:
15 Abhorre it and go not therein, depart aside, and passe ouer by it.
16 For they sleepe not except they haue done mischiefe: and sleepe is taken from
them, vntyll they haue done harme.
17 For they eate the bread of wickednes, and drinke the wine of robberie.
18 The path of the righteous shineth, as the light that is euer bryghter and
bryghter vnto the perfect day.
19 But the way of the vngodly is as the darkenesse, they knowe not where they
fall.
20 My sonne marke my wordes, and encline thyne eare vnto my sayinges:
21 Let them not depart from thine eyes, but kepe them euen in the middest of
thyne heart:
22 For they are life vnto those that finde them, and health vnto all their
bodyes.
23 Kepe thyne heart with all diligence, for out of it issueth lyfe.
24 Put away from thee a frowarde mouth, and let the lippes of slaunder be farre
from thee.
25 Let thyne eyes beholde that thyng that is right, and let thyne eye liddes
loke straight before thee.
26 Ponder the path of thy feete, and let all thy wayes be ordred aright.
27 Turne not aside, neither to the right hande nor to the left: but wihholde thy
foote from euyll.

Chapter 5

1 My sonne geue heede vnto my wisdome, and bowe thyne eare vnto my prudence:
2 That thou mayest regarde good counsell, and that thy lippes may kepe
knowledge.
3 For the lippes of a straunge woman are a dropping hony combe, and her throte
is more glistering then oyle:
4 But at the laste she is as bitter as wormewood, and as sharpe as a two edged
sworde.
5 Her feete go downe vnto death, and her steppes pearce thorowe vnto hell.
6 Perchaunce thou wylt ponder the path of her lyfe: so vnstedfast are her wayes
that thou canst not know them.
7 Heare me nowe therefore O ye chyldren, and depart not from the wordes of my
mouth.
8 Kepe thy way farre from her, & come not nigh the doores of her house.
9 That thou geue not thy honour vnto other, and thy yeres to the cruell:
10 That other men be not filled with thy vertues, and that thy labours come not
in a straunge house.
11 Yea, that thou mourne not at the last, when thou hast spent thy bodye and
lustie youth, and then say:
12 Alas, why hated I nurture? why did my heart dispise correction?
13 Wherefore was not I obedient vnto the voyce of my teachers, and hearkened not
vnto them that enfourmed me?
14 I was come almost into all misfortune, in the middest of the multitude and
congregation.
15 Drinke of the water of thyne owne well, and of the riuers that runne out of
thyne owne spring.
16 Let thy welles flowe out abrode, that there may be riuers of waters in the
streates:
17 But let them be onlye thyne owne, and not straungers with thee.
18 Let thy well be blessed, and be glad with the wyfe of thy youth.
19 Let her be as the louyng Hinde and pleasaunt Roe: let her breastes alway
satisfie thee, and holde thee euer content with her loue.
20 Why wylt thou my sonne haue pleasure in a straunge woman, and embrace the
bosome of a straunger?
21 For euery mans wayes are open in the sight of the Lord, and he pondereth all
their goynges.
22 The wickednes of the vngodly shall catche him selfe, and with the snares of
his owne sinne shall he be trapped.
23 He shall dye without amendement, and for his great foolishnes he shall go
astray.

Chapter 6

1 My sonne if thou be suretie for thy neyghbour, and hast fastened thyne hande
for another man:
2 Thou art bounde with thine owne wordes, and taken with thine owne speach.
3 Therfore my sonne do this, and thou shalt be discharged: When thou art come
into thy neyghbours daunger, go thy wayes then soone, humble thy selfe, and with
thy frendes intreate thy creditour.
4 Let not thyne eyes sleepe, nor thyne eye liddes slumber.
5 Saue thy self as a Doe from the hand of the hunter and as a byrde from the
hande of the fouler.
6 Go to the emmet thou sluggarde, consider her wayes, and learne to be wyse:
7 She hath no guyde, nor ouerseer, nor ruler,
8 Yet in the sommer she prouideth her meate, and gathereth her foode together in
the haruest.
9 Howe long wylt thou sleepe thou sluggishe man? When wylt thou aryse out of thy
sleepe?
10 Yea, sleepe on still a litle, slumber a litle, folde thyne handes together
yet a litle that thou mayest sleepe:
11 So shall pouertie come vnto thee as one that trauayleth by the way, and
necessitie like a weaponed man.
12 An vngodly person, a wicked man, goeth with a frowarde mouth.
13 He winketh with his eyes, he tokeneth with his feete, he teacheth with his
fingers.
14 He is euer imagining mischiefe and frowardnes in his heart, and causeth
discorde.
15 Therefore shall his destruction come hastyly vpon hym, sodainly shall he be
all to broken, and not be healed.
16 These sixe thinges doth the Lorde hate, and the seuenth he vtterly abhorreth:
17 A proude loke, a lying tongue, handes that shed innocent blood,
18 An heart that goeth about wicked imaginations, feete that be swyft in running
to mischiefe,
19 A false witnesse that bringeth vp lyes, and hym that soweth discorde among
brethren.
20 My sonne, kepe thy fathers commaundement, and forsake not the lawe of thy
mother:
21 Tye them continually in thyne heart, and bynde them about thy necke.
22 That shall leade thee when thou goest, preserue thee when thou art asleepe,
and when thou awakest talke with thee.
23 For the commaundement is a lanterne, and the lawe a light: yea chastening and
nurture is the way of life:
24 That they may kepe thee from the euyll woman, and from the flattering tongue
of the straunge woman.
25 Lust not after her beautie in thyne heart, lest thou be taken with her fayre
lokes.
26 By an harlot a man is brought to beg his bread, and a woman wyll hunte for
the pretious life of man.
27 May a man take fire in his bosome, and his clothes not be brent?
28 Or can one go vpon hotte coales, and his feete not be brent?
29 Euen so, whosoeuer goeth in to his neyghbours wife and toucheth her, can not
be vngiltie.
30 Men do not vtterly despise a thiefe that stealeth to satisfie his soule, when
he is hungrie:
31 But if he may be gotten, he restoreth agayne seuen tymes as muche, or els he
maketh recompence with all the good of his house.
32 But whoso committeth adultrie with a woman, lacketh vnderstanding: and he
that doth it, destroyeth his owne soule.
33 He getteth him selfe a plague and dishonour, and his reproche shall neuer be
put out:
34 For the ielousie and wrath of the man wyll not be entreated,
35 No though thou wouldest offer hym great gyftes to make amendes, he wyll not
receaue them.

Chapter 7

1 My sonne kepe my words, and lay vp my commaundements by thee.
2 Kepe my commaundementes & my lawe, euen as the apple of thyne eye, and thou
shalt liue.
3 Binde them vpon thy fingers, and wryte them in the table of thyne heart.
4 Say vnto wysdome, thou art my sister: and call vnderstanding thy kinsewoman:
5 That they may kepe thee from the straunge woman, and from the forraine woman
which geueth sweete wordes.
6 For at the windowe of my house I loked through the windowe,
7 And behelde among the simple people and among the chyldren a young man voyde
of wyt,
8 Goyng ouer the streate by the corner in the way towarde her house
9 In the twylight of the euening, when it began nowe to be night and darke:
10 And behold there met hym a woman with open tokens of an harlot, onlye her
heart was hid:
11 She was full of loude wordes and redye to dallie, whose feete coulde not
abide in the house:
12 Nowe is she without, nowe in the streates, and lyeth in wayte at euery
corner.
13 She caught hym and kissed him, and was not ashamed, saying:
14 I had a vowe of peace offeringes to pay, and this day I perfourme it:
15 Therefore came I foorth to meete thee, that I might seeke thy face, and so
haue I founde thee.
16 I haue deckt my bed with coueringes of tapessarie, and clothes of Egypt.
17 My bed haue I made to smell of Myrre, Aloes, and Cinamon.
18 Come let vs take our fill of loue vntyll the morning, and let vs solace our
selues with the pleasures of loue.
19 For the good man is not at home, he is gone farre of.
20 He hath taken the bagge of money with hym, and wyll returne at the appointed
solempne feast.
21 Thus with many sweete wordes she ouercame him, and with her flattering lippes
she entised hym.
22 Sodainly he folowed her, as it were an oxe led to the slaughter, and lyke as
it were a foole that laugheth when he goeth to the stockes to be punished,
23 So long tyll she had wounded his lyuer with her dart: lyke as if a byrde
hasted to the snare, not knowing that the perill of his life lieth thervpon.
24 Heare me now therfore O my chylde, and marke the wordes of my mouth:
25 Let not thyne heart wander in her wayes, and be not thou deceaued in her
pathes.
26 For many one hath she wounded and cast downe, yea many a strong man hath ben
slaine by the meanes of her.
27 Her house is the way vnto hell, and bryng men downe into the chaumbers of
death.

Chapter 8

1 Doth not wysdome crye? doth not vnderstanding put foorth her voyce?
2 She standeth in the top of high places, by the way in the place of the pathes:
3 She cryeth at the gates of the citie, at the entrye of the doores:
4 It is you O ye men saith she whom I call, vnto the chyldren of men do I lyft
vp my voyce.
5 Take heede vnto knowledge O ye ignoraunt, be ye wise in heart O ye fooles.
6 Geue eare, for I wyll speake of great matters, and open my lippes to tell
thinges that be right:
7 For my mouth shall be talking of the trueth, and my lippes abhorre
vngodlynesse.
8 All the wordes of my mouth are righteous, there is no frowardnes nor falsehood
in them.
9 They are all playne to suche as wyll vnderstande, and right to them that finde
knowledge.
10 Receaue my doctrine and not siluer, and knowledge rather then fine golde:
11 For wysdome is more worth then pretious stones, yea all thinges that thou
canst desire, may not be compared vnto it.
12 I wysdome dwell with counsell, and finde out knowledge and vnderstanding.
13 The feare of the Lorde abhorreth wickednes, pryde, disdayne, and the euil
way, and a mouth that speaketh wicked thinges I vtterly abhorre.
14 Counsell is mine, and direction, I am vnderstanding, and I haue strength.
15 Through me kinges raigne, and princes make iust lawes.
16 By me princes beare rule, and noble men do iudge the earth.
17 I am louing vnto those that loue me: and they that seeke me early, shall
finde me.
18 Riches and honour are with me, yea durable riches and righteousnes.
19 My fruite is better then golde and pretious stones, and mine encrease more
worth then fine siluer.
20 I wyll guyde thee in the way of righteousnes, and in the midst of the pathes
of iudgement:
21 That I maye stablishe the inhetaunce of them that loue me, and encrease their
treasure.
22 The Lorde him selfe had me in possession in the beginning of his wayes, or
euer he began his workes aforetime.
23 I haue ben ordayned from euerlasting, and from the beginning or euer the
earth was made.
24 When I was borne there were neither depthes nor springes of water.
25 Before the foundations of the mountaines were layde: yea before all hilles,
was I borne:
26 The earth, and all that is vpon the earth was not yet made, no not the dust
it selfe.
27 For when he made the heauens, I was present, when he compassed the deapthes
about:
28 When he hanged the cloudes aboue, when he fastened the springes of the deepe:
29 When he shut the sea within certaine boundes, that the waters should not go
ouer their markes that he commaunded: when he layde the foundations of the
earth,
30 I was with him ordring all thinges, deliting dayly and reioysyng alway before
hym.
31 As for the rounde compasse of this worlde I make it ioyfull: for my delite is
to be among the chyldren of men.
32 Therefore hearken vnto me: O ye chyldren, blessed are they that kepe my
wayes.
33 O geue eare vnto nurture, be wyse, and refuse it not:
34 Blessed is the man that heareth me, watching dayly at my gates, and geuing
attendaunce at the postes of my doores.
35 For whoso findeth me, findeth life, and shall obtaine fauour of the Lorde.
36 But whoso offendeth against me, hurteth his owne soule: and they that hate
me, are the louers of death.

Chapter 9

1 Wysdome hath buylded her house, and hewen out seuen pillers:
2 She hath kylled her victuals, powred out her wine, and prepared her table:
3 She hath sent foorth her maydens to crye vpon the highest place of the citie,
4 Who so is without knowledge, let him come hither: And to the vnwise she said,
5 O come on your way, eate my bread, and drinke my wine whiche I haue powred out
for you.
6 Forsake foolishnes, and ye shall lyue: and see that ye go in the way of
vnderstandyng.
7 Whoso reproueth a scornefull person, getteth him selfe dishonour: and he that
rebuketh the vngodly, stayneth hym selfe.
8 Reproue not a scorner, lest he owe thee euyll will: but rebuke a wyse man, and
he wyll loue thee.
9 Geue a discrete man but an occasion, and he wyll be the wyser: teache a
righteous man, and he wyll encrease in knowledge.
10 The feare of the Lorde is the beginning of wisdome: and the knowledge of holy
thinges, is vnderstanding.
11 For thorowe me thy dayes shalbe prolonged, and the yeres of thy life shall be
many.
12 If thou be wise, thy wysdome shal do thy selfe good: but if thou thinkest
scorne therof, it shalbe thine owne harme.
13 A foolishe retchlesse woman full of wordes, and suche a one as hath no
knowledge,
14 Sitteth at the doore of her house, and in the hye places of the citie,
15 To call such as go by, and that walke straight in their wayes.
16 Who so is ignoraunt sayeth she let hym come hyther: and to the vnwyse she
saith,
17 Stolen waters are sweete, & the bread that is priuily eaten, hath a good
taste.
18 And he doth not consider that they are but dead whiche be there, and that her
ghestes are in the deepe of hell.

Chapter 10

1 A wyse sonne maketh a glad father: but an vndiscrete sonne is an heauinesse
vnto his mother.
2 Treasures that are wickedly gotten, profite nothing: but righteousnesse
deliuereth from death.
3 The Lorde wyll not let the soule of the righteous suffer hunger: but he taketh
away the richesse of the vngodly.
4 An idle hande maketh poore: but a quicke labouring hande maketh riche.
5 Who so gathereth in sommer is wyse: but he that is sluggishe in haruest,
bringeth hym selfe to confusion.
6 Blessinges are vpon the head of the righteous: and the mouth of the vngodly
kepeth mischiefe in secrete.
7 The memoriall of the iust shall haue a good report: but the name of the
vngodly shall stincke.
8 A wyse man wyll receaue warning: but a prating foole shalbe punished.
9 He that walketh vprightly, walketh surely: but whoso goeth a wrong way, shalbe
knowen.
10 He that winketh with his eye, wyll cause sorowe: but he that hath a foolishe
mouth, shalbe beaten.
11 The mouth of a righteous man is a well of life: but the mouth of the vngodly
kepeth mischiefe in secrete.
12 Hatred stirreth vp strifes: but loue couereth the multitude of sinnes.
13 In the lippes of him that hath vnderstanding, a man shall finde wysdome: but
the rod belongeth to the backe of the foolishe.
14 Wyse men lay vp knowledge: but the mouth of the foolish is nye destruction.
15 The riche mans goodes are his strong holde: but their owne pouertie feareth
the poore.
16 The labour of the righteous tendeth to lyfe: but the fruites of the vngodly,
to sinne.
17 Nurture kepeth the way of lyfe: but he that refuseth to be nurtured,
deceaueth hym selfe.
18 He that hydeth hatred with lying lippes, and he that speaketh slaunder, is a
foole.
19 Where much babblyng is, there must needes be offence: and he that refrayneth
his lippes, is wyse.
20 The tongue of the iust man is as tried siluer: but the heart of the vngodly
is a thyng of naught.
21 The lippes of the ryghteous feede a whole multitude: but fooles shall dye in
their owne follie.
22 The blessyng of the Lorde maketh riche: and bryngeth no sorowe of heart with
it.
23 A foole doth wickedly, and maketh but a sport of it: but wisdome ruleth the
man that hath vnderstandyng.
24 The thing that the vngodly is afraide of, shall come vpon hym: but the
ryghteous shall haue their desire.
25 As the tempest, so passeth away the vngodly and is not: but the ryghteous
remayneth sure for euer.
26 As vineger is to the teeth, & as smoke is vnto the eyes: euen so is a
sluggishe person to them that sendeth him foorth.
27 The feare of the Lorde maketh a long lyfe: but the yeres of the vngodly
shalbe shortened.
28 The patient abydyng of the righteous shalbe turned to gladnesse: but the hope
of the vngodly shall perishe.
29 The way of the Lord geueth courage vnto the godly: but it is a feare for
wicked doers.
30 The ryghteous shall neuer be ouerthrowen: but the vngodly shall not remayne
in the lande.
31 The mouth of the iust wyll be talking of wisdome: but the tongue of the
frowarde shall be cut out.
32 The lippes of the ryghteous vtter that which is acceptable: but the mouth of
the vngodly speaketh frowarde thynges.

Chapter 11

1 A false ballaunce is an abomination vnto the Lorde: but a true wayght pleaseth
him.
2 Where pryde is, there is shame also and confusion: but wheras is lowlinesse,
there is wisdome.
3 The innocent dealyng of the iust shall leade them: but the wickednesse of the
offendours shalbe their owne destruction.
4 Riches helpe not in the day of vengeaunce: but ryghteousnesse deliuereth from
death.
5 The ryghteousnesse of the innocent ordereth his way: but the vngodly shall
fall in his owne wickednesse.
6 The righteousnesse of the iust shall delyuer them: but the wicked shalbe taken
in their owne vngodlynesse.
7 When an vngodly man dyeth, his hope is gone: the confidence of riches shall
perishe.
8 The ryghteous shalbe delyuered out of trouble: and the vngodly shall come in
his steade.
9 The dissembler with his mouth hurteth his neighbour: but through knowledge
shall the iust be deliuered.
10 When it goeth well with the ryghteous the citie is mery: and when the vngodly
perishe there is gladnesse.
11 In the blessyng of the ryghteous the citie is exalted: but it is ouerthrowen
by the mouth of the wicked.
12 A foole slaundereth his neyghbour: but a wise man holdeth his peace.
13 A dissemblyng person wyll discouer priuie thynges: but he that is of a
faythfull heart wyll kepe counsayle.
14 Where no counsayle is, there the people decay: but wheras many are that can
geue counsayle, there is wealth.
15 He that is suretie for a straunger shall smart for it: and he that hateth
suretishyp is sure.
16 A gratious woman getteth honour: but the strong men attayne riches.
17 He that is mercifull, doth hym selfe a benefite: but who so hurteth his
neyghbour, is a tiraunt.
18 The vngodly worketh deceiptfull workes: but he that soweth righteousnesse
shall receaue a sure rewarde.
19 Lyke as ryghteousnesse bringeth lyfe: euen so to cleaue vnto euyll, bryngeth
death.
20 The Lorde abhorreth them that be of a corrupt heart: but he hath pleasure in
them that are of an vndefiled conuersation.
21 Though hand be ioyned in hande, yet the wicked shall not escape: but the
seede of the ryghteous shalbe preserued.
22 A faire woman without discrete maners, is lyke a ryng of golde in a swines
snoute.
23 The desire of the ryghteous is acceptable: but the hope of the vngodly is
indignation.
24 Some man geueth out his goodes and is the richer: but the niggarde hauyng
inough, wyll depart from nothyng, and yet is euer in pouertie.
25 He that is liberall in geuyng, shall haue plentie: and he that watereth,
shalbe watered also hym selfe.
26 Who so hoordeth vp his corne, shalbe cursed among the people: but blessyng
shall lyght vpon his head that geueth foode.
27 He that searcheth for good thynges fyndeth fauour: but who so seketh after
mischiefe, it shall happen vnto hym.
28 He that trusteth in his riches shall haue a fall: but the ryghteous shall
florishe as the greene leafe.
29 Who so maketh disquietnesse in his owne house, he shal haue winde for his
heritage: and the foole shalbe seruaunt to the wise.
30 The fruite of the ryghteous is a tree of life: and he that winneth mens
soules is wise.
31 If the ryghteous be recompensed vpon earth: howe much more then the vngodly
and the sinner?

Chapter 12

1 Who so loueth correction loueth knowledge: but he that hateth to be reproued
is a foole.
2 A good man is acceptable vnto the Lorde: but the wicked imaginer wyll he
condempne.
3 A man can not endure in vngodlinesse: but the roote of the ryghteous shall not
be moued.
4 A huswifely woman is a crowne vnto her husbande: but she that behaueth her
selfe vnhonestly, is as corruption in his bones.
5 The thoughtes of the ryghteous are ryght: but the imaginations of the vngodly
are deceptfull.
6 The talkyng of the vngodly is howe they may lay wayte for blood: but the mouth
of the righteous will deliuer the.
7 God ouerturneth the estate of the wicked, and they stande not: but the house
of the ryghteous shall stande.
8 A man shalbe commended for his wisdome: but a foole shalbe dispised.
9 He that is dispised and is yet his owne man, is better then the glorious that
lacketh bread.
10 A ryghteous man regardeth the lyfe of his cattell: but the vngodly haue
cruell heartes.
11 He that tylleth his lande, shall haue plenteousnesse of bread: but he that
foloweth idlenesse is a very foole.
12 The desire of the vngodly is a net of euyls: but the roote of the ryghteous
bryngeth foorth fruite.
13 The wicked falleth into the snare thorowe the malice of his owne mouth: but
the iust shall escape out of all perill.
14 Man shalbe satisfied with good thinges: by the fruite of his mouth, and after
the workes of his handes shall he be rewarded.
15 The way of a foole is strayght in his owne eyes: but he that hearkeneth vnto
counsayle is wise.
16 A foole vttereth his wrath in all the haste: but a discrete man couereth his
owne shame.
17 A iust man wyll tell the trueth and shewe the thyng that is ryght: but a
false witnesse deceaueth.
18 A slaunderous person pricketh lyke a sworde: but a wise mans tongue is
wholsome.
19 The lippe of trueth shalbe stable for euer: but a dissemblyng tongue is soone
chaunged.
20 Deceipt is in the heart of them that imagine euyll: but to the counsaylers of
peace shalbe ioy.
21 There shall no aduersitie happen vnto the iust: but the vngodly shalbe fylled
with miserie.
22 The Lorde abhorreth lying lippes: but they that deale truely please hym.
23 A discrete man doth hyde knowledge: but the heart of fooles blabbeth out
foolishnesse.
24 A diligent hande shall beare rule: but the idle shalbe vnder tribute.
25 Heauinesse discourageth the heart of man: but a good worde maketh it glad
agayne.
26 The ryghteous excelleth his neyghbour: but the way of the vngodly wyll
deceaue them selues.
27 The deciptfull man shall not coste that he toke in huntyng: but the riches of
the iust man is of great value.
28 In the way of ryghteousnesse there is life: & in the same way there is no
death.

Chapter 13

1 A wise sonne wil hearken to his fathers warnyng: but he that is scorneful wil
not heare when he is reproued.
2 Of the fruite of a wise mans mouth shall eche man eate good thynges: but the
wicked shall eate of the fruite of the transgressours.
3 He that kepeth his mouth, kepeth his lyfe: but who so rashlye openeth his
lippes, destroyeth hym selfe.
4 The sluggarde woulde fayne haue and can not get his desire: but the soule of
the diligent shall haue plentie.
5 A ryghteous man abhorreth lyes: but the vngodly shameth hym selfe, and is put
to scilence.
6 Ryghteousnesse kepeth the innocent in the way: but vngodlinesse doth
ouerthrowe the sinner.
7 Some men make them selues riche though they haue nothyng: agayne, some make
them selues poore hauyng great riches.
8 With goodes a man redeemeth his life: and the poore wyll not be reproued.
9 The lyght of the ryghteous maketh ioyfull: but the candell of the vngodly
shalbe put out.
10 Among the proude there is euer strife: but with the well aduised is wisdome.
11 Uaynly gotten goodes are soone spent: but they that be gathered together with
the hande, shall encrease.
12 Hope deferred greeueth the heart: but whe the desire cometh, it is a tree of
life.
13 Who so dispiseth the worde, shall perishe for the same: but he that feareth
the commaundement, shall haue the rewarde.
14 The lawe of the wise is a well of life, to auoyde from the snares of death.
15 Good vnderstandyng geueth fauour: but harde is the way of the dispisers.
16 A wise man doth all thynges with discretion: but a foole wyll declare his
follie.
17 An vngodly messenger falleth into mischiefe: but a faythfull embassadour is
as health.
18 He that thinketh scorne to be refourmed, commeth to pouertie and shame: but
who so regardeth correction, shall come to honour.
19 When a desire is brought to passe, it deliteth the soule: but fooles count it
abhomination to depart from euyll.
20 He that goeth in the companie of wise men, shalbe wise: but who so is a
companion of fooles, shalbe afflicted.
21 Mischiefe foloweth vpon sinners: but the righteous shal haue a good reward.
22 He that is vertuous leaueth an heritaunce vnto his childers children, & the
riches of ye sinner is layde vp for the iust.
23 There is plenteousnesse of foode in the fieldes of the poore: but the fielde
not well ordered, is without fruite.
24 He that spareth the rodde, hateth his sonne: but who so loueth hym,
chasteneth hym betymes.
25 The righteous eateth and is satisfied: but the belly of the vngodly hath
neuer enough.

Chapter 14

1 Wyse women vpholde their house: but a foolishe wyfe plucketh it downe.
2 He that walketh vpryghtlye, feareth the Lorde: but he that turneth hym selfe
from his wayes, dispiseth hym.
3 In the mouth of the foolishe is the rodde of pryde: but the lippes of the wyse
wyll preserue them.
4 Where no oxen are, there the cribbe is emptie: but much encrease commeth by
the toyle of the oxe.
5 A faithfull witnesse will not dissemble: but a false recorde wyll make a lye.
6 A scornfull body seketh wisdome, and fyndeth it not: but knowledge is easie
vnto hym that wyll vnderstande.
7 Get thee from a foolishe man, when thou perceauest not in hym the lippes of
knowledge.
8 The wisdome of the circumspect man, is to vnderstande his way: but the
foolishnesse of the vnwise, deceaueth.
9 Fooles make but a sport of sinne: but there is a fauourable loue among the
ryghteous.
10 The heart knoweth his owne soules bitternesse: and the straunger shall not be
partaker of his ioy.
11 The house of the vngodly shalbe ouerthrowen: but the tabernacle of the
righteous shall florishe.
12 There is a way which seemeth right vnto a man: but the ende therof are the
wayes of death.
13 The heart is sorowfull euen in laughter, and the ende of myrth is heauinesse.
14 A backe slydyng heart shalbe fylled with his owne wayes: but a good man shall
depart from hym.
15 An ignorant body beleueth euery worde: but who so hath vnderstanding, loketh
well to his goynges.
16 A wyse man feareth, and departeth from euyll: but the foole is angry, and
counteth hym selfe sure.
17 An vnpatient man dealeth foolishly: but he that is well aduised, is hated of
the foole.
18 The ignoraunt haue foolishnesse in possession: but the wyse are crowned with
knowledge.
19 The euyll shall bowe them selues before the good: and the vngodly shall wayte
at the gates of the ryghteous.
20 The poore is hated euen of his owne neyghbours: but the riche hath many
frendes.
21 Who so dispiseth his neighbour, sinneth: but blessed is he that hath pitie of
the poore.
22 Without doubt they erre that worke wickednesse: but they that muse vpon good
thynges, vnto such shall happen mercie and trueth.
23 In euery labour there is some profite: but vayne wordes bryng foorth onely
penurie.
24 Riches are as a crowne vnto the wise: but the ignoraunce of fooles is very
foolishnesse.
25 A faythfull witnesse deliuereth soules: but a deceiptfull witnesse bryngeth
foorth lyes.
26 In the feare of the Lord is an assured strength: and his children are vnder a
sure defence.
27 The feare of the Lorde is a well of lyfe, to auoyde the snares of death.
28 In the multitude of people is the kynges honour: but the decay of the people
is the confusion of the prince.
29 He that is patient hath much vnderstanding: but he that is soone displeased,
exalteth foolishnesse.
30 A mery heart is the lyfe of the body: but enuie consumeth away the bones.
31 He that doth a poore man wrong, blasphemeth his maker: but who so honoureth
him, hath pitie on the poore.
32 The vngodly is cast away for his iniquitie: but the ryghteous hath a good
hope, euen in death.
33 Wisdome resteth in the heart of hym that hath vnderstandyng, and it shalbe
knowen among them that are vnlearned.
34 Righteousnesse setteth vp the people: but the sacrifice of the heathen is
sinnefull.
35 A discrete seruaunt is a pleasure vnto the kyng: but his wrath is agaynst hym
that doth dishonour hym.

Chapter 15

1 A soft aunswere appeaseth wrath: but rough wordes stirre vp anger.
2 The tongue of such as be wise vseth knoweledge aryght: as for a foolishe mouth
it babbleth out nothyng but foolishnesse.
3 The eyes of the Lorde in euery place, beholdeth both the good and the bad.
4 A wholsome tongue is a tree of lyfe: but the frowardnesse therof doth make sad
the spirite.
5 A foole dispiseth his fathers correction: but he that taketh heede when he is
reproued, shall haue the more vnderstandyng.
6 The house of the ryghteous is full of riches: but in the fruites of the
vngodly there is trouble.
7 The lippes of the wise do sowe knowledge: but the heart of the foolishe do not
so.
8 The Lorde abhorreth the sacrifice of the vngodly: but the prayer of the
righteous is acceptable vnto hym.
9 The way of the vngodly is an abhomination vnto the Lorde: but who so foloweth
righteousnesse, him he loueth.
10 Correction is greeuous vnto hym that forsaketh the way: and who so hateth
correction shall dye.
11 Hell and destruction are before the Lorde: howe much more then the heartes of
the children of men?
12 A scornefull body loueth not one that rebuketh hym: neither wyll he come vnto
the wyse.
13 A mery heart maketh a chearfull countenaunce: but by the sorowe of the heart
the mynde is heauy.
14 The heart of hym that hath vnderstandyng doth seke knowledge: but the mouth
of fooles is fed with foolishnesse.
15 All the dayes of the poore are miserable: but a quiet heart is a continuall
feast.
16 Better is a litle with the feare of the Lorde: then great treasure, and
trouble therwith.
17 Better is a dynner of hearbes with loue, then a fat oxe with euyll wyll.
18 An angry man stirreth vp strife: but he that is patient stylleth discorde.
19 The way of a slouthfull man is as an hedge of thornes: but the way of the
ryghteous is playne.
20 A wyse sonne maketh a glad father: but a foolishe man dispiseth his mother.
21 Foolishnesse is ioy to him that is destitute of knowledge: but a man of
vnderstandyng walketh vprightly.
22 Thoughtes without counsayle shall come to naught: but wheras men are that can
geue good counsayle, there is stedfastnesse.
23 A ioyfull thing it is to a man whe his counsayle is folowed: and howe good is
a worde spoken in season.
24 The way of lyfe is on hygh to the wise, that a man shoulde beware of hell
beneath.
25 The Lorde wyll breake downe the house of the proude: but he shall make fast
the borders of the wydowe.
26 The Lorde abhorreth the imaginations of the wicked: but the wordes of the
pure are pleasaunt.
27 The greedy couetous man rooteth vp his owne house: but who so hateth rewardes
shall lyue.
28 The heart of the ryghteous studyeth his aunswere afore: but the wicked mans
mouth spueth out mischiefe.
29 The Lorde is farre from the vngodly: but he heareth the prayer of the
ryghteous.
30 The clearnes of the eye reioyseth the heart, & a good name feedeth the bones.
31 The eare that hearkeneth to the refourmation of lyfe, shall dwell among the
wyse.
32 He that refuseth to be refourmed, dispiseth his owne soule: but he that
submitteth him selfe to correction, is wyse.
33 The feare of the Lorde is the ryght science of wisdome, and lowlynesse goeth
before honour.

Chapter 16

1 A man may wel purpose a thyng in his heart: but the aunswere of the tongue
commeth of the Lorde.
2 A man thynketh all his wayes to be cleane: but it is the Lorde that iudgeth
the myndes.
3 Commit thy workes vnto the Lorde: and what thou deuisest it shall prosper.
4 The Lorde hath made all thynges for his owne sake: yea, the vngodly for the
day of wrath.
5 The Lorde abhorreth all such as be of a proude heart: and though hande be
ioyned in hande, yet they shall not be vnpunished.
6 With mercie and faythfulnesse sinnes be forgeuen: and by the feare of the
Lorde euyll is eschewed.
7 When a mans wayes please the Lord, he maketh his very enemies to be his
frendes.
8 Better it is to haue a litle with ryghteousnesse, then great rentes wrongfully
gotten.
9 A man deuiseth a way in his heart: but it is the Lorde that ordereth his
goynges.
10 When the prophecie is in the lippes of the kyng, his mouth shall not go wrong
in iudgement.
11 A true wayght and ballaunce are the Lordes iudgement: all the wayghtes of the
bagge are his worke.
12 Wicked doers are an abhomination to the kyng, for a kynges seate shoulde be
holden vp with ryghteousnesse.
13 Ryghteous lippes are pleasaunt vnto kynges, and them that speaketh the trueth
shall he loue.
14 The kinges displeasure is a messenger of death: but a wise man wyll pacifie
hym.
15 The chearfull countenaunce of the kyng is life: and his louyng fauour is as a
cloude of the latter rayne.
16 To haue wisdome in possession, is better then to haue golde: and to get
vnderstandyng, is rather to be chosen then to haue siluer.
17 The path of the ryghteous is to eschewe euyll, and who so loketh well to his
wayes, kepeth his owne soule.
18 Pryde goeth before destruction, and an hygh mynde before the fall.
19 Better it is to be of humble mynde with the lowly, the to deuide the spoyles
with the proude.
20 He that handleth a matter wisely obteyneth good: and blessed is he that
putteth his trust in the Lorde.
21 Who so is wyse in heart, shalbe called prudent: and the sweetnesse of his
lippes encreaseth learnyng.
22 Vnderstandyng is a well of lyfe vnto hym that hath it: as for the chastenyng
of fooles it is but foolishnesse.
23 A wyse heart ordereth his mouth wisely, and ministreth learnyng vnto his
lippes.
24 Fayre wordes are an hony combe, a refresshyng of the mynde, and health of the
bones.
25 There is a way that men thynke to be ryght: but the ende therof leadeth vnto
death.
26 A troublous soule disquieteth her selfe, for her owne mouth hath brought her
therto.
27 An vngodly person stirreth vp euyll, and in his lippes he is as an hotte
burnyng fyre.
28 A frowarde body causeth strife: and he that is a blabbe of his tongue maketh
deuision among princes.
29 A wicked man beguyleth his neyghbour, and leadeth hym into the way that is
not good:
30 He shutteth his eyes to deuise mischiefe: and moueth his lippes to bryng
euyll to passe.
31 Age is a crowne of worshyp, yf it be founde in the way of ryghteousnesse.
32 A patient man is better the one strong: and he that can rule hym selfe, is
more worth then he that wynneth a citie.
33 The lottes are cast into the lappe: but the orderyng therof standeth all in
the Lorde.

Chapter 17

1 Better is a drye morsell with quietnesse, then a house full of fat offeryng
with strife.
2 A discrete seruaunt shall haue rule ouer a lewde sonne, and shal haue heritage
with the brethren.
3 As siluer is tryed in the fire, and golde in the furnace: so doth the Lorde
proue the heartes.
4 A wicked body geueth heede to false lippes, and a lyer geueth eare to a
deceiptfull tongue.
5 Who so scorneth the poore, blasphemeth his maker: and he that is glad at
another mans hurt, shall not be vnpunished.
6 Childers children are a crowne of the aged, and the fathers are the honour of
the children.
7 Speache of aucthoritie becommeth not a foole, much lesse a lying mouth then
beseemeth a prince.
8 A gyft is as a precious stone vnto hym that hath it: but vnto whom soeuer it
turneth, it maketh hym vnwise.
9 Who so couereth a fault, procureth loue: but he that discloseth it, deuideth
very frendes.
10 One reproofe more feareth a wise man, then an hundred stripes doth a foole.
11 A seditious person seketh mischiefe, and a cruell messenger shalbe sent
agaynst hym.
12 It were better to meete a shee beare robbed of her whelpes, then a foole
trusting in his foolishnesse.
13 Who so rewardeth euill for good, euil shall not depart from his house.
14 The beginning of strife is, as when a man maketh an issue for water: therfore
leaue of before the contention be medled with.
15 The Lorde hateth as well hym that iustifieth the vngodly, as him that
condempneth the innocent.
16 Whereto hath a foole treasure in his hande to bye wisdome, seeing he hath no
minde therto?
17 He is a frende that alway loueth, and in aduersitie a man shall knowe who is
his brother.
18 Who so promiseth by the hande and is suretie for his neighbour, he is a
foole.
19 He that delighteth in sinne, loueth strife: and who so setteth his doore to
hye, seeketh destruction.
20 Who so hath a frowarde heart, obteyneth no good: and he that hath a double
tongue, shall fall into mischiefe.
21 He that begetteth a foole, begetteth his sorowe: and the father of a foole
can haue no ioy.
22 A mery heart make a lustie age: but a sorowfull minde dryeth vp the bones.
23 The vngodly taketh gyftes out of the bosome, to wrest the wayes of iudgement.
24 Wisdome shineth in the face of hym that hath vnderstanding: but the eyes of
fooles wander throughout al landes.
25 An vndiscrete sonne is a griefe vnto his father: and an heauinesse vnto his
mother.
26 Certaynely to condempne the iust is not good: nor to strike the gouernours
whiche iudge rightly.
27 A wyse man vseth fewe wordes, and a man of vnderstanding is of a pacient
spirite.
28 Yea, a very foole when he holdeth his tongue is counted wise: and he that
stoppeth his lippes is esteemed prudent.

Chapter 18

1 Who so hath an earnest desire to wysdome he will sequester him selfe to seeke
it, and occupie him selfe in all stedfastnesse & sounde doctrine.
2 A foole hath no delight in vnderstanding: but onlye to vtter the fansies of
his owne heart.
3 When the vngodly commeth, then commeth also disdayne: and with the dishonest
person commeth shame and dishonour.
4 The wordes of a wyse mans mouth are lyke deepe waters: and the well of wisdome
is like a full streame.
5 It is not good to regarde the person of the vngodly, to ouerthrowe the
righteous in iudgement.
6 A fooles lippes come with brawling, and his mouth prouoketh vnto stripes.
7 A fooles mouth is his owne destruction, and his lippes are the snare for his
owne soule.
8 The wordes of a slaunderer are very woundes, and go through vnto the innermost
partes of the body.
9 Who so is slouthfull in his labour, is the brother of hym that is a waster.
10 The name of the Lorde is a strong castell, the righteous runneth vnto it and
is in safegarde.
11 The rich mans goodes are his strong citie, and as an high wall in his owne
conceipt.
12 Before destruction the heart of a man is proude: and before honour goeth
humilitie.
13 He that geueth sentence in a matter before he heare it, the same to hym is
folly and shame.
14 A good stomacke beareth out sickenesse: but the minde beyng sicke, who shall
heale it?
15 A wise heart possesseth knowledge, & a prudent eare seeketh vnderstanding.
16 A mans gyft maketh an open way, to bryng hym before great men.
17 The righteous declareth his owne cause first him selfe, and his neighbour
commeth and tryeth hym.
18 The lot causeth variaunce to ceasse: and parteth the mightie a sunder.
19 Brethren beyng at variaunce are harder to be wonne then a strong citie, and
their contentions are like the barre of a castell.
20 A mans belly shalbe satisfied with the fruite of his owne mouth, and with the
encrease of his lippes shall he be filled.
21 Death and life are in the instrument of the tongue, and they that loue it,
shall eate the fruite thereof.
22 Who so findeth a wyfe, findeth a good thing, and receaueth fauour of the
Lorde.
23 The poore prayeth meekely: but the riche geueth a rough aunswere.
24 A man that wyll haue frendes, must shewe hym selfe frendly: and there is a
frende whiche is nearer then a brother.

Chapter 19

1 Better is the poore that liueth godly, then he that abuseth his lippes, and is
a foole.
2 The desire without discretion is not good: but as a man whiche hasteth with
his feete offendeth.
3 The foolishnesse of man paruerteth his way: and his heart fretteth against the
Lorde.
4 Riches maketh many frendes: but the poore is separated from his neighbour.
5 A false witnesse shall not be vnpunished: and he that speaketh lyes shall not
escape.
6 The multitude hangeth vpon great men: and euery man fauoureth hym that geueth
rewardes.
7 All the brethren of the poore do hate hym, yea his owne frendes withdrawe them
selues from hym: and he that geueth credence to wordes, getteth nothing.
8 He that is wise loueth his owne soule, and kepeth vnderstanding, that he may
prosper.
9 A false witnesse shall not be vnpunished: and he that speaketh lyes shall
perishe.
10 Pleasure is not seemely for a foole: muche lesse for a bondman to haue rule
of princes.
11 A wyse man can put of displeasure, and it is his honour to let some faultes
passe.
12 The kynges displeasure is lyke the roaryng of a Lion: but his fauour is lyke
the deawe vpon the grasse.
13 An vndiscrete sonne is the heauinesse of his father, and a brawlyng wyfe is
like the toppe of an house wherthrough it is euer dropping.
14 House and riches may a man haue by the heritage of his elders: but a discrete
woman is the gyft of the Lorde.
15 Slouthfulnesse bryngeth sleepe, and a soule accustomed with craft, shall
suffer hunger.
16 Who so kepeth the commaundement, kepeth his owne soule: but he that regardeth
not his wayes, shall dye.
17 He that hath pitie vpon the poore, lendeth vnto the Lord: and looke what he
layeth out, it shalbe payde hym agayne.
18 Chasten thy sonne whyle there is hope: and let not thy soule spare for his
crying.
19 A man of great wrath shall suffer punishment: and though thou once deliuer
hym, thou must do it agayne.
20 O geue eare vnto good counsayle, and be content to be refourmed, that thou
mayest be wyse in the latter dayes.
21 There are many deuises in a mans heart: neuerthelesse, the counsayle of the
Lorde shall stande.
22 It is a mans worship to do good: and a poore man is better then a lyer.
23 The feare of the Lord bringeth a man to lyfe: and he shall rest the whole
night in plenteousnesse without visitation of any plague.
24 A slouthfull man shutteth his hande into his bosome, and wyll not take payne
to put it to his mouth.
25 If thou smytest a scornefull person, the ignoraunt shall take better heede:
and if thou reprouest one that hath vnderstanding, he wyll be the wyser.
26 He that hurteth his father, or shutteth out his mother, is a shamefull and an
vnworthy sonne.
27 My sonne heare no more the doctrine that leadeth thee vnto errours from the
wordes of vnderstanding.
28 A wicked witnesse mocketh iudgement: and the mouth of the vngodly deuoureth
wickednesse.
29 Iudgementes are ordeyned for the scornefull, and stripes for fooles backes.

Chapter 20

1 Wine maketh a man to be scornefull, & strong drinke causeth a man to be
vnquiet: who so delighteth therin shall not be wyse.
2 The feare of the king is as the roaring of a Lion, who so prouoketh hym vnto
anger, offendeth against his owne soule.
3 It is a mans honour to kepe him selfe from strife: but euery foole wyll be
medling.
4 A slouthfull body wyll not go to plow for colde of the winter: therefore shall
he begge in sommer, and haue nothing.
5 Counsayle in the heart of man is like deepe water: but a man of vnderstanding
wyll drawe it out.
6 Many there be that woulde be called good doers: but where shall one finde a
faythfull man?
7 The chyldren of the iust man which walketh vprightly, shalbe blessed after
hym.
8 A kyng that sitteth in the throne of iudgement, chaseth away all euyll with
his looke.
9 Who can say, I haue made my heart cleane, I am pure from my sinne?
10 Two maner of wayghtes or two maner of measures, both these are abhomination
vnto the Lorde.
11 A chylde is knowen by his conuersation, whether his workes be pure and right.
12 The eare to heare, the eye to see: the Lorde hath made them both.
13 Loue not sleepe, lest thou come vnto pouertie: but open thyne eyes, that thou
mayest haue bread inough.
14 It is naught, it is naught (saith he that byeth): but when he commeth to his
owne house, then he boasteth of his peny worth.
15 There is golde, and a multitude of precious stones: but the lippes of
knowledge are a precious iewell.
16 Take his garment that is suretie for a straunger: and take a pledge of hym
for the vnknowen sake.
17 A man liketh the bread that is gotten with deceipt: but at the last his mouth
shalbe filled with grauell.
18 Thorowe counsayle, the thinges that men deuise are made strong: and with good
aduise take warre in hande.
19 The craftie deceiptfull bewrayeth secrete counsayle: therefore meddle not
with hym that flattereth with his lips.
20 Who so curseth his father and mother, his light shalbe put out in the depth
of darknesse.
21 The heritage that commeth hastylye at the first, shall not be blessed at the
ende.
22 Say not thou, I wyll recompence euyll: but put thy trust in the Lorde, and he
shall deliuer thee.
23 Diuers wayghtes are an abhomination vnto the Lord, and a false balaunce is
not good.
24 The Lord ordereth euery mans goinges: how can a man then vnderstand his owne
way?
25 It is a snare for a man to deuour that whiche is holy, and after the vowe to
make inquirie.
26 A wyse kyng disperseth the vngodly, and bringeth the wheele ouer them.
27 The lanterne of the Lorde is the breath of man, searching all the inwarde
partes of the body.
28 Mercy and trueth preserueth the king, and with louing kindnes his seate is
holden vp.
29 The strength of young men is their worship, and a gray head is an honour vnto
the aged.
30 Blewe woundes driue away euyll, and stripes in the inwarde partes of the
body.

Chapter 21

1 The kynges heart is in the hand of the Lord, lyke as are the riuers of water,
he maye turne it whyther soeuer he wyll.
2 Euery mans way seemeth right in his owne eyes: but the Lorde pondereth the
heart.
3 To do righteousnes and iudgement, is more acceptable to the Lorde then
sacrifice.
4 An high looke, a proude heart, and the plowing of the vngodly is sinne.
5 The deuises of one that is diligent, bring plenteousnesse: but he that is
vnaduised, commeth vnto pouertie.
6 To hoorde vp riches with a deceiptfull tongue, is vanitie tossed to and fro of
them that seeke death.
7 The robberies of the vngodly shalbe their owne destruction: for they wyll not
do the thing that is right.
8 The way of the vngodly is frowarde and straunge: but of the pure man his worke
is right.
9 It is better to dwel in a corner on the house toppe, then with a brawling
woman in a wide house.
10 The soule of the vngodly wisheth euyll, and his neighbour findeth no fauour
in his eyes.
11 When the scornefull is punished, the ignoraunt take the better heede: and
when the wyse is instructed, he wyll receaue vnderstanding.
12 The righteous man wysely considereth the house of the wicked, and for their
wickednesse God ouerthroweth the vngodly.
13 Who so stoppeth his eares at the crying of the poore, he shall crye hym selfe
and not be hearde.
14 A priuie rewarde pacifieth displeasure: and a gyft in the bosome stylleth
furiousnesse.
15 The iust delighteth in doing the thing that is right: but destruction shalbe
to the workers of wickednesse.
16 The man that wandereth out of the way of wysdome, shall remaine in the
congregation of the dead.
17 He that hath pleasure in bankettes shalbe a poore man: and whoso delighteth
in wyne and delicates, shall not be riche.
18 The vngodly shalbe a raunsome for the righteous: and the wicked for the iust.
19 It is better to dwell in the wyldernesse, then with a chydyng and an angrye
woman.
20 In a wise mans house there is a great treasure and oyle: but a foolishe body
spendeth vp all.
21 Who so foloweth righteousnesse and mercy, findeth both life, righteousnesse,
and honour.
22 A wyse man skaleth the citie of the mightie, & ouerthroweth the strength
wherein they trusted.
23 Who so kepeth his mouth and his tongue, the same kepeth his soule from
troubles.
24 He that is proude and arrogant; is called a scorner, whiche in his wrath
worketh presumptuously.
25 The desire of the slouthfull kylleth him: for his handes wyll not labour.
26 He coueteth greedyly all day long: but the righteous geueth and spareth not.
27 The sacrifice of the vngodly is abhomination: howe muche more when they offer
the thing that is gotten with wickednesse?
28 A false witnesse shall perishe: but a good man speaketh constantly what he
hath hearde.
29 An vngodly man hardeneth his face: but the iust refourmeth his owne way.
30 There is no wysdome, there is no vnderstanding, there is no counsayle against
the Lorde.
31 The horse is prepared against the day of battayle: but the Lorde geueth
victorie.

Chapter 22

1 A good name is more to be desired then great riches: and louing fauour is
better then siluer and golde.
2 The riche and poore meete together: the Lorde is the maker of them all.
3 A wyse man seeth the plague, and hydeth hym selfe: but the foolishe go on
still, and are punished.
4 By humilitie and the feare of the Lorde, commeth riches, honour, and life.
5 Thornes and snares are in the way of the frowarde: but he that doth kepe his
soule, wyll flee farre from them.
6 Teache a chylde what way he should go: for he shall not leaue it when he is
olde.
7 The ryche ruleth the poore, and the borower is seruaunt to the lender.
8 He that soweth wickednes, shal reape wickednes: and the rodde of his anger
shall fayle.
9 He that hath a bountifull eye, shalbe blessed: for he geueth of his bread to
the poore.
10 Cast out the scorneful man, and so shal strife go out with hym: yea variaunce
and sclaunder shall ceasse.
11 Who so loueth cleannes of heart, for the grace of his lippes the kyng shalbe
his frende.
12 The eyes of the Lord preserue knowledge: and he ouerthroweth the wordes of
the transgressours.
13 The slouthfull body saith there is a Lion without: I might be slaine in the
streate.
14 The mouth of straunge women is a deepe pit: wherein he falleth that the Lorde
is angrye withall.
15 Foolishnes is bounde in the heart of the chylde: and the rodde of correction
shall driue it away.
16 Who so doth a poore man wrong, to increase his owne riches and geueth vnto
the ryche, at the last commeth to pouertie hym selfe.
17 Bowe downe thyne eare, and heare the wordes of the wise: applie thy mind vnto
my doctrine:
18 For it is a pleasaunt thing if thou kepe them in thyne heart, and order them
in thy lippes:
19 That thou mayest put thy trust in the Lorde, I haue shewed thee this day the
thing that thou knowest.
20 Haue not I warned thee very oft with counsayle and learning,
21 That I might make thee knowe the trueth, that thou with the veritie mightest
aunswere them that sende vnto thee?
22 Rob not the poore, because he is poore: and oppresse not the simple in
iudgement:
23 For the Lorde him selfe wyll defende their cause, and do violence vnto them
that haue vsed violence.
24 Make no frendship with an angrye wylfull man, and walke not with the furious:
25 Lest thou learne his wayes, and receaue hurt to thy soule.
26 Be not thou one of them that binde their hande vpon promise, and are suretie
for waightie causes:
27 For if thou hast nothing to pay, they shall take away thy bed from vnder
thee.
28 Thou shalt not remoue the auncient lande marke, whiche thy fore elders haue
set.
29 Seest thou not that they which be diligent in their businesse stande before
kinges, & not among the simple people?

Chapter 23

1 When thou sittest to eate with a noble man, consider diligently what is set
before thee.
2 Measure thyne appetite if it be gredyly set.
3 Be not desirous of his daintie meates, for meate begyleth and deceaueth.
4 Take not ouer great trauayle to be riche, beware of suche a purpose.
5 Wylt thou set thyne eye vpon the thing which sodenly vanisheth away? For
riches make them selues wynges, and take their flight lyke an Egle into the
ayre.
6 Eate thou not the bread of hym that hath an euyll eye: neither desire thou his
daintie meate.
7 For as though he thought it in his heart, he saith, eate and drinke: where as
his heart is not with thee.
8 The morsels that thou hast eaten shalt thou parbreake, and loose those sweete
wordes.
9 Tell nothing into the eares of a foole: for he wyll despise the wysdome of thy
wordes.
10 Remoue not the olde lande marke, and come not within the fielde of the
fatherlesse:
11 For their redeemer is mightie, euen he shall defend their cause against thee.
12 Applye thyne heart vnto correction, and thyne eare to the wordes of
knowledge.
13 Withholde not correction from the chylde: for if thou beatest hym with the
rodde, he shall not dye thereof:
14 If thou smyte hym with the rodde, thou shalt deliuer his soule from hell.
15 My sonne if thy heart receaue wysdome, my heart also shall reioyce:
16 Yea my raynes shalbe very glad, if thy lippes speake the thing that is right.
17 Let not thyne heart be ielous to folowe sinners, but kepe thee styll in the
feare of the Lorde all the day long:
18 For veryly there is an ende, and thy pacient abiding shall not be cut of.
19 My sonne geue eare and be wyse, and set straight thyne heart in the way of
the Lorde.
20 Kepe not company with wine bibbers, and riotous eaters of fleshe:
21 For suche as be drunkardes and riotours shall come to pouertie: and he that
is geuen to muche sleepe, shall go with a ragged coate.
22 Geue eare vnto thy father that begat thee, and despise not thy mother when
she is olde.
23 Purchase trueth, wysdome, nurture, and vnderstanding, and sell them not.
24 The father of the righteous shall greatly reioyce: and he that begetteth a
wyse chylde, shall haue ioy of hym.
25 Do so that thy father and mother may be glad of thee, and that she that bare
thee may reioyce.
26 My sonne geue me thyne heart, and let thyne eyes haue pleasure in my wayes:
27 For an whore is a deepe graue, and a straunge woman is a narowe pit.
28 She lyeth in wayte as for a pray, and increaseth the transgressours amongst
men.
29 Who hath wo? who hath sorowe? who hath strife? who hath brawling? and who
hath woundes without a cause?
30 Or who hath red eyes? euen they that be euer at the wine, & seeke excesse.
31 Looke not thou vpon the wine howe red it is, and what a colour it geueth in
the glasse:
32 It goeth downe sweetely, but at the last it byteth like a serpent, and
stingeth lyke an adder.
33 Thyne eyes shall beholde straunge women, and thyne heart shall vtter lewde
thinges:
34 Yea thou shalt be as though thou layest in the middest of the sea, or slepest
vppon the top of the maste of a ship.
35 They haue beaten me shalt thou say and I was not sicke, they haue stricken
me, and I felt it not: When I am well wakened, I wil go to the drinke again.

Chapter 24

1 Be not thou enuious to folow wicked men, and desire not to be among them:
2 For their heart imagineth to do hurt, and their lippes talke mischiefe.
3 Thorowe wysdome is an house buylded, & with vnderstanding is it set vp.
4 Thorowe discretion shall the chaumbers be filled with all costly and pleasaunt
riches.
5 A wise man is euer strong: yea a man of vnderstanding increaseth strength.
6 For with discretion must warres be taken in hand: and where as are many that
can geue counsaile, there is health.
7 Wysdome is to hye a thyng for a foole: for he dare not open his mouth in the
gate.
8 He that imagineth mischiefe, maye well be called an vngratious person.
9 The wicked thought of the foolishe is sinne: and the scornefull is an
abhomination vnto men.
10 If thou be faynt in the day of aduersitie, thy strength is small.
11 Deliuer them that are drawen vnto death, and ceasse not to preserue them that
are led to be slayne:
12 If thou wylt say, beholde I knewe not of it: doth not he that pondereth the
heart consider it? And he that kepeth thy soule, knoweth he it not? Shall not he
also recompence euery man according to his workes?
13 My sonne, eate thou hony because it is good, and the hony combe, for it is
sweete vnto thy mouth:
14 So sweete shal the knowledge of wysdome be vnto thy soule when thou hast
found it: and there shalbe hope, and thy hope shall not be cut of.
15 Laye no priuie wayte (O wicked man) against the house of the righteous, and
spoyle not his resting place.
16 For a iust man falleth seuen tymes, and ryseth vp agayne: but the vngodly
fall into mischiefe.
17 Reioyce not thou at the fall of thyne enemie, and let not thyne heart be glad
when he stumbleth:
18 Lest the Lorde when he seeth it be angry, and turne his wrath from hym vnto
thee.
19 Fret not thy selfe because of the malitious, neither be enuious at the
wicked:
20 For the wicked shall haue no posteritie, and the candle of the vngodly shalbe
put out.
21 My sonne, feare thou the Lorde and the kyng, and kepe no company with them
that slide backe from his feare:
22 For their destruction shall rise sodainlye: and who knoweth the aduersitie
that may come from them both?
23 It is not good to haue respect of any person in iudgement.
24 He that saith to the vngodly thou art righteous, hym shall the people curse,
yea the comminaltie shall abhorre him:
25 But they that rebuke the vngodly in them doth God delight, and a rych
blessing shall come vpon them.
26 Euery man shall kisse his lippes that geueth a good aunswere.
27 Make redie thy worke that is without, and looke well vnto that whiche thou
hast in the fielde: and then buylde thyne house.
28 Be not a false witnesse against thy neighbour, and speake no falsehood with
thy lippes.
29 Say not, I wyll handle hym euen as he hath dealt with me: and wyll rewarde
euery man according to his deedes.
30 I went by the fielde of the slouthfull, and by the vineyarde of the foolishe
man:
31 And lo, it was all couered with nettles, and stoode full of thornes, and the
stone wall was broken downe.
32 This I sawe, and considered it well: I looked vpon it, and toke it for a
warning.
33 Yea sleepe on styll I say a litle, slumber a litle, folde thy handes together
yet a litle:
34 So shall pouertie come vnto thee as one that trauayleth by the way, and
necessitie lyke a weaponed man.

Chapter 25

1 These are also parables of Solomon, which the men of Ezekia king of Iuda
copied out.
2 It is the glory of God to kepe a thing secrete: but the kynges honour is to
searche out a thing.
3 The heauen is hye, the earth is deepe: and the kinges heart is vnsearcheable.
4 Take the drosse from the siluer, and there shalbe a vessell for the siner.
5 Take away the vngodly from the kyng: and his seate shalbe stablished with
righteousnesse.
6 Put not foorth thy selfe in the presence of the king, and preasse not into the
place of great men:
7 For better is it, that it be sayde vnto thee, come vp hyther: then thou to be
put lower in the presence of the priuce whom thou seest with thyne eyes.
8 Be not hastie to go to lawe: lest haplye thou knowest not what to do when thy
neighbour hath confounded thee.
9 Handle thy matter with thy neighbour himselfe, and discouer not thy secrete to
another:
10 Lest he that heareth it put thee to shame, and thy infamie do not ceasse.
11 A worde spoken in due season, is lyke apples of golde in a graued worke of
siluer.
12 Who so reproueth a wyse man that hath an obedient eare, is as a golden
earring, and an ornament of fine golde.
13 As the colde of snowe in the tyme of haruest: so is a faythfull messenger to
them that sende hym, for he refresheth his maisters mynde.
14 Whoso maketh great boastes and geueth nothing, is lyke cloudes and winde
without rayne.
15 With pacience is a prince pacified, and with a softe tongue is rigorousnesse
broken.
16 If thou findest honie, eate so muche as is sufficient for thee: lest thou be
ouer full, and parbreake it out agayne.
17 Withdrawe thy foote from thy neighbours house: lest he be werie of thee, and
so hate thee.
18 Whoso beareth false witnesse against his neighbour, he is a very club, a
sworde, and a sharpe arrowe.
19 The confidence that is put in an vnfaythfull man in tyme of trouble, is like
a broken tooth, and a sliding foote.
20 Who so taketh away a mans garment in the colde weather, is like vineger vpon
lime, or lyke hym that singeth songues to an heauie heart.
21 If thyne enemie hunger, feede hym, if he thirst, geue him drinke:
22 For so shalt thou heape coles of fire vpon his head, and the Lorde shall
rewarde thee.
23 The northwinde dryueth away the rayne: euen so doth an angry countenaunce a
backbiters tongue.
24 It is better to sit in a corner vpon the house toppe, then with a brawling
woman in a wide house.
25 Good newes from a straunge countrey, are as colde water to a thirstie soule.
26 A righteous man fallyng downe before the vngodly, is like a troubled wel, and
a spring that is corrupted.
27 As it is not good to eate to muche honye, so curiously to searche the glory
of heauenly thinges, is not commendable.
28 He that can not rule him selfe, is like a citie whiche is broken downe and
hath no walles.

Chapter 26

1 Lyke as snowe is not meete in sommer and rayne in haruest: euen so is worship
vnseemely for a foole.
2 As the byrde and the swalowe take their flight and flee here and there: so the
curse that is geuen in vayne, shall not light vpon a man.
3 Unto the horse belongeth a whip, to the asse a brydle: and a rod to the fooles
backe.
4 Geue not the foole an aunswere after his foolishnes, lest thou become like
vnto him.
5 But make the foole an aunswere to his foolishnesse, lest he be wyse in his
owne conceipt.
6 As he that cutteth of his messengers feete endamageth himselfe: so doth he
that committeth a message to a foole.
7 Like as in a lame man his legges are not equall: euen so is a parable in a
fooles mouth.
8 He that setteth a foole in hye dignitie, that is euen as if a man would bynde
a stone in a sling.
9 As is a thorne in the hande of a drunkarde: so is a parable in a fooles mouth.
10 The mightie that fourmed al thinges, rewardeth the fooles & transgressours.
11 Like as the dogge turneth agayne to his owne vomite: euen so a foole
beginneth his foolishnes agayne afreshe.
12 If thou seest a man that is wise in his owne conceipt: there is more hope in
a foole, then in hym.
13 The slouthfull saith, there is a lion in the way, and a lion in the middest
of the streates.
14 Like as the doore turneth about vpon the hynges: euen so doth the slouthfull
walter him selfe in his bed.
15 The slouthfull body thrusteth his hande into his bosome, and it greeueth hym
to put it agayne to his mouth.
16 The sluggarde thinketh him selfe wiser then seuen men that sit and teache.
17 Who so goeth by and medleth with other mens strife: he is like one that
taketh a dogge by the eares.
18 As he that fayneth him selfe mad, casteth firebrandes, deadly arrowes and
dartes:
19 So doth a dissembler with his neighbour, and saith, am not I in sport?
20 Where no wood is, there the fire goeth out: euen so where the talebearer is
taken away, there the strife ceasseth.
21 As coles kindle heate, and wood the fire: euen so doth a brawling felowe
stirre vp variaunce.
22 A talebearers wordes are lyke men that strike with hammers, and they pearse
the inwarde partes of the body.
23 Burning lippes and a wicked heart, are like a potsharde couered with siluer
drosse.
24 An enemie wyll dissemble with his lippes, and layeth vp deceipt in his heart.
25 But when he speaketh fayre, beleue hym not: for there are seuen abhominations
in his heart.
26 Hatred maye be couered by deceipt: but the malice therof shalbe shewed before
the whole congregation.
27 Who so diggeth vp a pit, shal fall therin: and he that rolleth vp a stone, it
wyl returne vpon hym.
28 A lying tongue hateth the afflicted: and a flattering mouth worketh
mischiefe.

Chapter 27

1 Make not thy boast of to morowe: for thou knowest not what a day may bring
foorth.
2 Let another man prayse thee, and not thyne owne mouth, yea other folkes, and
not thyne owne lippes.
3 The stone is heauie, and the sande wayghtie: but a fooles wrath is heauier
then them both.
4 Wrath is a cruell thing, and furiousnesse is a very tempest: but who is able
to abide enuie?
5 Open rebuke, is better then secrete loue.
6 Faythfull are the woundes of a louer: but the kysses of an enemie are cruell.
7 He that is full, abhorreth an honye combe: but vnto hym that is hungrye, euery
sowre thing is sweete.
8 He that oft times flitteth, is like a byrd that forsaketh her nest.
9 Baulme and sweete incense make the heart merie: so sweete is that frende that
geueth counsell from the heart.
10 Thyne owne frende and thy fathers frende see thou forsake not, and go not
into thy brothers house in tyme of thy trouble: for better is a frende at hand,
then a brother farre of.
11 My sonne be wyse, and make me a glad heart, that I may make aunswere vnto my
rebukers.
12 A wyse man seing the plague, wyll hide hym selfe: as for fooles they go on
styll and suffer harme.
13 Take his garment that is suretie for a straunger, and take a pledge of hym
for the vnknowen sake.
14 He that is to hastie to praise his neighbour aboue measure, shalbe taken as
one that geueth hym an euyll report.
15 A brawling woman and the roofe of the house dropping in a raynie day, may
well be compared together.
16 He that stilleth her, stilleth the winde, and stoppeth the smell of the
oyntment in his hande.
17 Like as one iron whetteth another, so doth one man comfort another.
18 Whoso kepeth his figge tree, shall eate the fruites thereof: so he that
wayteth vpon his maister, shall come to honour.
19 Like as in one water there appeare diuers faces: euen so diuers men haue
diuers heartes.
20 Hell and destruction are neuer full: euen so the eyes of men can neuer be
satisfied.
21 As is the fining pot for the siluer, and the furnace for golde: so is a man
tryed by the mouth of him that prayseth him.
22 Though thou shouldest bray a foole with a pestel in a morter like furmentie
corne: yet wyll not his foolishnes go from hym.
23 Be thou diligent to knowe the state of thy cattell thy selfe, and loke well
to thy flockes.
24 For riches abideth not alway, and the crowne endureth not for euer.
25 The hay groweth, the grasse commeth vp, and hearbes are gathered in the
mountaynes.
26 The lambes shall clothe thee, and for the goates thou shalt haue money to thy
husbandry.
27 Thou shalt haue goates milke inough to feede thee, to vpholde thy housholde,
and to sustayne thy maydens.

Chapter 28

1 The vngodly fleeth when no man pursueth him: but the righteous are bolde as a
Lion.
2 For the wickednes of the lande, the prince is oft chaunged: but thorowe a man
of vnderstanding and wysdome, a realme endureth long.
3 One poore man oppressing another by violence, is like a raging rayne that
destroyeth the fruite.
4 They that forsake the lawe, prayse the vngodly: but such as kepe the lawe are
greeued at them.
5 Wicked men vnderstande not iudgement: but they that seeke the Lord,
vnderstande all thinges.
6 Better is he that walketh in his vprightnes: then he that peruerteth his
wayes, and is riche.
7 Who so kepeth the lawe, is a chylde of vnderstanding: but he that is a
companion of riotous men, shameth his father.
8 He that by vsurie and vniust gaynes gathereth riches: he shall lay them in
store for a man that will pitie the poore.
9 He that turneth away his eare from hearing the lawe, his prayer shalbe
abhominable.
10 Who so causeth the righteous to go astray by an euill way, shall fall into
his owne pit: but the iust shall haue the good in possession.
11 The riche man thinketh hym selfe to be wise: but the poore that hath
vnderstandyng can perceaue hym well inough.
12 When righteous men do reioyce, there is great glory: but when the wicked come
vp, the man is tryed.
13 He that hydeth his sinnes, shall not prosper: but whoso knowledgeth them and
forsaketh them, shall haue mercy.
14 Well is hym that standeth alway in awe: as for hym that hardeneth his heart,
he shall fall into mischiefe.
15 As a roaring Lion and an hungrye Beare, so is an vngodly prince ouer the
poore people.
16 Where the prince is without vnderstanding, there is great oppression and
wrong: but if he hateth couetousnes, he shall long raigne.
17 He that by violence shedeth any mans blood, shalbe a runnagate vnto his
graue, and no man shalbe able to succour hym.
18 Whoso leadeth an innocent life, shalbe saued: but he that goeth frowarde
wayes, shall once haue a fall.
19 He that tylleth his lande shall haue plenteousnes of bread: but he that
foloweth idle persons, shall haue pouertie inough.
20 A faythfull man shalbe fylled with blessinges, and he that maketh haste to be
riche, shall not be vngyltie.
21 To haue respect of persons in iudgement is not good, for that man wyll do
wrong, yea euen for a peece of bread.
22 He that wyll be riche all to soone, hath an euyll eye: and considereth not
that pouertie shall come vpon hym.
23 He that folowyng my preceptes rebuketh a man, shall fynde more fauour at the
last then he that flattereth hym.
24 Who so robbeth his father and mother, and sayth it is no sinne: the same is
the companion of a destroyer.
25 He that is of a proude stomacke stirreth vp strife: but he that putteth his
trust in the Lorde shalbe well fed.
26 He that trusteth in his owne heart is a foole: but he that dealeth wisely
shalbe safe.
27 He that geueth vnto the poore shall not lacke: but he that hydeth his eyes
from them, shall haue many a curse.
28 When the vngodly are come vp, men are fayne to hide themselues: but when they
perishe, the ryghteous encrease.

Chapter 29

1 He that is stifnecked and wyll not be refourmed, shall sodaynly be destroyed
without any helpe.
2 When the ryghteous are in aucthoritie the people do reioyce: but when the
wicked beare rule, the people mourne.
3 Who so loueth wisdome, maketh his father a glad man: but he that kepeth
companie with harlottes, spendeth away that he hath.
4 With true iudgement the kyng stablissheth the lande: but yf he be a man that
oppresse the people with gatherynges, he turneth it vpside downe.
5 Who so flattereth his neighbour, layeth a net for his feete.
6 The sinne of the wicked is his owne snare: but the ryghteous doth syng and
reioyce.
7 The righteous considereth the cause of the poore: but the vngodly regardeth no
vnderstandyng.
8 Scornefull men bryng a citie into a snare: but wise men turne away wrath.
9 If a wise man contendeth with a foole: whether he be angry or laugh, there is
no rest.
10 The bloodthirstie hate the righteous: but the iust seeke his soule.
11 A foole vttereth all his mynde at once: but a wyse man kepeth it in tyll
afterwarde.
12 If a prince delight in lyes, all his seruauntes are vngodly.
13 The poore and the lender meete together, and the Lorde lyghteneth both their
eyes.
14 The seate of the kyng that faithfully iudgeth the poore, shall continue sure
for euermore.
15 The rodde and correction geueth wisdome: but a childe left to his owne will,
bryngeth his mother to shame.
16 When the vngodly are multiplied, wickednesse encreaseth: but the ryghteous
shall see their fall.
17 Nurture thy sonne with correction, and thou shalt be at rest: yea, he shall
do thee good at thine heart.
18 When the worde of God is not preached, the people perishe: but well is hym
that kepeth the lawe.
19 A stubbourne seruaunt wyll not be the better for wordes: for though he
vnderstande, yet will he not regarde them.
20 Seest thou a man that is hastie to speake vnaduisedly? there is more hope in
a foole then in hym.
21 He that delicately bryngeth vp his seruaunt from a chylde, shall make hym his
maister at length.
22 An angry man stirreth vp strife, and he that beareth euyll will in his mynde
doth much euyll.
23 After pryde commeth a fall: but a lowly spirite bryngeth great worshyp.
24 Who so is partner with a thiefe, hateth his owne soule: he heareth blasphemie
and telleth it not foorth.
25 He that feareth men shall haue a fall: but who so putteth his trust in the
Lorde, is without daunger.
26 Many there be that seke the princes fauour: but euery mans iudgement commeth
from the Lorde.
27 The righteous abhorreth the vngodlye: and the wicked hateth hym that is in
the ryght way.

Chapter 30

1 And the prophecie that the same man spake vnto Ithiel, euen vnto Ithiel and
Uchal.
2 Surely I am more foolishe then any man, and haue no mans vnderstandyng.
3 I neuer learned wisdome, nor had knowledge of holy thynges.
4 Who hath clymed vp into heauen, and come downe from thence? who hath holden
the wynde fast in his hande? who hath gathered together the waters in a garment?
who hath established all the endes of the worlde: what is his name, and what is
his sonnes name, yf thou canst tell?
5 Euery worde of God is pure: he is a shielde vnto all them that put their trust
in hym.
6 Put thou nothyng vnto his wordes, lest he reproue thee, and thou be founde a
lyar.
7 Two thinges haue I required of thee, denie me them not before I dye:
8 Remoue farre fro me vanitie and lyes, geue me neither pouertie nor riches,
only graunt me a necessary lyuyng:
9 Lest peraduenture I beyng full, shoulde denie thee, and say, who is the Lorde?
or beyng oppressed with pouertie fall to stealyng, and forswere the name of my
God.
10 Accuse not a seruaunt vnto his maister, lest he speake euyll of thee, and
thou be hurt.
11 There is a generation that curseth their father, and doth not blesse their
mother.
12 There is a generation that thynke them selues cleane, and yet is not cleansed
from their filthinesse.
13 There is a generation that hath a proude loke, and doth cast vp their eye
lyddes.
14 There is a generation whose teeth are as swordes, and their chawes as knyues,
to deuour the poore from of the earth, & the needy from among men.
15 The horse leache hath two daughters crying: bryng hyther, bryng hyther. There
be three thynges that are neuer satisfied, yea foure thynges sayth neuer hoe:
16 The graue, the barren wombe, and the earth that hath neuer water enough: as
for fire it sayth neuer hoe.
17 Who so laugheth his father to scorne, and setteth his mothers commaundement
at naught, the rauens of the valley picke out his eyes, and deuoured be he of
the young Egles.
18 There be three thynges whiche are wonderfull to me, yea foure whiche passe my
vnderstandyng:
19 The way of an Egle in the ayre, the way of a serpent vpon a stone, the way of
a ship in the middest of the sea, and the way of a man with a young woman:
20 Such is the way also of a wyfe that breaketh wedlocke, which wypeth her mouth
lyke as when she hath eaten, and sayth, as for me I haue done no wickednesse.
21 For three thynges the earth is disquieted, and the fourth may it not abyde.
22 A seruaunt that beareth rule, a foole that is full fedde,
23 A spiteful woman when she is maried, and an handmayde that is heire to her
maistresse.
24 These be foure thynges in the earth the which are very litle, but in wisdome
they exceede the wyse:
25 The emmets are but a weake people, which yet gather their meate in the
sommer:
26 The conies are but a feeble folke, yet make their boroughes among the rockes:
27 The grashoppers haue not a guide, yet go they foorth together by heapes:
28 The spyder laboureth with her handes, and is in kynges palaces.
29 There be three thynges that go well, yea foure are comely in goyng.
30 A lion whiche is strongest among beastes, and shunneth not at the syght of
any:
31 A grayhounde strong in the hynder partes, a ramme also, and a king against
whom no man aryseth vp.
32 If thou hast done foolishly when thou wast in hye estate, or yf thou hast
taken euyll counsayle, then lay thine hande vpon thy mouth.
33 Who so chirneth mylke bringeth foorth butter, and he that rubbeth his nose,
maketh it bleede: Euen so he that forceth wrath, bringeth foorth strife.

Chapter 31

1 The wordes of king Lamuel, and the lesson that his mother taught him.
2 What my sonne? what the sonne of my body? and what O my deare beloued sonne?
3 Geue not ouer thy strength & wayes vnto women, which are the destruction euen
of kynges.
4 O Lamuel, it is not for kynges, it is not I say for kynges to drynke wine, nor
princes strong drynke.
5 Lest they by drnkyng forget the lawe, and peruert the iudgement of all poore
mens children.
6 Geue strong drynke vnto such as are redy to perishe, and wine vnto those that
mourne:
7 That they may drynke it, and forget their miserie and aduersitie.
8 Be thou an aduocate for the dumbe, to speake in the cause of all such as be
succourlesse in this transitorie worlde.
9 Open thy mouth, defende the thyng that is lawfull and ryght, and the cause of
the poore and helpelesse.
10 Who so fyndeth an honest faythfull woman, she is much more worth then
pearles.
11 The heart of her husbande may safely trust in her, so that he shall fall into
no pouertie.
12 She wyll do hym good, and not euill, all the dayes of her lyfe.
13 She occupieth wooll and flaxe, and laboureth gladly with her handes.
14 She is like a marchauntes ship, that bryngeth her vittayles from a farre.
15 She is vp in the nyght season, to prouide meate for her housholde, and foode
for her maydens.
16 She considereth lande, and byeth it: and with the fruite of her handes she
planteth a vineyarde.
17 She girdeth her loynes with strength, and fortifieth her armes.
18 And yf she perceaue that her huswiferie doth good, her candell goeth not out
by nyght.
19 She layeth her fingers to the spindle, & her hande taketh holde of the
distaffe.
20 She openeth her hande to the poore, yea she stretcheth foorth her handes to
such as haue neede.
21 She feareth not that the colde of wynter shall hurt her housholde, for all
her housholde folkes are clothed with scarlet.
22 She maketh her selfe faire ornametes, her clothyng is white silke and purple.
23 Her husbande is much set by in the gates, when he sitteth among the rulers of
the lande.
24 She maketh cloth of silke, and selleth it: and deliuereth girdles vnto the
marchaunt.
25 Strength and honour is her clothing, and in the latter day she shall reioyce.
26 She openeth her mouth with wisdome, and in her tongue is the lawe of grace.
27 She loketh well to the wayes of her housholde: and eateth not her bread with
idlenesse.
28 Her children arise vp & call her blessed: and her husbande shall make much of
her.
29 Many daughters there be that gather riches together: but thou goest aboue
them all.
30 As for fauour it is deceiptfull, & beautie is a vayne thyng: but a woman that
feareth the Lorde, shalbe praysed.
31 Geue her of the fruite of her handes: and let her owne workes prayse her in
the gates.


Ecclesiastes

Chapter 1

1 The wordes of the preacher ye sonne of Dauid kyng of Hierusalem.
2 All is but most vayne vanitie saith the preacher, & all is most vayne I say
and but playne vanitie.
3 For what els hath a man of all the labour that he taketh vnder the sunne?
4 One generation passeth away, another commeth: but the earth abideth styll.
5 The sunne aryseth, the sunne goeth downe, and returneth to his place, that he
may there ryse vp agayne.
6 The wynde goeth towarde the south and turneth vnto the north, fetcheth his
compasse, whirleth about, and goeth foorth, and returneth agayne to his
circuites from whence he dyd come.
7 All fluddes runne into the sea, and yet is the sea it selfe not fylled: For
loke vnto what place the waters runne, thence they come to flowe agayne.
8 All thinges are so harde to be knowen, that no man can expresse them: The eye
is not satisfied with sight, the eare is not fylled with hearyng.
9 The thyng that hath ben, commeth to passe agayne, and the thyng that hath ben
done, shalbe done agayne: There is no newe thyng vnder the sunne.
10 Is there any thyng wherof it may be sayde, lo this is newe? for it was long
ago in the tymes that haue ben before vs.
11 The thyng that is past is out of remembraunce: euen so the thynges that are
for to come, shal no more be thought vpon among them that come after.
12 I my selfe the preacher was kyng of Israel at Hierusalem,
13 And dyd applie my mynde to seke out & searche for knowledge of all thynges
that are done vnder heauen: Such trauayle and labour hath God geuen vnto the
children of men, to exercise them selues therin.
14 Thus haue I considered all these thynges that come to passe vnder the sunne:
and lo, they are all but vanitie and vexation of mynde.
15 The croked can not be made straight, nor the imperfection of thynges can be
numbred.
16 I communed with myne owne heart, saying: lo I am come to great estate, and
haue gotten more wisdome then all they that haue ben before me in Hierusalem.
17 Yea, my heart had great experience of wisdome & knowledge: for thervnto I
applied my mynde, that I myght knowe what were wisdome and vnderstandyng, what
were errour and foolishnesse: and I perceaued that this was also but a vexation
of mynde.
18 For where much wisdome is, there is also great trauayle and disquietnesse:
and the more knowledge a man hath, the more is his care.

Chapter 2

1 Then sayde I thus in my heart: Nowe go to, I will take myne ease, and haue
good dayes: But lo, that is vanitie also.
2 Insomuch that I saide vnto the man geuen to laughter, thou art mad: and to
mirth, what doest thou?
3 So I thought in my heart to geue my fleshe vnto wine, and agayne to apply my
mynde vnto wisdome, and to comprehende foolishnesse: vntyll the tyme that among
all the thynges which are vnder the sunne, I myght see what were best for men to
do so long as they liue vnder heauen.
4 I made gorgious faire workes: I builded my houses, and planted vineyardes.
5 I made me orchardes and gardens of pleasure, and planted trees in them of all
maner of fruites.
6 I made pooles of water, to water the greene and fruitfull trees withall.
7 I bought seruauntes and maydens, and had a great housholde: As for cattel and
sheepe, I had more substaunce of them then all they that were before me in
Hierusalem.
8 I gathered together siluer and golde, and the chiefe treasures of kynges and
landes: I haue prouided me men singgers and women singers, and the delites of
the sonnes of men, as a woman taken captiue, and women taken captiues.
9 And I was greater and in more worship then all my predecessours in Hierusalem:
For wisdome remayned with me.
10 And loke whatsoeuer myne eyes desired, I let them haue it: and wherin soeuer
my heart delited or had any pleasure, I withhelde it not from it: Thus my heart
reioyced in all that I did, and this was my portion of all my trauayle.
11 But when I considered all the workes that my handes had wrought, and all the
labour that I had taken therin: lo all was but vanitie and vexation of mynde,
and nothing of any value vnder the sunne.
12 Then turned I me to consider wisdome, errour, and foolishnesse (for what is
he among men that myght be compared to me the kyng in such workes?)
13 And I sawe that wisdome excelleth foolishnesse, as farre as light doth
darknesse.
14 For a wise man hath his eyes in his head, but the foole goeth in darknesse: I
perceaued also that they both had one ende.
15 Then thought I in my mynde, yf it happen vnto the foole as it doth vnto me,
what needeth me then to labour any more for wisdome? So I confessed within my
heart that this also was but vanitie.
16 For the wise are euer as litle in remembraunce as the foolishe: for the dayes
shall come when all shalbe forgotten: yea the wise man dyeth as well as the
foole.
17 Thus began I to be weery of my life, insomuch that I coulde away with nothyng
that is done vnder the sunne: for all was but vanitie and vexation of mynde.
18 Yea I was weery of my labour which I had taken vnder the sunne, because I
shoulde be fayne to leaue them vnto another man that commeth after me:
19 And who knoweth whether he shalbe a wise man or a foole? And yet shall he be
lorde of all my laboures which I with such wisdome haue taken vnder the sunne:
This is also a vayne thyng.
20 So I turned me to refrayne my mynde from all such trauayle as I toke vnder
the sunne,
21 Forsomuch as a man shoulde weery hym selfe with wisdome, with vnderstandyng
and oportunitie, and yet be fayne to leaue his labours vnto another that neuer
sweat for them: This is also a vayne thyng, and great miserie.
22 For what getteth a man of all the labour and trauayle of his mynde that he
taketh vnder the sunne?
23 But heauinesse, sorowe, and disquietnesse all the dayes of his life? Insomuch
that his heart can not rest in the nyght: This is also a vayne thyng.
24 Is it not better then for a man to eate and drynke, and his soule to be mery
in his labour? yea I sawe that this also was a gift of God.
25 For who wyll eate or go more lustyly to his worke then I?
26 And why? God geueth to the man that is good before hym, wisdome,
vnderstandyng, and gladnesse: but vnto the sinner he geueth weerinesse, that he
may gather and heape together the thyng that afterwarde shalbe geuen vnto hym
whom it pleaseth God: This is nowe a vayne thyng, yea a very disquietnesse and
vexation of mynde.

Chapter 3

1 Euery thyng hath a tyme, yea all that is vnder the heaue hath his conuenient
season.
2 There is a tyme to be borne, and a tyme to dye: there is a tyme to plant, and
a tyme to plucke vp the thyng that is planted.
3 A tyme to slay, and a tyme to make whole: a tyme to breake downe, and a tyme
to builde vp.
4 A tyme to weepe, and a tyme to laugh: a tyme to mourne, & a tyme to daunce.
5 A tyme to cast away stones, and a tyme to gather stones together: A tyme to
imbrace, and a tyme to refrayne from imbracyng.
6 A tyme to wynne, and a tyme to lose: A tyme to spare, and a tyme to spende.
7 A tyme to cut in peeces, and a tyme to sowe together: A tyme to kepe scilence,
and a tyme to speake.
8 A tyme to loue, and a tyme to hate: A tyme of warre, and a tyme of peace.
9 What hath a man els that doth any thyng, but weerinesse and labour?
10 For as touchyng the trauayle and carefulnesse which God hath geuen vnto men,
I see that he hath geuen it them to be exercised in it.
11 All this hath he ordeyned marueilous goodly, to euery thyng his due tyme: He
hath planted ignoraunce also in the heartes of men, that they shoulde not
comprehende the ground of his workes which he doth from the begynnyng to the
ende.
12 So I perceaued that in those thinges there is nothyng better for a man then
to be mery, and to do well as long as he lyueth.
13 For all that a man eateth & drynketh, yea whatsoeuer a man enioyeth of all
his labour: that same is a gyft of God.
14 I considered also that whatsoeuer God doth, it continueth for euer: And that
nothyng can be put vnto it, nor taken from it, & that God doth it to the intent
that men shoulde feare hym.
15 The thyng that hath ben, is nowe: and the thyng that is for to come, hath ben
afore time: for God restoreth againe the thyng that was past.
16 Moreouer, I sawe vnder the sunne vngodlynes in the steade of iudgement, &
iniquitie in steade of righteousnesse.
17 Then thought I in my mynde, God shall separate the ryghteous from the
vngodly: and then shalbe the tyme and iudgement of all counsayles & workes.
18 I communed with myne owne heart also concernyng the children of men, howe God
hath chosen them, and yet letteth them appeare as though they were beastes.
19 For it happeneth vnto men as it doth vnto beastes, euen one condition vnto
them both: as the one dyeth so dyeth the other, yea they haue both one maner of
breath: so that in this a man hath no preeminence aboue a beast, but are all
subdued vnto vanitie.
20 They go all vnto one place: for as they be all of dust, so shall they all
turne vnto dust agayne.
21 Who knoweth the spirite of man that goeth vpwarde, & the breath of the beast
that goeth downe to the earth?
22 Wherfore I perceaue that there is nothyng better for a man then to be ioyfull
in his labour, for that is his portion: But who wyll bryng hym to see the thyng
that shall come after hym?

Chapter 4

1 So I turned me, and considered all the violent wrong that is done vnder the
sunne: and beholde the teares of such as were oppressed, and there was no man to
comfort them, or that woulde deliuer and defende them from the violence of their
oppressours.
2 Wherfore I iudged those that are dead, to be more happy then those that be
alyue?
3 Yea him that is yet vnborne, to be better at ease then they both: because he
seeth not the miserable workes that are done vnder the sunne.
4 Agayne, I sawe that all trauayle and diligence of labour that euery man taketh
in hande, was done of enuie agaynst his neighbour: This is also a vayne thyng,
and a vexation of mynde.
5 The foole foldeth his handes together, and eateth vp his owne fleshe.
6 One handfull saith he is better with rest, then both the handes full with
labour and trauayle of mynde.
7 Moreouer I turned me, and beholde yet another vanitie vnder the sunne.
8 There is one man, no mo but himselfe alone, hauing neither childe nor brother,
yet is there no ende of his carefull trauayle, his eyes can not be satisfied
with riches: yet saith he not for whom do I take such trauayle? For whose
pleasure do I thus consume away my life? This is also a vayne and miserable
thyng.
9 Therfore two are better then one, for they may well enioy the profite of their
labour: For yf one of them fall, his companion helpeth him vp agayne.
10 But wo is him that is alone: for yf he fal, he hath not another to helpe him
vp.
11 Agayne, when two sleepe together they are warme: but howe can a body be warme
alone?
12 One may be ouercome, but two may make resistaunce: A three folde gable is not
lightly broken.
13 A poore chylde beyng wise, is better then an olde kyng that doteth, and can
not beware in tyme to come.
14 Some one commeth out of prison, and is made a kyng: and another which is
borne in the kyngdome, commeth vnto pouertie.
15 And I perceaued that all men lyuyng vnder the sunne, go with the seconde
childe that shall stande vp in the steade of the other.
16 As for the people that haue ben before him, and that come after him, they are
innumerable, and they that come after him shall not reioyce in him: This is also
a vayne thyng, and vexation of mynde.

Chapter 5

1 When thou commest into the house of God, kepe thy foote and drawe nye, that
God which is at hande may heare that thou geue not the offerynges of fooles: for
they knowe naught but to do euyll.
2 Be not hastye with thy mouth, and let not thine heart speake any thyng rashly
before God: For God is in heauen, and thou vpon earth, therfore let thy wordes
be fewe.
3 For where much carefulnesse is, there are many dreames: and where many wordes
are, there men may heare fooles.
4 If thou make a vowe vnto God, be not slacke to perfourme it: As for foolish
vowes he hath no pleasure in them: yf thou promise any thyng, pay it.
5 For better is it that thou make no vowe, then that thou shouldest promise and
not pay.
6 Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy fleshe for to sinne, neither say thou before
the angell that it is thy ignoraunce: for then God wyll be angry at thy voyce,
and destroy all the worke of thyne handes.
7 And why? wheras are many dreames and many wordes, there are also diuers
vanities: but loke that thou feare God.
8 If thou seest the poore to be oppressed, and wrongfully dealt withall, so that
equitie and right of the lawe is wrested in the lande, maruayle not thou at such
a thyng: for he that is higher then the hyghest regardeth, and there be hygher
then they.
9 The encrease of the earth vpholdeth all thyng: yea the kyng hym selfe is
maynteyned by husbandry.
10 He that loueth money, wyll neuer be satisfied with money: and he that loueth
riches, shalbe without the fruite therof: This is also a vayne thyng.
11 Wheras much riches is, there are many also that spende them away: And what
pleasure more hath he that possesseth them, sauyng that he may loke vpon them
with his eyes?
12 A labouryng man sleepeth swetely, whether it be litle or much that he eateth:
but the aboundaunce of the riche wyll not suffer him to sleepe.
13 Yet is there a sore plague which I haue seene vnder the sunne namely riches
kept to the hurt of him that hath them in possession:
14 For oft tymes they perishe with his great miserie and trouble: and yf he haue
a chylde, it getteth nothyng.
15 Lyke as he came naked out of his mothers wombe, so goeth he thyther agayne,
and caryeth nothyng away with him of all his labour.
16 This is a miserable plague, that he shall go euen as he came away: What
helpeth it him then that he hath laboured in the wynde?
17 All the dayes of his lyfe also he dyd eate in the darke, with great
carefulnesse, sicknesse, and sorowe.
18 Therfore me thinke it a better and a fayrer thyng, a man to eate and drynke,
and to be refresshed of all his labour that he taketh vnder the sunne, all the
dayes of his lyfe which God geueth him: for this is his portion.
19 For vnto whom soeuer God geueth riches, goodes, and power, he geueth it him
to enioy it, to take it for his portion, and to be refresshed of his labour:
this is the gyft of God.
20 For he thinketh not much howe long he shall lyue, forasmuch as God fylleth
his heart with gladnesse.

Chapter 6

1 There is yet a plague vnder the sunne, and it is a generall thyng among men:
2 when God geueth a man riches, goodes, and honour, so that he wanteth nothyng
of all that his heart can desire, and yet God geueth him not leaue to enioy the
same, but another man spendeth them: This is a vayne thyng and a miserable
plague.
3 If a man beget a hundred children, and lyue many yeres, so that his dayes are
many in number, and yet can not enioy his good, neither be buryed: as for him I
say, that vntymely birth is better then he.
4 For he commeth to naught, & spendeth his tyme in darknesse, and his name is
forgotten.
5 Moreouer he seeth not the sunne, and knoweth not of it: and yet hath he more
rest then the other.
6 Yea, though he lyued two thousande yeres, yet hath he no good lyfe: Come not
all to one place?
7 All the labour that a man taketh, is for him selfe, and yet his desire is
neuer fylled after his mynde.
8 For what hath the wise more then the foole? What helpeth it the poore that he
knoweth to walke with fooles before the lyuyng?
9 The cleare sight of the eye, is better then that the soule shoulde walke after
desires of the lust: Howbeit, this is also a vayne thyng, and a disquietnesse of
mynde.
10 The thyng that hath ben, is named alredy, and knowen that it is euen man him
selfe: neither may he go to lawe with him that is mightier then he.
11 Many thinges there be that encrease vanitie, and what hath a man els?
12 For who knoweth what is good for man liuing in the dayes of his vayne life,
whiche is but a shadowe? Or who wyl tell a man what shall happen after hym vnder
the sunne?

Chapter 7

1 A good name is more worth then precious oyntment: & the day of death, is
better the the day of byrth.
2 It is better to go into an house of mourning, then into a banketting house:
For there is the ende of all men, and he that is liuing taketh it to heart.
3 Grauitie is better then to laugh: for when the countenaunce is heauie, the
heart is refourmed.
4 The heart of the wise is in the mourning house: but the heart of the foolishe
is in the house of myrth.
5 It is better to geue eare to the chastening of a wyse man, then to heare the
songue of fooles:
6 For the laughyng of fooles is like the cracking of thornes vnder a pot: and
that is but a vayne thing.
7 The wyse man hateth wrong dealing, and abhorreth the heart that coueteth
rewardes.
8 Better is it to consider the ende of a thing then the beginning: The pacient
of spirite, is better then the hye minded.
9 Be not hastyly angrie in thy minde: for wrath resteth in the bosome of fooles.
10 Say not thou, What is the cause that the dayes of the old time were better
then they that be nowe? for that were no wyse question.
11 Wysdome with inheritaunce is good, yet better is it with them that without
care may beholde the sunne:
12 For wysdome defendeth aswell as money, and the excellent knowledge & wysdome
geueth lyfe vnto hym that hath it in possession.
13 Consider the worke of God, how that no man can make the thing straight,
whiche he maketh crooked.
14 Use well the tyme of prosperitie, and remember the tyme of misfortune: for
God doth so temper the one and the other, that a man can finde nothing els.
15 All thinges haue I considered in the time of my vanitie: that the iust man
perisheth for his righteousnesse sake, & the vngodly liueth in his wickednesse.
16 Therfore be thou neither to righteous nor ouer wyse, that thou perishe not.
17 Be neither to vnrighteous also nor to foolishe, lest thou die before thy
time.
18 It is good for thee to take holde of this, and not to let that go out of thy
hande: For he that feareth God, commeth foorth with them all.
19 Wysdome geueth more courage vnto the wyse, then ten mightie men of the citie.
20 For there is not one iust vpon earth that doth good, and sinneth not.
21 Take no heede vnto euery word that is spoken, lest thou heare thy seruaunt
curse thee:
22 for thyne owne heart knoweth that thou thy self also hast ofttimes spoken
euyll by other men.
23 All these thinges haue I proued in wysdome, for I thought to be wyse, but she
went farther from me then she was before:
24 yea and so deepe, that I might not reache vnto her.
25 I applied my minde also vnto knowledge, and to seeke and searche out science,
wysdome, and vnderstanding, to knowe the foolishnesse of the vngodly, and the
errour of doting fooles.
26 And I founde that a woman is bitterer then death, the whiche hath cast abrode
her heart as a net that men fishe with, and her handes are chaynes: Who so
pleaseth God shall escape from her, but the sinner wyll be taken with her.
27 Beholde (saith the preacher) this haue I diligently searched out and proued:
One thing must be considered with another, that a man may come by knowledge,
28 which as yet I seeke, and finde it not. Among a thousande men I haue founde
one: but not one woman among all.
29 Lo this onlye haue I founde, that God made man iust and right: but they
sought many inuentions.

Chapter 8

1 Who is wise? who hath knowledge to make an aunswere? A mans wysdome maketh his
face to shine: but vnshamefastnes putteth it out of fauour.
2 Kepe the kynges commaundement, namely for the oth that thou hast made vnto God
for the same.
3 Be not hastie to go out of his sight, and see thou continue in no euyll thing:
for whatsoeuer it pleaseth hym, that doth he.
4 Like as when a king geueth a charge, his commaundement is mightie: Euen so,
who may say vnto him, what doest thou?
5 Who so kepeth the commaundement, shall feele no harme: but a wyse mans heart
discerneth the tyme and iudgement.
6 For euery thing wyll haue oportunitie and iudgement: and this is the thing
that maketh men full of carefulnesse and sorowe.
7 And why? a man knoweth not what is for to come: for who can tell hym when it
shalbe?
8 Neither is there any man that hath power ouer the spirite to kepe styll the
spirite, nor to haue any power in the tyme of death, nor that can make an ende
of the battayle, neither may vngodlynesse deliuer them that meddle withall.
9 All these thinges haue I considered, and applied my mynde vnto euery worke
that is vnder the sunne, howe one man hath lordship vpon another to his owne
harme.
10 For I haue seene often the vngodly brought to their graues, and yet they haue
returned into the citie agayne: and came from the place of holy men, whiche in
the citie were growen out of memorie, as were those also that liued well: This
is also a vayne thing.
11 Because nowe that euyll workes are not hastyly punished, the heart of man
geueth hym selfe ouer vnto wickednesse.
12 Because an euyll person offendeth an hundred tymes, and God deferreth, geuing
hym long life, therefore am I sure that it shall go well with them that feare
God, whiche haue hym before their eyes.
13 Againe, as for the vngodly it shall not be well with him, neither shall he
prolong his dayes: but euen as a shadowe, so shall he be that feareth not God.
14 Yet is there a vanitie vpon earth: There be iust men vnto whom it happeneth
as though they had the workes of the vngodly: Againe, there be vngodly, with
whom it goeth as though they had the workes of the righteous: This haue I called
also a vayne thing.
15 Therfore I commende gladnesse, because a man hath no better thing vnder the
sunne, then to eate and drinke, and to be merie: for that shall he haue of his
labour, al the dayes of his life which God geueth hym vnder the sunne.
16 And so I applied my minde to learne wysdome, and to knowe the trauayle that
is in the worlde, and that of suche a fashion, that I suffred not mine eyes to
sleepe neither day nor night.
17 I vnderstoode of all the workes of God, but it is not possible for a man to
attayne vnto the workes that are done vnder the sunne: and though he bestowe his
labour to seeke them out, yet can he not reach vnto them: yea though a wyse man
would vndertake to know them, yet shall he not finde them.

Chapter 9

1 For all these thinges purposed I in my mynde to seeke out: The righteous &
wise, yea & their seruauntes also are in the hand of God, and there is no man
that knoweth eyther loue or hate, but all thinges are before them.
2 It happeneth vnto one as vnto another, it goeth with the righteous as with the
vngodly, with the good and cleane, as with the vncleane, with hym that offereth,
as with him that offereth not: like as it goeth with the vertuous, so goeth it
also with the sinner: as it happeneth vnto the pariured, so happeneth it also to
hym that is afrayde to be forsworne.
3 Among all thinges that come to passe vnder the sunne, this is a miserie, that
it happeneth vnto all alike: This is the cause also that the heartes of men are
full of wickednesse, and madde foolishnesse is in their heartes as long as they
liue, vntyll they dye.
4 And why? as long as a man liueth, he hath an hope: for a quicke dogge say they
is better then a dead lion.
5 For they that be liuing knowe that they shall dye: but they that be dead knowe
nothing, neither deserue they any more, for their memoriall is forgotten.
6 Also their loue, and their hatred, and their enuie is nowe perished, neither
haue they any more part in the worlde in all that is done vnder the sunne.
7 Go thou thy way then, eate thy bread with ioy, & drinke thy wine with a glad
heart, for thy workes please god:
8 Let thy garmentes be alwayes white, and let thy head lacke no oyntment.
9 Use thy selfe to liue ioyfully with thy wife whom thou louest all the dayes of
thy life whiche is but vayne, that God geueth thee vnder the sunne all the dayes
of thy vanitie: for that is thy portion in this life of al thy labour and
trauayle that thou takest vnder the sunne.
10 Whatsoeuer thou takest in hande to do, that do with al thy power: for in the
graue that thou goest vnto, there is neither worke, counsayle, knowledge, nor
wysdome.
11 So I turned me vnto other thinges vnder the sunne, & I sawe that in running
it helpeth not to be swift, in battell it helpeth not to be strong, to feeding
it helpeth not to be wyse, to riches it helpeth not to be a man of muche
vnderstanding, to be had in fauour it helpeth not to be cunning: but that all
lieth in tyme and fortune.
12 For a man knoweth not his tyme: but like as the fishes are taken with the
angle, and as the byrdes are caught with the snare: euen so are men taken in the
perillous time, when it commeth sodaynly vpon them.
13 This wysdome haue I seene also vnder the sunne, and me thought it a great
thing:
14 There was a litle citie and a few men within it: so there came a great kyng
and besieged it, and made great bulwarkes against it.
15 And in the citie there was founde a poore man, but he was wyse, whiche with
his wysdome deliuered the citie, yet was there no body that had any respect to
such a simple man.
16 Then sayd I, wysdome is better then strength: Neuerthelesse, a simple mans
wysdome is despised, and his wordes are not hearde.
17 A wyse mans counsayle that is folowed in scilence, is farre aboue the crying
of a captaine among fooles.
18 For wysdome is better then harnesse: but one sinner alone destroyeth muche
goodnesse.

Chapter 10

1 A dead flye doth corrupt sweete oyntment, and maketh it to stinke: Euen so oft
tymes he that hath ben had in estimation for wysdome and honour, is abhorred
because of a litle foolishnesse.
2 A wyse mans heart is vpon his right hande, but a fooles heart vpon his left.
3 A foole wyll shewe him selfe when he goeth by the way, yet thinketh he that
euery man doth as foolishly as him self.
4 If a principall spirite be geuen thee to beare rule, be not negligent then in
thine office: for he that can take cure of him selfe, auoydeth great offences.
5 Another plague is there whiche I haue seene vnder the sunne, namely, the
ignoraunce that is commonly among princes: in that a foole sitteth in great
dignitie, and the riche are set downe beneath.
6 in that a foole sitteth in great dignitie, and the riche are set downe
beneath.
7 I haue seene seruauntes ride vpon horses, and princes goyng vpon their feete
as it were seruauntes.
8 But he that diggeth vp a pitte, shall fall therin hym selfe: and who so
breaketh downe the hedge, a serpent shall byte hym.
9 Who so remoueth stones, shall haue trauayle withall: and he that heweth wood,
shalbe hurt therwith.
10 When an iron is blunt and the poynt not sharpened, it must be whet agayne,
and that with might: Euen so doth wisdome folowe diligence.
11 A backbiter is no better then a serpent that stingeth without hissing.
12 The wordes out of a wyse mans mouth are gratious: but the lippes of a foole
wyll destroy him selfe.
13 The beginning of his talking is foolishnesse: & the last worde of his mouth
is starke madnesse.
14 A foole is full of wordes, and a man can not tell what shall come to passe:
who wyll then warne hym of it that shall folowe after hym?
15 The labour of the foolishe is greeuous vnto them, whyle they know not howe to
go into the citie.
16 Wo be vnto thee O thou lande, whose kyng is but a chylde, and whose princes
are early at their bankettes.
17 But well is thee O thou lande, whose kyng is come of nobles, and whose
princes eate in due season for necessitie, and not for lust.
18 Thorowe slouthfulnesse the balkes fall downe, and thorowe idle handes it
rayneth in at the house.
19 Meate maketh men to laugh, and wine maketh them merie: but vnto money are all
thinges obedient.
20 Wishe the king no euil in thy thought, and speake no hurt of the riche in thy
priuie chaumber: for a byrde of the ayre shall betray thy voyce, and with her
fethers shall she bewray thy wordes.

Chapter 11

1 Lay thy bread vpon wette faces, and so shalt thou finde it after many dayes.
2 Geue part seue days, & also vpon the eyght: for thou knowest not what miserie
shall come vpon earth.
3 When the cloudes are full, they powre out raine vpon the earth. And when the
tree falleth, whether it be towarde the south or north, in what place soeuer it
fall, there it lieth.
4 He that regardeth the winde, shall not sowe: and he that hath respect vnto the
cloudes, shall not reape.
5 Nowe like as thou knowest not the way of the spirite, nor howe the bones do
growe in the wombe of her that is with chylde: Euen so thou knowest not the
workes of God, which is the workmaster of all.
6 Ceasse not thou therefore with thy handes to sowe thy seede, whether it be in
the morning or in the euening: for thou knowest not whether this or that shall
prosper, and if they both take, it is the better.
7 The light is sweete, and a pleasaunt thing is it for the eyes to looke vpon
the sunne.
8 If a man lyue many yeres, and be glad in them all, let hym remember the dayes
of darknesse whiche shalbe manye, and that foloweth: Al thinges shalbe but
vanitie.
9 Be glad then (O thou young man) in thy youth, and let thy heart be merie in
thy young dayes, folowe the wayes of thyne owne heart, and the lust of thyne
eyes, but be thou sure that God shall bryng thee into iudgement for all these
thinges.
10 Put away displeasure out of thine heart, and remoue euill from thy body: for
chyldhood and youth is but vanitie.

Chapter 12

1 Remember thy maker the sooner in thy youth, or euer the dayes of aduersitie
come, and or the yeres drawe nye when thou shalt say, I haue not pleasure in
them:
2 Before the sunne, the light, the moone, and starres be darkened, and or the
cloudes turne agayne after the rayne:
3 When the kepers of the house shall tremble, and when the strong men shall bowe
them selues, when the milners stand styll because they be so fewe, and when the
sight of the windowes shall waxe dimme:
4 When the doores in the streetes shalbe shut, and when the voyce of the milner
shalbe layde downe, when men shall ryse vp at the voyce of the byrde, and when
all the daughters of musicke shalbe brought lowe:
5 When men shall feare in hye places, and be afraide in the streetes, when the
Almonde tree shall florishe and be laden with the grashopper, and when all lust
shal passe: because man goeth to his long home, and the mourners go about the
streetes.
6 Or euer the siluer lace be taken away, and or the golden well be broken: Or
the pot be broken at the well, and the wheele broken vpon the cesterne.
7 Then shall the dust be turned agayne vnto earth from whence it came, and the
spirite shall returne vnto God who gaue it.
8 All is but vanitie (saith the preacher) all is but playne vanitie.
9 The preacher was yet more wyse, and taught the people knowledge, he gaue good
heede, sought out the ground, and set foorth many parables:
10 His diligence was to finde out acceptable wordes, right scripture, & the
wordes of trueth.
11 For the wordes of the wyse are like prickes and nayles that go thorowe, of
the auctoures of gatheringes which are geuen of one shephearde.
12 Therefore beware my sonne of that doctrine that is beside this: for to make
many bookes, it is an endlesse worke, and to muche studie weerieth the body.
13 Let vs heare the conclusion of all thinges, Feare God, and kepe his
commaundementes: for that toucheth all men.
14 For God shall iudge all workes and secrete thinges, whether they be good or
euyll.


Song of Solomon

Chapter 1

1 The Ballet of Ballettes of Solomon, called in Latin,
2 O that he would kisse me with the kisses of his mouth: for thy loue is more
pleasaunt then wine,
3 and that because of the good and pleasaunt sauour of thy most precious
baulmes. Thy name is a sweet smelling oyntment when it is shed foorth, therfore
do the maydens loue thee.
4 Drawe thou me vnto thee we wyll runne after thee. The kyng hath brought me
into his priuie chaumbers: We wylbe glad and reioyce in thee, we thinke more of
thy loue then of wine: they that be righteous loue thee.
5 I am blacke (O ye daughters of Hierusalem) but yet fayre and well fauoured,
like as the tentes of the Cedarenes, and as the hanginges of Solomon.
6 Marueyle not at me that I am so blacke, for why? the sunne hath shined vpon
me: my mothers chyldren haue euyll wyll at me, they made me the keper of the
vineyardes, but mine owne vineyarde haue I not kept.
7 Tell me O thou whom my soule loueth, where thou feedest the sheepe, where thou
makest them rest at the noone day: for why shall I be like hym that goeth wrong
about the flockes of thy companions?
8 If thou knowe not thy selfe (O thou fayrest among women) then go thy way
foorth after the footesteppes of the sheepe, and feede thy goates besyde the
shepheardes tentes.
9 Unto the hoast of Pharaos charets haue I compared thee, O my loue.
10 Thy cheekes and thy necke is beautifull as the turtles, and hanged with
spanges and goodly iewels,
11 a neckband of golde wyll we make thee, with siluer buttons.
12 When the king sitteth at the table, he shall smell my Nardus:
13 a bundell of myrre is my loue vnto me, he wyll lye betwixt my brestes:
14 a cluster of Camphire in the vineyardes of Engaddi is my loue vnto me.
15 Oh howe fayre art thou my loue, Oh howe fayre art thou? thou hast doues eyes.
16 O howe fayre art thou my beloued, howe well fauoured art thou? Our bed is
dect with flowres,
17 the seelinges of our house are of Cedar tree, and our crosse ioyntes of
Cipresse.

Chapter 2

1 I am the rose of the fielde, and lillie of the valleys,
2 As the lillie among the thornes: so is my loue among the daughters.
3 Like as the apple tree among the trees of the wood: so is my beloued among the
sonnes.
4 My delight is to sit vnder his shadowe, for his fruite is sweete vnto my
throte.
5 He bringeth me into his wine seller, his banner spread ouer me, whiche is his
loue.
6 Set about me cuppes of wine, comfort me with apples, for I am sicke of loue.
7 His left hande lyeth vnder my head, and his right hande shall imbrace me.
8 I charge you (O ye daughters of Hierusalem) by the roes and hindes of the
fiede, that ye wake not vp my loue, nor touche her, tyll she be content her
selfe.
9 Me thinke I heare the voyce of my beloued: lo, there commeth he hopping vpon
the mountaines, and leaping ouer the litle hilles.
10 My beloued is lyke a roe or a young hart: beholde he standeth behinde our
wall, he looketh in at the windowe, and peepeth thorowe the grace.
11 My beloued aunswered and sayd vnto me: O stande vp my loue, my beautifull,
and go to thyne owne: for lo the winter is nowe past, the rayne is away and
gone.
12 The flowres are come vp in the field, the tyme of the byrdes singing is come,
and the voyce of the turtle doue is hearde in our lande.
13 The figge tree bryngeth foorth her figges, and the vines beare blossomes and
haue a good smell.
14 O stande vp then and come my loue my beautifull, and come I say O my doue,
out of the caues of the rockes, out of the holes of the wall, O let me see thy
countenaunce and heare thy voyce: for sweete is thy voyce, and fayre is thy
face.
15 Get vs the foxes, yea the litle foxes that hurt the vines: for our vines
beare blossomes.
16 My loue is mine, & I am his, whiche feedeth among the lillies vntill the day
breake, and till the shadowes be gone:
17 Come agayne O my beloued, and be lyke as a roe or a young hart vpon the wyde
mountaines.

Chapter 3

1 By night in my bed I sought hym whom my soule loueth: yea diligently sought I
him, but I found him not.
2 I will get vp thought & go about the citie, in the wayes in all the streates
wyll I seeke hym whom my soule loueth: but when I sought him I founde him not.
3 The watchmen also that go about the citie, founde me to whom I sayde Sawe ye
not hym whom my soule loueth?
4 So when I was a litle past them, I founde him whom my soule loueth: I haue
gotten holde vpon hym, and wyll not let him go, vntyll I bryng him into my
mothers house, and into her chaumber that bare me.
5 I charge you O ye daughters of Hierusalem by the roes and hyndes of the
fielde, that ye wake not vp my loue, nor touch her, till she be content her
self.
6 Who is this that commeth vp out of the wyldernesse like vapours of smoke, as
it were a smell of myrre, frankensence, and all maner spices of the Apothecarie?
7 Beholde, about Solomons bedsteede there stande threescore valiaunt, of the
most mightie in Israel: They holde swordes euery one, and are expert in warre.
8 Euery man also hath his sworde vpon his thigh, because of feare in the night.
9 Kyng Solomon had made him selfe a pallace of the wood of Libanus,
10 the pillers are of siluer, the couering of golde, the seate of purple, the
grounde is pleasauntly paued with loue for the daughters of Hierusalem.
11 Go foorth (O ye daughters of Sion) and beholde king Solomon in the crowne
wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his mariage, and in the day of
the gladnesse of his heart.

Chapter 4

1 O howe fayre art thou my loue, howe fayre art thou? thou hast doues eyes,
beside that which lyeth hid within: Thy heerie lockes are lyke the wooll of a
flocke of goates that be shorne vpon mount Gilead.
2 Thy teeth are like a flocke of sheepe of the same bignesse whiche went vp from
the washing place, where euery one beareth two twinnes, and not one vnfruitfull
among them.
3 Thy lippes are lyke a rose coloured ribande, thy wordes are louely, thy
cheekes are like a peece of a pomegranate within thyne heeres.
4 Thy necke is like the towre of Dauid buylded with costly stones, lying out on
the sides wherevpon there hange a thousande shieldes: yea all the weapons of the
giauntes.
5 Thy two breastes are lyke two twinnes of young Roes, whiche feede among roses.
6 O that I might go to the mountaine of myrre, and to the hil of frankencense,
til the day breake, and til the shadowes be past away.
7 Thou art all fayre (O my loue) and no spot is there in thee.
8 Come to me from Libanus (O my spouse) come to me from Libanus: looke from the
top of Amana, from the top of Sanir and Hermon, from the lions dennes, and from
the mountaines of the leopardes.
9 Thou hast with loue bewitched my heart O my sister my spouse, thou hast
bewitched my heart with one of thyne eyes, and with one chayne of thy necke.
10 O howe fayre are thy breastes, my sister, my spouse? Thy breastes are more
pleasaunt then wine, and the smell of thyne oyntmentes passeth all spices.
11 Thy lippes, O my spouse, drop as the hony combe, yea mylke and hony is vnder
thy tongue, and the smell of thy garmentes is like the smell of Libanus.
12 A garden well locked is my sister, my spouse: a garden well locked, and a
sealed well.
13 The fruites that are planted in thee, are lyke a very paradise of
pomegranates with sweete fruites, as Camphire, Nardus,
14 & Saffron, Calamus, Sinamom, with all sweete smellyng trees, Myrre, Aloes,
and all the best spyces,
15 a well of gardens, a well of liuing waters which runne downe from Libanus.
16 Up thou north winde, come thou south winde and blowe vpon my garden, that the
smell therof may be caryed on euery side: yea that my beloued may come into his
garden, and eate of the sweete fruites that growe therein.

Chapter 5

1 I am come into my garden, O my sister, my spouse, I haue gathered my Myrre
with my spice: I haue eate hony with my hony combe, I haue drunke my wine with
my milke: Eate O ye frendes, drinke and be merie O ye beloued.
2 I am a sleepe, but my heart is waking: I heare the voyce of my beloued when he
knocketh, saying, Open to me O my sister, my loue, my doue, my dearling: for my
head is full of deawe, and the lockes of my heere are full of the nyght doppes.
3 I haue put of my coate, howe can I do it on agayne? I haue washed my feete,
howe shall I fyle them agayne?
4 My loue put in his hande at the hole, and my heart was moued within me.
5 I stoode vp to open vnto my beloued, and my handes dropped with Myrre, & the
Myrre ranne downe my fingers vpon the locke.
6 I opened vnto my beloued, but he was departed and gone his way: Now whe he
spake, my heart was gone: I sought him, but I coulde not finde him: I cryed vpon
hym, neuerthelesse he gaue me no aunswere.
7 So the watchmen that went about the citie, founde me, smote me, and wounded
me: yea they that kept the walles toke away my kerchaffe from me.
8 I charge you therfore O ye daughters of Hierusalem, yf ye fynde my beloued,
that ye tell hym howe that I am sicke for loue.
9 What maner of man is thy loue aboue other louers, O thou fairest among women?
Or what can thy loue do more then other louers, that thou chargest vs so
straytly?
10 As for my loue, he is whyte and red coloured, a goodly person among tenne
thousande.
11 His head is as the most fine golde, the lockes of his heere are busshed, &
blacke as a crowe.
12 His eyes are as the eyes of doues by the water brookes as though they were
wasshed with mylke, and are set lyke pearles in golde.
13 His cheekes are lyke a garden bed, wherin the Apothecaries plant all maner of
sweete thynges. His lippes are lyke lilies that droppe sweete smellyng Myrre:
14 His handes are lyke golde rynges, hauyng inclosed the precious stone of
Tharsis. His body is as the pure iuorie, dect ouer with Saphires:
15 His legges are as the pillers of Marble set vpon sockettes of golde. His face
is as Libanus: and as the beautie of the Cedar trees.
16 The wordes of his mouth are sweete: yea he is altogether louely: Such a one
is my loue O ye daughters of Hierusalem, such a one is my loue.

Chapter 6

1 Whyther is thy loue gone then O thou fairest among women? whyther is thy loue
departed, and we wyll seke hym with thee?
2 My loue is gone downe into his garden vnto the sweete smellyng beddes, that he
may refreshe hym selfe in the garden, & gather lilies.
3 My loue is myne, and I am his, which feedeth among the lilies.
4 Thou are beautifull O my loue as is the place Thirza, thou art faire as
Hierusalem, fearefull as an armie of men with their banners.
5 Turne away thine eyes from me, for they haue set me on fire: Thy heery lockes
are lyke a flocke of goates shorne vpon the mount of Gilead.
6 Thy teeth are lyke a flocke of shorne sheepe which go out of the wasshyng
place, where euery one beareth twinnes, and not one vnfruitfull among them.
7 Thy cheekes are like a peece of a pomegranate within thy lockes of heere.
8 There are threescore queenes, fourescore wiues, and damselles without number.
9 One is my doue, one is my dearlyng: She is the only beloued of her mother, and
deare vnto her that bare her: When the daughters sawe her, they sayde she was
blessed, yea the queenes & wiues praysed her.
10 What is she this that loketh foorth as the mornyng, faire as the moone,
cleare as the sunne, and fearfull as an armie of men with their banners?
11 I went downe into the nut garden to see what grewe by the brookes, and to
loke yf the vineyarde florished, or yf the pomegranates were not foorth.
12 I knewe not that my soule had made me the charyot of the people that be vnder
tribute.
13 Turne agayne turne agayne O thou perfect one, turne agayne turne agayne and
we wyll loke vpon thee: What will ye see in the Sulamite? She is lyke men of
warre singing in a companie.

Chapter 7

1 O howe pleasaunt are thy treadynges with thy shoes, thou princes daughter? the
ioyntes of thy thighes are like a faire iewell, which is wrought by a cunnyng
workemaister.
2 Thy nauell is lyke a rounde goblet, which is neuer without drynke. Thy wombe
is like a heape of wheate that is set about with lilies.
3 Thy two breastes are lyke two twinnes of young roes.
4 Thy necke is as it were a towre of iuorie: thine eyes also are lyke the water
pooles that are in Hesebon, beside the port of Bathrabbim, thy nose is lyke the
towre of Libanus, which loketh towarde Damascus.
5 That head that standeth vpon thee is lyke Carmel: and the heere of thy head is
like purple, and like a kyng dwellyng among many water conduites.
6 O Howe faire and louely art thou my dearlyng in pleasures?
7 Thy stature is lyke a paulme tree, and thy breastes lyke the grapes.
8 I sayde, I wyll climbe vp into the paulme tree, and take holde of his hye
braunches. Thy breastes also shalbe as the wine clusters, the smell of thy
nosethrilles like as the smell of apples.
9 And thy rooffe of thy mouth lyke the best wine, which is meete for my best
beloued, pleasaunt for his lippes, and for his teeth to chawe.
10 I am my beloueds, and he shall turne hym vnto me.
11 O come on my loue, we wyll go foorth into the fielde, and take our lodgyng in
the villages.
12 In the mornyng wyll we go see the vineyarde, we wyll see yf the vine be
sprong foorth, yf the grapes be growen, and yf the pomegranates be shot out.
There will I geue thee my brestes:
13 the Mandragoras geue their sweete smell, and besyde our doores are all maner
of pleasaunt fruites both newe and olde, which I haue kept for thee O my
beloued.

Chapter 8

1 O that I might finde thee without and kisse thee, whom I loue as my brother
whiche suckt my mothers brestes, and that thou shalt not be dispised,
2 I wyll leade thee and bryng thee into my mothers house, that thou myghtest
teache me, and that I myght geue thee drynke of the spiced wine, and of the
sweete sappe of my pomegranates.
3 His left hande shalbe vnder my head, and his ryght hande shall imbrace me.
4 I charge you O ye daughters of Hierusalem that ye wake not vp my loue, nor
touche her, tyll she be content her selfe.
5 (What is she this that cometh vp from the wildernesse, and leaneth vpon her
loue?) I wake thee vp among the apple trees where thy mother conceaued thee,
where thy mother I say brought thee into the worlde.
6 O set me as a seale vpon thine heart, and as a seale vpon thine arme: for loue
is myghtie as the death, and gelousie as the hell.
7 Her coales are coales of fire, and a very vehement flambe of the Lorde: so
that many waters are not able to quenche loue, neither may the streames drowne
it: Yea yf a man woulde geue all the good of his house for loue, he shoulde
count it nothyng.
8 Our sister is but young and hath no brestes: what shall we do for our sister
when she shalbe spoken for?
9 If she be a wall, we shall builde a siluer bulwarke thervpon: yf she be a
doore, we shall fasten her with boordes of Cedar tree.
10 I am a wall, and my brestes lyke towres, then was I as one that hath founde
fauour in his syght.
11 Solomon hath a vineyarde at BaalHamon: and this vineyarde deliuered he vnto
the kepers, that euery one for the fruite therof shoulde geue hym a thousande
peeces of siluer.
12 My vineyarde which is myne, is in my syght: thou (O Solomon) must haue a
thousande, and the kepers two hundred, which kepe the fruite.
13 Thou that dwellest in the gardens, O let me heare thy voyce, that my
companions may hearken to the same.
14 O get thee away my loue, and be as a roe or a young hart vpon the sweete
smellyng mountaynes.


Isaiah

Chapter 1

1 The vision of Esai ye sonne of Amos, which he sawe vpon Iuda and Hierusalem,
in the dayes of Uzia & Ioathan, Ahaz and Iehezekiah, kinges of Iuda.
2 Heare O heauens, and hearken O earth: for the Lorde hath spoken, I haue
norished and brought vp children, and they haue done vnfaithfully against me.
3 The oxe hath knowen his owner, and the asse his maisters cribbe: but Israel
hath not knowen, my people hath geuen no heede.
4 Ah sinnefull nation, a people laden with iniquitie, a seede of the wicked,
corrupt children: they haue forsaken the Lorde, they haue prouoked the holy one
of Israel vnto anger, they are gone backwarde.
5 Why shoulde ye be stricken any more? for ye are euer fallyng away: euery head
is diseased, and euery heart heauy:
6 From the sole of the foote vnto the head there is nothyng sounde in it: but
woundes, blaynes, and putrifiyng sore: they haue not ben salued, neither wrapped
vp, neither molified with the oyntment.
7 Your lande is wasted, your cities are burnt vp, straungers deuour your lande
before your face, and it is made desolate, as it were the destruction of enemies
in the tyme of warre.
8 And the daughter of Sion shalbe left as a cotage in a vineyarde, lyke a lodge
in a garden of Cucumbers, lyke a besieged citie.
9 Except the Lorde of hoastes had left vs a small remnaunt, we shoulde haue ben
as Sodoma, & lyke vnto Gomorra.
10 Heare the worde of the Lord ye lordes of Sodoma, and hearken vnto the lawe of
our God thou people of Gomorra.
11 Why offer ye so many sacrifices to me, wyll the Lorde say? I am full of the
burnt offeringes of weathers, & of the fatnesse of fed beastes, I haue no
pleasure in the blood of bullockes, lambes, and goates.
12 When ye come to appeare before me treadyng in my courtes, who hath required
this at your handes?
13 Offer me no mo oblations, for it is but lost labour: incense is an
abhominable thyng vnto me, I may not away with your newe moones, your sabbathes
& solempne meetynges, your solempne assemblies are wicked.
14 I hate your newe moones and appoynted feastes euen from my very heart, they
make me weery, I can not abyde them.
15 When you holde out your handes, I wyll turne myne eyes from you: and though
ye make many prayers, yet I wyll heare nothyng at all, seyng your handes are
full of blood.
16 Washe you, make you cleane, put away your euyll thoughtes out of my syght:
ceasse from doyng of euyll,
17 Learne to do well, applie your selues to equitie, deliuer the oppressed,
helpe the fatherlesse to his ryght, let the widdowes complaynt come before you:
18 And then go to, saith the Lorde, let vs talke together: though your sinnes be
as red as scarlet, they shalbe as whyte as snowe: and though they were lyke
purple, they shalbe as whyte as wooll.
19 If ye be wyllyng and obedient, ye shal eate the good of the lande:
20 But yf ye be obstinate and rebellious, ye shalbe deuoured with the sworde:
for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.
21 Howe happeneth it then that the righteous citie which was full of equitie, is
become vnfaythfull as a whore? Righteousnesse dwelt in it, but nowe murtherers.
22 Thy siluer is turned to drosse, and thy wine mixt with water.
23 Thy princes are wicked, and companions of theeues: they loue gyftes
altogether, and gape for rewardes: As for the fatherlesse they helpe hym not to
his ryght, neither wyll they let the widdowes causes come before them.
24 Therfore saith the Lorde God of hoastes, the mightie one of Israel: Ah I must
ease me of mine enemies, and auenge me of mine aduersaries:
25 And I shall lay my hande vpon thee, and purely purge away thy drosse, and
take away all thy tinne:
26 And set thy iudges agayne as they were sometyme, and thy senatours as they
were from the begynnyng: and then thou shalt be called the ryghteous citie, the
faythfull citie.
27 Sion shalbe redeemed with equitie, and her conuertes with righteousnesse.
28 But the transgressours, and the vngodly, and such as forsake the Lorde, shall
altogether be vtterly destroyed.
29 For ye shalbe confounded for the trees which ye haue desired: and ye shalbe
ashamed of the gardens that ye haue chosen.
30 For ye shalbe as a tree whose leaues are fallen away, and as a garden that
hath no moystnesse.
31 And the very strong one of your idols shalbe as towe, and the maker of it as
a sparke of fire and they shal both burne together, and no man quenche them.

Chapter 2

1 The selfe same worde that Esai the sonne of Amos sawe vpon Iuda and
Hierusalem.
2 And this shall come to passe in the latter dayes: the hyll of the Lordes house
shalbe prepared in the heyght of the mountaynes, and shalbe hygher then the
hylles, and all nations shall preasse vnto hym.
3 And a multitude of people shall go, speakyng thus one to another come, let vs
ascende to the hyll of the Lorde, to the house of the God of Iacob, and he wyll
instruct vs of his wayes, and we wyll walke in his pathes: for out of Sion shall
come a lawe, and the worde of the Lorde from Hierusalem:
4 And shall geue sentence among the heathen, and shall refourme the multitude of
people: they shall breake their swordes also into mattockes, and their speares
to make sithes: And one people shall not lyft vp a weapon agaynst another,
neither shall they learne to fyght from thencefoorth.
5 Come ye O house of Iacob, and let vs walke in the lyght of the Lorde:
6 For thou hast forsaken thy people the house of Iacob, because they be
replenished with euils from the east, and with sorcerers lyke the Philistines,
and in straunge children they thynke them selues to haue enough.
7 Their lande is full of siluer and golde, neither is there any ende of their
treasure: their lande is also full of horses, and no ende is there of their
charrettes.
8 Their lande also is full of vayne gods, and before the worke of their owne
handes they haue bowed them selues, yea euen before the thyng that their owne
fingers haue made.
9 There kneeleth the man, there falleth the man downe before them: therfore
forgeue them not.
10 Get thee into the rocke, and hyde thee in the grounde for feare of the Lorde,
and for the glorie of his maiestie.
11 The high lookes of man shalbe brought lowe, and the hautinesse of men shalbe
bowed downe: and the Lorde alone shalbe exalted in that day.
12 For the day of the Lorde of hoastes shalbe vpon all the proude, loftie, and
vpon all that is exalted, and he shalbe brought lowe:
13 And vpon all high and stout Cedar trees of Libanus, and vpon all the okes of
Basan.
14 And vpon all the high mountaynes, and vpon all the high hilles,
15 And vpon euery high towre, and vpon euery fenced wall,
16 And vpon all the shippes of Tharsis, and vpon all pictures of pleasure.
17 And the pride of man shalbe brought downe, and the loftinesse of men shalbe
made lowe, and the Lorde alone shalbe exalted in that day:
18 As for the idols he shall vtterly abolishe:
19 And they shall creepe into holes of stone, and into caues of the earth for
feare of the Lorde, and for the glorie of his maiestie, when he ariseth to
destroy the wicked ones of the earth.
20 In the selfe same day shall man cast away his gods of siluer, and his gods of
golde, into the holes of Mowles and Backes, which he neuerthelesse had made to
hym selfe to honour them.
21 And they shall creepe into the cliftes of the rockes, and into the toppes of
the harde stones for feare of the Lorde, and for the glorie of his maiestie,
when he ariseth to destroy the wicked ones of the earth.
22 Ceasse therfore from man in whose nosethrilles there is breath: for wherin is
he to be accompted of?

Chapter 3

1 For lo, the Lorde God of hoastes doth take away from Hierusalem and Iuda all
maner of stay, all stay of meate and drynke,
2 The captayne and the souldiour, the iudge and the prophete, the prudent and
the aged man,
3 The captayne of fiftie & the honorable, the senatour, the cunnyng artificer,
and the eloquent oratour.
4 And I shall geue children to be their princes, and babes shall rule ouer them.
5 And the people shall eche one of them violently oppresse another, and euery
one agaynst his neyghbour: The boy shall presume agaynst the elder, and the
person of lowe degree agaynst the honorable.
6 Yea one shall take a friende of his owne kinrede by the bosome, and say: thou
hast clothyng, thou shalt be our head, and stay this ruine with thy hande.
7 Then shall he sweare and say, I can not helpe you: there is neither meate nor
clothyng in my house, make me no ruler of the people.
8 For Hierusalem and Iuda must decay: because that both their wordes and
counsayles are agaynst the Lorde to prouoke the presence of his maiestie to
anger.
9 Their very countenaunce bewrayeth the, yea they declare their owne sinnes
themselues as Sodome, they hide it not: Wo be to their owne soules, for they
haue rewarded euyll vnto them selues.
10 Say to the ryghteous that it shall go well with them: for they shall eate the
fruite of their owne studies.
11 But wo be vnto the wicked, for it shalbe euyll with hym: for he shalbe
rewarded after his owne workes.
12 Children are extortioners of my people, and women rule ouer them: O my
people, thy leaders deceaue thee, and corrupt the way of thy footsteppes.
13 The Lorde is here to commune of the matter, & standeth to iudge the people.
14 The Lorde shall enter into iudgement with the elders and princes of his
people, and shall say to them: It is ye that haue burnt vp my vineyarde, the
spoyle of the poore is in your houses.
15 What meane ye that ye bray as in a morter my people, and grinde the faces of
the poore? saith the Lorde God of hoastes.
16 Moreouer the Lord hath said, seing the daughters of Sion are waxen proude, &
walke with stretched foorth neckes, and wanton lokes, goyng and trippyng nicely,
and tinckelyng with their feete:
17 Therfore shall the Lorde shaue the heades of the daughters of Sion, and shall
discouer their filthinesse.
18 In that day shall the Lord take away the gorgiousnesse of the attire about
their feete, & the caules, and the rounde tires after the fashion of the moone.
19 The sweete perfumes, and the bracelettes, and the mufflers,
20 The bonnettes, and the sloppes, and the head bandes, and the tablettes, and
the earynges,
21 And rynges, and nose iewels:
22 The costly apparell, and the vayles, and the wimples, & the crispyng pinnes,
23 And the glasses, and the fine linnen, and the hoodes, and the lawnes.
24 And in steade of good smell there shalbe stincke, and in steade of their
girdle a rent, and for well set heere there shalbe baldnesse, in steade of a
stomacher a sacke cloth, & sunne burnyng for beautie.
25 Thy men shal perishe with the sword, and thy valiaunt souldiours in the
battayle O Hierusalem.
26 And her gates shall mourne and bewayle: and she deyng desolate, shall syt
vpon the grounde.

Chapter 4

1 In that day, seuen women shall take holde of one man, saying: we wyll finde
our selues meate and apparell: only let vs be called by thy name, to take our
shamefull reproofe from vs.
2 In that day shall the budde of the Lorde be beautifull and glorious, and the
fruite of the earth shalbe excellent and pleasaunt, for them that are escaped of
Israel.
3 Then shall the remnaunt in Sion and the remnaunt at Hierusalem be called holy:
namely all such as are written among the lyuyng in Hierusalem,
4 After that the Lorde hath washt away the filthinesse of the daughters of Sion,
and hath purged the blood out from Hierusalem in the spirite of iudgement and in
the spirite of fire.
5 And vpon all the dwellynges of the hylles of Sion, and vpon her congregations,
the Lord shall create a cloude and smoke by day, and the shynyng of a flamyng
fire by night: for all the glorie shalbe preserued.
6 And there shalbe a tabernacle for a shadowe in the day time from the heat, & a
safe place and refuge from weather and rayne.

Chapter 5

1 Nowe wyll I syng my beloued friende, a song of my friende touching his
vineyard: My beloued friende hath a vineyarde in a very fruiteful plenteous
grounde.
2 This he hedged, and gathered out the stones from it, and planted it with the
choysest vine: In the middest of it builded he a towre, also made a wine presse
therin: and he loked that it shoulde bring him grapes, and it brought foorth
wylde grapes.
3 Nowe O citezen of Hierusalem, and man of Iuda, iudge I pray thee betwixt me
and my vineyarde:
4 What more coulde haue ben done for it, that I haue not done? Wherfore then
hath it geuen wylde grapes, where I loked to haue had grapes of it?
5 Well, nowe I shall tell you howe I will do with my vineyarde: I will take the
hedge from it, that it may perishe, and breake downe the wall therof, that it
may be troden vnder foote.
6 I wyll lay it waste, it shall neither be digged nor cut, but beare thornes and
briers: I wyll also forbyd the cloudes that they shall not rayne vpon it.
7 As for the vineyarde of the Lorde of hoastes, it is the house of Israel: and
the man of Iuda, the plant of his pleasure: Of these he loked for equitie, but
see there is oppression for ryghteousnesse, and lo it is a crying.
8 Wo vnto them that ioyne one house to another, and bring one lande so nigh vnto
another, that there is no more place: Wyll ye be placed alone in the myddest of
the earth?
9 These thynges are in the eares of the Lorde of hoastes: of a trueth great and
faire houses shalbe without any dweller in them.
10 And tenne acres of vines shall geue but a quart, and thirtie busshels of
seede shall geue but an Epha.
11 Wo be vnto them that rise vp early to folowe drunkennesse, continuyng vntyll
nyght, tyll they be set on fire with wine.
12 In their feastes are harpes and lutes, tabrettes and pipes, and wine: but
they regarde not the worke of the Lord, and consider not the operatio of his
handes.
13 Therfore commeth my folke into captiuitie, because they haue no
vnderstandyng: Their glorie is famished with hunger, and their multitude dryed
vp with thirst.
14 Therfore gapeth hell and openeth her mouth marueilous wyde, that their
glorie, multitude, and wealth, with such as reioyce in her, may descende into
it.
15 Thus hath man a fall and is brought lowe, and the hygh loke of the proude
shalbe layde downe.
16 But the Lorde of hoastes shalbe exalted in iudgement, and God that is holy is
sanctified in ryghteousnesse.
17 Then shall the sheepe eate as they were wont, and the riche mens landes that
were layde waste shall straungers deuour.
18 Wo be vnto them that drawe wickednesse with cordes of vanitie, and sinne as
it were with a cart rope.
19 Which vse to speake on this maner, Let hym make speede and hasten his worke,
that we may see it: let the counsayle of the holy one of Israel come and drawe
nye, that we may knowe it.
20 Wo be vnto them that call euyll good, and good euyll, which make darknesse
lyght, and lyght darknesse, that make sowre sweete, and sweete sowre.
21 Wo be vnto them that are wise in their owne syght, and thynke them selues to
haue vnderstandyng.
22 Wo be vnto them that are strong to suppe out wine, and expert men to set vp
drunkennesse.
23 Wo be vnto them that geue sentence with the vngodly for rewardes, but
condempne the iust cause of the ryghteous.
24 Therfore, lyke as fire licketh vp the strawe, and as the flambe consumeth the
stubble: euen so their roote shalbe as corruption, and their blossome shall
vanishe away lyke dust: for they haue cast away the lawe of the Lorde of
hoastes, and despised the worde of the holy one of Israel.
25 Therfore is the wrath of the Lorde kindeled against his people, and hath
stretched foorth his hande vpon them, yea he hath smitten them: and the hilles
dyd tremble, and their carkases dyd lye torne in the open streetes: and in al
this the wrath of God hath not ceassed, but his hande stretched out styll.
26 And he shall geue a token to a people of a farre countrey, and shall hisse
vnto them from the ende of the earth: and beholde, they shall come hastyly with
speede.
27 There shall not be one faynt nor feeble among them, no not a sluggishe nor
sleepie person: there shall not one of them put of his gyrdle from his loynes,
nor loose the latchet of his shoe.
28 His arrowes are sharpe, and all his bowes bent: his horse hoofes are as
flint, and his cart wheeles like a whyrle winde.
29 His crye is as it were of a Lion, and he roreth lyke Lions whelpes: they
shall roare and hantche vpon the pray, and no man shall recouer it, nor get it
from them.
30 In that day he shalbe so fierce vpon him as the raging of the sea: then one
shall beholde the lande, and lo darkenesse and sorow, and the light is darkened
in the heauens therof.

Chapter 6

1 In the yere that kyng Oziah dyed, I sawe also the Lorde sitting vpon an high
and glorious seate, and his trayne filled the temple.
2 And about hym stoode Seraphims, whereof one had sixe winges, with twayne eche
couered his face, with twayne his feete, and with twayne did he flee.
3 They cryed also eche one to another on this maner, Holy, holy, holy is the
Lorde of hoastes: the whole earth is full of his glory.
4 And the lintels of the doore checkes moued at his crying, and the house was
full of smoke.
5 Then sayd I, Wo is me, for I am lost, in as much as I am a man of vncleane
lippes, and dwell among people that hath vncleane lippes also: for mine eyes
haue seene the kyng the Lorde of hoastes.
6 Then flewe one of the Seraphims vnto me, hauing a hote cole in his hand,
whiche he had taken from the aulter with the tongues,
7 And layde it vpon my mouth, and sayde: Lo, this hath touched thy lippes, and
thine vnrighteousnesse shalbe taken away, and thy sinne forgeuen.
8 Also I hearde the voyce of the Lorde on this maner: whom shall I sende, and
who wyll be our messenger? Then I sayde, Here am I, sende me.
9 And he sayd, Go and tell this people: Heare in deede, yet vnderstande not, ye
shall playnely see, and yet perceaue not.
10 Harden the heart of this people, stop their eares, and shut their eyes: lest
they see with their eyes, heare with their eares, and vnderstande with their
heartes, and conuert and be healed.
11 Then spake I, Lord, howe long? He aunswered, vntill the cities be vtterly
wasted without inhabiters, and the houses without men, and tyll the lande be
also vtterly desolate.
12 For the Lorde shall put the men farre away, and there shalbe great waste in
the middest of the lande.
13 Yet in it shall succeede ten kinges, and it shall returne and be afterwarde
wasted: But as the Teyle tree and the Oke in the fall of their leaues haue yet
the sappe remayning in them, euen so the holy seede shalbe the stay therof.

Chapter 7

1 It happened in the tyme of Ahaz ye sonne of Iotham, whiche was the sonne of
Uziah king of Iuda, that Razin the kyng of Syria, and Pechah the sonne of
Romeliah kyng of Israel, went vp towarde Hierusalem to besiege it: but Razin was
not able to winne it.
2 Nowe when the house of Dauid hearde worde thereof, that Syria and Ephraim was
cofederate together, his heart quaked, yea and the heartes also of his people,
lyke as when the trees of the wood are moued with the winde.
3 Then sayd God vnto Esai: Go meete Ahaz thou and thy sonne Sear Iasub, at the
head of the ouer poole in the footepath by the fullers grounde,
4 And say vnto him: Take heede to thy selfe and be styll, feare not, neither be
faynt hearted, for these two tayles, that is, for these two smoking firebrandes,
the wrath and furiousnesse of Razin the Syrian, and Romelies sonne:
5 Because that the Syrian, Ephraim, and Romelies sonne haue wickedly conspired
against thee,
6 Saying, we wyll go vp against Iuda, vexe them, and bryng them vnder vs, and
set a kyng there, euen the sonne of Tabel:
7 Thus saith the Lorde God thereto, It shal not so go foorth, neither so come to
passe.
8 For the head citie of the Syrians is Damascus, but the head of Damascus is
Razin: And after threscore and fiue yeres shall Ephraim be no more a people.
9 And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, but the head of Samaria is Romelies sonne:
if ye beleue not, surely ye shall not be established.
10 Moreouer, God spake agayne vnto Ahaz, saying:
11 Require to thy selfe a token of the Lorde thy God, whether it be towarde the
depth beneath, or toward the height aboue.
12 Then said Ahaz, I will require none, neither wyll I tempt the Lorde.
13 The prophete aunswered, Then heare ye of the house of Dauid: Is it not inough
for you that ye be greeuous vnto me, but ye must greeue my God also?
14 Therefore the Lorde hym selfe shall geue you a token: Beholde, a virgin shall
conceaue and beare a sonne, and shall call his name Emmanuel.
15 Butter and honye shall he eate, vntill he knowe to refuse the euyll and
choose the good.
16 For or euer the chylde come to knowledge to eschewe the euil and choose the
good, the lande that thou so abhorrest shalbe desolate of both her kynges.
17 The Lord also shall sende a tyme vppon thee, vpon thy people, and vpon thy
fathers house, such as neuer came since the tyme that Ephraim departed from
Iuda, namely thorowe the kyng of the Assyrians.
18 For at the same tyme shall the Lorde hisse for the flyes that are about the
water of Egypt, and for the bees in the Assyrians lande:
19 These shall come and shall light all in the desolate valleys, in the holes of
stones, and vpon all thornie and bushie places.
20 At the same time shal the Lord shaue the heere of the head, and the feete,
and the bearde cleane of, with the raser that he shall hyre beyonde the waters:
namely with the king of the Assyrians.
21 At the same time shal a man nurrishe a young cowe, and two sheepe.
22 Then because of the aboundaunce of mylke that they geue he shall eate butter:
so that euery one which remayneth in the lande shall eate butter and hony.
23 At the same time al vineyardes wherin there shalbe a thousand vines worth a
thousande siluerlinges, shalbe turned to bryers and thornes.
24 They shall come into the lande with arrowes and bowes, because all the lande
shall become bryers and thornes.
25 As for all hilles that shalbe digged with the mattocke, there shall not come
vpon them any feare of bryers and thornes: but the cattell shalbe driuen
thyther, and the sheepe shal feede there.

Chapter 8

1 Moreouer the Lorde sayde vnto me, Take thee a great roule, and wryte in it as
men do with a pen: make hastie speede to rob, and haste to the spoyle.
2 And I called vnto me faythfull witnesses to recorde, Uriah the priest, and
Zachariah the sonne of Barachiah.
3 After that went I vnto the prophetisse, and she conceaued & bare a sonne: Then
sayde the Lord to me, Geue him his name, a speedie robber, an hastie spoyler.
4 For why, or euer the chylde shall haue knowledge to crye my father and mother,
shall the riches of Damascus and the spoyle of Samaria be taken away before the
kyng of the Assyrians.
5 The Lorde spake also vnto me agayne, saying:
6 Forsomuche as this people refuseth the styll running water of Silo, and put
their delight in Razin and Romelies sonne:
7 Beholde, the Lord shall bryng mightie and great fluddes of water vpon them,
namely the king of the Assyrians with all his power, whiche shall climbe vp vpon
all his fluddes, and runne ouer all his bankes,
8 And shall breake in vpon Iuda, he shall flowe and passe thorowe, tyll he come
vp to the necke thereof: he shall fill also the widenesse of thy lande with his
wynges O Emmanuel.
9 Breake downe O ye people, and ye shalbe broken downe, hearken to all ye of
farre countreys: muster you, and you shalbe broken downe, prepare you, and you
shalbe torne in peeces.
10 Take your counsell together, yet shall your counsell come to naught:
determine the matter, yet shall it not prosper: for God is with vs.
11 For the Lorde spake thus to me in a mightie prophesie, and warned me that I
should not walke in the way of this people, saying:
12 Ye shall not speake wordes of conspiracie in all thinges, when this people
shall say conspiracie: feare them not, neither be afraide of them.
13 But sanctifie the Lorde of hoastes, let him be your feare and dread.
14 For he shalbe the holy place to flee to, and stone to stumble at, the rocke
to fall vpon, a snare and net to both the houses of Israel, and the inhabitours
of Hierusalem:
15 And many among them shall stumble, and fall, and be broken, yea they shalbe
snared and taken.
16 Binde vp the testimonie, seale the law in my disciples.
17 And I wyll wayte vpon the Lorde that hideth his face from the house of Iacob,
and I wyll loke for him.
18 But lo, as for me and the chyldren whiche the Lorde hath geuen me, we are to
be a token and a wonder in Israel from the Lorde of hoastes, whiche dwelleth
vpon the hill of Sion.
19 And if they say vnto you, Aske counsayle at the Soothsayers, Witches,
Charmers, and Coniurers: then make them this aunswere, Is there a people any
where that asketh not counsayle at his God? shoulde men runne vnto the dead for
the liuing?
20 Get thee to the lawe, and the testimonie: and if they speake not after this
worde, there is no light in them.
21 And they shall wander thorowe this lande hardly besteade and hungry, and when
they suffer hunger, they wyll be out of pacience, and curse their king and their
God, and shall loke vpwarde and downewarde to the earth,
22 And beholde there is trouble and darknesse, dymnesse is rounde about him, &
he shalbe driuen into darknesse.

Chapter 9

1 Neuerthelesse, the darknesse shall not be suche as was in her vexation, when
at the first he lightly afflicted the lande Zabulon, and the lande of Nephthali,
and afterwarde dyd more greeuously afflict her by the way of the sea beyond
Iordane in Galilee of the heathen.
2 The people that walked in darknesse, haue seene a great light: As for them
that dwell in the lande of the shadowe of death, vpon them hath the light
shined.
3 Thou hast multiplied the people, and not increased their ioy: they reioyce
before thee, euen as men make merie in haruest, and they be ioyfull as men that
do deuide the spoyle after the victorie.
4 For thou hast broken the yoke of his burthen, the staffe of his shoulder, and
the rod of his oppressour, as in the day of Madian.
5 And truely euery battayle that the warrier maketh, is done with confused
noyse: and defiling their garmentes with blood but this battayle shalbe with
burning and consuming of fire.
6 For vnto vs a chylde is borne, and vnto vs a sonne is geuen, vpon his shoulder
doth the rule lye, and he is called with his owne name wonderfull, the geuer of
counsell, the mightie God, the euerlasting father, the prince of peace.
7 He shall make no ende to encrease the rule & peace, and shall sit vpon the
seate of Dauid, and in his kingdome, to order the same, and to stablishe it with
equitie and righteousnesse from hence foorth for euermore: This shall the zeale
of the Lorde of hoastes bring to passe.
8 The Lorde sent a worde into Iacob, the same is come into Israel.
9 And all the people of Ephraim shall knowe, and they that dwell in Samaria that
say with pryde and high stomackes on this maner,
10 The tyle worke is fallen downe, but we wyll buylde it with squared stones:
the Mulberie timber is broken, but we shall set it vp agayne with Cedar.
11 But the Lorde shall strengthen the enemies of Razin, and ioyne his
aduersaries together against him.
12 The Syrians before, and the Philistines behinde, and shall deuour Israel with
open mouth: After all this is not the wrath of the Lorde ceassed, but yet his
hande stretched out styll.
13 For the people turneth not vnto hym that chastiseth them, neither do they
seeke the Lorde of hoastes.
14 Therefore hath the Lorde rooted out of Israel both head and tayle, bough and
reede in one day.
15 By the head, is vnderstande the senatour and honourable man, and by the
tayle, the prophete that preached lyes.
16 For the guides of this people are deceauers, and those that be gouerned are
vtterly lost.
17 Therefore shall the Lorde haue no pleasure in their young men, neither haue
pitie of their fatherlesse and wydowes: for they are altogether hypocrites and
wicked, and al their mouthes speake folly: After all this is not the Lordes
wrath ceassed, but yet his hand is stretched out styll.
18 For vngodlynesse burneth as a fire, and shall deuour bryers and thornes, and
it shall burne as in the thicket of a wood, and the wicked aduaunce them selues,
as the smoke is caryed vp.
19 Thorowe the wrath of the Lorde of hoastes is the lande full of darknesse, and
the people be consumed as it were with fire: no man doth spare his brother.
20 But he robbeth on the right hande, and doth famishe, he eateth on the left
hande, and he shall not haue inough: euery man shall eate the fleshe of his owne
arme.
21 Manasses shall eate Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasses, and they both together
shall eate Iuda: After all this is not the Lordes wrath ceassed, but yet his
hande stretched out styll.

Chapter 10

1 Wo be vnto them that make vnrighteous lawes, and that causeth their actuaries
to wryte greeuousnesse,
2 Where thorowe the poore are put from their right, and my seelie people robbed
of iudgement, that wydowes may be their pray, and that they may rob the
fatherlesse.
3 What wyll ye do in the tyme of visitation, and when destruction shall come
from farre? to whom wyll ye runne for helpe? and where wyll you leaue your
glory?
4 That when I withdrawe my hand, ye come not among the prysoners, nor lye among
the dead? After all this doth not the wrath of the Lorde ceasse, but yet is his
hande stretched out styll.
5 O Assur whiche art the staffe of my wrath, in whose hand is the rod of mine
indignation.
6 I wyll sende hym among those hypocritishe people: among the people that haue
deserued my disfauour wyll I sende hym, that he vtterly rob them, spoyle them,
and treade them downe lyke the myre in the streete.
7 Howbeit, his meaning is not so, neither thinketh his heart on this fashion:
But he imagineth howe he may roote out and destroy muche people.
8 For he saith, Are not my princes all kynges?
9 Is not Chalno as easie to winne, as Charchamis? Is it harder to conquer
Hamath, then Arphad? or is it lighter to ouercome Damascus, then Samaria?
10 As who say I were able to winne the kyngdomes of the idolaters and their
gods, but not Hierusalem and Samaria.
11 Shall I not do vnto Hierusalem and her images, as I dyd vnto Samaria and her
idols?
12 Wherefore it shall come to passe, that assoone as the Lorde hath perfourmed
his whole worke vpon the hill of Sion and Hierusalem, then wyll I visite the
fruite of the stoute heart of the kyng of Assyria with his proude lookes.
13 For he standeth thus in his owne conceipt, This do I thorowe the power of
myne owne hande, & thorowe my wysdome: for I am wyse, I am he that remoue the
landes of the people, I rob their treasure, and haue pulled downe the
inhabitauntes like a valiaunt man.
14 My hand hath found out the strength of the people as it were a nest: and like
as egges that were layde here and there, are gathered together, so do I gather
all countreys, and there was none so bolde as to moue the winge, that dare open
his mouth, or once whisper.
15 Shall the axe boast it selfe against him that heweth therwith? or shal the
sawe make any bragging against hym that ruleth it? That were euen lyke as if the
rod did exalt it selfe against him that beareth it, or as though the staffe
should magnifie it selfe as who say it were no wood.
16 Therefore shall the Lorde the God of hoastes sende among his fatlinges
leanenesse, and burne vp his glory as it were with a fire.
17 And the light of Israel shalbe that fire, and his holy one shalbe the flambe:
and it shall kindle and burne vp his thornes and bryers in one day.
18 Yea all the glory of his wooddes and fieldes shalbe consumed with body and
soule, and they shalbe as an hoast of men, whose standard bearer fayleth.
19 The trees also of his wood whiche remayne shalbe of such a number that a
chylde may tell them.
20 After that day shall the remnaunt of Israel, and suche as are escaped out of
the house of Iacob, seeke no more comfort at him that smote them: but vnfaynedly
shall they trust vnto the Lorde, the holy one of Israel.
21 The remnaunt, euen the posteritie of Iacob, shall conuert vnto God the
mightie one.
22 For though thy people O Israel be as the sande of the sea, yet shal the
remnaunt of them conuert vnto him: The decreed consumption ouerfloweth with
righteousnesse.
23 And therefore the Lorde of hoastes shall perfectly fulfill the thing that he
hath determined in the middest of the whole worlde.
24 Therefore thus saith the Lorde God of hoastes: Thou my people that dwellest
in Sion, be not afraide for the king of the Assirians: he shall smyte thee with
a rod, and shall lyft vp his staffe against thee, as the Egyptians dyd sometime.
25 But very soone after shall my wrath and indignation be fulfilled in the
destruction of them:
26 Moreouer, the Lorde of hoastes shall stirre vp a scourge for him, like as was
the slaughter of Madian vpo the rocke Oreb, and as the destruction of the
Egyptians when he lyfted vp his rod vpon the sea.
27 Then shal his burthen be taken from thy shoulders, and his yoke from thy
necke, yea the same yoke shalbe destroyed because of the vnction.
28 He shal come to Aiath, and go thorow towarde Migron, at Michmas shall he lay
vp his harnesse.
29 They shall go ouer the foorde, Geba shalbe their resting place, Rhama shalbe
afraide, Gibea Saul shall flee away.
30 Lift vp thy voyce O daughter Gallim, geue eare to Laisa thou poore Anathoth.
31 Madmena shall tremble for feare, but the citizens of Gabim are manly.
32 Yet shall he remaine at Nob that day: after that shall he lyft vp his hande
against the mount of the daughter Sion the hyll of Hierusalem.
33 But see, the Lord God of hoastes shall breake downe the bough with feare, he
shall hewe downe the proude, and fell the high minded.
34 The thickets also of the wood shall he roote out with iron, and Libanus shall
haue a fall thorowe the mightie.

Chapter 11

1 And there shall come a sprig foorth of the stemne of Esai, and a young shoote
shall growe out of his roote.
2 The spirite of the Lorde shall rest vpon him, the spirite of wysdome and
vnderstanding, the spirite of counsaile and strength, the spirite of knowledge
and of the feare of the Lorde,
3 And shall make hym of deepe iudgement in the feare of God: For he shall not
geue sentence after the thing that shalbe brought before his eyes, neither
reproue after the hearing of his eares:
4 But with righteousnesse shal he iudge the poore, and with equitie shall he
refourme the simple of the worlde, and he shall smyte the worlde with the rod of
his mouth, and with the breath of his mouth shall he slay the vngodly.
5 Righteousnesse shalbe the gyrdle of his loynes, and faythfulnesse the gyrding
vp of his raynes.
6 The Woolfe shall dwell with the Lambe, and the Leoparde shall lye downe by the
Goate: Bullockes, Lions, and cattell, shall kepe company together, so that a
litle chylde shall leade them.
7 The Cowe and the Beare shall feede together, and their young ones shall lye
together: the Lion shall eate strawe, lyke the Oxe or the Cowe.
8 The chylde whyle he sucketh shall haue a desire to the serpentes nest, and
when he is weaned, he shall put his hande into the Cockatrice denne.
9 No man shall do euill vnto another, no man shall destroy another in all the
hyll of my holynes: for the earth shalbe full of the knowledge of the Lorde:
euen as the sea floweth ouer with water.
10 And in that day shall the gentiles enquire after the roote of Iesse, whiche
shalbe set vp for a token vnto the people, and his rest shalbe glorious.
11 At the same time shall the Lord take in hande agayne to recouer the remnaunt
of his people, whiche shalbe left aliue from the Assirians, Egyptians, Arabians,
Morians, Elamites, Chaldees, Antiochians, & from the Ilandes of the sea,
12 And he shall set vp a token among the gentiles, and gather together the
dispearsed of Israel, yea and the outcastes of Iuda from the foure corners of
the worlde.
13 The hatred of Ephraim also and enemies of Iuda shalbe cleane rooted out:
Ephraim shall beare none euyll wyll to Iuda, & Iuda shall not vexe Ephraim.
14 But they both together shall flee vppon the shoulders of the Philistines
towarde the west, and spoyle them together that dwell towarde the east: The
Idumites and the Moabites shal come vnder their handes, and the Amonites shalbe
obedient vnto them.
15 The Lord also shal cleaue the tongues of the Egyptians sea, and with his
mightie winde shall he lyft vp his hand ouer Nilus, and shall smyte his seuen
streames, and make men go ouer drye shod.
16 And thus shall there be a way for his people that remayneth from the
Assirians, lyke as it happened to the Israelites what tyme they departed out of
the lande of Egypt.

Chapter 12

1 And in that day thou shalt say, O Lorde I wyll prayse thee, for thou wast
displeased at me: but refrayne thou from thy wrath, and comfort me.
2 Beholde, God is my saluation, in who I wyll trust and not be afrayde: for the
Lorde God is my strength and my song, he also is become my saluation.
3 Therfore with ioy shall ye drawe water out of the welles of saluation:
4 And then shall ye say: Geue thankes vnto the Lorde, call vpon his name,
declare his workes among the people, kepe them in remembraunce, for his name is
excellent.
5 O sing prayses vnto the Lorde, for he hath done great thinges, as it is knowen
in all the worlde.
6 Crye out, and sing thou that dwellest in Sion: for great is the holy one of
Israel in the middest of thee.

Chapter 13

1 This is the burthen of Babylon, whiche Esai the sonne of Amos did see.
2 Lift vp the banner vppon the high hyll, call vnto the, wagge your hande, that
they may go into the gates of the princes.
3 I haue commaunded my sanctified, I haue also called my valiaunt ones, ioying
in my honour to execute my wrath.
4 There is a noyse of a multitude in the mountaynes, lyke as of a great people,
a rushing as though the kingdomes of the nations came together: the Lorde of
hoastes mustreth his armye to battayle.
5 They come out of a farre countrey from the ende of the heauen, euen the Lorde
hym selfe with the ministers of his wrath, to destroy the whole lande.
6 Mourne ye, for the day of the Lord is at hande, and shall come as a destroyer
from the almightie.
7 Therefore shall all handes be letten downe, and all mens heartes shall melt
away.
8 They shall stande in feare, carefulnes and sorowe shall come vpon them, and
they shal haue payne, as a woman that trauayleth with chylde: One shalbe abashed
of another, and their faces shall burne like the flame of fire.
9 Beholde, the day of the Lorde shall come terribly and full of indignation,
furie & wrath, to make the lande waste, and to roote out the sinners therof.
10 For the starres and planettes of heauen shall not geue their light, the sunne
shalbe darkened in the rising, and the moone shall not shine with her light.
11 And I wyll visite the wickednesse of the worlde, and the sinnes of the
vngodlye. The high stomakes of the proude wyll I take away, and will lay downe
the boasting of the tiraunt.
12 I wyll make a man dearer then fine gold, and a man to be more worth then a
golden wedge of Ophir.
13 Therfore I wyll shake the heauens, and the earth shall remoue out of her
place in the wrath of the Lorde of hoastes, and in the day of his fearefull
indignation.
14 And Babylon shalbe as an hunted or chased Doe, and as a sheepe that no man
taketh vp: Euery man shall turne to his owne people, and flee eche one into his
owne lande.
15 Whoso is founde shalbe shot thorowe: and whoso taketh their part, shalbe
destroyed with the sworde.
16 Their chyldren shalbe slayne before their eyes: their house spoyled, and
their wiues rauished.
17 For lo, I shall bring vp the Medes against them, whiche shall not regarde
siluer, nor be desirous of golde:
18 With bowes shall they destroy the young men, and haue no pitie on women with
chylde, and their faces shall not spare the chyldren.
19 And Babylon that glory of kingdomes, and beautie of the Chaldees honour
shalbe destroyed, euen as God destroyed Sodome and Gomor.
20 It shall not endure for euer, neither shall there be any more dwelling there
from generation to generation: The Arabians shall pitche no tentes there,
neither shall the sheepheardes make their foldes there any more.
21 But fearefull wylde beastes shall lye there, and the houses shalbe ful of
great Owles, Estriches shall dwell there, and Apes shall daunce there.
22 Wylde cattes shall crye in the palaces, and dragons shalbe in the pleasaunt
houses: And as for Babylons tyme it is at hande, and her dayes shall not be
prolonged.

Chapter 14

1 But the Lorde wylbe mercyfull vnto Iacob, and will yet chose Israel againe,
and set them in their owne land, straungers shall cleaue and get them to the
house of Iacob.
2 The people shall take them and carry them home to their owne land: and the
house of Israel shall possesse them in the lande of the Lord, that they may be
seruaunts and handmaydes: and they shall take those prysoners whose captiues
they had ben before, and rule those that had oppressed them.
3 When the Lorde nowe shall bryng thee to rest from thy trauayle, feare, and
harde bondage that thou wast laden withall:
4 Then shalt thou vse this mockage vpon the kyng of Babylon, and say: Howe
happeneth it that the oppressour leaueth of? Is the golden tribute come to an
ende?
5 The Lorde hath broken the scepter of the vngodly, and the rod of the lordelye,
6 Which when he is wroth, smiteth the people with continuall strokes, and in
wrath raigneth ouer the heathen, who he persecuteth without compassion.
7 And therfore the whole worlde is nowe at rest and quietnesse, and men sing for
ioy.
8 Yea euen the Firre trees and Cedars of Libanus reioyce at thy fall, saying:
Nowe that thou art layde downe, there come no mo vp to hewe downe vs.
9 Hell also beneath trembleth to meete thee at thy commyng, and for thy sake
hath raysed his dead, all mightie men and princes of the earth, all kynges of
the earth stande vp from their seates,
10 That they may all aunswere and speake vnto thee, Art thou become weake also
as we? Art thou become lyke vnto vs?
11 Thy pompe and thy pride is layde downe into the pit, and so is the melodie of
thy instrumentes. Wormes be layde vnder thee, & wormes be thy coueryng.
12 Howe art thou fallen from heauen O Lucifer, thou faire mornyng chylde? Howe
hast thou gotten a fall euen to the grounde, which didst weaken the nations?
13 For thou saydest in thine heart, I wyll clymbe vp into heauen, and exalt my
throne aboue beside the starres of God, I wyll sit also vpon the mount of the
congregation towarde the North.
14 I wyll clymbe vp aboue the cloudes, and wyll be lyke the hyghest of all.
15 Yet thou shalt be brought downe to the deepe of hell, to the sides of the
lake.
16 They that see thee shall narowly loke vpon thee, and thinke in them selues,
saying: Is this the man that brought all landes in feare, and made the kyngdomes
afrayde?
17 Is this he that made the worlde in a maner waste, and layde the cities to the
grounde, which let not his prisoners go out?
18 The kynges of the nations lye euery one in his owne house with worship.
19 And thou art cast out of thy graue like a fylthy abhominable braunche, like
as dead mens rayment that are shot thorowe with the sworde, and go downe to the
stones of the deepe, as a dead coarse that is troden vnder feete.
20 Thou art not buried with them: euen because that thou hast wasted thy lande &
destroyed thy people: The generation of the wicked shalbe out of memorie for
euer.
21 Let there a way be sought to destroy their children that be in their fathers
wickednesse, that they come not vp agayne to possesse the lande, and fyll the
worlde full of enemies.
22 I wyll stande vp agaynst them saith the Lorde of hoastes, and roote out the
name and remnaunt, sonne and sonnes sonne of Babylon saith the Lorde.
23 I wyll geue it to the Otters, and wyll make water puddels of it, and I wyll
sweepe them out with the besome of destruction saith the Lorde of hoastes.
24 The Lorde of hoastes hath sworne an othe, saying: It shall come to passe as I
haue determined, and shalbe fulfylled as I haue deuised,
25 So that Assyria shall I destroy in my lande, and vpon my mountaynes wil I
treade hym vnder foote, wherthrough his yoke shall come from them, and his
burthen shalbe taken from their shoulder.
26 This deuise hath God taken through the whole worlde, and this is his hande
stretched out ouer all people.
27 For yf the Lord of hoastes determine a thyng, who is able to disanull it? And
if he stretch foorth his hande, who may returne it agayne?
28 The same yere that kyng Ahaz dyed, was this burthen:
29 Reioyce not thou whole Palestina, because the rod of him that beateth thee is
broken: for out of the serpentes roote there shall come an Adder, and his fruite
shalbe a fierie fleeyng worme.
30 But the first borne of the poore shalbe fed, and the simple shall dwell in
safetie: Thy roote also wyll I destroy with hunger, and it shall slay the
remnaunt.
31 Mourne thou porte, weepe thou citie, for, O whole lande of Palestina, thou
art layd waste: for there shal come from the north a smoke, that not one alone
may abide at home in his times.
32 What shall one then aunswere the messengers of the Gentiles? For the Lorde
hath stablished Sion, and the poore of his people that be therein shall put
their trust in it.

Chapter 15

1 This is the burthen vpon Moab: Ar of Moab was destroyed & ouerthrowen in the
nyght season, Kir also in Moab was destroyed and perished in the nyght.
2 Moab went vp to the idols house, euen to Dibon to the hygh places to weepe:
for Neba and Moab shall mourne for Medba, All their heades were balde, and all
their beardes shauen.
3 In her streetes are they girded about with sackcloth: In all the toppes of her
houses and streetes shalbe nothyng but mournyng and weepyng.
4 Hesbon and Eleale shall crye, that their voyce shalbe hearde vnto Iahaz: and
therfore the armed souldiours also of Moab shall bleate out and crye for very
sorowe of their myndes.
5 Wo shall my heart be for Moabs sake, they shall flee vnto the citie of Zoar,
which is lyke a faire young bullocke of three yere olde, for they shall all go
vp to Luith weepyng: euen so by the way towarde Horonaim they shall make
lamentation for their vtter destruction.
6 For the waters of Nimrim shalbe dryed vp, by reason wherof the grasse is
withered, the hearbes destroyed, and the greene thynges gone.
7 Therfore the goodes that remayneth in Moab, and the riches therof, they shall
cary to the brooke of wyllowes.
8 For the crye went ouer the whole lande of Moab, vnto Eglaim and vnto Beer Elim
was there nothyng but mournyng.
9 Because the waters of Dimon were fall of blood, I wyll adde more vpon Dimon:
and lions vpon the remnaunt of the lande, and on them that are escaped from
Moab.

Chapter 16

1 Sende the lorde of the worlde a lambe from the rocke that lyeth towarde the
desert, vnto the hyl of the daughter Sion.
2 For as for the daughters of Moab they shalbe as a trembling birde that is put
out of her neste: for they shall cary them vnto Arnon.
3 Gather your counsell, come together in iudgement, couer vs with your shadowe
in the midday as the nyght doth hyde the chased, and bewray not them that are
fled.
4 Let my persecuted people dwell among you, Moab be thou their refuge against
the destroyer: for the aduersarie is brought to naught, the robber is vndone,
the tiraunt is wasted out of the lande.
5 And in mercie shall the seate be prepared, and he shall sit vpon it in the
trueth in the tabernacle of Dauid, iudging and sekyng iudgement, and makyng
haste vnto ryghteousnesse.
6 We haue hearde of the pride of Moab, he is very proude, presumptuous,
arrogant, and full of indignation, and vayne are his lyes.
7 Therfore shall Moab make lamentation because of the Moabites that shalbe
slayne yea they shall wayle altogether: because of the foundations of the citie
that is made of bricke shall ye complayne, euen ye lame people that are left
only behynde.
8 For the vines of Hesbon are cut downe: as for the vine of Sibma, the lordes of
the heathen haue broken downe her principall braunches, they are come euen vnto
Iazer, they went on wandering vnto the wildernesse, her goodly braunches were
throwen downe as they went ouer the sea.
9 Therfore wyll I mourne for Iazer, and for the vine of Sibma, I wyl poure my
teares vpon thee O Hesbon and Eleale: for the crye of thyne enemies is fallen
vpon thy sommer fruites, and vpon thy haruest.
10 The mirth and cheare is taken away out of the plentifull fielde, and in the
vineyardes there shalbe no ioy nor gladnesse: The treader shall treade out no
wine in their presses, the song of their mery cheare haue I layde downe.
11 Wherfore my bowels shall rumble like an Harpe for Moabs sake, & mine inwarde
partes for the cities sake that is made of bricke.
12 And it shall come to passe, that when it is seene that Moab shalbe made weery
of his hyll chappelles, he shall come to his temple to pray, but he shall not be
able.
13 So then this is the saying that the Lorde hath spoken concernyng Moab since
that tyme.
14 But nowe the Lorde hath spoken, saying: In three yeres, which shalbe as the
yeres of an hired seruaunt, shall the glorie of Moab be turned into contempt
throughout all his multitude, which is very great: and that which remayneth
shalbe very small and feeble.

Chapter 17

1 This is the burthen vpon Damascus: Beholde Damascus is taken away to be no
more a citie, but shalbe an heape of broken stones.
2 The waste cities of Aroer shalbe foldes for cattell which shall lye there, and
there shalbe none to fray them away.
3 Ephraim also shall no more be strong, and Damascus shall no longer be a
kyngdome, and the remnaunt of Syria shalbe as the glorie of the children of
Israel, saith the Lorde of hoastes.
4 And in that day it shall come to passe, that the glorie of Iacob shalbe made
very thinne, and the fatnesse of his fleshe shall waxe leane.
5 And he shalbe as one that gathereth vp corne in haruest, euen lyke hym whose
arme reapeth the eares of corne: He shalbe also lyke hym that gathereth eares of
corne in the valley of Rephaim.
6 Some gatheryng in deede shall there be left in it, euen as in the shakyng of
an Oliue tree there remayne two or three berries in the toppe of the vppermost
bowe, and foure or fyue in the brode fruitfull braunches thereof, saith the
Lorde God of Israel.
7 Then shall man turne agayne to his maker, and his eyes shall haue respect to
the holy one of Israel.
8 As for the aulters which are his owne handy worke he shal not regarde them,
and the thynges that his fingers hath made, as groues and images, those shal he
not cast his eye vnto.
9 In that day shall their strong cities be as the forsaken shrubbes & braunches,
which they left because of the childre of Israel, and the lande shalbe desolate.
10 Because thou hast forgotten the God of thy saluation, and hast not ben
myndfull of thy strong rocke: therfore shalt thou set pleasaunt plantes, and
shalt graffe the braunche of another mans vine.
11 In that day shalt thou make thy plant to growe, and early in the mornyng
shalt thou make thy seede to florishe: The haruest shalbe gone in the day of
inheritaunce, and there shalbe sorowe without hope of comfort.
12 Wo shalbe to the multitude of much people, which shall make a sounde lyke to
the noyse of the sea, and the violence of the nations which shall rage lyke the
russhyng in of many waters.
13 Euen lyke many waters shal the people rage, God shall rebuke hym, and he shal
flee farre of, he shalbe chased away lyke as drye strawe vpon the mountaynes
before the wynde, and lyke a thyng that turneth before the storme.
14 At euen beholde there is trouble, and or euer it be mornyng lo it is gone:
This is the portion of them that oppresse vs, and the lot of them that robbe vs.

Chapter 18

1 O that lande that trusteth vnder the shadow of wynges, that lande which is
beyonde the waters of Ethiopia,
2 Sendyng messengers by the sea, euen in vessels of reedes ouer the water, Get
you hence ye speedy messengers to a nation that is scattered abrode, and robbed
of that they had, a fearefull people from their begynnyng hytherto, a nation
troden downe by litle and litle, whose lande the fluddes haue spoyled.
3 All the inhabitours of the worlde, and indwellers of the earth, loke vp whe he
setteth vp a token in the mountaynes, and hearken when he bloweth with the
trumpe.
4 For so the Lorde sayde vnto me as for me I wyll take my rest, and loke vpon
the matter in my habitation, lyke a faire heate after the rayne, and lyke a
cloude of deawe in the heate of haruest.
5 For afore the haruest whe the braunch is growen, there shall come ripe fruite
of the floure: and he shal cut downe the increase with sithes, and the braunches
shall he take away with hookes.
6 Thus shall they be left together vnto the soules of the mountaines, and to the
beastes of the earth: for in sommer the birdes shall remayne vpon it, and euery
beast of the lande shalbe vpon it in wynter.
7 In that tyme shall there a present be brought vnto the Lord of hoastes, euen a
people that is scattered abrode and robbed of that they had, that same people
which haue ben fearfull from their begynnyng hytherto, a nation troden downe by
litle and litle, whose lande the fluddes haue spoyled, to the place of the name
of the Lorde of hoastes, euen to the mount Sion.

Chapter 19

1 The burthen of Egypt. Beholde, the Lorde rideth vpon a swift cloude, and shall
come into Egypt, and the idols of Egypt shall tremble at the presence of hym,
and the heart of Egypt shall quake in the middest of her.
2 And I wyll set the Egyptians one agaynst another, so that one brother shall
fyght agaynst another, and one neighbour against another, citie against citie,
and realme against realme.
3 The mynde also of Egypt shalbe cleane without counsayle within it selfe, and
the deuice that they take wil I destroy: and they shall seke counsayle at idols
and at sorcerers, at workers with spirites, and at soothsayers.
4 And the Egyptians wyll I geue ouer into the hande of a maruaylous cruell
lorde, and a mightie kyng shall haue dominion ouer them, saith the Lorde God of
hoastes.
5 The waters of the sea shall fayle, and the riuer shall decrease and be dryed
vp.
6 The waters shalbe drawen out, the riuers of Egypt shalbe emptied & dryed vp,
the reedes and flagges shalbe cut downe.
7 The grasse in the riuer and by the riuers bancke, and all that groweth by the
riuer, shall wither away, and be brought to naught.
8 The fisshers also shall mourne, and all they that cast angle into the water
shall make lamentation: and they that lay foorth their net beside the waters
shalbe rooted out.
9 Moreouer, they that worke in flaxe and make fine workes, shalbe confounded,
and so shall they that weaue open workes.
10 For their open workes shal euen be destroyed, and all they that make pondes
and slues for fishe shall come to naught.
11 But you foolishe princes of Zoan, ye wise counsaylers of Pharao, whose wit is
turned to foolishnesse, howe say ye vnto Pharao, I am come of wise men and of
auncient kinges?
12 Where are thy wise men? Let them tell thee yf they can, what the Lorde of
hoastes hath deuised vpon Egypt.
13 The princes of Zoan are become fooles, the princes of Noph are deceaued, they
haue deceaued Egypt, euen they that were taken for the chiefe stay therof.
14 In the middest of it hath the Lorde powred the spirite of wickednesse: and
they haue deceaued Egypt in euery worke therof, euen as a drunken man staggereth
in his vomite.
15 Neither shall the head or tayle, the braunche or reede, be able to do any
worke in Egypt.
16 In that day shall Egypt be lyke vnto women: It shalbe afrayde and stande in
feare at the motion of the hande of the Lorde of hoastes which he shaketh ouer
it.
17 And Egypt shalbe afraide of the lande of Iuda: so that euery one that maketh
mention of it shalbe afraide therat, because of the counsayle of the Lorde of
hoastes which he deuised for it.
18 In that day shall fiue cities in the lande of Egypt speake the language of
Chanaan, and sweare by the Lorde of hoastes: the citie of desolation shalbe
called one of them.
19 In that day shall the aulter of the Lorde be in the middest of the lande of
Egypt, and this title beside it vnto the Lorde.
20 And it shalbe a token and a witnesse vnto the Lorde of hostes in the lande of
Egypt: For they shal crie vnto the Lord because of such as trouble them, and he
shall sende them a sauiour and a great man to delyuer them.
21 And the Lorde shalbe knowen in Egypt, and the Egyptians shall knowe the Lorde
in that day, and do sacrifice and oblation: yea they shall vowe a vowe vnto the
Lord, and perfourme it.
22 The Lorde also shall smite Egypt sore, and heale them agayne: and they shalbe
conuerted vnto the Lorde, and he shalbe intreated of them, and shall heale them.
23 In that day shall there be a common way out of Egypt into Assyria, and
Assyria shall come into Egypt, & Egypt into Assyria: so that the Egyptians and
the Assyrians shall serue the Lorde together.
24 In that day shal the nation of Israel be the thirde with Egypt and Assyria:
and they shalbe blessed in the middest of the lande,
25 Which lande the Lorde of hoastes hath blessed, saying: blessed is my people
of Egypt, Assur also is the worke of my handes, and Israel is mine inheritaunce.

Chapter 20

1 In the yere that Tharthan came vnto Asdod when Sargon the kyng of Assyria had
sent hym, and had fought agaynst Asdod, and taken it:
2 At the same tyme spake the Lorde by the hande of Esai the sonne of Amos,
saying: Go and take of the sackcloth from thy loynes, and put of thy shoe from
thy foote. And he dyd so, walkyng naked and barefoote.
3 And the Lorde sayde, Lyke as my seruaunt Esai hath walked naked and barefoote
for a signe and wonder three yeres vpon Egypt and Ethiopia:
4 Euen so shall the kyng of Assyria take away out of Egypt and Ethiopia,
children and olde men naked and barefoote, with their loynes vncouered, to the
great shame of Egypt.
5 They shalbe brought in feare also, and be ashamed of Ethiopia their hope, & of
Egypt wherin they are wont to glorie.
6 And they that dwell in the same Isle shall say in that day, Beholde such is
our hope, whyther shall we flee for helpe, that we may be delyuered from the
kyng of Assyria? And howe shall we escape?

Chapter 21

1 The burthen of the waste sea. Euen as the stormie weather passeth through at
the noone day from the wildernesse, so shall it come from the terrible lande.
2 A greeuous vision was shewed vnto me: let one deceiptfull offendour come
agaynst another, and one destroyer agaynst another: Up Elam, lay siege thou of
Media, all their gronyng haue I layde downe.
3 Therfore are my loynes fylled with sorowe, heauinesse hath taken holde vpon me
as the panges of a woman that is trauaylyng: it made me stoupe when I heard it,
and it vexed me when I sawe it.
4 My heart panted, fearefulnesse came vpon me: the nyght of my voluptuousnesse
hath he turned agaynst me into feare.
5 Whyle they garnished the table, the watchman loked: and whyle I was eatyng and
drynkyng, it was sayde, vp ye captaynes, take you to your shielde.
6 For thus hath the Lorde sayde vnto me: Go and set a watchman to tel what he
seeth.
7 And he sawe a charret which two horsemen sat vpon, with the cariage of an
Asse, and the cariage of a Camel: So he loked, and toke diligent heede.
8 And he cryed, a lion, my Lorde I stande continually vpon the watche towre in
the day tyme, and am appoynted to kepe my watch euery nyght.
9 And beholde here commeth a charret of men, with two horsemen, and he aunswered
and sayd, Babylon is fallen, it is fallen, and all the images of her gods hath
he smitten downe vnto the grounde.
10 Thou art he whom I must threshe, and thou belongest to my corne floure: This
that I hearde of the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel, haue I shewed vnto you.
11 The burthen of Duma. He calleth to me out of Seir: watchman what hast thou
espied by nyght? watchman what hast thou espied by nyght?
12 The watchman sayde, The mornyng commeth, and so doth the nyght: If ye wyll
aske me any question, then aske it: returne and come agayne.
13 The burthen concernyng Arabia. In the wooddes of Arabia shall ye tary all
nyght, euen in the streetes of Dedanim.
14 The inhabitours of the lande of Thema brought foorth water to hym that was
thirstie, they preuented hym that was fled away with their bread.
15 For because of swordes they are become fugitiue, Euen for the drawen sworde,
and for the bent bowe, and because of the greeuousnesse of warre.
16 For thus hath the Lorde sayde vnto me: There is yet a yere, accordyng to the
yeres of an hired seruaunt, and all the glorie of Cedar shall fayle.
17 And the number of them that shall escape from the bowes, shalbe minished by
the mightie children of Cedar: for the Lorde God of Israel hath spoken it.

Chapter 22

1 The burthen of the valley of vision. What hast thou to do here, that thou
clymbest to the house toppes?
2 Thou that art full of tumultuousnes, thou troublesome and proude citie: Thy
slayne men are neither put to death with the sworde, nor dead in battayle.
3 All thy captaynes are fugitiue together, the archers haue taken them
prisoners: All they I say that are founde in thee are in captiuitie together,
and they also that fled farre of.
4 Therfore sayde I, Let me alone, and I wyll make lamentation: Ye shall not be
able to comfort me because of the destruction of the daughter of my people.
5 For this is a day of trouble, of ruine, and of destruction, that the Lorde the
God of hoastes wyll bryng to passe in the valley of vision, breakyng downe the
citie, and crying vnto mountaynes.
6 Elam bare the quiuer with a charret of footmen and horsemen, and the citie of
Kir shewed the shielde open.
7 Thy chiefe valley also was full of charrettes, and the horsemen set their
faces directly towarde the gate.
8 And in that day dyd the enemie take away the couer of Iuda, and then didst
thou loke towarde the armour of the house of the forest.
9 Ye haue seene also the broken places of the citie of Dauid, howe that they are
many, and ye gathered together the waters of the lower poole.
10 As for the houses of Hierusalem ye haue numbred them, and the houses haue ye
broken downe, to make the wall strong.
11 A pit also haue ye made betweene the two walles for the waters of the olde
poole, & haue not regarded the maker therof, neither had respect vnto hym that
fashioned it long ago.
12 And in that day dyd the Lorde God of hoastes call men vnto weepyng and
mournyng, to baldnesse and girdyng about with sackcloth.
13 And beholde they haue ioy and gladnesse, slaying oxen, and kyllyng sheepe,
eatyng fleshe, and drynkyng wine: Let vs eate and drynke, for to morowe we shall
dye.
14 And it came to the eares of the Lorde of hoastes, This iniquitie shall not be
purged from you tyll ye dye, saith the Lorde God of hoastes.
15 Thus saith the Lord God of hoastes: Get ye vnto yonder treasurer, euen vnto
Sebna, which is the ruler of the house.
16 What hast thou to do here? and whom hast thou here? that thou shouldest here
hewe thee out a sepulchree, as it were one that heweth hym out a sepulchree on
hye, or that graueth an habitation for hym selfe on an harde rocke?
17 Beholde O thou man, the Lorde shal cary thee away into captiuitie, and shall
surely couer thee with confusion.
18 The Lorde shal turne thee ouer like a ball with his handes and shall sende
thee into a farre countrey: there shalt thou dye, and there in steade of the
charrets of thy pompe, shall the house of thy Lorde haue confusion.
19 I wyll driue thee from thy place, and out of thy dwellyng shal he ouerthrowe
thee.
20 And in that day shall I call my seruaunt Eliakim the sonne of Helkia:
21 And with thy garmentes wyll I clothe hym, and with thy girdle wyll I strength
hym: thy power also wyll I commit into his hande, and he shalbe a father of such
as dwell in Hierusalem, and in the house of Iuda.
22 And the key of the house of Dauid wyll I lay vpon his shoulder: so that he
shall open and no man shut, he shall shut and no man open.
23 And I wyll fasten hym as a nayle in a sure place, and he shalbe the glorious
seate of his fathers house.
24 Moreouer, all generations and posterities shall hang vpon him all the glorie
of their fathers house, all vessels both great and small, and all instrumentes
of measure and musicke.
25 In that day saith the Lord of hoastes, shall the nayle that is fastened in
the sure place, depart and be broken, and fall: and the burthen that was vpon it
shalbe pluckt away, for so the Lorde hath spoken.

Chapter 23

1 The burthen of Tyre. Mourne ye shippes of Tharsis, for there commeth such
destruction, that ye shall not haue an house to enter into: and that there
shalbe no traffike out of the lande of Cittim, they haue knowledge of this
plague.
2 Be styll ye that dwell in the Isle, the marchauntes of Zidon, & such as passe
ouer the sea haue made thee plenteous.
3 The corne that groweth by the great waters of Nilus, and the fruites of the
riuer were her vittayles, so that it became a common mart of the nations.
4 Be ashamed thou Zidon: for the sea, euen the strength of the sea hath spoken
saying, I haue not trauayled nor brought foorth children, nor norished vp young
men, or brought vp virgins.
5 When tidinges commeth to the Egyptians, they shalbe sory for the rumour of
Tyre.
6 Get you to Tharsis, mourne you that dwell in the Isle.
7 Is not this that glorious citie of yours which hath ben of olde antiquitie?
her owne feete shall cary her foorth to be a soiurner into a farre countrey.
8 Who hath deuised this agaynst Tyre that crowneth her selfe? Whose marchauntes
are princes, & whose factours are honorable in the worlde.
9 Euen the Lorde of hoastes hath deuised this, to put downe the pride of all
such as be glorious, and to minishe all them that be proude vpon the earth.
10 Get thee out of thy lande like a fludde vnto the daughter of Tharsis, for
thou hast no more strength.
11 He that smote the kyngdomes together, holdeth out his hande ouer the sea:
euen the Lord him selfe hath geuen a commaundement agaynst the same common place
of marchaundise, that they shall vtterly destroy the myght therof.
12 And he sayde: Make no more thy boast O virgin thou daughter Zidon, thou shalt
be brought downe: Up, get thee ouer vnto Cittim, where neuerthelesse thou shalt
haue no rest.
13 Beholde, this people came not of the Chaldees, but Assur made them strong
with great shippes: They set vp the strong holdes therof, and destroyed his
palaces: and he brought it in decay.
14 Mourne ye shippes of Tharsis, for your strength is brought downe.
15 And in that day shal Tyre be forgotten seuentie yeres, accordyng to the yeres
of one king: & after the ende of the seuentie yeres shall Tyre sing as doth an
harlot.
16 Take an harpe and go about the citie thou harlot that hast ben forgotten,
make sweete melodie, sing mo songes, that thou mayest be had in remembraunce.
17 And after the ende of the seuentie yeres shall the Lorde visite Tyre, and she
shall conuert vnto her rewarde, and shall commit fornication with all the
kyngdomes of the earth that are in the worlde.
18 Their occupying also & their rewarde shalbe holy vnto the Lorde: their gaynes
shall not be layde vp nor kept in store, but it shalbe theirs that dwell before
the Lorde, that they may eate inough, and haue clothyng sufficent.

Chapter 24

1 Beholde, the Lord maketh the earth waste and emptie, he turneth it vpside
downe, and scattereth abrode the inhabitours therof.
2 And the priest shalbe as the people, and the maister as the seruaunt, the
mistresse lyke the mayde, the seller lyke the byer, he that lendeth vpon vsurie,
like him that boroweth vpon vsurie, the creditour as the dettour.
3 The lande shalbe cleane wasted and vtterly spoyled: for so the Lorde hath
spoken.
4 The earth is sory and consumeth away, the worlde is feeble & perisheth, the
proude people of the earth are come to naught.
5 The earth also is become vnprofitable vnder the inhabitours therof, which haue
transgressed the lawes, chaunged the ordinaunce, broken the euerlastyng
couenaunt.
6 Therfore hath the curse consumed the earth, and they that dwell therin are
fallen into trespasse: Wherfore the inhabitours of the earth are perished with
drought, and fewe men are left behinde.
7 The wine fayleth, the vine hath no myght, all they that haue ben mery of heart
are come to mournyng.
8 The myrth of tabrettes is layde downe, the noyse of such as haue made mery is
ceassed, the ioy at the harpe is at an ende.
9 They shall drynke no more wine with mirth, strong drynke shalbe bytter to them
that drinke it.
10 The citie of vanitie is broken downe, euery house is shut vp, that no man may
come in.
11 In the streetes is there a crying because of wine, all cheare is vanished
away, the myrth of the lande is gone.
12 In the citie is left desolation, and the gate is smitten with destruction.
13 For in the middes of the lande, euen among the people, it shall come to passe
as at the shaking of oliues, and as the grapes are when the wine haruest is
done.
14 They shall lift vp their voyce, and make a merie noyse: and in magnifiyng of
the Lorde shall they crye out of the west.
15 Wherefore prayse ye the Lorde in the valleys, euen the name of the Lorde God
of Israel in the Iles of the sea.
16 From the vttermost part of the earth haue we hearde prayses and myrth,
because of the righteous: And I sayde, I knowe a thing in secrete, I knowe a
thing in secrete, wo is me: the transgressours haue offended, the transgressours
haue greeuously offended.
17 Fearefulnesse, the pit, and the snare are vpon thee, O thou that dwellest on
the earth.
18 It wyll come to passe, that whosoeuer escapeth the fearefull noyse, shall
fall into the pit, and he that commeth vp out of the pit, shalbe taken with the
snare: for the windowes from on high are open, and the foundations of the earth
are moued.
19 The earth is vtterly broken downe, the earth hath a sore ruine, the earth
quaketh exceedingly:
20 The earth shall reele to and fro like a drunkarde, and shalbe remoued lyke a
tent, and the iniquitie thereof shalbe heauie vpon it, it shall fall, and not
rise vp agayne.
21 And in that day shall the Lorde visite the hoast aboue that is on hye, and
the kynges of the worlde that are vpon the earth.
22 And they shalbe gathered together as they that be in pryson, and they shalbe
shut vp in warde, and after many dayes shall they be visited.
23 The moone shalbe abashed, and the sunne ashamed, when the Lorde of hoastes
shal raigne in mount Sion and in Hierusalem with worship, and in the sight of
suche as shalbe of his counsell.

Chapter 25

1 Thou art my Lorde my God, I wyll magnifie thee, I will geue thankes vnto thy
name, for thou hast brought wonderfull thinges to passe, according to thine olde
counsels truely & faythfully.
2 Thou hast made a citie a heape of stones, and brought a strong towne into
decay: the habitation of straungers hast thou made to be no citie, neither shall
it be buylded any more.
3 Therefore shall the mightie people geue glory vnto thee, the citie of the
valiaunt heathen shall feare thee.
4 For thou hast ben a strength vnto the poore, and a succour for the needie in
his trouble, a refuge against euill weather, a shadow against the heate: for the
blast of raging men is like a storme that casteth downe a wall.
5 Like as the heate in a drye place wasteth all thinges: so shalt thou suppresse
the noyse of aliantes, the heate is abated with the shadowe of the cloude, euen
so shall God asswage the noyse of the cruel tirauntes.
6 And in this mountaine shal the Lord of hoastes make vnto all people a feast of
plenteous and delicate thinges, euen of most plesaunt and daintie disshes.
7 And in this mountaine shall the Lord destroy the couering that all people are
wrapped in, and the hanging that is spread vpon all nations.
8 As for death he hath destroyed it for euer, and the Lorde God shall wype away
teares from all faces, and the rebuke of his people shall he take away out of
all the earth, for so the Lorde hath sayde.
9 And in that day it shalbe sayde, lo this is our God, we haue wayted for hym,
and he shall saue vs, this is the Lorde in whom we haue hoped, we wyll be merie
and reioyce in the saluation that commeth of hym.
10 For in this mountaine shall the hande of the Lorde ceasse, and Moab shalbe
threshed vnder hym, euen as strawe is troden to doung on the dounghill.
11 And he shall stretche out his hande in the middes of them, as he that
swimmeth casteth out his hands to swimme: and with the strength of his handes
shall he bring downe their pryde.
12 The strong holde also and defence of thy walles hath he ouerthrowne and cast
downe, and brought them to the grounde, euen vnto dust.

Chapter 26

1 In that day shall this song be song in the land of Iuda, we haue a strong
citie, saluation shal God appoint in steede of walles and bulwarkes.
2 Open ye the gates, that the righteous people whiche kepeth the trueth may
enter in.
3 By an assured purpose wylt thou preserue perfect peace, because they put their
trust in thee.
4 Put ye your trust alway in the Lord: for in the Lorde God there is strength
for euermore.
5 For he hath brought downe the high minded citizens: as for the proude citie he
hath brought it lowe, euen to the ground shall he cast it downe, and bring it
vnto dust.
6 The foote, euen the foote of the poore, and the steppes of suche as be in
necessitie shall treade it downe.
7 The path of equitie wylt thou graunt vnto the iust O thou most righteous thou
shalt order the path of hym that is righteous.
8 Yea in the way of thy iudgementes, O Lord, haue we put our trust in thee: thy
name also and the remembraunce of thee, is the thing that our soule longeth for.
9 My soule hath longed for thee all the night, and with my spirite whiche is
within me wyll I seeke thee early in the morning: For when thy iudgementes are
in the earth, the inhabiters of the worlde shall learne righteousnesse.
10 Shall the vngodly man be fauoured, which hath not learned righteousnesse, but
doth wickedly in the earth, where nothing ought to be done but that which is
righteous? he shall not see the glory of the Lorde.
11 Lorde, when thy hande is lyft vp to strike, they see it not: but they shall
see it, and be confounded with the zeale of the people, and the fire that
consumeth thyne enemies shall deuour them.
12 Lorde vnto vs thou shalt prouide peace: for thou also hast wrought all our
workes in vs.
13 O Lord our God, other lordes beside thee hath subdued vs: but we wyll be
mindfull only of thee and of thy name.
14 The dead wyll not liue, they that be out of life will not ryse agayne,
therfore hast thou visited and rooted them out, and destroyed all the memorie of
them.
15 Thou hast increased the people, O Lorde, thou hast increased the people, thou
art glorious, thou hast sent them farre of vnto all the coastes of the earth.
16 Lorde, in trouble haue they visited thee, they powred out their prayer whe
thy chastening was vpon them.
17 Like as a woman with chylde that draweth nye towardes her trauayle is sorie
and cryeth in her paynes: euen so haue we ben in thy sight O Lorde.
18 We haue ben with chylde and suffred paine, as though we had brought forth
winde: for there is no saluation in the earth, neither do the inhabiters of the
worlde submit them selues.
19 Thy dead men shall liue, euen as my body shall they rise againe: Awake and
sing ye that dwell in dust, for thy deawe is euen as the deawe of hearbes, and
the earth shall cast out them that be vnder her.
20 Come my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doores about thee,
hide thy selfe for a litle whyle, vntill the indignation be ouerpast.
21 For beholde, the Lorde is comming out of his place, to visite the wickednesse
of suche as dwell vpon earth: the earth also shall disclose her bloods, and
shall no more hide them that are slayne in her.

Chapter 27

1 In that day the Lord with his sore, great, and mightie sworde, shall visite
Leuiathan the fugitiue serpent, euen Leuiathan that crooked serpent, and he
shall slay the dragon that is in the sea.
2 In that day see that ye sing of the congregation which is the vineyarde that
bringeth foorth the best wine:
3 Euen I the Lorde do kepe it, in due seasons shall I water it: and lest the
enemie do it any harme, I wyll both night and day preserue it.
4 There is no displeasure in me, els when the vineyarde bringeth me foorth
bryers and thornes I woulde go thorowe it by warre, and burne it vp together.
5 Let it take holde of my strength, and it shalbe at one with me, euen at one
shall it be with me.
6 The dayes are comming that Iacob shall take roote, Israel shalbe greene and
florishe, and the world shalbe filled with fruite.
7 Hath he smitten hym as sore as he did the other that smote hym? Or is he
slayne with so sore a slaughter as they that slue hym?
8 Thou wylt punishe it in the braunches, yet not beyonde measure: for in the day
that the east winde bloweth sore, it taketh away the fruites.
9 By this meanes therfore shall the iniquitie of Iacob be purged, and this is
all the fruite namely the taking away of his sinne, if he make all the stones of
the aulter of idols as chalke stones that are beaten in sunder, that their
groues and images ryse not vp agayne.
10 Els shall the strong citie be desolate, and the habitation forsaken and left
like a wildernesse: there shall the Calfe feede, and there shall he lye, and
eate vp the graffes therof.
11 When the braunches of it are drye, they are broken of, & the women come and
set them on fire: for it is a people of no vnderstanding, and therfore he that
made them shall not fauour them, and he that created them shall geue them no
grace.
12 And in that day shall the Lorde make a threshing, from the middest of the
riuer Euphrates, vnto the riuer of Egypt, and ye chyldren of Israel shalbe
gathered together one to another.
13 In that day shall the great trumpe be blowne, so that they which were lost in
the lande of Assyria, and they that were banished in the lande of Egypt, shall
come and worship the Lorde in the holye mount of Hierusalem.

Chapter 28

1 Wo be vnto the crowne of pryde, euen to the drunken people of Ephraim, whose
great pompe is as a floure that fadeth away vpon the head of the valley of suche
as be in wealth, and are ouerladen with wine.
2 Behold, there commeth a vehement and sore day from the Lord, like an
vnmeasurable hayle and perillous tempest, euen like the force of mightie and
horrible waters that violently beareth downe all thinges.
3 The crowne of the pryde of the drunken Ephraemites shalbe troden vnder foote:
4 So that the floure of his fayrenesse and beautie whiche is in the head of the
valley of fatnesse, shall fade away as doth an vntimely ripe figge before
haruest: whiche when a man espieth, he loketh vpon it, and whyle it is yet in
his hande he eateth it vp.
5 In that day shal the Lord of hoastes be the crowne of glory and diamonde of
beautie vnto the residue of his people.
6 He wylbe also a spirite of perfect knowledge to him that sitteth in iudgement,
and strength vnto them that turne away the battayle to the gate of the enemies.
7 But they are out of the way by reason of wine, yea farre out of the way are
they thorowe strong drinke: The priest also and the prophete are gone astray by
the meanes of strong drinke, they are drunken with wine, they go amisse thorowe
strong drinke, they fayle in propheciyng, and stumble in iudgement.
8 For all tables are full of vomit and filthynesse, that no place is cleane.
9 Whom then shall suche one teache knowledge? and whom shall he make to
vnderstande the thing that he heareth? for they are as ignoraunt as young
chyldren that are taken from the milke, and are weaned.
10 For they that be suche, must take after one lesson, another lesson, after one
commaundement, another commaundement, for one rule, another rule, after one
instruction, another instruction, there a litle, and there a litle.
11 For he that speaketh vnto this people, is euen as one that vseth rudenesse of
speache, and a straunge language.
12 If any man say vnto them, lo, this is the rest wherewith ye may ease hym that
is weerie, this is the refreshing: they wyll not hearken.
13 Therfore shall the word of the Lord be vnto them, lesson vpon lesson,
commaundement vpon commaundement, rule vpon rule, instruction vpon instruction,
there a litle, and there a litle: that they may go on and fall backwarde, be
brused, tangled, and snared.
14 Wherfore heare the word of the Lord ye mockers, ye that haue rule of this
people whiche is at Hierusalem.
15 Because ye haue sayd, We haue made a couenaunt with death, and with hell are
we at agreement: and though there go foorth a sore plague, it shall not come
vnto vs, for we haue made falsehood our refuge, and vnder vanitie are we hid.
16 Therfore thus saith the Lorde God, Beholde, I lay in Sion for a foundation a
stone, euen a tryed stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation: who so
beleueth, let hym not be to hastie.
17 Iudgement also wyll I laye to the rule, and righteousnesse to the balaunce,
so that the hayle shall sweepe away as a broome your vayne confidence, and the
priuie place of your refuge shall the waters runne ouer.
18 And thus the couenaunt that ye made with death, shalbe disanulled, and your
agreement that ye made with hell shall not stand, yea when the sore plague goeth
foorth, ye shalbe troden downe vnder it.
19 From the tyme that it goeth foorth it shall take you away: for early in the
morning euery day, yea both day and night shall it go thorowe, and when the
noyse thereof is perceaued, it shall gender vexation.
20 For the bed is narrowe and not large, and the couering so small that a man
can not winde him selfe vnder it.
21 For the Lord shall stand as in mount Perazim, and shalbe wroth like as in the
valley Gibeon, that he may do his worke, his straunge worke, and bryng to passe
his acte, his straunge acte.
22 Nowe therefore see that ye be no mockers, lest your punishment increase: For
I hearde of the Lorde of hoastes, that there shall come a short ende vpon the
whole earth.
23 Heare ye then, and hearken vnto my voyce, consider and ponder my speache.
24 Doth not the husbandman plowe all the day, and openeth and breaketh the
clottes of his grounde, that he may sowe?
25 When he hath made it playne, wyll he not spreade abrode the fitches, and sowe
comin, and cast in wheate by measure, and the appointed barlye and rye in their
place?
26 God wyll instruct hym to haue discretion, euen his God wyll teache hym.
27 For fitches shall not be threshed with an harrowe, neither shall a cart
wheele be brought thorowe the comin: but the fitches are beaten out with a
staffe, and comin with a rodde.
28 But the seede that bread is made of, is threshed, though it be not alway a
threshing, and the cart wheele must be brought ouer it, lest he grinde it with
his teeth.
29 This also commeth of the Lorde of hoastes, which worketh with wonderfull
wysdome, and bringeth excellent workes to passe.

Chapter 29

1 Wo vnto thee O Ariel Ariel, thou citie that Dauid dwelt in: Go on from yere to
yere, and let the lambes be slayne.
2 I wyll lay siege vnto Ariel, so that there shalbe heauinesse and sorowe in it:
and it shalbe vnto me euen an aulter of slaughter.
3 A will besiege thee rounde about, and fight against thee thorowe a bulwarke,
and wyll reare vp diches against thee.
4 Thou shalt be brought downe, and shalt speake out of the ground, and thy
speache shall go lowe out of the dust: Thy voyce also shall come out of the
grounde lyke the voyce of a witche, and thy talkyng shall whisper out of the
dust:
5 Moreouer, the noyse of the straunge enemies shalbe like thinne dust, and the
multitude of tirauntes shalbe as drye strawe that can not tary: euen sodenly and
in haste shall their blast go.
6 Thou shalt be visited of the Lorde of hoastes with thunder, earthquake, and
with a great noyse, with storme and tempest, and with the flambe of a consuming
fire.
7 And the multitude of all nations that fight against Ariel, shalbe as a dreame
seene by night: euen so shall they be that make warre against it, and strong
holdes to ouercome it, and that lay any siege vnto it.
8 In conclusion, it shalbe euen as when a hungry man dreameth that he is eating,
and when he awaketh, his soule is emptie, or as when a thirstie man dreameth
that he is drinking, and when he awaketh, he is yet fainte, and his soule hath
appetite: euen so shall the multitude of all nations that fighteth against mount
Sion.
9 Ponder these thinges once in your mindes, and wonder: Blinded are they them
selues, and the blinde guides of other: They are drunken, but not with wine:
they are vnstable, but not thorow strong drinke.
10 For the Lorde hath couered you with a slumbring spirite, and hath closed your
eyes: your prophetes also and rulers that shoulde see, them hath he couered.
11 And the vision of all the prophetes is become vnto you as the wordes of a
booke that is sealed vp, whiche men deliuer to one that is learned, saying,
Reade thou in it: and he saith, I can not, for it is sealed.
12 And the booke is geuen to him that is not learned, saying, Reade thou in it:
and he saith, I am not learned.
13 Therfore thus hath the Lorde sayd: Forsomuche as this people when they be in
trouble, do honour me with their mouth and with their lippes, but their heart is
farre fro me, and the feare whiche they haue vnto me proceedeth of a
commaundement that is taught of men:
14 Therefore wyll I do marueyles among this people, euen marueylous thinges I
say and a wonder: For the wysdome of their wyse men shall perishe, and the
vnderstanding of their wittie men shall hyde it selfe.
15 Wo vnto them that kepe secrete their thoughtes, to hide their counsell from
the Lorde, and to do their workes in darknesse, saying: Who seeth vs? and who
knoweth vs?
16 Doubtlesse your destruction is in reputation as the potters clay: And doth
the worke say of hym that made it, he made not me? And doth an earthen vessell
say of hym that fashioned it, he had no vnderstanding?
17 Is it not harde at hande that Libanus shalbe turned into a low fielde, and
that the lowe fielde shalbe taken as the wood?
18 And in that day shall deafe men heare the wordes of the booke, and the eyes
of the blynde shall see, euen out of the cloude, and out of darknesse.
19 The meeke spirited also shall be merie in the Lorde, and the poore among them
that be lowly shall reioyce in the holy one of Israel:
20 For he that dyd violence is brought to naught, and the scornefull man is
consumed, and they rooted out that made haste early to vnrighteousnesse,
21 Making a man to sinne in the worde, and that toke him in a snare, whiche
reproued them in the open place, and they that haue turned the cause of the
righteous to naught.
22 Therefore thus saith the Lorde to the house of Iacob, euen thus saith he that
redeemed Abraham: Iacob shall not nowe be confounded, nor his face pale.
23 But when he seeth his chyldren the worke of my handes in the middes of hym,
they shall sanctifie my name, and prayse the holy one of Iacob, and feare the
God of Israel.
24 They also that haue ben of an erronious spirite shall come to vnderstanding,
and they that haue ben scornefull shall learne doctrine.

Chapter 30

1 Alas for those disobedient chyldren saith the Lorde, that they will take
counsell and not of me, that they wyll take a secrete aduice and not out of my
spirite, and therefore adde they sinne vnto sinne.
2 Euen they that walke to go downe into Egypt, and haue asked no question at my
mouth, but seeke strength in the might of Pharao, and trust in the shadowe of
Egypt.
3 Therefore shall the strength of Pharao be your confusion, and the trust in the
shadowe of Egypt your shame.
4 For his captaynes were at Zoan, and his embassadours came vnto Hanes.
5 They were ashamed of the people that coulde do them no good, and that might
not helpe them nor shewe them any profit, but were their confusion and rebuke.
6 The burthen of the beastes of the south. In a land of trouble & anguishe, from
whence shall come the young and olde lion, the viper and firie serpent that
fleeth against them that vpon coltes beare their riches, and vpon camels their
treasures, to a people that can do them no good.
7 For vayne and nothing worth shall the helpe of the Egyptians be: Therefore
haue I cryed vnto Hierusalem, they shall haue strength inough if they wyll
settle their mindes in quietnesse.
8 Nowe therefore go thy way, and write this before them in a table, and note it
in a booke: that it may finally remaine and be kept styll for euer.
9 For this is an obstinate people, and dissembling chyldren, chyldren that
refuse to heare the lawe of the Lorde.
10 For they say vnto the seers, see not, and to them that be cleare of
iudgement, loke not out right thinges for vs: but speake fayre wordes vnto vs,
loke out errours.
11 Get you out of this way, depart out of this path, and turne the holy one of
Israel from vs.
12 Wherefore thus saith the holy one of Israel: Because your heartes ryse
against this word, and because you trust in wrong dealing and peruerse
iudgement, and put your confidence therin:
13 Therfore shall ye haue this mischiefe for your destruction and fall, like as
an hye wall that falleth because of some rift or blast, whose breakyng commeth
sodainly.
14 And the hurt thereof is lyke an earthen vessell whiche breaketh without
helpe, so that in the bursting of it, there is not founde one sheuer to fetch
fire in, or to take water withall out of the pit.
15 For thus saith the Lorde God, euen the holy one of Israel: In repentaunce and
in rest shall ye be safe, in quietnesse and sure confidence shalbe your
strength, but ye haue had no list thereto.
16 For ye haue sayde, No, but we wyll escape thorowe horses, therefore shall ye
flee: And we wyll get vs vp vpon swift beastes, and therefore shall your
persecutours be swifter.
17 A thousande shall flee at the rebuke of one, and at the rebuke of fiue shall
ye all flee, till ye be left as a ship mast vpon the top of a mountaine, and as
a beaken vpon an hill.
18 Therefore doth the Lorde cause you to wayte, that he may haue mercy vpon you,
to the entent that he may haue the preeminence when he is gratious vnto you: For
the Lord is the God of iudgement, Blessed are all they that hope in hym.
19 If the people remaine in Sion and at Hierusalem, thou shalt not be in
heauinesse: but at the voyce of thy complaint shall he haue mercy vpon thee, and
when he heareth it, he shall geue thee an aunswere.
20 And though the Lorde geue you the bread of trouble, and the water of
aduersitie, thy rayne shalbe no more so scant, but thyne eyes shall see thy
rayne.
21 Yea and thyne eare shall heare the talking of him that doth speake behinde
thee: This is the way, walke ye in it, turne not aside neither to the right
hande, nor to the left.
22 Ye shall destroy also the couering of your siluer images, and the decking of
your golden idols, euen as filthynesse shalt thou put them away: And thou shalt
say vnto it, Get thee hence.
23 Then shall God geue rayne vnto thy seede, that thou shalt sowe the grounde
withall, and bread of the increase of the earth, whiche shalbe fat and very
plenteous: in that day also shall thy cattell be fed in large pastures.
24 The oxen lykewyse and the young asses that eare the grounde shall eate cleane
prouender, whiche is purged with the winde and the fanne.
25 Finally, vpon euery hye mountayne and hyll shall there be riuers, and
streames of waters in the day of the great slaughter when the towres fall.
26 Moreouer, the light of the moone shalbe as the light of the sunne, and the
sunne light shalbe seuen folde, and haue as much shine as in seuen dayes beside,
when the Lorde bindeth vp the sore of his people, and healeth the stroke of
their wounde.
27 Beholde, the fame of the Lorde commeth from farre, and his presence is so
hotte, that no man is able to abyde: his lippes are full of indignation, and his
tongue is as a consuming fire.
28 His breath is a vehement flud of water, that reacheth vp to the necke: that
he may sift away the heathen in the siue of vanitie, and his breath is a brydle
of errour in the iawes of the people.
29 And ye shall sing lyke as in the night when the holy solempnitie beginneth,
and ye shall haue gladnesse of heart, like as when one commeth with a pipe vnto
the hill of the Lorde, and to the most mightie one of Israel.
30 And the Lorde shall cause his glorious voyce to be hearde, and shall declare
his stretched out arme with a terrible countenaunce, & with the flambe of a
consuming fire, with noysome lightening, with a showre, and with hayle stones.
31 For thorowe the voyce of the Lorde shall Assur be destroyed, which smote
other men with the rodde.
32 And it shall come to passe, that whyther soeuer he goeth the rodde shall
cleaue vnto him which the Lorde shall laye vpon hym, with tabrettes and harpes:
and with great warre shall he fight against his hoast.
33 For the fire of hell is ordayned from the beginning, yea euen for the kyng is
it prepared: This hath the Lorde set in the deepe, and made it wide, the burning
whereof is fire and muche wood: The breath of the Lorde whiche is like a riuer
of brimstone doth kindle it.

Chapter 31

1 Wo be vnto them that go downe into Egypt for helpe, and trust in horses, and
put their confidence in charrets because they be many, and in horsemen because
they be lustie and strong: but they regarde not the holy one of Israel, and they
aske no question at the Lorde.
2 And he neuerthelesse is wise, and will plague the wicked, and goeth not from
his worde, he wyll aryse against the housholde of the frowarde, and against the
helpe of euyll doers.
3 Nowe the Egyptians are men and not God, and their horses fleshe, and not
spirite: And assoone as the Lord stretcheth out his hande, then shall the helper
fall and he that shoulde haue ben helped, and they shall altogether be
destroyed.
4 For thus hath the Lorde spoken vnto me: Lyke as the lion and lions whelpe
roareth vpon the pray that he hath gotten, and is not afraide though the
multitude of shepheardes crye out vpon him, neither be abashed for all the heape
of them: so shall the Lorde of hoastes come downe to fight for mount Sion, and
defende his hyll.
5 Like as the byrdes flutter about their nestes, so shall the Lorde of hoastes,
kepe, saue, defende, and deliuer Hierusalem.
6 Therefore O ye chyldren of Israel, turne againe vnto him whom you haue
ofttimes forsaken.
7 For in that day euery man shall cast out his idols of siluer, and his idols of
golde, whiche ye haue made with your owne handes vnto your sinne.
8 Assur also shalbe slayne with the sworde, not with a mans sworde, neither shal
the sworde of any man deuour hym, and he shall flee from the slaughter, and his
choise young men shalbe discomfited.
9 He shall go for feare to his strong holdes, and his princes shall flee from
his standerd saith the Lord, whose fire is in Sion, and his fornace in
Hierusalem.

Chapter 32

1 Beholde, a kyng shall gouerne after the rule of righteousnesse, and the
princes shall rule according to the ballaunce of equitie.
2 And that man shalbe vnto men as a defence for the winde, and as a refuge for
the tempest, lyke as a ryuer of water in a thirstie place, and the shadowe of a
great rocke in a drye lande.
3 The eyes of the seeing shall not be dim, and the eares of them that heare
shall take diligent heede.
4 The heart of the vnwyse shall attayne to knowledge, and the vnperfect tongue
shall speake playnely and distinctly.
5 Then shall the foolishe nigarde be no more called gentle, nor the churle
liberall.
6 But the nigarde wyll speake nigardlye, and his heart wyll worke euyll, and
play the hypocrite, and imagine abhominations against God, to make the hungry
leane, and to withholde drinke from the thirstie.
7 The weapons of the churlishe are euyll, he deuiseth noysome deuises, that he
may beguyle the poore with deceiptfull wordes, yea euen there as he should geue
sentence with the poore.
8 But the liberall person imagineth honest thynges, and commeth vp for
liberalitie vnto promotion.
9 Up ye riche and idle women, hearken vnto my voyce, ye carelesse daughters
marke my wordes.
10 Many yeres and dayes shall ye be brought in feare O ye carelesse women: for
the vintage shall fayle, and the haruest shall not come.
11 Be abashed you that lyue in aboundaunce, tremble you that lyue carelesse,
cast of your rayment, make your selues bare, and put sackcloth about you.
12 For as the infantes weepe when their mothers teates are dryed vp: so shall
you weepe for your faire fieldes and fruitfull vineyardes.
13 My peoples fielde shall bryng thornes and thistles: and so shall it be in
euery house of voluptuousnesse, and in euery citie that reioyceth.
14 The palaces also shalbe broke, and the greatly occupied cities desolate: The
towres and bulwarkes shall become dennes for euermore, where wylde asses take
their pleasure, and sheepe their pasture.
15 Unto the tyme that the spirite be powred vpon vs from aboue, and that the
wildernesse be a fruitfull fielde, and the plenteous fielde be reckened for a
wood.
16 Then shall equitie dwell in the desert, and righteousnesse in a fruitfull
lande.
17 And the worke of righteousnesse shalbe peace, and her fruite rest and
quietnesse for euer.
18 And my people shall dwell in the innes of peace, and in sure dwellynges, in
safe places of comfort.
19 And when the hayle falleth, it shall fall in the wood, and the citie shalbe
set lowe in the valley.
20 O howe happy shall ye be when ye shall safely sowe your seede beside all
waters, and dryue thyther the feete of your oxen and asses.

Chapter 33

1 Wo to thee that destroyest when thou wast not destroyed, thou breakest ye
league where as none hath broken it with thee: for when thou shalt leaue
destroying, thou thy selfe shalt be destroyed: and when thou ceassest from
breakyng the league, then shall they breake it to thee.
2 O Lorde haue mercie vpon vs, we haue put our whole trust in thee: be an arme
to such early, and our health in the tyme of trouble.
3 At that confuse noyse the people fled, and at thine exaltyng the heathen were
scattered.
4 And the spoyles shalbe gathered, which shalbe yours, as are the gathetheryng
of Bruchus, and the multitude goyng to it shalbe as Locustes, running to and
fro.
5 The Lorde is exalted, for it is he that dwelleth on hye, he hath fylled Sion
with iudgement and rygteousnesse.
6 And a sure stablishyng of thy tymes, shalbe strength, health, wisdome, and
knowledge: and the very feare of the Lorde shalbe the treasure of it.
7 Beholde the messengers shall crye without: and the embassadours of peace shall
weepe bitterly.
8 Their streetes are waste, there walketh no man therin: God hath broken the
appoyntment, the cities are cast away, and men are nothyng regarded.
9 The desolate earth is in heauinesse, Libanus is shamed and hewen downe, Saron
is like a wildernesse, Basan and Charmel are spoyled of their fruites.
10 And therfore saith the Lorde, I wyll vp nowe, nowe wyll I be aduaunced, nowe
wyll I be exalted.
11 Ye shall conceaue stubble, and beare strawe: and your spirite shalbe the
fire, that it may consume you.
12 And the people shalbe burnt like lime, and as thornes burnt that are hewen of
and cast in the fire.
13 Nowe hearken to ye that are farre of howe I haue done, and consider my power
ye that are at hande.
14 The sinners at Sion are afrayde, a sodayne fearefulnesse is come vpon the
hypocrites: What is he among vs say they that shall dwell by the consumyng fire?
Which of vs may abyde the euerlasting heate?
15 He that leadeth a godly life, and speaketh the trueth, he that abhorreth
gaynes by violence and deceipt, he that kepeth his hande that he touche no
rewarde, which stoppeth his eares that he heare no counsayle agaynst the
innocent blood, which holdeth downe his eyes that he see no euyll:
16 He it is that shall dwell on hye, whose safegarde shalbe in a bulwarke of
rockes: to hym shalbe geuen meate, and his waters shall not fayle.
17 Thine eyes shall see the kyng in his glorie, euen the kyng of the farre
countreys shall they see.
18 Thine heart studied for feare thinking thus: What shall then become of the
scribe? of the receauer of our money? what of hym that taxed our fairest houses?
19 There shalt thou not see a cruel people of a straunge tongue, to haue so
diffused a language that it may not be vnderstanded, neither so straunge a
speache but it shalbe perceaued.
20 Loke vpon Sion the head citie of our solempne feastes: thyne eyes shall see
Hierusalem that glorious habitation, the tabernacle that neuer shall remoue,
whose nayles shall neuer be taken out worlde without ende, whose cordes euery
one shall neuer corrupt.
21 For the glorious maiestie of the Lorde shall there be present among vs as a
place where faire brode riuers and streames are, through the which shall neither
galley rowe nor great ship sayle.
22 For the Lorde is our iudge, the Lord is our lawe geuer, the Lord is our king,
and he hym selfe shalbe our sauiour.
23 Thy tacklyng is loosed, therfore it can not make fast the mast, nor spread
the sayle: then there is dealed great spoyle, yea lame men runne after the pray.
24 There lyeth no man that saith, I am sicke: but all euyll is taken away from
the people that dwell there.

Chapter 34

1 Come ye heathen and heare, take heede you people: hearken thou earth and all
that is therin, thou rounde compasse and all that dwelleth thervpon.
2 For the Lorde is angry with all people, & his displeasure is kindled agaynst
all the multitude of them, he hath destroyed them, and delyuered them to the
slaughter.
3 So that their slayne shalbe cast out and their bodyes stincke, that euen the
very hylles shalbe wet with the blood of them.
4 All the starres of heauen shall waste, and the heauens shall folde together
lyke a roll, and all the starres therof shall fall, lyke as the leaues fall from
the vines and figge trees.
5 For my sworde shalbe bathed in heauen, and shall immediatly come downe to
iudgement vpon Idumea, and vpon the people which I haue cursed.
6 And the Lordes sworde shalbe full of blood, and be rusty with the fatnesse and
blood of lambes and goates, with the fatnesse of the kidneys of weathers: For
the Lord shall kyll a great offering in Bozra, and a great slaughter in the
lande of Idumea.
7 There shall the vnicornes fall with them, and the bulles with the giauntes,
and their lande shalbe throughly soked with blood, and their grounde corrupt
with fatnesse.
8 For it is the day of Gods vengeaunce, and the yere of recompence for the
reuenge of Sion.
9 And his fluddes shalbe turned to pitch, and his earth to brimstone, and
therewith shall the lande be kindled.
10 So that it shall not be quenched day nor nyght, but smoke euermore, and so
foorth lye waste: and no man shall go through it for euer.
11 But Pellicanes, Storkes, great Owles, and Rauens shall haue it in possession
and dwell therin: for God shall spreade out the line of desolation vpon it, and
the stones of emptinesse.
12 Her nobles shall call, and there is no kyngdome: and all her princes shalbe
nothyng.
13 Thornes shall growe in their palaces, nettles & thistles in their strong
holdes, that the dragons may haue their pleasure therin, and that they may be a
court for Estriches.
14 There shall straunge visures & monsterous beastes meete one another, and the
wylde kepe company together: there shall the Lamia lye and haue her lodgyng.
15 There shall the Owle make her nest, builde, be there at home, & bryng foorth
her young ones: there shall the Kytes come together, eche one to his lyke.
16 Seke through the booke of the Lorde and reade it: there shall none of these
thynges be left out, there shall not one nor such lyke fayle: for his mouth
commaundeth, and that same doth his spirite gather together, or fulfyll.
17 He hath cast the lot for them, and to those beastes hath his hande deuided it
by the line: therfore those shall possesse it for euer, from generation to
generation shall they dwell therin.

Chapter 35

1 But the desert & wildernesse shall reioyce, the waste ground shall be glad and
florishe as the Lilie.
2 She shall florishe pleasauntly and be ioyfull, and euer be geuing thankes more
and more: For the glorie of Libanus, the beautie of Charmel and Saron shalbe
geuen her: These shall knowe the honour of the Lorde, & the maiestie of our God.
3 And therfore strength the weake handes, and comfort the feeble knees.
4 Say vnto them that are of a fearfull heart, be of good cheare and feare not,
beholde your God commeth to take vengeaunce, and you shall see the rewarde that
God geueth: God commeth his owne selfe, and wyll delyuer you.
5 Then shall the eyes of the blynde be lyghtened, and the eares of the deaffe
opened.
6 Then shall the lame men leape as an Hart, & the dumbe mans tongue shall geue
thankes: for in the wildernesse there shall welles spryng, and fluddes of water
in the desert.
7 The drye grounde shal turne to riuers, and the thirstie to sprynges of water:
wheras dragons dwelt afore, there shal growe sweete flowres & greene russhes.
8 There shalbe foote pathes & common streetes, this shalbe called the holy way:
no vncleane person shall go through it, for the Lorde hym selfe shall go with
them that way, and the wayfayrer nor ignoraunt shall not erre.
9 There shalbe no lion, & no rauishyng beastes shall come therin nor be there,
but men redeemed shall go there free and safe.
10 And the redeemed of the Lorde I say shall conuert and come to Sion with
thankesgeuyng: euerlastyng ioy shall they haue, pleasure and gladnesse shalbe
among them, and as for all sorowe and heauinesse it shall vanishe.

Chapter 36

1 In the foureteenth yere of king Hezekias came Sennacherib kyng of the
Assyrians downe, to lay siege vnto all the strong cities of Iuda, to conquer
them.
2 And the kyng of the Assyrians sent Rabsakeh from Lachis towarde Hierusalem,
agaynst Hezekias with an exceedyng hoast, which set hym by the conduite of the
ouer poole in the way that goeth through the fullers lande.
3 And so there came foorth vnto hym Eliakim Helkias sonne, the chiefe ouer the
householde, Sobna the scribe, and Ioah Asaphs sonne the secretarie:
4 And Rabsakeh sayde vnto them, Tell Hezekia that the great kyng saith thus vnto
hym: What presumption is this that thou trustest vnto?
5 I sayde surely that thou trustest in vayne wordes, when counsayle and strength
are necessarie to battayle: but nowe wherto trustest thou, that thou rebellest
agaynst me?
6 Lo, thou puttest thy trust in a broken staffe of reede I meane Egypt, which he
that leaneth vpon, it goeth into his hande and shooteth it through: euen so is
Pharao the kyng of Egypt vnto all them that trust in hym.
7 But if thou wouldest say vnto me, We trust in the Lorde our God: Is not he
that God whose hygh places & aulters Hezekia toke downe, and commaunded Iuda and
Hierusalem to worship only before this aulter?
8 Nowe therfore deliuer hostages that thou rebell no more agaynst my Lorde the
kyng of the Assyrians, and I wyll geue thee two thousande horses yf thou be able
to set men vpon them.
9 Howe darest thou resist the power of the smallest prince that my Lorde hath?
howe darest thou trust in the charrets and horsemen of Egypt?
10 Moreouer, thinkest thou that I am come vp hyther to destroy this lande
without the Lordes wyll? The Lorde sayd vnto me, Go vp agaynst this lande and
destroy it.
11 Then sayd Eliakim, Sobna, & Ioah, vnto Rabsakeh: Speake to vs thy seruauntes
we pray thee in the Syrians language, for we vnderstande it well, and speake not
to vs in the Iewes tongue, lest the folke heare which lyeth vpon the wall.
12 Then aunswered Rabsakeh: Hath my maister sent me to speake this only to thy
maister and thee? hath he not sent me to them also that lye vpon the wall? that
they may be compelled to eate their owne dunge, and drinke their owne stale with
you?
13 And Rabsakeh stoode stiffe, and cryed with a loude voyce in the Iewes tongue,
and sayde: Nowe take heede howe the great kyng of the Assyrians geueth you
warnyng.
14 Thus saith the kyng: Let not Hezekia deceaue you, for he shall not be able to
deliuer you.
15 Moreouer, let not Hezekia comfort you in the Lorde when he saith, The Lorde
without doubt shall defende vs, and shall not geue ouer this citie into the
handes of the king of the Assyrians.
16 Hearken not to Hezekia, for thus saith the kyng of Assyria: Obtayne my
fauour, encline to me, so may euery man enioy his vineyardes and figge trees,
and drynke the water of his cesterne:
17 Unto the tyme that I come my selfe, and bryng you into a lande that is lyke
your owne, wherin is wheate & wine, which is both sowen with seede and planted
with vineyardes.
18 Let not Hezekia deceaue you, when he saith vnto you, the Lorde shall deliuer
vs: Myght the gods of the gentiles kepe euery mans lande from the power of the
kyng of the Assyrians?
19 Where is the god of Hemath and Arphad? where is the god of Sepharuaim? and
who is able to defende Samaria out of my hande?
20 Or which of all the gods of these landes hath deliuered their countrey out of
my power? Is the Lord in deede able to deliuer Hierusalem from my hande?
21 Unto this Hezekias messengers helde their tongues, and aunswered not one
worde: for the kyng had charged them that they should geue him no aunswere.
22 So came Eliakim Helkias sonne the chiefe ouer the householde, Sobna the
scribe, and Ioah Asaphes sonne the secratarie vnto Hezekia with rent clothes,
and tolde hym the wordes of Rabsakeh.

Chapter 37

1 When Hezekia hearde that, he rent his clothes, and put on sackcloth, and went
into the temple of the Lorde.
2 But he sent Eliakim the chiefe ouer the householde, Sobna the scribe, with the
eldest priestes clothed in sacke, vnto the prophete Esai the sonne of Amos,
3 And they sayde vnto hym, Thus saith Hezekia: This is the day of trouble, of
plague, and of blasphemie: for the children are come to the place of birth, but
there is no power to bryng them foorth.
4 The Lorde thy God no doubt hath well considered the wordes of Rabsakeh, whom
his lorde king of the Assyrians hath sent to defie and blaspheme the lyuyng God,
with such wordes as the Lorde thy God hath hearde ryght well: and therfore lyft
vp thy prayer for the remnaunt that yet are left.
5 So the seruauntes of the kyng Hezekia came to Esai,
6 And Esai gaue them this aunswere: Say thus vnto your lorde, Thus saith the
Lord: Be not afraide of the wordes that thou hast hearde, wherwith the kyng of
the Assyrians seruauntes haue blasphemed me.
7 Beholde, I wyll rayse vp a wynde agaynst him, & he shall heare a rumour, and
he shall go agayne into his countrey, there wyll I destroy hym with the sworde
in his owne lande.
8 Nowe when Rabsakeh returned, he founde the kyng of Assyria laying siege to
Libnas: for he had vnderstandyng that he was departed from Lachis.
9 And there came a rumour that Tharakas kyng of Ethiopia was come foorth to
warre agaynst hym: and when the king of Assyria hearde that, he sent other
messengers to kyng Hezekia with this commaundement.
10 Say thus to Hezekia kyng of Iuda: Let not thy God deceaue thee, in whom thou
hopest, and sayest, Hierusalem shall not be geuen into the handes of the kyng of
Assyria.
11 For lo, thou knowest well howe the kynges of Assyria haue handled all the
landes that they haue subuerted: and hopest thou to escape?
12 Were the people of the gentiles whom my progenitours conquered, deliuered at
any tyme through their gods? As namely Gosan, Haran, Rezeph, and the children of
Eden, which were at Thalassar?
13 Where is the king of Hemath, and the king of Arphad, and the king of the
citie Sepharuaim, Ena, and Aua?
14 Nowe when Hezekia had receaued the letter of the messengers, and read it, he
went vp into the house of the Lorde, and opened the letter before the Lorde,
15 And Hezekia prayed vnto the Lorde on this maner.
16 O Lorde of hoastes, thou God of Israel, which dwellest vpon Cherubim, thou
art the God that only is God of all the kingdomes of the world, for thou only
hast created heauen and earth.
17 Encline thine eare Lorde and consider, open thine eyes Lorde and see, and
ponder all the wordes of Sennacherib, which hath sent his embassage to blaspheme
the lyuyng God.
18 It is true O Lorde that the kynges of Assyria haue conquered all kyngdomes
and landes,
19 And cast their gods in the fire: for those were no gods, but the workes of
mens handes, of wood or stone, therfore haue they destroyed them.
20 Nowe therfore deliuer vs O Lord our God from the handes of Sennacherib, that
all the kyngdomes of the earth may knowe that thou only art the Lorde.
21 Then Esai the sonne of Amos sent vnto Hezekia, saying, Thus saith the Lorde
God of Israel: Wheras thou hast made thy prayer vnto me as touching Sennacherib
the king of Assyria,
22 This is the aunswere that the Lorde hath geuen concernyng hym: Dispised art
thou and mocked O daughter Sion, he hath shaken his head at thee O daughter of
Hierusalem.
23 But thou Sennacherib, whom hast thou defied and blasphemed? Agaynst whom hast
thou lifted vp thy voyce, and exalted thy proude lokes? euen agaynst the holy
one of Israel.
24 Thou with thy seruauntes hast blasphemed the Lorde, and thus holdest thou of
thy selfe: I wyll couer the hye mountaynes and sydes of Libanus with my
horsemen, and there wyll I cut downe the hye Cedar trees, and the fayrest Firre
trees: I wyll vp in the heyght of it, and into the chiefest of his tymber woods.
25 If there be no water, I wyll graue and drynke: and as for waters of defence,
I wyll drye them vp with the feete of myne hoast.
26 Yea, hast thou not hearde what I haue taken in hande and brought to passe of
olde tyme? That same wyll I do nowe also, and waste, destroy, and bryng strong
cities vnto heapes of stones.
27 For their inhabitours shalbe like lame men brought in feare and confounded:
they shalbe lyke grasse and greene hearbes in the fielde, lyke the hay vpon
house toppes, that wythereth before it be growen vp.
28 I knowe thy wayes, thy going foorth, and thy commyng home, yea and thy
madnesse agaynst me.
29 Therfore thy furiousnesse agaynst me, and thy pride is come before me, I wyll
put my ryng in thy nose, and my bridle bit in the iawes of thee, and turne thee
about euen the same way thou camest.
30 I wyll geue thee also this token O Hezekia this yere shalt thou eate such as
groweth of it selfe, and the seconde yere that which spryngeth agayne of the
same, & in the thirde yere ye shall sowe and reape, yea ye shall plant
vineyardes, and enioy the fruites therof.
31 And such of the house of Iuda as are escaped shall come together, and the
remnaunt shall take roote beneath, and bryng foorth fruite aboue.
32 For the escaped shall go out of Hierusalem, and the remnaunt from the mount
Sion: and this shall the zeale of the Lorde of hoastes bryng to passe.
33 Therfore thus saith the Lorde concernyng the kyng of the Assyrians: He shall
not come into this citie, and shall shoote no arrowe into it, there shall no
shielde hurt it, neither shall they cast ditches about it.
34 The same way he came he shall returne, and not come at this citie, saith the
Lorde.
35 And I wyll kepe and saue this citie saith he for myne owne and for my
seruaunt Dauids sake.
36 Thus the angell of the Lorde went foorth, and slue of the Assyrians hoaste an
hundred fourescore and fiue thousande: and when men arose vp early in the
mornyng, beholde they were slayne, and all lay full of dead bodyes.
37 So Sennacherib the kyng of the Assyrians brake vp & dwelt at Niniue.
38 Afterwarde it chaunced as he prayed in the temple of Nesroch his God, that
Adramalech and Sarazer his owne sonnes slue hym with the sworde, and fled into
the lande of Armenia: and Asarhaddon his sonne raigned in his steede.

Chapter 38

1 About this tyme was Hezekia sicke vnto death, and the prophete Esai the sonne
of Amos came vnto hym, and sayde, Thus commaundeth the Lorde: Set thyne house in
order, for thou must dye, and shalt not escape.
2 Then Hezekia turned his face toward the wall, and prayed vnto the Lorde,
3 And sayde: Remember O Lorde I beseche thee, that I haue walked before thee in
trueth and a stedfast heart, & haue done the thyng that is pleasaunt to thee.
And Hezekia wept sore.
4 Then sayde God vnto Esai,
5 Go and speake vnto Ezekia: The Lord God of Dauid thy father sendeth thee this
worde, I haue hearde thy prayer, and considered thy teares: beholde I wyll put
fifteene yeres mo vnto thy lyfe,
6 And deliuer thee and the citie also from the hande of the kyng of Assyria: for
I wyll defende the citie.
7 And take thee this token of the Lord, that he wyll do it as he hath spoken.
8 Beholde, I wyll returne the shadowe of Ahaz diall that nowe is layde out with
the sunne, and bring it ten degrees backwarde: So the sunne turned ten degrees
backwarde, the which he was descended afore.
9 A thankesgeuyng which Hezekia kyng of Iuda wrote, when he had ben sicke and
was recouered.
10 I thought I shoulde haue gone to the gates of hell when myne age was
shortened, and haue wanted the residue of my yeres.
11 I spake within my selfe, I wyll neuer visite the Lorde the Lorde I say in
this lyfe: I wyll neuer see man among the dwellers of the worlde.
12 Myne age is folden together & taken away from me lyke a sheepheardes cotage,
I haue hewen of my lyfe by my sinnes, lyke as a weauer cutteth of his webbe: He
wyll with pinyng sicknesse make an ende of me, yea he wyll make an ende of me in
one day.
13 I thought I woulde haue lyued vntyll the morowe, but he brused my bones lyke
a lion: and in one day thou wylt make an ende of me.
14 Then chattered I lyke a swallowe, and lyke a crane, and mourned lyke a doue,
I lift vp mine eyes into the heyght: O Lorde sayde my sicknesse kepeth me downe,
ease thou me.
15 What shall I say? The Lorde hath made a promise to me, yea and he hym selfe
hath perfourmed it: I shall therefore so long as I lyue remember this
bitternesse of my lyfe.
16 O Lorde, to all those that shall lyue hereafter, yea to all men shall it be
knowen, that euen in those yeres I haue a ioyfull lyfe, and that it was thou
that causedst me to sleepe agayne, thou hast geuen lyfe to me.
17 Beholde, bitter as gall was my pensiuenesse, so sore longed I for health, and
it was thy pleasure to deliuer my lyfe from the filthy pit: for thou it is O
Lorde that hast cast all my sinnes behynde thy backe.
18 For hell prayseth not thee, death doth not magnifie thee: they that go downe
into the graue prayse not thy trueth:
19 But the lyuyng, yea the lyuyng knowledge thee, as I do this day: the father
telleth his children of thy faythfulnesse.
20 To heale me it is the Lordes worke, and we will sing my songes in the house
of the Lorde all the dayes of our lyfe.
21 And Esai sayde: Take a plaster of figges, and lay it vpon the sore, so shall
it be whole.
22 Then sayd Hezekia: O what a miracle is this, that I shall go vp into the
house of the Lorde.

Chapter 39

1 At the same tyme Merodach Baladan, Baladans sonne kyng of Babylon, sent
letters and presentes to Hezekia: for he vnderstoode that he had ben sicke, and
was recouered agayne.
2 And Hezekia was glad therof, and shewed them the house of his treasures of
siluer and golde, of spices, and rootes, of precious oyles, & all that was in
his cubbordes and treasure houses: there was not one thyng in Hezekias house,
and so throughout all his kyngdome, but he let them see it.
3 Then came Esai the prophete to king Hezekia, and sayde vnto hym: What haue the
men sayde, and from whence came they vnto thee? Hezekia aunswered, They came out
of a farre countrey vnto me, out of Babylon.
4 Esai sayde, What haue they loked vpon in thy house? Hezekia aunswered, All
that is in my house haue they seene, and there is nothyng in my treasure but I
shewed it them.
5 Then sayde Esai vnto Hezekia: Understande the worde of the Lorde of hoastes:
6 Beholde, the tyme wyll come that euery thyng which is in thyne house, and all
that thy progenitours haue layde vp in store vntyll this day, shalbe caryed to
Babylon, and nothing left behynde, thus saith the Lorde.
7 Yea and part of thy sonnes that shall come of thee, & whom thou shalt beget,
shalbe caryed hence, and become gelded chamberlaynes in the kyng of Babylons
court.
8 Then sayde Hezekia to Esai, Good is the worde of God which thou hast tolde me.
He sayd moreouer. For there shalbe peace and faythfulnesse in my tyme.

Chapter 40

1 Comfort my people O ye prophetes comfort my people, saith your God,
2 Comfort Hierusalem at the heart, and tell her, that her trauayle is at an
ende, that her offence is pardoned, that she hath receaued at the Lordes hande
sufficient correction for all her sinnes.
3 A voyce crieth in wildernesse: Prepare the way of the Lorde, make strayght the
path of our God in the desert.
4 All valleys shalbe exalted, and euery mountayne and hyll layde lowe: what so
is croked shalbe made strayght, and the rough shalbe made playne.
5 For the glorie of the Lorde shall appeare, for all fleshe shall at once see
that the mouth of the Lorde hath spoken it.
6 The same voyce spake: Nowe crye. And the prophete aunswered, What shall I
crye? That all fleshe is grasse, and that all the goodlinesse therof is as the
floure of the fielde.
7 The grasse is withered, the floure falleth away, for the breath of the Lord
bloweth vpon them: of a trueth the people are grasse.
8 The grasse withereth, and the floure fadeth away: yet the worde of our God
endureth for euer.
9 Go vp vnto the hye hyll O Sion thou that bryngest good tidinges, lyft vp thy
voyce with power O thou preacher Hierusalem, lyft vp without feare, & say vnto
the cities of Iuda: Beholde your God,
10 Beholde ye Lorde God shal come with power, and shall of him selfe beare rule
with his arme: beholde his rewarde with hym, and his workes before hym.
11 He shall feede his flocke like an heardman, he shall gather the lambes
together with his arme, and cary them in his bosome, and shall kyndly intreate
those that beare young.
12 Who hath measured the waters in his fist? who hath measured heauen with his
spanne, and hath comprehended all the earth of the worlde in three measures? who
hath wayed the mountaynes and hylles in a ballaunce?
13 Who hath directed the spirite of the Lorde? or who gaue hym counsayle, and
shewed hym?
14 Who is of his counsayle, and geueth hym vnderstandyng, and hath taught hym
the path of iudgement? who taught hym cunnyng, and opened to hym the way of
vnderstandyng?
15 Beholde, all people are in comparison of hym as a droppe of a bucket full,
and are counted as the least thyng that the ballaunce wayeth: yea and the Isles
he taketh vp as a very litle thyng.
16 Libanus is not sufficient to minister fire to his offeryng, and all the
beastes therof are not inough for one sacrifice.
17 All people in comparison of hym are reckened as nothyng: yf they be compared
with hym, lesse then nothyng, and as it that is not.
18 To whom then wyll ye lyken God? or what similitude will ye set vp to him?
19 Shall the caruer make hym a carued image? and shall the goldesmith couer hym
with golde, or cast hym into a fourme of siluer plates?
20 Moreouer, shal the image maker that the poore man which is disposed may haue
some thyng to set vp also, seeke out and choose a tree that is not rotten, and
carue thereout an image that moueth not?
21 Knowe ye nothyng? hearde ye neuer of it? hath it not ben preached vnto you
since the beginning? haue ye not ben enfourmed of this by the foundation of the
earth?
22 It is he that sitteth vpon the circle of the world, whose inhabiters are in
comparison of him but as grashoppers: he spreadeth out the heauens as a
couering, he stretcheth them out as a tent to dwell in.
23 He bringeth princes to nothing, and the iudges of the earth as though they
were not.
24 So that of them it may be sayde, they be not planted nor sowne agayne,
neither their stocke rooted agayne in the earth: for assoone as he bloweth vpon
them, they wither and fade away lyke the strawe in a whirle winde.
25 To whom nowe will ye liken me, and whom shall I be lyke, saith the holy one?
26 Lift vp your eyes on high, and consider who hath made those thinges which
come out by so great heapes, and he calleth them al by their names: there is
nothing hid from the greatnesse of his power, strength, and might.
27 Howe may then Iacob thinke, or may Israel say, My wayes are hid from the
Lord, and my God knoweth not of my iudgementes?
28 Knowest thou not, or hast thou not hearde that the euerlasting God, the Lorde
whiche made all the corners of the earth, is neither weerie nor fainte? and that
his wysdome can not be comprehended?
29 It is he that geueth strength vnto the weerie, and power vnto the faint.
30 Children are weerie and faint, and the strongest men fall:
31 But vnto them that haue their trust in the Lorde, shall strength be
increased: Egles winges shall growe vpon them, when they runne they shall not
fall, and when they go they shall not be weerie.

Chapter 41

1 Be styll you Ilandes and hearken vnto me: let the people lay their strength
together, let them come hither, and then shew their cause: we will go to the
lawe together.
2 Who raysed vp the iust man from the east, and called hym to go foorth? who
cast downe the people, and subdued the kynges before him? that he may throw them
al to the ground with his sworde, and scatter them lyke stubble with his bowe.
3 He foloweth vpon them, and goeth safely him selfe, & that in a way where
before his foote had not troden.
4 Who hath made and created these thinges? euen he that called the generations
from the beginning, euen I the Lorde whiche am the first, and with the last.
5 The Isles sawe and did feare, and the endes of the earth were abashed, drewe
nye, and came hither.
6 Euery man helped his neighbour, and sayd to his brother, be strong.
7 The carpenter comforted the goldsmith, and the goldsmith the hammerman,
saying, sowder wyll do very well in it: and they fastened it with nayles, that
it shoulde not be moued.
8 But thou Israel art my seruaunt, thou Iacob whom I haue chose, thou art the
seede of Abraham my beloued.
9 Thou art he whom I led from the endes of the earth: for I called thee euen
from among the glorious men of it, and sayd vnto thee, Thou art my seruaunt, I
haue chosen thee, and not cast thee away.
10 Be not afraide, for I am with thee: Melt not away as waxe, for I am thy God
to strength thee, helpe thee, and kepe thee with the right hande of my
righteousnesse.
11 Beholde, all they that resist thee shall come to confusion and shame, and
thine aduersaries shalbe destroyed & brought to naught.
12 So that who so seeketh after them, shall not finde them, thy destroyers shall
perishe: and so shall they that vndertake to make battayle against thee be as
that is not, & as a thing of naught.
13 For I the Lorde thy God wyll strengthen thy right hande, euen I that say vnto
thee, Feare not, I wyll helpe thee.
14 Be not afraide thou litle worme Iacob, and thou despised Israel: for I wil
helpe thee saith the Lorde, and the holy one of Israel thy redeemer.
15 Beholde, I will make thee a treading cart and a newe flaile, that thou mayest
threshe and grinde the mountaines, and bring the hilles to powder.
16 Thou shalt fanne them, and the winde shall carrie them away, and the whirle
winde shall scatter them: but thou shalt reioyce in the Lorde, and shalt delight
in the holy one of Israel.
17 When the thirstie and poore seeke water and finde none, and when their tongue
is drye of thirst, I geue it them saith the Lorde, I the God of Israel forsake
them not.
18 I bryng foorth fluddes in the hilles, and welles in the playne fieldes: I
turne the wildernesse to riuers, and the drye lande to conduites of water.
19 I plant in the waste grounde trees of Cedar, Boxe, Myrre, and Oliues, and in
the drie I set Firre trees, Elmes, and Hawthornes together.
20 All this do I, that they altogether may see and marke, perceaue with their
heartes and consider that the hande of the Lorde maketh these thinges, and that
the holy one of Israel bringeth them to passe.
21 Stande at your cause saith the Lord, & bryng foorth your strongest grounde,
saith the kyng of Iacob.
22 Let them bring foorth their gods, and let their gods tel vs what shall
chaunce hereafter, yea let them shewe vs the thinges that are past what they be,
let them declare them vnto vs, that we may take them to heart, and knowe them
hereafter.
23 Either shewe vs thinges for to come, and tell vs what shall be done
hereafter, so shall we know that ye are gods: do something either good or bad,
so wyl we both knowledge the same, and tell it out.
24 Beholde ye are gods of naught, and your making is of naught: yea abhomible is
the man that hath chosen you.
25 Neuerthelesse, I haue waked vp one from the north, and he shall come from the
east, he shal call vpon my name, and shall treade vpon princes as vpon clay, and
as the potter treadeth downe the mire.
26 Who declared this from the beginning, and we will knowe hym: or from the olde
times, and we wil confesse and say that he is righteous? but there is none that
sheweth or declareth any thing, there is none also that heareth your wordes.
27 The first is he that shall say to Sion, beholde, beholde, they are present:
and to Hierusalem it selfe wyll I geue an euangelist.
28 But when I consider, there is not a man among them, nor any that can geue
counsayle, nor that when I examine them that can aunswere one worde.
29 Lo wicked are they, and vayne, with the thinges also that they take in hand,
yea their images are but winde and vayne thinges.

Chapter 42

1 Behold this is my seruaunt vpon whom I leane, my elect in who my soule is
pacified: I haue geuen my spirite vpon him, that he may shewe foorth iudgement
among the gentiles.
2 He shall not be an outcryer, nor lift vp his voyce, his voyce shall not be
hearde in the streetes.
3 And a broosed reede shall he not breake, and the smoking flaxe shall he not
quench: but faythfully and truely shall he geue iudgement.
4 He shall not be pensiue nor carefull, that he may restore righteousnesse vnto
the earth: and the gentiles also shall loke for his lawes.
5 For thus saith God the Lorde vnto hym, euen he that made the heauens and
spread them abroade, and set foorth the earth with her increase, whiche geueth
breath vnto the people that is in it, and spirite to them that dwell therein,
6 I the Lorde haue called thee in righteousnesse, and wyll holde thee by the
hande, and wyll also defende thee, and geue thee for a couenaunt of the people,
to be the light of the gentiles.
7 That thou mayest open the eyes of the blinde, let out the prisoners from their
bondes, and them that sit in darknesse out of the dungeon house.
8 Euen I am the Lord, and this is my name: and my glory wyll I geue to none
other, neither mine honour to grauen images.
9 Beholde olde thinges are come to passe, and newe thinges do I declare, and or
euer they come I tell you of them.
10 Sing vnto the Lorde a newe song of thankesgeuing, blowe out his prayse from
the ende of the worlde: they that be vpon the sea, and all that is therein
prayse hym, the Isles and they that dwell in them.
11 Let the wildernesse with the cities lift vp her voyce, the townes also that
they of Cedar dwell in: let them be glad that sit vpon rockes of stone, and let
them crye downe from the high mountaines,
12 Ascribing glory vnto the Lorde, and magnifiyng hym among the gentiles.
13 The Lorde shall come foorth lyke a giaunt, and take a stomacke to him like a
freshe man of warre: he shall roare and crye, and ouercome his enemies.
14 I haue long holden my peace saith the Lorde I haue ben styll and refrained my
selfe, but now I wyll crie like a trauayling woman, and at once wyll I destroy
and deuour.
15 I wyll make waste both mountaine and hill, and drye vp euery greene thing
that groweth theron: I wyll drye vp the fluddes to become Ilandes, and drinke vp
the riuers.
16 I wyll bryng the blinde into a streete that they know not, and leade them
into a foote path that they are ignoraunt in: I shall make darknesse light
before them, and the thing that is crooked to be straight: These things haue I
done vnto them, and not forsaken them.
17 They are fallen backe, yea and let them be ashamed earnestly that hope in
idols, and say to the moulten images, ye are our gods.
18 Heare O ye deafe men, and sharpen your eyes to see O ye blinde.
19 Who is blinde but my seruaunt? or so deafe as my messenger whom I sent vnto
them? for who is so blinde as the perfect man, and so blinde as the Lords
seruaunt?
20 Thou hast seene much, and kepest nothing: the eares are open, and no man
heareth.
21 The Lorde is mercyfull vnto them for his righteousnesse sake, that his word
might be magnified and praysed:
22 But the people them selues is robbed and troden vnder the foote, chayned in
dungeons, and they all I say, are shut into prison houses: they be caryed away
captiue, and no man doth loose them: they be troden vnder foote, and no man doth
labour to bryng them agayne.
23 But who is he among you that pondereth this, that considereth it, and taketh
it for a warning in tyme to come?
24 Who gaue Iacob to be troden vnder foote, and Israel to be spoyled? Did not
the Lorde? Because we haue sinned against hym, and haue had no delight to walke
in his wayes, neither ben obedient vnto his lawe:
25 Therfore he hath powred vpon hym his wrathfull displeasure and strong
battayle, and hath fired hym on euery side, yet wyll he not vnderstand: he
burneth hym vp, yet sinketh it not into his heart.

Chapter 43

1 But nowe the Lorde that made thee O Iacob, and he that fashioned thee O Israel
saith thus: feare not, for I haue redeemed thee, I haue called thee by thy name,
thou art mine owne.
2 If thou goest thorow ye water, I wyl be with thee, the strong fluddes shal not
ouerwhelme thee: and if thou walkest thorowe the fire, it shall not burne thee,
& the flambe shal not kindle vpon thee:
3 For I am the Lord thy God, the holye one of Israel thy sauiour: I gaue Egypt
for thy deliueraunce, the Ethiopians and the Sabees for thee:
4 Because thou wast deare in my sight, and because I set by thee and loued thee:
I wyl geue ouer all men for thee, and deliuer vp all people for thy sake.
5 Feare not, for I am with thee, I will bryng thy seede from the east, and
gather thee together from the west.
6 I wyll say to the north, let go, and to the south kepe not backe: but bring me
my sonnes from farre, and my daughters from the endes of the worlde.
7 namely all those that be called after my name: For them haue I created,
fashioned, and made for mine honour.
8 Bring foorth that people whiche is blinde and yet hath eyes, whiche are deafe
although they haue eares.
9 If all nations come in one and be gathered together, whiche among them shall
declare suche thinges, and tell vs the things that are past? let them bring
their witnesse, so that they be iust: els let them heare, and say, it is trueth.
10 You are my witnesses saith the Lord, and my seruaunt whom I haue chosen:
therefore be certified, and geue me faythfull credence, and consider that I am
he before whom there was neuer any god, neither shalbe any after me.
11 I am, euen I am the only Lord, and beside me there is no sauiour.
12 I gaue warning, I made whole, I taught you when there was no straunge god
among you: and this recorde must ye beare me your selues, saith the Lorde, that
I am God.
13 And euen he am I who was from the beginning, and there is none that can take
any thing out of my hande: I do the worke, and who shalbe able to let it?
14 Thus saith the Lorde the holy one of Israel your redeemer: for your sake I
haue sent to Babylo, & brought it down: al they are fugitiue with the Chaldees,
whose sorowfull crie is in their shippes.
15 I am the Lord your holy one, which haue made Israel, and am your kyng.
16 Thus saith the Lorde, euen he that maketh away in the sea, and a foote path
in the mightie waters.
17 It is he whiche bringeth foorth the charrets and horses, the hoast and power
of warre, that they may fall together and neuer rise, and be extinct, lyke as
towe are they quenched.
18 Remember not thinges of olde, and regarde nothing that is past.
19 Beholde, I shall make a newe thing, and shortly shall it appeare, and shall
you not knowe it? I wyll make a way in the desert, and riuers of water in the
wyldernesse.
20 The wilde beastes shall worship me, the dragons and the young Estriches: for
I shall geue water in the wyldernesse, and streames in the desert, that they may
geue drinke to my people whom I chose.
21 This people haue I made for my self, and they shall shewe foorth my prayse.
22 For thou Iacob wouldest not call vppon me, but thou haddest an vnlust towarde
me O Israel.
23 Thou gauest me not thy beastes for burnt offerings, neither diddest honour me
with sacrifices: I haue not ben chargeable vnto thee in offeringes, neither
greeuous in incense.
24 Thou boughtest me no deare spice with thy money, neither powredst the fat of
thy sacrifices vpon me: but thou hast laden me with thy sinnes, and weeried me
with thy vngodlynesse.
25 Where as I yet, euen I am he onlye that for my owne selues sake do away thine
offences, and forget thy sinnes, so that I wyll neuer thinke vpon them.
26 Put me now in remembraunce: for we wyl reason together, & shew what thou hast
for thee to make thee righteous.
27 Thy first father offended sore, and thy rulers haue sinned against me:
28 Therefore I profaned or slue the princes of the sanctuarie, I dyd curse
Iacob, and gaue Israel into reproofe.

Chapter 44

1 So heare nowe O Iacob my seruaunt, and Israel whom I haue chosen.
2 For thus saith the Lorde that made thee, fassioned thee, and helped thee euen
from thy mothers wombe: Be not afraide O Iacob my seruaunt, thou righteous whom
I haue chosen:
3 For I shall powre water vpon the drye grounde, and riuers vpon the thirstie: I
shall powre my spirite vpon thy seede, and my blessing vpon thy stocke:
4 They shall growe together lyke as the grasse, and as the willowes by the
waters side.
5 One shal say, I am the Lordes: another shall call hym selfe after the name of
Iacob: the thirde shall subscribe with his hande vnto the Lorde, and geue hym
selfe vnder the name of Israel.
6 Thus hath the Lorde spoken, euen the kyng of Israel, and his redeemer the
Lorde of hoastes: I am the first and the last, and besides me there is no God.
7 If any be like me, let hym call foorth the thing past, and openly shewe it,
and lay it playne before me, what hath chaunced since I appointed the people of
the worlde, and what shalbe shortly, or what shal come to passe in tyme long to
come let them shewe these thinges?
8 Be not abashed nor afraide: for haue not I euer tolde you hitherto and warned
you? ye can beare me recorde your selues: is there any God except me, or any
maker, that I should not know hym?
9 All caruers of images are but vayne, and the carued images that they loue can
do no good: they must beare recorde them selues, that seeing they can neither
see nor vnderstande, they shalbe confounded.
10 Who dare then make a god, or fashion an image that is profitable for nothing?
11 Beholde, all the felowship of them must be brought to confusion, & truely all
the workemasters of them are men: they shal all be gathered together, they shall
stand, tremble, and be confounded one with another.
12 The smith maketh an axe, and tempereth it with hotte coales, and fashioneth
it with hammers, and worketh it with all the strength of his armes, yea sometime
he is fainte for very hunger, and so thirstie that he hath no more power.
13 The carpenter or image caruer taketh measure of the timber, and spreadeth
foorth his line, he marketh it with some colour, he playneth it, he ruleth it,
and squareth it, and maketh it after the image of a man, and according to the
beautie of a man, that it may stande in the house.
14 Moreouer, he goeth out to hewe Cedar trees, he bringeth home Elmes and Okes,
and taking a bolde courage, he seeketh out the best timber of the wood: he him
selfe hath planted a Pine tree, whiche the rayne hath swelled,
15 Which wood serueth for men to burne: Of this he taketh and warmeth hym selfe
withall, he maketh a fire of it to bakebread, and maketh also a god therof to
honour it, and a grauen image to kneele before it.
16 One peece he burneth in the fire, with another he rosteth fleshe, that he may
eate roste his belly full: with the thirde he warmeth him selfe, and saith, Aha,
I am well warmed, I haue ben at the fire.
17 And of the residue he maketh hym a god, and grauen image for him selfe: he
kneeleth before it, he worshippeth it, he prayeth vnto it, and saith, Deliuer
me, for thou art my god.
18 Yet men neither consider nor vnderstande, because their eyes be stopped that
they can not see, and their heartes that they can not perceaue.
19 They ponder not in their mindes, for they haue neither knowledge nor
vnderstanding to thinke thus: I haue brent one peece in the fire, I haue baked
bread with the coales thereof, I haue rosted fleshe withall, and eaten it: and I
wyll nowe of the residue make an abhominable idoll, and fall downe before a
rotten peece of wood.
20 Thus doth he but lose his labour, and his heart whiche is deceaued doth turne
hym aside, so that none of them can haue a free conscience to thinke, Do not I
erre?
21 Consider this O Iacob and Israel, for thou art my seruaunt: I made thee that
thou mightest serue me, O Israel forget me not.
22 As for thyne offences I haue driuen them away lyke the cloudes, and thy
sinnes as the mist: Turne thee agayne vnto me, for I haue redeemed thee.
23 Be glad ye heauens, for the Lorde hath dealt graciously with his people, let
all that is here beneath vpon the earth be ioyfull: reioyce ye mountaines and
woods, with all the trees thereof, for the Lorde hath redeemed Iacob, and wyll
shewe his glory vpon Israel.
24 Thus saith the Lorde thy redeemer, euen he that fassioned thee from thy
mothers wombe: I the Lorde do all thinges my selfe alone, I only spreade out the
heauens, and I only haue laide abrode the earth by my owne selfe.
25 I destroy the tokens of witches, and make the soothsayers fooles: As for the
wise I turne them backwarde, and make their cunning foolishnesse.
26 He doth set vp the purpose of his seruaunt, and fulfilleth the counsaile of
his messengers concerning Hierusalem, he saith it shalbe inhabited, and of the
cities of Iuda they shalbe buylded againe, and I will repayre their decayed
places.
27 He saith to the deapth, be drye, and I wyll drye vp water fluddes.
28 He saith of Cyrus, he is my heardman, so that he shall fulfill all thinges
after my wyll: He saith also of Herusalem, it shalbe buylded, and of the temple,
it shalbe fast grounded.

Chapter 45

1 Thus saith the Lorde vnto Cyrus his annointed, who I haue taken by the right
hande, to subdue nations before hym: I wyl loose the loynes of kinges, and I wyl
open the gates before his face, and the gates shall not be shut.
2 I wyll go before thee, and make the crooked straigth: I shall breake the
brasen doores, and burst the iron barres.
3 I shall geue thee hid treasures and the thing whiche is secretly kept: that
thou mayest know that I am the Lord God of Israel, whiche haue called thee by
thy name.
4 For Iacob my seruauntes sake, and for Israel my chosen, I called thee by thy
name, and ordayned thee or euer thou knewest me.
5 I am the Lord, and there is none other, for without me there is no God: I haue
prepared thee or euer thou knewest me.
6 Therfore they shall knowe from the rising of the sunne, vnto the goyng downe
of the same, that all is nothing without me: for I am the Lorde, and there is
els none.
7 It is I that created light and darknesse, I make peace and trouble: yea euen I
the Lorde do all these thinges.
8 Ye heauens from aboue drop downe, and let the cloudes rayne righteousnesse:
the earth open it selfe, let saluation and righteousnesse growe foorth, let it
bryng them foorth together: I the Lorde haue created him.
9 Wo be vnto hym that striueth with his maker, let the potsherde striue with the
potsherdes of the earth: Saieth the clay to the potter, What makest thou? or,
thy worke is not perfectly done.
10 Wo be vnto hym that saieth to his father, what begettest thou? and to his
mother, what bearest thou?
11 Thus saith the Lorde, euen the holy one and maker of Israel: Aske me of
thinges for to come concerning my sonnes, and put me in remembraunce as touching
the workes of my handes.
12 I haue made the earth, and created man vpon it: With my handes haue I spread
foorth heauen, and geuen a commaundement for all the hoast thereof.
13 I shall wake hym vp with righteousnesse, and order all his wayes: He shall
buylde my citie, and let out my prisoners, and that neither for gyftes nor
rewardes saith the Lorde of hoastes.
14 Thus saith the Lorde, The occupiers of Egypt, the marchauntes of the
Ethiopians and Sabees, shall come vnto thee with tribute, they shalbe thyne,
they shall folowe thee, and go with chaines vpon their feete, they shall fall
downe before thee, and make supplication vnto thee: for God without whom there
is none other God, shalbe with thee.
15 O howe profounde art thou O God, thou God and sauiour of Israel?
16 Confounded are they all and put to dishonour, thei are gone hence together
with shame, euen the makers of images.
17 But Israel shalbe saued in the Lord with an euerlasting saluation: ye shall
not come to shame nor confusion world without ende.
18 For thus saith the Lorde, Euen he that created heauen, the God that made the
earth & fassioned it, and set it foorth, he dyd not make it for naught, but to
be inhabited, euen I the Lorde, without whom there is none other.
19 I haue not spoken secretly, neither in darke places of the earth: I sayde not
in vayne to the seede of Iacob, seeke me: I am the Lorde, whiche when I speake,
do declare the thing that is righteous and true.
20 Gather you and come together, drawe nigh hither you that escaped of the
people: they haue no vnderstanding that set vp the stockes of their idols, and
pray vnto a god that can not helpe them.
21 Drawe nye, come hyther, and let them aske counsaile one at another, and shew
foorth what is he that told this before? or who spake of it euer since the
beginning? haue not I the Lorde done it? without whom there is none other God,
the true God and sauiour, and there is els none but I.
22 And therfore turne you vnto me, all ye endes of the earth, that ye may be
saued: for I am God, and there is els none.
23 I sweare by my self, out of my mouth commeth the worde of righteousnesse, and
that may no man turne: but all knees shall bowe vnto me, and all tongues shall
sweare by my name,
24 Saying: veryly in the Lorde is my righteousnesse and strength, to hym shall
men come: but all they that thinke scorne of him shalbe confounded.
25 And the whole seede of Israel shalbe iustified, and glory in the Lorde.

Chapter 46

1 Bel is fallen, Nabo is broken downe, whose images were a burthen for the
beastes and cattell, to ouerlade them, and to make them weerie.
2 They are sunke downe and fallen together, for they may not ease them of their
burthen, therfore must they go into captiuitie.
3 Hearken vnto me O house Iacob, and all ye that remaine yet of the house of
Israel, whom I haue borne from your mothers wombe, and brought you vp from your
byrth.
4 It is euen I whiche shall beare you vnto your last age: I haue made you, I
wyll also norishe you, beare you, and saue you.
5 whom wyll ye make me lyke, or to whom wyll ye make me equall or compare me,
that I shoulde be like him?
6 Take out siluer and gold out of your purses, and way it, and hyre a goldesmith
to make a god of it, that men may kneele downe and worship it:
7 Yet must he be taken on mens shoulders and borne, and set in his place, that
he may stande, and not moue out of his place: And if one crye vnto hym, he
geueth no aunswere, and deliuereth not the man that calleth vpon hym from his
trouble.
8 Consider this well, and be ashamed: go into your owne selues.
9 Remember the thinges that are past since the beginning of the worlde, that I
am God, and that there is els no God, yea and that there is nothing like vnto
me.
10 In the beginning of a thing I shewe the ende therof, & I tell before thinges
that are not yet come to passe: My deuise standeth stedfastly stablished, and I
fulfill all my pleasure.
11 I call a byrde out of the east, and the man by whom my counsayle shalbe
fulfilled out of straunge countreys, as I haue spoken, so wyll I bryng to passe,
assoone as I thinke to deuise a thing, I do it.
12 Heare me O ye that are of an hye stomacke, but farre from righteousnesse:
13 I shall bryng foorth my righteousnesse, it is not farre, and my health shall
not tary long away: I wyll lay health in Sion, and in Israel my glory.

Chapter 47

1 But as for thee O daughter, thou virgin Babylon, sit thou downe in the dust,
sit vpo the ground, there is no throne O thou daughter of Caldea, for thou shalt
no more be called tender and pleasaunt.
2 Bryng foorth the querne and grinde meale, vntrusse thy broydred heere, put of
thy shoes, make bare thy knees, and wade thorowe the water riuers.
3 Thy filthynesse shalbe discouered, and thy priuities shalbe seene: for I wil
auenge me of thee, and wyll shewe no mercy to thee, as I do to other men.
4 Our redeemer is called the Lorde of hoastes, the holy one of Israel.
5 Sit still, holde thy tongue; get thee into some darke corner O daughter
Caldea: for thou shalt no more be called lady of kyngdomes.
6 I was so wroth with my people, that I punished myne inheritaunce, and gaue
them into thy power, neuerthelesse thou shewedst them no mercy, but euen the
very aged of them diddest thou oppresse right sore with the yoke.
7 And thou thoughtest thus: I shalbe lady for euer, and beside all that, thou
hast not regarded these thinges, neither remembred what was the ende of that
citie Hierusalem.
8 Heare nowe therefore thou delicate one that sittest so carelesse, and speakest
thus in thyne heart, I am alone, and without me is there none, I shal neuer be
widowe nor desolate agayne.
9 And yet both these thinges shal come to thee vpon one day, in the twinckeling
of an eye, namely, widowhood and desolation: they mightyly fall vpon thee, for
the multitude of thy witches, and for the great heape of thy coniurers.
10 For thou hast trusted in thy wickednesse, and hast said, No man seeth me:
thine owne wisdome and cunning hath deceaued thee, in that thou hast sayd in
thyne heart, I am alone, and without me there is none.
11 Therefore shall trouble come vpon thee, and thou shalt not knowe from whence
it shall arise: Mischiefe shall fal vpon thee, which thou shalt not be able to
put of, a sodayne vtter destruction shall come vpon thee or euer thou be ware.
12 Nowe go to thy coniurers, and to the multitude of thy witches with whom thou
hast weeryed thy selfe from thy youth, if thei may helpe thee or strength thee.
13 Thou hast hitherto had many counsayles of them: So let the heauen gasers, and
the beholders of starres, and moone prophetes, come on now and deliuer thee, yea
and let them shew when these new thinges shal come vpon thee.
14 Beholde, they shalbe lyke strawe, whiche if it be kindeled with fire, no man
may rid it for the vehemencie of the flambe, and yet it geueth no finders to
warme a man by, nor cleare fire to sit by.
15 Thus are they with whom thou hast weeried thy self, and thus are thy
marchauntes that haue ben with thee from thy youth: euery one hath taken his
owne way, and none of them shall defende thee.

Chapter 48

1 Heare this O thou house of Iacob, ye that are called by the name of Israel, &
are come out of one stocke with Iuda: whiche sweare by the name of the Lorde,
and beare witnesse by the God of Israel, but not with trueth and ryght.
2 For they are named of the holy citie, and are grounded vpon the God of Israel,
whose name is the Lorde of hoastes.
3 The thynges that I haue shewed you euer since the begynnyng, haue I not
brought them to passe immediatly as they came out of my mouth, and declared
them, and they are come?
4 Howbeit I knowe that thou art obstinate, and that thy necke hath an iron
sinowe, and that thy browe is of brasse.
5 Neuerthelesse, I haue euer since the begynnyng shewed thee of thynges for to
come, and declared them vnto thee or euer they came to passe: that thou
shouldest not say, myne idoll hath done it, my carued or molten image hath
shewed it.
6 Thou heardest it before, and beholde it is come to passe: And shall not ye
your selues shewe foorth or confesse the same? But as for me, I tolde thee
before at the begynnyng newe and secrete thynges which thou knewest not of,
7 And some done of olde tyme, wherof thou neuer heardest before they were
brought to passe, that thou canst not say, beholde I knewe of them.
8 Moreouer, there be some wherof thou hast neither heard nor knowen, neither
haue ben opened vnto thyne eares afore tyme: For I knewe that thou wouldest
malitiously offende, therfore haue I called thee a transgressour, euen from thy
mothers wombe.
9 Neuerthelesse, for my names sake I wyll withdrawe my wrath, and for my honours
sake I will patiently forbeare thee, that I do not roote thee out.
10 Beholde I haue purged thee, yet not as siluer, I haue chosen thee in the fire
of affliction.
11 And that only for myne owne sake, yea euen for myne owne sake wyll I do this:
or els what dishonour woulde they do to my name? surely I wyll not geue my
glorie vnto another.
12 Hearken vnto me O Iacob, and Israel whom I haue called: I am euen he that is,
I am the first and the last.
13 My hande hath layde the foundation of the earth, and my ryght hande hath
spanned ouer the heauens: assoone as I call them, they stande together.
14 Gather you altogether and hearken: Which of yonder gods hath declared this?
The Lorde hath a loue vnto him, and he shal perfourme his wyll against Babel,
and declare his power against the Chaldees.
15 I my selfe alone, euen I haue tolde you this, I dyd call him and bryng him
foorth, and he shall make his iourney prosperous.
16 Come to me and heare this: Haue I spoken any thyng darkly since the
begynnyng? From the tyme that this thyng begynneth I am there: Wherefore the
Lorde God and his spirite hath sent me.
17 And thus saith the Lorde God thy redeemer, the holy one of Israel: I am the
Lorde thy God which teache thee profitable thynges, and leade thee the way that
thou shouldest go.
18 O that thou hadst regarded my commaundementes, then had thy wealthynesse ben
as the water streame, and thy ryghteousnesse as the waues flowyng in the sea:
19 Thy seede also had ben lyke as the sande in the sea, and the fruite of thy
body lyke the grauell stones therof: His name shoulde not be rooted out, nor
destroyed before me.
20 Go away from Babylon, flee from the Chaldees, with a mery voyce speake of
this, declare it abrode, and go foorth into the ende of the worlde, say: The
Lorde hath redeemed his seruaunt Iacob.
21 They suffred no thirst, he led them through the wildernesse, and caused the
waters to flowe out vnto them from out of the rocke: he claue the rocke a
sunder, and the water gusshed out.
22 As for the vngodly, they haue no peace, saith the Lorde.

Chapter 49

1 Ye Isles hearken vnto me, and take heede ye people from farre: The Lord hath
called me from my birth, and made mention of my name from my mothers wombe:
2 He hath made my mouth lyke a sharpe sworde, vnder the shadowe of his hande
hath he defended me, and hid me in his quiuer as a good arrowe,
3 And sayde vnto me: Thou art my seruaunt Israel, I wyll be honoured in thee.
4 Then I aunswered: I haue lost my labour, I haue spent my strength in vayne:
Neuerthelesse, I wyll commit my cause and my worke vnto the Lorde my God.
5 And nowe saith the Lorde, euen he that fashioned me from my mothers wombe to
be his seruaunt, that I may bryng Iacob agayne vnto hym, albeit Israel wyll not
be gathered vnto hym agayne, yet in Gods sight shall I be glorious, my God
shalbe my strength.
6 And he sayde: It is but a small thyng that thou art my seruaunt to set vp the
kinredes of Iacob, and to restore the destruction of Israel: For I haue made
thee the lyght of the gentiles, that thou mayest be my health vnto the ende of
the worlde.
7 Moreouer, thus saith the Lorde the redeemer and holy one of Israel, concernyng
the abhorred & dispised among the gentiles, the seruaunt of them that beare
rule, kynges and princes shall see and arise, and worship because of the Lorde
that is faythfull, and because of the holy one of Israel that hath chosen thee.
8 And thus saith the Lorde: In the tyme accepted haue I hearde thee, and in the
day of saluation haue I helped thee: I wyll preserue thee, and make thee to be
the attonement of the people, that thou mayest helpe vp the earth againe, and
possesse againe the desolate heritages.
9 That thou mayest say vnto the prisoners, go foorth, and to them that are in
darknesse, come into the lyght: they shall feede thee in the hye wayes, and get
their pasture in all hye places.
10 They shall neither hunger nor thirst, heate nor sunne shall not hurt them:
for he that fauoureth them shall leade them, and geue them drynke of the well
sprynges.
11 I wyll make wayes vpon all my mountaynes, and my footpathes shalbe exalted.
12 And beholde, these shall come from farre, lo, some from the north and west,
some from the lande of Sinis which is in the south.
13 Reioyce ye heauens, and sing prayses thou earth, talke of ioy ye hylles: for
God hath comforted his people, & wyll haue mercie vpon his that be in trouble.
14 But Sion sayde: God hath forsaken me, and my Lorde hath forgotten me.
15 Will a woman forget her owne infant, and not pitie the sonne of her owne
wombe? And though they do forget, yet wyll I not forget thee.
16 Beholde, I haue written thee vp vpon my handes, thy walles are euer in my
syght.
17 They make haste who buildeth thee vp againe: as for those that ouerthrowe
thee and make thee waste, they shall depart from thee.
18 Lift vp thine eyes and loke about thee, all these gather them together and
come to thee: As truely as I lyue saith the Lorde, thou shalt put them all vpon
thee as an apparell, and girde them to thee as a bride doth her iewels.
19 As for thy lande that lyeth desolate, wasted, and destroyed, it shalbe to
narowe for them that shall dwell in it: and they that woulde deuoure thee, they
shalbe farre away.
20 Then thy children whom the barren shall bring foorth, shall say in thine
eare: This place is to narowe, geue place that I may haue roome.
21 Then shalt thou thinke by thy selfe, who hath begotten me these, seeyng I am
barren and alone, a captiue and an outcast? and who hath norished them vp for
me? I am desolate and alone, but from whence come these?
22 And therfore thus saith the Lorde God: Beholde, I wyll stretch out my hande
vnto the gentiles, and set vp my token to the people, they shall bryng thee thy
sonnes in their lappes, and cary thy daughters vnto thee vpon their shoulders.
23 For kynges shalbe thy nursyng fathers, and queenes shalbe thy nursyng
mothers: They shall fall before thee with their faces flat vpon the earth, &
lick vp the dust of thy feete: that thou mayest knowe howe that I am the Lorde,
and that who so putteth their trust in me shall not be confounded.
24 Shall the spoyle be taken from the mightie? or the lawfull prisoner from the
taker?
25 But thus saith the Lorde: The prisoners shalbe taken from the mightie, & the
spoyle shalbe recouered from the violent: for I wyll maynteyne thy cause agaynst
thine aduersaries, and I wyll saue thy sonnes.
26 And I wyll feede thine enemies with their owne fleshe, & make them drunken
with their owne blood, as with sweete wine: And all fleshe shall knowe O Iacob
that I am the Lorde thy sauiour, thy noble redeemer.

Chapter 50

1 Thus saith the Lorde: Where is the byll of your mothers deuorcement whom I
sent away? or who is the vsurer to whom I solde you? Beholde, for your offences
are ye solde, and because of your transgression is your mother forsaken.
2 For why woulde no man receaue me when I came? and when I called, no man gaue
me aunswere? Is my hande shortened that it myght not helpe? or haue I not power
to deliuer? lo, at a worde I drynke vp the sea, & of water fluddes I make drye
lande: so that for want of water the fishe corrupt and dye for thirste.
3 As for heauen I clothe it with darknesse, and put as it were a sacke vpon it.
4 The Lorde God hath geuen me a well learned tongue, so that I can comfort them
that are troubled, yea & that in due season: he wakeneth mine eare vp betymes in
the mornyng, betymes in the mornyng I say he wyll waken mine eare, that I might
hearke as to the schoolemaisters.
5 The Lorde God hath opened myne eare, and I haue not gaynesayde nor withdrawen
my selfe.
6 But I offred my backe vnto the smiters, and my cheekes to the nippers: I
turned not my face from shame and spittinges.
7 And the Lorde God shall helpe me, therfore shall I not be confounded: I haue
therfore hardened my face lyke a flint stone, for I am sure that I shall not
come to confusion.
8 He is at hande that iustifieth me, who wyll then go with me to lawe? Let vs
stande together, yf there be any that will reason with me? let hym come here
foorth to me.
9 Beholde the Lorde God wyll helpe me, what is he the that can condempne me? lo,
they all shall waxe olde lyke a cloth, the moth shall eate them vp.
10 Therfore who so feareth the Lorde among you, let hym heare the voyce of his
seruaunt: Who so walketh in darknesse and no lyght shyneth vpon hym, let hym put
his trust in the name of the Lorde, and holde hym by his God.
11 But take heede, ye all kindle a fire, and stirre vp the coales: walke on in
the glisteryng of your owne fire, and in the coales that ye haue kindled: This
commeth vnto you from my hande namely that ye shall sleepe in sorowe.

Chapter 51

1 Hearken vnto me ye that holde of ryghteousnesse, and ye that seeke the Lorde:
take heede to ye stone wherout ye are hewen, and to the graue wherout ye are
digged.
2 Consider Abraham your father, and Sara that bare you, how that I called hym
alone, and blessed hym, and encreased hym.
3 Therfore shall the Lorde comfort Sion, and repayre all her decay, makyng her
desert as a paradise, and her wildernesse as the garden of the Lorde: Mirth and
ioy shalbe founde there, thankesgeuyng and the voyce of prayse.
4 Haue respect vnto me then O my people both high & lowe, and lay thine eare
vnto me: for a lawe and an ordinaunce shall go foorth fro me, to lyghten the
gentiles.
5 It is harde by that my health and my ryghteousnesse shall go foorth, and the
people shalbe ordered with mine arme: the ilandes that is the gentiles shall
hope in me, and put their trust in myne arme.
6 Lyft vp your eyes towarde heauen, and loke vpon the earth beneath: for the
heauens shall vanishe away lyke smoke, and the earth shal waxe olde like a
garment, and they that dwell therein shall perishe in lyke maner: But my
saluation shall endure for euer, and my ryghteousnesse shall not ceasse.
7 Hearken vnto me ye that haue knowledge in ryghteousnesse, thou people that
bearest my lawe in thyne heart: feare not the reuilynges of men, be not afrayde
of their blasphemies.
8 For wormes and mothes shall eate them vp lyke cloth and wooll: but my
ryghteousnesse shall endure for euer, and my sauyng health from generation to
generation.
9 Wake vp, wake vp, and be strong O thou arme of the Lorde, wake vp, lyke as in
tyme past, euer, and since the world began.
10 Art not thou the same arme that hast wounded the proude, and hewen the dragon
in peeces? Art not thou euen the same which hast dryed vp the deepe of the sea,
which hast made playne the sea grounde, that the deliuered myght go through?
11 Therfore the redeemed of the Lorde shall turne agayne, & come with ioy vnto
Sion, continuall ioy shalbe on their head, and mirth and gladnesse shalbe with
them, and sorowe and wo shall flee from them.
12 Yea I, euen I am he that in all thynges geueth you consolation: What art thou
then that fearest a mortall man & the childe of man, which goeth away as doth
the floure?
13 And forgettest the Lorde that made thee, that spread out the heauens, and
layde the foundation of the earth: but thou art euer afrayde for the syght of
thyne oppressour, which is redy to do harme: where is the wrath of the
oppressour?
14 The exile maketh haste to be loosed, that he dye not in prison, and that his
bread fayle hym not.
15 I am the Lord thy God that deuide the sea, & his waues shall rage, whose name
is the Lorde of hoastes.
16 I haue put my wordes in thy mouth, and haue defended thee in the shadowe of
my hande, that I may plant the heauens, & lay the foundation of the earth, and
say vnto Sion: thou art my people.
17 Awake, awake, and stande vp O Hierusalem, thou that from the hande of the
Lorde hast drunken out the cup of his wrath, thou that hast supped of and sucked
out the slumbryng cuppe to the bottome.
18 For among all the sonnes whom he hath begotten, there is not one that may
holde it vp, and not one to leade it by the hande of all the sonnes that he hath
norished.
19 Both these thinges are happened vnto thee, but who is sory for it? yea
destruction, wastyng, hunger, and sworde, but who wyll comfort thee?
20 Thy sonnes lye comfortlesse at the head of euery streete like a take venison,
and are full of the terrible wrath of the Lorde, and punishment of thy God.
21 And therfore thou miserable and drunken (howbeit not with wine) heare this:
22 Thus saith the Lorde, thy Lorde and God, the defendour of his people:
Beholde, I wyll take the slumbryng cup out of his hande, euen the cup with the
dregges of my wrath, that from hencefoorth thou shalt neuer drinke it more:
23 But I wil put it into their hande that trouble thee, which haue spoken to thy
soule, Stoupe downe, that we may go ouer thee, make thy body euen with the
grounde, and as the streete to go vpon.

Chapter 52

1 Vp Sion, vp, take thy strength vnto thee, put on thyne honest rayment O
Hierusalem, thou holy citie: for from this tyme foorth there shall no
vncircumcised nor vncleane person come in thee.
2 Shake thee from the dust, arise and stande vp O Hierusalem: Plucke out thy
necke from the bonde, O thou captiue daughter Sion.
3 For thus saith the Lorde: ye are solde for naught, therfore shal ye be
redeemed also without any money.
4 For thus saith the Lorde God: My people went downe afore tyme into Egypt,
there to be straungers, and the kyng of the Assyrians oppressed them without any
cause.
5 And nowe, what profite is it to me saith the Lorde? that my people is freely
caryed away, & brought into heauinesse by their rulers, and my name euer styll
blasphemed saith the Lorde.
6 But that my people may knowe my name, I my selfe wyll speake in that day,
Beholde here am I.
7 O howe beautifull are the feete of the embassadour that bryngeth the message
from the mountayne and proclaymeth peace? that bryngeth the good tidinges, and
preacheth health, and saith vnto Sion, Thy God is the kyng.
8 Thy watchmen shall lyft vp their voyce, with loude voyce they shall reioyce
together: for they shall see plainly when the Lorde shall conuert Sion.
9 Be glad O thou desolate Hierusalem, and reioyce together: for the Lord hath
comforted his people, he hath deliuered Hierusalem.
10 The Lorde hath made bare his holy arme, and shewed it foorth in the syght of
all the gentiles, and all the endes of the earth hath seene the sauyng health of
our God.
11 Away, away, get you out from hence, and touche no vncleane thyng: Go out from
among such, and be cleane that beare the vessell of the Lorde.
12 For ye shall not escape by runnyng, nor by fleeyng away: but the Lorde shall
go before you, and the God of Israel shall gather you together.
13 Beholde my seruaunt shal deale prosperously, therfore shal he be magnified,
exalted, and greatly honoured.
14 Lyke as the multitude shall wonder vpon hym, because his face shalbe so
defourmed and not as mans face, his beautie like no man:
15 Euen so shall the multitude of the gentiles speake of him, and kynges shall
shut their mouthes before hym: for they haue seene that which was not tolde to
them, and haue vnderstande that wherof they had not hearde.

Chapter 53

1 But who hath geuen credence vnto our preaching? or to whom is the arme of the
Lorde knowen?
2 For he dyd growe before the Lorde like as a braunche, and as a roote in a drye
grounde, he hath neither beautie nor fauour: when we loke vpon hym, there shalbe
no fairenesse, we shall haue no lust vnto hym.
3 He is dispised and abhorred of men, he is such a man as hath good experience
of sorowes and infirmities: We haue reckened hym so vile, that we hyd our faces
from hym.
4 Howbeit, he only hath taken on him our infirmitie, and borne our paynes: Yet
we dyd iudge hym as though he were plagued, and cast downe of God.
5 Wheras he notwithstandyng was wounded for our offences, and smitten for our
wickednesse: for the payne of our punishment was layde vpon hym, and with his
stripes are we healed.
6 As for vs we are all gone astray lyke sheepe, euery one hath turned his owne
way: but the Lord hath throwen vpon hym all our sinnes.
7 He suffered violence, and was euyll intreated, and dyd not open his mouth: He
shalbe led as a sheepe to be slayne, yet shall he be as styll as a lambe before
the shearer, and not open his mouth.
8 From the prison and iudgement was he taken, and his generation who can
declare? for he was cut of from the grounde of the lyuyng, which punishment dyd
go vpon hym for the transgression of my people.
9 His graue was geuen hym with the condempned, and with the riche man at his
death, wheras he did neuer violence nor vnright, neither hath there ben any
disceiptfulnesse in his mouth.
10 Yet hath it pleased the Lord to smite hym with infirmitie, that when he had
made his soule an offeryng for sinne, he might see long lastyng seede: and this
deuice of the Lorde shall prosper in his hande.
11 Of the trauayle and labour of his soule, shall he see the fruite & be
satisfied: My righteous seruaunt shall with his knowledge iustifie the
multitude, for he shall beare their sinnes.
12 Therfore wyll I geue hym among the great ones his part, and he shall deuide
the spoyle with the mightie, because he geueth ouer his soule to death, and is
reckened among the transgressours: which neuerthelesse hath taken away the
sinnes of the multitude, and made intercession for the misdoers.

Chapter 54

1 Be glad nowe thou baren that bearest not, reioyce, syng, and be mery thou that
art not with childe: for the desolate hath mo childre then the maryed wyfe saith
the Lorde.
2 Make thy tent wyder, and spreade out the hanginges of thine habitation: spare
not, lay foorth thy wardes, and make fast thy stakes:
3 For thou shalt be multiplied on the ryght syde and on the left, and thy seede
shall haue the gentiles in possession, and dwell in the desolate cities.
4 Feare not, for thou shalt not be confounded: be not ashamed, for thou shalt
not come to confusion: Yea thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt
not remember the dishonour of thy widowhead.
5 For he that made thee shalbe thy Lorde and husbande (whose name is the Lord of
hoastes) and thy redeemer shalbe euen the holy one of Israel, the Lorde of the
whole worlde.
6 For the Lorde hath called thee beyng as a desolate sorowfull woman, and as a
young wyfe that was forsaken saith thy God.
7 A litle while haue I forsaken thee: but with great mercifulnesse shall I take
thee vp vnto me.
8 When I was angry I hyd my face from thee for a litle season: but through
euerlastyng goodnesse haue I pardoned thee, saith the Lorde thy redeemer.
9 And this is vnto me as the water of Noe: for like as I haue sworne that I wyll
not bryng the water of Noe any more vpon the worlde: so haue I sworne that I
wyll neuer be angry with thee, nor reproue thee.
10 The mountaynes shall remoue, and the hylles shall fall downe: but my louyng
kyndnesse shall not moue, and the bonde of my peace shall not fall downe from
thee, saith the Lorde thy mercifull louer.
11 Beholde, thou poore, vexed, & dispised, I wyll make thy walles of precious
stones, & thy foundation of Saphires,
12 Thy windowes of Christal, thy gates of fine cleare stone, and all thy borders
of pleasaunt stones.
13 Thy children shalbe all taught of God, and I wyll geue thee plenteousnesse of
peace.
14 In ryghteousnesse shalt thou be grounded, & be farre from oppression: for the
which thou needest not be afrayde, neither for hinderaunce, for it shall not
come nye thee.
15 Lo, whoso gathereth together agaynst thee, doth it without me, and who so
within thee doth ioyne together against thee, shall surely fall.
16 Beholde, I make the smith that bloweth the coales in the fire, & he maketh a
weapon after his handy worke: I make also the waster to destroy.
17 But all the weapons that are made against thee shall not prosper: and as for
all tongues that shal resist thee in iudgement, thou shalt ouercome them, and
condempne them: This is the heritage of the Lordes seruauntes, and their
righteousnesse commeth of me, saith the Lorde.

Chapter 55

1 Come to the waters all ye that be thirstie, and ye that haue no money, come,
bye, that ye may haue to eate: Come, bye wine and mylke without any money or
money worth.
2 Wherfore do ye lay out any money for the thyng that feedeth not, and spende
your labour about the thyng that satisfieth you not? But hearken rather vnto me,
and ye shal eate of the best, and your soule shall haue her pleasure in
plenteousnesse.
3 Encline your eares and come vnto me, take heede I say and your soule shall
lyue: For I wyll make an euerlastyng couenaunt with you, euen the sure mercies
of Dauid.
4 Beholde, I gaue hym for a witnesse among the folke, for a prince & a teacher
vnto the people.
5 Lo, thou shalt call an vnknowen people: and a people that had no knowledge of
thee shall runne vnto thee, because of the Lorde thy God and the holy one of
Israel which glorifieth thee.
6 Seke the Lorde whyle he may be founde, and call vpon hym whyle he is nye.
7 Let the vngodly man forsake his owne wayes, and the vnrighteous his owne
imaginations, and turne agayne vnto the Lorde, so shall he be mercifull vnto
hym: and to our God, for he is very redy to forgeue.
8 For thus saith ye Lord: My thoughtes are not your thoughtes, & your wayes are
not my wayes.
9 But as farre as the heauens are hyer then the earth: so farre do my wayes
exceede yours, & my thoughtes yours.
10 And lyke as the rayne and snowe commeth downe from heauen, and returneth not
thyther agayne, but watereth the earth, maketh it fruitfull and greene, that it
may geue corne vnto the sower, and bread to hym that eateth:
11 So the worde also that commeth out of my mouth shall not turne agayne voyde
vnto me, but shall accomplishe my wyll, and prosper in the thing wherto I sende
it.
12 And so shall ye go foorth with ioy, and be led with peace: The mountaynes and
hylles shall syng with you for ioy, and all the trees of the fielde shal clappe
their handes.
13 For thornes, there shall growe Firre trees, and the Myrre tree in the steede
of bryers: And this shalbe done to the prayse of the Lorde, and for an
euerlastyng token that shall not be taken away.

Chapter 56

1 Thus saith the Lorde, Kepe equitie, and do right: for my sauyng health shal
come shortlye, and my righteousnesse shalbe opened.
2 Blessed is the man that doth this, and the mans childe which keepeth the same:
He that taketh heede that he vnhalowe not the Sabbath that is he that keepeth
him selfe that he do no euill.
3 Then shall not the straunger whiche cleaueth to the Lorde, say, Alas the Lorde
hath shut me cleane out from his people: Neither shall the gelded man say, Lo I
am a drye tree.
4 For thus saith the Lorde vnto the gelded that kepeth my Sabbath, namelye that
holdeth greatly of the thyng that pleaseth me, and kepeth my couenaunt:
5 Unto them wyll I geue in my householde and within my walles, a better heritage
and name then yf they had ben called sonnes and daughters: I wyll geue them an
euerlastyng name that shall not perishe.
6 Agayne, the straungers that sticke to the Lorde to serue hym, and to loue his
name, and to be his seruauntes, and all they which kepe them selues that they
vnhalowe not the Sabbath, namely that they fulfyll my couenaunt:
7 Them will I bring to my holy mountayne, & make them ioyfull in my house of
prayer: their burnt offerynges and sacrifices shalbe accepted vpon myne aulter:
for my house shalbe called an house of prayer for all people.
8 Thus saith the Lorde God which gathereth together the scattered of Israel: I
wyll bryng yet an other congregation to hym.
9 Come all ye beastes of the fielde, that ye may deuoure all the beastes of the
wood.
10 For his watchmen are all blynde, they haue altogether no vnderstanding, they
are all dumbe dogges not beyng able to barke, they are sleepy, sluggishe are
they and lye snortyng.
11 They are shamelesse dogges that be neuer satisfied: The sheepheardes also in
like maner haue no vnderstandyng, but euery man turneth his owne way, euery one
after his owne couetousnesse with all his power.
12 Come say they I wyll fetche wine, so shall we fyll our selues, that we may be
drunken: and do to morowe lyke as to day, yea and much more.

Chapter 57

1 The ryghteous perisheth, and no man regardeth it in his heart: good godly
people are taken away, & no man considereth it, namely, that the righteous is
conueyed away from the wicked.
2 He commeth into peace, and godly men rest in their chaumbers, and before the
godly man goeth peace.
3 Come hyther therfore ye charmers children, ye sonnes of the adulterer and the
whore.
4 Wherin take ye your pleasure? vpon whom gape ye with your mouth, and bleare
out your tongue? Are ye not children of transgression, and a seede of
dissimulation?
5 Ye make your fire vnder the okes, and vnder all greene trees, and ye offer
children in the valleys and dennes of stone.
6 Thy part shalbe with the stony rockes by the riuer, yea euen these shalbe thy
part: For there thou hast powred meate & drynke offeryng vnto them: Shoulde I
delyght in that?
7 Thou hast made thy bed vpon hye mountaynes, thou wentest vp thyther, and there
thou hast slayne sacrifices.
8 Behynde the doores and postes hast thou set vp thy remembraunce, when thou
hadst discouered thy selfe to another then me, when thou wentest vp and made thy
bed wider, and with those idols hast thou made a couenaunt, and louedst their
couches where thou sawest them.
9 Thou wentest straight to kinges with oyle and diuers oyntmentes that is thou
hast sent thy messengers farre of, and yet art thou fallen into the pit.
10 Thou art weerie for the multitude of thyne owne wayes, yet saydest thou
neuer, there is no hope: Thou hast had the life that thy handes wrought, and
therefore thou art carelesse.
11 For whom wylt thou be abashed or feare, seing thou hast broken thy promise,
and remembrest not me, neither hast me in thyne heart? Thinkest thou that I also
wyll holde my peace as aforetime, that thou fearest me not?
12 Yea veryly I wyll declare thy goodnesse and thy workes, but they shall not
profite thee.
13 When thou cryest, let thy chosen heape deliuer thee: but the winde shall
blowe them foorth, and vanitie shal take them all away: Neuerthelesse they that
put their trust in me, shall inherite the land, and haue my holy hill in
possession.
14 And therefore thus he saith: make playne, make playne, and clense the
streete, take vp the stumbling blockes out of the way of my people.
15 For thus saith the hye and excellent, euen he that dwelleth in
euerlastingnesse, whose name is the holy one: I dwell hye aboue and in the
sanctuarie, and with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirite do I
dwell, that I may heale a troubled minde, and a contrite heart.
16 For I chyde not euer, and am not wroth without ende: but the blasting goeth
from me, and is included in the body, and I made the breath.
17 I am wroth with hym for his couetousnesse, I smite hym, I hide me and am
angrie, and he turneth himselfe, and foloweth thee by the way of his owne heart.
18 I haue seene his wayes, and I heale hym, I leade him, and restore to hym
comfort, and to those that were sorie for hym.
19 I make the fruites of thankesgeuing, that he may say, peace, peace, vnto the
that are farre of, and to them that are nye saith the Lorde, I make hym whole.
20 But the wicked are lyke the raging sea that can not rest, whose water fometh
with the mire and grauell.
21 Euen so the wicked haue no peace, saith God.

Chapter 58

1 Crye nowe as loude as thou canst, leaue not of, lift vp thy voyce like a
trumpet, & shew my people their offences, and the house of Iacob their sinnes.
2 For they seeke me dayly, and wyll knowe my wayes, euen as it were a people
that dyd right, and had not forsaken the statutes of their God: they aske of me
concerning right iudgement, and wyll be nye vnto God.
3 Wherefore fast we say they and thou seest it not? we put our liues to
straitnesse, and thou regardest it not?
4 Beholde, when ye fast, your lust remayneth still, for ye do no lesse violence
to your detters: lo, ye fast to strife and debate, and to smite with your fist
without mercy: Nowe ye shall not fast thus, that your voyce might be hearde
aboue.
5 Thinke ye this fast pleaseth me, that a man shoulde chasten hym selfe for a
day? and to hang downe his head like a bulrushe, and to lye vpon the earth in an
heerie cloth? Should that be called fasting, or a day that pleaseth the Lord?
6 Doth not this fasting rather please me, That thou lose the wicked bands, that
thou take of the ouer heauie burthens, that thou let the oppressed go free, and
breake all maner of yoke?
7 To deale thy bread to the hungrie, and to bring the poore wandering home into
thy house? when thou seest the naked that thou couer hym, and hide not thy selfe
from thy neighbour, and despise not thyne owne fleshe?
8 Then shall thy light breake foorth as the morning, and thy health florishe
right shortly: righteousnesse shall go before thee, and the glory of the Lorde
shall embrace thee.
9 Then if thou callest, the Lorde shall aunswere thee, if thou cryest, he shall
say, here I am: yea if thou layest away from thee thy burthens, and holdest thy
fingers, and ceassest from vngracious talking:
10 If thou hast compassion vpon the hungrie, and refreshest the troubled soule:
then shall thy light spring out in the darknesse, and thy darknesse shalbe as
the noone day.
11 The Lorde shall euer be thy guyde, and satisfie the desire of thyne heart in
the tyme of drought, and fill thy bones with mary: Thou shalt be like a freshe
watred garden, and like the fountaine of water that neuer leaueth running.
12 Then the places that haue euer ben waste, shalbe builded of thee, there shalt
thou lay a foundation for many kinredes: Thou shalt be called the maker vp of
the breache, and the buylder agayne of the way to dwell in.
13 Yea if thou turne thy feete from the sabbath, so that thou do not the thing
whiche pleaseth thy selfe in my holy day, and thou call the pleasaunt, holy, and
glorious sabbath of the Lorde, and that thou geue hym the honour, so that thou
do not after thyne owne imagination, neither seeke thyne owne wyll, nor speake
thyne owne wordes:
14 Then shalt thou haue thy pleasure in the Lorde, and I wyll cary thee hye
aboue the earth, and feede thee with the heritage of Iacob thy father: for the
Lordes owne mouth hath so promised.

Chapter 59

1 Beholde, the Lordes hande is not so shortened that it can not helpe, neither
is his eare so stopped that it may not heare:
2 But your misdeedes haue seperated you from your God, and your sinnes hyde his
face from you, that he heareth you not.
3 For your handes are defiled with blood, and your fingers with
vnrighteousnesse: your lippes speake leasinges, and your tongue setteth out
wickednesse.
4 No man regardeth righteousnesse, and no man iudgeth truely: euery man hopeth
in vayne things, and imagineth deceipt, conceaueth weerinesse, and bringeth
foorth euill.
5 They breede cockatrice egges, and weaue the spiders webbe, who so eateth of
their egges, dyeth: but if one treade vpon them, there commeth vp a serpent.
6 Their webbe maketh no cloth, and they may not couer them with their labours:
their deedes are the deedes of wickednesse, and the worke of robberie is in
their handes.
7 Their feete runne to euyll, and they make haste to shed innocent blood: their
counsels are wicked counsels, harme and destruction are in their wayes.
8 But the way of peace they know not, in their goinges is no equitie: their
wayes are so crooked, that whosoeuer goeth therein knoweth of no peace.
9 And this is the cause that equitie is so farre from vs, and that
righteousnesse commeth not nie vs: We loke for light, lo it is darknesse: for
the morning shine, see, we walke in the darke.
10 We grope lyke the blinde vpon the wall, we grope euen as one that hath none
eyes, we stumble at the noone day as though it were towarde night, in the
falling places, lyke men that are halfe dead.
11 We roare all like beares, and mourne still like doues: we looke for equitie,
but there is none: for health, but it is farre from vs.
12 For our offences are many before thee, and our sinnes testifie against vs:
yea we must confesse that we offende, and knowledge that we do amisse,
13 namely transgresse and dissemble against the Lorde, and fall away from our
God, vsing presumpteous and trayterous imaginations, and casting false matters
in our heartes.
14 And therefore is equitie gone aside, and righteousnesse standeth farre of,
trueth is fallen downe in the streete, and the thing that is playne and open,
may not be shewed.
15 Yea the trueth is taken away, and he that refraineth hym selfe from euyll,
must be spoyled: When the Lorde sawe this, it displeased hym sore that there was
no equitie.
16 He sawe also that there was no man righteous, and he wondred that there was
no man to helpe hym: wherefore he helde hym by his owne power, and he sustayned
hym by his owne righteousnesse.
17 He put righteousnesse vpon hym for a brestplate, he set the helmet of health
vpon his head: He put on wrath in the steade of clothing, and toke ielousie
about him for a cloke.
18 Euen as when a man goeth foorth wrathfully to recompence his enemies, and to
be auenged of his aduersaries, he wyll recompence and rewarde the Ilandes.
19 They shall feare the name of the Lorde from the rising of the sunne, and his
maiestie vnto the going downe of the same, for he shall come as a violent water
streame which the winde of the Lorde hath moued.
20 But vnto Sion there shall come a redeemer, and vnto them in Iacob that turne
from wickednesse, saith the Lord.
21 I wyll make this couenaunt with them (saith the Lord:) My spirite that is
vpon thee, and the wordes whiche I haue put in thy mouth, shall neuer go out of
thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy childers chyldren, from this time foorth
for euermore, worlde without ende, saith the Lorde.

Chapter 60

1 Get thee vp betymes, and be bright O Hierusalem for thy light commeth, and the
glorie of the Lord is risen vp vpon thee.
2 For lo, whyle the darknesse & cloude couereth the earth and the people, the
Lorde shall shewe thee light, and his glory shalbe seene in thee.
3 The gentiles shall come to thy light, & kinges to the brightnesse that
springeth foorth vpon thee.
4 Lift vp thyne eyes, and loke rounde about thee: all these gather them selues
and come to thee, thy sonnes shall come vnto thee from farre, and thy daughters
shall gather them selues to thee on euery side.
5 Then thou shalt see this and be glorious, thou shalt maruayle exceedingly, and
thyne heart shalbe opened: when the aboundaunce of the sea shalbe conuerted vnto
thee that is when the riches of the gentiles shall come vnto thee.
6 The multitude of camels shall couer thee, the dromedaries of Madian and Epha:
all they of Saba shall come, bringing gold and incense, and shewing the prayse
of the Lorde.
7 All the cattell of Cedar shalbe gathered vnto thee, the rammes of Nabaioth
shall serue thee to be offred acceptablie vpon mine aulter, and the house of my
glory wyll I garnishe.
8 But what are these that flee here like the cloudes, and as the doues fleing to
their windowes?
9 The Isles also shall wayte for me, and specially the shippes of Tharsis that
they may bryng thy sonnes from farre, and their siluer and their golde with
them, vnto the name of the Lorde thy God, vnto the holy one of Israel that hath
glorified thee.
10 Straungers shall buylde vp thy walles, and their kynges shall do thee
seruice: for whe I was angrie, I smote thee, and of my mercy I pardoned thee.
11 Thy gates shall stande open still both day and night, and neuer be shut, that
the hoast of the gentiles may come, and that their kynges may be brought vnto
thee.
12 For euery people and kingdome that serueth not thee, shall perishe, and be
destroyed with vtter destruction.
13 The glory of Libanus shall come vnto thee, the Firre trees, Boxes, and Cedars
together, to garnishe the place of my sanctuarie: for I wyll glorifie the place
of my feete.
14 Moreouer, those shall come kneeling vnto thee that haue vexed thee, and all
they that despised thee shall fall downe at thy foote: Thou shalt be called the
citie of the Lorde, Sion the citie of the holy one of Israel.
15 Because thou hast ben forsaken and hated, so that no man went thorowe thee: I
wyl make thee glorious for euer and euer, and ioyfull throughout all
posterities.
16 Thou shalt sucke the milke of the gentiles, and kinges breastes shall feede
thee: and thou shalt knowe that I the Lorde am thy sauiour and redeemer, the
mightie one of Iacob.
17 For brasse, wyll I geue thee golde, and for iron, siluer: for wood, brasse,
and for stones iron: I wyll turne thyne oppression into peace, and thyne
exactions into righteousnesse.
18 Uiolence and robberie shall neuer be hearde of in thy lande, neither harme
and destruction within thy borders: thy walles shalbe called health, and thy
gates the prayse of God.
19 The sunne shall neuer be thy day light, and the light of the moone shall
neuer shine vnto thee: but the Lorde him selfe shalbe thyne euerlasting light,
and thy God shalbe thy glory.
20 Thy sunne shall neuer go downe, and thy moone shall not be hid: for the Lorde
hym selfe shalbe thyne euerlasting light, and thy sorowfull dayes shalbe ended.
21 Thy people shalbe all righteous and possesse the lande euer, the floure of my
planting, the worke of my hands wherof I wyll reioyce.
22 The youngest and least shall growe into a thousande, and the simplest into a
strong people: I the Lorde shall shortlye bryng this thing to passe in his tyme.

Chapter 61

1 The spirite of the Lord is vpon me: for the Lord hath annoynted me, and sent
me to preache good tidinges vnto the poore, that I might binde vp the wounded
heartes, that I might preache deliueraunce to the captiue, and open the prison
to the that are bounde:
2 That I might declare the acceptable yere of the Lorde, and the day of the
vengeaunce of our God: that I might comfort all them that are in heauinesse:
3 That I might geue vnto them that mourne in Sion, that I might geue I say
beautie in steede of asshes, ioyfull oyntment for sighing, pleasaunt rayment for
an heauie minde, that they might be called trees of righteousnesse, a planting
of the Lorde for hym to reioyce in.
4 They shall buylde the long rough wildernesse, and set vp the olde desert: they
shall repayre the waste places, and suche as haue ben voyde throughout many
generations.
5 Straungers shall stande and feede your cattell, and the altauntes shalbe your
plowmen and dressers of your vines.
6 But ye shalbe named the priestes of the Lorde, and men shall call you the
seruauntes of our God: ye shall enioy the goodes of the gentiles, and triumph in
their substaunce.
7 For your great reproofe you shal haue double ioy, and for shame shall they
haue ioy of their portion: for they shall haue double possession in their lande,
and euerlasting ioy shalbe with them.
8 For I the Lorde whiche loue right and hate robberie (though it were offered
me) shall make their workes full of faythfulnesse, and make an euerlasting
couenaunt with them.
9 Their seede also and their generation shalbe knowen among the gentiles, and
among the people: all they that see them, shall knowe that they are the hye
blessed seede of the Lorde.
10 And therefore I am ioyfull in the Lorde, and my soule reioyceth in God: For
he hath put vpon me the garment of saluation, and couered me with the mantle of
righteousnesse: He shal decke me lyke a bridegrome, and as a bride that hath her
apparell vpon her.
11 For like as the ground bringeth foorth her fruite, and as the garden shooteth
foorth seede: so shall the Lorde God cause righteousnesse and prayse to
floorishe foorth before all the heathen.

Chapter 62

1 For Sions sake wyll I not holde my tongue, and for Hierusalems sake I wyll not
ceasse, vntill their righteousnesse breake foorth as the shining light, and
their saluation as a burning lampe.
2 Then shall the gentiles see thy righteousnesse, and all kynges thy glory: Thou
shalt be named with a newe name, whiche the mouth of the Lorde shall shewe.
3 Thou shalt be a crowne in the hande of the Lorde, and a glorious garlande in
the hande of thy God.
4 From this tyme foorth thou shalt neuer be called the forsaken, and thy lande
shall no more be called the wildernesse: but thou shalt be called, My pleasure
is in her, and thy lande shalbe called, The maried woman: for the Lorde loueth
thee, and thy land shalbe ioyned in mariage.
5 And lyke as a young man taketh a virgin to mariage, so shal thy sonnes be
maried vnto thee: and as a bridegrome is glad of his bride, so shall thy God
reioyce ouer thee.
6 I haue set watchmen vpon thy walles O Hierusalem, which shall neither ceasse
day nor night to preache the Lorde: and ye also that remember the Lorde, ye
shall not kepe him close,
7 Nor leaue to speake of him, vntill Hierusalem be set vp, and made the prayse
of the worlde.
8 The Lorde hath sworne by his right hand and by his strong arme, that from
hencefoorth he wyll not geue thy corne to be meate for thyne enemies, nor thy
vine wherein thou hast laboured, to be drinke for the straungers.
9 But they that haue gathered in the corne, shall eate it, and geue thankes to
the Lorde: and they that haue borne in the vine, shall drinke it in the court of
my sanctuarie.
10 Go you, go you thorowe the gates, make cleane the way for the people, make
playne, make playne the foote path, and take away the stones out of it, and set
out a token for the people.
11 Beholde, the Lorde proclaymeth vnto the endes of the worlde, tell the
daughter Sion, See thy sauiour commeth, beholde he bringeth his recompence with
hym, and his worke go before hym.
12 For they whom the Lorde deliuereth, shalbe called the holy people: and as for
thee, thou shalt be named the greatlye occupied, and not the forsaken citie.

Chapter 63

1 What is he this that commeth fro Edom, with red coloured clothes from Bosra?
He is honourablye arrayed, and commeth in mightyly with his power: I am he that
teacheth righteousnesse, and am of power to helpe.
2 Wherefore then is thy clothing red, and thy rayment like his that treadeth in
the wine presse?
3 I haue troden the presse my selfe alone, and of all people there is not one
with me: Thus wyll I treade them downe in my wrath, and set my feete vpon them
in myne indignation, and their blood shal be sprong vpon my clothes, and so wyll
I stayne all my rayment.
4 For the day of vengeaunce is assigned in my heart, and the yere when my people
shalbe deliuered is come.
5 I loked about me, and there was no man to shewe me any helpe, I marueyled that
no man helde me vp: Then I helde me by myne owne arme, and my feruentnesse
sustayned me.
6 And thus wyll I treade downe the people in my wrath, and bathe them in my
displeasure, and vpon the earth will I lay their strength.
7 I wyll declare the goodnesse of the Lorde, yea and the prayse of the Lorde for
all that he hath geuen vs, for the great good that he hath done for Israel,
whiche he hath geuen them of his owne fauour, and according to the multitude of
his louing kindnesses.
8 For he sayde, These no doubt are my people, and no shrinking chyldren: and so
was he their sauiour.
9 In their troubles, he was also troubled with them, and the angell that went
foorth from his presence deliuered them: of very loue and kindnesse that he had
vnto them, he redeemed them, he hath borne them and caried them vp euer since
the worlde began.
10 But after they prouoked hym to wrath and vexed his holy spirite, he was their
enemie, and fought against them hym selfe.
11 Yet remembred Israel the olde time, of Moyses and his people, saying: where
is he that brought them from the water of the sea, with them that feede his
sheepe? Where is he that hath geuen his holy spirite among them?
12 He led them by the right hande of Moyses with his glorious arme, deuiding the
water before them, wherby he gat him selfe an euerlasting name.
13 He led them in the deepe as an horse is led in the playne, that they shoulde
not stumble.
14 As a tame beast goeth in the fielde, and the spirite of God geueth hym rest:
thus (O God) hast thou led thy people, to make thy selfe a glorious name
withall.
15 Loke downe then from heauen, and beholde from the dwelling place of thy
sanctuarie and thy glorie: Howe is it that thy gelousie, thy strength, the
multitude of thy mercies, and thy louing kindnesse wyll not be intreated of vs?
16 Yet art thou our father: for Abraham knoweth vs not, neither is Israel
acquainted with vs: but thou Lorde art our father and redeemer, and thy name is
euerlasting.
17 O Lorde, wherefore hast thou led vs out of the way? wherefore hast thou
hardened our heartes that we feare thee not? Be at one with vs agayne for thy
seruauntes sake, and for the generation of thyne heritage.
18 Thy holy people haue had but a litle whyle thy sanctuarie in possession, for
our enemies haue troden downe thy holy place.
19 And we were thyne from the beginning, when thou wast not their Lorde, for
they haue not called vpon thy name.

Chapter 64

1 O that thou wouldest cleaue the heauens in sunder & come downe, that the
mountaines might melt away at thy presence:
2 Like as at an hotte fire, and that the malitious might boyle away as the water
doth vpon the fire: whereby thy name might be knowen among thyne enemies, and
that the gentiles might tremble before thee.
3 When thou wroughtest wonderous straunge workes, we looked not for them: thou
camest downe, and the hilles melted at thy presence.
4 For since the beginning of the worlde it hath not ben hearde or perceaued,
neither hath any eye seene another God beside thee, whiche doest so muche for
them that put their trust in thee.
5 Thou helpest hym that doth right with chearefulnesse, and them that thinke
vpon thee in thy wayes: but lo, thou hast ben angrie, for we offended, and haue
ben euer in sinne, though the worlde hath cleaued to them, yet shall we be
saued.
6 We are all as an vncleane thing, and all our righteousnesse are as tilthy
ragges: we fal euerychone as the leafe, for our sinnes cary vs away lyke the
winde.
7 There is no man that calleth vpon thy name, that standeth vp to take hold by
thee: therefore hidest thou thy face from vs, and consumest vs, because of our
sinnes.
8 But nowe, O Lorde, thou father of ours, we are thy clay, and thou art our
potter, and we all are the worke of thy handes.
9 Be not to sore displeased O Lord, and kepe not our offences to long in thy
remembraunce: but consider that we all are thy people.
10 The cities of thy sanctuarie lye waste, Sion is a wildernesse, and Hierusalem
a desert.
11 Our holy house whiche is our beautie where our fathers praysed thee, is brent
vp: yea, all our commodities and pleasures are wasted away.
12 Wylt thou not be intreated O Lorde, for all this wylt thou holde thy peace,
and scourge vs so sore?

Chapter 65

1 They seeke me, that hitherto haue not asked for me, they finde me, that
hitherto haue not sought me: I haue saide, I am here, I am here, I am founde of
a people that neuer called vpon my name.
2 For thus long haue I euer holden out mine handes to an vnfaythfull people that
go not the right way, but after their owne imagination:
3 To a people that is euer defiyng me to my face, they make their oblations in
gardens, and their smoke vpon aulters of bricke.
4 They lurke among the groues, and lye in the dennes all night: they eate swines
fleshe, and vncleane broth is in their vessels.
5 If thou commest nye them, they say, touche me not, for I am holyer then thou:
All these men when I am angry, shalbe turned to smoke and fire that shall burne
for euer.
6 Beholde, it is written before my face, and shall not be forgotten, but
recompenced: I shall rewarde it them into their bosome.
7 I meane your misdeedes, and the misdeedes of your fathers together saith the
Lord, which haue made their smokes vpon the mountaines, and blasphemed me vpon
the hilles: therefore wyll I measure their olde deedes into their bosome agayne.
8 Moreouer, thus saith the Lord: Like as when newe wine is founde in the
cluster, and one saith, Lose it not, for there is blessing therein: euen so wyll
I do also for my seruauntes sakes, that I wyll not destroy them all.
9 But I will take a seede out of Iacob, and out of Iuda one, to take possession
of my hill: My chosen shall possesse it, and my seruauntes shall dwell there.
10 Saron shalbe a sheepefolde, and the valley of Achor shall geue the stalling
for the cattell of my people that seeke after me.
11 But as for you, ye are they that haue forsaken the Lorde, and forgotten my
holy hyll: ye haue set vp an aulter vnto Iupiter, and geuen riche drinke
offeringes vnto the planets:
12 Therfore wyll I number you to the sworde, that ye shalbe destroyed
altogether: for that when I called, no man gaue me aunswere, when I spake, ye
hearkened not vnto me, but dyd wickednesse before mine eyes, and chose the
thinges that pleased me not.
13 Therefore thus saith the Lord God: Beholde, my seruauntes shall eate, but ye
shall haue hunger: beholde, my seruauntes shall drinke, but ye shall suffer
thirst: beholde, my seruauntes shalbe merie, but ye shalbe confounded:
14 Beholde, my seruauntes shall reioyce for very quietnesse of heart: but ye
shal crye for sorowe of heart, and complaine for vexation of minde.
15 Your name shall ye leaue accursed among my chosen: for God the Lorde shall
slay you, and call his seruauntes by another name.
16 Who so reioyceth vpon earth, shall reioyce in the true God, and who so
sweareth vpon earth, shall sweare in the true God: for the olde afflictions
shalbe forgotten, and taken away out of my sight.
17 For lo, I shall make a newe heauen and a newe earth: and as for the olde,
they shall neuer be thought vpon, nor kept in minde:
18 But the Lorde saith Be glad and euermore reioyce for the things that I shall
do: For why? beholde, I shall make a ioyfull Hierusalem, and his people ioyfull.
19 Yea, I my selfe will reioyce with Hierusalem, and be glad with my people: and
the voyce of weeping and wayling shall not be hearde in her from thencefoorth.
20 There shall neither be chylde nor olde man that haue not their full dayes:
but when the chylde commeth to an hundred yeres olde it shal dye, and if he that
is an hundred yeres of age do wrong, he shalbe cursed.
21 They shall buylde houses and dwell in them, they shall plant vineyardes and
eate the fruite of them.
22 They shall not buylde and another possesse, they shall not plant and another
eate: but the life of my people shalbe like a tree, and mine elect shall enioy
styll the worke of their handes.
23 They shall not labour in vayne, nor beget with trouble: for they are the hye
blessed seede of the Lorde, and their fruites with them.
24 And it shalbe, that or euer they call, I shall aunswere them, whyle they are
yet but thinking howe to speake, I shal heare them.
25 The woolfe and the lambe shal feede together, and the lion shall eate hay
like the bullocke, but earth shalbe the serpentes meate: There shal no man hurt
nor slay another in al my holy hill, saith the Lorde.

Chapter 66

1 Thus saith the Lorde: Heauen is my seate, and the earth is my footstoole:
Where shall nowe the house stande that ye wyll builde vnto me? And where shalbe
the place that I wyll dwell in?
2 As for these thynges, my hande hath made them all, and they are all created
saith the Lorde: which of them shall I then regarde? Euen hym that is poore and
of a lowly troubled spirite, and standeth in awe of my wordes.
3 For who so slayeth an oxe for me, doth me so great dishonour as he that
killeth a man: He that killeth a sheepe for me knetcheth a dogge: He that
bryngeth me meate offerynges, offereth sivynes blood, who so maketh me a
memorial of incense, prayseth the thyng that is vnryght: Yet take they such
wayes in hande, and their soule delyghteth in these abhominations.
4 Therfore wyll I also haue pleasure in laughyng them to scorne, & the thyng
that they feare will I bring vpon them: For when I called, no man gaue aunswere,
when I spake, they woulde not heare: but did wickednesse before mine eyes, and
chose the thynges that displeased me.
5 Heare the worde of God all ye that feare the thyng which he speaketh: Your
brethren that hate you and cast you out for my name sake, say, The Lorde is
heynous agaynst vs: but you shall see hym in ioy, when they shalbe confounded.
6 Then shalbe hearde a great noyse from the citie and the temple, the voyce of
the Lorde, that wyll rewarde and recompence his enemies:
7 Lyke as when a wife bringeth foorth a man childe, or euer she suffer the payne
of the birth & anguishe of the trauayle.
8 Who euer heard or sawe such thinges? doth the grounde beare in one day? or are
the people borne all at once, as Sion trauayled in childe birth and bare her
sonnes?
9 For thus saith the Lorde: Am I he that maketh other to beare, and beare not my
selfe? Am not I he that beareth and maketh barren, saith thy God?
10 Reioyce with Hierusalem, and be glad with her all ye that loue her, be
ioyfull with her all ye that mourne for her.
11 For ye shall sucke comfort out of her breastes, and be satisfied: Ye shall
taste, and haue delyte in the bryghtnesse of her glorie.
12 For thus saith the Lorde: Beholde, I wyll let peace into her lyke a water
fludde, and the glory of the heathen like a flowing streame: Then shall ye
sucke, ye shalbe borne vpon her sydes, and be ioyfull vpon her knees.
13 For lyke as a chylde is comforted of his mother: so shall I comfort you, and
ye shalbe comforted in Hierusalem.
14 And when ye see this, your heart shall reioyce, and your bones shall florishe
lyke an hearbe: Thus shall the hande of the Lorde be knowen among his
seruauntes, and his indignation among his enemies.
15 For beholde the Lorde shall come with fire, and his charret shalbe lyke a
whirle wynde: that he may recompence his vengeaunce in his wrath, and his
indignation with the flambe of fire.
16 For the Lorde shall iudge all fleshe with the fire and with his sworde, and
there shalbe a great number slayne of the Lorde.
17 Such as haue made them selues holy and cleane in the gardens, and those that
haue eaten swines fleshe, mice, and other abhominations, shalbe taken away
together saith the Lorde.
18 For I do knowe their workes and thoughtes, and I wyll come to gather all
people and tongues: then they shall come and see my glorie.
19 Unto them shall I geue a token, and sende certayne of the that be deliuered
among the gentiles, into Cilicia, Affrica, and Lydia, where men can handle
bowes, into Italie, and also Greeke lande: The Isles farre of that haue not
hearde speake of me, and haue not seene my glorie, shall preache my prayse among
the gentiles.
20 And shall bryng all your brethren for an offeryng vnto the Lorde out of all
the people, vpon horses, charettes, and horslitters, vpon mules and cartes, to
Hierusalem my holy hil saith the Lord: lyke as the children of Israel bryng the
offeryng in cleane vessels to the house of the Lorde.
21 And I shal take out certayne of them for to be priestes and Leuites, saith
the Lorde.
22 For lyke as the newe heauen and the newe earth which I wyll make, shalbe fast
stablished by me, saith the Lorde: so shall your seede & your name continue.
23 And it shall come to passe, that from moone to his moone, from Sabbath to his
Sabbath, all fleshe shall come to worship before me, saith the Lorde.
24 And they shall go foorth and loke vpon the carions of them that haue
transgressed agaynst me: for their wormes shall not dye, neither shall their
fire be quenched, and all fleshe shall abhorre them.


Jeremiah

Chapter 1

1 These are the sermons of Ieremie the sonne of Helkiah the priest, one of them
that dwelt at Anathoth in the lande of Beniamin,
2 When the Lorde had first spoken with hym in the tyme of Iosiah the sonne of
Amon kyng of Iuda, in the 13 yere of his raigne:
3 And so duryng vnto the tyme of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosiah king of Iuda, and
vntyll the 11 yere of Zedekiah the sonne of Iosiah kyng of Iuda were ended, when
Hierusalem was taken, euen in the fifth moneth.
4 The worde of the Lorde spake thus vnto me.
5 Before I fashioned thee in thy mothers wombe, I dyd knowe thee: and or euer
thou wast borne, I sanctified thee, and ordeyned thee to be a prophete vnto the
people.
6 Then sayde I: O Lorde God, I can not speake, for I am yet but young.
7 And the Lorde aunswered me thus: Say not so, I am to young: for thou shalt go
to all that I shall sende thee vnto, and whatsoeuer I commaunde thee, that shalt
thou speake.
8 Be not afrayde of their faces: for I am with thee to deliuer thee, saith the
Lorde.
9 And with that the Lorde stretched out his hande and touched my mouth: and the
same Lorde sayde vnto me, Beholde, I put my wordes in thy mouth.
10 And beholde, this day do I set thee ouer the people and kyngdomes, that thou
mayest roote out, breake of, destroy, and make waste, and that thou mayest
builde vp and plant.
11 After this the Lorde spake vnto me, saying: Ieremie, what seest thou? And I
sayd, I see a rod of an Almond tree.
12 Then sayde the Lorde vnto me: thou hast seene ryght, for I wyll make haste
speedyly vpon my worde to performe it.
13 It happened afterwarde that the Lorde spake to me agayne, and sayde: what
seest thou? and I sayde: I do see a seethyng pot, lokyng from out of the north.
14 Then sayde the Lorde vnto me: Out of the north shall come a plague vpon all
the dwellers of the lande.
15 For lo, I wyll call all the kinredes of the kingdomes of the north, saith the
Lorde: and they shall come, and euery one shall set his seate in the gates of
Hierusalem, and in all their walles rounde about, and in all cities of Iuda.
16 And through them shall I declare my iudgement, vpo all the wickednesse of
those men that haue forsaken me, that haue burnt incense vnto straunge gods, and
worshipped the workes of their owne handes.
17 And therfore girde vp thy loynes, arise, and tell them all that I geue thee
in commaundement: Feare them not, lest I destroy thee before them.
18 For beholde, this day do I make thee a strong fensed towne, an iron pyller,
and a brasen wall, agaynst the whole lande, agaynst the kinges and mightie men
of Iuda, agaynst the priestes and people of the lande.
19 They shall fight agaynst thee, but they shall not be able to ouercome thee:
for I am with thee to deliuer thee, saith the Lorde.

Chapter 2

1 Moreouer, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
2 Go thy way, crye in the eares of Hierusalem, and say, Thus saith the Lorde: I
remember thee, the kindnesse of thy youth, and the loue of thy despousyng, in
that thou folowedst me through the wildernesse in an vntylled lande.
3 Israel was an halowed thyng vnto the Lorde, and was his first fruites: All
they that deuour Israel shall offende, misfortune shall fall vpon them, saith
the Lorde.
4 Heare therfore the worde of the Lord O thou house of Iacob, and all the
generations of the house of Israel.
5 Thus saith the Lorde, What vnfaithfulnesse founde your fathers in me, that
they went so farre away fro me, fallyng to lightnesse, and beyng so vayne?
6 They thought not in their heartes, where is the Lord that brought vs out of
the lande of Egypt, that led vs thorowe the wildernesse, through a desert &
rough lande, through a drye and deadly lande, yea a lande that no man had gone
through, and wherin no man had dwelt?
7 And when I had brought you into a pleasauut fertile lande, that ye myght enioy
the fruites & all the commodities of the same: ye went foorth and defiled my
lande, and brought mine heritage to abhomination.
8 The priestes them selues sayde not, Where is the Lord? They that had the lawe
in their handes knewe me not, the sheepheardes offended agaynst me, the
prophetes did prophecie in Baal, and folowed such thinges as shal bryng them no
profite.
9 Wherfore I am constrayned, saith the Lorde, yet agayne to contende in
iudgement with you, and with your childers children.
10 Go into the Isles of Cethim, and loke well: sende vnto Cedar, take diligent
heede, and see whether such thynges be done there,
11 Whether the gentiles them selues haue chaunged their gods which yet are no
gods in deede? but my people hath chaunged their honour for a thyng that may not
helpe them.
12 Be astonished O ye heauens, be afraide and abashed at such a thyng, saith the
Lorde.
13 For my people hath done two euils: they haue forsaken me the well of the
water of lyfe, and digged them pittes, yea vile and broken pittes that can holde
no water.
14 Is Israel a bonde seruaunt, or one of the housholde? why is he the so
spoyled?
15 They rore and crye vpon him as lions, they haue made his lande waste: his
cities are so burnt vp, that there is no man dwellyng in them:
16 Yea the children of Noph & Taphnes shall cracke their crowne.
17 Commeth not this vnto thee because thou hast forsaken the Lorde thy God, euen
when he led thee by the way?
18 And what hast thou nowe to do in the streete of Egypt, to drynke water out of
Nilus? Either what makest thou in the way to Assyria, to drynke water of the
fludde?
19 Thine owne wickednesse shall reproue thee, and thy turnyng away shall
condempne thee: that thou mayest knowe and vnderstand howe euyll and hurtfull a
thyng it is, that thou hast forsaken the Lorde thy God, and hast not feared me,
saith the Lorde God of hoastes.
20 I haue euer broken thy yoke of olde, and burst thy bondes, yet sayest thou: I
wyll no more transgresse: but like an harlot thou runnest about vpon all hye
hylles, and among all greene trees.
21 Wheras I planted thee a noble vine, and wholly a right seede: howe art thou
turned then into a bitter vnfruitfull and straunge grape?
22 Yea and that so sore that though thou washe thee with Nitrus, and make thy
selfe to sauour with that sweete smellyng hearbe of Borith: yet in my sight thou
art stayned with thy wickednesse, saith the Lorde thy God.
23 Howe sayest thou nowe, I am not vncleane, and I haue not folowed Baalim? Loke
vpon thine owne wayes in the valleys what thou hast done? Thou art like a swift
dromedarie that goeth easyly her way.
24 And thy wantonnesse is lyke a wylde Asse that vseth the wildernesse, and that
snuffeth and bloweth at her wyll: who can tame her? All they that seeke her,
shall not fayle but fynde her in her moneth.
25 Kepe thy foote from nakednesse, and thy throte from thirst, and thou thinkest
in thy selfe: tushe, I wil take no sorowe, for I haue loued the straungers, and
them wyll I folowe.
26 Lyke as a theefe that is taken with the deede, commeth to shame: euen so is
the house of Israel come to confusion, the common people, their kynges and
rulers, their priestes and prophetes.
27 For they say to a stocke, Thou art my father, & to a stone, Thou hast
begotten me: yea they haue turned their backe vpon me, and not their face: but
in the tyme of their trouble, when they say, stande vp and helpe vs:
28 I shall aunswere them Where are nowe thy gods that thou hast made thee? bid
them stande vp, and helpe thee in the time of thy neede: For loke howe many
cities thou hast O Iuda, so many gods hast thou also.
29 Wherfore then wyll ye go to lawe with me? seeyng ye all are sinners agaynst
me, saith the Lorde.
30 It is but lost labour that I smite your children, for they receaue not my
correction: your owne sworde destroyeth your prophetes, lyke a deuouryng lion.
31 Oh generation, hearken vnto the worde of the Lorde: Am I become a wildernesse
vnto the people of Israel? or a lande that hath no lyght? wherfore saith my
people then, We are lordes, we wyll come no more vnto thee?
32 Doth a mayde forget her rayment, or a bride her stomacher? but my people hath
forgotten me a very long whyle.
33 Why beautifiest thou thy wayes so hyely, to obteyne fauour therthrough?
therfore also hast thou taught wickednesse through thy wayes.
34 Upon thy wynges is found the blood of poore and innocent people, whom thou
didst not fynde in corners & holes: but thou sluest the prophetes for reprouyng
all these thynges.
35 Yet darest thou say, I am without sinne and giltlesse, Tushe, his wrath can
not come vpon me: Beholde, I wyll reason with thee, because thou darest say, I
haue not offended.
36 Why gaddest thou so much hither and thither, to chaunge thy wayes? for thou
shalt be confounded aswell of Egypt as thou wast of the Assyrians.
37 Yea thou shalt go thy way from them, and smite thine handes together vpon thy
head, because the Lorde shall bring that confidence and hope of thine to naught,
& thou shalt not prosper withal.

Chapter 3

1 Commonly when a man putteth away his wyfe, and she goeth from hym & maryeth
with another, then the question is: shoulde he resort vnto her any more after
that? (Is not that lande then defiled and vncleane?) But as for thee thou hast
played the harlot with many louers, yet turne agayne to me, saith the Lorde.
2 Lift vp thine eyes to the hygh places, and loke where thou hast not ben
defiled: Thou hast wayted for them in the streetes, and as a murtherer in the
wildernesse, through thy whoredome and shamefull blasphemies is the lande
defiled.
3 This is the cause that the rayne and euenyng deawe hath ceassed: Thou hast
gotten thee an whores forehead, and wylt not be ashamed.
4 Wylt thou not herafter say vnto me, O my father, thou art he that hast brought
me vp, and led me from my youth?
5 Wyll God continue his wrath for euer? wyll he kepe our faultes in memorie to
the ende? Neuerthelesse, thou speakest such wordes, but thou art euer doyng
worse and worse to the vtmost of thy power.
6 The Lorde sayde also vnto me in the tyme of Iosiah the kyng, Hast thou seene
what that rebellion Israel hath done? howe she hath runne vp vpon all the
hylles, and among all thicke trees, and there played the harlot?
7 Hast thou seene also when she had done all this, howe I sayde vnto her, that
she shoulde turne agayne vnto me, and yet she is not returned? Iuda that
vnfaithfull sister of hers also sawe this:
8 Namely, that after I had well seene the adulterie of the shrinckyng harlot
Israel, I put her away, and gaue her a byll of deuorcement: For all this, her
vnfaithfull sister Iuda was not ashamed, but went backe and played the whore.
9 Yea and the wantonnesse of her whoredome hath defyled the whole lande: For she
hath comitted fornication with stones and stockes.
10 Neuerthelsse, her vnfaithfull sister Iuda is not turned vnto me agayne with
her whole heart, but faignedlye saith the Lorde.
11 And the Lorde sayde vnto me, The backslyder Israel, is more righteous then
the vnfaithfull Iuda.
12 And therfore go preach these wordes towarde the north, and say, Thou
disobedient Israel, turne agayne saith the Lorde, and I wyll not bring my wrath
vpon you: for I am mercifull saith the Lorde, and I wyll not alway beare
displeasure agaynst thee:
13 But on this condition, that thou know thy great blasphemie, namely that thou
hast vnfaithfully forsaken the Lord thy God, and hast made thy selfe partaker of
straunge gods vnder all greene trees, and hast had no wyll to heare my voyce,
saith the Lorde.
14 O ye disobedient childre, turne againe saith the Lorde, and I wyll be maryed
with you: for I wyll take one out of the citie, and two out of one generation
from among you, and bryng you into Sion,
15 And wyll geue you heardmen after myne owne mynde, which shall feede you with
learnyng and wisdome.
16 Moreouer, when ye be encreased and multiplied in the lande, then saith the
Lorde, there shall no more boast be made of the arke of the Lordes testament: No
man shall thinke vpon it, neither shall any man make mention of it: for from
thencefoorth it shall neither be visited, neither shall such thyng be done any
more.
17 Then shall Hierusalem be called the Lordes seate, and all heathen shalbe
gathered vnto it for the name of the Lordes sake which shalbe set vp at
Hierusalem: And from that tyme foorth they shall folowe no more the imagination
of their owne frowarde heart.
18 Then those that be of the house of Iuda, shal go vnto the house of Israel,
and they shall come together out of the north, into the same lande that I haue
geuen your fathers.
19 I haue thought thus: howe shall I take thee to be my children, and geue a
pleasaunt lande for thine heritage, yea and a goodly hoast of the heathen? And I
sayd, Call me father, and shrincke not from me.
20 Truely, lyke as a woman fayleth her husbande, so are ye vnfaithfull vnto me O
ye house of Israel, saith the Lorde.
21 The voyce of the children of Israel was hearde on hye, weepyng and waylyng:
for that they haue defiled their way, and forgotten God their Lorde.
22 O ye disobedient children, turne againe, & so shall I heale your
backturnynges. Lo we come vnto thee, for thou art the Lorde our God.
23 Truely, in vayne is health hoped for from the hylles, be they neuer so many:
but the health of Israel standeth only vpon God our Lorde.
24 Confusion hath deuoured our fathers labour from our youth vp, yea their
sheepe and bullockes, their sonnes and daughters.
25 So do we also sleepe in our confusion, and shame couereth vs: for we & our
fathers from our youth vp vnto this day haue sinned agaynst the Lord our God,
and haue not obeyed the voyce of the Lorde our God.

Chapter 4

1 O Israel, yf thou wylt turne thee, then turne vnto me, saith ye Lord: and yf
thou wylt put away thine abhominations out of my sight, thou shalt not be moued.
2 And shalt sweare, The Lord lyueth, in trueth, in equitie, and righteousnesse,
and all people shalbe fortunable and ioyfull in hym.
3 For thus saith the Lorde to all Iuda and Hierusalem: Plowe your lande, and
sowe not among the thornes.
4 Be circumcised in the Lorde, and cut away the foreskynne of your heartes all
ye of Iuda, and all the indwellers of Hierusalem: that myne indignation breake
not out lyke fire, and kindle, so that no man may quenche it, because of the
wickednesse of your imaginations.
5 Preach in Iuda and Hierusalem, crye out and speake, blowe the trumpettes in
the lande, crye that euery man may heare, and say, Gather you together, and we
wyll go into strong cities.
6 Set vp the token in Sion, speede you and make no tarying: for I wyll bring a
great plague and a great destruction from the north.
7 For the spoyler of the gentiles is broken vp from his place as a lion out of
his denne: that he may make thy lande waste, and destroy the cities, so that no
man may dwell therin.
8 Wherfore girde your selues about with sackcloth, mourne and weepe: for the
fearefull wrath of the Lorde is not withdrawen from vs.
9 At the same tyme saith the Lord, the heart of the kyng & of the princes shalbe
gone, the priestes shalbe astonished, and the prophetes shalbe sore afrayde.
10 Then sayde I: Oh Lorde God, hast thou then deceaued this people and
Hierusalem, saying, Ye shall haue peace: and nowe the sworde goeth through their
lyues?
11 Then shall it be sayde to the people and Hierusalem, A strong winde in the
hye places of the wildernesse commeth through the way of my people, but neither
to fanne nor to cleanse.
12 After that, shall there come vnto me a strong wynde from those places, & then
wyll I also geue sentence vpon them.
13 For lo, he ariseth like a cloude, and his charrets are like a stormie wynde,
his horses are swifter then the Egle: Wo vnto vs, for we are destroyed.
14 O Hierusalem, washe thine heart from wickednesse, that thou mayest be helped:
Howe long shall thy vayne thoughtes remayne with thee?
15 For a voyce from Dan and from the hill of Ephraim speaketh out, and telleth
of a destruction.
16 Remember the heathen, and geue Hierusalem warning, and preache vnto her, that
watchers ouer her are commyng from farre countries, they haue cryed out against
the cities of Iuda.
17 And they haue beset her about in euery place, lyke as the watchmen in the
fielde: For they haue prouoked me to wrath, saith the Lorde.
18 Thy wayes and thy thoughtes haue brought thee vnto this, such is thine owne
wickednesse and disobedience: and because it is a bitter thyng, it hath stricken
thee to the heart.
19 Ah my belly, ah my belly shalt thou crie, howe is my heart so sore? my heart
panteth within me, I can not be styll, for I haue hearde the crying of the
trumpettes, and peales of warre.
20 They crye murther vpon murther, the whole lande shall perishe: Immediatly my
tentes were destroyed, and my hanginges in the twincklyng of an eye.
21 Howe long shall I see the tokens of warre, and heare the noyse of the
trumpettes?
22 Neuerthelesse, this shall come vpon them, because my people is become
foolishe, and hath not knowen me: they are the children of foolishnesse, and
without any discretion: To do euyll, they haue wit inough: but to do well, they
haue no wisdome.
23 I haue loked vpon the earth, and see it was waste and voyde: I loked towarde
heauen, and it had no shine.
24 I behelde the mountaynes, and lo, they trembled, and all the hylles were in a
feare.
25 I loked about me, and there was no body: and all the birdes of the ayre were
away.
26 I marked well, and the plowed fielde was become waste, yea all their cities
were broken downe at the presence of the Lord and indignation of his wrath.
27 For thus hath the Lorde saide: The whole lande shalbe desolate, yet wyll I
not then haue done.
28 And therfore shall the earth mourne, and the heauen be sorie aboue: for the
thyng that I haue spoken to the prophetes, purposed, and taken vpon me to do,
shall not repent me, and I wyll not go from it.
29 The whole lande shall flee for the noyse of horsemen and bowmen, they shall
runne into dennes, into wooddes, and climbe vp the stonye rockes: all the cities
shalbe voyde, and no man dwellyng therin.
30 What wylt thou nowe do, thou being destroyed? For though thou clothest thy
selfe with scarlet, and deckest thee with golde, though thou payntest thy face
with colours nowe, yet shalt thou trimme thy selfe in vayne: For those that
hitherto haue ben thy louers, shall abhorre thee, and go about to slay thee.
31 For I heare a noyse lyke as it were of a woman trauaylyng, & one labouryng of
her first childe, Euen the voyce of the daughter Sion, that casteth out her
armes, and sowneth, saying: Ah, wo is me, howe sore vexed and faynt is my heart
for feare of the murtherers?

Chapter 5

1 Loke through Hierusalem, beholde and see, seeke through her streetes also
within, yf ye can fynde one man that doth equall and ryght, or seketh for the
trueth, and I shall spare that citie, saith the Lorde.
2 For though they can say, the Lorde lyueth: yet they sweare to deceaue.
3 Wheras thou (O Lorde) lokest only vpon faith and trueth: Thou hast scourged
them, but they toke no repentaunce, thou hast corrected them for amendement, but
they refused thy correction, they made their faces harder then a stone, and
woulde not amende.
4 Therfore I thought in my selfe: peraduenture they are so simple & foolishe
that they vnderstande nothyng of the Lordes way, and iudgementes of their God.
5 Therfore will I go vnto their heades and rulers, and talke with them, if they
knowe the way of the Lord, and iudgementes of their God: But these in lyke maner
haue broken the yoke, and burst the bondes in sunder.
6 Wherfore a lion out of the wood hath hurt them, and a woolfe in the euenyng
shall destroy them, the Leoparde doth lye lurkyng by their cities, to teare in
peeces all them that come therout: for their offences are multiplied, and their
departyng away is encreased.
7 Shoulde I then for all this haue mercie vpon thee? Thy children haue forsaken
me, and sworne by them that are no gods: and albeit that I fed them to the full,
yet they fall to adulterie, and haunt harlottes houses.
8 In the desire of vncleanly lust they are become lyke the stoned horse, euery
man neyeth at his neighbours wife.
9 Shoulde I not correct this, saith the Lorde? shoulde I not be auenged of euery
people that is lyke vnto this?
10 Climbe vp vpon their walles, beate them downe, and destroy them not vtterly:
take away their battlementes, because they are not the lordes.
11 For vnfaithfully hath the house of Israel and Iuda forsaken me, saith the
Lorde.
12 They haue denied the Lorde and sayde, It is not he that loketh vpon vs tushe,
there shall no misfortune come vpon vs, we shall see neither sworde nor hunger.
13 As for the warning of the prophetes, it is but wynde, yea there is not the
worde of God in them: such thynges shall happen vnto them selues.
14 Wherfore thus saith the Lorde God of hoastes, Because ye speake such wordes,
beholde, the wordes that are in thy mouth wyll I turne to fire, and make the
people to be wood, that the fire may consume them.
15 Lo, I wyll bryng a people vpon you from farre, O house of Israel, saith the
Lorde, a mightie people, an olde people, a people whose speache thou knowest
not, neither vnderstandest what they say.
16 Their arrowes are sodayne death, yea they them selues be very giauntes.
17 This people shall eate vp thy fruite and thy meate, yea they shall deuour thy
sonnes & thy daughters, thy sheepe and thy bullockes, they shall eate vp thy
grapes and figges: As for thy strong and well defensed cities wherin thou didst
trust, they shall bryng to pouertie, and that through the sworde.
18 Neuerthelesse, I wyll not then haue done with you, saith the Lorde.
19 But if they say, wherfore doth the Lorde our God all this vnto vs? Then
aunswere them: because that lyke as ye haue forsaken me, & serued straunge gods
in your lande, euen so shal ye serue straungers out of your lande.
20 Preach this vnto the house of Iacob, and crye it out in Iuda, and say thus:
21 Heare this thou foolishe and vndiscreete people, ye haue eyes but ye see not,
eares haue ye but ye heare not.
22 Feare ye not me, saith the Lorde? will ye not tremble at my presence? which
bynde the sea with the sande by a continuall decree, so that it can not passe
his boundes: for though it rage, yet can it do nothing, and though the waues
therof do swell, yet may they not go ouer.
23 But this people hath a false and obstinate heart, they are departed and gone
away fro me.
24 They thinke not in their heartes, O let vs feare the Lord our God, who geueth
vs raine early and late when nede is, whiche kepeth euer still the haruest for
vs yerely.
25 Neuerthesse, your misdeedes haue turned these from you, and your sinnes haue
robbed you of good thinges.
26 For among my people are found wicked persons, that priuily lay snares and
wayte for men, to take them and destroy them.
27 And like as a nette is full of byrdes, so are their houses full of that which
they haue gotten with falshood and deceipt: Hereof commeth their great
substaunce and riches,
28 Hereof are they fat and welthy, and are more mischieuous then any other: they
minister not the lawe, they make no ende of the fatherlesse cause, yea and they
prosper: yet they iudge not the poore according to equitie.
29 Should I not punishe these thinges saith the Lorde? should not I be auenged
of all suche people as these be?
30 Horrible and greeuous thinges are done in the lande.
31 The prophetes teache falsely, and the preachers receaue giftes, and my people
hath pleasure therein: what wyll come thereof at the last.

Chapter 6

1 Come out of Hierusalem, ye strong chyldre of Beniamin blowe vp the trumpettes
ye Thecuites, set vp a token vnto Bethcaran: for a plague & a great miserie
appeareth out from the north.
2 I wyll liken the daughter Sion to a faire and tender woman, and to her shall
come the shepheardes with their flockes.
3 Their tentes shall they pitche rounde about her, and euery one shall feede in
his place.
4 Make battayle against her shall they say aryse, let vs go vp whyle it is yet
day: Alas the day goeth away, and the night shadowes fall downe.
5 Arise, let vs go vp by night, and destroy her strong holdes.
6 For thus hath the Lorde of hoastes commaunded, Hewe downe her trees, and set
vp bulwarkes against Hierusalem: for the tyme is come that this citie must be
punished, for in her is all maliciousnesse.
7 Like as a conduite spouteth out waters, so she spouteth out her wickednesse:
Robberie and vnrighteousnesse is hearde in her, sorowe and woundes are euer
there in my sight.
8 Amende thee (O Hierusalem) lest I withdrawe my heart from thee, and make thee
desolate, and thy lande also, that no man dwell in it.
9 For thus saith the Lorde of hoastes: The residue of Israel shalbe gathered as
the remnaunt of grapes: and therefore turne thyne hande agayne into the basket,
like the grape gatherer.
10 But vnto whom shall I speake? whom shall I warne that he may take heede?
Their eares are so vncircumcised, that they may not heare: beholde, they take
the worde of God but for a scorne, and haue no lust therto.
11 And therefore I am so full of thyne indignation O Lorde, that I may suffer no
lenger, but shed it out vpon the chyldren that are without, and vpon all young
men: yea the man must be taken prisoner with the wife, and the aged with the
creeple.
12 Their houses with their landes and wiues shalbe turned into straungers: for I
wyll stretche out mine hand vpon the inhabitours of this lande, saith the Lorde.
13 For from the least to the most they hang all vpon couetousnesse: and from the
prophete vnto the priest, they go about falshood and lyes.
14 And beside that, they heale the hurt of my people with sweete wordes, saying,
Peace, peace: when there is no peace at all.
15 Were they ashamed when they had committed abhomination? Truly nay, they be
past shame, and therefore they shall fall among the slayne: and in the houre
when I shall visite them, they shalbe brought downe saith the Lorde.
16 Thus saith the Lorde, Go into the streetes, consider and make inquisition for
the olde way, and if it be the good and right way, then go therein, that ye may
finde rest for your soules: but they say, we wyll not walke therin.
17 Moreouer, I wyl set watchmen ouer you, and therefore take heede vnto the
voyce of the trumpet: but they say, we wyll not take heede.
18 Heare therefore ye gentiles, and thou congregation shalt know what I haue
deuised for them.
19 Heare thou earth also: behold, I wyll cause a plague to come vpon this
people, euen the fruite of their owne imaginations, for that they haue not ben
obedient vnto my wordes and to my lawe, but abhorred them.
20 Wherefore bryng ye me incense from Saba, and sweete smelling calamus from
farre countreys? your burnt offeringes displease me, and I reioyce not in your
sacrifices.
21 And therefore thus saith the Lorde: Beholde, I wyll lay stumbling blockes
among this people, and there shall fall at them the father with the chyldren,
one neighbour shall perishe with another.
22 Thus saith the Lorde: Beholde, there shall come a people from the north, and
a great people shal arise from the endes of the earth.
23 With bowes and with dartes shall they be weaponed, it is a rough and fearce
people, & an vnmercifull people: their voyce roareth like the sea, thei ride
vpon horses well appointed to the battaile against thee O daughter Sion.
24 The fame of them haue we hearde, our armes are feeble, heauinesse and sorowe
is come vpon vs, as vpon a woman trauayling with chylde.
25 Let no man go foorth into the fielde, let no man come vpon the hye streete:
for the sworde and feare of the enemie is on euery side.
26 Wherfore gyrde a sackcloth about thee O thou daughter of my people, sprinkle
thy selfe with ashes: mourne and weepe bitterly as vpon thyne onlye beloued
sonne, for the destroyer shall sodainly fall vpon vs.
27 Thee haue I set for a strong towre O thou prophete and a well fensed wall
among my people, to seeke out and to trye their wayes.
28 For they are all stubborne apostates and fallen away, walking deceiptfully,
they are cleane brasse and iron, for they hurt and destroy euery man.
29 The bellowes are brent in the fire, the leade is not moulten, the melter
melteth in vayne, for the euill is not taken away from them.
30 Therefore do they call them naughtie siluer, because the Lorde hath cast them
out.

Chapter 7

1 These are the wordes that God spake vnto Ieremie, saying:
2 Stande vnder the gate of the Lordes house, & crye out these wordes there with
a loude voyce, and say, Heare the word of the Lorde all ye of Iuda, that go in
at this doore to worship the Lorde:
3 Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes, the God of Israel: Amende your wayes and your
counsels, and I wyll let you dwell in this place.
4 Trust not in false lying words, saying: Here is the temple of the Lord, here
is the temple of the Lord, here is the temple of the Lorde:
5 But rather in deede amende your wayes and counsels, and iudge right betwixt a
man and his neighbour,
6 Oppresse not the straunger, the fatherlesse, and the widowe, shed not innocent
blood in this place, cleaue not to straunge gods to your owne destruction:
7 Then wyll I let you dwell in this place, yea in the land that I gaue afore
tyme to your fathers for euer.
8 But take heede, ye trust in lying tales, that beguile you and do you no good.
9 For when ye haue stollen, murthered, committed adultrie and periurie, when ye
haue offered vnto Baal, folowing straunge and vnknowen gods: shall ye be
vnpunished?
10 Yet then come ye and stande before me in this house (whiche hath my name
geuen vnto it) and say, tushe, we are absolued quite, though we haue done all
these abhominations.
11 What, thinke you this house that beareth my name, is a denne of thieues? And
yet I see what you thinke, saith the Lorde.
12 Go to my place in Silo, wherevnto I gaue my name aforetyme, and looke well
what I did to the same place for the wickednesse of my people of Israel.
13 And now seing ye haue done all these deedes saith the Lorde, and I my selfe
rose vp euer betimes to warne you and to commune with you, yet would ye not
heare me, I called, ye would not aunswere:
14 Therefore, euen as I haue done vnto Silo, so wyll I do to this house that my
name is geuen vnto, and that you put your trust in, yea vnto the place that I
haue geuen to you and your fathers:
15 And I shal thrust you out of my sight, as I haue cast out all your brethren
the whole seede of Ephraim.
16 Therfore thou shalt not pray for this people, thou shalt neither geue thankes
nor bid prayer for them: make thou no intercession for them, for in no wise will
I heare thee.
17 Seest thou not what they do in the cities of Iuda, and in the streetes of
Hierusalem?
18 The chyldren gather stickes, the fathers kindle the fire, the wome kneade the
dough to bake cakes for the queene of heauen: they powre out drinke offeringes
vnto straunge gods, to prouoke me vnto wrath.
19 Howbeit they hurt not me saith the Lord, but rather confounde and shame them
selues.
20 And therefore thus saith the Lorde God: Beholde, my wrath and indignation
shalbe powred out vpon this place, vpon men and cattell, vpon trees in the
fielde, and fruite of the lande: and it shall burne, so that no man may quench
it.
21 Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel: Heape vp your burnt
offeringes with your sacrifices, and eate the fleshe.
22 For when I brought your fathers out of Egypt, I spake no worde vnto them of
burnt offeringes and sacrifices:
23 But this I commaunded them, saying, Hearken and obay my voyce, and I shalbe
your God, and ye shalbe my people, so that ye walke in al the wayes whiche I
haue commaunded you, that ye may prosper.
24 But they were not obedient, they inclined not their eares there vnto: but
went after their owne imaginations, and after the motions of their owne wicked
heart, and so turned them selues away, and conuerted not vnto me.
25 And this haue they done from the tyme that your fathers came out of Egypt,
vnto this day: Neuerthelesse, I sent vnto you all my seruauntes the prophetes, I
rose vp early, and sent you worde.
26 Yet woulde they not hearken nor offer me their eares, but were obstinate, and
worse then their fathers.
27 And thou shalt nowe speake all these wordes vnto them, but they shall not
heare thee: thou shalt crye vpon them, but they shall not aunswere thee.
28 Therefore shalt thou say vnto them, This is the people that neither heareth
the voyce of the Lorde their God, nor receaueth his correction: faythfulnesse
and trueth is cleane rooted out of their mouth.
29 Wherefore cut of thine heere, O Hierusalem, and cast it away, take vp a
complaint on hye: for the Lorde hath cast away and forsaken the people that he
is displeased withall.
30 For the chyldren of Iuda haue done euyll in my sight, saith the Lorde: they
haue set vp their abhominations in the house that hath my name, and haue defiled
it:
31 They haue also buylded an aulter at Topheth, whiche is in the valley of the
chyldren of Hennom, that they might burne their sonnes and daughters in fire:
whiche I neuer commaunded them, neither came it euer in my thought.
32 And therfore beholde the dayes shall come (saith the Lorde) that it shall no
more be called Topheth, or the valley of the chyldren of Hennom, but the valley
of slaughter: for in Topheth they shall be buried, because they shall els haue
no roome.
33 Yea the dead bodyes of this people shalbe eaten vp of the foules of the ayre,
and wylde beastes of the earth, and no man shall fray them away.
34 And as for the voyce of mirth and gladnesse of the cities of Iuda and
Hierusalem, the voyce of the bridegrome and of the bride, I wyll make them
ceasse: for the lande shalbe desolate.

Chapter 8

1 At the same tyme saith the Lorde, the bones of the kinges of Iuda, the bones
of his princes, the bones of the preachers and prophetes, yea and the bones of
the citizens of Hierusalem, shalbe brought out of their graues,
2 And layde against the sunne, the moone, & all the heauenly hoast, whom they
loued, whom they serued, whom they ranne after, whom they sought and worshipped:
they shall neither be gathered together nor buried, but shall lye as dunge vpon
the earth.
3 And all they that remaine of this wicked generation, shal desire rather to die
then to liue, whersoeuer they remaine, and where as I scatter them, saith the
Lorde of hoastes.
4 Thus shalt thou say vnto them also: Thus saith the Lorde, Do men fall so, that
they arise not vp againe? or if Israel repent, wyll not God turne againe to
them?
5 Wherefore then is this people of Hierusalem gone so farre backe, that they
turne not againe? They are euer the longer the more obstinate, and wyll not be
conuerted.
6 For I haue loked and considered, but there is no man that speaketh a good
worde, there is no man that taketh repentaunce for his sinne, that wyll so muche
say, what haue I done? but euerie man turneth to his owne course, like a fierce
horse headlong to the battaile.
7 The Storke in the ayre knoweth his appointed tyme, the Turtle doue, the
Swallowe and the Crane consider the tyme of their trauayle: but my people wyll
not knowe the tyme of the punishment of the Lorde.
8 Howe dare ye say then, we are wyse, we haue the lawe of the Lorde among vs?
Truely in vayne hath he prepared his penne, and vainely haue the writers written
it.
9 Therefore shall the wyse be confounded, they shalbe afraide and taken: for lo,
they haue cast out the worde of the Lorde, what wisdome can then be among them?
10 Wherfore I wyl geue their wiues vnto aliauntes, and their fields to
destroyers: For from the lowest vnto the hyest they folowe filthy lucre, and
from the prophete vnto the priest they deale all with lies.
11 Neuerthelesse, they heale the hurt of my people very slenderly, saying,
peace, peace: where there is no peace at all.
12 Fye for shame, howe abhominable thinges do they? and yet they be not ashamed,
yea they knowe of no shame: Wherefore in the tyme of their visitation they shal
fal among the dead bodies, and be ouerthrowne, saith the Lorde.
13 Moreouer, I wyll consume them in deede (saith the Lorde) so that there shall
not be one grape vpon the vine, neither one figge vpon the figge tree, and the
leaues shalbe pluckt of: and the thing that I haue geuen them, shalbe taken from
them.
14 Why prolong we the time? Let vs gather our selues together, and go into the
strong citie, there shall we be in rest: for the Lorde our God hath put vs to
scilence, and geuen vs water mixt with gall to drinke, because we haue sinned
against hym.
15 We loked for peace, and we fare not the better, we wayted for the tyme of
health, and lo, here is nothing but trouble.
16 The noyse of his horses is heard from Dan, the whole lande is afraide at the
neighing of his strong horses: for they are come in, and haue deuoured the
lande, withall that is in it, the cities, and those that dwell therin.
17 Moreouer, I wyll sende cockatrices and serpentes among you (whiche wyl not be
charmed) and they shall bite you, saith the Lorde.
18 I woulde haue had comfort against sorowe: but sorowe is come vpon me, and
heauinesse vexeth my heart.
19 For lo, the voyce of the crying of my people is hearde, for feare of them
that come from a farre countrey: Is not the Lord in Sion? Is not her king in
her? Wherefore then haue they greeued me shall the Lorde say with their images,
and foolishe straunge fashions of a forraine god?
20 The haruest is gone, the sommer hath an ende, and we are not helped.
21 I am sore vexed, because of the hurt of my people, I am heauie and abashed:
22 Is there not triacle at Gilead? Is there no phisitio there? why then is not
the health of my people recouered?

Chapter 9

1 O who wyll geue my head water inough, and a wel of teares for mine eyes, that
I may weepe night and day for the slaughter of my people?
2 Woulde God that I had a cottage somewhere farre from folke, that I might leaue
my people and go from them, for they be all adulterers and a shrinking sort.
3 They bend their tongues like vowes to shoote out lyes, they waxe strong vppon
earth: As for the trueth, they may nothing away withall in the worlde, for they
go from one wickednes to another, and wyll not knowe me, saith the Lorde.
4 Yea, one must kepe hym selfe from another, no man may safely trust his owne
brother: for one brother vndermindeth another, one neighbour beguileth another.
5 Yea, one dissembleth with another, and they deale with no trueth: They haue
practised their tongues to lye, and taken great paynes to do mischiefe.
6 Thou sittest in the middes of a deceiptfull people, which for very dissembling
falshood wyll not knowe me, saith the Lorde.
7 Therefore thus saith the Lorde of hoastes: Beholde, I wyll melt them and trye
them: for what shoulde I els do to my people?
8 Their tongues are like sharpe arrowes to speake deceipt: with their mouth they
speake peaceablie to their neighbour, but priuilie they lay wayte for hym.
9 Should I not punishe them for these thinges, saith the Lorde? or shoulde I not
be auenged of any suche people as this?
10 Upon the mountaines wyl I take vp a lamentation and a sorowfull crye, and a
mourning vpon the faire places of the wildernesse: Namely, howe they are so
brent vp, that no man goeth there any more, yea a man shall not heare one beast
crye there: byrdes and cattell are all gone from thence.
11 I wyl make Hierusalem also an heape of stones, & a den of venemous wormes:
and I wyll make the cities of Iuda so waste, that no man shall dwel therin.
12 What man is so wise as to vnderstand this? or to whom hath the Lorde spoken
by mouth, that he may shewe this, and say: O thou lande, why perishest thou so?
wherfore art thou so brent vp, and like a wildernesse that no man goeth thorowe?
13 Yea the Lorde hym selfe tolde the same vnto them that forsoke his lawe, and
kept not the thing that he gaue them in commaundement, neither liued thereafter:
14 But folowed the wickednesse of their owne heartes, & serued straunge gods as
their forefathers taught them.
15 Therefore thus saith the Lorde of hoastes, the God of Israel: Beholde, I wyll
feede this people with wormewood, and geue them gall to drinke.
16 I wyll scatter them also among the heathen, whom neither they nor their
fathers haue knowen: and I wyll send a sworde among them to persecute them,
vntyll I bring them to naught.
17 Moreouer, thus saith the Lorde of hoastes: Beware of the vengeaunce that
hangeth ouer you, and call for mourning wiues, and sende for wyse women, that
they come shortly,
18 And sing a mourning song of vs, that the teares may fall out of our eyes, and
that our eye liddes may gushe out of water.
19 For there is a lamentable noyse heard of Sion: O howe are we so sore
destroyed? O howe are we so pitiously confounded? We must forsake our owne
naturall countrey, and we are shut out of our owne lodginges.
20 Yet heare the worde of the Lorde (O ye women) and let your eares regarde the
wordes of his mouth: that ye may learne your daughters to mourne, and that euery
one may teache her neighbour to make lamentation
21 Namely thus Death is climing vp in at our windowes, he is come into our
houses, to destroy the chylde before the doore, and the young man in the
streete.
22 But tell thou playnely, thus saith the Lord: The dead bodyes of men shall lye
vpon the ground as the dunge vpon the fielde, and as the handfull after the
mower, and there shalbe no man to take them vp.
23 Thus saith the Lorde: Let not the wise man reioyce in his wisdome, nor the
strong man in his strength, neither the riche man in his riches:
24 But who so wyll reioyce, let hym reioyce in this, that he vnderstandeth and
knoweth me, that I am the Lorde whiche do mercy, equitie, and righteousnesse
vpon the earth: therfore haue I pleasure in suche thinges, saith the Lorde.
25 Beholde the time commeth (saith the Lord) that I will visite all them whose
foreskinne is vncircumcised, and the circumcised,
26 The Egyptians, the Iewes, the Edomites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, and the
shauen Madianites that dwel in the wildernesse: for all the gentiles are all
vncircumcised in the fleshe, but all the house of Israel are vncircumcised in
the heart.

Chapter 10

1 Heare the worde of the Lord that he speaketh vnto thee, O thou house of
Israel.
2 Thus saith the Lord: ye shal not learne after the maner of the heathen, and ye
shall not be afraide for the tokens of heauen: for the heathen are afraide of
suche.
3 Yea all the customes and lawes of the gentiles are nothing but vanitie: They
hewe downe a tree in the wood with the handes of the workeman, and fashion it
with the axe.
4 They couer it ouer with golde or siluer, they fasten it with nailes and
hammers, that it moue not.
5 It standeth as stiffe as the Palme tree, it can neither speake nor go one
foote, but must be borne: Be not ye afraide of suche, for they can do neither
good nor euill.
6 But there is none lyke vnto thee O Lorde, and great is the name of thy power.
7 Who would not feare thee, O king of the gentiles? for thyne is the dominion:
for among all the wise men of the gentiles, and in all their kingdomes, there is
none that may be likened vnto thee.
8 They are altogether brutishe and vnwise in this one thing: wood is the
teaching of vanitie.
9 Siluer is brought out of Tharsis, and beaten to plates, and gold from Ophir, a
worke that is made with the hande of the craftesman, and they are clothed with
yelowe silke and scarlet: all these are the worke of cunning men.
10 But the Lorde is a true God, a liuing God, and an euerlasting kyng: if he be
wroth, the earth shaketh, all the gentiles may not abide his indignation.
11 As for their gods thus shall you say to them, they are no gods that made
neither heauen nor earth, therfore shall they perishe from the earth, and from
all thinges vnder heauen.
12 But as for our God he made the earth with his power, and with his wisdome
doth he order the whole compasse of the worlde, with his discretion hath he
spread out the heauens.
13 At his voyce the waters gathered together in the ayre, he draweth vp the
cloudes from the vttermost partes of the earth, he turneth lightning to raine,
and bringeth foorth the windes out of their treasures.
14 His wisdome maketh all men fooles, and confounded be casters of images: for
that they cast, is but a vayne thing, and hath no life.
15 The vayne craftesmen with their workes that they in their vanitie haue made,
shall perishe one with another in time of visitation.
16 Neuerthelesse, Iacobs portion is none such: but it is he that hath made all
thinges, and Israel is the rod of his inheritaunce: the Lorde of hoastes is his
name.
17 Gather vp thy wares out of the land, thou that art in the strong place.
18 For thus saith the Lorde: beholde, I wyll now throwe as with a stone sling,
the inhabiters of this land at this once, and I wyll bring trouble vpon them,
that they shall proue true the wordes that I haue spoken by the prophetes.
19 Alas howe am I hurt? alas howe paynefull are my scourges vnto me? for I
consider this sorowe by my selfe, and I must suffer it.
20 My tabernacle is destroyed, and all my cordes are broken, my chyldren are
gone fro me, & can no where be founde: Nowe haue I none to spreade out my tent,
nor to set vp my hanginges.
21 For the heardmen are become foolishe, and they haue not sought the Lorde:
therefore haue they dealt vnwisely with their cattell, and all are scattered
abrode.
22 Beholde, the noyse is harde at hande, and great sedition out of the north, to
make the cities of Iuda a wildernesse, and a dwelling place for dragons.
23 Nowe I knowe (O Lord) that it is not in mans power to order his owne wayes,
or to rule his owne steppes and goinges.
24 Therefore chasten thou me O Lord, but with fauour, and not in thy wrath, lest
thou bring me vtterly to naught.
25 Powre out thyne indignation vpon the gentiles that knowe thee not, and vpon
the people that call not vpon thy name, and that because they haue consumed,
deuoured, and destroyed Iacob, and haue made his habitation waste.

Chapter 11

1 This is a sermo which the Lorde commaunded Ieremie for to preache, saying:
2 Heare the wordes of this couenaunt and speake vnto the men of Iuda, and to all
them that dwell at Hierusalem,
3 And say vnto them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel: Cursed be euery one that
is not obedient vnto the words of this couenaunt,
4 Whiche I commaunded vnto your fathers, what time as I brought them out of
Egypt from the iron furnace, saying: Be obedient vnto my voyce, and do according
to all that I commaunde you, so shall ye be my people, and I will be your God:
5 And wyll kepe my promise that I haue sworne vnto your fathers, namelye that I
woulde geue them a lande whiche floweth with milke and honie, as ye see it is
come to passe vnto this day. Then aunswered I and sayde, Amen: let it be euen so
Lorde as thou sayest.
6 Then the Lord sayd vnto me againe: Preache this in the cities of Iuda, and
rounde about Hierusalem, & say: Heare the wordes of this couenaunt, and kepe
them.
7 For I haue diligently exhorted your fathers, euer since the tyme that I
brought them out of the lande of Egypt vnto this day, I gaue them warning be
times, saying: hearken vnto my voyce.
8 Neuerthelesse, they would not obey me, nor encline their eares vnto me: but
folowed the wicked imaginations of their owne heartes, and therefore I haue
brought vpon them al the wordes of this couenaunt that I gaue them to kepe,
which they notwithstanding haue not kept.
9 And the Lorde sayde vnto me: it is founde out that whole Israel and all these
cities of Hierusalem are gone backe.
10 They haue turned them selues to the blasphemies of their forefathers, which
had no lust to heare my wordes: Euen lykewyse haue these also folowed straunge
gods, and worshipped them: The house of Israel and Iuda haue broken my couenaunt
whiche I made with their fathers.
11 Therefore, thus saith the Lorde: beholde, I will send a plague vpon them,
whiche they shall not be able to escape: and they shall crye vnto me, and I wyl
not heare them.
12 Then shall the townes of Iuda, and the citizens of Hierusalem go and call
vpon their gods vnto whom they made their oblations: but they shall not be able
to helpe them in tyme of their trouble.
13 For as many cities as thou hast, O Iuda, so many gods hast thou had also: and
loke howe many streetes there be in thee (O Hierusalem) so many shameful aulters
haue ye set vp, aulters I say to offer vpon them vnto Baal.
14 Therfore pray not thou for this people, byd neither prayse nor prayer for
them: for though they crye vnto me in their trouble, yet wil I not heare them.
15 What part hath my beloued in my house, seing he hath worked abhomination,
seruing many gods? The holy fleshe offeringes in the temple are gone from thee O
Iuda and thou when thou hast done euyll, makest thy boast of it.
16 The Lord called thee a greene oliue tree, a faire one, a fruitefull one, a
goodlye one: but with great clamour hath the enemie set fire vpon it, & the
braunches of it are destroyed.
17 For the Lorde of hoastes that planted thee, hath deuised a plague for thee (O
thou house of Israel and Iuda) for the euyll that ye haue done to prouoke hym to
wrath, in that ye dyd seruice to Baal.
18 This (O Lorde) haue I learned of thee, and vnderstande it: for thou hast
shewed me their imaginations.
19 But I am as a meeke lambe, an oxe that is caryed away to be slayne, not
knowing that they had deuised suche a counsell against me saying, We wyll
destroy his meate with wood, and driue him out of the lande of the liuing, that
his name shall neuer be thought vpon.
20 Therfore I wyll beseche thee nowe (O Lorde of hoastes) thou righteous iudge,
thou that tryest the raynes and the heartes, let me see thee auenged of them:
for vnto thee haue I committed my cause.
21 The Lorde therfore spake thus of the citizens of Anathoth that sought to slay
me, saying: Preache not vnto vs in the name of the Lorde, or els thou shalt dye
of our handes:
22 Thus I say spake the Lorde of hoastes: Beholde, I will visit you, your young
me shal perishe with the sworde, your sonnes and your daughters shall vtterly
dye of hunger,
23 So that none shall remaine: for vpon the citizens of Anathoth wyll I bring a
plague euen the yere of their visitation.

Chapter 12

1 O Lorde thou art more righteous, then that I shoulde dispute with thee:
neuerthelesse, let me talke with thee in thynges reasonable. Howe happeneth it
that the way of the vngodly is so prosperous? and that it goeth so well with
them which without any shame offend and liue in wickednesse,
2 Thou plantest them, they take roote, they growe, and bryng foorth fruite: they
boast much of thee, yet art thou farre from their raynes.
3 But thou Lorde to whom I am well knowen, thou that hast sene and proued my
heart, take them away, like as a flocke is caryed to the slaughter house, &
appoynt them for the day of slaughter.
4 Howe long shall the lande mourne, and all the hearbes of the fielde perishe
for the wickednesse of them that dwell therin? The cattell and the birdes are
gone, yet say they, tushe, God wyll not destroy vs vtterly.
5 Seyng thou art weery in runnyng with the footmen, howe wilt thou then runne
with horses? In a peaceable sure lande thou mayest be safe: but howe wylt thou
do in the furious pride of Iordane?
6 For thy brethren and thy kinrede haue altogether dispised thee, and cryed out
vpon thee altogether: Beleue them not, though they speake faire wordes to thee.
7 As for me I say I haue forsaken mine owne dwellyng place, and left mine
heritage: my lyfe also that I loue so well, haue I geuen into the handes of myne
enemies.
8 Myne heritage is become vnto me as a lion in the wood: it cryed out vpon me,
therfore haue I forsaken it.
9 Is not mine heritage vnto me as a speckled birde? are not the birdes round
about agaynst her? Come and gather ye together all the beastes of the fielde,
come, that ye may eate it vp.
10 Diuers heardmen haue broke downe my vineyarde, and troden vpon my portion: of
my pleasaunt portion they haue made a wildernesse and desert.
11 They haue layde it waste, and nowe that it is waste it sigheth vnto me: yea
the whole lande lyeth waste, and no man regardeth it.
12 The destroyers come ouer the borders in the desert euery way: for the sworde
of the Lorde doth consume from the one ende of the lande to the other, and no
fleshe hath rest.
13 They haue sowen wheate, and reaped thornes, they haue taken heritage in
possession, but it doth them no good: and they were ashamed of your fruites,
because of the great wrath of the Lord.
14 Thus saith the Lord vpon all my euyl neighbours that lay hande on mine
heritage which I haue possessed, euen my people of Israel: Beholde, I wyll
plucke them namely Israel out of their lande, and put out the house of Iuda from
among them.
15 And when I haue rooted them out, I will be at one with them agayne, and I
wyll haue mercie vpon them, and bryng them agayne euery man to his owne
heritage, and into his lande.
16 And yf they namely that trouble my people wyll learne the wayes of them to
sweare by my name, the Lorde lyueth, lyke as they learned my people to sweare by
Baal, then shall they be built among my people:
17 But yf they wyll not obey, then wyll I roote out the same folke, and destroy
them, saith the Lorde.

Chapter 13

1 Thus saith the Lorde vnto me: Go thy way and get thee a lynnen girdle, and
girde it about thy loynes, let it not be wet.
2 Then I got me a girdle accordyng to the commaundement of the Lorde, and put it
about my loynes.
3 After this, the seconde tyme the Lorde spake vnto me agayne.
4 Take the girdle that thou hast prepared and put about thee, and get thee vp,
and go vnto Euphrates, and hyde it there in a hole of the rocke.
5 So went I, and hyd it at Euphrates, as the Lorde commaunded me.
6 And it happened long after this, that the Lorde spake vnto me: Up, and get
thee to Euphrates, & fetche the girdle from thence, which I commaunded thee to
hyde there.
7 Then went I to Euphrates, & digged vp, and toke the girdle from the place
where I had hid it: and beholde, the girdle was corrupt, so that it was
profitable for nothyng.
8 Then sayde the Lorde vnto me,
9 Thus saith the Lorde, Euen so wyll I corrupt the pride of Iuda, and the hye
mynde of Hierusalem.
10 This people is a wicked people, they wyll not heare my worde, they folowe the
wicked imaginations of their owne heart, and hang vpon straunge gods, them they
serue and worship, and therfore they shalbe as this breeche that serueth for
nothyng.
11 For as straytly as a girdle lyeth vpon a mans loynes, so straytly dyd I bynde
the whole house of Israel, and the whole house of Iuda vnto me, saith the Lorde:
that they myght be my people, that they might haue a glorious name, that they
might be in honour: but they woulde not obey me.
12 Therfore lay this riddle before them, and say, Thus saith the Lorde God of
Israel: Euery pot shalbe fylled with wine. And they shall say vnto thee.
Thinkest thou we knowe not that euery pot shalbe fylled with wine?
13 Then shalt thou say vnto them, thus saith the Lorde: Beholde, I shall fyll
all the inhabitours of this lande with drunkennesse, the kynges that syt vpon
Dauids stoole, the priestes & prophetes, with all that dwell at Hierusalem.
14 And I wyll set them one agaynst another, yea the fathers against the sonnes,
saith the Lorde: I wyll not pardon them, I wyll not spare them, nor haue pitie
vpon them: but destroy them.
15 Heare, geue eare, take not disdayne at it: for it is the Lorde hym selfe that
speaketh.
16 Honour the Lorde your God or he take his light from you, and or euer your
feete stumble in darcknesse at the hyll: lest when you loke for the lyght, he
turne it into the shadowe and darcknesse of death.
17 But if ye wyll not heare me that geue you secrete warnyng, I wyll mourne from
my whole heart for your stubburnnesse: Piteously wyll I weepe, and the teares
shall gushe out of mine eyes, for the Lordes flocke shalbe caried away captiue.
18 Tell the kyng and the queene, humble your selues, sit you downe lowe, for
your dignitie shalbe throwen downe, and the crowne of your glorie shall fall
from your head.
19 The cities towarde the south shalbe shut vp, and no man shall open them: all
Iuda shalbe caryed away captiue, so that none shall remayne.
20 Lyft vp your eyes, and beholde them that come from the north, where is the
flocke O thou lande that was geuen thee? and where are thy fat and riche sheepe?
21 To whom wilt thou make thy mone when the enemie shall come vpon thee? for
thou hast taught them thy selfe, and made them maisters ouer thee: Shall not
sorowe come vpon thee as on a woman trauaylyng with childe?
22 And if thou wouldest then say in thine heart, Wherfore come these thinges
vpon me? Euen for the multitude of thy blasphemies shall thy hynder partes and
thy feete be discouered.
23 May a man of Inde chaunge his skinne, and the cat of the mountayne her
spottes? so, may ye that be exercised in euyll, do good?
24 Therfore wyll I scatter them like as the stubble that is taken away with the
south wynde.
25 This shalbe your portion, and the portion of your measure wherwith ye shalbe
rewarded of me saith the Lorde, because ye haue forgotten me, and put your trust
in deceiptfull thinges.
26 Therfore shall I turne thy clothes ouer thy head, and discouer thy shame.
27 Thy adulteries, thy neyghinges, thy shamefull whoredome on the hylles in the
fieldes, and thy abhominations haue I seene: Wo be vnto thee (O Hierusalem) wylt
thou neuer be clensed any more? Or when shall that be?

Chapter 14

1 The worde of the Lorde shewed vnto Ieremie concernyng the dearth of the
fruites.
2 Iuda hath mourned, his gates are desolate, they are brought to heauinesse,
euen vnto the grounde, and the crye of Hierusalem goeth vp.
3 The Lordes sent their seruauntes to fetche water, and when they came to the
welles, they did finde no water, but caried their vessels home emptie: they be
ashamed and confounded, and couer their heades.
4 For the grounde is dryed, because there commeth no rayne vpon it: the plowmen
also be ashamed and couer their heades.
5 The hynde also forsoke the young fawne that he brought foorth in the fielde,
because there was no grasse.
6 The wylde asses did stande in the hye places, and drewe in their winde lyke
the dragons, their eyes did fayle for want of grasse.
7 Doubtlesse our owne wickednesse doth rewarde vs: but Lorde do thou accordyng
to thy name, though our transgression and sinnes be many, and agaynst thee haue
we sinned.
8 For thou art the comfort and helpe of Israel in the tyme of trouble: Why wilt
thou be as a straunger in the lande, and as one that goeth his iourney, and
cometh in only to remayne for a night?
9 Why wylt thou make thy selfe a cowarde, and as it were a giaunt that yet may
not helpe? But thou O Lorde art in the middest of vs, and thy name is called
vpon of vs, forsake vs not.
10 Thus hath the Lorde sayde vnto his people, seyng they haue had such a lust to
wander abrode, and haue not refrayned their feete: therfore the Lorde hath no
pleasure in them, but he wyll nowe bring againe to remembraunce all their
misdeedes, and punishe all their sinnes.
11 Yea euen thus sayde the Lorde vnto me: Thou shalt not pray to do this people
good.
12 For though they fast, I wyll not heare their prayers, and though they offer
burnt offeringes and sacrifices, yet wyll not I accept them: for I wyll destroy
them with the sworde, hunger, and pestilence.
13 Then aunswered I: O Lorde God, the prophetes say vnto them, Tushe, ye shall
neede to feare no sworde, and no hunger shall come vpon you: but the Lorde shall
geue you sure rest in this place.
14 And the Lorde sayde vnto me, The prophetes preach lyes in my name, wheras I
haue not sent them, neither gaue I them any charge, neither did I speake vnto
them: yet they preache vnto you false visions, charming, vanitie, and
deceiptfulnesse of their owne heart.
15 Therfore thus saith the Lorde: As for those prophetes that preache in my
name, whom I neuerthelesse haue not sent, and that say, Tushe, there shall no
sworde nor hunger be in this lande: with sworde and with hunger shall those
prophetes perishe.
16 And the people to whom they preache shalbe cast out of Hierusalem, dye of
hunger, and be slayne with the sworde, and there shalbe no man to bury them,
both they, and their wiues, their sonnes, and their daughters: for thus wyll I
poure their wickednesse vpon them.
17 This shalt thou say also vnto them, Mine eyes shall weepe without ceassyng
day and nyght: for my people shalbe destroyed with great harme, and shall
perishe with a great plague.
18 For yf I go into the fielde, lo, it lyeth all full of slayne men: If I come
into the citie, lo, they be all famished of hunger: yea their prophetes also and
priestes shalbe led into an vnknowen lande.
19 Hast thou then vtterly forsaken Iuda? Doest thou so abhorre Sion? Wherfore
hast thou so plagued vs, that we can be healed no more? We loked for peace, and
there commeth no good, for the tyme of health, and lo here is nothyng but
trouble.
20 We knowledge (O Lorde) all our misdeedes, and the sinnes of our fathers: for
we haue offended thee.
21 Cast vs not of (O Lord) for thy names sake, forget not thy louyng kindnesse,
ouerthrowe not the throne of thine honour, breake not the couenaunt that thou
hast made with vs.
22 Are there any among the gods of the gentiles that sende rayne, or geue the
showres from heauen? Art not thou thy selfe our Lorde God? we wyll trust in
thee, for thou doest all these thynges.

Chapter 15

1 Thus spake the Lorde vnto me, Though Moyses and Samuel stoode before me, yet
haue I no heart to this people: driue them away, that they may go out of my
sight.
2 And yf they say vnto thee, whyther shall we go? then tell them, The Lorde
geueth you this aunswere: Some vnto death, some to the sworde, some to hunger,
some into captiuitie.
3 For I wyll bryng foure plagues vpon them, saith the Lorde: The sworde shal
slay them, the dogges shall teare them in peeces, the foules of the ayre and
beastes of the earth shall eate them vp, and destroy them.
4 I wyll scatter them about also in all kingdomes and landes to be plagued,
because of Manasses the sonne of Hezekia kyng of Iuda, for the thynges that he
did in Hierusalem.
5 Who shall then haue pitie vpon thee O Hierusalem? who shalbe sorie for thee?
Or who shall make intercession to obtayne peace for thee?
6 Seing thou goest from me, and turnest backwarde, saith the Lorde: therfore I
dyd stretche out myne hande against thee to destroy thee, and I haue ben sorie
for thee so long that I am weerie.
7 I haue scattred them abrode with the fanne of euery side of the land, I haue
wasted my people and destroyed them, yet they haue had no lust to turne from
their owne wayes.
8 I haue made their widowes mo in number then the sandes of the sea, vpon the
mothers of their children dyd I bryng a destroyer in the noone day: sodaynly and
vnawares did I sende a feare vpon their cities.
9 She that hath borne seuen children, hath none, her heart is full of sorowe:
the sunne doth fayle her in the cleare day, she is confounded and faintie for
very heauinesse: As for those that remayne, I wyll deliuer them vnto the sworde
before their enemies, saith the Lorde.
10 O mother, alas that thou euer didst beare me, a brawler and rebuker of the
whole lande: though I neuer lent nor receaued vpon vsurie, yet all men speake
euyll vpon me.
11 And the Lord aunswered me, Ueryly thy remnaunt shall haue wealth: Come not I
to thee when thou art in trouble, & helpe thee when thine enemie oppresseth
thee?
12 Doth one iron hurt another? or one metall that commeth from the north
another?
13 As for thy riches and treasure, I will geue them out into a pray: not for
money, but because of all thy sinnes that thou hast done in all thy coastes.
14 And I wyll bryng thee with thine enemies into a lande that thou knowest not:
for the fire that is kindled in myne indignation shall burne you vp.
15 O Lorde thou knowest, therfore remember me, and visite me, reuenge me of my
persecutours: take me not from this life in the tyme of thine anger, thou
knowest that for thy sake I suffer rebuke.
16 When I had founde thy wordes I did eate them vp greedyly, they haue made my
heart ioyfull and glad: for thy name was called vpon me O Lorde God of hoastes.
17 I dwell not among the scorners, neither is my delight therin: but I dwell
alone because of thy hande, for thou hast fylled me with bitternesse.
18 Shall my heauinesse endure for euer? Are my plagues then so great that they
may neuer be healed? Wylt thou be as one that is false, and as a water that
falleth, and can not continue?
19 Upon these wordes, thus sayde the Lorde vnto me, If thou wylt turne agayne, I
shall set thee in my seruice, and yf thou wylt take out the thynges that is
precious from the vile, thou shalt be euen as myne owne mouth: they shall
conuert vnto thee, but turne not thou vnto them.
20 And so shall I make thee a strong brasen wall agaynst this people, they shall
fyght agaynst thee, but they shall not preuayle: for I my selfe wyll be with
thee, to helpe thee and deliuer thee, saith the Lorde:
21 And I will rid thee out of the handes of the wicked, and deliuer thee out of
the handes of tirauntes.

Chapter 16

1 Thus sayde the Lorde vnto me:
2 Thou shalt take thee no wife, nor beget children in this place.
3 For of the children that are borne in this place, of their mothers that haue
borne them, and of their fathers that haue begotten them in this lande, thus
saith the Lorde.
4 They shall dye an horrible death, no man shall weepe for them, nor bury them,
but they shall lye as dunge vpon the earth: they shall perishe through the
sworde & hunger, and their bodyes shalbe meate for the fowles of the ayre, and
beastes of the earth.
5 For thus saith the Lorde, Go not thou into the house of mournyng, nor come to
mourne and weepe for them: for I haue taken my peace from this people saith the
Lorde, yea my fauour and my mercies.
6 And in this lande shall they dye olde and young, and shall not be buryed: no
man shall beweepe them, no man shall clippe or shaue hym selfe for them.
7 They shall not wryng their handes in mournyng wise on their dead one to
comfort another: one shall not offer another the cup of consolation, to forget
their heauinesse for their father and mother.
8 Thou shalt not go into their feast house, to sit downe to eate or drynke with
them:
9 For thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel: Beholde, I shall take
away out of this place the voyce of mirth and gladnesse, the voyce of the
bridegrome and of the bride, yea and that in your dayes, that ye may see it.
10 Nowe when thou shewest this people all these wordes, and they say vnto thee,
Wherfore hath the Lord deuised all this great plague for vs? or what is the
offence and sinne that we haue done agaynst the Lorde our God?
11 Then make thou them this aunswere: Because your fathers haue forsaken me,
saith the Lorde, and haue walked after straunge gods, whom they honoured and
worshipped: but me haue they forsaken, and haue not kept my lawe.
12 And ye with your shamefull blasphemies haue exceeded the wickednesse of your
fathers: for euery one of you hath folowed the frowarde and euyll imaginations
of his owne heart, and is not obedient vnto me.
13 Therfore wyll I cast you out of this lande, into a lande that ye and your
fathers knowe not: and there shall ye serue straunge gods day and nyght, there
wyll I shewe you no fauour.
14 Beholde therfore saith the Lorde, the dayes are come that it shall no more be
sayd: The Lorde liueth which brought the children of Israel out of the lande of
Egypt:
15 But it shalbe sayde, The Lorde liueth that brought the children of Israel
from the north, and from all landes where he had scattered them: for I wyll
bryng them agayne into the lande that I gaue their fathers.
16 Beholde, saith the Lorde, I wyll sende out many fisshers to take them, and
after that wyll I sende out many hunters, to hunt them out from all mountaynes
and hylles, and out of the caues of stone.
17 For mine eyes behold all their wayes, and they can not be hyd fro my face:
neither can their wicked deedes be kept close out of my sight.
18 But first wyll I sufficiently rewarde their shameful blasphemies and sinnes,
because they haue defiled my lande with their stinckyng carions and their
abhominations, wherwith they haue filled mine heritage.
19 O Lorde my strength, my power and refuge in tyme of trouble: the gentiles
shall come vnto thee from the endes of the worlde, and say, Ueryly our fathers
haue cleaued vnto lyes, their idols are but vayne and vnprofitable.
20 Howe can a man make those his gods, which are not able to be gods?
21 And therfore I wyll once teach them, saith the Lorde, I wyll shewe them my
hande and my power, and they shall knowe that my name is the Lorde.

Chapter 17

1 Your sinne O ye of the tribe of Iuda is written in the table of your heartes,
and grauen so vpon the edges of your aulters with a penne of iron, and with an
Adamant clawe:
2 That as the fathers thinke vpon their children, so thinke you also vpon your
aulters, wooddes, thicke trees, hye hylles, mountaynes, and fieldes.
3 Wherfore, I wyll make my mount that standeth in the fielde, all your
substaunce and treasure to be spoyled, for the great sinne that ye haue done
vpon your hye places throughout all the coastes of your lande.
4 Ye shalbe cast out also from the heritage that I gaue you: and I wyll subdue
you vnder the heauie bondage of your enemies, in a lande that ye knowe not: for
ye haue ministred fire to mine indignation, which shall burne euermore.
5 Thus saith the Lorde, Cursed be the man that putteth his trust in man, and
that taketh fleshe for his arme, and he whose heart departeth from the Lord.
6 He shalbe like the heath that groweth in wildernesse: As for the good thyng
that is for to come, he shall not see it, but dwell in a drye place of the
wildernesse, in a salt and vnoccupied lande.
7 O blessed is the man that putteth his trust in the Lorde, and whose hope is in
the Lorde hym selfe.
8 For he shalbe as a tree that is planted by the water side, which spreadeth out
the roote vnto moystnesse, whom the heate can not harme when it commeth, but his
leafe shalbe greene: And though there growe but litle fruite because of drouth,
yet is he not carefull, but he neuer leaueth of to bryng foorth fruite.
9 Among all thynges, man hath the most deceiptfull and stubburne heart: Who
shall then knowe it?
10 Euen I the Lorde searche out the grounde of the heart, & trye the raynes, and
rewarde euery man accordyng to his wayes, and accordyng to the fruite of his
workes.
11 The partrich maketh a nest of egges, which she layed not: he commeth by
riches, but not righteously, in the middest of his life must he leane them
behynde hym, & at the last be founde a very foole.
12 But thou (O Lorde) whose throne is most glorious, excellent, and of most
antiquitie, which dwellest in the place of our holy rest:
13 Thou art the comfort of Israel, all they that forsake thee shalbe confounded,
all they that do depart from thee shalbe written in earth: for they haue
forsaken the Lorde the very conduite of the waters of lyfe.
14 Heale me O Lorde, and I shalbe whole: saue thou me, & I shalbe saued: for
thou art my prayse.
15 Beholde, these men say vnto me, where is the worde of the Lorde? let it come
nowe.
16 Wheras I neuerthelesse obediently folowed thee as a sheephearde, & haue not
vncalled taken this office vpon me, this knowest thou well: my wordes also were
ryght before thee.
17 Be not thou terrible vnto me O Lord: for thou art he in whom I hope when I am
in perill.
18 Let my persecutours be confounded, but not me: let them be afrayde, and not
me: Thou shalt bryng vpon them the tyme of plague, and shalt destroy them right
sore.
19 Thus hath the Lorde sayde vnto me, Go and stande vnder the gate wherethrough
the people and the kynges of Iuda go out and in, yea vnder all the gates of
Hierusalem,
20 And say vnto them, Heare the worde of the Lorde ye kynges of Iuda, and all
thou people of Iuda, and all the citezins of Hierusalem, that go through this
gate.
21 Thus the Lorde comaundeth, Take heede for your lyues that ye cary no burthen
vpon you in the Sabbath, to bryng it through the gates of Hierusalem.
22 Ye shall beare no burthen also out of your houses in the Sabbath, you shall
do no labour therin: but halowe the Sabbath, as I commaunded your fathers.
23 Howbeit they obeyed me not, neither hearkened they vnto me: but were
obstinate & stubburne, and neither obeyed me, nor receaued my correction.
24 Neuerthelesse, yf ye wyll heare me saith the Lorde, and beare no burthen into
the citie through this gate vpon the Sabbath, yf ye wyll halowe the Sabbath, so
that ye do no worke therin:
25 Then shall there go through the gates of this citie kynges and princes that
shal sit vpon the throne of Dauid, they shalbe caryed vpon charrettes, and ride
vpon horses, both they & their princes: yea whole Iuda and all the citezins of
Hierusalem shall go here through, and this citie shall euer be inhabited.
26 There shall come men also from the cities of Iuda, from about Hierusalem, and
from the lande of Beniamin, from the plaine fieldes, from the moutaynes, and
from the wildernesse, which shall bryng burnt offerynges, sacrifices, oblations,
and incense, and offer vp thankesgeuyng in the house of the Lorde.
27 But yf ye wyll not be obedient vnto me to halowe the Sabbath, so that ye wyll
beare your burthens through the gates of Hierusalem vpon the Sabbath: then shall
I set fire vpon the gates of Hierusalem, and it shall burne vp the houses of
Hierusalem, and no man shalbe able to quenche it.

Chapter 18

1 This is another communication that God had with Ieremie, saying:
2 Arise, and go downe into the potters house, & there shal I tell thee more of
my mynde,
3 Nowe when I came to the potters house, I founde hym makyng his worke vpon a
wheele.
4 The vessell that the potter made of clay, brake among his handes: So he began
a newe, and made another vessell accordyng to his mynde.
5 Then sayde the Lorde thus vnto me:
6 May not I do with you as this potter doth O ye house of Israel saith the
Lorde? Beholde ye house of Israel, ye are in my hande, euen as the clay is in
the potters hande.
7 When I take in hande to roote out, to destroy, or to waste away any people or
kyngdome:
8 If that people agaynst whom I haue thus deuised, conuert from their
wickednesse, I repent of the plague that I deuised to bryng vpon them.
9 Agayne, when I take in hande to builde or to plant a people or a kyngdome:
10 If the same people do euyll before me and heare not my voyce, I repent of the
good that I haue deuised for them.
11 Speake nowe therfore vnto whole Iuda, and to them that dwell at Hierusalem,
thus saith the Lorde, Beholde I am deuisyng a plague for you, and am takyng a
thyng in hande agaynst you: therfore let euery man turne from his euyll way, and
take vpon you the thyng that is good and ryght.
12 But they sayde, No more of this, we wyll folowe our owne imaginations, and do
euery man accordyng to the wilfulnesse of his owne mynde.
13 Therfore thus saith the Lorde, Aske among the heathen yf any man haue hearde
such horrible thynges, as the mayden Israel hath done?
14 Wyll a man forsake the showe of Libanus, which commeth from the rocke of the
fielde? Or shall the colde flowyng waters that commeth from another place be
forsaken?
15 But my people hath forgotten me, they haue made sacrifice in vayne, and their
prophetes make them fall in their wayes from the auncient pathes, and to go into
a way not vsed to be troden of iust men.
16 Wherethrough they haue brought their lande into an euerlastyng wildernesse
and scorne: so that whosoeuer trauayleth therby, shalbe abashed, and wagge their
heades.
17 With an east wynde wyll I scatter them before their enemies: and when their
destruction commeth, I wil turne my backe vpon them, but not my face.
18 Then sayd they, Come, let vs imagine somethyng agaynst this Ieremie: for the
priestes shall not be destitute of the lawe, neither shall the wise men be
destitute of counsayle, nor the prophetes destitute of the worde of God: Come,
and let vs smite hym with the tongue, and let vs not marke all his wordes.
19 Consider me O Lorde, and heare the voyce of mine enemies.
20 Shall they recompence euyll for good? for they haue digged a pit for my
soule: Remember howe that I stoode before thee to speake good for them, and to
turne away thy wrath from them.
21 Therfore, let their children dye of hunger, and let them be oppressed with
the sworde: Let their wiues be robbed of their children, and become widowes, let
their husbandes be slayne, let their young men be kylled with the sworde in the
fielde.
22 Let the noyse be hearde out of their houses when thou bryngest the murtherer
sodaynly vpon them: for they haue digged a pit to take me, and layde snares for
my feete.
23 Yet Lorde thou knowest all their counsayle, that they haue deuised to slay
me, forgeue not their wickednesse, and let not their sinnes be put out of thy
sight, but let them be iudged before thee as giltie: this do thou vnto them in
the tyme of thine indignation.

Chapter 19

1 Thus sayde the Lorde: Go thy way and buye thee an earthen pitcher, and bryng
foorth the senatours & chiefe priestes,
2 Unto the valley of the children of Hennom, which lyeth without the east gate,
and shewe them there the wordes that I shall tell thee.
3 And say thus vnto them, Heare the worde of the Lorde ye kinges of Iuda, and ye
citezins of Hierusalem, thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel:
Beholde, I wyll bryng suche a plague vpon this place, that the eares of all that
heare it shall glowe:
4 And that because they haue forsaken me, and vnhalowed this place, and haue
offered in it vnto straunge gods, whom neither they, their fathers, nor the
kynges of Iuda haue knowen: they haue filled this place also with the blood of
innocentes.
5 And they haue set vp an aulter vnto Baal, to burne their children for a burnt
offring vnto Baal, whiche I neither commaunded nor charged them, neither thought
once thervpon.
6 Beholde therfore the time commeth (saith the Lorde) that this place shall no
more be called Thopheth, nor the valley of the chyldren of Hennom, but the
valley of slaughter.
7 For in this place wyll I bryng to naught the counsayle of Iuda and Hierusalem,
and kyll them downe with the sworde before their enemies: and I wyll deliuer
them into the handes of them that seeke their liues, and their dead carkasses
will I geue to be meate for the foules of the ayre, & the beastes of the fielde.
8 And I will make this citie so desolate and despised, that whosoeuer goeth
thereby shalbe abashed, and iest vpon her, because of all her plagues.
9 I will feede them also with the flesh of their sonnes and their daughters, yea
euery one shall eate vp another in the besieging & straytnesse wherewith their
enemies that seeke their liues shall kepe them in.
10 And the pitcher shalt thou breake in the sight of the men that goeth with
thee,
11 And say vnto them, Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes: Euen so wyll I destroy
this people and citie, as a man breaketh an earthen vessell that can not be made
whole agayne: in Thopheth shall they be buried, for they shall haue none other
place.
12 Thus wyll I do vnto this place also saith the Lorde, and to them that dwel
therin, yea I wyll make this citie as Thopheth.
13 For the houses of Hierusalem, and the houses of the kynges of Iuda shalbe
defiled like as Thopheth, and so shal al the houses in whose roofes they did
sacrifice vnto all the hoast of heauen, and powred drinke offerings vnto
straunge gods.
14 And so Ieremie came from Thopheth where the Lorde had sent hym to prophesie,
and stoode in the court of the house of the Lorde, and spake to all the people,
15 Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel: Beholde, I will bryng vpon
this citie, and vpon euery towne about it, all the plagues that I haue deuised
against them, because they haue ben obstinate, and would not obay my warninges.

Chapter 20

1 When Phashur the priest the sonne of Emmer, chiefe in the house of the Lorde,
hearde Ieremie preache these wordes so stedfastly
2 He smote Ieremie, and put hym in the prison that is in the hye gate of
Beniamin towardes the house of the Lorde.
3 The next day folowing Phashur brought Ieremie out of the prison agayne: Then
saide Ieremie vnto him, The Lorde shall call thee no more Phashur that is
excellent and increasing but Magor that is fearefull and afraide euery where.
4 For thus saith the Lorde: Beholde, I wil make thee afraide, euen thy selfe,
and all that fauour thee, which shall perishe with the sworde of their enemies,
euen before thy face, and I wyll geue whole Iuda into the hands of the king of
Babylon, whiche shall cary some vnto Babylon prisoners, and slay some with the
sworde.
5 Moreouer, all the substaunce of this citie, whatsoeuer they haue gotten with
their trauaile, all their precious thinges, & all the treasure of the kinges of
Iuda, wyll I geue into the handes of their enemies, whiche shall spoyle them,
and cary them vnto Babylon.
6 But as for thee (O Phashur) thou shalt go into captiuitie with all thyne
housholde, and to Babylon shalt thou come, where thou shalt dye and be buried,
thou and all thy fauourers to whom thou hast preached lies.
7 O Lord, if I am deceaued, then hast thou deceaued me, thou enforcedst me, and
hast preuayled: dayly am I despised and laughed to scorne of euery man.
8 For since I began to preache, I cryed out against violencie, and exclamed
against oppression: for the whiche cause they cast the worde of the Lorde in my
teeth, to my reproche continually.
9 Wherefore I thought from hencefoorth not to speake of hym, nor to preache any
more in his name: but the worde of the Lorde was a very burning fire in my heart
and in my bones, whiche when I woulde haue stopped, I might not.
10 Ueryly I hearde the euyll reportes of many, terrour was on euery side of me:
complayne vpon hym say they, and we wyll tell his tale: Yea all myne owne
companions, and suche as were conuersaunt with me, lay in wayte for my halting,
saying: peraduenture he wylbe deceaued, and so shall we preuayle against hym,
and be auenged of hym.
11 But the Lorde stoode by me lyke a mightie giaunt, therefore my persecutours
fell and coulde do nothing: they shalbe sore confounded, for they haue done
vnwisely, they shall haue an euerlasting shame, which shall neuer be forgotten.
12 And nowe O Lorde of hoastes that triest the righteous, which knowest the
raynes and the very heartes, let me see them punished: for vnto thee I haue
declared my cause.
13 Sing vnto the Lord and prayse hym, for he hath deliuered the soule of the
oppressed from the hande of the violent.
14 Cursed be the day wherein I was borne, vnhappy be the day wherein my mother
brought me foorth.
15 Cursed be the man that brought my father the tidinges to make hym gald,
saying, Thou hast begotten a sonne:
16 Let it happen vnto that man, as to the cities whiche the Lorde turned
vpsidedowne and repented not: Let hym heare crying in the morning, and at noone
day lamentable howling.
17 Why sluest thou not me assoone as I came out of my mothers wombe? or that my
mother had ben my graue her selfe, that the byrth might not haue come out, but
remayned still in her?
18 Wherefore came I foorth of my mothers wombe? to haue experience of labour and
sorowe, and to leade my lyfe with shame?

Chapter 21

1 These are the wordes that the lord spake vnto Ieremie, what time as kyng
Zedekias sent vnto him Phashur the sonne of Melchias, & Sophonias the sonne of
Maasias priest, saying:
2 Aske counsayle at the Lorde we pray thee on our behalfe, for Nabuchodonozor
the king of Babylon besiegeth vs: if the Lorde (peraduenture) wyll deale with vs
according to his maruaylous power, and take hym from vs.
3 Then spake Ieremie: Geue Zedechias this aunswere.
4 Thus saith the Lord God of Israel: Beholde, I wyll turne backe the weapons
that ye haue in your hands, wherwith ye fight against the king of Babylon and
the Chaldees, whiche besiege you rounde about the walles, and I wyll bryng them
together into the middest of this citie.
5 And I my selfe will fight against you with an ouerstretched hande, and with a
mightie arme, in great displeasure and terrible wrath:
6 And wyll smite them that dwell in this citie, yea both men and cattell shall
dye of a great pestilence.
7 But after this (saith the Lorde) I shall deliuer Zedekias kyng of Iuda, and
his seruauntes, his people, and such as are escaped in the citie from the
pestilence, sworde, and hunger, into the power of Nabuchodonozor kyng of
Babylon, yea into the handes of their enemies, into the handes of those that
folowe vpon their liues, whiche shall smite them with the sworde, they shall not
pitie them, they shal not spare them, they shall haue no mercy vpon them.
8 And vnto this people thou shalt say, thus saith the Lorde: Beholde, I lay
before you the way of life and death.
9 Whoso abideth in the citie, shall perishe, either with the sworde, with
hunger, or pestilence: but whoso goeth out to holde on the Chaldees part that
besiege it, he shall saue his lyfe, and shall winne his soule for a pray.
10 For I haue set my face against this citie (saith the Lorde) to plague it, and
to do it no good: it must be geuen into the hande of the kyng of Babylon, and be
brent with fire.
11 And vnto the house of the king of Iuda say thus: Heare the worde of the
Lorde:
12 O thou house of Dauid, thus saith the Lorde: Minister righteousnesse and that
soone, deliuer the oppressed from violent power, or euer my terrible wrath
breake out lyke a fire and burne, so that no man may quenche it because of the
wickednesse of your imaginations.
13 Behold, saith the Lord, I wyll come vpon thee that dwellest in the valleys,
rockes, and fieldes, and say, tushe, who will make vs afraide? or who wil come
into our houses?
14 For I wyll visite you saith the Lord, because of the wickednesse of your
inuentions, and wyll kindle suche a fire in your wood, as shall consume all that
is about you.

Chapter 22

1 Thus saith the Lord: Go downe into the house of the kyng of Iuda, and speake
there these wordes,
2 And say: Heare the worde of the Lorde thou king of Iuda that sittest in the
kyngly seate of Dauid, thou and thy seruauntes, and thy people that goeth in and
out at these gates.
3 Thus the Lord comaundeth: Kepe equitie and righteousnesse, deliuer the
oppressed from the power of the violent, do not greeue nor oppresse the
straunger, the fatherlesse, nor the widowe, and shed no innocent blood in this
place.
4 And if ye kepe these thinges faythfullye, then shall there come in at the
doore of this house, kinges to sit vpon Dauids seate, they shalbe caried in
charrets, and ride vpon horses, both they and their seruauntes, and their
people.
5 But if ye wyll not be obedient vnto these commaundementes, I sweare by mine
owne selfe, saith the Lord, this house shalbe waste.
6 For thus hath the Lorde spoken vppon the kynges of Iuda: Thou Gilead art vnto
me the head of Libanus: Shall I not make thee so waste as the cities that no man
dwell in?
7 I wyll prepare a destroyer with his weapons for thee, to hewe downe thy
especiall Cedar trees, and to cast them in the fire.
8 And all the people that go by this citie, shall speake one to another:
Wherfore hath the Lorde done thus vnto this noble citie?
9 Then shall it be aunswered: Because they haue broken the couenaunt of the
Lorde their God, and haue worshipped and serued straunge Gods.
10 Mourne not ouer the dead, and be not wo for them: but be sorie for hym that
departeth away, for he commeth not agayne, and seeth his natiue countrey no
more.
11 For thus saith the Lorde as touching Sellum the sonne of Iosias kyng of Iuda,
whiche raigned after his father: When he is caried out of this place, he shall
neuer come hyther agayne.
12 For he shall dye in the place wherevnto he is led captiue, and shall see this
lande no more.
13 Wo worth hym that buyldeth his house with vnrighteousnesse, and his parlours
with the good that he hath gotten by violence, which neuer recompenceth his
neighbours labour, nor payeth hym his hyre:
14 Who thinketh in hym selfe, I wyll buylde me a wyde house and gorgious
parlours, who causeth windowes to be hewen therin, and the seelinges and ioystes
maketh he of Cedar, and painteth them with Sinoper.
15 Thinkest thou to raigne nowe that thou hast inclosed thy selfe with Cedar?
Did not thy father eate and drinke and prosper well, as long as he dealt with
equitie and righteousnesse?
16 Yea, when he helped the oppressed and poore to their right, then prospered he
well: From whence came this, but onlye because he knewe me, saith the Lorde?
17 Neuerthelesse, as for thyne eyes and thyne heart they loke vpon
couetousnesse, to shed innocent blood, to do wrong and violence.
18 And therefore thus saith the Lorde against Iehoakim the sonne of Iosias kyng
of Iuda: They shall not mourne for hym as they vse to do Alas brother, alas
sister: neither shall they say vnto him, Alas sir, alas for that noble prince.
19 But as an asse shall he be buried, corrupt, and be cast without the gates of
Hierusalem.
20 Climbe vp the hyll of Libanus O thou daughter Sion lyft vp thy voyce vppon
Basan, crye from all partes: for all thy louers are destroyed.
21 I gaue thee warning whyle thou wast yet in prosperitie: but thou saidest, I
wyll not heare: And this maner hast thou vsed from thy youth, that thou wouldest
neuer heare my voyce.
22 All thy heardmen shalbe driuen with the winde, and thy darlinges shalbe
caryed away into captiuitie: then shalt thou be brought to shame and confusion,
because of all thy wickednes.
23 Thou that dwellest vpon Libanus, and makest thy nest in the Cedar trees, O
howe litle shalt thou be regarded when thy sorowe and panges come vppon thee, as
vpon a woman trauayling with chylde?
24 As truely as I liue saith the Lorde, though Conanias the sonne of Iehoakim
kyng of Iuda were the signet of my right hande, yet wyll I plucke him of.
25 And I wyll geue thee into the hande of them that seeke thy life, and into the
power of them that thou fearest, euen into the power of Nabuchodonozor the kyng
of Babylon, and into the power of the Chaldees.
26 Moreouer, I wyll sende thee and thy mother that bare thee into a straunge
lande where ye were not borne, and there shall ye dye.
27 But as for the lande that ye wyll desire to returne vnto, ye shall neuer come
at it agayne.
28 This man Conanias shalbe lyke an image robbed and torne in peeces, and like a
vessell wherein there is no pleasure: Wherefore both he and his seede shalbe
sent away, and cast into a lande that they knowe not.
29 O thou earth, earth, earth, heare the worde of the Lorde,
30 Thus saith the Lorde, Write this man destitute of chyldren: for no
prosperitie shall this man haue all his dayes, neyther shall any of his seede be
so happie as to sit vpon the seate of Dauid, and to beare rule any more in Iuda.

Chapter 23

1 Wo vnto the shepheardes that destroy and scatter my flocke, saith the Lorde.
2 Wherefore this is the saying of the Lord God of Israel concerning the
shepheardes that feede my people, Ye scatter and thrust out my flocke, and loke
not vpon them: therefore nowe wyll I visite the wickednesse of your
imaginations, saith the Lorde.
3 And I wyll gather together the remnaunt of my flocke from all landes that I
had driuen them vnto, and will bring them agayne to their foldes, that they may
growe and increase.
4 I wyll set shepheardes also ouer them, whiche shall feede them: they shall no
more feare and dread, and there shall none of them be loste, saith the Lorde.
5 Beholde, the tyme commeth saith the Lorde, that I wyll rayse vp the righteous
braunche of Dauid, whiche kyng shall beare rule, and he shall prosper with
wisdome, and shal set vp equitie and righteousnesse agayne in the earth.
6 In his tyme shall Iuda be saued, and Israel shall dwell without feare: and
this is the name that they shall call hym, euen the Lorde our righteousnesse.
7 And therefore beholde the time commeth saith the Lorde, that it shalbe no more
sayde, the Lorde liueth whiche brought the chyldren of Israel out of the lande
of Egypt:
8 But the Lorde liueth which brought foorth and led the seede of the house of
Israel out of the north lande, and from all countreys where I had scattred them:
and they shal dwel in their owne lande agayne.
9 My heart breaketh in my body, because of the false prophetes all my bones
shake, I am become like a drunken man that by the reason of wine can take no
rest, for very feare of the Lorde and his holy wordes.
10 Because the lande is full of adulterers, and thorowe swearing it mourneth,
and the pleasaunt pastures of the desert are dryed vp: yea the way that men take
is wicked, and their power is nothing right.
11 For the prophetes and the priestes them selues are polluted hypocrites, and
their wickednesse haue I founde in my house, saith the Lorde.
12 Wherefore their way shalbe slipperie in the darknesse, wherein they may
stacker and fall: for I wyll bryng a plague vpon them, euen the yere of their
visitation, saith the Lorde.
13 I haue seene folly among the prophetes of Samaria, that preached for Baal,
and deceaued my people of Israel.
14 I haue seene also among the prophetes of Hierusalem foule adultrie, and
presumptuous lyes: they take the most shamefull men by the hande, flattering
them, so that they can not returne from their wickednes: all these with their
citizens are vnto me as Sodom, and as the inhabitours of Gomorre.
15 Therefore thus saith the Lorde of hoastes concerning these prophetes:
Beholde, I wyll feede them with wormewood, and make them drinke the water of
gall: For from the prophetes of Hierusalem is hypocrisie come into all the
lande.
16 And therfore the Lorde of hoastes geueth you this warning: Heare not the
wordes of the prophetes that preache vnto you and deceaue you, truely they
reache you vanitie: for they speake the meaning of their owne heart, and not out
of the mouth of the Lorde.
17 They say vnto them that despise me, The Lorde hath spoken it, tushe, ye shall
prosper right well: and vnto all them that walke after the lust of their owne
heart, they say, tushe, there shall no misfortune happen you.
18 For who hath sitten in the counsayle of the Lorde, that he hath hearde and
vnderstande what he is about to do? who hath marked his deuice, and hearde it?
19 Beholde, the stormie weather of the Lorde that is his indignation, shall go
foorth, and a violent whirlewinde shall fall downe vpon the head of the vngodly.
20 And the wrath of the Lorde shall not turne agayne, vntill he perfourme and
fulfill the thought of his heart: and in the latter dayes ye shall knowe his
meaning.
21 I haue not sent these prophetes saith the Lorde and yet they ranne, I haue
not spoken to them, and yet they preached.
22 But if they had continued in my counsayle, they had opened to my people my
wordes, and they had turned my people from their euyll wayes, and wicked
imaginations.
23 Am I then God that seeth but the thing whiche is nye at hande, and not that
is farre of, saith the Lorde?
24 May any man hide him selfe so, that I shall not see hym saith the Lorde? do
not I fulfill heauen and earth saith the Lorde?
25 I haue hearde well inough what the prophetes say that preache lyes in my
name, saying, I haue dreamed, I haue dreamed.
26 Howe long wyll this continue in the prophetes heart to tell lies, and preache
the craftie subtiltie of their owne heart?
27 Whose purpose is with the dreames that euery one tell, to make my people
forget my name, as their fathers dyd when Baal came vp.
28 The prophete that hath a dreame, let hym tell it, and he that vnderstandeth
my worde, let hym shewe it faythfully: for what hath chaffe and wheate to do
together saith the Lorde?
29 Is not my worde like a fire saith the Lorde? and like an hammer that breaketh
the harde stone?
30 Therefore thus saith the Lodre: beholde, I wyll vpon the prophetes that
steale my worde priuilie from euery man.
31 Beholde, here am I saith the Lorde, against the prophetes that make tongues
tender to speake, and to say, The Lorde hath saide it.
32 Beholde, here am I saith the Lorde, against those prophetes that dare
prophecie lying dreames, and deceaue my people with their vanities and
inconstant deuices, yet I neuer sent nor commaunded them: They shall do this
people no good at all, saith the Lorde.
33 If this people, eyther any prophete or priest aske thee, and say: What is the
burthen of the Lord? Thou shalt say vnto them: what burthen? I wyll forsake you
saith the Lorde.
34 And the prophete, priest, or people that vseth this tearme, The burthen of
the Lorde: him wyll I visite, and his house also.
35 But thus shall ye say euery one to another, and euery man to his brother:
what aunswere hath the Lorde geuen? or what is the Lordes commaundement?
36 And as for the burthen of the Lorde, ye shall speake no more of it, for euery
mans owne worde is his burthen: because ye haue altred the wordes of the liuing
God, the Lorde of hoastes, our God.
37 Thus shall euery man say to the prophetes: what aunswere hath the Lorde geuen
thee? or what saith the Lorde?
38 And not once to name the burthen of the Lorde. Therefore thus saith the Lord:
Forasmuch as ye haue vsed this terme (the burthen of the Lord) where as I
notwithstanding sent vnto you and forbad you to speake of the Lordes burthen:
39 Beholde therefore, I wyll take you vp as a burthen, and wyl cast you farre of
from my presence, yea and the citie also that I gaue you and your fathers:
40 And wyll bryng you to an euerlasting confusion, and into a shame that shall
neuer be forgotten.

Chapter 24

1 The Lorde shewed me a vision: Beholde, there stode two maundes of figges
before the temple of the Lorde, after that Nabuchodonozar kyng of Babylon had
led away captiue Iechonias the sonne of Iehoakim kyng of Iuda, the mightie men
also of Iuda, with the workemasters and cunning men of Hierusalem vnto Babylon.
2 In the one maunde were very good figges, euen like those that be first ripe:
in the other maunde were very naughtie figges, whiche might not be eaten they
were so euyll.
3 Then sayd the Lord vnto me: What seest thou Ieremie? I sayde, figges, whereof
some be very good, and some so euyll that no man may eate them.
4 Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto me, after this maner:
5 Thus saith the Lorde the God of Israel, Like as thou knowest the good figges:
so shall I knowe the men led away, whom I haue sent out of this place into the
lande of the Chaldees for their profite:
6 And I wyll set mine eyes vpon them for the best, for I wyll bryng them agayne
into this lande, I wyll buylde them vp, and not breake them downe, I wyll plant
them, and not roote them out.
7 And I wyll geue them an heart to knowe howe that I am the Lorde: They shalbe
my people, and I wyll be their God: for they shall returne vnto me with their
whole heart.
8 And like as thou knowest the naughtie figges whiche may not be eaten they are
so euyll: euen so wyll I, saith the Lorde, cause Zedechias the kyng of Iuda, yea
and all his princes, and the residue of Hierusalem that remaine ouer in this
lande, and them also that dwell in Egypt, to be vexed and plagued in all
kyngdomes and landes.
9 And I wyll make them to be a reprofe, a common byworde, a laughing stocke and
shame in al the places where I shall scatter them.
10 I wyll sende the sworde, hunger, and pestilence among them, vntyll I haue
cleane consumed them out of the lande that I gaue vnto them and their fathers.

Chapter 25

1 A Sermon that was geuen vnto Ieremie vppon all the people of Iuda, in the
fourth yere of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosias kyng of Iuda (that was in the first
yere of Nabuchodonozor kyng of Babylon.)
2 Which sermon Ieremie the prophete made vnto all the people of Iuda, and to all
the inhabitours of Hierusalem, on this maner.
3 From the thirteenth yere of Iosias the sonne of Amon kyng of Iuda vnto this
present day (that is euen twentie and three yeres) the worde of the Lord hath
ben committed vnto me, and so I haue spoken vnto you, I haue risen vp early, I
haue geuen you warning in season: but ye woulde not heare me.
4 Though the Lord hath sent his seruauntes all the prophetes vnto you in season,
yet would ye not obay, ye would not encline your eares to heare.
5 He sayde: Turne againe euery man from his euill way, and from your wicked
imaginations, and so shall ye dwell for euer in the lande that the Lord promised
you and your forefathers.
6 And go not after straunge gods, serue them not, worship them not, and anger me
not with the workes of your owne handes, then wyll I not punishe you.
7 Neuerthelesse, ye woulde not heare me saith the Lorde, but haue prouoked me to
anger with the workes of your handes, to your great harme.
8 Wherefore thus saith the Lorde of hoastes: Because ye haue not hearkened vnto
my worde,
9 Lo, I wyll sende out and call for all the people that dwell in the north saith
the Lorde, and wyll prepare Nabuchodonozar the kyng of Babylon my seruaunt, and
wyll bryng them vpon this lande, and vpon all that dwell therin, and vpon all
the people that are about them, and wyll vtterly roote them out: I wyll make
them amased, a mockage, and a continuall desert.
10 Moreouer, I wyll take from them the voyce of gladnesse and solace, the voyce
of the bridegrome and the bride, the noyse of the milstones, and the light of
the cressets.
11 And this whole lande shall become a wildernesse and astonished: and these
nations shal serue the king of Babylon threscore yeres and ten.
12 When the threscore and ten yeres are expired, I wil visite all the
wickednesse of the kyng of Babylon and his people saith the Lorde, yea and the
lande of the Chaldees, and wyll make it a perpetuall wildernesse,
13 And wyll fulfill all my wordes vpon that lande whiche I haue deuised against
it: yea all that is written in this booke, whiche Ieremie hath prophecied of all
people.
14 So that they also shalbe subdued vnto diuers nations and great kynges, for I
will recompence them according to their deedes and workes of their owne handes.
15 For thus hath the Lorde God of Israel spoken vnto me: take this wine cup of
indignation fro my hande, that thou mayest cause all people to whom I sende
thee, for to drinke of it.
16 That when they haue drunken therof, they may be madde and out of their
wittes, when the sworde commeth that I wyll sende among them.
17 Then toke I the cuppe from the Lordes hande, and made all people to drinke
thereof vnto whom the Lorde had sent me:
18 But first the citie of Hierusalem, and all the cities of Iuda, their kinges
and princes, to make them desolate, amased, despised, and hissed at, and cursed,
according as it is come to passe this day:
19 Yea and Pharao the kyng of Egypt, his seruauntes, his princes, and his people
altogether one with another:
20 And all kinges of the lande of Hus, all kinges of the Philistines lande,
Ascalon, Azah, Accaron, and the remnaunt of Asdod,
21 The Edomites, the Moabites, and the Ammonites,
22 All the kinges of Tyrus and Sidon, the kinges of the Isles that are beyonde
the sea,
23 Dedan, Thema, Buz, and all them that dwell in the vttermost partes of the
worlde,
24 All the kinges of Arabia, and generally all the kinges that dwell in the
desert,
25 All the kinges of Zimri, al the kinges of Elam, all the kinges of the Medes,
26 All the kinges towarde the north, whether they be farre or nye, euery one
against his neighbour, yea and all the kyngdomes that are vpon the whole earth:
and the kyng of Sesach shall drinke also after them.
27 Therfore say thou vnto them, This is the commaundement of the Lorde of
hoastes the God of Israel: Drinke and be drunken, spewe and fall, that ye neuer
arise, and that thorowe the sworde whiche I wyll sende among you.
28 But yf they wyll not receaue the cup of thy hande, and drynke it, then tell
them, thus doth the Lorde of hoastes threaten you, Drynke it you shall, and that
shortly?
29 For lo, I begyn to plague the citie that my name is geuen vnto, thinke ye
then that I will leaue you vnpunished? ye shall not go quite: for why? I call
for a sworde vpon all the inhabitours of the earth, saith the Lorde of hoastes.
30 Therfore tell them all these wordes, and say vnto them: The Lorde shall crye
from aboue, and his voyce shalbe hearde from his holy habitation, with a great
noyse shal he crie from his court regall: he shall geue a great voyce like the
grape gatherers, and the sounde therof shalbe hearde vnto the endes of the
worlde.
31 For the Lorde hath a iudgement to geue vpon all people, and wyll holde his
court of iustice with all fleshe, and wyll deliuer the vngodly to the sworde,
saith the Lorde.
32 For thus saith the Lorde of hoastes, Beholde, a miserable plague shall go
from one people to another, and a great stormie water shall arise from all the
endes of the earth.
33 And the same day shall the Lord him selfe slay them from one ende of the
earth to another: there shal no mone be made for any of them, none gathered vp,
none buryed: but shall lye as dunge vpon the grounde.
34 Mourne O ye sheepheardes, and crye, sprinckle your selues with asshes O ye
rammes of the flocke: for the tyme of your slaughter and breache is fulfylled,
and ye shall fall lyke vessels that were much set by.
35 The sheepheardes shall haue no way to flee, and the rammes of the flocke
shall not escape.
36 Then shall the sheepheardes crye horribly, and the rammes of the flocke shall
mourne: for the Lorde hath consumed their pasture,
37 And their best fieldes lye dead, because of the horrible wrath of the Lorde.
38 They haue forsaken their foldes like as a lion: for their lande is waste
because of the spoylers furious crueltie, and of his fearefull indignation.

Chapter 26

1 In the begynnyng of the raigne of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosias kyng of Iuda,
came this worde from the Lorde, saying:
2 Thus saith the Lord: Stande in the court of the Lordes house, & speake vnto al
them which (out of the citie of Iuda) come to do worship in the Lordes house,
all the wordes that I commaunde thee to say: loke that thou kepe not one worde
backe.
3 (If peraduenture they wyll hearken and turne euery man from his wicked way,
that I may also repent of the plague which I haue determined to bryng vpon them,
because of their wicked inuentions.)
4 And after this maner shalt thou speake vnto them, Thus saith the Lord: If ye
wyll not obey me, to walke in my lawes which I haue geuen you,
5 And to heare the wordes of my seruauntes the prophetes whom I sent vnto you,
risyng vp tymely, and styll sendyng, yet you haue not hearkened:
6 Then wyll I do to this house as I did vnto Silo, and wyll make this citie to
be abhorred of all the people of the earth.
7 And the priestes, the prophetes, and all the people hearde Ieremie preache
these wordes in the house of the Lorde.
8 Nowe when he had spoken out all the wordes that the Lorde commaunded hym to
preache vnto the people, then the priestes, the prophetes, and all the people
toke holde vpon hym, and sayde, Thou shalt dye:
9 Howe darest thou be so bolde as to say in the name of the Lord, it shall
happen to this house as it did vnto Silo, and this citie shalbe so waste that no
man may dwell therin?
10 And when all the people were gathered about Ieremie in the house of the
Lorde, the princes of Iuda hearde of this rumour, and they came soone out of the
kynges palace into the house of the Lorde, and sate them downe before the newe
doore of the Lorde.
11 Then spake the priestes and the prophetes vnto the rulers, and to all the
people these wordes, This man is worthy to dye: for he hath preached agaynst
this citie, as ye your selues haue hearde with your eares.
12 Then sayde Ieremie vnto the rulers and to all the people, The Lorde hath sent
me to preache agaynst this house, and agaynst this citie, all the wordes that ye
haue hearde.
13 Therfore amende your wayes, and your aduisementes, and be obedient vnto the
voyce of the Lorde your God, so shall the Lorde repent of the plague that he
hath deuised agaynst you.
14 Nowe as for me I am in your handes, do with me as you thinke expedient and
good:
15 But this shall ye knowe yf ye put me to death, ye shall make your selues,
this citie, and all the inhabitours therof giltie of innocent blood: For this is
of a trueth, that the Lorde hath sent me vnto you, to speake all these wordes in
your eares.
16 Then sayde the rulers and the people vnto the priestes and prophetes: This
man may not be condempned to death, for he hath preached vnto vs in the name of
the Lorde our God.
17 The elders also of the lande stoode vp, and sayde thus vnto all the people.
18 Micheas the Morasthite, which was a prophete vnder Ezekias kyng of Iuda,
spake to all the people of Iuda, thus saith the Lorde of hoastes, Sion shalbe
plowed like a fielde, Hierusalem shalbe an heape of stones, and the hyll of the
Lordes house shalbe turned to an hye wood.
19 Did Ezekias the kyng of Iuda and all the people of Iuda put hym to death for
this? No veryly: but rather feared the Lord, and made their prayer vnto hym, for
the which cause also the Lorde repented of the plague that he had deuised
agaynst them: Shoulde we then do such a shamefull deede agaynst our soules?
20 There was a prophete also that preached stifly in the name of the Lorde,
called Urias the sonne of Semaiah of Kiriathiarim: this man also preached
agaynst this citie and agaynst this lande, according to all as Ieremie saith.
21 Nowe when Iehoakim the king with all the estates and princes had hearde his
wordes, the kyng went about to slay him: When Urias perceaued that, he was
afrayde and fled, and departed into Egypt.
22 Then Iehoakim the kyng sent seruauntes into the lande of Egypt namelye
Elnathan the sonne of Achbor, and certayne men with hym into Egypt:
23 Which fetched Urias out of Egypt, and brought him vnto king Iehoakim, that
slue hym with the sworde, and cast his dead body into the common peoples graue.
24 But Ahikam the sonne of Saphan helped Hieremie, that he came not into the
handes of the people to be slayne.

Chapter 27

1 In the begynnyng of the raigne of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosias kyng of Iuda,
came this worde vnto Ieremie from the Lorde, which spake thus vnto me:
2 Make thee bondes and chaynes, and put them about thy necke,
3 And sende them to the kyng of Edom, to the kyng of Moab, to the kyng of Ammon,
to the kyng of Tyrus, and to the kyng of Sidon, and that by the messengers which
shall come to Hierusalem, vnto Zedekiah the kyng of Iuda:
4 And bid them say vnto their maisters, Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes, the God
of Israel, speake thus vnto your maisters:
5 I am he that made the earth, the men, and the cattell that are vpon the
grounde with my great power & stretched out arme, and haue geuen it vnto whom it
pleased me.
6 And nowe wyll I deliuer all these landes into the power of Nabuchodonozor the
kyng of Babylon my seruaunt: the beastes also of the fielde shall I geue hym, to
do hym seruice.
7 And all the people shal serue him, and his sonne, and his childers children,
vntyll the tyme of the same lande be come, and his tyme also: yea many people
and great kynges shall serue hym.
8 Moreouer, that people and kyngdome which wyl not serue Nabuchodonozor, & that
wyll not put their neckes vnder the yoke of the kyng of Babylon: the same people
wyll I visite with the sworde, with hunger and pestilence, vntyll I haue
consumed them in his handes, saith the Lorde.
9 And therfore folowe not your prophetes, soothsayers, expounders of dreames,
charmers, & witches, which say vnto you, Ye shal not serue the kyng of Babylon.
10 For they preache you lyes, to bring you farre from your lande, & that I myght
cast you out, and destroy you.
11 But the people that put their neckes vnder the yoke of the kyng of Babylon
and serue hym, those wyll I let remayne styll in their owne lande, saith the
Lorde, and they shall occupie it and dwell therin.
12 All these thynges tolde I Zedekiah the kyng of Iuda, and sayde: Put your
neckes vnder the yoke of the kyng of Babylon, and serue him and his people, that
ye may liue.
13 Why wylt thou and thy people perishe with the sworde, with hunger, with
pestilence, like as the Lord hath deuised for all people that wyll not serue the
kyng of Babylon?
14 Therfore geue no eare vnto those prophetes that tell you, Ye shall not serue
the kyng of Babylon: for they preache you lyes.
15 Neither haue I sent them saith the Lorde: howbeit they are bolde falsly to
prophecie in my name, that I myght the sooner driue you out, and that ye myght
perishe, with your preachers.
16 I speake to the priestes also, and to all this people: Thus saith the Lorde,
Heare not the wordes of your prophetes that preache vnto you, and say, Beholde,
the vessels of the Lordes house shall shortly be brought hyther agayne from
Babylon: for they prophecie lyes vnto you.
17 Heare them not, but serue the kyng of Babylon, that ye may lyue: Wherfore
wyll ye make this citie to be destroyed?
18 But yf they be true prophetes in very deede, and yf the worde of the Lorde be
committed vnto them, then let them pray the Lord of hoastes, that the remnaunt
of the ornamentes which are in the house of the Lorde & in the house of the kyng
of Iuda, and at Hierusalem, be not caryed to Babylon also.
19 For thus hath the Lorde of hoastes spoken concerning the pillers, the lauer,
the seate, and the residue of the ornamentes that yet remayne in this citie,
20 Which Nabuchodonozor the kyng of Babylon toke not when he caryed away
Iechonias the sonne of Iehoakim kyng of Iuda, with all the power of Iuda &
Hierusalem, vnto Babylon captiue.
21 Yea thus hath the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel spoken, as touchyng the
residue of the ornamentes of the Lordes house, of the kyng of Iuda his house,
and of Hierusalem:
22 They shalbe caryed vnto Babylon, and there shall they remayne vntyll I visite
them, saith the Lorde: then wyll I bryng them hyther agayne.

Chapter 28

1 And it came to passe the same yere, euen in the begynnyng of the raigne of
Zedekiah kyng of Iuda, in the fourth yere, the fift moneth, that Hananias the
sonne of Assur the prophete of Gibeon spake to me in the house of the Lorde, in
the presence of the priestes, and of all the people, and sayde:
2 Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel: I haue broken the yoke of
the kyng of Babylon,
3 And after two yeres wyll I bryng agayne into this place all the ornamentes of
the Lordes house, that Nabuchodonozor kyng of Babylon caryed away from this
place vnto Babylon,
4 Yea I wyll bryng agayne Iechonias the sonne of Iehoakim the kyng of Iuda hym
selfe, with all the prisoners of Iuda that are caried vnto Babylon, euen into
this place, saith the Lorde: for I wyll breake the yoke of the kyng of Babylon.
5 Then the prophete Ieremie gaue aunswere vnto the prophete Hananias before all
the priestes, and before all the people that were present in the house of the
Lorde.
6 And the prophete Ieremie sayde, Amen, the Lorde do that, and graunt the thyng
which thou hast prophecied, that he may bryng agayne all the ornamentes of the
Lordes house, and restore all the prisoners from Babylon into this place.
7 Neuerthelesse, hearken thou also what I wyll say, that thou and all the people
may heare.
8 The prophetes that were before vs in tyme past, which prophecied of warre, or
trouble, or pestilence,
9 Either of peace vpon many nations and great kyngdomes, were proued by this (yf
God hath sent them in very deede) when the thyng came to passe which the
prophete tolde before.
10 And Hananias the prophete toke the chayne from the prophete Ieremies necke,
and brake it:
11 And with that sayde Hananias that all the people might heare, thus hath the
Lorde spoken, Euen so wyll I breake the yoke of Nabuchodonozor kyng of Babylon
from the necke of all nations, yea and that within this two yere. And so the
prophete Ieremie went his way.
12 Nowe after that Hananias the prophete had taken the chayne from the prophete
Ieremies necke and broken it, the worde of the Lorde came vnto the prophete
Ieremie, saying:
13 Go and tell Hananias these wordes, Thus saith the Lord: thou hast broken the
chayne of wood, but in steade of wood thou shalt make chaynes of iron.
14 For thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel: I wyll put a yoke of
iron vpon the necke of all this people, that they may serue Nabuchodonozor the
kyng of Babylon, yea and so shall they do: and I wyll geue hym the beastes of
the fielde.
15 Then sayde the prophete Ieremie vnto the prophete Hananias: Heare me
Hananias, The Lorde hath not sent thee, but thou bryngest this people into a
false beliefe.
16 And therfore thus saith the Lorde: Beholde, I wyll sende thee out of the
lande, and within a yere thou shalt dye, because thou hast falsely spoken
agaynst the Lorde.
17 So Hananias dyed the same yere in the seuenth moneth.

Chapter 29

1 These are the wordes of the booke that Ieremie the prophete sent from
Hierusalem vnto the prisoners, the senatours, priestes, prophetes, and all the
people, whom Nabuchodonozor had led from Hierusalem vnto Babylon,
2 After that tyme that kyng Iechonias and his queene, his chamberlaynes, the
princes of Iuda and Hierusalem, the workmaisters of Hierusalem, were departed
thyther.
3 Which booke Elasah the sonne of Saphan, & Gamariah the sonne of Helkia did
beare, whom Zedekias the kyng of Iuda sent vnto Babylon to Nabuchodonozor the
kyng of Babylon: These were the wordes of Hieremies booke.
4 Thus hath the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel spoken, vnto all the
prisoners that were fled from Hierusalem to Babylon:
5 Builde you houses to dwell therin, plant you gardens, that you may enioy the
fruites therof.
6 Take you wiues to beare you sonnes and daughters, prouide wiues for your
sonnes, and husbandes for your daughters, that they may get sonnes & daughters:
and that ye may multiplie there, and decrease not.
7 Seke after the peace and prosperitie of the citie wherin ye be prisoners, and
pray vnto the Lorde for it: for in the peace therof shall your peace be.
8 For thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel, Let not these prophetes
and soothsayers that be among you deceaue you, and beleue not your owne dreames:
9 For why? they preache you lyes in my name, and I haue not sent them, saith the
Lorde.
10 But thus saith the Lorde, When ye haue fulfylled seuentie yeres at Babylon, I
will bring you home, and of mine owne goodnesse I wyll cary you hither agayne
into this place.
11 For I knowe what I haue deuised for you, saith the Lorde: My thoughtes are to
geue you peace, and not trouble, and to geue you an ende as you wishe and hope
to haue.
12 Ye shall crye vnto me, ye shall go and call vpon me, and I wyll heare you.
13 Ye shall seke me and fynde me, yea yf so be that you seke me with your whole
heart.
14 I wyll be founde of you, saith the Lord, and will deliuer you out of prison,
and gather you together agayne out of all places wherin I haue scattered you
saith the Lorde, and wyll bryng you agayne to the same place from whence I
caused you to be caried away captiue.
15 But where as ye say that God hath raysed you vp prophetes at Babylon,
16 Thus hath the Lorde spoken to the king that sitteth in the throne of Dauid,
and to all the people that dwell in this citie, your brethren that are gone with
you into captiuitie:
17 Thus I say speaketh the Lorde of hoastes, Beholde I wyll sende a sworde,
hunger, and pestilence vpon them, and wyll make them lyke vntymely figges that
may not be eaten for bitternesse:
18 And I wyll persecute them with the sworde, with hunger, and pestilence, I
wyll deliuer them vp to be vexed of all kyngdomes, to be cursed, abhorred,
laughed to scorne, and put to confusion of all the people among whom I haue
scattered them:
19 And that because they haue not ben obedient vnto my commaundementes saith the
Lord, which I sent vnto them by my seruauntes the prophetes: I stoode vp early
and sent vnto them, but they woulde not heare, saith the Lorde.
20 Heare therfore the worde of the Lord all ye prisoners whom I sent from
Hierusalem to Babylon.
21 Thus hath the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel spoken of Ahab the sonne of
Colaiah, and of Zedekiah the sonne of Maasiah, which prophecie lyes vnto you in
my name: Beholde, I wyll deliuer them into the hande of Nabuchodonozor the kyng
of Babylon, that he may slay them before your eyes.
22 And all the prisoners of Iuda that are in Babylon, shall take this tearme of
cursyng, and say: Nowe God do vnto thee as he did vnto Zedekiah & Ahab, whom the
kyng of Babylon rosted in the fire:
23 Because they sinned shamefully in Israel, for they haue not only defiled
their neighbours wiues, but also preached lying wordes in my name, which I haue
not commaunded them: This I testifie and assure, saith the Lorde.
24 But as for Semeiah the Nehelamite, thou shalt speake vnto hym:
25 Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel, Because thou hast sent
letters in thine owne name vnto all the people that is at Hierusalem, and to
Sophoniah the sonne of Maasiah the priest, yea & sent them to all the priestes,
wherin thou writest thus vnto hym:
26 The Lorde hath ordeyned thee to be priest in the steade of Iehoiada the
priest, that thou shouldest be chiefe in the house of the Lorde aboue all
prophetes and preachers, and that thou mightest set them vpon the pyllory, or in
the stockes:
27 Howe happeneth it then that thou hast not reproued Hieremie of Anathoth,
which neuer leaueth of his propheciyng.
28 And beside all this, he hath sent vs worde vnto Babylon, and tolde vs
playnely that our captiuitie shall long endure, that we should builde vs houses
to dwel therin, and to plant vs gardens, that we may enioy the fruites therof.
29 Which letter Sophonias the priest read, and let Ieremie the prophete heare
it.
30 Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto Ieremie, saying:
31 Sende worde to all them that be in captiuitie, on this maner, Thus hath the
Lorde spoken concerning Semeiah the Nehelamite: Because that Semeiah hath
prophecied vnto you without my commission, and brought you into a false hope:
32 Therfore thus the Lorde doth certifie you, Beholde, I wyll visite Semeiah the
Nehelamite and his seede, so that none of his shall remayne among this people,
and none of them shall see the good that I wyll do for my people, saith the
Lorde: for he hath preached falsely of the Lorde.

Chapter 30

1 These are the wordes that the Lord sheweth vnto Ieremie, saying:
2 Thus saith the Lorde God of Israel: Write vp diligently all the wordes that I
haue spoken vnto thee in a booke.
3 For lo, the tyme commeth saith the Lorde, that I wyll bryng agayne the
prisoners of my people of Israel and Iuda saith the Lorde: for I wyll restore
them vnto the lande that I gaue to their fathers, and they shall haue it in
possession.
4 Agayne, these wordes spake the Lord concernyng Israel and Iuda,
5 Thus saith the Lorde, We haue heard a terrible crye, feare and disquietnesse.
6 For what els doth this signifie that I see? namely that all strong men smite
euery man his hande vpon his loynes, as a woman in the payne of her trauayle:
Who euer sawe a man trauayle with childe? Enquire therafter and see, yea all
their faces are marueylous pale.
7 Alas for this day, which is so dreadfull that none may be likened vnto it, and
alas for the tyme of Iacobs trouble, from the which he shal yet be deliuered.
8 For in that day saith the Lorde of hoastes, I wyll take his yoke from of thy
necke, and breake thy bondes, and straungers shall no more haue dominion ouer
them:
9 But they shall do seruice vnto God their Lorde, and to Dauid their kyng whom I
wyll rayse vp vnto them.
10 And as for thee O my seruaunt Iacob, feare not saith the Lorde, and be not
afrayde O Israel: For lo, I wyll helpe thee also from farre, and thy seede from
the lande of their captiuitie: And Iacob shall turne agayne, he shalbe in rest,
and haue a prosperous lyfe, and no man shall make hym afrayde:
11 For I am with thee to helpe thee, saith the Lorde: And though I shall destroy
all the people among whom I haue scattered thee, yet wyll I not destroy thee,
but correct thee, and that with descretion: for I wyll not vtterly destroy thee.
12 Therfore thus saith the Lorde, Thy brosinges are perilous, & thy woundes redy
to cast thee into sicknesse.
13 There is no man to meddle with thy cause, or to lay plaster vpon thee, or to
bynde vp thy woundes to heale thee.
14 All thy louers haue forgotten thee, and care nothyng for thee: for I haue
geuen thee a cruell stroke, and chastened thee roughly, and that for the
multitude of thy misdeedes: for thy sinnes haue had the ouer hande.
15 Why makest thou mone for thy harme? In deede thou art sore wounded and in
ieopardie: but for the multitude of thy misdeedes and sinnes I haue done this
vnto thee.
16 And therfore all they that deuour thee, shalbe deuoured, and all thine
enemies shalbe led into captiuitie: all they that make thee waste, shalbe wasted
them selues, and all those that rob thee, wyll I make also to be robbed.
17 For I wyll geue thee thy health agayne, and make thy woundes whole saith the
Lorde, because they reuiled thee, as one cast away and dispised: Sion sayde they
is she whom no man regardeth.
18 For thus saith the Lorde, Beholde I wyll bryng agayne the captiuitie of
Iacobs tentes, and defende his dwellyng place: the citie shalbe builded in her
olde estate, and the houses shall haue their ryght foundation.
19 And out of them shal go thankesgeuing and the voyce of ioy: I wyll multiplie
them, and they shal not be fewe, I shall endue them with honour, and no man
shall subdue them.
20 Their children shalbe as aforetyme, and their congregation shall continue in
my syght: and all those that vexe them wyll I visite.
21 A captayne also shall come of them, and a prince shall spryng out from the
middest of them, hym wyll I chalenge to my selfe, and he shall come vnto me: For
what is he that geueth ouer his heart to come vnto me, saith the Lorde?
22 Ye shalbe my people also, and I wyll be your God.
23 Beholde, on the other syde shall the wrath of the Lorde breake out as a
stormie water, as a myghtie whirle wynde, and shall fall vpon the heades of the
vngodly.
24 The terrible displeasure of the Lorde shall not leaue of, vntyll he haue done
and perfourmed the intent of his heart, which in the latter dayes ye shall
vnderstande.

Chapter 31

1 At the same tyme, saith the Lord, shal I be the God of all the generations of
Israel, & they shalbe my people.
2 Thus saith the Lord: The people of Israel which escaped in the wildernesse
from the sworde, founde grace to come into their rest.
3 Euen so shall the Lorde nowe also appeare vnto me from farre and say I loue
thee with an euerlasting loue, therfore by my mercie I haue drawen thee vnto me.
4 I wyll repayre thee agayne O thou daughter of Israel, that thou mayest be fast
and sure: thou shalt take thy tabrettes agayne, and go foorth with them that
leade the daunce:
5 Thou shalt plant vines agayne vpon the hylles of Samaria, and the grape
gatherers shall plant, and commonly eate of it.
6 For the dayes shall come when the watchmen vpon the mount of Ephraim shall
crye, Arise, let vs go vp vnto Sion to our Lorde God.
7 For thus saith the Lorde, Reioyce with gladnesse because of Iacob, crye vnto
the head of the gentiles, speake out, syng and say, O Lorde saue thy people the
remnaunt of Israel.
8 Beholde, I wyll bryng them agayne from out of the north lande, and gather them
from the endes of the worlde, with the blynde & lame that are among them, with
the women that be great with chylde, & such as be also deliuered: and the
companie of them that come agayne shalbe great.
9 They shall come weepyng, and with mercifull pitie will I bring them hither
agayne: I will leade them to the riuers of water in a strayght way where they
shall not stumble: For I am Israels father, and Ephraim is my first borne.
10 Heare the worde of the Lorde O ye gentiles, preache in the Isles that lye
farre of, and say: He that hath scattered Israel, shall gather hym together
agayne, and shall kepe hym as a sheephearde doth his flocke.
11 For the Lorde hath redeemed Iacob, and ridde hym from the hande of the
violent.
12 And they shall come and reioyce vpon the hyll of Sion, and shall haue
plenteousnesse of goodes, which the Lorde shall geue them, namely wheate, wine,
oyle, young sheepe, and calues: and their soule shalbe as a well watered garden,
for they shall no more be hungry.
13 Then shall the mayde reioyce in the daunce, yea both young and olde folkes:
for I wyll turne their sorowe into gladnesse, and wyll comfort them from their
sorowes, and make them ioyfull.
14 I wyll powre plenteousnesse vpon the heartes of the priestes, and my people
shalbe satisfied with my goodnesse, saith the Lorde.
15 Thus saith the Lorde, The voyce of heauinesse, weepyng, and lamentation was
hearde on hye, euen of Rachel mournyng for her children, and woulde not be
comforted because they were not.
16 But nowe saith the Lorde, leaue of from weepyng and crying, withholde thine
eyes from teares: for thy labour shalbe rewarded saith the Lorde, and they shall
come agayne out of the lande of their enemies.
17 Yea euen thy posteritie shall haue consolation in this saith the Lorde, that
thy children shal come agayne into their owne lande.
18 Moreouer, I hearde Ephraim that was led away captiue complayne on this maner:
O Lorde thou hast correct me, & thy chastenyng haue I receaued, as an vntamed
calfe, conuert thou me and I shalbe conuerted: for thou art my Lorde God.
19 Yea assoone as thou turnest me, I shall refourme my selfe, and when I
vnderstande, I shall smite vpon my thygh: For veryly I haue committed shamefull
thynges: for I haue borne the reproofe and confusion of my youth.
20 Upon this complaynt I thought thus by my selfe: Is not Ephraim my deare
sonne? Is he not the childe with whom I haue had all my mirth and pastime? For
since the tyme that I first comuned with hym, I haue hym euer in remembraunce:
therfore my heart driueth me vnto hym, gladly and louyngly wyll I haue mercie
vpon him, saith the Lorde.
21 Make thy selfe markes, set vp heapes of stone, set thine heart vpon the way
that thou didst walke, and turne againe O thou daughter of Israel, turne agayne
to these cities of thine.
22 Howe long wilt thou go astray O thou shrinkyng daughter? for the Lorde wyll
worke a newe thyng vpon earth: A woman shall compasse a man.
23 For thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel: It wyl come therto,
that when I haue brought Iuda out of captiuitie, these wordes shalbe hearde in
the lande and in his cities, The Lord blesse thee O thou dwellyng place of
ryghteousnesse, O thou holy hyll.
24 And there shall dwell Iuda and all her cities, the sheepheardes and
husbandmen:
25 For I shall feede the hungry soule, and refreshe all faynt heartes.
26 When I hearde this, I came agayne to my selfe, I sawe like as I had ben waked
out of a sweete sleepe.
27 Beholde saith the Lorde, the dayes come that I wyll sowe the house of Israel
and the house of Iuda with men and with cattell.
28 Yea it shall come therto, that like as I haue gone about in tymes past to
roote them out, to scatter them, to breake them downe, to destroy them, &
chasten them: euen so wyll I also go diligently about to builde them vp agayne,
and to plant them, saith the Lorde.
29 Then shall it no more be sayde, The fathers haue eaten a sowre grape, and the
childrens teeth are set on edge:
30 For euery one shall dye for his owne misdeedes: so that who so eateth a sowre
grape, his teeth shalbe set on edge.
31 Beholde the dayes wyll come saith the Lorde, that I wyll make a newe
couenaunt with the house of Israel, and the house of Iuda:
32 Not after the couenaunt that I made with their fathers, when I toke them by
the hande and led them out of the lande of Egypt, which couenaunt they brake,
yea euen when I as an husbande had rule ouer them saith the Lorde.
33 But this shalbe the couenaunt that I wyll make with the house of Israel after
those dayes saith the Lorde: I wyll plant my lawe in the inwarde partes of them,
and write it in their heartes, and wyll be their God, and they shalbe my people.
34 And from thencefoorth shall no man teache his neighbour or his brother, and
say, Knowe the Lorde: but they shal all knowe me from the lowest vnto the hyest,
saith the Lorde: for I wyll forgeue their misdeedes, and wyll neuer remember
their sinnes any more.
35 Thus saith the Lorde, which gaue the sunne to be a lyght for the day, and the
moone and the starres to shine in the night, whiche moueth the sea, so that the
fluddes thereof waxe fierce, his name is the Lorde of hoastes.
36 Like as this ordinaunce shall neuer be taken out of my sight, saith the Lord:
so shall the seede of Israel neuer ceasse, but alway be a people before me.
37 Moreouer, thus saith the Lord, Like as the heauen aboue can not be measured,
and as the foundations of the earth beneath may not be sought out: so will I
also not cast out the whole seede of Israel for that they haue committed saith
the Lorde.
38 Beholde, the dayes come saith the Lorde, that the citie of the Lorde shalbe
enlarged, from the towre of Hananeel, vnto the gate of the corner wall.
39 From thence shall the right measure be taken before her vnto the hyll toppe
of Gareb, and shall come about Gaath.
40 And the whole valley of the dead carkasses, and of the asshes, and all the
fieldes, vnto the brooke of Cedron, and vnto the corner of the horse gate
towarde the east, it shalbe holy vnto the Lorde, and shall neuer be broken nor
cast downe any more.

Chapter 32

1 These wordes spake the Lorde vnto Ieremie in the tenth yere of Zedekias king
of Iuda, whiche was the eyghteenth yere of Nabuchodonozor,
2 What tyme as the kyng of Babylons hoast layde siege vnto Hierusalem: but
Ieremie the prophete lay bounde in the court of the pryson, whiche was in the
kyng of Iudaes house,
3 Where Zedekias the kyng of Iuda caused hym to be layde, because he had
prophecied on this maner: Thus saith the Lorde, Beholde, I wyll deliuer this
citie into the handes of the kyng of Babylon, whiche shall take it.
4 As for Zedekias the kyng of Iuda, he shall not be able to escape the Chaldees:
but surely he shall come into the handes of the king of Babylon, whiche shall
speake with him mouth to mouth, and one of them shall looke another in the face.
5 And Zedekias shalbe caryed vnto Babylon, and there shall he be vntyll the tyme
that I visite hym saith the Lorde: but if thou takest in hande to fight against
the Chaldees, thou shalt not prosper.
6 And Ieremie saide, Thus hath the Lorde spoken vnto me:
7 Beholde, Hananeel the sonne of Sellum thine vncles sonne, shall come vnto
thee, and require thee to redeeme the lande that lyeth in Anathoth vnto thy
selfe: for by reason of kinred it is thy right to redeeme it and bye it out.
8 And Hananeel myne vncles sonne came to me in the court of the pryson,
according to the word of the Lord, and sayde vnto me: Bye my lande I pray thee,
that lieth in Anathoth in the countrey of Beniamin, for by heritage thou hast
right to loose it out for thy selfe, therfore redeeme it. Then I perceaued that
this was the comaundement the Lorde:
9 And so I bought the lande from Hanaeel of Anathoth myne vncles sonne, and
wayed hym there the money, euen seuen sicles, and ten syluer pence:
10 And I writ it in a booke, and sealed it, and toke witnesses, and wayed hym
there the money vpon the waightes.
11 So I toke the euidence with the copie, when it was orderly sealed, and read
it ouer:
12 And I gaue the euidence to Baruch the sonne of Neriah, the sonne of Maasiah,
in the sight of Hananeel my cosin, and in the presence of the witnesses that be
named in the euidence, and before all the Iewes that were thereby in the court
of the pryson.
13 I charged Baruch also before them, saying:
14 The Lord of hoastes, the God of Israel commaundeth thee to take this sealed
euidence with the copie, and to lay it in the earthen vessell, that it may long
continue.
15 For the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel hath determined, that houses,
fieldes, and vineyardes shalbe possessed agayne in this lande.
16 Nowe when I had deliuered the euidence vnto Baruch the sonne of Neriah, I
besought the Lorde, saying:
17 O Lorde God, it is thou that hast made heauen and earth with thy great power
and hye arme, and there is nothing hid from thee.
18 Thou shewest mercy vpon thousandes, thou recompensest the wickednesse of the
fathers into the bosome of the chyldren that come after them.
19 Thou art the great and mightie God, whose name is the Lorde of hoastes, great
in counsel, and excellent in worke, thyne eyes looke vpon all the wayes of mens
chyldren, to rewarde euery one after his way, and according to the fruites of
his inuentions.
20 Thou hast done great tokens and wonders in the lande of Egypt, as we see this
day, vpon the people of Israel, and vpon those men, to make thy name great, as
it is come to passe this day.
21 Thou hast brought thy people of Israel out of the lande of Egypt, with
tokens, with wonders, with a mightie hande, with a stretched out arme, and with
great terriblenesse:
22 And hast geuen them this lande, like as thou haddest promised vnto their
fathers namely that thou wouldest geue them a lande that floweth with mylke and
honye.
23 Nowe when they came therein and possessed it, they folowed not thy voyce, and
walked not in thy lawe: but all that thou commaundedst them to do, that haue
they not done, and therefore come all these plagues vpon them.
24 Beholde, there are bulwarkes made nowe against this citie to take it, and it
shalbe wonne of the Chaldees that besiege it with sworde, with hunger, and
death: and looke what thou hast spoken, that same shall come vpon them, for lo
all thinges are present vnto thee.
25 Yet sayest thou vnto me O Lorde God, and commaundest me that I shall bye a
peece of land vnto my selfe for money, and take witnesses thereto: and yet in
the meane season the citie is deliuered into the power of the Chaldees.
26 Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto Ieremie, saying:
27 Beholde, I am the Lorde God of all fleshe: is there any thing then to harde
for me?
28 Therefore thus saith the Lorde: beholde, I shall deliuer this citie into the
power of the Chaldees, and into the power of Nabuchodonozor the king of Babylon,
they shall take it:
29 For the Chaldees shall come and winne this citie, and set fire vpon it, and
burne it, with the gorgious houses, in whose parlours they haue made sacrifice
vnto Baal, and powred drinke offeringes vnto straunge gods, to prouoke me vnto
wrath:
30 For the chyldren of Israel and the chyldren of Iuda haue only ben doyng
wickednesse before me from their youth vp, they haue ben only prouoking me to
wrath with the workes of their owne handes, saith the Lorde.
31 For what hath this citie ben els, but a prouoking of my wrath euer since the
day that thei builded it, vnto this houre wherein I cast it out of my sight?
32 Because of the great blasphemies of the children of Israel and Iuda, which
they haue done to prouoke me, yea they, their kynges, their princes, their
priestes, their prophetes, the men of Iuda, and the citizens of Hierusalem:
33 When I stoode vp early and taught them, and instructed them, they turned
their backes to me, and not their faces,
34 They woulde not heare to be refourmed and correct: but set their idols in the
house that is halowed to my name, to defile it.
35 They haue buylded hye places for Baal in the valley of the chyldren of
Hennom, to cause their sonnes & daughters to passe thorow fire in the honour of
Moloch, whiche I neuer commaunded them: neither came it euer in my thought to
make Iuda sinne with such abhomination.
36 And nowe therefore thus hath the Lorde God of Israel spoken concerning this
citie, whiche as ye your selues confesse, shalbe deliuered into the hande of the
kyng of Babylon, when it is wonne with the sworde, with hunger, and with
pestilence.
37 Beholde, I wyll gather them together from all landes, wherein I haue scattred
them in my wrath in fearefull and great displeasure, and wyll bryng them agayne
vnto this place, where they shall dwell safely:
38 And they shalbe my people, and I wyll be their God.
39 And I wyll geue them one heart and one way, that they may feare me al the
dayes of their lyfe: that they and their chyldren after them may prosper.
40 And I wyll set vp an euerlasting couenaunt with them namely that I wyll neuer
ceasse to do them good, and that I wyll put my feare in their heartes, so that
they shall not runne away from me.
41 Yea I wyll haue a lust and pleasure to do them good, and faithfully to plant
them in this land with my whole heart and with my whole soule.
42 For thus saith the Lorde, Like as I haue brought all this great plague vppon
this people: euen so wyll I also bryng vpon them all the good that I haue
promised them.
43 And men shall haue their possessions in this lande, wherof ye say nowe, that
it shall neither be inhabited of the people, nor of cattell, but be deliuered
into the handes of the Chaldees:
44 Yea lande shalbe bought for money, and euidences made thervpon, and sealed
before witnesses in the countrey of Beniamin, and rounde about Hierusalem, in
the cities of Iuda, in the cities that are vpon the mountaynes, and them that
lye beneath, yea and in the cities that are in the south: for I wyll bryng their
prysoners hyther agayne, saith the Lorde.

Chapter 33

1 Moreouer, the worde of the Lorde came vnto Ieremie againe whe he was yet
bounde in the court of the prison.
2 Thus saith the Lord who made Hierusale, who fashioned the same to establishe
it, whose name is the Lorde:
3 Crye vnto me, and I wyll aunswere, and shewe thee great and hye thinges whiche
were vnknowen vnto thee.
4 Thus I say speaketh the Lorde god of Israel, concerning the houses of this
citie, and the houses of the kynges of Iuda that are broken thorowe the
ordinaunce and the sworde.
5 The inhabitours of this citie haue come to fight against the Chaldees, and
they are filled with the dead carkasses of men, whom I haue slayne in my wrath
and displeasure, when I turned my face from this citie, because of al her
wickednesse.
6 Beholde saith the Lorde, I wyll repaire and heale their woundes, and make them
whole: I wyll open them the large treasure of peace and trueth,
7 And wyll returne the captiuitie of Iuda and Israel, and wyll set them vp
agayne as they were before:
8 From all misdeedes wherein they offended against me, I wyll clense them: and
all their blasphemies which they haue done against me when they regarded me not,
I wyll forgeue them.
9 And this shall get me a name, a prayse and honour among all the people of the
earth, whiche shall heare all the good that I wyll shewe vnto them, yea they
shalbe afraide and astonied at all the good deedes and benefites that I wyll do
for them.
10 Moreouer, thus saith the Lorde: In this place (wherof ye say that it shalbe a
wildernesse, wherein neither people nor cattle shall dwell) in lyke maner in the
cities of Iuda and in the streetes of Hierusalem (which also shalbe so voyde
that neither people nor cattle shall dwel there,)
11 Shall the voyce of gladnesse be heard agayne, the voyce of the bridegrome and
of the bride, the voyce of them that shall sing, Prayse the Lord of hoastes, for
he is louing, and his mercy endureth for euer, and the voyce of them that offer
vp gyftes in the house of the Lorde: for I wyll restore the captiuitie of this
lande as it was afore, saith the Lorde.
12 Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes, It shall come yet therto, that in this lande
whiche is voyde from men and cattle, and in all the cities of the lande, there
shalbe set vp shepheardes cottages to rest their flockes.
13 In the cities vpon the mountaynes, and in the cities that lye vpon the
plaine, and in the cities of the south, in the lande of Beniamin, and rounde
about Hierusalem, and in the cities of Iuda shall the sheepe passe agayne vnder
the hande of him that telleth them, saith the Lorde.
14 Beholde, the tyme commeth saith the Lorde, that I will perfourme that good
thing whiche I haue promised vnto the house of Israel, and vnto the house of
Iuda.
15 In those dayes, and at the same tyme, I wyll bryng foorth vnto Dauid the
braunche of righteousnesse, and he shall do equitie and righteousnesse in the
lande.
16 In those dayes shall Iuda be saued, and Hierusalem shall dwell safe: and this
shalbe her name, God our righteousnesse.
17 For thus the Lorde promiseth, Dauid shall neuer want one to sit vpon the
throne of the house of Israel:
18 Neither shall the priestes and leuites want one to offer alway before me
burnt offeringes, to kindle the meate offeringes, and to prepare the sacrifices.
19 And the worde of the Lord came vnto Ieremie, after this maner.
20 Thus saith the Lorde: May the couenaunt whiche I haue made with day and night
be broken, that there shoulde not be day and night in due season?
21 Then may my couenaunt also be broken whiche I made with Dauid my seruaunt,
and so he not to haue a sonne to raigne in his throne: so shall also the
Priestes and Leuites neuer fayle, but serue me.
22 For like as the starres of heauen may not be numbred, neither the sande of
the sea measured: so wyll I multiplie the seede of Dauid my seruaunt, and the
Leuites my ministers.
23 Moreouer, the worde of the Lorde came to Ieremie, saying:
24 Considerest thou not what this people speaketh? Two kinredes say they had the
Lorde chosen, and those same two hath he cast away: for so they haue despised my
people, and they reputed them as though they were no people.
25 Therefore thus saith the Lord, If I haue made no couenaunt with day and
night, and geuen no statute vnto heauen and earth:
26 Then will I also cast away the seede of Iacob and Dauid my seruaunt, so that
I wyll take no prince out of his seede to rule the posteritie of Abraham, Isaac,
and Iacob: but yet I will turne agayne their captiuitie, and be mercyfull vnto
them.

Chapter 34

1 These are the wordes whiche the Lord spake vnto Ieremie, what tyme as
Nabuchodonozor the king of Babylon, and all his hoast, and all the kyngdomes
that were vnder his power, and all his people fought against Hierusalem and all
the cities therof.
2 Thus saith the Lorde God of Israel, Go and speake to Zedekias the king of
Iuda, and tell hym, the Lorde sendeth thee this worde: beholde, I wyll deliuer
this citie into the hande of the kyng of Babylon, he shall burne it with fire,
3 And thou shalt not escape his handes, but shalbe taken prisoner, and deliuered
into his power: Thou shalt looke the kyng of Babylon in the face, and he shall
speake to thee mouth to mouth, and then shalt thou go to Babylon.
4 Yet heare the worde of the Lorde, O Zedekias thou kyng of Iuda, thus saith the
Lorde vnto thee, Thou shalt not be slayne with the sworde,
5 But shalt dye in peace: And as thy forefathers the kynges, thy progenitours
were brent, so shalt thou be brent also, and in thy mourning they shal say, O
Lorde: for thus haue I determined, saith the Lorde.
6 Then saide Ieremie the prophete all these wordes vnto Zedekias kyng of Iuda in
Hierusalem,
7 What tyme as the kyng of Babylons hoast besieged Hierusalem, and the remnaunt
of the cities namely Lachis and Azecah, whiche yet remayned of the strong
defensed cities of Iuda.
8 These are the wordes that the Lorde spake vnto Ieremie the prophete, when
Zedekias was agreed with all the people at Hierusalem, that there shoulde be
proclaymed a libertie:
9 So that euery man should let his seruaunt and handmayde go free, Hebrue and
Hebruesse, and no Iewe holde his brother as a bondman.
10 Nowe as they had consented, all the princes and all the people whiche had
gathered vnto this agreement, that euery man shoulde set at libertie his
bondseruaunt and bondwoman, and no longer to holde them bounde: euen so they
were obedient, and let them go free.
11 But afterwarde they repented, and toke agayne the seruauntes and handmaydens
whom they had let go free, and so made them bonde agayne.
12 For whiche cause, the worde of the Lorde came vnto Ieremie from the Lorde hym
selfe, saying:
13 Thus saith the Lorde God of Israel: I made a couenaunt with your fathers when
I brought them out of the lande of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, saying:
14 When seuen yeres are out, euery man shall let his bought seruaunt an Hebrue
go free, if he haue serued hym sixe yeres: but your fathers obayed me not, and
hearkened not vnto me.
15 As for you ye were nowe turned, and dyd right before me, in that ye
proclaymed euery man to let his neighbour go free, and in that ye made a
couenaunt before me in the temple that beareth my name.
16 But yet ye turned your selues againe, and blasphemed my name, in this, that
euery man hath required his seruaunt and handemayde agayne whom ye had let go
quite and free, and compelled them to serue you agayne, and to be bondmen and
bondwomen.
17 And therfore thus saith the Lord: Ye haue not obayed me, euery man to
proclaime freedome vnto his brother and neighbour: wherefore I wyll call you
vnto freedome, saith the Lorde, euen vnto the sworde, to the pestilence, and to
hunger, and will make you to be plagued in all kyngdomes of the earth.
18 Yea those men that haue broken my couenaunt, and not kept the wordes of the
appointment whiche they made before me, when they hewed the calfe in two, and
when they went thorowe the two halfes therof,
19 The princes of Iuda, the princes of Hierusalem, the gelded me, the priestes,
and all the people of the lande, whiche went thorowe the two sydes of the calfe:
20 Those men will I geue into the power of their enemies, and into the handes of
them that folowe vpon their liues: and their dead bodies shalbe meate for the
foules of the ayre and beastes of the fielde.
21 As for Zedekias the king of Iuda and his princes, I wyll deliuer them into
the power of their enemies, & of them that desire to slay them, and into the
hande of the kyng of Babylons hoast, whiche nowe is departed from you.
22 But thorowe my commaundement (saith the Lord) they shall come againe before
this citie, they shall fight against it, winne it, and burne it: Moreouer, I
wyll lay the cities of Iuda so waste, that no man shall dwell therin.

Chapter 35

1 The wordes which the Lorde spake vnto Ieremie, in the raigne of Iehoakim the
sonne of Iosias kyng of Iuda, are these:
2 Go vnto the house of the Rechabites, and call them out, and bryng them to the
house of the Lorde, into some commodious place, and geue them wine to drinke.
3 Then toke I Iazaniah the sonne of Ieremie, the sonne of Habaziniah, and his
brethren, and all his sonnes, and the whole housholde of the Rechabites,
4 And brought them into the house of the Lord, into the closet of the chyldren
of Hanan the sonne of Iegedaliah the man of God, whiche was by the closet of the
princes, that is aboue the closet of Maasiah the sonne of Sellum, whiche is the
treasurer.
5 And before the sonnes of the kinred of the Rechabites I set pottes full of
wine, and cuppes, and sayde vnto them, Drinke wine:
6 But they sayde, We wyll drinke no wine: for Ionadab the sonne of Rechab our
father commaunded vs, saying: Ye and your sonnes shall neuer drinke wine, buylde
houses, sowe no seede, plant no vines,
7 Yea ye shall haue no vineyardes: but for al your tyme ye shall dwel in tentes,
that ye may liue long in the land wherin ye be straungers.
8 Thus haue we obayed the commaundement of Ionadab the sonne of Rechab our
father in al that he hath charged vs, and so we drinke no wine al our life long,
we nor our wiues, our sonnes and our daughters,
9 Neither buylde we any house to dwel therein: we haue also among vs neither
vineyardes, nor corne lande to sowe:
10 But we dwell in tentes, we obay, and do according vnto all that Ionadab our
father commaunded vs.
11 But nowe that Nabuchodonozor the kyng of Babylon came vp into the lande, we
sayde, Come, let vs go to Hierusalem, that we may escape the hoast of the
Chaldees and the Assyrians: and so we dwell nowe at Hierusalem.
12 Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto Ieremie, saying:
13 Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes, the God of Israel: Go and tell the men of
Iuda, and the inhabitours of Hierusalem: wyll ye not be refourmed to obay my
wordes, saith the Lorde?
14 The wordes whiche Ionadab the sonne of Reehab commaunded his sonnes, that
they shoulde drinke no wine, are fast surely kept, for vnto this day they drinke
no wine, but obay their fathers commaundement: but as for me I haue stande vp
early, I haue spoken vnto you, and geuen you earnest warning, and yet haue ye
not ben obedient vnto me.
15 Yea I haue sent my seruauntes al the prophetes vnto you, I rose vp early, and
sent you worde, saying: O turne you nowe euery man from his wicked way, amende
your liues, and go not after straunge gods to worship them, that ye may continue
in the lande whiche I haue geuen vnto you and your fathers: but ye woulde
neither heare me nor folowe me.
16 The chyldren of Ionadab Rechabs sonne, haue stedfastly kept their fathers
commaundement that he gaue them: but this people is not obedient vnto me,
17 And therfore thus saith the Lorde of hoastes, the God of Israel: Beholde, I
wyll bryng vpon Iuda, and vpon euery one that dwelleth in Hierusalem, all the
trouble that I haue deuised against them: For I haue spoken vnto them, but they
woulde not folowe, I haue called vnto them, neuerthelesse they woulde geue me no
aunswere.
18 Ieremie also spake vnto the householde of the Rechabites, Thus saith the Lord
of hoastes the God of Israel: forasmuche as ye haue obayed the commaundement of
Ionadab your father, and kept all his preceptes, and done according to all that
he hath bidden:
19 Therefore thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the God Israel: Ionadab the sonne
of Rechab shal not faile, but haue one out of his flocke to stande alway before
me.

Chapter 36

1 In the fourth yere of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosias the kyng of Iuda, came the
worde of the Lorde vnto Ieremie, saying:
2 Take a booke, and write therein all the wordes that I haue spoken to thee
against Israel, against Iuda, and against all the people, from the tyme that I
began to speake vnto thee in the raigne of Iosias, vnto this day:
3 That when the house of Iuda heareth of the plague whiche I haue deuised for
them, they may peraduenture turne euery man from his wicked way, that I may
forgeue their offences and sinnes.
4 Then dyd Ieremie call Baruch the sonne of Neriah, and Baruch wrote in the
booke at the mouth of Ieremie, all the wordes of the Lorde whiche he had spoken
vnto hym.
5 And Ieremie commaunded Baruch, saying: I am in prison, so that I may not come
into the house of the Lorde:
6 Therefore go thou thither, and reade the booke that thou hast written at my
mouth namely the wordes of the Lord, and reade them in the Lordes house vpon the
fasting day, that the people, whole Iuda, and al they that come out of the
cities may heare.
7 Peraduenture they wyll pray meekelye before the face of the Lorde, and turne
euery one from his wicked way: for great is the wrath and displeasure that the
Lorde hath taken against this people.
8 So Baruch the sonne of Neriah, dyd according to all that Ieremie the prophete
commaunded hym, reading the wordes of the Lorde out of the booke in the Lordes
house.
9 And this was done in the fifth yere of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosias kyng of
Iuda, in the ninth moneth, when it was commaunded that all the people of
Hierusalem shoulde fast before the Lorde, and they also that were come fro the
cities of Iuda vnto Hierusalem:
10 Then read Baruch the wordes of Ieremie out of the booke within the house of
the Lorde, out of the treasurie of Gamariah the sonne of Saphan the scribe,
which is beside the hyer loft of the new doore of the Lordes house, that all the
people might heare.
11 Now when Micheas the sonne of Gamariah, the sonne of Saphan, heard all the
wordes of the lord out of the booke,
12 He went downe to the kynges palace into the scribes chaumbers, for there all
the princes were set, Elisama the scribe, Dalaiah the sonne of Semei, Elnathan
the sonne of Achbor, Gamariah the sonne of Saphan, Zedekias the sonne of
Hananias, with all the princes.
13 And Micheas tolde them all the wordes that he hearde Baruch reade out of the
booke before the people.
14 Then all the princes sent Iehudi the sonne of Nathaniah the sonne of
Selemiah, the sonne of Chusi, vnto Baruch, saying: Take in thine hande the booke
whereout thou hast read before all the people, & come. So Baruch the sonne of
Neriah toke the booke in his hande, and came vnto them.
15 And they sayd vnto him: Sit downe and reade the booke, that we may heare
also: So Baruch read that they might heare.
16 Nowe when they had hearde all the wordes, they were abashed one vpon another,
and sayde vnto Baruch: We will certifie the king of al these wordes.
17 And they examined Baruch, saying: Tell vs, howe diddest thou write all these
wordes out of his mouth?
18 Then Baruch aunswered them: He spake all these wordes vnto me with his mouth,
and I wrote them in the booke.
19 Then sayd the princes vnto Baruch: Go thy way, hide thee with Ieremie, so
that no man knowe where ye be.
20 And they went in to the kyng to the court (but they kept the booke in the
chaumber of Elizama the scribe) and tolde the kyng all the wordes, that he might
heare.
21 So the kyng sent Iehudi to fet hym the booke: which he brought out of Elizama
the scribes chaumber, and Iehudi read in it, that the king and all the princes
whiche were about hym might heare.
22 Nowe the kyng sate in the winter house (for it was in the ninth moneth) and
there was a fire before hym.
23 And when Iehudi had read three or foure leaues therof, he cut the booke in
peeces with a penknife, and cast it into the fire vpon the harth, vntill the
booke was al brent in the fire vpon the harth.
24 Yet no man was abashed therof, nor rent his clothes, neither the kyng hym
selfe nor his seruauntes, though they hearde all these wordes.
25 Neuerthelesse, Elnathan, Dalaiah, and Gamariah besought the kyng that he
woulde not burne the booke: notwithstanding, the kyng woulde not heare them:
26 But commaunded Ierahmel the sonne of Amelech, Saraiah the sonne of Ezriel,
and Selemiah the sonne of Abdeel, to lay handes vpon Baruch the scribe, and vpon
Ieremie the prophete: but the Lorde kept them out of sight.
27 Nowe after that the kyng had brent the booke, and the sermons which Baruch
wrote at the mouth of Ieremie, the worde of the Lorde came vnto Ieremie, saying:
28 Take another booke, and write in it all the foresayde sermons that were
written in the first booke whiche Iehoakim the kyng of Iuda hath brent.
29 And tell Iehoakim the kyng of Iuda, thus saith the Lorde: Thou hast brent the
booke, and thoughtest within thy selfe, Why hast thou written therin, that the
kyng of Babylon shall come and make this lande waste, so that he shall make both
people and cattell to be out of it?
30 Therefore thus the Lorde saith of Iehoakim the kyng of Iuda: There shall none
of his generation sit vpon the throne of Dauid, his dead coarse shalbe cast out,
that the heate of the day and the frost of the night may come vppon hym.
31 And I wyll visite the wickednesse of hym, of his seede, and of his
seruauntes: Moreouer, all the euyll that I haue promised them, though they
hearde me not, wyll I bryng vpon them, vpon the inhabitours of Hierusalem, and
vpon all Iuda.
32 Then toke Ieremie another booke and gaue it Baruch the scribe the sonne of
Neriah, which wrote therin out of the mouth of Hieremie, all the sermons that
were in the first booke which Iehoakim the kyng of Iuda did burne: and there
were added vnto them many mo sermons, lyke vnto the former.

Chapter 37

1 Zedekia the sonne of Iosiah which was made kyng through Nabuchodonozor king of
Babylon, raigned in the lande of Iuda, in the stead of Cononiah the sonne of
Iehoakim.
2 But neither he, nor his seruauntes, nor the people in his lande, woulde obey
the wordes of the Lorde which he spake by the prophete Ieremie.
3 Neuerthelesse, Zedekia the king sent Iehucall the sonne of Selemiah, and
Sophoniah the sonne of Maasiah the priest, to the prophete Ieremie, saying: O
pray thou vnto the Lorde our God for vs.
4 Nowe Ieremie walked free among the people at that tyme, and was not put in
prison as yet.
5 Pharaos hoast also was come out of Egypt: which when the Chaldees which
besieged Hierusalem perceaued, they departed from thence.
6 Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto the prophete Ieremie, saying:
7 Thus saith the Lorde God of Israel, This aunswere shal ye geue to the king of
Iuda that sent you vnto me for counsayle: Beholde, Pharaos hoast which is come
foorth to helpe you, shal returne into Egypt into his owne lande.
8 But the Chaldees shall come agayne, and fight agaynst this citie, winne it,
and set fire vpon it.
9 For thus saith the Lorde, Deceaue not your owne myndes, thynkyng on this
maner, Tushe, the Chaldees go nowe their way from vs: No, they shall not go
their way.
10 For though ye had slayne the whole hoast of the Chaldees that besiege you,
and that none remayned of them but wounded men, yet shoulde they stande vp and
set fire vpon this citie.
11 Nowe when the hoast of the Chaldees was broken vp from Hierusalem for feare
of the Egyptians armie,
12 Ieremie went out of Hierusalem towarde the lande of Beniamin, to get hym from
among the people.
13 And when he came vnder Beniamins port, there was a porter called Ieriah, the
sonne of Selemiah, the sonne of Hananiah, which fell vpon hym, and toke hym,
saying: Thy mynde is to runne to the Chaldees.
14 Then sayde Ieremie, It is not so, I go not to the Chaldees: Neuerthelesse,
Ieriah woulde not beleue hym, but brought Ieremie bounde before the princes.
15 Wherfore the princes were angry with Ieremie, & smote hym, and layde hym in
prison in the house of Ionathan the scribe: for they had made that house the
prison.
16 Thus was Hieremie put into a dungeon and prison, and so lay there a long
tyme.
17 Then Zedekia the kyng sent for him, and called hym, and asked hym quietly in
his owne house, saying: Thinkest thou this businesse that nowe is in hande
commeth of the Lorde? Ieremie aunswered, Yea that it doth: and thou (sayde he)
shalt be deliuered into the kyng of Babylons power.
18 Moreouer, Ieremie sayde vnto king Zedekia, What haue I offended agaynst thee,
agaynst thy seruauntes, or agaynst this people, that ye haue put me in prison?
19 Where are your prophetes which haue prophecied vnto you, and sayde, that the
kyng of Babylon shoulde not come agaynst you and this lande?
20 And therfore heare nowe O my Lorde the kyng, let my prayer be accepted before
thee, and sende me no more into the house of Ionathan the scribe, that I dye not
there.
21 Then Zedekia commaunded to put Ieremie in the fore entrie of the prison, and
dayly to be geuen hym a cake of bread of the bakers streete, vntyll all the
bread in the citie was eaten vp: Thus Ieremie remayned in the fore entrie of the
prison.

Chapter 38

1 Saphatiah the sonne of Mathan, Gedaliah the sonne of Pashur, Iucal the sonne
of Selemiah, & Pashur the sonne of Melchia, perceaued the wordes that Ieremie
had spoken vnto all the people, namely, on this maner.
2 Thus saith the Lorde, Who so remayneth in this citie, shall perishe either
with the sworde, with hunger, or with pestilence: but who so falleth vnto the
Chaldees shal escape, winning his soule for a pray, and shall lyue.
3 For thus saith the Lorde, This citie no doubt must be deliuered into the power
of the kyng of Babylon, and he also shall winne it.
4 Then saide the princes vnto the kyng, Sir, we beseche you let this man be put
to death: for thus he discourageth the handes of the souldiours that be in this
citie, and the handes of all the people, when he speaketh such wordes vnto them:
This man laboureth not for peace of the people, but mischiefe.
5 Zedekia the kyng aunswered, and sayde, Lo, he is in your handes: for the kyng
may denie you nothyng.
6 Then toke they Ieremie and cast him into the dungeon of Melchiah the sonne of
Amelech, that dwelt in the fore entrie of the prison, and they let downe Ieremie
with coardes into a dungeon, where there was no water, but mire: So Ieremie
stack fast in the mire.
7 Nowe when Abedmelech the Morian beyng a chaumberlayne in the kynges court,
vnderstoode that they had cast Ieremie into the dungeon,
8 He went out of the kynges house, and spake to the king, which then sate vnder
the port of Beniamin, these wordes.
9 My Lorde the kyng, where as these men meddle with Ieremie the prophete, they
do hym wrong namely in that they haue put hym in prison, there to dye for
hunger: for there is no more bread in the citie.
10 Then the kyng commaunded Abedmelech the Morian, and sayde, Take from hence
thirtie men whom thou wylt, and drawe vp Ieremie the prophete out of the dungeon
before he dye.
11 So Abedmelech toke the men with hym, and went to the house of the king, and
there vnder the treasurie he gat olde ragges and worne cloutes, and let them
downe by a corde into the dungeon to Ieremie.
12 And Abedmelech the Morian sayde vnto the prophete Ieremie: O put these ragges
and cloutes vnder thine arme holes betwixt them and the cordes: And Ieremie did
so.
13 So they drewe vp Ieremie with cordes, & toke hym out of the dungeon: and he
remayned in the fore entrie of the prison.
14 Then Zedekia the kyng sent, & caused Ieremie the prophete to be called vnto
hym, into the thirde entrie that is in the house of the Lorde, and the kyng
sayde vnto Ieremie: I wyll aske thee somewhat, but hyde nothyng fro me.
15 Then Ieremie aunswered Zedekia, If I be playne vnto thee, thou wylt cause me
to suffer death: yf I geue thee counsayle, thou wylt not folowe me.
16 So the kyng swore an oth secretely to Ieremie, saying: As the Lorde liueth
that made vs these soules, I wyll not slay thee, nor geue thee into the handes
of them that seke after thy lyfe.
17 Then sayde Ieremie vnto Zedekia, Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the God of
Israel: If case be that thou wylt go foorth vnto the kyng of Babylons princes,
thou shalt saue thy lyfe, and this citie shall not be brent, yea both thou and
thy housholde shall escape with your lyues:
18 But yf thou wylt not go foorth to the kyng of Babylons princes, then shall
this citie be deliuered into the handes of the Chaldees, which shall set fire
vpon it, and thou shalt not be able to escape them.
19 And Zedekia said vnto Ieremie: I am afrayde for the Iewes that are fled vnto
the Chaldees, lest I come into their handes, & so they to haue me in derision.
20 But Ieremie aunswered, No, they shall not betray thee: O hearken vnto the
voyce of the Lorde I beseche thee, which I speake vnto thee, so shalt thou be
well, and saue thy lyfe:
21 But yf thou wylt not go foorth, the Lorde hath tolde me this playnely,
22 Beholde, all the women that are left in the kyng of Iudas house, shalbe led
foorth vnto the kyng of Babylons princes: and they shall say, thou art deceaued,
and the men in whom thou didst put thy trust, haue gotten thee vnder, & set thy
feete fast in the mire, and gone their way from thee.
23 Therfore all thy wyues with thy children shall they leade foorth vnto the
Chaldees, and thou shalt not escape their handes: but shalt be the kyng of
Babylons prisoner, and this citie shalt thou cause to be burnt.
24 Then sayde Zedekia vnto Ieremie: Loke that no body knowe of these wordes, and
thou shalt not dye.
25 But yf the princes perceaue that I haue talked with thee, and come vnto thee,
saying: O speake, what sayde the kyng to thee, hyde it not from vs, and we wyll
not put thee to death: tell vs (we pray thee) what sayde the kyng to thee?
26 See thou geue them this aunswere: I haue humbly besought the kyng that he
wyll let me lye no more in Iehonathans house, that I dye not there.
27 Then came all the princes vnto Ieremie, and asked hym: and he tolde them
after the maner as the kyng bad hym. Then they helde their peace, and let hym
alone: for they perceaued nothyng.
28 So Ieremie abode styll in the fore entrie of the prison, vntyll the day that
Hierusalem was wonne.

Chapter 39

1 Nowe when the citie of Hierusalem was taken (for in the ninth yere of Zedekia
kyng of Iuda, the tenth moneth, came Nabuchodonozor the kyng of Babylon and all
his hoast, and besieged Hierusalem, and fought agaynst it,
2 And in the eleuenth yere of Zedekia, in the fourth moneth, the ninth day of
the moneth, he brake into the citie)
3 Then all the princes of the kyng of Babylon came in and sate them downe vnder
the port: Neregel, Sarezer, Samgarnebo, Sarsachim, Rabsaris, Neregel, Sarezer,
Rabmag, with all the other princes of the king of Babylo.
4 And when Zedekia the kyng of Iuda with his souldiers sawe them, then they fled
and departed out of the citie by nyght through the kynges garden, and through
the port that is betweene the two walles, and so the kyng went towarde the
wildernesse:
5 But the Chaldees hoast folowed fast after them, and toke Zedekia in the fielde
of Hiericho, and brought hym prisoner to Nabuchodonozor the kyng of Babylon,
vnto Reblath, that lyeth in the lande of Hemath, where he gaue iudgement vpon
hym.
6 So the kyng of Babylon caused the children of Zedekia and all the nobles of
Iuda to be slayne before his face at Reblath,
7 And made Zedekias eyes to be put out, and bounde him with two chaines, and
sent hym to Babylon.
8 Moreouer, the Chaldees burnt vp the kynges palace, with the other houses of
the people, and brake downe the walles of Hierusalem.
9 As for the remnaunt of the people that were in the citie, and such as were
come to hym, and whatsoeuer was left of the common sort, Nabuzaradan the chiefe
captayne caryed them to Babylon.
10 But Nabuzaradan the chiefe captaine let the rascall people and those that had
nothyng, dwell styll in the lande of Iuda, and gaue them vineyardes and corne
fieldes at the same tyme.
11 Nabuchodonozor also the kyng of Babylon, gaue Nabuzaradan the chiefe captayne
a charge concerning Ieremie, saying:
12 Take and cherishe hym, and make much of him, see thou do him no harme, but
entreate hym after his owne desire.
13 So Nabuzaradan the chiefe captayne, Nabuzarban, Rabsares, Neregal, Sarezer,
Rabmag, and all the kyng of Babylons lordes, sent for Ieremie,
14 And caused hym to be set out of the fore entrie of the prison, and committed
hym vnto Gedaliah the sonne of Ahikam, the sonne of Saphan, that he shoulde cary
hym home: and so he dwelt among the people.
15 Nowe when Ieremie lay yet bounde in the fore entrie of the prison, the worde
of the Lorde came vnto hym, saying:
16 Go and tell Abedmelech the Morian, thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the God of
Israel: Beholde, the cruell and sharpe plague that I haue deuised for this citie
wyll I bring vpon them, that thou shalt see it:
17 But I wyll deliuer thee in that day saith the Lorde, & thou shalt not come in
the handes of those men whom thou fearest:
18 For doubtlesse I wyll saue thee, so that thou shalt not perishe with the
sworde: but thy lyfe shalbe saued, and that because thou hast put thy trust in
me, saith the Lorde.

Chapter 40

1 This is the worde that the Lorde spake vnto Ieremie, when Nabuzaradan the
chiefe captayne had let hym go free from Ramath, whyther he had led hym bounde
among all the prisoners that were caryed from Hierusalem and Iuda vnto Babylon.
2 The chiefe captaine called for Ieremie, and sayde vnto hym, The Lorde thy God
spake mightily before of the misery vpon this place.
3 Nowe the Lorde hath sent it and perfourmed it as he hath promised: for ye haue
sinned agaynst the Lord, and haue not ben obedient vnto his voyce, therfore
commeth this plague vpon you.
4 Beholde, I loose the bandes from thy handes this day: yf thou wilt nowe go
with me vnto Babylon, vp then, for I wyll see to thee, and prouide for thee: but
yf thou wylt not go with me to Babylon, then remayne here: Beholde all the lande
is at thy wyll, loke where thou thinkest conuenient and good for thee to abyde,
there dwell.
5 For as yet he was not gone backe agayne to Gedaliah: therfore he sayde to him,
Go backe to Gedaliah the sonne of Ahicam, the sonne of Saphan, whom the kyng of
Babylon hath made gouernour ouer the cities of Iuda, and dwell with hym among
the people, or remayne where soeuer it please thee. So the chiefe captayne gaue
him his expences with a rewarde, and let hym go.
6 Then went Ieremie vnto Gedaliah the sonne of Ahicam to Mispa, & dwelt there
with hym among the people that were left in the lande.
7 Nowe whe the captaynes of the hoast of Iuda, which with their felowes were
scattered abrode on euery syde in the lande, vnderstoode that the kyng of
Babylon had made Gedaliah the sonne of Ahicam gouernour in the lande, and that
man, wyfe, and chylde, yea and the poore men in the lande that were not led
captiue to Babylon, should be vnder his iurisdiction:
8 They came to Gedaliah vnto Mispa, namely Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah,
Iohanan and Ionathan the sonnes of Careah, Sareah the sonne of Thanehumeth, the
sonnes of Ephai the Netophatite, Iezaniah the sonne of Maachati, with their
companions.
9 And Gedaliah the sonne of Ahicam, the sonne of Saphan, sware vnto them and
their felowes in this maner: Be not afrayde to serue the Chaldees, dwel in the
lande, and do the king of Babylon seruice, so shall ye prosper.
10 Beholde I dwell at Mispa, to be an officer in the Chaldees behalfe, and to
satisfie such as come to vs: therfore gather wine, corne, and oyle, & kepe them
in your ware houses, and dwell in your cities that ye haue in kepyng.
11 Yea all the Iewes also that dwelt in Moab, vnder the Ammonites, Idumea, and
in all the countreys, when they hearde that the kyng of Babylon had made
Gedaliah the sonne of Ahicam the sonne of Saphan, gouernour vpon all them that
were left in Iuda:
12 All the Iewes I say returned out of all places where they were fled vnto, and
came into the lande of Iuda to Gedaliah vnto Mispa, and gathered wine and other
fruites, and that very much.
13 Moreouer, Iohanan the sonne of Careah, and all the captaynes of the hoast
that were scattered on euery syde in the lande, came to Gedaliah to Mispa, and
sayde vnto hym:
14 Knowest thou not that Baalis the kyng of the Ammonites hath sent Ismael the
sonne of Nathaniah to slay thee? But Gedaliah the sonne of Ahicam beleued them
not.
15 Then sayde Iohanan the sonne of Careah vnto Gedaliah in Mispa these wordes
secretely, Let me go I pray thee, and I wyll slay Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah,
so that no body shall knowe it: Wherfore wyll he kyll thee, that all the Iewes
which resort vnto thee myght be scattered, and the remnaunt in Iuda perishe.
16 And Gedaliah the sonne of Ahicam sayde to Iohanan the sonne of Careah, Thou
shalt not do it: for they are but lyes that thou sayest of Ismael.

Chapter 41

1 But in the seuenth moneth, it happened that Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah, the
sonne of Elisama, one of the kynges blood came, and the greatest about the kyng,
& ten men with him, vnto Gedaliah the sonne of Ahicam to Mispa, and they did
eate together in Mispa.
2 And Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah, with those ten men that were with him,
start vp, and smote Gedaliah the sonne of Ahicam the sonne of Saphan with the
sworde, and slue hym whom the king of Babylon had made a gouernour of the lande.
3 Ismael also slue all the Iewes that were with Gedaliah at Mispa, and all the
Chaldees that he founde there waytyng vpon hym, and those that were able to
fyght he slue with hym.
4 The next day after that he had slayne Gedaliah, the matter was yet vnknowen:
5 And there came certayne men from Sichem, from Silo, and Samaria, to the number
of fourescore, which had shauen their beardes, rent their clothes, and were all
heauie, bryngyng meate offerynges and incense in their handes, to offer it in
the house of the Lorde.
6 And Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah went foorth of Mispa weepyng, to meete them:
Nowe when he met them, he sayde, Go your way to Gedaliah the sonne of Ahicam.
7 And when they came in the middest of the citie, Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah,
with them that were with hym, slue them euen at the middest of the pit.
8 Among these fourescore men there were ten that sayde vnto Ismael: Oh slay vs
not, for we haue yet a great treasure in the fielde, of wheate, barly, oyle, and
hony: So he spared them, and slue them not with their brethren.
9 Nowe the pit wherin Ismael did cast the dead bodyes of the men whom he slue
because of Gedaliah, had kyng Asa caused to be made for feare of Baasa the kyng
of Israel, and the same pit did Ismael fyll with slayne men.
10 As for the remnaunt of the people, the kynges daughters, and all the people
that were left at Mispa, vpon whom Nabuzaradan the chiefe captayne had made
Gedaliah the sonne of Ahicam gouernour, Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah caryed
them away prisoners towarde the Ammonites.
11 But when Iohanan the sonne of Careah, and all they which had ben captaynes
ouer the kinges hoast with him, hearde of all the wickednesse that Ismael the
sonne of Nathaniah had done:
12 They toke their companions, & went out for to fyght with Ismael the sonne of
Nathaniah, and founde hym by the great waters that are at Gibeon.
13 Nowe when all the people whom Ismael led captiue, sawe Iohanan the sonne of
Careah, and all the other captaynes of the hoast, they were glad.
14 So all the people that Ismael had caried away from Mispa, were brought
agayne: and when they returned, they came to Iohanan the sonne of Careah.
15 But Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah fled from Iohanan with eyght companions,
and went to the Ammonites.
16 Then Iohanan the sonne of Careah, and all the captaynes of the hoast that
were with hym, toke all the remnaunt of the people, whom Ismael the sonne of
Nathaniah had led away when he had slayne Gedaliah the sonne of Ahicam, whom
they also had reserued from hym, fightyng men, women, and children, and gelded
men, whom they brought agayne from Gibeon,
17 And went from thence, and sate them downe at Geruth Chamaam, which lyeth
beside Bethlehem, that they might go into Egypt for feare of the Chaldees:
18 Of whom they were afrayde, because that Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah had
slayne Gedaliah Ahicams sonne, whom the kyng of Babylon had made gouernour in
the lande.

Chapter 42

1 So all the captaynes of Iohanan the sonne of Careah, Iezaniah the sonne of
Osiah, came, with all the people fro the least vnto the most,
2 And sayde vnto Ieremie the prophete: O heare our petition, that thou mayest
pray for vs vnto the Lorde thy God, namely for all the remnaunt, wherof there be
fewe of vs left of many, as thou seest vs:
3 That the Lorde thy God may shewe vs a way to go in, and tell vs what we
shoulde do.
4 Then Ieremie the prophete sayde vnto them: I haue hearde you, beholde, I wyll
pray vnto God your Lorde as ye haue required me: and loke what aunswere the
Lorde geueth, I shall certifie you therof, and kepe nothyng backe from you.
5 And they sayde vnto Ieremie, The Lorde be a true and faithfull witnesse
betwixt vs, that we wyll do all that the Lorde thy God commaundeth vs.
6 Whether it be good or euyll, we wyll hearken vnto the voyce of the Lorde God,
to whom we sende thee, that we may prosper when we haue folowed the voyce of the
Lorde our God.
7 And after ten dayes came the worde of the Lorde vnto Ieremie.
8 Then called he Iohanan the sonne of Careah, and all the captaynes of the
people that were with hym, yea and all the people from the least to the most,
9 And sayde vnto them: Thus saith the Lorde God of Israel, vnto whom ye sent me
to lay foorth your prayers before hym:
10 If ye wyll dwell in this lande, I shall builde you vp, & not breake you
downe, I shal plant you, and not roote you out: for I repent as concerning the
trouble that I haue done to you.
11 Feare not the kyng of Babylon of whom ye stande in awe, O be not afraide of
him, saith the Lord: for I wyll be with you to helpe you, and deliuer you from
his hande.
12 I wyll pardon you, I wyll haue mercie vpon you, and cause hym to pitie you,
and bryng you agayne into your owne lande.
13 Neuerthelesse, yf ye purpose not to dwell in this lande, nor to folowe the
voyce of the Lorde your God:
14 But wyll say thus, We wyll not dwell heare, but go into Egypt, where we shall
neither see warre, heare the noyse of the trumpe, nor suffer hunger, there wyll
we dwell:
15 Wherfore heare nowe the worde of the Lorde O ye remnaunt of Iuda, Thus saith
the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel: If ye be wholly purposed to go into
Egypt, and to dwell there as straungers,
16 The sworde that ye feared, shall ouertake you in Egypt: and the hunger wherof
ye be here afrayde, shall hang vpon you, and folowe you into Egypt, and there
shall ye dye.
17 And all they that of set purpose vndertake to go into Egypt to soiourne
there, shall perishe with the sworde, with hunger, and pestilence, not one of
them shall remayne, there shall none escape the plague that I wyll bryng vpon
them.
18 For thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel, Lyke as my wrath and
indignation is moued agaynst the inhabitours of Hierusalem: so shall my
displeasure be kindled agaynst you also yf ye go into Egypt, and there ye shalbe
reuiled, abhorred, brought to shame and confusion, and as for this place ye
shall neuer see it more.
19 The Lorde forbiddeth you (O ye remnaunt of Iuda) that ye shall not go into
Egypt: and forget not that I haue warned you earnestly this day.
20 For ye haue dissembled with me: for ye sent me vnto the Lorde your God, and
sayde, O pray thou the Lorde our God for vs, and loke what aunswere the Lorde
our God geueth thee, that bryng vs agayne, and we shall do therafter:
21 Nowe haue I shewed and declared vnto you, but ye haue not obeyed the voyce of
the Lorde your God, for the which cause he hath sent me to you.
22 Nowe therfore be sure that ye shall perishe with the sworde, with hunger and
pestilence, euen in the same place where your lust is to go and dwell.

Chapter 43

1 Nowe when Ieremie had ended all ye wordes of the Lorde his God vnto the
people, which to declare the Lorde their God had sent him to them, euen all
these wordes I say
2 Azariah the sonne of Osaiah, and Iohanan the sonne of Careah, with all the
stubburne persons, sayd vnto Ieremie, Thou lyest, the Lorde our God hath not
sent thee to speake vnto vs, that we shoulde not go into Egypt, and dwell there:
3 But Baruch the sonne of Neriah prouoketh thee agaynst vs, that he myght bryng
vs into the captiuitie of the Chaldees, that they myght slay vs, and cary vs
away prisoners vnto Babylon.
4 So Iohanan the sonne of Careah, and all the captaynes of the hoast, and all
the people, folowed not the commaundement of the Lorde, namely to dwell in the
lande of Iuda:
5 But Iohanan the sonne of Cariah, and all the captaines of the hoast, caried
away all the remnaunt of Iuda, that were come together agayne from all the
heathen, among whom they had ben scattered, to dwell in the lande of Iuda,
6 Men, women, children, the kynges daughters, all those that Nabuzaradan the
chiefe captayne had left with Gedaliah the sonne of Ahikam, the sonne of Saphan:
they caryed away also the prophete Ieremie, Baruch the sonne of Neriah,
7 And so came into Egypt: for they were not obedient vnto the commaundement of
God. Thus came they to Thaphnis:
8 And in Thaphnis the worde of the Lorde happened vnto Ieremie, saying:
9 Take great stones in thine hande, and hyde them in the bricke wall vnder the
doore of Pharaos house in Thaphnis, that all the men of Iuda may see,
10 And say vnto them, Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel:
Beholde, I will sende and call for Nabuchodonozor the kyng of Babylon my
seruaunt, and wyll set his seate vpon these stones that I haue hyd, and he shall
spreade his tent ouer them.
11 And when he commeth, he shall smite the land of Egypt, some with slaughter,
some with banishment, and some with the sworde.
12 He shall set fire vpon the temple of the Egyptians gods, and burne them vp,
and take them selues prisoners: Moreouer, he shall aray hym selfe with the lande
of Egypt, lyke as a sheephearde putteth on his coate, and shall depart his way
from thence in peace.
13 The pyllers also of the temple of the sunne that is in Egypt shall he breake
in peeces, and burne the temples of the Egyptians gods.

Chapter 44

1 This is the worde that was shewed to Ieremie concernyng all the Iewes which
dwelt in Egypt, at Migdol, at Thaphnis, at Noph, and in the lande of Pathures.
2 Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel, Ye haue seene all the
miserie that I haue brought vpon Hierusalem, & vpon all the cities of Iuda: so
that this day they are desolate and no man dwellyng therin,
3 And that because of the great blasphemies, which they commited to prouoke me
vnto anger, in that they went backe to do sacrifice and worship vnto straunge
gods, whom neither they, nor ye, nor your fathers haue knowen.
4 Howbeit I sent vnto them my seruauntes all the prophetes, I rose vp early, I
sent vnto them and gaue them warning, O do no suche abhominable thinges, and
thinges that I hate.
5 But they would not folowe nor hearken to turne from their wickednesse, & to do
no more sacrifice vnto straunge gods.
6 Wherefore, myne indignation and wrath was kindled, and it brent vp the cities
of Iuda, with the streetes of Hierusalem, so that they were made waste and
desolate, as it is come to passe this day.
7 Nowe therfore thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel: Howe
happeneth it that ye do so great euyll vnto your owne soules, thus to destroy
the men and woman, chyldren and babes of Iuda, so that none of you is left?
8 Because ye prouoke me to wrath with the workes of your owne hands, when ye
offer vnto straunge gods in the lande of Egypt where as ye be gone to dwell,
that ye might vtterly perishe, and that ye might be reuiled and shamefully
intreated of all nations?
9 Or haue ye nowe forgotten the wickednesse of your forefathers, the wickednesse
of the kynges of Iuda and their wiues, the wickednesse that ye your selues and
your wiues haue done in the lande of Iuda, and in the streetes of Hierusalem?
10 Yet are ye not sorie this day, ye feare not, neither walke ye in my lawe, and
in my commaundementes that I haue geuen vnto you and your forefathers.
11 Therefore thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel: I am stedfally
aduised and determined to punish you, and to roote out all Iuda.
12 As for the remnaunt of Iuda that purposely went into Egypt there to dwell, I
wyll take them, and they shall all be destroyed, in the lande of Egypt shall
they perishe, beyng consumed with the sworde and with hunger: for from the least
vnto the most they shall perishe with the sworde and with hunger: Moreouer, they
shalbe reuiled, adhorred, shamed, and confounded.
13 For I wyll visite them that dwell in Egypt, as I haue visited Hierusalem,
with the sworde, with hunger, and with pestilence.
14 So that none of the remnaunt of Iuda whiche are gone to dwell in Egypt,
shalbe left to come againe into the land of Iuda, although they thinke to come
thyther agayne and to dwell there: for none shall come agayne but suche as are
fled away.
15 Then all the men whiche knewe that their wiues had offred vnto straunge gods,
and a great sort of wiues that stoode there, yea and all the people that dwelt
there in Egypt in the citie of Phatures, aunswered Ieremie and saide:
16 As for the wordes that thou hast spoken vnto vs in the name of the Lorde, we
wyll in no wise heare them:
17 But whatsoeuer goeth out of our owne mouth, that wyll we do, we wyll do
sacrifice, and offer oblations vnto the Queene of heauen, like as we and our
forefathers, our kinges and our heades haue done in the cities of Iuda, and in
the streetes of Hierusalem: for then had we plenteousnesse of vitailes, then
were we in prosperitie, and no misfortune came vpon vs:
18 But since we left to offer and to do sacrifice vnto the Queene of heauen, we
haue had scarsenesse of all thinges, and perishe with the sworde and hunger.
19 Last of all when we women dyd sacrifice and offred vnto the Queene of heauen:
dyd we make her cakes and powre vnto her drinke offeringes to do her seruice,
without our husbandes wylles?
20 Then saide Ieremie vnto all the people, to the men, to the women, and to all
the folke whiche had geuen hym that aunswere:
21 Dyd not the Lorde remember the sacrifices that ye, your forefathers, your
kynges and rulers, with all the people, haue offred in the cities of Iuda, in
the streetes of Hierusalem? and hath he not considered this in his minde?
22 Insomuche that the Lorde might no longer suffer the wickednesse of your
inuentions, and the abhominable thinges whiche ye dyd: Is not your lande
desolate and voyde, yea and abhorred, so that no man dwelleth therein any more,
as it is come to passe this day?
23 Did not all this happen vnto you, because ye made suche sacrifice, and sinned
against the Lord: Ye haue not folowed his voyce, to walke in his law, in his
ordinaunces and statutes: yea this is the cause that all misfortune happened
vnto you, as it is come to passe this day.
24 Moreouer, Ieremie spake vnto al the people, and to al the women: Heare the
worde of the Lorde all Iuda that be in the lande of Egypt.
25 Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the god of Israel, Ye and your wiues haue
spoken with your owne mouth the thing that ye haue fulfilled in deede, yea thus
haue ye sayde: We wyll not fayle, but perfourme the vowes that we haue vowed, we
wyll do sacrifice, and powre out drinke offeringes to the Queene of heauen:
Purposely wyll ye set vp your owne meaninges, and perfourme your vowes.
26 And therefore heare the worde of the Lorde all Iuda, that dwell in the lande
of Egypt: Beholde, I haue sworne by my great name, saith the Lorde, that my name
shall not be rehearsed thorowe any mans mouth of Iuda in all the lande of Egypt,
to say, the Lorde God liueth.
27 For I wyl watch to plague them, and not for their wealth: And all the men of
Iuda that be in the lande of Egypt shall perishe with the sworde, and with
hunger, vntil they be vtterly destroyed.
28 Neuerthelesse, those that fled away for the sworde, shall come againe out of
Egypt into the land of Iuda, but there shalbe very fewe of them: and all the
remnaunt of Iuda that are gone into Egypt there to dwell, shall knowe whose
words shalbe found true, theirs, or myne.
29 Take this for a token, that I wyll visite you in this place saith the Lorde,
and that ye may knowe howe that I without doubt wyl perfourme my purpose vpon
you, to punishe you.
30 Beholde saith the Lorde, I wyll deliuer Pharao Hophrea kyng of Egypt, into
the handes of his enemies that seeke after his lyfe: euen as I gaue Zedekias the
kyng of Iuda into the handes of Nabuchodonozor kyng of Babylon his enemie,
whiche sought after his life.

Chapter 45

1 These are the wordes that Ieremie the prophete spake vnto Baruch the sonne of
Neriah, after that he had written these sermons in a booke at the mouth of
Ieremie, in the fourth yere of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosias kyng of Iuda,
saying:
2 Thus saith the Lorde God of Israel vnto thee, O Baruch:
3 Insomuch as thou thoughtest thus when thou wast wrytyng wo is me, the Lorde
hath geuen me payne for my trauayle, I haue weeried my selfe with sighing, and
haue founde no rest:
4 Therefore tell hym O Ieremie, that the Lord saith thus: Beholde, the thing
that I haue buylded, wyll I breake downe agayne, and roote out the thing that I
haue planted, yea this whole lande:
5 And seekest thou yet promotion looke not for it, and desire it not, for I wyll
bryng a miserable plague vpon all flesh saith the Lorde: but thy lyfe wyll I
geue thee for a pray in all places whythersoeuer thou goest.

Chapter 46

1 Heare folowe the wordes of the Lorde to the prophete Ieremie, which he spake
against all the gentiles.
2 These wordes folowing preached he in the Egyptians, concerning the hoast of
Pharao Necho kyng of Egypt, when he was in Charchamis beside the water of
Euphrates, what tyme as Nabuchodonozor the kyng of Babylon slue hym, in the
fourth yere of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosias kyng of Iuda.
3 Make redy buckler and shielde, and go foorth to fight.
4 Harnesse your horses, and set your selues vpon them, set your sallets fast on,
bryng foorth speares, scoure your swordes, and put on your brestplates.
5 But alas, howe happeneth it that I see you so afraide? why shrinke ye backe?
Their worthyes are slayne, yea they runne so fast away that none of them looketh
behinde hym: fearefulnesse is fallen vpon euery one of them saith the Lorde.
6 The lightest of foote shall not flee away, and the worthyes shal not escape:
towarde the north by the water of Euphrates they dyd stumble and fall.
7 But what is he this that swelleth vp as it were a fludde, roaring and raging
lyke the streames of water?
8 It is Egypt that ryseth vp lyke the fludde, and casteth out the waters with so
great noyse: And he saide, I wyll go vp and wyll couer the earth, I wyll destroy
the citie with them that are therin.
9 Get you vp ye horses, roule foorth ye charets, come foorth worthyes, ye
Ethiopians, ye Libyans with your bucklers, ye Lydians with your bowes.
10 But this day of the Lorde God of hoastes, is a day of vengeaunce, that he may
auenge him of his enemies: The sworde shall deuour, it shalbe satisfied and
bathed in their blood, for the Lord God of hoastes shall haue a slayne offering
towarde the north, by the water of Euphrates.
11 Go vp vnto Gilead, and bryng triacle O virgin thou daughter of Egypt: but in
vayne shalt thou go to surgerie, for thy wounde shall not be stopped.
12 The heathen haue hearde of thy shame, and the lande is full of thy confusion,
for one strong man did stumble vpon another, and they are fallen both together.
13 These are the wordes that the Lord spake to the prophete Ieremie, concerning
the comming of Nabuchodonozor the kyng of Babylon, whiche was sent to destroy
the lande of Egypt:
14 Preache out thorowe the lande of Egypt, and cause it to be proclaymed at
Migdol, Noph, and Thaphnis, and say: stande styll, make thee redye, for the
sworde shall consume thee rounde about.
15 Howe happeneth it that thy mightie worthyes are fallen? why stoode they not
fast? euen because the Lorde thrust them downe.
16 The slaughter was great, for one fell euer still vpon another: and they
sayde, Up, let vs go agayne to our owne people, and to our owne naturall
countrey, from the cruel sworde.
17 They dyd crye euen there, Pharao the kyng of Egypt is a kyng of
troublesomnesse: he hath ouerpast the appointed tyme.
18 As I liue (saith the kyng whose name is the Lorde of hoastes) so surely as
Thabor standeth among the mountaynes, and Charmel in the sea: euen so assuredly
shall this mischiefe come vppon Egypt.
19 O thou daughter of Egypt, make redye thy geare to flit: for Noph shalbe voyde
and desolate, so that no man shal dwell therein.
20 The lande of Egypt is lyke a goodly faire calfe: but destruction shall come
out of the north I say it commeth.
21 Her waged souldiers that be with her are lyke fat calues, they also shall
flee away together and not abyde: for the day of their slaughter, and the tyme
of their visitation shall come vpon them.
22 The crye of them shall make a noyse as the hissing of serpentes: for they
shall enter in with their hoastes, and come against her with axes, as it were
hewers downe of wood.
23 And they shall cut downe her wood saith the Lorde, they shalbe innumerable:
for they shalbe mo in number then the grashoppers, so that no man shalbe able to
tell them.
24 The daughter of Egypt is confounded, and deliuered into the handes of the
people of the north.
25 Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel: Beholde, I wyll visite
that restlesse people of Alexandria, Pharao, & Egypt, yea both their gods and
their kinges, euen Pharoa and all them that put their trust in hym:
26 Yea I wyl deliuer them into the handes of those that seeke after their liues,
namely into the power of Nabuchodonozor the kyng of Babylon, and into the power
of his seruauntes: and after all these thinges, it shalbe inhabited as
aforetyme, saith the Lorde.
27 Be not thou afraide O my seruaunt Iacob, feare not thou O Israel: for lo, I
wyll helpe thee from farre, and thy seede from the lande of their captiuitie:
Iacob also shall come againe and be in rest, he shall prosper, and no man shall
do hym harme.
28 Feare thou not (O Iacob my seruaunt) saith the Lorde, for I am with thee, and
wyll destroy all nations among whom I haue scattered thee: neuerthelesse I wyll
not consume thee, but chasten thee and correct thee, yea and that with
discretion, neither wyll I vtterly destroy thee.

Chapter 47

1 These are the wordes that the Lorde spake vnto Ieremie the prophete against
the Philistines, before that Pharao smote the citie of Azah.
2 Thus saith the Lorde: Beholde, there shal waters arise out of the north, and
shall growe to a great fludde, running ouer & couering the lande and all that is
therin, the cities and them that dwel therin: and the men shal crye, & all they
that dwel in the land shal mourne
3 At the noyse and stamping of their strong barbed horses, at the shaking of
their charrets, and at the rumbling of the wheeles: the fathers shall not looke
to their chyldren, so feeble and weerie shall their handes be,
4 At the same tyme when he shalbe there to destroy the whole lande of the
Philistines, he shall make waste both Tyrus, Sidon, and the residue of their
ayde: for the Lorde wyll destroy the Philistines, the remnaunt of the Ile of
Caphtor.
5 Baldnesse is come vpon Azah, Ascalon is put to scilence, with the rest of
their valleys: Howe long wylt thou teare thy selfe?
6 O thou sworde of the Lorde, howe long wylt thou not ceasse? Turne againe into
thy sheath, rest, and leaue of.
7 But how can it ceasse, when the Lord him selfe hath geuen it a charge against
Ascalon, and raysed it vp against the cities of the sea coast?

Chapter 48

1 Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel against Moab: Wo be to the
citie of Nebo, for it is layde waste, brought to confusion, and Kiriathaim is
taken: Misgab is brought to shame and afraide.
2 Moab can boast no more of Hesbon, for they haue deuised a mischiefe against
it: Come shall they say let vs roote them out, that they may be no more a
nation, thou also shalt be destroyed O Madmena, and the sworde shall persecute
thee.
3 A voyce shall crye from Horonaim: Great wasting and destruction shall come
vpon them,
4 Moab is made desolate, her litle ones haue cryed out.
5 For at the going vp vnto Luith he arose with lamentation and mourning, and
downe towarde Horonaim they hearde a cruel and deadly crye:
6 Get you away, saue your liues, and be lyke vnto the heath in the wyldernesse.
7 For because thou hast trusted in thine owne workes and treasure, thou shalt be
taken: Chamos with his priestes and princes shall go away into captiuitie.
8 The destroyer shall come vpon all cities, none shall escape: The valleys
shalbe destroyed, and the fieldes shalbe layde waste, lyke as the Lorde hath
spoken.
9 Geue winges vnto Moab, that she get her away speedyly: for her cities shalbe
made so desolate, that no man shall dwell therein.
10 Cursed be he that doth the worke of the Lorde fraudulently, and cursed be he
that kepeth backe his sworde from sheddyng of blood.
11 Moab hath euer ben riche and carelesse from her youth vp, she hath ben still
setled vpon lies, she was neuer yet put out of one vessell into another that is
she neuer went away into captiuitie, therefore her taste remayneth, and her
sauour is not yet chaunged.
12 But lo, the tyme commeth saith the Lorde, that I shall sende her trussers to
trusse her vp, whiche shall remoue her from her dwelling, and emptie her
vessels, and breake her wine pottes.
13 And Moab shalbe ashamed of Chamos, lyke as Israel was ashamed of Bethel,
wherein she put her trust.
14 Wherefore do ye thinke thus: we are mightie and strong men of warre?
15 Moab is destroyed, and her cities brent vp, her chosen young men be slayne,
saith the kyng whose name is the Lorde of hoastes.
16 The destruction of Moab commeth on a pace, and her fall is at hande.
17 All ye neighbours mourne for her, and all ye that knowe her name, say, O howe
happeneth it that the strong staffe and the goodly rodde is thus broken?
18 And thou daughter Dibon, come downe from thy glory, and sit in thyrst: for he
that destroyeth Moab, shall come vp to thee also, and breake downe thy strong
holdes.
19 And thou that dwellest in Aroer, get thee to the streete, and looke about
thee, aske them that are fled and escaped, and say, What thing is happened?
20 Oh Moab is confounded and ouercome: mourne and crye, tell it out at Arnon,
that Moab is destroyed.
21 For iudgement shall come vpon the playne lande namely vpon Holon, and Iahzah,
and vpon Mephaath.
22 And vpon Dibon, vpon Nabo, and Beth Deblathaim,
23 Upon Kiriathaim, and vpon Beth Gamul, vpon Beth Maon,
24 And vpon Carioth, vpon Bozra, and all the cities in the lande of Moab,
whether they lye farre or neare.
25 The horne of Moab is smitten downe, and her arme broken saith the Lorde.
26 Make her drunken, for she magnified her selfe aboue the Lorde, that men may
clap their handes at her vomite, and that she also may be laughed to scorne.
27 Diddest not thou laugh Israel to scorne, as though he had ben taken with
theft among thieues? for so often as thou makest mention of hym, thou skippest
for ioy.
28 Ye Moabites, leaue the cities, and dwel in rockes of stone, and become like
doues that make their nestes in holes.
29 As for Moabs pride we haue hearde of it, she is very hye minded, I knowe her
stoutenesse, her boasting, her arrogancie, and the pride of her stomacke, saith
the Lorde.
30 I knowe (saith the Lorde) her indignation, she doth not right, her wordes are
lyes, and they haue not dealt truely.
31 Therefore will I mourne for Moab, for whole Moabs sake: my heart shall lament
the men of Kirchares.
32 O thou vineyarde of Sabamah, I wyll weepe for thee as for Iazer: thy vine
braunches shall come ouer the sea vnto the sea of Iazer, the destroyer shal
breake into thy haruest and grape gathering.
33 Myrth and cheare shalbe taken away from the fertile fielde, and from the
lande of Moab: there shalbe no sweete wine in the presse, the treader shal haue
no stomacke to crye, yea there shalbe none to crye vnto him,
34 Whiche aforetyme were hearde from Hesbon to Eleale, and Iahaz, whiche lyfted
vp their voyce from Zoar vnto Horonaim, that bullocke of three yere olde: the
waters also of Nemrim shalbe dryed vp.
35 Moreouer, I will make Moab ceasse saith the Lorde, from the offeringes and
censing that she hath made vnto her gods in hye places.
36 Wherefore my heart mourneth for Moab like a crowde playing an heauie song,
and for the mens sake of Kirchares my heart mourneth also, euen as a pipe that
pipeth a dolefull song: for their riches which they haue gathered, shalbe
destroyed.
37 All heades shalbe shauen, and all beardes clipped of, all handes bounde, and
all loynes gyrded about with sackcloth.
38 Upon all the house toppes and streetes of Moab there shalbe lamentable
mourning: for I wyl breake Moab lyke an vnprofitable vessell, saith the Lorde.
39 O howe is she destroyed? O howe mourneth she? O howe doth Moab hang downe her
head and is ashamed? Thus shal Moab be a laughing stocke, and had in derision of
all them that be rounde about her.
40 For thus saith the Lorde: Beholde, the enemie shall come fleeing as an Egle,
and spreade his winges vpon Moab.
41 They shall take the cities, and winne the strong holdes: then the mightie
mens heartes in Moab, shalbe lyke the heart of a woman trauayling with chylde.
42 And Moab shalbe made so desolate, that she shall no more be a people, because
she hath set vp her selfe against the Lorde.
43 Feare, pit, and snare, shall come vpon thee O Moab, saith the Lorde.
44 Whoso escapeth the feare, shall fall into the pit, and whoso getteth out of
the pit, shalbe taken in the snare: for I will bryng a yere of visitation vpon
Moab, saith the Lorde.
45 They that are able to flee, shall stande vnder the shadowe of Hesbon, for
there shall go a fire out of Hesbon, and a flambe from Sion, and shall burne vp
that proude people of Moab, and the toppe of those seditious chyldren.
46 Wo be vnto thee O Moab, thou people of Chamos shalt perishe: yea thy sonnes
and daughters shalbe led away captiue.
47 Yet at the last wyll I bryng Moab out of captiuitie agayne saith the Lord:
Thus farre is of the plague of Moab.

Chapter 49

1 As concerning the Ammonites, thus the Lorde saith: Hath Israel no chyldren? or
is he without any ayre? Why hath your kyng then taken Gad in? Wherefore doth his
people dwell in his cities.
2 Beholde therefore, the tyme commeth saith the Lord, that I wyll bring a noyse
of warre into Rabath of the Ammonites, and it shalbe layde on a desolate heape,
and her cities brent vp, and the Israelites shalbe lordes ouer those that had
them in possession afore saith the Lorde.
3 Hesbon shall mourne, for Ai shalbe rooted out of the grounde, saith the Lorde:
the citie of Rabbah shall crye out, and gyrde them selues with sackcloth, they
shall mourne and runne about the walles, for their kyng shalbe led away
prisoner, yea his priestes and princes with hym.
4 Wherfore gloriest thou in the valley? thy valley hath flowed away O thou
rebellious daughter, and thinkest thou that thou art so safe by reason of thy
treasure, that no man shall come to thee?
5 Beholde, I wyll bryng a feare vpon thee saith the Lorde God of hoastes, from
all those that be about thee, so that ye shalbe scattred euery man from another,
and no man shall gather them together agayne that be fled.
6 But after that, I will bryng the Ammonites also out of captiuitie agayne,
saith the Lorde.
7 Upon the Edomites hath the Lord of hoastes spoken on this maner: Is there no
more wysdome in Theman? Is there no more good counsayle among his people? Is
their wysdome then turned cleane to naught?
8 Get you hence, turne your backes, creepe downe into the deepe O ye citizens of
Dedan: for I wyll bryng destruction vpon Esau, yea and the day of his
visitation.
9 If the grape gatherers come vpon thee, shoulde they not leaue some grapes? If
the night robbers come vppon thee, shoulde they not take so much as they thought
were inough?
10 But I wyll make Esau bare, and discouer his secretes, so that he shall not be
able to byde them: His seede shalbe wasted away, yea his brethren and his
neighbours, and he hym selfe shall not be left behynde.
11 Thou shalt leaue thy fatherlesse chyldren behynde thee, and I wyll kepe them,
and thy wydowes shal take their comfort in me.
12 For thus hath the Lord spoken: Beholde, they that men thought were vnmeete to
drinke of the cuppe, haue drunken with the first, and thinkest thou then to be
free? No no, thou shalt neither be quit nor free: but thou must drinke also.
13 For why? I haue sworne by my selfe saith the Lorde, that Bozrah shall become
a wyldernesse, an open shame, a laughing stocke, and cursing, and all her cities
shalbe a continuall desert.
14 For I am perfectly infourmed of the Lorde, that he hath sent a message alredy
vnto the heathen: Gather you together, and go foorth agaynst her, make you redy
to battayle.
15 For lo, I wyll make thee but small among the heathen, and litle regarded
among men.
16 Thy hye stomacke, and the pryde of thy heart hath deceaued thee, because thou
doest dwell in the holes of stonye rockes, and hast the hye mountaynes in
possession: Neuerthelesse, though thy nest were as hye as the Egles, yet I wyll
cast thee downe saith the Lorde.
17 Moreouer, Idumea shalbe a wyldernesse, whoso goeth by it, shalbe abashed, and
wonder at all her miserable plagues.
18 Like as Sodom, Gomor, and the cities that lay there about, were turned vpside
downe, saith the Lorde: so shalt no body dwell in Idumea, and no man shall haue
his habitation there.
19 Beholde, lyke as the lion, so shall a destroyer come vp from the pleasaunt
medowes of Iordane, vnto the strong dwelling place, & when I haue made hym
quiet, I wyll make hym to flee from her, and all chosen men wyll I set in aray
against her: Who is lyke vnto me? what is he that wyll striue with me? what
sheephearde may stande in my handes?
20 Therefore heare the counsell of the Lorde that he hath taken vpon Idumea, and
his purpose that he hath deuised vpon the citizens of Theman: The least of the
flocke shall trayle them, and looke what fayre habitation they haue, they shall
make it waste, and them selues also.
21 At the noyse of their fall the earth shall quake, the crye of their voyce
shalbe hearde vnto the red sea.
22 Beholde, the enemie shall come and flee vp hyther lyke as it were an Egle,
and spreade his winges vpon Bozrah: then shall the heartes of the worthyes in
Edom, be as the heart of a woman trauayling of chylde.
23 Upon Damascus, Hemath, and Arphad, shall come confusion: for they shal heare
euyll tidinges, they shalbe tossed to and fro like the sea that can not stand
styll.
24 Damascus shalbe sore afraide, and shal flee: trembling commeth vpon her,
sorowe and payne shall ouertake her, as a woman trauayling of chylde.
25 But howe happeneth it that the famous citie, the citie of my ioy, is not
spared?
26 Her young men shal fal in the streetes, and all her men of warre shalbe taken
away in that tyme, saith the Lorde of hoastes.
27 I wyll kindle a fire in the walles of Damascus, whiche shall consume the
palace of Benhadad.
28 As for Cedar and the kyngdome of Hazor, whom Nabuchodonozor the kyng of
Babylon smote, the Lord hath spoken thus vpon them: Aryse, and get you vp vnto
Cedar, and destroy the people towarde the east.
29 Their tentes and their flockes shall they take away, yea their hanginges and
their vessels, their camels also shall they cary away with them: they shall crye
to them, feare is on euery syde.
30 Flee, get you farre away, creepe into caues, that ye may dwell there O ye
inhabiters of Hazor saith the Lorde: for Nabuchodonozor the kyng of Babylon hath
holden a counsell concerning you, and concluded his deuice against you.
31 Aryse and get you vp against yonder rythe and carelesse people saith the
Lorde, whiche haue neither gates nor doore barres, but dwell alone.
32 Their camels shalbe a pray, and the droues of their cattell driuen awaye:
Moreouer, those wil I scatter towarde all the wyndes, and to the farthest partes
of the worlde, yea from all the sides therof will I bryng their destruction,
saith the Lorde.
33 Hazor also shalbe a dwelling for dragons, and an euerlasting wyldernesse, so
that no body shall dwell there, and no man shall haue there his habitation.
34 These are the wordes that the Lord spake to the prophete Ieremie concerning
Elam, in the beginning of the raigne of Zedekias kyng of Iuda.
35 Thus saith the Lord of hoastes, Beholde, I wyl breake the bowe of Elam, their
principall strength.
36 And vpon Elam I wyll bryng the foure windes from the foure quarters of
heauen, and wyll scatter them against the same foure wyndes: and there shalbe no
people, but some of Elam shall flee vnto them.
37 For I wyll cause Elam to be afraide of their enemies, and of them that seeke
their liues, and wyll bryng vpon them a mischiefe, euen my wrath saith the
Lorde: And I wyll persecute them with the sworde so long tyll I haue brought
them to naught.
38 I wyll set my throne in Elam, I wyll destroy both the kyng and princes from
thence saith the Lorde:
39 But in processe of tyme I wyll bryng Elam out of captiuitie agayne, saith the
Lorde.

Chapter 50

1 The wordes that the Lorde spake vnto the prophete Ieremie, cocerning Babylon
and the lande of the Chaldees:
2 Preache among the gentiles, let your voyce be hearde, make a token, crye out,
kepe no scilence, but say, Babylon is wonne, Bel is confounded, and Merodach is
ouercome, yea their gods be brought to shame, and their images burst in peeces:
3 For out of the north there doth come a people against her, which shall make
her lande so waste that no body shall dwell therin, neither man nor beast, for
they shall flee and depart from thence.
4 In those dayes, and at that tyme saith the Lorde, the chyldren of Israel shall
come, they and the children of Iuda, weeping and making haste, and shal seeke
the Lorde their God.
5 They shall aske the way to Sion, thither shall they turne their faces, saying:
Come, and we wyll cleaue to the Lorde in a couenaunt that neuer shalbe broken.
6 My people haue ben a lost flocke, my sheepheardes haue deceaued them, and haue
made them go astray vpon the hylles, they haue gone from the mountayne to the
litle hyl, and forgotten their folde.
7 All they that came vpon them haue deuoured them, and their enemies said, We
haue made no fault agaynst them, for they haue displeased the Lorde, yea euen
the Lorde which is the habitation of their righteousnesse, and the hope of their
fathers.
8 Flee from Babylon, and depart out of the lande of the Chaldees, and be ye as
the rammes that go before the flocke.
9 For lo, I wyll wake vp an hoast of people from the northren lande, & bryng
them vpon Babylon, these shal lay siege to it, and winne it: their arrowes shall
not misse, like as a cunnyng archer shooteth not wrong.
10 And the Chaldees shalbe spoyled, and all they that spoyle them, shalbe
satisfied saith the Lorde:
11 Although ye were so chearfull & glad, to treade downe myne heritage, and
fulfylled your pleasures as the calues in the grasse, and triumphed ouer them
like bulles when ye had gotten the victorie
12 Your mothers shalbe sore confounded, and they that bare you shall come to
shame, she shalbe the least set by among the nations, voyde, wasted, & dryed vp.
13 No man shalbe able to dwell there for the feare of the Lorde, but she shalbe
whole desolate: all they that go by Babylon, shall stande styll & be abashed,
and shall wonder at all her plagues.
14 Go foorth in your aray agaynst Babylon rounde about all ye that can handle
bowes, shoote at her, spare no arrowes: for she hath sinned agaynst the Lorde.
15 Crye out agaynst her rounde about, she shall yelde her selfe, her foundations
shall fall, and her walles shall come downe, for it shalbe the vengeaunce of the
Lorde, yea vengeaunce shalbe taken of her: and as she hath done, so deale ye
with her.
16 Roote out the sower from Babylon, & hym that handleth the sicle in haruest:
for feare of the sworde of the enemie euery man shall get hym to his owne
people, and euery man shall flee to his owne lande.
17 Israel is a scattered flocke, the lions haue dispearsed them: First the kyng
of the Assyrians deuoured them, last of all this Nabuchodonozor king of Babylon
hath brused all their bones.
18 Therfore thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel, Beholde, I wyll
visite the kyng of Babylon and his kyngdome, as I haue visited the kyng of the
Assyrians,
19 And wyll bryng Israel agayne to his pleasaunt pasture, that he may feede vpon
Charmel and Basan, and be satisfied vpon the mount of Ephraim and Galaad.
20 In those dayes and at the same tyme saith the Lorde, yf the offence of Israel
be sought for, there shal none be founde, yf men enquire for the sinne of Iuda,
there shalbe none: for I wyll be mercifull vnto them whom I suffer to remayne.
21 Go downe O thou auenger into the enemies lande, and visite them that dwell
therin: downe with them, & smite them vpon the backes saith the Lorde, do
accordyng to all that I haue commaunded thee.
22 There is gone about the lande a crye of a slaughter and great murther namelye
on this maner
23 Howe happeneth it that the hammer of the whole worlde is thus broken and
brused in sunder? Howe chaunceth it that Babylon is become a wildernesse among
the heathen on this maner?
24 I my selfe haue layde a snare for thee, and thou art taken vnawares, thou art
trapped and snared: for why? thou hast contended agaynst the Lorde.
25 The Lorde hath opened his house of ordinaunce, and brought foorth the weapons
of his wrath: for the thyng that is done in the land of the Chaldees, it is the
Lorde of hoastes worke.
26 Come agaynst her, for this is her ende, breake vp her chestes, threshe her as
ye threshe corne, destroy her that nothyng shalbe left.
27 Slay all their mightie souldiers, and put them to death: Wo be vnto them, for
the day and tyme of their visitation is at hande.
28 Me thynke I heare alredy a crye of them that be fled and escaped out of the
lande of Babylon, which shewe in Sion the vengeaunce of the Lorde our God, the
vengeaunce of his temple, yea a voyce of them that crye agaynst Babylon
29 Call vp all the archers agaynst Babylon, pitch your tentes rounde about her,
that none escape, recompence her as she hath deserued, and accordyng as she hath
done, so deale with her agayne: for she hath set vp her selfe agaynst the Lorde,
agaynst the holy one of Israel.
30 Therfore shall her young men fall downe in the streetes, and all her men of
warre shalbe rooted out in that day saith the Lorde.
31 Beholde, I speake vnto thee O thou proude saith the Lorde God of hoastes, for
thy day shall come, euen the tyme of thy visitation.
32 And the proude shall stumble and fall, and no man shall helpe hym vp, I wyll
burne vp his cities with fire, and it shall consume all that is rounde about
hym.
33 Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes, The children of Israel and Iuda suffer
violence together, all they that haue them in captiuitie kepe them fast, and
wyll not let them go.
34 But their auenger and redeemer is mightie, whose name is the Lorde of
hoastes, he shall maynteyne their cause, he shal make the lande shake, and iudge
them that dwell therin, one with another
35 The sworde shal come vpon the Chaldees saith the Lorde, vpon them that dwell
in Babylon, vpon their princes, and vpon their wise men.
36 The sworde vpon their soothsayers, as for those they shall become fooles: the
sworde vpon their worthies, so that they shall stande in feare.
37 The sworde vpon their horsemen and charrettes, and vpon all the comon people
that dwell among them, so that they shall all become lyke women: The sworde vpon
their treasure, so that it shalbe stollen away.
38 A drought vpon their waters, so that they shalbe dryed vp: for the lande
worshippeth images, and delighteth wonderfully in idols.
39 Therfore shall wylde beastes, Lamia, and Cat of mountaynes, and Estreches
dwell therin: for there shall neuer man dwell there, neither shall any man haue
his habitation there for euermore.
40 Like as God destroyed Sodome and Gomorre, with the cities that lay there
about saith the Lorde: so shall no man dwell there also, neither shall any man
haue there his habitation.
41 Beholde, there shall come a people from the north with a great bonde of men,
and many kynges shall stande vp from the endes of the earth.
42 They beare bowes and bucklers, cruell are they and vnmercifull: their voyce
roreth like the ragyng sea, they ryde vpon horses, and come weaponed to fight
agaynst thee O Babylon.
43 Assoone as the king of Babylon heare tell of them, his handes shall waxe
feeble, sorowe and heauinesse shall come vpon him as a woman trauayling with
chylde.
44 Beholde, like as the lion commeth vp from the swellyng of Iordane vnto the
dennes of Ethan, so wyll I dryue them foorth, and make them runne agaynst her:
But whom shall I choose out and ordayne to such a thyng? for who is like me? or
who wil striue with me? or what sheephearde may stande agaynst me?
45 Therfore here the counsayle that the Lorde hath geuen vpon Babylon, and the
deuice that he hath taken vpon the lande of the Chaldees, The least among the
people shall drawe them out, and loke what pleasaunt houses they haue, they
shall lay them waste.
46 The noyse at the wynnyng of Babylon shall moue the earth, and the crye shalbe
hearde among the gentiles.

Chapter 51

1 Thus hath the Lorde sayde: Behold, I wyll rayse vp a perilous wynde agaynst
Babylon, & her citizens that beare euyl wyll against me.
2 I wyll sende also into Babylon fanners to fanne her out, and to destroy her
lande: for in the day of her trouble they shalbe about her on euery syde.
3 Moreouer the Lorde wyll say vnto the the bowmen, & to them that aduaunce them
selues in their armoure: Ye shall not spare her young men, kyll downe all her
hoast.
4 Thus the slayne shall fall downe in the lande of the Chaldees, and the wounded
in the streetes.
5 As for Israel and Iuda they shall not be forsaken of their God of the Lord of
hoastes, yea for the holy one of Israels sake haue the Chaldees fylled their
lande full of sinne.
6 Flee away from Babylon, euery man saue his lyfe, that ye be not rooted out
with her wickednesse: for the tyme of the Lordes vengeaunce is come, yea he
shall rewarde her agayne.
7 Babylon hath ben in the Lordes hande a golden cuppe, that maketh all landes
drunken: of her wine haue all people drunken, therfore are they out of their
wittes.
8 But sodaynly is Babylon fallen and destroyed: mourne for her, bryng plasters
for her woundes, yf she may peraduenture be healed agayne.
9 We woulde haue made Babylon whole say they, but she is not recouered, therfore
wyll we let her alone, and go euery man into his owne countrey: for her
iudgement is come into heauen, and is gone vp to the cloudes.
10 The Lorde hath brought foorth our righteousnesse: and therfore come on, we
wyll shewe in Sion the worke of the Lorde our God.
11 Make sharpe the arrowes, and multiplie your shieldes: for the Lorde shall
rayse vp the spirite of the kyng of the Medes, which hath alredy a desire to
destroy Babylon: this shalbe the vengeaunce of the Lorde, & the vengeaunce of
his temple.
12 Set vp tokens vpon the walles of Babylon, make your watch strong, set your
watchmen in araye, yea holde priuie watches, and yet for all that shall the
Lorde go foorth with his deuice which he hath taken vpon them that dwell in
Babylon.
13 O thou that dwellest by the great waters, O thou that hast so great treasure
and riches, thine ende is come, and the reckenyng of thy wynnynges.
14 The Lorde of hoastes hath sworne by hym selfe, that he wyll ouerwhelme thee
with men lyke grashoppers in number, whiche with a courage shall crye alarum
alarum agaynst thee:
15 Yea euen the Lorde of hoastes that with his power made the earth, with his
wisdome prepared the round world, and with his discretion spread out the
heauens.
16 Assoone as he letteth his voyce be hearde, the waters in the ayre waxe
fierce: he draweth vp the cloudes from the endes of the earth, he turneth the
lightnynges to rayne, he bryngeth the wyndes out of their secrete places.
17 If they be esteemed by their wisdome, all men are become fooles: confounded
be all the casters of images, for the thing that they make, is but deceipt, and
hath no breath.
18 Uayne is it and an erronious worke, and in the tyme of visitation it shall
perishe.
19 The portion of Iacob is none such: but he that made all thinges whose name is
the Lorde of hoastes, he is the rodde of his enheritaunce.
20 Thou hast ben mine hammer and weapons for warre: for with thee haue I broken
the people in peeces, and with thee haue I destroyed kyngdomes.
21 Through thee I haue beaten to powder horse and horsemen, yea the charrettes
and such as sate vpon them.
22 Through thee I haue broken man and woman, olde and young, bacheler and
mayden.
23 Through thee I haue destroyed the sheepheard and his flocke, the husbandman
and his cattell, the princes and the rulers.
24 Therfore wyll I rewarde the citie of Babylon, and all the inhabitauntes of
Chaldea, with all the euyll which they haue done vnto Sion, yea that ye your
selues shall see it, saith the Lorde.
25 Beholde I come vpon thee thou noysome hyll saith the Lorde, thou that
destroyest all landes, I wyll stretch out my hand ouer thee, and cast thee downe
from the stony rockes, and wyll make thee a burnt hyll,
26 So that neither corner stones shalbe taken any more out of thee: but waste
and desolate shalt thou lye for euermore saith the Lorde.
27 Set vp a token in the lande, blowe the trumpets among the heathen, prouoke
the nations agaynst her, call the kyngdomes of Ararat, Menni, and Ascanez,
agaynst her, set the prince agaynst her, bryng as great a sort of terrible
horses agaynst her as yf they were grashoppers.
28 Prepare against them the people of the Medes, with their kynges, princes, and
all their chiefe rulers: yea and the whole lande that is vnder hym.
29 The lande also shall shake and be afrayde when the deuice of the Lorde shall
come foorth agaynst Babylon, to make the lande of Babylon so waste that no man
shal dwel any more therin.
30 The worthyes of Babylon shall leaue the battayle and kepe them selues in
strong holdes, their strength hath failed them, they shalbe lyke women, their
dwellyng places shalbe burnt vp, their barres shalbe broken.
31 One purseuaunt shall meete another, yea one poste shall come by another, to
bryng the kyng of Babylon tidinges that his citie is taken on euery syde,
32 The foordes occupied, the fennes burnt vp, and the souldiers sore afrayde.
33 For thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel, The daughter of
Babylon hath ben in her tyme lyke as a threshyng floore, but shortly shall her
haruest come.
34 Nabuchodonozor the kyng of Babylon hath deuoured and destroyed me, he hath
made me an emptie vessell, he swalowed me vp lyke a dragon, and fylled his belly
with my delicates, he hath cast me out.
35 My substaunce wherof he hath spoyled me, and the thyng that was left me which
he hath caryed away, crye out against Babylon saith the daughter that dwelleth
in Sion, yea and my blood also agaynst the Chaldees, saith Hierusalem.
36 Therfore thus saith the Lorde, Beholde I wyll defende thy cause, and auenge
thee, I wyll drynke vp her sea, and drye vp her water sprynges.
37 Babylon shall become an heape of stones, a dwellyng place for dragons, a
fearefulnesse and wonderyng, and no man shall dwell there.
38 They shall rose together lyke lions, and as the young lions when they be
angry, so shall they bende them selues.
39 In their heate I shall geue them a dinner, and they shalbe drunken for ioy:
then shall they sleepe an euerlastyng sleepe, and neuer wake, saith the Lorde.
40 I shall cary them downe to be slayne lyke sheepe, lyke weathers and goates:
41 O howe was Sesach wonne? O howe was the glorie of the whole lande taken? howe
happeneth it that Babylon is so wondred at among the heathen?
42 The sea is risen ouer Babylon, & hath couered her with her great waues.
43 Her cities are layde waste, the lande lyeth vnbuilded and voyde, it is a
lande where no man dwelleth, and where no man trauyleth through.
44 Moreouer, I wyll visite Bell at Babylon, & the thyng that he hath swalowed
vp, that same shall I plucke out of his mouth: the gentiles also shall runne no
more vnto hym, yea and the walles of Babylon shall fall.
45 O my people, come out of Babylon, that euery man may saue his life from the
fearfull wrath of the Lorde.
46 Be not faynt hearted, and feare not at euery rumoure that shalbe hearde in
the lande: for euery yere bryngeth newe tidinges, and in the yere folowing newe
tidinges, and robbyng in the lande, and lorde vpon lorde.
47 And lo the tyme commeth that I will visite the images of Babylon, and the
whole lande shalbe confounded, yea and her slayne shall lye in the middest of
her.
48 Heauen and earth with all that is therin shal reioyce ouer Babylon, when the
destroyers shal come vpon her from the north, saith the Lorde.
49 Like as Babylon hath beaten downe and slayne many out of Israel, so shall
there fall many, and be slayne in all her kingdome.
50 Ye that haue escaped the sworde, haste you, stande not styl, remember the
Lord a farre of, and thynke vpon Hierusalem.
51 For we are ashamed to heare the blasphemies, our faces were couered with
shame, because the straunge aliauntes came into the sanctuarie of the Lorde.
52 Wherfore, beholde saith the Lorde, the tyme commeth that I wyll visite the
images of Babylon, and through the whole lande they shall mourne and fall.
53 Though Babylon clymed vp into heauen, and kept her power on hye, yet shall I
sende her destroyers saith the Lorde.
54 A piteous crye shalbe hearde from Babylon, and a great miserie from the lande
of the Chaldees:
55 When the Lorde destroyeth Babylon, & whe he driueth out the high stomacke and
proude boastyng, wherwith they haue ben as furious as the waues of the great
water fluds, and made great crakes with their wordes:
56 For the destroyers shall come vpon her, euen vpon Babylon, which shall take
their worthies, and breake their bowes: for the God of recompence, euen the
Lorde shall sufficiently recompence them.
57 Yea saith the Lorde I wyll make their princes, their wise men, their chiefe
rulers, their nobles, and their worthies drunken, so that they shall sleepe an
euerlastyng sleepe and neuer wake: thus saith the kyng whose name is the Lorde
of hoastes.
58 Moreouer, thus saith the Lorde of hoastes, The thicke wall of Babylon shalbe
broken, and her hye gates shalbe burnt vp, & the thyng that the Gentiles & the
people haue wrought with great trauayle & labour, shall come to naught, and be
consumed in the fire.
59 This is the charge that Ieremie the prophete gaue vnto Saraiah the sonne of
Neriah, the sonne of Maasiah, when he went towarde Babylon with Zedekiah the
kyng of Iuda, in the fourth yere of his raigne: nowe this Saraiah was a
peaceable prince.
60 Ieremie wrote in a booke al the miserie that shoulde come vpon Babylon, yea
and all these sermons that be written agaynst Babylon.
61 And gaue Saraiah this charge: When thou commest vnto Babylon, see that thou
reade these wordes,
62 And say, O Lord thou art determined to roote out this place, so that neither
people nor cattell shall dwell there any more, but to lye waste for euer.
63 And when thou hast read out the booke, bynde a stone to it, and cast it in
the middest of Euphrates,
64 And say, Euen thus shall Babylon sincke, & be thrust downe with the burthen
of trouble that I wyll bryng vpon her: so that she shall neuer come vp agayne.
Thus farre are the preachynges of Ieremie.

Chapter 52

1 Zedekiah was one and twentie yeres olde whe he was made king, and raigned
eleuen yeres in Hierusale: his mothers name was Hamutal, Ieremies daughter of
Libna.
2 He liued wickedly before the Lorde, euen as Iehoakim did:
3 For the Lorde was angry at Hierusalem and Iuda, so long tyll he had cast them
out of his presence: and Zedekiah fell from the kyng of Babylon.
4 But in the ninth yere of his raigne, in the tenth moneth, the tenth day of the
moneth, it happened that Nabuchodonozor the king of Babylon, with all his hoast,
came before Hierusalem, and besieged it, and made bulwarkes rounde about it.
5 And this besiegyng of the citie endured vnto the eleuenth yere of kyng
Zedekiah.
6 And in the fourth moneth, the ninth day of the moneth, there was a great
hunger in the citie, that there were no more victuals for the people of the
lande.
7 So all the souldiers brake away, and fled out of the citie by night through
the way of the port, betweene the two walles by the kynges garden: (Nowe the
Chaldees had compassed the citie rounde about) yet went these men their way
through the wildernesse.
8 And so the Chaldees folowed vpon them, and toke Zedekiah the kyng in the
fielde of Iericho, when his hoast was runne from hym.
9 So they caryed the kyng away prisoner to Reblath, vnto the kyng of Babylon in
the lande of Hemath, where he gaue iudgement vpon hym.
10 The kyng of Babylon also caused Zedekias sonnes to be slayne before his face,
yea and put all the princes of Iuda to death at Reblath.
11 Moreouer, he put out the eyes of Zedekiah, & caused hym to be bounde with two
chaynes, to be caryed vnto Babylon, and let him lye in prison tyl he dyed.
12 Nowe the tenth day of the fifth moneth, in the nineteenth yere of
Nabuchodonozor kyng of Babylon, Nabuzaradau the chiefe captayne, and the kyng of
Babylons seruauntes came vnto Hierusalem,
13 And burnt vp the house of the Lorde: he burnt vp also the kynges palace, all
the houses, and all the gorgeous buildinges in Hierusalem.
14 And the whole hoast of the Chaldees that were with the chiefe captayne, brake
downe all the walles of Hierusalem rounde about.
15 As for the poore people, and such folke as was yet left in the citie, which
also were fallen to the kyng of Babylon, yea and what people as yet remayned,
Nabuzaradan the chiefe captayne caryed them away prisoners.
16 But the poore people of the countrey did Nabuzaradan the chiefe captayne
leaue in the lande, to occupie the vineyardes and fieldes.
17 The Chaldees also brake the brasen pyllers that were in the house of the
Lord, yea the seate and the brasen lauer that was in the house of the Lorde, and
caryed all the mettall of them vnto Babylon.
18 They toke away also the chalderns, shouels, fleshhokes, sprinklers, spoones,
and all the brasen vessels that was occupied in the seruice.
19 With the basons, cole pannes, sprinklers, pottes, candlestickes, spoones, and
cuppes, wherof some were of golde, and some of siluer.
20 The chiefe captayne toke also the two pillers, the lauer, the twelue brasen
bullockes that stoode vnder the seat which king Solomon made in the house of the
Lorde: and all the vessels conteyned so much mettal that it might not be waied.
21 For euery piller was eyghteene cubites hye, and the rope that went about it
was twelue cubites and foure fingers thicke, and rounde.
22 Nowe vpon the rope were brasen knoppes, and euery knoppe was fiue cubites
hye, and vpon the knoppes were hoopes, and pomgranates round about of cleane
brasse.
23 After this maner were both the pillers fashioned with ye pomgranates, wherof
there were an hundred ninetie and sixe, which hanged vpon the hoopes rounde
about.
24 The chiefe captayne also toke Saraiah the hye priest, and Sophoniah that was
chiefe next hym, & the three kepers of the doore:
25 He toke out of the citie a chaumberlaine which was captaine of the souldiers,
and seuen men that were the kinges seruauntes, which were founde in the citie:
and Sopher a captaine that vsed to muster the men of warre, with threescore men
of the countrey that were taken in the citie:
26 These Nabuzaradan the chiefe captaine toke, and caryed them to the king of
Babylon vnto Reblath:
27 And the kyng of Babylon caused them to be put to death at Reblath in the
lande of Hemath: And thus Iuda was ledde away captiue out of his owne lande.
28 This is the summe of the people whom Nabuchodonozor led away captiue: in the
seuenth yere of his raigne he caryed away of the Iewes three thousande twentie
and three,
29 In the eyghteenth yere Nabuchodonozor caryed away from Hierusalem eyght
hundred thirtie and two persons,
30 In the three and twentie yere of Nabuchodonozor, Nabuzaradan the chiefe
captayne toke away seuen hundred fourtie and fiue Iewes, prisoners. The whole
summe of the prisoners is foure thousande and sixe hundred.
31 In the thirtie and seuenth yere after that Iehoakim the kyng of Iuda was
caryed away, in the fiue and twentith day of the twelft moneth, Euilmerodach
kyng of Babylon (the same yere that he raigned) gaue Iehoakim the kyng of Iuda
his pardon, and let hym out of prison,
32 And spake louyngly to hym, and set his throne aboue the thrones of the other
kynges that were with hym in Babylon.
33 He chaunged also the clothes of his prison, yea and did eate with hym all his
life long.
34 And he had a continuall lyuyng geuen hym of the kyng of Babylon, euery day a
certayne thyng alowed hym, all the dayes of his life, vntyll he dyed.


Lamentations

Chapter 1

1 Alas howe sitteth the citie so desolate, that sometime was full of people?
Howe is she become lyke a widow which was great among nations? Howe is she
brought vnder tribute that ruled landes?
2 She weepeth sore in the nyght, so that the teares runne downe her cheekes: for
among all her louers there is none that geueth her any comfort, yea her next
friendes transgresse agaynst her, and are become her enemies.
3 Iuda went away by reason of the affliction and great bondage: she dwelleth
among the heathen, she findeth no rest, all they that persecuted her, toke her
in strayte places where she coulde not escape.
4 The streetes of Sion mourne, because no man cometh no more to the solempne
feastes: all her gates are desolate, her priestes make lamentatio, her maydens
are carefull, and she her selfe is in great heauinesse.
5 Her enemies haue ben rulers ouer her, and her enemies haue prospered, because
the Lorde hath chastened her for her great wickednesse: her children are led
away captiue before their enemies.
6 All the beautie of the daughter of Sion is away, her princes are become lyke
hartes that fynde no pasture, they are driuen away before their enemie, so that
they haue no more power.
7 Nowe Hierusalem remembred in the tyme of her miserie and bare estate all her
ioy & pleasure that she hath had in tymes past, seyng her people is brought
downe vnder the power of their enemies, and there is no man for to helpe her:
her enemies stande lokyng at her, and laugh her Sabbath daies to scorne.
8 Hierusalem hath sinned greeuouslye, therfore is she come in decay: all they
that had her in honour dispise her, for they haue seene her filthinesse, yea she
sigheth and is ashamed of her selfe.
9 Her skirtes are defiled, she remembred not her last ende, therfore is her fall
so wonderfull, and there is no man to comfort her: O Lorde consider my trouble,
for myne enemie hath the vpper hande.
10 The enemie hath put his hande to all the precious thinges that she had, yea
euen before her eyes came the heathen in and out of the sanctuarie, whom thou
neuerthelesse hast forbidden to come within thy congregation.
11 All her people seeke their bread with heauinesse, and loke what precious
thyng euery man hath, that geueth he for meate to saue his lyfe: Consider O
Lorde, and see howe vile I am become.
12 Haue ye no regarde all ye that go foreby, beholde & see yf there be any
sorowe lyke vnto mine, wherwith the Lorde hath troubled me in the day of his
fearefull wrath.
13 From aboue hath he sent downe a fire into my bones, and it burneth them
cruelly: he hath layde a net for my feete, and throwen me wyde open, he hath
made me desolate, so that I must euer be mournyng.
14 The yoke of my transgressions is bounde fast to his hande, they are wrapped
or writhen and come vp about my necke: he hath caused my strength to fayle, the
Lorde hath deliuered me into those handes wherout I can not quyte my selfe.
15 The Lorde hath destroyed all the mightie men that were in me, he hath
proclaymed an appoynted tyme to slaughter all my best men: the Lorde hath troden
downe the daughter of Iuda, lyke as it were in a winepresse.
16 Therfore do I weepe, and mine eyes gushe out of water: for the comfort that
shoulde quicken me is farre fro me, my children are driuen away: for why? the
enemie hath gotten the vpper hande.
17 Sion casteth out her handes, and there is no man to comfort her, the Lorde
hath layde the enemies rounde about Iacob, and Hierusalem is become abhomination
in the middest of them.
18 The Lorde is righteous, for I haue prouoked his countenaunce vnto anger, O
take heede all ye people and consider my heauinesse, my maydens and my young men
are led away into captiuitie.
19 I called for my louers, but they beguiled me, for my priestes and
counsaylers, but they perished, euen whyle they sought for meate to saue their
lyues.
20 Consider (O Lorde) howe I am troubled, my wombe is disquieted, my heart
turneth about in me, and I am full of heauinesse, because I rebelled stubburnly:
the sworde hurteth me without, and within I am lyke vnto death.
21 They heare my mournyng, but there is none that wyll comfort me: All myne
enemies haue hearde of my trouble, and are glad therof because thou hast done
it: and thou hast brought foorth the time which thou calledst, when they also
shal be lyke vnto me.
22 Let all their wickednesse come before thee, and do thou to them as thou hast
done vnto me for all my trespasses: for my sorowe is very great, and my heart is
heauy.

Chapter 2

1 Alas howe hath the Lorde darckened the daughter of Sion in his wrath? As for
the honour of Israel he hath cast it downe fro heauen vnto the earth, and he
remembred not his owne footestole when he was angry?
2 The Lorde hath cast out all the habitations of Iacob without any fauour, all
the strong places of the daughter of Iuda hath he broken in his wrath, and
throwen them downe to the grounde, her kingdome and her princes hath he
prophaned.
3 In the wrath of his indignation he hath broken all the horne of Israel, he
hath withdrawen his right hande from the enemie, yea a flambe of fire is kindled
in Iacob, and hath consumed vp all rounde about.
4 He hath bent his bowe like an enemie, he hath fastened his ryght hande as an
aduersarie, and euery thyng that was pleasaunt to see, he hath slayne: he hath
powred out his wrath like a fire, into the tabernacle of the daughter of Sion.
5 The Lorde is become like as it were an enemie, he hath deuoured Israel and all
his palaces, yea all his strong holdes hath he destroyed, and fylled the
daughter of Iuda with much sorowe and heauinesse.
6 His tabernacle as a garden hath he destroyed, his solempne meetinges hath he
put downe: the Lord hath brought it so to passe that the hye solempne feastes
and Sabbathes in Sion are cleane forgotten: in his heauy displeasure hath he
dispised the kyng and priestes.
7 The Lorde hath forsaken his owne aulter, and hath abhorred his owne
sanctuarie, and hath geuen the walles of their towres into the handes of the
enemie: their enemies made a noyse in the house of the Lorde, as it had ben in a
solempne feast day.
8 The Lorde thought to breake downe the walles of the daughter of Sion, he
spread out his line, and drewe not in his hande tyll he had destroyed them:
therfore mourne the turrettes, & the broken walles fall downe together.
9 Her gates are suncke downe to the grounde, her barres are broken and smitten
in sunder, the kyng and princes are caryed away to the gentiles: they haue
neither lawe nor prophetes, nor yet any vision from the Lorde.
10 The senatours of the daughter Sion sit vpon the grounde in scilence, they
haue strawed asshes vpon their heads, and gyrded them selues with sackcloth: the
maydens of Hierusalem hang downe their heades to the grounde.
11 Mine eyes begin to fayle me through weeping, my body is disquieted, my liuer
is powred vpon the earth for the great hurt of the daughter of my people, seeing
the chyldren and babes dyd swowne in the streetes of the citie.
12 Euen when they spake to their mothers, Where is meate and drinke? for whyle
they so sayde, they fell downe in the streetes of the citie, like as they had
ben wounded, and some dyed in their mothers bosome.
13 What shall I say vnto thee, O thou daughter Hierusalem? to whom shal I liken
thee? To whom shall I compare thee O thou daughter Sion, to comfort thee
withall? thy heart is lyke a mayne sea, who may heale thee?
14 Thy prophetes haue looke dout vayne and foolish thinges for thee, they haue
not shewed thee of thy wickednesse, to kepe thee from captiuitie: but they haue
seene out for thee burthens of vanitie and banishment.
15 All they that go by thee, clappe their handes at thee, hissing and wagging
their heades vpon the daughter Hierusalem and say Is this the citie that men
call so faire, wherein the whole lande reioyceth?
16 All thyne enemies gape vpon thee, whispering and grinding their teeth,
saying: let vs deuour, for the tyme that we looked for is come, we haue founde
and seene it.
17 The Lorde hath fulfilled the thing that he was purposed to do, and perfourmed
that he had deuised long ago: he hath destroyed and not spared, he hath caused
thyne aduersarie to triumph ouer thee, and set vp the horne of thyne enemie.
18 Their heart cryed vnto the Lorde, O thou citie of the daughter Sion: let thy
teares runne downe like a riuer day and night, rest not, and let not the apple
of thyne eye leaue of.
19 Stand vp, and make thy prayer in the first watche of the night, powre out
thine heart like water before the Lord: lift vp thyne handes for the liues of
thy young chyldren that dye of hunger in the streetes.
20 Beholde O Lorde, and consider to whom thou hast done thus: Shall the women
then eate their owne fruite, euen chyldren of a spanne long? shall the priestes
and prophetes be slayne in the sanctuarie of the Lorde?
21 Young and olde lye thorowe the streetes vpon the grounde, my maydens and
young men are slayne with the sworde, whom thou in the day of thy wrathfull
indignation hast put to death, yea euen thou hast put them to death, and not
spared them.
22 My neighbours that are rounde about me hast thou called as it were to a feast
day, so that in the day of the lordes wrath none escaped, neither was any left
behinde: those that I haue brought vp and nourished, hath myne enemie destroyed.

Chapter 3

1 I am the man that thorowe the rodde of his wrath haue experience of miserie.
2 He droue me foorth and led me, yea into darknesse, but not into light.
3 Against me is he turned, he turneth his hande dayly against me.
4 My flesh and my skinne hath he made olde, and my bones hath he bruised.
5 He hath buylded rounde about me, and closed me in with gall and trauaile.
6 He hath set me in darknesse, as they that be dead for euer.
7 He hath so hedged me in, that I can not get out, and hath layde heauie linkes
vpon me.
8 Though I crye and call pitiously, yet heareth he not my prayer.
9 He hath stopped vp my wayes with foure squared stones, and made my pathes
crooked.
10 He layeth wayte for me lyke a beare, and as a lion in a hole.
11 He hath marred my wayes, and broken me in peeces, he hath layde me waste
altogether.
12 He hath bent his bowe, and made me as it were a marke to shoote at.
13 The arrowes of his quiuer hath he shot, euen into my reynes.
14 I am laughed to scorne of all my people, they make songues vpon me all the
day long.
15 He hath filled me with bitternesse, and geuen me wormewood to drinke.
16 He hath smitten my teeth in peeces with stones, and roulled me in the dust.
17 He hath put my soule out of rest, I forget all good thinges.
18 I thought in my selfe, I am vndone, there is no hope for me in the Lorde.
19 O remember yet my miserie and my trouble, the wormewood and the gall.
20 Yea thou shalt remember them, for my soule melteth away in me.
21 Whyle I consider these thinges in my heart, I get a hope agayne.
22 namely it is of the Lordes mercies that we are not vtterly consumed, for
truely his pitifull compassion hath not ceassed.
23 Newe mercyes shall the Lord shewe vpon thee early in the day springing, (O
Lorde) great is thy faythfulnesse.
24 The Lorde is my portion saith my soule therefore wyll I hope in hym.
25 O howe good is the Lord vnto them that put their trust in hym, and to the
soule that seeketh after hym.
26 The good man with stilnesse and pacience, taryeth for the health of the
Lorde.
27 O howe good is it for a man to take the yoke vpon him from his youth vp?
28 He sitteth alone, he holdeth hym styll, because he hath taken the Lordes yoke
vpon hym.
29 He layeth his face vpon the earth, if there happen to be any hope.
30 He offreth his cheeke to the smyter, he wyll be content with reproffes:
31 For the Lord wil not forsake for euer.
32 But though he punishe, yet according to the multitude of his mercies he
receaueth to grace agayne.
33 For he doth not plague willingly, and afflict the chyldren of men,
34 To treade all the prysoners of the earth vnder his feete,
35 To moue the iudgement of man before the most highest,
36 To condemne a man in his cause: the Lord hath not pleasure in such thinges.
37 What is he then that saith, there should some thing be done without the
Lordes commaundement?
38 Out of the mouth of the most highest goeth not euyll and good?
39 Wherefore then murmureth the liuing man? let hym murmure at his owne sinne.
40 Let vs looke well vpon our wayes, and remember our selues, and turne agayne
to the Lorde.
41 Let vs lift our heartes with our handes vnto the Lorde that is in heauen.
42 We haue ben dissemblers and haue offended, wylt thou therefore not be
intreated?
43 Thou hast couered vs in thy wrath, and persecuted vs: thou hast slayne vs
without any fauour.
44 Thou hast hid thy selfe in a cloude, that our prayer should not go through.
45 Thou hast made vs outcastes, and to be despised among the people.
46 All our enemies gape vpon vs.
47 Feare and pit is come vpon vs, yea deceipt and destruction.
48 Whole riuers of water gushe out of mine eyes for the hurt of my people:
49 Myne eyes runne and cannot ceasse, for there is no rest:
50 O Lorde, when wylt thou looke downe from heauen and consider?
51 Mine eyes breaketh my heart, because of all the daughters of my citie.
52 Mine enemies hunted me out sharply like a byrde, yea & that without a cause.
53 They haue put downe my life into a pit, and they haue cast stones vpon me.
54 They haue powred water vpon my head: then thought I, nowe am I vndone.
55 I called vpon thy name O Lorde out of the deepe pit.
56 Thou hast heard my voyce, and hast not turned away thyne eares from my
sighing and crying.
57 Thou hast inclyned thy selfe vnto me when I called vpon thee: and hast said,
feare not.
58 Thou (O Lorde) hast mayntayned the cause of my soule, and hast redeemed my
lyfe.
59 O Lorde, thou hast seene my wrong, take thou my cause vpon thee.
60 Thou hast well considered howe they go about to do me harme, and that all
their counsels are against me.
61 Thou hast hearde their despitefull wordes O Lorde, yea and all the
imaginations against me:
62 The lippes of mine enemies, and their deuises that they take against me al
the day long.
63 Thou seest also their sitting downe and their rising vp, they make their
songes of nothing but of me.
64 Rewarde them, O Lorde, according to the workes of their handes.
65 Geue them an obstinate heart, euen thy curse.
66 Persecute them O Lorde with thyne indignation, and roote them out from vnder
the heauen.

Chapter 4

1 O howe is the golde become so dimme? howe is the most fine golde so sore
chaunged? and the stones of the sanctuarie thus scattered in the corner of euery
streete?
2 The chyldren of Sion that were alway in honour, and clothed with the most
precious golde: howe are they nowe become lyke the earthen vessels, whiche be
made with the potters hande?
3 The dragons geue their young ones sucke with bare brestes: but the daughter of
my people is cruel, like the Estriches in the wildernesse.
4 The tongues of the sucking chyldren cleaue to the roofe of their mouthes for
very thyrst: the young chyldren aske bread, but there is no man that geueth it
them.
5 They that were wont to fare delicatelye perishe in the streetes: they that
afore were brought vp in purple, make nowe muche of doung.
6 The sinne of the daughter of my people, is become greater then the wickednesse
of Sodome, that sodaynely was destroyed, and not taken with handes.
7 Her abstayners were whyter then the snowe or milke, their colour was freshe,
red as corall, their beautie like the Saphire.
8 But nowe their faces be very blacke, insomuche that thou shouldest not knowe
them in the streetes: their skinne cleaueth to their bones, it is withered and
become like a drye stocke.
9 They that be slayne with the sworde, are happier then such as dye of hunger,
and perishe away famishing for the fruites of the fielde.
10 The women (whiche of nature are pitifull) haue sodden their owne chyldren
with their hands, that they might be their meate in the miserable destruction of
the daughter of my people.
11 The Lorde hath perfourmed his heauie wrath, he hath powred out the
furiousnesse of his displeasure: he hath kindeled a fire in Sion, which hath
consumed the foundations therof.
12 Neither the kynges of the earth, nor all the inhabitours of the world, would
haue beleued that the enemie and aduersarie shoulde haue come in at the gates of
the citie of Hierusalem.
13 Whiche neuerthelesse is come to passe for the sinne of her prophetes, and for
the wickednesse of her priestes, that haue shed innocents blood within her.
14 As blinde men went, they stumbling in the streetes, and stayned them selues
with blood, insomuch that the heathen woulde in no wyse touche their garmentes.
15 But they cryed vnto them, flee ye polluted, away, get you hence, touche not:
for they are vncleane and be remoued, yea they haue said among the heathen, they
shall no more dwell in this citie.
16 The countenaunce of the Lorde hath banished them, and shall neuer looke more
vpon them: for they them selues neither regarded the priestes, nor pitied their
elders.
17 Wherefore yet our eyes fayled vs, whyles we looked for our vayne helpe,
seeing we euer wayted vpon a people that coulde do vs no good.
18 They lay so sharpe wayte for vs, that we can not go safe vpon the streetes,
for our ende is come, our dayes are fulfilled, our ende is here.
19 Our persecutours are swifter then the Egles of the ayre: they folowed vppon
vs ouer the mountaynes, and layde wayte for vs in the wyldernesse.
20 The very breath of our mouth, euen the annointed of the Lorde hym selfe, was
taken in their net, of whom we say, Under his shadowe we shalbe preserued among
the heathen.
21 And thou O daughter Edom that dwellest in the land of Huz, be glad and
reioyce, for the cup shall come vnto thee also, thou shalt be dronken, and
discouer thy nakednesse.
22 Thy sinnes are wel punished O thou daughter Sion, he shall not suffer thee to
be caried away: but thy wickednesse O daughter Edom shall he visite, and wyll
discouer thy sinnes.

Chapter 5

1 Call to remembraunce (O Lorde) what we haue suffred, consider and see our
confusion.
2 Our inheritaunce is turned to the straungers, and our houses to the aliaunts.
3 We are become carefull and fatherlesse, and our mothers are as the wydowes.
4 We are fayne to drinke our owne water for money, and our owne wood must we buy
for money.
5 Our neckes are vnder persecution, we are weery and haue no rest.
6 Aforetime we yeelded our selues to the Egyptians, and nowe to the Assyrians,
onlye that we might haue bread inough.
7 Our fathers (which nowe are gone) haue sinned, and we must beare their
wickednesse.
8 Seruauntes haue the rule of vs, and no man deliuereth vs out of their handes.
9 We must get our liuing with the perill of our liues, because of the drouth of
the wildernesse.
10 Our skinne is as it had ben made blacke in an ouen, for very sore hunger.
11 The wiues are rauished in Sion, and the maydens in the cities of Iuda.
12 The princes are hanged vp with the hand of the enemies, they haue not spared
the olde sage men.
13 They haue taken young men to grinde, and the boyes fainted vnder the burthens
of wood.
14 The elders sit no more vnder the gates, and the young men vse no more playing
of musicke.
15 The ioy of our heart is gone, our melodious meeting is turned into mourning.
16 The garlande of our head is fallen: alas that euer we sinned so sore.
17 Therefore our heart is full of heauinesse, and our eyes dimme.
18 Because of the hill of Sion that is destroyed: insomuch that the foxes runne
vpon it.
19 But thou O Lorde, that remaynest for euer, and thy seate worlde without ende:
20 Wherefore wylt thou styll forget vs, and forsake vs so long?
21 O Lord turne thou vs vnto thee, and so shall we be turned, renue our dayes as
in olde tymes:
22 But thou hast banished vs vtterly, and hast ben displeased at vs.


Ezekiel

Chapter 1

1 It came to passe in the thirtith yere in the fourth moneth in the fifth day of
the moneth, that (I beyng in the middes of the captiuitie, by the riuer Chebar)
the heauens were opened, and I sawe visions of God:
2 In the fifth day of the moneth, which was the fifth yere of kyng Ioakins
captiuitie,
3 The worde of the Lorde came to Ezechiel the priest the sonne of Buzi, in the
lande of the Chaldeans by the riuer Chebar, where the hand of the Lord was vpon
hym.
4 And I looked, and beholde a stormie wind came out of the north, a great
cloude, and a fire folding it selfe in the cloude and a brightnes rounde about
it, and foorth of the middes therof as the colour of amber out of the middes of
the fire.
5 And out of the middes therof, the likenesse of foure beastes appeared and this
was their fourme, they had the likenesse of a man.
6 And euery one had foure faces, and euery one of them had foure wynges.
7 Their feete were straight feete, and the sole of their feete lyke the sole of
calues feete, and they glistered as the appearaunce of brasse burnished.
8 From vnder their wynges vpon all the foure corners they had mens handes: and
they foure had their faces and their wynges.
9 Their wynges were ioyned one to another: when they went they looked not backe,
but eche one went straight forwarde.
10 But touching the similitude of their faces, they foure had the face of a man
and the face of a lion on the right side, and they foure had the face of an oxe
on the left side, the foure also had the face of an Egle.
11 Thus were their faces, and their winges were spread out aboue, so that two
wynges of euery one were ioyned one to another, and two wynges couered euery one
of their bodyes.
12 Euery one went straight forward: whyther as the spirite led them, thither
thei went, & returned not in their going.
13 And the fashion of the beastes, their appearaunce was lyke coales of fire,
burning like the appearaunce of cressets, it ran among the beastes, and the fire
gaue a glister, and out of the fire there went lightening.
14 And the beastes ranne, and returned like lightening.
15 When I had considered the beastes, beholde a wheele vpon the earth nye to the
beastes, to euery of the foure before his face.
16 The fashion & worke of the wheeles was lyke the colour of Tharsis, and they
foure had one fashion, and their fashion & their worke was as though it were a
wheele in ye middle of a wheele.
17 When they went, they went vpon their foure sides: they returned not backe
when they went.
18 They had ringes, and heyght, and were feareful to beholde: & their ringes
were full of eyes rounde about them foure.
19 When the beastes went, the wheeles went also by them: and when the beastes
were lift vp from the earth, the wheeles were lyft vp.
20 Whyther soeuer the spirite was to go, they went, and thyther was the spirite
to go, and the wheeles were lyft vp before them: for the spirite of the beastes
were in the wheeles.
21 When the beastes went, they went, & when thei stoode, they stoode, and when
they were lifted vp from the earth, the wheeles were lifted vp before the, for
ye spirite of ye beastes was in the wheeles.
22 And the similitude of the firmament vpon the heades of the beastes, was like
the colour of christall wonderfull, spread ouer their heades aboue.
23 And vnder the firmament their winges were stretcht foorth one towardes
another, euery one had two couering them, and euery one had two couering them,
euen their bodyes.
24 And when they went, I hearde the noyse of their wynges, lyke the noyse of
great waters, as it had ben the voyce of the almightie, the voyce of speache, as
the noyse of an hoast: when they stoode, they let downe their winges.
25 And there was a noyse from aboue the firmament that was ouer their heades:
when they stoode, they let downe their wynges.
26 And aboue the firmament that was ouer their heades, there was the fashion of
a throne lyke a Saphir stone: and vpon the similitude of the throne by
appearaunce, as the similitude of a man aboue vpon it.
27 And I sawe as the appearaunce of amber and as the similitude of fire rounde
about within, from the appearaunce of his loynes vpward: and from the
appearaunce of his loynes downewarde I sawe as the lykenesse of fire, and
brightnesse rounde about it.
28 As the likenesse of a bowe that is in a cloude in a raynie day, so was the
appearaunce of the brightnesse rounde about: this was the appearaunce of the
similitude of the glory of God, & when I sawe it, I fell vpon my face and
hearkened vnto the voyce of one that spake.

Chapter 2

1 And then said he vnto me, Stande vp vpon thy fete (O thou sonne of man) and I
wyll talke with thee.
2 And the spirite entred into me when he had spoken vnto me, & set me vpon my
feete, so that I heard him that spake vnto me.
3 And he sayde vnto me, Thou sonne of man, I sende thee to the children of
Israel, to a rebellious people which haue rebelled against me, both they and
their forefathers haue wickedly behaued them selues against me, euen vnto this
very day.
4 For they are children of a harde face and stiffe heart, I do sende thee vnto
them, and thou shalt say vnto them, Thus saith the Lorde God.
5 And whether they wyll heare or refuse (for they are a rebellious house) yet
they may knowe that there hath ben a prophete among them.
6 And thou sonne of man feare them not, neither be afraide of their wordes, for
bryers and thornes are with thee, and thou doest dwell among scorpions: feare
not their wordes, nor be abashed at their lookes, for they are a rebellious
house.
7 And thou shalt speake my wordes vnto them, whether they wyll heare or refuse,
for they are rebellious.
8 Therefore thou sonne of man, obay thou all thinges that I say vnto thee, and
be not thou rebellious lyke the rebellious house: open thy mouth, and eate that
I geue thee.
9 And when I looked, beholde a hand was sent vnto me, and lo, in it was a roule
of a booke.
10 And he opened it before me, and it was written within and without, and there
was written therein, lamentations, and mourning, and wo.

Chapter 3

1 After this said he vnto me: Thou sonne of man, eate whatsoeuer thou findest,
eate this roule, and go thy way and speake vnto the house of Israel.
2 So I opened my mouth, and he fed me with this roule.
3 And he saide vnto me, Thou sonne of man, thy belly shall eate, and thy bowels
shalt thou fill with this roule that I geue thee: Then dyd I eate, and it was in
my mouth sweeter then honie.
4 And he saide vnto me, Thou sonne of man, go, get thee vnto the house of
Israel, and declare my wordes vnto them.
5 For not to a people of profounde lippes and harde language art thou sent, but
vnto the house of Israel:
6 Not to many nations whiche haue profounde lippes and harde languages, whose
wordes thou vnderstandest not: otherwise if I had sent thee vnto them, they
would haue hearkened vnto thee.
7 But the house of Israel will not hearken vnto thee, for they will not hearken
vnto me: for al the house of Israel haue stiffe foreheades, & stubburne heartes.
8 Beholde therefore, I haue made thy face strong against their faces, & thy
forehead strong against their foreheades.
9 As an Adamant, harder then the flint stone haue I made thy forehead: thou
shalt not feare them, nor be abashed at their lookes: for they are a rebellious
house.
10 He sayde moreouer vnto me, Thou sonne of man, all my wordes that I shall
speake vnto thee, receaue in thyne heart, and hearken with thyne eares.
11 And go, get thee to the captiuitie, to the chyldren of thy people, and thou
shalt speake vnto them, and shalt say vnto them, Thus saith the Lord God,
whether they will heare, or leaue.
12 With that the spirite tooke me vp, and I hearde behinde me a voyce of a great
rushing to wit Blessed be the glory of Iehouah from his place.
13 I hearde also the noyse of the winges of the beastes ioyning one with
another, and the ratling of the wheeles that were before them, euen a noyse of
great rushing.
14 Nowe when the spirite lift me vp and tooke me away, I went in bitternesse and
furie of my spirite: but the hande of the Lorde vpon me was strong.
15 Then I came to the captiues in Thelabib that dwelt by the riuer Chebar, and I
sate where they sate, and I remayned there seuen dayes, astonished among them.
16 And when the seuen dayes were expired, the Lorde saide vnto me,
17 Thou sonne of man, I haue made thee a watchman vnto the house of Israel:
therefore thou shalt heare the worde at my mouth, and geue them warning from me.
18 When I shall say vnto the wicked, Thou shalt surely dye, and thou geuest not
him warning, nor speakest to admonishe the wicked of his euill way, and so to
liue: then shal the same vngodly man dye in his owne vnrighteousnesse, but his
blood wyl I require of thyne hand.
19 Neuerthelesse, if thou geue warning vnto the wicked, and he yet turne not
from his vngodlynesse and from his wicked way: he shall dye in his owne
wickednesse, but thou hast deliuered thy soule.
20 Nowe if a righteous man go from his righteousnesse and do the thing that is
euyll I wyll lay a stumbling blocke before him: and he shall dye, because thou
hast not geuen him warning, dye shall he in his owne sinne, so that his
righteousnesse whiche he hath done, shall not be thought vpon: but his blood
will I require at thyne hande.
21 Neuerthelesse, if thou exhortest that righteous that he sinne not, and so the
righteous do not sinne: then shall he liue, because he hath receaued thy
warning, and thou hast deliuered thy soule.
22 And there came the hand of the Lord vpon me, and he sayd vnto me: Stande vp,
and go into the fielde, that I may there talke with thee.
23 So when I had risen vp, and gone foorth into the fielde: beholde, the glorie
of the Lord stoode there, like the glorie which I sawe by the riuer Chebar: then
fell I downe vpon my face.
24 And the spirite came into me, whiche set me vp vpon my feete, and spake vnto
me, and said vnto me: Go thy way, and shut thy selfe in thyne house.
25 Beholde O thou sonne of man, they haue prepared bandes against thee, and they
wyll binde thee with them, and thou shalt not go out among them.
26 And I will make thy tongue cleaue to the roofe of thy mouth, that thou shalt
be dumbe, and not be as a reprouer vnto them: for they are a rebellious house.
27 But when I speake vnto thee, I wyl open my mouth, and thou shalt say vnto
them, Thus saith the Lorde God: Whoso heareth, let hym heare, whoso leaueth of,
let him leaue: for they are a rebellious house.

Chapter 4

1 Thou sonne of man, take thee a tyle stone and lay it before thee, and purtray
vpon it the citie Hierusalem,
2 And lay siege against it, and builde a fort against it, and cast a mount
against it: set the campe also against it, and lay engins of warre against it
rounde about.
3 Moreouer, take an iron panne, and set it betwixt thee and the citie in steede
of an iron wall, then set thy face towarde it to besiege it, and make an assault
against it: this shalbe a token vnto the house of Israel.
4 But thou shalt sleepe vpon thy left side, and lay the sinne of the house of
Israel vpon it according to the number of the dayes that thou shalt sleepe vpon
it, thou shalt beare their iniquitie.
5 For I haue layde vpon thee the yeres of their iniquitie according to the
number of the dayes euen three hundred and ninetie dayes, so shalt thou beare
the iniquitie of the house of Israel.
6 When thou hast fulfilled these dayes, lye downe agayne and sleepe vpon thy
right side, and beare the sinnes of the house of Iuda: fourtie dayes haue I
appointed thee, a day for a yere euen a day for a yere.
7 Therfore set nowe thy face towarde the siege of Hierusalem, and discouer thine
arme, that thou mayest prophecie against it.
8 Behold, I will lay chaines vpon thee, that thou shalt not turne thee from one
side to another, till thou hast ended the dayes of thy besieging.
9 Wherfore take vnto thee wheate, barlye, beanes, lintils, millot, and fetches,
and put these together in a vessell, and make thee loaues of bread thereof,
according to the number of the dayes that thou must lye vpon thy side, that thou
mayest haue bread to eate for three hundred and ninetie dayes.
10 And thy meate that thou eatest shall haue a certaine wayght appointed, namely
twentie sicles euery day: & from time to time shalt thou eate therof.
11 Thou shalt drinke also a certaine measure of water namely the sixt part of an
Hin from tyme to tyme shalt thou drinke.
12 Barly cakes shalt thou eate, and them shalt thou bake in mans doung before
their eyes.
13 And with that sayde the Lord, Euen thus shall the chyldren of Israel eate
their defiled bread among the gentiles whyther I wyll cast them.
14 Then sayde I, Oh Lorde God: beholde, my soule was yet neuer stayned, for fro
my youth vp vnto this houre, I did neuer eate of a dead carkase, or of that
whiche was slayne of wylde beastes, neither came there euer any vncleane fleshe
in my mouth.
15 Whervnto he aunswered me: Lo, I wyll graunt thee cowcasins in steede of mans
doung, and thou shalt make thy bread with them.
16 And he saide vnto me, Beholde thou sonne of man, I wyll breake the staffe of
bread in Hierusalem, and they shall eate their bread with waight and with care,
and their water in measure and astonishment shall they drinke,
17 That they may cause a lacke of bread and water, and be astonied one at
another, and be consumed in their iniquitie.

Chapter 5

1 O thou sonne of man, take thee then a sharpe knife namely a barbers rasour,
take that to thee, and cause it to passe vpon thy head and vpon thy beard: then
take thee waight scales and deuide the heere.
2 Thou shalt burne with fire the thirde part in the middest of the citie when
the dayes of the siege are fulfylled, and thou shalt take the other thirde part
and smite about it with a knife, and the last thirde part thou shalt scatter in
the wynde, and I wyll drawe out a sworde after them.
3 Thou shalt also take therof a fewe in number, and bynde them in thy lappe.
4 Of them yet shalt thou take, and cast them into the middest of the fire, &
burne them in the fire: therof shall a fire come foorth into all the house of
Israel.
5 Moreouer, thus saith the Lorde God: This same is Hierusalem, which I set in
the middest of nations, and countreis rounde about her.
6 But she hath chaunged my iudgementes into wickednesse more then the nations,
and my statutes more then the countreis that are rounde about her: for they haue
refused my iudgementes and my statutes, and not walked in them.
7 Therfore thus saith the Lorde God: For your multiplying more then the gentiles
that dwell rounde about you, and because ye haue not walked in my lawes, neither
haue ye kept my ordinaunces, no ye haue not done accordyng to the iudgementes of
the nations that are rounde about you:
8 Therfore thus saith the Lorde God, Beholde I will also come agaynst thee, I my
selfe I say: for in the middest of thee wyll I execute iudgement in the sight of
the heathen.
9 And I wyll handle thee of such a fashion as I neuer did before, & as I will
neuer do from that tyme foorth, and that because of all thine abhominations.
10 For in thee the fathers shalbe fayne to eate their owne sonnes, and the
sonnes their owne fathers, I wyll execute iudgement in thee, and the whole
remnaunt of thee wyll I scatter into all the wyndes.
11 Wherfore, as truly as I lyue saith the Lorde God, seyng thou hast defiled my
sanctuarie with all maner of abhominations, and with all shamefull offences: For
this cause will I also destroy thee, mine eye shall not spare thee, neither wyll
I haue any pitie.
12 One thirde part within thee shall dye of the pestilence and be consumed of
hunger, another thirde part shalbe slayne downe rounde about thee with the
sworde, the other thirde part that remayneth, wyll I scatter abrode towarde all
the wyndes, and drawe out a sworde after them.
13 Thus wyll I perfourme mine indignation, & make my wrath to settle vpon them,
and I will be comforted: so that when I haue fulfylled myne anger agaynst them,
they shall knowe that I am the Lorde, which with a seruent gelousie haue spoken
it.
14 Moreouer, I wyll make thee waste and reuiled among all the heathen that dwell
about thee, in the sight of all them that go by thee.
15 So thou shalt be a reproche and shame, a chastisement and a wondryng vnto the
nations that are rounde about thee, when I shall execute iudgementes in thee, in
anger & in wrath, and in sharpe rebukes, I the Lorde haue spoken it:
16 When I shoote among them the perilous dartes of hunger, which shalbe for
their destruction, yea therfore shall I shoote them because I wyll destroy you,
I wyll encrease hunger vpon you, and wyll breake your staffe of bread.
17 Plagues wyll I sende vpon you, yea and wicked beastes also to spoyle thee,
pestilence and bloodsheddyng shal come vpon thee, and the sworde wyll I bring
ouer thee: I the Lorde haue spoken it.

Chapter 6

1 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
2 Thou sonne of man set thy face to the mountaynes of Israel, that thou mayest
prophecie agaynst them,
3 And say, Heare the worde of the Lord God: O ye mountaynes of Israel Thus hath
the Lord God spoken to the mountaynes, hylles, riuers, & dales, Beholde I euen
will bryng a sworde vpon you, and destroy your hye places.
4 Your aulters shalbe destroyed, & your images of the sunne broken downe, your
slayne men wyll I cast downe before your idols.
5 And the dead carkases of the children of Israel wyll I cast before their
idols, your bones will I scatter rounde about your aulters.
6 In all your dwellyng places your cities shalbe desolate, and the hye places
laide waste, so that your aulters shalbe made waste and desolate, your idols
shalbe broken and abolished, and your images of the sunne shalbe cut downe, and
your workes quite taken away.
7 Your slayne men shall fall among you: and ye shal knowe that I am the Lord.
8 Yet wyll I leaue a remnaunt, that you may haue some that shall escape the
sworde among the nations, when as ye shalbe scattered through the countreis.
9 And they that escape of you shal thinke vpon me among the heathen where they
shalbe in captiuitie, because I haue ben broken with their whorishe heart which
hath departed from me, & with their eyes that haue gone a whoryng after their
idols: and they shalbe abhorred before their owne eyes for the euils which they
haue commited in all their abhominations.
10 And they shall knowe that I am the Lorde, and that I haue not sayde in vayne,
that I woulde do this euill vnto them.
11 Thus saith the Lorde God, Smite thine handes together, and stampe with thy
feete, and say, Wo worth all the abhominations and wickednesses of the house of
Israel: for they shall fall with the sworde, with hunger, and with pestilence.
12 Who so is farre of shall dye of the pestilence, he that is nye at hande shall
perishe with the sworde, and the other that are besieged shall dye of hunger:
Thus wyll I satisfie my wrathfull displeasure vpon them.
13 And so shall ye knowe that I am the Lorde, when their slayne men shalbe among
their idols rounde about their aulters, vpon euery hye hyll, and toppes of
mountaynes, and vnder euery greene tree, and vnder euery thicke oke, euen in the
places where they dyd offer sweete sauour to all their idols.
14 I wyll stretche mine hande out vpon them, and wyll make the lande waste, and
desolate from the wildernesse vnto Deblathah through all their habitations: and
they shall knowe that I am the Lorde.

Chapter 7

1 The worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
2 And thou sonne of man, thus saith the Lorde God, an ende is come vnto the
lande of Israel: yea veryly the ende commeth vpon the foure corners of the
lande.
3 Nowe shall the ende come vpon thee: for I wyll sende my wrath vpon thee, and
wyll punishe thee accordyng to thy wayes, and rewarde thee after all thine
abhominations.
4 Mine eye shall not spare thee, neither wyll I haue pitie, but rewarde thee
accordyng to thy wayes, & declare thine abhominations: then shall ye knowe that
I am the Lorde.
5 Thus saith the Lorde God, Beholde, one euyll shall come after another:
6 The ende is here, the ende I say is come, it watched for thee: beholde it is
come alredy.
7 The mornyng is come vnto thee that dwellest in the lande, the tyme is at
hande, the day of trouble is harde by, and not the foundyng agayne of the
mountaynes.
8 Nowe I wyll shortly poure out my sore displeasure ouer thee, and fulfyll my
wrath vpon thee: I wyll iudge thee after thy wayes, and recompence thee all
thine abhominations.
9 Mine eye shall not spare, neither wyll I haue pitie, but rewarde thee after
thy wayes, & thine abhominations shalbe in the middest of thee: and ye shal
knowe that I am the Lorde that smiteth.
10 Beholde the day, beholde it is come, the mornyng is gone foorth, the rodde
florisheth, pride hath budded.
11 Crueltie is waxen to a rodde of wickednesse, none of them shall remayne, none
of their riches, not one of their seede, & no lamentation shalbe made for them.
12 The tyme commeth, the day draweth nye: who so byeth let hym not reioyce, he
that selleth let hym not be sory: for why? wrath is vpon all the multitude
therof.
13 So that the seller not come againe to the thyng that he solde, although their
life be yet with the lyuyng: for when the prophecie was preached vnto all the
people, none returned, no man shal strengthen hym selfe in the iniquitie of his
life.
14 They haue blowen the trumpet, and made all redy, but none goeth to the
battayle: for my wrath is vpon the whole multitude.
15 The sworde shalbe without, pestilence and hunger within: so that who so is in
the fielde shalbe slayne with the sworde, and he that is in the citie shalbe
deuoured with hunger and pestilence.
16 But they that flee away from them shall escape, and shalbe in the mountaynes
lyke the doues of the valleys, all they shall mourne, euery one for his
iniquitie.
17 All handes shalbe let downe, and all knees shalbe weake as the water.
18 They shall girde them selues with sackcloth, feare shall couer them, shame
shalbe vpon all faces, and baldnesse vpon their heades.
19 Their siluer shall they cast foorth in the streetes, and their golde shalbe
dispised: yea their siluer and golde shall not be able to deliuer them in the
day of the wrath of the Lorde, they shall not satisfie their soules, neither
fyll their bellyes therwith, because it was a stumblyng blocke of their
iniquitie.
20 He had also set the beautie of his ornament in maiestie: but they made images
of their abhominations and fylthinesses in it, therfore haue I set it farre from
them.
21 Moreouer, I wyll geue it into the handes of straungers to be spoyled, & to
the wicked of the earth for to be robbed, and they shall pollute it.
22 My face wyll I turne from them, my secrete place shalbe defiled: for burglers
shall go into it and pollute it.
23 Make a chayne: for the lande is full of the iudgement of blood, and the citie
is full of extortion.
24 Wherfore I wyll bryng the most wicked of the heathen to take their houses in
possession, I wyll make the pompe of the mightie to ceasse, and their
sanctuaries shalbe defyled.
25 When destruction is come, they shall seeke peace, but they shall haue none.
26 One mischiefe shall folowe another, and one rumour shall come after another:
then shall they seeke a vision in vayne at their prophete, the lawe shall
perishe from the priest, and counsayle from the auncientes.
27 The kyng shall mourne, the prince shalbe clothed with desolation, and the
handes of the people in the lande shalbe troubled: I wyll do vnto them after
their owne wayes, accordyng to their owne iudgementes wyll I iudge them: and
they shall knowe that I am the Lorde.

Chapter 8

1 And it was in the sixt yere, in the sixt moneth in the fift day of the moneth,
I sate in my house, and the elders of Iuda sate before me, and the hande of the
Lorde God fell there vpon me.
2 Then I behelde, and lo, there was a likenesse as the appearaunce of fire: from
the appearaunce of his loynes downewarde, fire: and from his loynes vpwarde as
the appearaunce of brightnesse, lyke the colour of amber.
3 And he stretched out the likenesse of an hande, and toke me by an heery locke
of my head, and the spirite lift me vp betwixt earth and heauen, and brought me
in a diuine vision to Hierusalem, into the entry of the inner gate that lyeth
towarde the north, where remayned the image of emulation and of gayne.
4 And beholde, the glorie of the Lorde God of Israel was in the same place, euen
as I had seene it afore in the fielde.
5 And he sayde vnto me, Thou sonne of man, lift vp thine eyes nowe towarde the
north: then lift I vp mine eyes towarde the north, and beholde northwarde, at
the gate of the aulter this image of emulation was in the entry.
6 And he sayde furthermore vnto me, Thou sonne of man, seest thou what these do?
seest thou the great abhominations that the house of Israel commit in this
place, to driue me from my sanctuarie? but turne thee about, and thou shalt see
yet greater abhominations.
7 And with that brought he me to the court gate, and when I loked, beholde there
was a hole in the wall.
8 Then sayde he vnto me, Thou sonne of man, digge nowe in the wall: and when I
digged in the wall, beholde there was a doore.
9 And he sayde vnto me, Go thy way in, and loke what wicked abhominations they
do here.
10 So I went in and sawe, and beholde there were al maner of creeping beastes,
and abhominable beastes, and all the idols of the house of Israel paynted vpon
the wall rounde about.
11 There stoode also before the images threescore and ten men of the auncientes
of the house of Israel, and in the middest of the stoode Iaazaniah the sonne of
Shaphan, with euery man his censor in his hande, and the smoke of the insence
ascended as a cloude.
12 Then sayde he vnto me, Thou sonne of man, hast thou seene what the auncientes
of the house of Israel do secretly, euery one in the chaumber of his imagerie?
for they say, The Lorde seeth vs not, the Lorde hath forsaken the earth.
13 And he sayde vnto me, Turne thee yet agayne, and thou shalt see greater
abhominations that they do.
14 And with that he brought me to the doore of the gate of the Lordes house
towarde the north, and beholde there sate wome mourning for Thammuz.
15 Then sayd he vnto me, Hast thou seene this thou sonne of man? turne thee yet
about, and thou shalt see greater abhominations then these are.
16 And so he brought me into the inward court of the Lordes house, and beholde
at the doore of the Lordes house, betwixt the porche and the aulter, there were
about twentie and fiue men that turned their backes vpon the temple of the
Lorde, and their faces towarde the east, and these worshipped the sunne
eastwarde.
17 And he sayde vnto me, Hast thou seene this thou sonne of man? Thinketh the
house of Iuda that it is but a trifle to do these abhominations which they do
here? for they haue fylled the lande full of wickednesse, and haue returned to
prouoke me to anger, and lo they are puttyng the braunches to their noses.
18 Therfore wyll I also do somethyng in my wrathful displeasure, so that mine
eye shall not spare them, neither wyll I haue pitie: yea and though they crye in
mine eares with a loude voyce, yet wyll I not heare them.

Chapter 9

1 He cryed also with a loude voyce in mine eares, saying: Drawe neare ye
visitations of the citie, euery man with a destroying weapon in his hande.
2 And beholde, then came there sixe men out of the streete of the vpper gate
towarde the north, and euery man a slaughter weapon in his hande: There was one
amongest them that had on hym lynnen rayment, and a writers inckhorne by his
syde: these went in and stoode besyde the brasen aulter.
3 And the glorie of the Lorde of Israel was gone from the Cherub whervpon it
was, to the doore of the house: and he called to the man that had the lynnen
rayment vpon hym, and the writers inckhorne by his syde,
4 And the Lorde sayde vnto hym, Go through the citie, euen through Hierusalem, &
set a marke vpon the foreheades of them that mourne, and are sory for all the
abhominations that be done therin.
5 And to the other he sayd, that I might here, Go ye after hym through the
citie, and sinite, let your eye spare none, neither haue ye any pitie:
6 Kyll and destroy both olde men and young, maydens, children, and women: but as
for all those that haue the marke vpon them, see that ye touche them not, and
begyn at my sanctuarie. Then they began at the auncient men which were before
the house.
7 And he sayde vnto them, Defyle ye the temple, fyll the courtes with the
slayne, then go your way foorth. So they went out, and slue downe through the
citie.
8 Nowe when they had done the slaughter, and I yet escaped, I fell downe vpon my
face, and cryed, saying: Ah Lorde God, wylt thou then destroy all the residue of
Israel, in powryng out thy wrath vpon Hierusalem?
9 Then sayde he vnto me, The wickednesse of the house of Israel and Iuda is
exceedyng great: so that the lande is full of blood, & the citie full of
reuoltyng from God for they say, The Lorde hath forsaken the earth, and the
Lorde seeth it not.
10 As touchyng me also, mine eye shall not spare them, neither wyll I haue
pitie: but wyll recompence their wayes vpon their heades.
11 And beholde, the man that had the lynnen rayment vpon hym and the writers
inckhorne by his syde, reported the matter, and sayde: As thou hast commaunded
me, so haue I done.

Chapter 10

1 And as I loked, beholde in the firmament that was aboue the head of the
Cherubims, as it were a Saphir stone made lyke the similitude of a throne, was
seene ouer them.
2 Then spake he to hym that had the lynnen rayment vpon hym, and sayde: Crepe in
betwene the wheeles that are vnder the Cherub, and take thine hand full of hotte
coales out from betwene the Cherubims, and scatter them ouer the citie. And he
crept in, that I myght see.
3 (Nowe the Cherubims stoode vpon the ryght syde of the house when the man went
in, and the cloude fylled the inner court.
4 And the glorie of the Lorde remoued from the Cherubims, and came vpon the
doore of the house: so that the temple was full of cloudes, and the court was
full of the shine of the Lordes glorie.
5 Yea and the sounde of the Cherubims winges was hearde into the fore court,
lyke as it had ben the voyce of the almightie God when he speaketh.)
6 Nowe when he had bidden the man that was clothed in lynnen, saying, Take fire
from the middest of the wheeles which were vnder the Cherubims: he went, and
stoode besyde the wheeles.
7 Then one Cherub reached foorth his hande from betwene the Cherubims vnto the
fire that was betwene the Cherubims, and toke therof, and gaue it into the
handes of hym that had on the lynnen rayment: which toke it, and went out.
8 And vnder the wynges of the Cherubims there appeared the likenesse of a mans
hande.
9 I loked also, and behold foure wheeles beside the Cherubims, one wheele by one
Cherub, and another by another Cherub, and the wheeles were to loke vpon after
the fashion of the precious stone Tharsis.
10 As touchyng their appearaunce (they were all foure of one fashion) as yf one
wheele had ben in another.
11 When they went foorth, they went vpon their foure sides, not turnyng backe in
their goyng: for which way the head of the first loked, after it they went, so
that they turned not backe in their goyng.
12 And their whole bodyes, their backes, their handes, and wynges, yea and the
wheeles also were full of eyes rounde about the foure wheeles.
13 And to the wheeles, he cryed to them in my hearyng, O wheele,
14 Euery one of them had foure faces, so that the face of the first was the face
of a Cherub, and the face of the seconde the face of a man, and of the thirde
the face of a lion, and of the fourth the face of an egle.
15 And the Cherubims were lyfted vp: This is the beast that I sawe at the water
of Chebar.
16 Nowe when the Cherubims went, the wheeles went by them: and when the
Cherubims lyft vp their wynges to mount vp from the earth, the same wheeles also
turned not from besides them.
17 Shortly when they stoode, these stoode also, and when they were lifted vp,
the wheeles lift vp them selues also with them: for the spirite of the beast was
in the wheeles.
18 Then the glorie of the Lorde departed from aboue the doore of the temple, and
remayned vpon the Cherubims.
19 And the Cherubims flackered with their wynges, and lyft them selues vp from
the earth, so that I sawe when they went, & the wheeles besides them, and they
stoode at the doore of the east gate of the house of the Lorde, so the glorie of
the God of Israel was vpon them on hye.
20 This is the beast that I sawe vnder the God of Israel by the riuer of Chebar,
and I perceaued that it was the Cherubims.
21 Euery one had foure faces, and euery one foure wynges, and vnder their wynges
the likenesse of mens handes.
22 Touchyng the similitude of their countenaunces, they were the very same
countenaunces which I sawe at the riuer Chebar, and the selfe same appearaunces:
euery one in his goyng went strayght forwarde.

Chapter 11

1 Moreouer, the spirite lift me vp, and brought me vnto the east gate of the
Lordes house, which lyeth eastwarde: and beholde, at the entry of the gate were
fiue and twentie men, among whom I sawe Iaazaniah the sonne of Azur, and
Pheltiah the sonne of Banaiahu, the rulers of the people.
2 Then sayde he vnto me, Thou sonne of man, these men imagine mischiefe, & a
wicked counsayle take they in this citie,
3 Saying, It is not neare, let vs builde houses: this Hierusalem is the
cauldron, and we be the fleshe.
4 Therfore shalt thou prophecie against them: yea prophecie O sonne of man.
5 And with that fell the spirite of the Lorde vpon me, and sayde vnto me,
Speake, thus saith the Lorde: On this maner haue ye spoken (O ye house of
Israel) and I knowe the imaginations of your heartes.
6 Many one haue ye murthered in this citie, and fylled the streetes full of the
slayne:
7 Therfore thus saith the Lorde God, The slayne men that ye haue layde on the
grounde in the citie are the fleshe, and this citie is the cauldron: but I wyll
bryng you out of it,
8 ye haue feared the sworde, and I wyll bring a sworde ouer you, saith the Lorde
God.
9 And I wyll bryng you out of the middest therof, and deliuer you into the
handes of straungers, and wyll execute iudgementes among you.
10 Ye shall fall by the sworde, in the borders of Israel wyll I iudge you, and
ye shall knowe that I am the Lorde.
11 This citie shall not be your cauldron, neither shall ye be the fleshe therin:
but in the borders of Israel wyll I punishe you,
12 That ye may knowe that I am the Lorde, in whose commaundementes ye haue not
walked, nor kept my lawes: but haue done after the customes of the heathen that
lye rounde about you.
13 Nowe when I prophecied, Pheltiah the sonne of Banaiahu dyed: then fell I
downe vpon my face, and cryed with a loude voyce, saying, Ah Lorde God, wylt
thou then vtterly destroy all the remnaunt in Israel?
14 And so the worde of the Lorde came vnto me on this maner.
15 Thou sonne of man, thy brethren euen thy brethren, the men of thy kinrede,
and all the house of Israel, wholly are they vnto whom the inhabitauntes of
Hierusalem haue sayde withdrawe ye farre from the Lorde, for the lande is geuen
vs in possession.
16 Therfore tell them, thus saith the God: Although I sende them farre of among
the gentiles, and scatter them among the nations, yet wyll I be to them as a
litle sanctuarie in the landes where they shall come.
17 Tell them also, thus saith the Lorde God, I wyll gather you agayne out of the
nations, and bryng you from the countreis where ye be scattered, and I wyll geue
you the lande of Israel agayne.
18 And they shall come thither, and they shall take away all their idols, and
all their abhominations from thence.
19 And I wyll geue them one heart, and I wyll put a newe spirite within their
bowels: that stony heart wyll I take out of their body, and geue them a fleshlye
heart,
20 That they may walke in my commaundementes, and kepe mine ordinaunces and do
them, that they may be my people, and I their God.
21 But to the heart of their idols and their abhominations their heart goeth,
their wayes wyll I bryng vpon their owne heades, saith the Lorde God.
22 After this did the Cherubims lift vp their wynges and the wheeles besides
them, and the glorie of the God of Israel was vpon them on hye.
23 So the glorie of the Lorde went vp from the middest of the citie, and stoode
vpon the mount of the citie towarde the east.
24 And the spirite toke me vp, & brought me agayne to Chaldea to the captiuitie,
in a vision by the spirite of God: then the vision that I had seene went vp from
me.
25 So I spake vnto the captiues all the wordes of the Lorde which he had shewed
me.

Chapter 12

1 The worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
2 Thou sonne of man, thou dwellest in the middest of a rebellious house, which
haue eyes to see and yet see not, eares haue they to heare, and yet heare they
not: for they are a rebellious house.
3 Therfore (O thou sonne of man) prepare thee instrumentes to flit with, &
remoue on the day time that they may see, yea euen in their sight shalt thou go
from thy place to another place, yf peraduenture they wyll consider that they be
a rebellious house.
4 Thou shalt bryng foorth thine instrumentes as stuffe to flit with by the day
tyme in their sight, and thou thy selfe shalt go foorth also at euenyng before
their eyes, as they that go foorth to flit.
5 Digge through the wall in their sight, and cary out therby.
6 In their sight shalt thou beare vpon thy shouldiers, and cary it foorth in the
darke: hide thy face, that thou see not the earth, for I haue made thee a shewe
token vnto the house of Israel.
7 And I did so as I was commaunded, I brought foorth my stuffe by day as the
stuffe of one that goeth into captiuitie: and in the euening I digged through
the wall with my handes, and brought it foorth in the darke, and bare it vpon my
shoulder in their sight.
8 And in the mornyng came the worde of the Lorde vnto me, saying:
9 Thou sonne of man, hath not the house of Israel, the rebellious house, sayd
vnto thee, What doest thou?
10 Then tell them, thus saith the Lorde God, This burden toucheth the prince at
Hierusalem, and all the house of Israel that dwell among them.
11 Tell them, I am your shewe token, lyke as I haue done, so shall it be done
vnto them, they shall go into bondage and captiuitie.
12 The prince that is among them shall loade his shoulders in the darke and get
hym away, they shall breake downe the wall to cary through by it: he shall couer
his face, that he see not the ground with his eyes.
13 My net will I spreade out vpon him, and he shalbe caught in my net, and I
wyll bryng hym to Babylon in the lande of the Chaldees, which he shall not see,
and yet shall he dye there.
14 As for all his helpers & all his bandes that be about hym, I wyll scatter
them towarde all the wyndes, and drawe out a sworde after them.
15 So when I haue scattered them among the heathen and strowed them in the
landes, they shall knowe that I am the Lorde.
16 But I will leaue a litle number of the from the sworde, hunger, and
pestilence, to tell all their abhominations among the heathen where they come,
that they may knowe howe that I am the Lord.
17 Moreouer, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
18 Thou sonne of man, with a fearfull tremblyng shalt thou eate thy bread, with
vnquietnesse & sorowe shalt thou drynke thy water.
19 And vnto the people of the lande speake thou: Thus saith the Lord God to them
that dwell in Hierusalem, and to the lande of Israel: they shall eate their
bread with sorowe, and drynke their water with desolation: yea the lande with
the fulnesse therof shalbe layde waste for the wickednesse of all them that
dwell therin.
20 And the cities that nowe be well inhabited, shalbe voyde, & the lande
desolate, that ye may knowe that I am the Lorde.
21 Yet came the worde of the Lorde vnto me agayne, saying:
22 Thou sonne of man, what maner of prouerbe is that which ye vse in the lande
of Israel, saying: The dayes are slacke in comyng, & all visions fayle?
23 Tell them therfore, thus saith the Lord God, I wyll make that prouerbe to
ceasse, and they shall no more vse it as a prouerbe in Israel: but say vnto
them, the dayes are at hande, and the effect of euery vision.
24 There shall no vision be any more in vayne, neither any flattering diuination
within the house of Israel:
25 For I the Lorde speake it, and whatsoeuer I shall speake, it shalbe
perfourmed, and not be slacke in commyng any more, yea euen in your dayes O
rebellious house, wyll I speake the thyng & bryng it to passe, saith the Lorde
God.
26 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
27 Beholde thou sonne of man, the house of Israel saith on this maner The vision
that he seeth, it wyll be many a day or it come to passe: it is farre of yet the
tyme that he prophecieth of.
28 Therfore say thus vnto them, thus saith the Lorde God, All my wordes shall no
more be delayed, loke what I speake, that same shall come to passe, saith the
Lorde God.

Chapter 13

1 The worde of the Lord came vnto me, saying:
2 Thou sonne of man, prophecie against chose prophetes of Israel whiche
prophecie, and say vnto them that prophecie out of their owne heartes, Heare the
worde of the Lorde,
3 Thus saith the Lord God, wo be vnto those foolishe prophetes that folowe their
owne spirit, & haue seene nothing.
4 O Israel, thy prophetes are lyke the fores in desert places.
5 For ye haue not stand vp in the gappes, nor made a hedge for the house of
Israel, to stande in the battayle in the day of the Lorde.
6 They haue seene vanitie and lying diuination, saying: the Lorde saith it, and
the Lorde hath not sent them, and they haue made me hope that they woulde
confirme the worde.
7 Haue ye not seene vayne visions, and spoken false prophecies, when ye say, the
Lorde hath spoken it, whereas I neuer sayde it.
8 Therfore thus saith the Lorde God, Because ye haue spoken vanitie, and haue
seene lies: therfore beholde I am against you, saith the Lorde God:
9 Mine handes shal come vpon the prophetes that see vanities, and deuine lies:
they shall not be in the counsell of my people, nor written in the booke of the
house of Israel, neither shal they come in the lande of Israel, that ye may know
howe that I am the Lord God:
10 And that for because they haue deceaued my people, and told them of peace
where no peace was: one setteth vp a wall, and they daube it with vntempered
clay.
11 Therfore tell them which daube with vntempred morter, that it shall fall: for
there shal come a great showre of raine, I will sende haylestones to cause it to
fall, and a great storme of winde shall breake it.
12 And lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it not then be sayd vnto you, Where is
nowe your morter that ye daubed it withall?
13 Therfore thus saith the Lorde God: I wyll cause a stormie winde to breake out
in my wrathfull displeasure, so that in mine anger there shall come a mightie
showre of raine, and haylestones in my wrath to destroy it.
14 As for the wall that ye haue daubed with vntempered morter, I wil breake it
downe, and make it euen with the grounde, so that the foundation therof shalbe
discouered, and it shall fall: yea and ye your selues shall perishe in the
middes therof, and ye shall knowe that I am the Lorde.
15 Thus wyll I perfourme my wrath vpon this wall, and vpon them that haue daubed
it with vntempred morter, and then wyl I say vnto you, The wall is gone, and the
daubers of it.
16 To wit the prophetes of Israel, whiche prophecie vnto Hierusalem, and looke
out visions of peace for it, wheras no peace is, saith the Lorde God.
17 Wherefore O thou sonne of man, set thy face against the daughters of thy
people, whiche prophecie out of their owne heartes, and prophecie against them:
18 And say, thus saith the Lorde God: Wo be vnto them that sowe pillowes vnder
all arme holes, and put kirchifes vpon the heades of euery stature to hunt
soules. Wyll ye hunt the soules of my people, and geue life to the soules that
come vnto you?
19 And wyll ye pollute me to my people for handfuls of barly, and for peeces of
bread, to kyll the soules of them that dye not, and promise life to them that
liue not, in lying to my people that heareth your lyes?
20 Wherfore thus saith the Lorde God: Beholde, I wyll vpon your pillowes
wherwith ye hunt the soules, to make them flee, and I will teare them from your
armes, and wyll let the soules go, euen the soules that ye hunt to make them to
flee.
21 Your kirchifes also wyll I teare in peeces, and deliuer my people out of your
handes, so that they shall come no more in your handes to be hunted: and ye
shall knowe that I am the Lorde.
22 Seeing that with your lyes you discomfort the heart of the righteous, who I
haue not discomforted: Againe, forsomuche as ye encourage the hande of the
wicked, so that he may not turne from his wicked way in promising hym life:
23 Therfore shall ye see no more vanitie, neither shall ye deuine diuinations,
for I wyll deliuer my people out of your hande, that ye may knowe howe that I am
the Lorde.

Chapter 14

1 There resorted vnto me certayne of the elders of Israel, and sate downe by me.
2 Then came the word of the Lorde vnto me, saying:
3 Thou sonne of man, these men haue set vp their idols in their heartes, and put
the stumbling blocke of iniquitie before their face: shoulde I then aunswere
them at their request?
4 Therefore speake vnto them, and say vnto them, thus saith the Lorde God: Euery
man of the house of Israel that setteth vp his idols in his heart, & putteth the
stumbling blocke of his iniquitie before his face, and commeth to the prophete:
vnto that man wyll I the Lord my selfe geue aunswere when he commeth, according
to the multitude of his idols.
5 That the house of Israel may be snared in their owne heartes, because they be
cleane gone from me all of them thorowe their idols.
6 Wherefore tell the house of Israel, thus saith the Lorde God: Returne and
cause to returne from your idols, and turne your faces from all your
abhominations.
7 For euery man, whether he be of the house of Israel, or a straunger that
soiourneth in Israel, whiche departeth from me, and setteth vp his idols in his
heart, and putteth the stumbling blocke of his wickednesse before his face, and
commeth to a prophete for to aske counsell at me through hym: vnto that man wyll
I the Lorde geue aunswere by mine owne selfe.
8 I wyll set my face against that man, and wyll make hym to be an example for
other, yea and a common byworde, and wyll roote hym out of my people, that ye
may knowe howe that I am the Lorde.
9 And if that prophete be deceaued when he telleth a thing, then I the Lorde my
selfe haue deceaued that prophete, and wyll stretche out my hande vpon him, to
destroy him out of my people of Israel:
10 And they shalbe punished for their wickednesse, according to the sinne of hym
that asketh, shall the sinne of the prophete be:
11 That the house of Israel be led no more from me through errour, and be no
more defiled in all their transgressions: but that they may be my people, and I
their God, saith the Lorde God.
12 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
13 Thou sonne of man, when the lande sinneth against me by committing a
trespasse, I wyll stretche out my hande vpon it, and breake their staffe of
bread, and sende dearth vpon them, to destroy man and beast foorth of it.
14 And though Noe, Daniel, and Iob, these three men were among them: yet shal
they in their righteousnesse deliuer but their owne soules, saith the Lorde God.
15 If I bryng noysome beastes into the lande, and they spoyle it, and it be so
desolate that no man may passe through it for beastes,
16 If these three men were also in the land: as truely as I liue saith the Lord
God, they shall saue neither sonnes nor daughters, but be onlye deliuered them
selues: & as for the land, it shalbe waste.
17 Or if I bryng a sworde vpon this lande, and say, sworde go through the lande,
so that I slay downe man and beast in it,
18 And if these three men were therein: as truely as I liue saith the Lord God,
they shall deliuer neither sonnes nor daughters, but only be saued theselues.
19 If I sende a pestilence into this lande, and powre out my sore indignation
vppon it in blood, so that I roote out of it both man and beast,
20 And if Noe, Daniel, and Iob were therein, as truely as I liue saith the Lorde
God, they shall deliuer neither sonne nor daughter, but saue their owne soules
in their righteousnesse.
21 Moreouer thus saith the Lorde God, Howe much more when I sende my foure
troublous plagues vpon Hierusalem, the sworde, hunger, perillous beastes, and
pestilence, to destroy man and beast out of it?
22 Beholde, there shalbe a remnaunt saued therein, whiche shall bryng foorth
their sonnes and daughters, beholde, they shall come foorth vnto you, and ye
shall see their way and their enterprise, and ye shalbe comforted concerning the
euyll that I haue brought vpon Hierusalem euen concerning all that I haue
brought vpon it.
23 They shall comfort you when ye shal see their way and workes: and ye shall
knowe howe that it is not without a cause that I haue done all against
Hierusalem as I dyd, saith the Lorde God.

Chapter 15

1 The worde of the Lord came vnto me, saying:
2 Thou sonne of man, what commeth of the vine tree, more then of euery other
tree, & of the wylde vine stocke among other trees of the forest?
3 Do men take wood of it to make any worke withall? or wyll men take a pin of it
to hang any vessell theron?
4 Behold, it is cast in the fire to be brent, the fire consumeth both the endes
of it, the middes of it is brent: is it meete then for any worke?
5 Seeing then that it was meete for no worke beyng whole, muche lesse may there
any thing be made of it when the fire hath consumed and brent it.
6 And therefore thus saith the Lorde god, As the vine tree that is among the
trees of the forest, which I haue geuen to the fire to be consumed: so wyll I
geue the inhabitauntes of Hierusalem.
7 And I wyll set my face against them, they shall go out from the fire, and yet
the fire shall consume them: then shall ye knowe that I am the Lorde, when I set
my face against them,
8 And when I make the lande waste, because they haue so sore offended, saith the
Lorde God.

Chapter 16

1 Agayne the word of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
2 Thou sonne of man, shewe Hierusale their abhominations,
3 And say, Thus saith the Lorde God vnto Hierusalem: thy habitation and kinred
is of the lande of Chanaan, thy father was an Amorite, thy mother an Hittite.
4 In the day of thy byrth when thou wast borne, the string of thy nauell was not
cut of, thou wast not bathed in water to make thee cleane, thou wast not salted
with salt, nor swadled in cloutes.
5 No eye pitied thee to do any of these thinges for thee, for to haue compassion
vpon thee: but thou wast vtterly cast out vpon the fielde in contempt of thy
person in the day of thy byrth.
6 Then came I by thee, and sawe thee defiled in thyne owne blood, and I said
vnto thee when thou wast in thy blood, liue: euen when thou wast in thy blood, I
sayde vnto thee, liue.
7 I caused thee to multiplie as the bud of the fielde, thou art growen vp, and
waxen great, thou hast gotten a marueylous pleasaunt beautie, thy brestes are
fashioned, thy heere is goodly growen, whereas thou wast naked & bare.
8 Nowe when I went by thee and looked vpon thee, beholde, thy tyme was come, yea
euen the time to woo thee: then spread I my clothes ouer thee to couer thy
dishonestie, yea I made an othe vnto thee, and contracted my selfe with thee
(saith the Lorde God) and so thou becamest myne owne.
9 Then washed I thee with water, and purged thy blood from thee, and I annointed
thee with oyle.
10 I clothed thee with broidred worke, and shod thee with badgers skin, and I
gyrded thee about with fine linnen, and couered thee with silke.
11 I decked thee with costly apparell, I put braselets vpon thy hands, a chayne
about thy necke.
12 And I put a frontlet vpon thy face, and eareringes vpon thyne eares, and a
beautifull crowne vpon thyne head.
13 Thus wast thou deckt with golde and siluer, and thy rayment was of fine
linnen, and of silke, and of broidred worke: thou didst eate fine floure, honye
and oyle, marueylous beautifull wast thou, and thou dydst luckyly prosper into a
kingdome.
14 And thy name was spread among the heathen for thy beautie: for it was perfite
through thy beautie whiche I put vpon thee, saith the Lorde God.
15 But thou hast put thy confidence in thyne owne beautie, and played the harlot
because of thy renowne, and hast powred out thy fornications with euery one that
went by, thou wast his.
16 Thou didst take thy garmentes, and deckt thy hye places with diuers colours,
and played the harlot thervpon, they come not, and it shall not be.
17 The goodly iewels whiche I gaue thee of mine owne golde and siluer, hast thou
taken and made thee mens images therof, and committed whordome with them.
18 Thy broidred garmentes hast thou taken, and deckt them therewith: myne oyle
and incense hast thou set before them.
19 My meate whiche I gaue thee, as fine floure, oyle and hony to feede the
withall, that hast thou set before them for a sweete sauour: and thus it was
saith the Lorde God.
20 Thou hast taken thyne owne sonnes and daughters whom thou hast begotten vnto
me, and these hast thou offred vp vnto them to be deuoured: is this but a small
whordome of thyne?
21 And thou hast slayne my chyldren, and deliuered them, to cause them to passe
through the fire for them.
22 And yet in all thyne abhominations and whordomes, thou hast not remembred the
dayes of thy youth, howe naked and bare thou wast at that tyme, and wast defiled
in thyne owne blood.
23 After all these thy wickednesses, (wo wo vnto thee, saith the Lorde God.)
24 Thou hast buylt vnto thee an hye place, and hast made thee an hye place in
euery streete.
25 Thou hast buylt thyne hye plate at euery head of the way, thou hast made thy
beautie to be abhorred, thou hast opened thy feete to euery one that came by,
and multiplied thy whoredome.
26 Thou hast committed fornication with the Egyptians, thy neighbours whiche
were great in fleshe, and thus hast thou increased thyne whordome to anger me.
27 Beholde, I did stretche out my hand ouer thee, and dyd minishe thy store of
foode, and deliuered thee ouer into the wylles of them that hate thee, euen the
daughters of the Philistines, which are ashamed of thyne abhominable wayes.
28 Thou hast plaied the whore also with the Assyrians, because thou wast
insatiable: yea thou hast I say with them played the harlot, and yet hadst thou
not inough.
29 Thus hast thou furthermore multiplied thy fornication from the lande of
Chanaan vnto the Chaldees, and yet thou wast not satisfied herewith.
30 Howe weake is thyne heart saith the Lorde God, seeing thou doest all these
workes of a presumptuous whorishe woman?
31 Buylding thy hye places at the head of euery way, and makest thy hye places
in euery streete: thou hast not ben as another whore that holdeth scorne of a
rewarde.
32 But as a wyfe that breaketh wedlocke, and taketh other in steede of her
husbande.
33 Giftes are geuen to all other whores: but thou geuest rewardes vnto all thy
louers, & rewardest them to come vnto thee on euery side for thy fornication.
34 It is come to passe with thee in thy whoredomes contrary to the vse of other
women, yea there hath no suche fornication ben committed after thee: seeing that
thou geuest gyftes vnto other, and no rewarde is geuen thee, therfore thou art
contrary.
35 Therefore heare the worde of the Lorde, O thou harlot.
36 Thus saith the Lorde God, Because thou hast powred out thy brasse, and
discouered thy filthynes thorowe thy fornications with thy louers, and with all
the idols of thyne abhominations, and in the blood of thy chyldren whom thou
hast geuen them:
37 Beholde therefore, I wyll gather together all thy louers with whom thou hast
taken pleasure, yea and all them whom thou hast loued, and euery one that thou
hatest: I wyll I say gather them together rounde about against thee, and wil
discouer thy shame before them, that they may see all thy filthynesse.
38 Moreouer, I wyll iudge thee as a breaker of wedlocke and a murtherer, and
recompence thee thyne owne blood in wrath and gelousie.
39 I wyll geue thee ouer into their handes, and they shal destroy thy hie place,
and breake downe thy hye places, they shall strip thee also out of thy clothes:
thy farre iewels shall they take from thee, and so leaue thee naked and bare.
40 Yea they shall bryng a company vpon thee, whiche shall stone thee with
stones, and thrust thee through with their swordes,
41 They shall burne vp thy houses with fire, and punishe thee in the sight of
many women: thus wyll I make thee ceasse from playing the harlot, so that thou
shalt geue out no more rewardes.
42 So wyll I make my wrath towarde thee to rest, and my ielousie shall depart
from thee, and I will ceasse, and be angry no more.
43 Seing thou remembrest not the dayes of thy youth, but hast fretted me in all
these thinges: beholde therfore, I wyll bryng thyne owne wayes vpon thy head
saith the Lord God, so that thou shalt not commit any more mischiefe vpon all
thyne abhominations.
44 Beholde, all they that vse common prouerbes, shall vse this prouerbe also
against thee, saying: Such a mother, such a daughter.
45 Thou art euen thy mothers owne daughter, that hath cast of her husband and
her chyldren: yea thou art the sister of thy sisters, which forsoke their
husbandes & their chyldren: your mother is an Hittito, & your father an Amorite.
46 Thyne eldest sister is Samaria, she and her daughters that dwell vpon thy
left hande: but thy younger sister that dwelleth on thy right hande is Sodoma
and her daughters.
47 Yet hast thou not walked after their wayes, nor done after their
abhominations, as a litle and a litle: but in all thy wayes thou hast ben more
corrupt then they.
48 As truely as I liue, saith the Lorde God, Sodoma thy sister with her
daughters, haue not done as thou hast done and thy daughters.
49 Behold, the sinnes of thy sister Sodoma were these: Pryde, fulnesse of meate,
and aboundaunce of idlenesse, these thinges had she and her daughters: besides
that, they strengthed not the hande of the poore and needie.
50 But they were hautie, and committed abhomination before me, therefore I toke
them away as I sawe good.
51 Neither hath Samaria done halfe of thy sinnes, yea thou hast exceeded them in
thyne abhominations, and hast iustified thy sisters in all thyne abhominations
whiche thou hast done.
52 Therfore thou which didst condemne thy sister, beare thyne owne shame: for
thyne owne offences that thou hast comitted more abhominable then they dyd,
which in deede are more righteous then thou art, be thou I say ashamed, and
beare the shamefull rebuke, seeing that thou hast iustified thy sisters.
53 Therfore I wyll bryng agayne their captiuitie, the captiuitie of Sodom and
her daughters, & the captiuitie of Samaria and her daughters, and the captiuitie
of thy captiuities among them,
54 That thou mayest take thyne owne confusion vpon thee, and be ashamed of all
that thou hast done, in that thou hast comforted them.
55 And thy sister Sodom and her daughters shall returne to their former state,
Samaria also and her daughters shall returne to their former state, when thou
and thy daughters shall returne to your former state.
56 For thy sister Sodom was not heard of by thy report in the day of thy pryde,
57 Before thy wickednesse was discouered, according to the tyme of the reproche
of the daughters of Aram, and of all the daughters of the Philistines rounde
about her, whiche depise thee on all sides.
58 Thou hast borne thy wickednesse and thyne abhomination, saith the Lorde.
59 For thus saith the Lorde God, I might by right deale with thee as thou hast
done, which hast despised the othe in breaking the couenaunt:
60 Neuerthelesse, I wyll remember my couenaunt with thee in the daies of thy
youth, and I wyll establishe vnto thee an euerlasting couenaunt.
61 Then shalt thou remember thy wayes, and be ashamed when thou shalt receaue
thy sisters, both thy elder and thy younger: and I wyll geue them vnto thee for
daughters, but not by thy couenaunt.
62 And I wyll establishe my couenaunt with thee, that thou mayest know that I am
the Lorde.
63 That thou mayest thinke vpon it, and be ashamed, and neuer open thy mouth any
more for shame of thy selfe, when I am pacified towarde thee for all that thou
hast done, saith the Lorde God.

Chapter 17

1 The worde of the Lord came vnto me, saying:
2 Thou sonne of man, put foorth a parable, & speake a prouerbe vnto the house of
Israel,
3 And say, Thus saith the Lorde God: There came a great Egle, with great winges,
yea with a mightie long body, and ful of fethers of diuers colours, vppon the
mount of Libanus, and toke the hyest braunche of a Cedar tree.
4 And brake of the top of his twigges, and caryed it into the lande of
marchauntes, and set it in a citie of marchauntes.
5 He toke also of the seede of the land, and planted it in a fruiteful grounde,
he brought it vnto great waters, and set it in an open trenche.
6 Then did it grow, and was a spreading vine, but lowe of stature, whose
braunches turned towarde it, and the rootes of it were vnder it: thus there came
of it a vine, and it brought foorth braunches, and shot foorth buddes.
7 But there was another Egle, a great one, whiche had great wynges and many
fethers: and beholde, the rootes of this vine turned towardes it, and spread out
her braunches towards it, that she might water it by the trenches of her
plantation.
8 It was planted vpon a good soyle beside great waters, so that it should haue
brought out braunches, & borne fruite, and haue ben a goodly vine.
9 Speake thou therfore, thus saith the Lorde God: Shall this vine prosper? shall
he not pull vp the rootes therof, and destroy the fruite thereof, and cause them
to dry? all the leaues of her bud shall wither without great power, or many
people, to plucke it vp by the rootes thereof.
10 Behold, it was planted: Shall it prosper therfore? Shall it not be dryed vp
and withered? when the east winde shall touche it, it shall wither in the
trenches where it grewe.
11 Moreouer, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
12 Speake now to the rebellious house, Knowe ye not what these thinges do
signifie? Tell them, beholde, the kyng of Babylon is come to Hierusalem, and
hath taken the kyng thereof, and the princes therof, and hath led them with him
to Babylon.
13 He toke of the kynges seede, and made a couenaunt with him, and toke an othe
of hym, the princes of the lande toke he with him also.
14 That the kyngdome might be holden in subiection, and not lift vp it selfe,
but kepe the couenaunt, and stande to it.
15 But he rebelled against hym, and sent his embassadours into Egypt, that he
might haue horses and muche people: Should he prosper? shall he escape that doth
suche thinges? or shall he breake the couenaunt and escape free?
16 As truely as I liue saith the Lorde God, he shall dye at Babylon in the place
where the kyng dwelleth that made hym kyng, whose othe he hath despised, and
whose couenaunt he hath broken.
17 Neither shall Pharao with his great hoast and multitude of people, maintayne
hym in the warre, when they haue cast vp mountes, and buylt a fort to destroy
many persons.
18 For seeing he hath despised the othe and broken the couenaunt, (wheras he yet
gaue his hande therevpon) and done all these thinges, he shall not escape.
19 Therfore thus saith the Lorde God, As truely as I liue I wyll bryng mine othe
that he hath despised, and my couenaunt that he hath broken, vpon his owne head.
20 I wyll spreade my net vpon hym, and he shall be caught in my net: and I wyll
bryng hym to Babylon, and enter into iudgement with him there, for the trespasse
whiche he hath committed against me.
21 As for those that flee from hym, with all his hoast, they shalbe slayne with
the sworde, and the residue shalbe scattred towardes all the windes: and ye
shall knowe that I the Lord haue spoken it.
22 Thus saith the Lorde God, I wyll also take of the top of this hye Cedar, and
wyll set it, and cut of the top of the tender plant thereof, and wyll plant it
vpon an hye hyll and a great.
23 namely vpon the hye hyll of Israel will I plant it, that it may bryng foorth
bowes, and geue fruite, and be an excellent Cedar: and vnder it shall remayne
all byrdes, and euery foule shall remaine vnder the shadowe of the braunches
thereof.
24 And all the trees of the fielde shall knowe that I the Lorde haue brought
downe the hye tree, and exalted the lowe tree, that I haue dryed vp the greene
tree, and made the drye tree to florishe, euen I the Lorde that spake it, haue
also brought it to passe.

Chapter 18

1 The word of the Lord came vnto me, saying:
2 What meane ye by this comon prouerbe that ye vse in the lande of Israel,
saying: The fathers haue eaten sowre grapes, and the chyldrens teeth are set on
edge?
3 As truely as I liue saith the Lorde God, ye shall vse this byworde no more in
Israel.
4 Beholde, all soules are mine, lyke as the soule of the father is mine, so is
the soule of the sonne myne also: the soule that sinneth shall dye it selfe.
5 But if a man be iust, and do that which is lawfull and right:
6 He hath not eaten vpon the hilles, he hath not lift his eyes to the idols of
the house of Israel, neither hath defiled his neighbours wyfe, neither hath come
neare a woman remoued:
7 Neither hath oppressed any man, but hath restored to the detter his pledge: he
that hath not spoyled any by violence, hath geuen his bread to the hungry, and
hath clothed the naked:
8 And hath not geuen foorth vpon vsurie, neither taken any encrease, he hath
withdrawne his hande from iniquitie, and hath executed true iudgement betweene
man and man:
9 And hath walked in my statutes, and kept my iudgementes to deale truely: this
is a righteous man, he shall surely liue, saith the Lorde God.
10 If he nowe get a sonne that is a robber, a shedder of blood, and do any one
of these thinges:
11 Though he do not all these thinges, but either hath eaten vpon the hilles, or
defiled his neighbours wyfe:
12 Or hath oppressed the poore and needie, or spoyled by violence, or hath not
restored the pledge, or hath lyft vp his eyes vnto the idols, or hath committed
abomination:
13 Or hath geuen foorth vpon vsurie, or hath taken encrease: Shall this man
liue? he shall not liue: Seeing he hath done al these abhominations he shal die
the death, his blood shalbe vpon hym.
14 Nowe if this man get a sonne also, that seeth all his fathers sinnes whiche
he hath done, and feareth, neither doth suche like:
15 namely he hath not eaten vpon the hilles, he hath not lift vp his eyes to the
idols of the house of Israel, nor defiled his neighbours wyfe:
16 Neither hath oppressed any, nor hath withholden the pledge, neither hath
spoiled by violence: but hath geuen his bread to the hungry, and hath couered
the naked with a garment:
17 Neither hath withdrawen his hande from the afflicted, nor receaued vsurie nor
encrease, but hath executed my iudgementes, and walked in my statutes: this man
shall not dye in his fathers sinne, but shall liue without fayle.
18 As for his father, because he hath cruelly oppressed and spoyled his brother
by violence, and hath not done good among his people, lo he dyeth in his owne
sinne.
19 And yet say ye, wherfore then should not this sonne beare his fathers sinne?
Because the sonne hath done iudgment and righteousnesse, he hath kept all my
statutes and done them: therefore shall he liue in deede.
20 The same soule that sinneth shall dye, the sonne shall not beare the fathers
iniquitie, neither shall the father beare the sonnes iniquitie: the
righteousnesse of the righteous shalbe vpon hym, and the wickednesse of the
wicked shalbe vpon him selfe also.
21 But if the vngodly wyll turne away from all his sinnes that he hath done, and
kepe all my statutes, and do the thing that is iugdement and right, doubtlesse
he shall liue and not dye.
22 As for all his sinnes that he dyd before they shall not be mentioned vnto
hym: but in his righteousnesse that he hath done, he shall liue.
23 For haue I any pleasure in the death of a sinner saith the Lorde God? shall
he not liue if he returne from his wayes?
24 Agayne, if the righteous turne from his righteousnesse, and do iniquitie, and
shall do according to all the abominations that the wicked man doth: shall he
liue? All the righteousnesse that he hath done shall not be remembred, but in
his transgression that he hath committed, in his sinne that he hath sinned, in
them he shall dye.
25 And yet ye say, the way of the Lorde is not indifferent. Heare therefore ye
house of Israel, is not my way equall? or are not your wayes rather vnequall?
26 When a righteous man turneth away from his righteousnesse, and committeth
iniquitie, and dieth in the same: in his iniquitie whiche he hath committed
shall he dye.
27 Agayne, when the wicked turneth away from his wickednesse that he hath done,
and doth iudgement and right, he shall saue his soule aliue.
28 Because he seeth, and turneth away from all his iniquitie that he hath
committed, he shall surely liue, and not dye.
29 And yet saith the house of Israel, the way of the Lorde is not equall. Are my
wayes vnequall O ye house of Israel? are not your wayes rather vnequall?
30 Therefore I wyll iudge you, euery man according to his wayes, O ye house of
Israel saith the Lorde: returne and bryng your selues agayne from all your
wickednesse, so iniquitie shall not be your destruction.
31 Cast away from you all your transgressions wherby ye haue transgressed, and
make you a newe heart and a newe spirite: for why wyll ye dye O ye house of
Israel?
32 Seing I haue no pleasure in the death of hym that dyeth, saith the Lord God:
bryng agayne your selues then, and ye shall lyue.

Chapter 19

1 Thou also take vp a lamentation for the princes of Israel,
2 And say: wherfore lay thy mother that lionesse among the lions? she norished
her young ones among the lions whelpes.
3 One of her whelpes she brought vp, and it be came a lion, it learned to catche
the pray and to deuour folke.
4 The heathen hearde of hym, and caught hym in their snare, and brought hym in
hookes vnto the lande of Egypt.
5 Nowe when she sawe that she had wayted and her hope was lost, she toke another
of her whelpes and made a lion of hym.
6 Which went among the lions, and became a fearce lion, learned to catche the
pray, and to deuour folke,
7 He destroyed their palaces and made their cities waste, insomuch that the
whole lande and euery thyng therin were vtterly desolate through the voyce of
his roaryng.
8 Then set the heathen together on euery side of the countreis agaynst him,
layde their nettes for him, and toke him in their pit.
9 So they put him in prison in chaynes, and brought him to the kyng of Babylon:
they put him in holdes, that his voyce shoulde no more be hearde vpon the
mountaynes of Israel.
10 As for thy mother, she is like a vine in thy blood, planted by the waters:
she brought foorth fruite and braunches by the aboundaunt waters.
11 And she had strong roddes for the scepters of them that beare rule, and her
stature was exalted on hye among the braunches, & she appeared in her height
with the multitude of her braunches.
12 But she was pluckt vp in wrath, cast out vpon the grounde, the east wynde
dryed vp her fruite her braunches were broken of & withered, as for the roddes
of her strength, the fire consumed them.
13 And nowe she is planted in the wildernesse, in a dry and thirstie grounde.
14 And there is a fire gone out of the rodde of her brauches, it hath deuoured
her fruite, so that she hath no strong rodde for a scepter to rule: This is a
lamentation, and shalbe for a lamentation.

Chapter 20

1 In the seuenth yere the tenth day of the fift moneth, certayne of the elders
of Israel came for to aske counsayle at the Lorde, and sate downe before me.
2 Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto me, saying:
3 Thou sonne of man, speake vnto the elders of Israel, and say vnto them, thus
saith the Lorde God, Are ye come to enquire of me? As truely as I liue I wyll
not be sought of you, saith the Lorde God.
4 Wylt thou not iudge them sonne of man, wylt thou not iudge them? cause them to
vnderstande the abhominations of their fathers.
5 And tell them, thus saith the Lorde God, In the day when I chose Israel, and
lift vp mine hande vpon the seede of the house of Iacob, and was knowen vnto
them in the lande of Egypt, yea when I lift vp mine hande ouer them, and sayde,
I am the Lorde your God:
6 Euen in the day that I lift vp mine hande vnto them, to bryng them out of the
lande of Egypt into a lande that I had prouided for them, which floweth with
mylke and hony, and is pleasaunt among all other landes:
7 The said I vnto them, Cast away euery man the abhominations of his eyes, &
defile not your selues with the idols of Egypt: for I am the Lorde your God.
8 But they rebelled against me, and woulde not hearken vnto me, they dyd not
cast away euery man the abhominations of his eyes, neither dyd they forsake the
idols of Egypt: then I said I woulde powre out mine indignation ouer them, and
accomplishe my wrath vpon them, yea euen in the middest of the lande of Egypt.
9 And I wrought for my names sake that it shoulde not be polluted before the
heathen among whom they were, to whom I was manifestly knowen, in bryngyng them
foorth of the lande of Egypt.
10 Nowe when I had caused them to go out of the lande of Egypt, and brought them
into the wildernesse:
11 I gaue them my statutes, and shewed them my iudgementes: which whoso doeth,
shall lyue in them.
12 I gaue them also my Sabbath dayes to be a token betwixt me and them, and
therby to knowe that I am the Lorde which halowe them.
13 And yet the house of Israel rebelled agaynst me in the wildernesse, they
woulde not walke in my statutes, they haue cast away my iudgementes, which whoso
doth shall lyue in them, and my Sabbath dayes haue they greatly polluted: then I
sayde, I woulde powre out mine indignation vpon them, and consume them in the
wildernesse.
14 And I wrought for my names sake, lest it shoulde be defiled before the
heathen, in whose sight I brought them out.
15 Yet neuerthelesse I lift vp my hande vnto them in the wildernesse, that I
woulde not bring them into the lande which I gaue them, that floweth with mylke
and hony, and is a pleasure of all landes:
16 And that because they cast away my iudgementes and walked not in my statutes:
but haue defiled my Sabbathes: for their heart was gone after their idols.
17 Neuerthelesse mine eye spared them, so that I woulde not destroy them, nor
consume them in the wildernesse.
18 Moreouer, I sayde vnto their sonnes in the wildernesse, Walke not in the
statutes of your fathers, kepe not their iudgementes, and defile not your selues
with their idols.
19 I am the Lord your God, walke in my statutes, kepe my iudgementes, & do the.
20 Halowe my Sabbathes, for they are a token betwixt me and you: that ye may
knowe howe that I am the Lord your God.
21 Notwithstandyng, their sonnes rebelled agaynst me also, they walked not in my
statutes, they kept not my iudgementes to fulfyll them, which he that doth shall
liue in them, they prophaned my Sabbath dayes: and I sayde, I woulde powre out
mine indignation ouer them, and accomplishe my wrath vpon them in the
wildernesse.
22 Neuerthelesse, I withdrewe my hand and wrought for my names sake, lest it
shoulde be defiled in the sight of the heathen, before whom I had brought them
foorth.
23 I lift vp my hande to them also in the wildernesse, that I would scatter them
among the heathen, and strawe them among the nations:
24 Because they had not kept my iudgementes, but cast aside my statutes and
broken my Sabbathes, and their eyes were after their fathers idols.
25 Wherfore I gaue them also statutes that were not good, and iudgementes wherin
they shoulde not lyue.
26 And I defiled them in their owne giftes, in that they caused all that openeth
the wombe to passe, that I might destroy them, that they might knowe howe that I
am the Lorde.
27 Therfore speake vnto the house of Israel thou sonne of man, and thou shalt
say vnto them, Thus saith the Lord God: yet in this also your fathers haue
blasphemed me, and greeuously transgressed agaynst me:
28 For after I had brought them into the lande, for the which I lifted vp my
hande to geue it vnto them, when they sawe euery hie hil, & all thicke trees,
they offered there their sacrifices, & there they presented their offering of
anger, there also they made their sweete sauours, and powred out their wine
offerynges.
29 And I sayde vnto them, What is that hye place whervnto ye resort? and the
name of it is called Bamah vnto this day.
30 Wherfore speake vnto the house of Israel, thus saith the Lorde God, Are ye
not defiled in the waies of your fathers, and commit ye not whoredome after
their abhominations?
31 For when ye offer your giftes, & make your sonnes to passe through the fire,
you are polluted with all your idols vnto this day: shall I aunswere you when I
am asked, O house of Israel? As I liue saith the Lorde God, I wyll not be sought
of you.
32 And that which commeth into your mynde shall not be at all, which you say, We
wyll be as the gentiles, as the kinredes of countreis, to serue wood and stone.
33 As truely as I lyue saith the Lorde God, I my selfe wyll rule you with a
mightie hande, with a stretched out arme, and with indignation powred out ouer
you.
34 And I wyll bryng you from the people, and gather you out of the countreis
wherin ye are scattered, with a mightie hande, with a stretched out arme, and
with indignation powred out.
35 And I wyll bryng you into the wildernesse of the people, & there I wyll be
iudged with you face to face.
36 Like as I pleaded with your fathers in the wildernesse of Egypt: so wyll I
pleade with you also, saith the Lorde God.
37 I wyll cause you to passe vnder the rodde, and I wyll bryng you into the
bonde of the couenaunt.
38 And I wyll purge out of you the rebelles, & them that transgresse against me,
and bryng them out of the lande of their habitation: as for the lande of Israel
they shall not come in it, that you may knowe howe that I am the Lord.
39 As for you O house of Israel, thus saith the Lorde God, Go you and serue
euery man his idols, seyng that ye obey not me: and pollute no more my holy name
with your giftes and your idols.
40 For vpon my holy hyll, euen vpon the hye hyll of Israel saith the Lord God,
shall all the house of Israel, and all that is in the lande worship me: and in
the same place wyll I fauour them, & there wyll I require your heaue offerynges,
and the firstlinges of your oblations, with all your holy thinges.
41 I wyll accept your sweete sauour, when I bryng you from the nations, & gather
you together out of the landes wherin ye haue ben scattered, that I may be
halowed in you before the heathen.
42 And ye shall knowe that I am the Lorde, when I shall bring you into the lande
of Israel, into the lande for the which I lift vp my hande to geue it vnto your
fathers.
43 There shall ye call to rembraunce your owne wayes, and all your workes wherin
ye haue ben defiled, and ye shalbe cut of in your owne sight for all your
wickednesse that ye haue done.
44 And ye shall knowe that I am the Lorde, when I deale with you for my names
sake, and not after your wicked wayes, nor accordyng to your corrupt workes O ye
house of Israel, saith the Lorde God.
45 Moreouer, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
46 Thou sonne of man, set thy face towarde the way of Themanah, and drop thy
worde towarde the south, and prophecie towarde the forest of the south fielde.
47 And say to the forest of the south, Heare the worde of the Lord, thus saith
the Lorde God, Beholde I wyll kindle a fire in thee, that shall consume all the
greene trees, with all the dry: the continuall flambe shall not be quenched, and
euery face from the south to the north shalbe burnt therin.
48 And all fleshe shall see that I the Lorde haue kindled it, and it shall not
be quenched.
49 Then sayde I, Ah Lorde God, they say of me, Doth not he speake parables?

Chapter 21

1 The worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
2 Thou sonne of man, set thy face towarde Hierusalem, and drop thy worde towarde
the holy places, and prophecie agaynst the lande of Israel.
3 Say to the lande of Israel, thus saith the Lorde, Beholde I am against thee,
and wyll drawe my sworde out of the sheath, and cut of from thee both the
righteous and the wicked.
4 Seyng then that I wyll cut of from thee both the righteous and the wicked:
therfore shall my sworde go out of his sheath agaynst all fleshe from the south
to the north,
5 That all fleshe may knowe howe that I the Lorde haue drawne my sworde out of
the sheath, and it shall not be put in agayne.
6 Mourne therfore O thou sonne of man, yea euen with the breakyng of thy loynes,
mourne bitterly in their presence.
7 And if they say vnto thee, wherfore mournest thou? Then tell them, for the
tidinges that commeth: All heartes shall melt, all handes shalbe letten downe,
all stomackes shal faynt, and all knees shall go as water: beholde it commeth,
and shalbe brought to passe, saith the Lorde God.
8 Agayne, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
9 Thou sonne of man, prophecie and speake, thus saith the Lorde God, Speake, the
sworde the sworde is sharpened and well furbished.
10 Sharpened is it to make a great slaughter, and furbished that it may glitter:
Shall we then make mirth? It contemneth the rodde of my sonne as all other
trees.
11 He hath geuen it to be furbished, to holde it in the hande: this sworde is
sharpened, and furbished, to geue it into the hande of the slayer.
12 Crye and houle sonne of man, for it commeth vpon my people it commeth vpon
all the princes of Israel: the terrours of the sworde shalbe vpon my people,
smite therfore thou vpon thy thygh.
13 Because it is a triall: and what if it contemne the rodde? It shalbe no more
saith the Lorde.
14 Prophecie thou sonne of man, & smite thy handes together, & let the sworde be
doubled thrise, euen the sworde of the great slaughter, entryng into their
priuie chaumbers,
15 To make them faynt at the heartes, and to multiplie their falles, in all
their gates, haue I geuen the terrour of the sworde: Ah it is made bright, and
dressed for the slaughter.
16 Get thee one way or other, either vpon the right hande or vpon the left,
whyther soeuer thy face turneth.
17 I will smite my handes together also, and make my wrathfull indignation to
rest: euen I the Lorde haue sayde it.
18 The worde of the Lorde came yet vnto me agayne, saying:
19 Thou sonne of man, appoynt thee two wayes, that the sworde of the king of
Babylon may come: Both these wayes shal go out of one lande, and choose thee a
place, at the head of the citie wayes choose it.
20 Appoynt a way that the sworde may come towarde Rabbath of the Ammonites, and
towarde Iuda in the defenced Hierusalem.
21 For the kyng of Babylon stoode at the partyng of the wayes, at the head of
the two wayes, consultyng by diuination, he made his arrowes bright, consulted
with images, & lookt in the liuer.
22 At his right hande was the soothsaying for Hierusalem, to appoynt captaynes,
to open their mouth to the slaughter, and to lift vp their voice with the
alarum, to set battle rammes agaynst the gates, to cast a bulwarke, and to
builde a fort.
23 And it shalbe vnto them as a false diuination in their sight, for the othes
made vnto them: but he wyll call to remembraunce their iniquitie, to the intent
they may be taken.
24 Therfore thus saith the Lorde God, Because ye haue made your iniquitie to be
remebred in discoueryng your transgressions, so that in all your workes your
sinnes might appeare, because ye are come to remembraunce, ye shalbe taken by
hande.
25 O thou shamefull wicked prince of Israel, whose day is come, euen when
wickednesse shall haue an ende,
26 Thus saith the Lorde God, I wyll take away the Diademe, and put of the
crowne: this shalbe no more the same, I wyll exalt the humble, and abase him
that is hye.
27 Ouerthrowen, ouerthrowen, ouerthrowen wyll I put it, and it shall not be,
vntyll he come to whom the iudgement belongeth, and to whom I haue geuen it.
28 And thou O sonne of man, prophecie and speake, Thus saith the Lorde God to
the children of Ammon, and to their blasphemie, speake thou: The sworde, the
sworde is drawen foorth alredy to slaughter, and furbished to consume because of
the glitteryng:
29 Whiles they see vnto thee vanitie, and deuine a lye vnto thee, to put thee
with the neckes of the wicked that be slayne, whose day is come when their
iniquitie shall haue an ende.
30 Shoulde I cause it to returne into his sheath? In the place where thou wast
created, in the lande of thine habitation wyll I iudge thee:
31 And I wyll powre mine indignation vpon thee, and wyll blowe vpon thee in the
fire of my wrath, and deliuer thee into the handes of desperate people, which
are skilfull to destroy.
32 Thou shalt feede the fire, and thy blood shalbe shed in the lande: thou shalt
be put out of remembraunce, for I the Lorde haue spoken it.

Chapter 22

1 Moreouer the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, and sayde,
2 Thou sonne of man, wylt thou not iudge, wylt thou not iudge this blooddy
citie? wylt thou not shewe her all her abhominations?
3 And tell them, thus saith the Lorde God, The citie sheddeth blood in the
middest of it, that her tyme may come, and maketh idols agaynst her selfe, to
defile her selfe.
4 Thou hast made thy selfe giltie in the blood that thou hast shed, and defyled
thee in the idols which thou hast made: thou hast caused thy dayes to drawe nye,
and made the tyme of thy yeres to come: therfore wyll I make thee a reproche
among the heathen, and to be a mockyng in all landes.
5 Whether they be nye or farre from thee, they shall laugh thee to scorne, thou
that hast gotten thee so foule a name, and art full of trouble.
6 Beholde the rulers of Israel, euery one in thee was redy to his power to shed
blood.
7 In thee haue they dispised father and mother, in thee haue they oppressed the
straunger, in thee haue they vexed the widowe and the fatherlesse.
8 Thou hast dispised my holy thynges, and defiled my Sabbathes.
9 Tale tellers are there in thee to shed blood, in thee are such as eate vpon
the hylles, and in thee they commit abhomination.
10 In thee they discouered their fathers shame, in thee they haue humbled her
that was set apart for pollution.
11 Euery man hath dealt shamefully with his neighbours wife, and abhominably
defiled his daughter in lawe, in thee hath euery man forced his owne sister,
euen his fathers daughter.
12 Yea giftes haue ben receaued in thee to shed blood, thou hast taken vsurie
and encrease, thou hast oppressed thy neighbours by extortion, and forgotten me,
saith the Lorde God.
13 Beholde, I haue smitten my handes vpon thy couetousnesse that thou hast vsed,
and vpon the blood which hath ben shed in thee.
14 Is thy heart able to endure? or may thy handes be strenghthened in the dayes
that I shal haue to do with thee? Euen I the Lorde that speake it, wyll bryng it
also to passe.
15 I wyll scatter thee among the heathen, & strawe thee about in the landes, and
wyll cause thy filthinesse to ceasse out of thee.
16 Yea and thou shalt be thine owne inheritaunce in the sight of the heathen,
that thou mayest knowe that I am the Lorde.
17 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
18 Thou sonne of man, the house of Israel is vnto me as drosse: all they are
brasse, tinne, iron, and lead in the middest of the furnace, euen drosse of
siluer are they.
19 Therfore thus saith the Lorde God, Forasmuch as ye all are turned into
drosse, therfore beholde I wyll bryng you together vnto Hierusalem.
20 Lyke as they gather siluer, brasse, iron, tinne, and lead, into the middest
of the furnace, and the fire is blowne there vnder to melt them: euen so wyll I
gather you in mine anger & in my wrath, and let you remayne there and cause you
to melt.
21 I wyll bryng you together, and blowe the fire of my wrath vpon you, and ye
shalbe molten in the middest therof.
22 Lyke as the siluer is molten in the furnace, so shall ye also be molten
therin, that ye may knowe howe that I the Lord haue powred my wrath vpon you.
23 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
24 Thou sonne of man, tell her, Thou art an vncleane lande, which is not rayned
vpon in the day of wrath.
25 There is a conspiracie of her prophetes in the middest therof: as a roring
lion rauenyng his pray, they deuour soules, they haue taken the riche and
pretious thynges, they haue made her many widowes in the middest therof.
26 Her priestes haue broken my lawe, and defiled my holy thynges, they put no
difference betweene the holy & vnholy, neither discerne they betweene the cleane
& vncleane: they turne their eyes from my Sabbathes, and I am defiled among
them.
27 Thy rulers in thee are lyke woolues rauenyng the pray, to shed blood, and
destroy soules, for their owne couetous lucre.
28 As for her prophetes, they daube with vntempered morter, they see vanities,
and diuine lyes vnto them, saying, The Lorde saith so: wheras the Lorde hath not
spoken.
29 The people in the lande vsed wicked extortion and robbery, they vexe the
poore and needy, and oppresse the straunger agaynst right.
30 And I sought among them for a man that woulde make vp the hedge, and set hym
selfe in the gap before me in the landes behalfe, that I shoulde not destroy it:
but I coulde fynde none.
31 Therfore haue I powred out my cruel displeasure vpon them, and consumed them
in the fire of my wrath: their owne wayes wyll I recompence vpon their heades,
saith the Lorde God.

Chapter 23

1 The worde of the Lord came vnto me, saying:
2 Thou sonne of man, there were two women the daughters of one mother.
3 And they committed fornication in Egypt, they played the harlottes in their
youth: there were their breastes pressed, and there they bruised the teates of
their virginitie.
4 The names of them were Aholah the elder, and Aholibah her sister, and they
were mine, and they bare sonnes and daughters: thus were their names, Samaria is
Aholah, and Hierusalem Aholibah.
5 Aholah played ye harlot when she was mine, and she was set on fire with her
louers the Assyrians her neighbours:
6 Which were clothed with blewe silke, both captaynes and princes, they were all
pleasaunt young men, and horsemen rydyng vpon horses.
7 Thus she committed her whordome with them beyng all chosen men of Asshur, &
with all on whom she doted, and defiled her selfe with all their idols.
8 Neither left she the fornication that she vsed with the Egyptians: for in her
youth they lay with her, they bruised the brestes of her maydenhead, and powred
their whordome vpon her.
9 Wherfore I deliuered her into the handes of her louers euen into ye handes of
the Assyrians vpon whom she doted.
10 These discouered her shame, toke her sonnes & daughters, and slue her with
the sworde, an euyll name had she among women: for they had executed iudgement
vpon her.
11 Her sister Aholibah sawe this, and destroyed her selfe with inordinate loue
more then she, & with her fornications, more the her sister with her
fornications.
12 She doted vpo the Assyrians captaines & princes her neighbours, clothed with
all maner of gorgious apparel, horsmen riding vpon horses, beyng all pleasaunt
young men.
13 Then I sawe that she was defiled, and they toke both one way.
14 But the encreased styll in whordome: for when she sawe men paynted vpon the
wall, the images of the Chaldees paynted with vermilon,
15 And girded with girdles vpon their loynes and with dyed attire vpon their
heades, lokyng all like princes, after the maner of the Babylonians in Chaldea,
the lande where they were borne.
16 Assoone as she sawe them, she burnt in loue vpon them, & sent messengers vnto
them into the lande of the Chaldees.
17 Nowe when the Babylonians came vnto her in the bed of loue, they defiled her
with their whordome: and so was she polluted with them, and her lust was abated
from them.
18 And she discouered her whordome, and disclosed her shame: then my heart
forsoke her, like as my heart was gone from her sister also.
19 Neuerthelesse, she encreased her whordome more, and remembred the dayes of
her youth wherin she had played the harlot in the lande of Egypt.
20 She burnt in lust vpon their concubines, whose fleshe was like the fleshe of
asses, and their issue like the issue of horses.
21 Thus thou hast called to remebraunce the filthinesse of thy youth, when thy
teates were bruised by the Egyptians, for the pappes of thy youth.
22 Therfore O Aholibah, thus saith the Lorde God, I wyll raise vp thy louers
agaynst thee from whom thy heart is departed, and gather them together agaynst
thee on euery syde,
23 namely the Babylonians and all the Chaldees, rulers, wealthy and mightie men,
with all the Assyrians, all pleasaut young men, captaynes and princes, all
valiaunt and renowmed, riding vpon horses.
24 These shall come vpon thee with charrettes, wagons, and wheeles, and great
multitude of people, with buckler, shielde, and helmet they shall beser thee on
euery side: I wyll geue iudgement before them, yea they them selues shall iudge
thee accordyng to their owne iudgement.
25 I wyll lay mine indignation vpon thee, so that they shal deale cruelly with
thee: they shall cut of thy nose and thine eares, and thy remnaunt shall fall by
the sworde, they shall cary away thy sonnes and daughters, and the residue
shalbe deuoured by the fire.
26 They shal strip thee out of thy clothes, and take away thy faire iewels.
27 Thus wyll I make thy wickednesse to ceasse from thee, and thy fornication out
of the lande of Egypt: so that thou shalt turne thine eyes no more after them,
and cast thy mynde no more vpon Egypt.
28 For thus saith the Lord God, Beholde I wyll deliuer thee into the handes of
them whom thou hatest, yea euen into the handes of them from whom thine heart is
departed.
29 And they shall deale hatefully with thee, and take away all thy labour, &
leaue thee naked & bare, and the shame of thy fornications shalbe discouered,
both thy wickednesse & thy whordome.
30 I wyll do these thynges vnto thee, because thou hast gone a whoryng after the
heathen, and because thou art polluted with their idols.
31 Thou hast walked in the way of thy sister, therfore wyll I geue her cuppe in
thine hande.
32 Thus saith the Lorde God, Thou shalt drynke of thy sisters cuppe, deepe &
large, thou shalt be laughed to scorne, and had in derision, because it
conteineth much.
33 Thou shalt be filled with drunkennesse and sorowe euen with the cup of
destruction and desolation, with the cup of thy sister Samaria.
34 Thou shalt drynke it and sucke it out, and thou shalt breake the sheardes
therof, and teare thine owne brestes: for I haue spoken it, saith the Lorde God.
35 Therfore thus saith the Lorde God, Forasmuch as thou hast forgotten me, and
cast me aside behynde thy backe, so beare nowe thine owne wickednesse and
whordome.
36 The Lorde sayde moreouer vnto me, Thou sonne of man, wilt thou not iudge
Aholah and Aholibah? shewe them their abhominations.
37 namely that they haue broken their wedlocke, and blood is in their handes:
and with their idols haue they comitted adulterie, and haue also caused their
sonnes whom they bare vnto me, to passe by the fire to be their meate.
38 Yea and this haue they done vnto me also, they haue defiled my sanctuarie in
the same day, and haue prophaned my Sabbathes.
39 For when they had slayne their children for their idols, they came the same
day into my sanctuarie to defile it: and lo thus haue they done in my house.
40 And howe much more is it that they sent for men to come from farre, vnto whom
a messenger was sent, and lo they came? for whom thou didst washe thy selfe, and
paynted thine eyes, and deckedst thee with ornamentes.
41 Thou sattest vpon a stately bed, and a table spread before it, whervpon thou
hast set mine incense and mine sylc.
42 And a noyse of a mery company at it, and with the men, beside the multitude
of the people, were brought men of Saba out of the desert, which gaue them
bracelettes vpon their handes, and beautifull crownes vpon their heades.
43 And I sayd vnto her that was worne in her adulteries, Nowe shall her
fornications come to an ende, and she also.
44 And they went in to her as they go vnto a common harlot: euen so went they I
say to Aholah and Aholibah, those wicked women.
45 And the righteous men, they shall iudge the after the maner of harlottes, and
after the maner of murtherers: for they are harlottes, and blood is in their
handes.
46 Wherfore thus saith the Lorde God, I wyll bryng a great multitude of people
vpon them, and geue them to be scattered and spoyled:
47 And the multitude shall stone them with stones, and cut them downe with their
swordes, they shall slay their sonnes and daughters, and burne vp their houses
with fire.
48 Thus wyll I cause wickednesse to ceasse out of the lande, that all women may
be taught, not to do after your wickednesse.
49 And so they shal lay your wickednesse vpon your owne selues, and the sinnes
of your idols shall ye beare: and ye shall knowe that I am the Lorde God.

Chapter 24

1 In the ninth yere, in the tenth moneth, the tenth day of the moneth, came the
worde of the Lorde vnto me, saying:
2 O thou sonne of man, write the name of this day, yea euen of this present day:
for the kyng of Babylon set hym selfe agaynst Hierusalem this selfe same day.
3 Shewe the rebellious house a parable, and speake vnto them, thus saith the
Lorde God: Prepare a pot, set it on, and powre water into it.
4 Gather the peeces therof into it, euery good peece, the thygh and the
shoulder, & fyll it with the chiefe bones.
5 Take one of the best sheepe, & a heape of bones vnder it: let it boyle well,
and let the bones therof seeth well therin.
6 With that sayde the Lorde God on this maner, Wo vnto the blooddy citie, to the
pot whose scumme is therin, & whose scumme is not gone out of it: bryng it out
peece by peece, let no lot fall vpon it.
7 For her blood is yet in it, vpon a hygh drye stone hath she powred it: and not
vpon the grounde, that it myght be couered with dust.
8 That it might cause wrath to arise, and take vengeaunce: I haue set her blood
vpon a high drye rocke, that it shoulde not be couered.
9 Wherefore thus sayth the Lorde God: O wo be vnto the bloodthirstie citie, for
whom euen I my selfe wil make a great fire,
10 And set much wood, and kindle the fire, and seeth the fleshe, & spice the
pot, so that the very bones shalbe brent.
11 Moreouer, I will set the pot emptie vpo the coales, so that the brasse
thereof may be hot and burnt, and the filthynesse of it may be molten in it, and
the scum of it shalbe consumed.
12 She hath weeried her selfe with labour, yet her great scum is not gone of
her, in the fire her scum must be consumed.
13 In thy filthynesse is wickednesse: because I would haue purged thee, and thou
wast not purged, from thy filthynesse thou shalt not be purged any more, till I
haue caused myne indignation to rest in thee.
14 Euen I the Lorde haue spoken it: yea it is come therto all redy that I will
do it, I will not go backe, I will not spare, I will not repent: but according
to thy wayes and imaginations shall they iudge thee, sayth the Lorde God.
15 And the worde of the Lord came vnto me, saying:
16 Thou sonne of man, behold I wil take away from thee the pleasure of thyne
eyes with a plague, yet shalt thou neither mourne nor weepe, neither shal thy
teares run downe.
17 Mourne in scilens, make no mourning of the dead, bynde the tyre of thy head
vpon thee, and put on thy shoes vpon thy feete, couer not thy lippes, and eate
no mans bread.
18 So I spake vnto the people betymes in the morning, & at euen my wife dyed:
then vpon the next morowe I dyd as I was commaunded.
19 And the people sayd vnto me: Wilt thou not tell vs what this signifieth
towarde vs, that thou doest so?
20 I aunswered them, The word of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
21 Tell the house of Israel, thus sayth the Lorde God: Beholde, I will pollute
my sanctuarie, euen the glorie of your power, the pleasure of your eyes, and
your heartes delite: & your sonnes and daughters whom ye haue left, shall fall
through the sworde.
22 Like as I haue done, so shall ye do also: ye shall not couer your lippes, ye
shall eate no mans bread.
23 And your tire shalbe vpon your heades, and your shoes vpon your feete: ye
shall neither mourne nor weepe, but ye shall pyne away in your iniquities, &
mourne one towardes another.
24 Thus Ezechiel is your shewtoken, according to all that he hath done, ye shall
do: when it commeth, then ye shal know that I am the Lorde God.
25 Also thou sonne of man, shall it not be in the day when I take from the their
power, the ioy of their honour, the pleasure of their eyes, and the lifting vp
of their soules, their sonnes & their daughters,
26 In that day shall come one that is escaped, vnto thee,  and bring it to the
hearing of
27 In that day shall thy mouth be opened to him which is escaped, that thou
mayst speake & be no more dumbe: yea thou shalt be their shewtoken, that they
may knowe how that I am the Lorde.

Chapter 25

1 The worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
2 Thou sonne of man, set thy face toward the Ammonites, and prophecie vpon them.
3 And say vnto the Ammonites: heare the worde of the Lorde God, thus sayth the
Lorde God: Forsomuch as thou saydest Haha ouer my sanctuarie because it was
polluted, and ouer the land of Israel because it was desolate, and ouer the
house of Iuda because they went into captiuitie:
4 Beholde therfore, I wil deliuer thee to the people of the cast, that they may
haue thee in possession: these shall settle their palaces in thee, and make
their dwellinges in thee, they shall eate thy fruite, and drinke vp thy milke.
5 As for Rabbath, I will make of it a stable for camels, and of the Ammonites a
sheepfolde: and ye shall knowe that I am the Lorde.
6 For thus sayth the Lorde God: Insomuch as thou hast clapped with thyne handes,
and stamped with thy feete, yea and reioyced ouer the lande of Israel with all
thy despite in heart:
7 Behold therfore I wil stretche out my hande ouer thee, and deliuer thee to be
spoyled of the heathen, & roote thee out from among the people, and cause thee
to perishe out of the landes: yea I will make thee to be destroyed, that thou
mayest know that I am the Lorde.
8 Thus sayth the Lord God: Forsomuch as Moab and Seir do say, Beholde the house
of Iuda is like as all gentiles be:
9 Therfore behold, I will open the side of Moab from the cities, from his cities
I say of his frontiers, the pleasures of the countrey as namely Bethiesimoth,
Baalmeon, and Kiriathaim:
10 Unto the children of the east against the Ammonites, and will geue it into
possession, so that the Ammonites shall no more be had in remembraunce among the
heathen.
11 And I will execute iudgementes vpon Moab, and they shall knowe that I am the
Lorde.
12 Thus sayth the Lorde God: For that Edom hath done in auenging reuengement
vpon the house of Iuda, & hath done great offence and auenged hym selfe vpon
them:
13 Therfore thus sayth the Lord God, I wil reache out myne hand vpon Edom, and
destroy man and beast out of it, I will make it desolate from Theman, & Dedanah
shall fall by the sworde.
14 And I will execute my reuengement vpon Edom by the hande of my people Israel,
they shall do in Edom according to my wrath and indignation, so that they shall
knowe my vengeaunce, sayth the Lord God.
15 Thus sayth the Lorde God: For that the Philistines dyd in vengeaunce, namely
in auenging reuengement, with a dispyteful heart to destroy it for the old
enmitie:
16 Therfore thus saith the Lord God, Behold I will stretche out my hande ouer
the Philistines, and destroy the Cerethites, and cause all the remnaunt of the
sea coast to perishe:
17 A great vengeaunce will I take vpon them, with punishements of my wrath, that
they may knowe that I am the Lord, when I shal lay my vengeaunce vpon them.

Chapter 26

1 And it came to passe in the eleuenth yere, the first day of the moneth, the
word of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
2 Thou sonne of man, because that Tyre hath spoken vpon Hierusalem, Haha, the
gates of the people is broken, it is turned vnto me, for now that she is
destroyed, I shalbe filled:
3 Therfore thus sayth the Lord God, Behold O Tyre, I will vpon thee, I wil raise
vp many nations against thee, like as whe the sea ariseth with his waues.
4 They shal breake the walles of Tyre, & cast downe her towres, I will scrape
her dust fro her, & make her a drie rocke.
5 She shalbe for a spreading of nettes in the sea, for I haue spoken it, sayth
the Lord God, and she shalbe for a spoyle to the nations.
6 Her daughters that are in the fielde shalbe slayne with the sworde, that they
may knowe how that I am the Lorde.
7 For thus sayth the Lord God: Behold, I will bring vpon Tyrus, Nabuchodonozor
king of Babylon from the north, a king of kinges, with horses, charets,
horsemen, with a multitude, and much people.
8 Thy daughters that are in the field shal he slay with the sword: but against
thee he shal make bulwarkes, & cast a mount against thee, and lift vp his speare
against thee.
9 He shall set engins of warre before hym against thy walles, & with his weapons
breake downe thy towres.
10 The dust of his horses shall couer thee they shalbe so many: thy walles shall
shake at the noyse of the horsemen, wheeles & chariots, when he shal enter into
thy gates, as into the entry of a citie broken downe.
11 With the hoofes of his horses shall he treade downe al thy streetes, he shall
slay the people with the sworde, dna the pillers of thy strength shall fall
downe to the grounde.
12 They shall rob thy riches, and spoyle thy marchaundise, thy walles shall they
breake downe, and destroy thy houses of pleasure, thy stones, thy timber, and
dust shall they cast into the mids of the water.
13 Thus will I cause the sounde of thy songues to ceasse, and the noyse of thy
harpes shall no more be hearde.
14 I wil bring thee into a drie rocke, thou shalt be for a spreading of nettes,
thou shalt neuer be buylt againe: for euen I the Lord haue spoken it, saith the
Lord God.
15 Thus hath the Lord God spoken concerning Tyre: Shall not the iles tremble at
the noyse of thy fall, and at the crie of the wounded, when they shalbe slaine &
murthered in the mids of thee?
16 All princes of the sea shal come downe from their thrones, they shall lay
away their robes, & put of their broidred garmentes, yea with trembling shall
they be clothed, they shal sit vpon the ground, they shalbe astonished at euery
moment, and be amased at thee.
17 They shall mourne for thee, and say vnto thee: How art thou destroyed that
wast inhabited of the seas, the renowmed citie, whiche was strong in the sea,
she and her inhabitauntes, whiche caused their feare to be on all that haunted
therin?
18 Now shall the inhabitours of the iles be astonished in the day of thy fall:
yea the iles that are in the sea shalbe troubled at thy departure.
19 For thus sayth the Lord God: when I make thee a desolate citie, as other
cities be that no man dwell in, and when I bring vp the deepe vpon thee, that
great waters may couer thee:
20 Then wil I cast thee downe vnto them that descend into the pit, vnto a people
of olde time, and set thee in a lande that is beneath, like the olde ruynes,
with them which go downe to the graue, so that no man shall dwell more in thee:
but I wil reserue honour for the land of the liuing:
21 I will make thee terrors, and thou shalt be no more: though thou be sought
for, yet shalt thou not be founde for euermore, sayth the Lorde God.

Chapter 27

1 The worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
2 O thou sonne of man, take vp a lamentable complaint vpon Tyre,
3 And say vnto Tyre that is situate at the entry of the sea, whiche is the mart
of the people for many iles, thus sayth the Lorde God O Tyre, thou hast sayde, I
am of perfite beautie.
4 Thy borders are in the mids of the seas, thy buylders haue made perfite thy
beautie.
5 They haue made all thy ship bordes of firre trees of Shenir, from Libanus haue
they taken Cedar trees to make thee mastes:
6 And the Okes of Basan to make thee ores, they haue made thy benches of iuory,
gotten in Assyria, brought out of the iles of Chittim.
7 Fine linnen with broidred worke out of Egypt was spread ouer thee to be thy
sayle: blewe silke and purple out of the iles of Elishah was thy couering.
8 The inhabitours of Sidon and Aruad were thy mariners: and thy wise men O Tyre,
that were in thee, were thy shipmaisters.
9 The auncient and wyse men of Gebal were in thee, thy stoppers of chinkes: all
shippes of the sea with their shipmen were in thee, to occupie thy marchaundise.
10 The Perses, Lydians, and Phutens were in thy armies, thy men of warre: these
haged vp their shieldes & helmets in thee, these set foorth thyne honour.
11 They of Aruad were with thyne hoast round about thy walles, and the
Pygmenians were thy watchmen vpon thy towres: these hanged vp their quiuers
round about thy walles, they made thy beautie perfite.
12 They of Tharsis were thy marchauntes for the multitude of all riches, in
siluer, iron, tin, and lead, whiche they brought to thy faires.
13 Iauan, Tubal, and Mesech were thy marchauntes concerning the lyues of men,
and they brought vessels of brasse for thy marchaundise.
14 They of the house of Thogarma brought vnto thee at the time of thy marte,
horses, coursers, and mules.
15 They of Dedan were thy marchaunts, and many iles the marchaundise of thy
handes, & brought thee hornes, teeth, and Hebenus, for presentes.
16 They of Aram were thy marchauntes for the multitude of thy workes, and
occupied in thy fayres with emeraudes, purple, broidred worke, fine linnen,
coral, and pearle.
17 Iuda and the land of Israel occupied with thee, & brought vnto thy markets
wheat of Minnith & Pannag, hony, oyle, and triacle.
18 Damascus also vsed marchaundise with thee, in the wine of Helbon, and whyte
wooll: because thyne occupying was so great, and thy wares so many.
19 Dan, Iauan, & Meuzal haue brought vnto thy markets wrougth iron, Cassia, and
Calamus were among thy marchaundise.
20 They of Dedan were thy marchauntes in precious clothes for chariots.
21 Arabia and all the princes of Cedar haue occupied with thee, in weathers,
rammes, and goates: in these were they thy marchauntes.
22 The marchauntes of Seba and Rema haue occupied also with thee, in al chiefe
spices, in all precious stones and golde, which they brought vnto thy markets.
23 Haran, Chenne, and Eden, the marchauntes of Seba, Assyria, and Chelmad were
doers with thee:
24 These were thy marchauntes in all sortes of thinges, in rayment of blewe
silke, and of broidred worke, and in coffers for the riche apparell, whiche were
trussed with coardes, and Cedar boorde among thy marchaundise.
25 The ships of Tharsis were the chiefe of thyne occupying: thus thou wast
replenished and in great worship, euen in the mids of the sea.
26 Thy rowers haue brought thee into great waters, the east wind hath broken
thee in the mids of the sea.
27 Thy riches, and thy fayres, thy marchaundise, thy mariners, & shipmasters,
thy calkars, and the occupiers of thy marchaundise, and al thy men of warre that
are in thee, and all thy multitude that is in the mids of thee, shall fal in the
mids of the sea, in the day of thy fall.
28 The suburbes shal shake at the loude crie of thy shipmen.
29 All that handle the ore, mariners, and all shipmaisters of the sea, shall
come downe from their ships, and stand vpon the lande.
30 And they shall cause their voyce to be heard against thee, and shall crye
bitterly, and shall cast dust vpon their heades, and wallowe in the asshes.
31 They shal make them selues bauld for thee, and girde them with sackcloth, &
they shal weepe for thee, with sorowefull heart, and bitter mourning.
32 And they shall take vp a lamentation for thee in their mourning, and lament
ouer thee, what citie is like Tyrus so destroyed in the mids of the sea?
33 When thy wares went foorth of the seas, thou filledst many people: the kinges
of the earth hast thou made riche, thorowe the multitude of thy riches and
marchaundise.
34 When thou shalt be broken by the seas in the deapthes of the waters, thy
marchaundise & all thy multitude that was in the mids of thee, shall fall.
35 All the inhabitauntes of the iles shalbe astonied at thee, and all their
kinges shalbe sore afrayde, and troubled in their countenaunce.
36 The marchauntes of the nations shall hisse at thee: thou shalt be a terrour,
and shalt neuer be any more.

Chapter 28

1 The worde of the Lord came vnto me, saying:
2 Thou sonne of man, tel the prince of Tyre, thus sayth the Lorde God: Because
thou hast a proude heart, and hast said, I am a God, I sit in the seate of God,
in the mids of the sea: wher as thou art but a man, and not God, though thou set
thyne heart as the heart of God.
3 Beholde, thou thinkest thy selfe wyser then Daniel, that there is no secretes
hyd from thee.
4 With thy wisdome and thine vnderstanding thou hast gotten thee great
welthines, & gathered treasure of siluer & gold.
5 With thy great wysedome and occupying hast thou encreased thy power, and
because of thy great riches thy heart is proude.
6 Therfore thus sayth the Lorde God, Forsomuch as thou hast set thyne heart as
the heart of God:
7 Behold, I will bring straungers vpon thee, euen the terrible nations, these
shal drawe out their swordes vpon the beautie of thy wysdome, and shall defile
thy glorie.
8 They shall cast thee downe to the pit, so that thou shalt dye the death of
them that be slayne in the mids of the sea.
9 Wilt thou say then before them that slay thee, I am a God? where as thou art
but a man, and not God, in the handes of them that slay thee.
10 Die shalt thou the death of the vncircumcized in the handes of the
straungers: for I haue spoken it, sayth the Lorde God.
11 Moreouer, the worde of the Lord came vnto me, saying:
12 Thou sonne of man, take vp a lamentation vpon the king of Tyre, & tel him,
thus sayth the Lord God: Thou sealest vp the summe, full of wysdome, & perfite
beautie.
13 Thou hast ben in the pleasaunt garden of God, thou art deckt with all maner
of precious stones, with ruby, topas, diamond, thurkis, onyx, iasper, saphir,
emeralde, carbuncle, and golde: the workemanship of thy timbrels and of thy
pipes that be in thee, was prepared in the day that thou wast created.
14 Thou art an annoynted Cherub, that couereth, and I haue set thee in this
dignitie, thou wast vpon the holy mount of God, thou hast walked in the mids of
the stones of fire.
15 From the time of thy creation thou haste ben perfite in the wayes, till
wickednesse was founde in thee.
16 By the multitude of thy marchaundise they haue filled the mids of thee with
crueltie, & thou haste sinned: I will cast thee as prophane out of the mount of
God, & I will destroy thee O couering Cherub, from the mids of the stones of
fire.
17 Thy heart was proude in thy beautie, and thorowe thy brightnesse thou hast
destroyed thy wisdome: I will cast thee downe to the grounde, I will lay thee
before kinges, that they may beholde thee.
18 Thou hast defiled thy sanctification with the great wickednesse of thyne
vnrighteous occupying: I will bring a fire from the middest of thee to consume
thee, and will make thee to asshes vpon the earth, in the sight of all them that
loke vpon thee.
19 Al they that haue ben acquainted with thee among the heathen shalbe abashed
at thee: thou hast ben a terrour, and neuer shalt thou be any more.
20 And the word of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
21 Thou sonne of man, set thy face against Sidon, and prophecie vpon it,
22 And speake, thus sayth the Lord God: Beholde O Sidon, I will vpon thee, aud I
wilbe glorified in thee: that it may be knowen howe that I am the Lord when I
shal haue executed iudgementes in her, & shalbe sanctified in her.
23 For I will sende pestilence and bloodsheding into her streetes, and the
slayne shall fall in the mids of her, by the sword comming vpon her on euery
side: & they shall knowe that I am the Lorde.
24 They shalbe no more a pricking thorne vnto the house of Israel, nor a
greeuous thorne of al that are round about them and despised them: and they shal
knowe that I am the Lorde God.
25 Thus sayth the Lorde God: When I gather the houshold of Israel together
againe from the nations among whom they be scattered, then shall I be sanctified
in them in the sight of the gentiles, and they shall dwell in the lande that I
gaue to my seruaunt Iacob.
26 They shal dwell with confidence therin, buyld houses and plant vineyardes:
yea with confidence shall they dwell therin, when I haue executed iudgementes
vpon all those that despise them rounde about: and then shal they know that I am
the Lorde their God.

Chapter 29

1 In the tenth yere, vpon the twelft day of the tenth moneth, the worde of the
Lorde came vnto me, saying:
2 Thou sonne of man, set thy face against Pharao the king of Egypt, prophecie
against him, and against the whole lande of Egypt.
3 Speake & tell him, thus sayth the Lord God: Beholde O Pharao thou king of
Egypt, I will vpon thee thou great dragon that lyeth in the mids of his riuers,
thou that sayst, The riuer is mine, I haue made it for my selfe.
4 I wil put hookes in thy chawes, and hang the fishe in thy riuers vpon thy
skales: after that I will drawe thee out of thy riuers, yea and all the fishe of
thy riuers shall hang vpon thy skales.
5 I will leaue thee in the wildernesse, both thee and all the fishe of thy
riuers: thou shalt fall vpon the open fielde, thou shalt not be brought
together, nor gathered: I haue geuen thee for meate to the beastes of the
fielde, & to the foules of the ayre,
6 That all they which dwell in Egypt may know that I am the Lord, because they
haue ben a staffe of reede to the house of Israel.
7 When they toke hold of thee with their hand, thou brakest & rent all their
shoulder: & when they leaned vpon thee, thou brakest and madest all their loynes
to stande vpright.
8 Therefore thus sayth the Lorde God: Behold, I wil bring a sword vpon thee, &
destroy out of thee both man and beast.
9 Yea the lande of Egypt shalbe desolate and waste, and they shall knowe that I
am the Lorde, because he sayde, The riuer is myne, I my selfe haue made it.
10 Beholde therefore I will vpon thee and vpon thy riuers, I will make the land
of Egypt vtterly waste and desolate, from the towre of Seueneh vnto the borders
of Ethiopia.
11 No foote of man shall passe by it, nor foote of beast shall passe by it,
neither shall it be inhabited fourtie yeres.
12 I wil make the land of Egypt to be desolate among other waste countreys, and
her cities destroyed fourtie yeres among other destroyed cities: and I will
scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and strawe them thorow the countreys.
13 Againe, thus sayth the Lorde God: when the fourtie yeres are expired, I will
gather the Egyptians together againe out of the nations among whom they were
scattered.
14 And I will bring the captiuitie of Egypt againe, and cause them to returne
into the lande of Pathros, the lande of their habitation, and they shalbe there
a small kingdome.
15 Yea it shalbe the smallest among other kingdomes, neither shall it exalt it
selfe any more aboue the nations: for I wil so minishe them, that they shall no
more rule the nations.
16 And they shalbe no more vnto the house of Israel a trust whiche bringeth
their iniquitie to remembraunce, when they shall loke after them: & they shal
knowe that I am the Lorde God.
17 In the twentie and seuenth yere, the first day of the first moneth, came the
word of the Lorde vnto me, saying:
18 Thou sonne of man, Nabuchodonozor the king of Babylon caused his armie to
serue a great seruice against Tyrus: euery head was made balde, & euery shoulder
bare, yet had neither he nor his armie any wages for Tyrus for the seruice which
he serued against it.
19 Therefore thus sayth the Lorde God: Behold, I will geue the lande of Egypt
vnto Nabuchodonozor the king of Babylon, that he may take away her multitude,
and spoyle her spoyles, & take her pray to pay his hoast their wages withall.
20 For the worke whiche he wrought about it, I haue geuen him the lande of
Egypt, because they wrought for me, sayth the Lorde God.
21 In that day I will cause the horne of the house of Israel to bud foorth, and
I will geue thee the opening of thy mouth in the mids of them: & they shall
knowe that I am the Lorde.

Chapter 30

1 The word of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
2 Thou sonne of man prophecie, and speake, thus sayth the Lorde God, howle, wo
worth this day:
3 For the day is neare, the day of the Lorde is at hande, the darke day, the
time of the nations shalbe,
4 And the sworde shall come vpon Egypt, and feare shalbe in Ethiopia when the
slayne shall fall in Egypt: and they shall take away her multitude, and her
foundations shalbe broken downe.
5 Yea Ethiopia, Lybia, & Lydia, all their common people, and Chub, and all that
be confederate vnto them, shal fall with them thorowe the sworde.
6 Thus sayth the Lorde: The maynteiners of the lande of Egypt shall fall, the
pryde of her powre shall come downe: euen from the towre of Seueneh shal they
fall downe in it with the sworde, sayth the Lorde God.
7 Among other desolate countreys they shalbe made desolate, among other waste
cities they shalbe wasted.
8 And they shall knowe that I am the Lord when I haue set a fire in Egypt, &
when al her helpers shalbe destroyed.
9 In that day shall messengers go foorth from me in ships to make the carelesse
Morians afrayde, and feare shall come vpon them, according to the day of Egypt:
for lo it commeth.
10 Thus sayth the Lord God, I wil cause the multitude of Egypt to ceasse by the
hande of Nabuchodonozor king of Babylon.
11 He, and his people with him, the terrible nations shalbe brought to destoy
the land: they shal drawe out their swordes vpon Egypt, & fill the land full of
slayne men.
12 I wil make their riuers drie, and sel the lande into the handes of wicked
people: the land and all that is therin I will destroy thorow the hand of
straungers: euen I the Lorde haue sayde it.
13 Thus sayth the Lorde God, I will destroy the idoles, and bring the images of
Noph to an end: there shal no more be a prince of Egypt, and a fearfulnesse wil
I send into the Egyptians lande.
14 As for Pathros, I wil make it desolate, and kindle a fire in Zoan, and I will
execute iudgementes in No.
15 And I will powre my wrathful indignation vpon Sin the strength of Egypt, & I
will destroy the multitude of No.
16 And I will kindle a fire in Egypt, Sin shalbe in great heauinesse, No shalbe
rooted out, and Noph shall haue dayly sorowe.
17 The young men of Auen, and of Phibeseth shall fall by the sworde, and these
cities shall go into captiuitie.
18 At Tehaphnehes the day shalbe darke, when I breake there the barres of Egypt,
and when the pompe of her power shall ceasse in her: a cloude shall couer her,
and her daughters shall go into captiuitie.
19 Thus will I execute my iudgementes in Egypt, and they shall knowe howe that I
am the Lorde.
20 And in the eleuenth yere, vpon the seuenth day of the first moneth, the worde
of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
21 Thou sonne of man, I haue broken the arme of Pharao king of Egypt: and lo, it
shall not be bounde vp to be healed, to put a roller to bynde it, to make it
strong to hold the sworde.
22 Therfore thus sayth the Lorde God: Beholde, I will vpon Pharao king of Egypt,
and breake his arme that was strong, but is broken: and I will cause the sworde
to fall out of his hande.
23 As for the Egyptians, I will scatter them among the nations, and strawe them
in the landes about.
24 Againe, I will strengthen the arme of the king of Babylon, and geue hym my
sword in his hande: but I will breake Pharaos armes, and he shall grone the
grodinges of a deadly wounded man before hym:
25 Yea I will strengthen the king of Babylons arme, and the armes of Pharao
shall fall downe: and they shall knowe that I am the Lorde, when I shall geue my
sword into the hand of the king of Babylon, that he may stretch it out vpon the
lande of Egypt.
26 And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, & strowe them in the
landes about: and they shal knowe that I am the Lorde.

Chapter 31

1 Moreouer, in the eleuenth yere, the first day of ye third moneth, the worde of
the Lord came vnto me, saying,
2 Thou sonne of man, speake vnto Pharao king of Egypt, and to all his people:
whom art thou lyke in thy greatnesse?
3 Behold, Assur is a Cedar in Libanon, with faire braunches, and with thycke
shadowing bowes, of a hygh stature, & his top was among the thicke bowes.
4 The waters made him great, and the deepe set him vp on hye, with her riuers
running rounde about his plantes, and sent out her litle riuers vnto all the
trees of the fielde.
5 Therefore was he higher then all the trees of the fielde, and his bowes were
multiplied, & his braunches were long, because of the multitude of the waters,
which the deepe sent out.
6 Al foules of the aire made their nestes in his braunches, vnder his bowes did
all the beastes of the fielde bring foorth their young, and vnder his shadowe
dwelt all mightie nations.
7 Beautiful was he in his greatnesse, and in the length of his braunches: for
his roote stoode beside great waters.
8 No Cedar tree might hyde hym in the garden of God, there was no fyrre trees
like his braunches, the chestnut trees were not like the bowes of him: all the
trees in the garden of God, might not be compared vnto him in his beautie.
9 I made him faire with the multitude of his braunches: insomuch that all the
trees in the pleasaunt garden of God had enuie at hym.
10 Therefore thus sayth the Lorde God: forsomuch as he hath lift vp him selfe so
hye, and hath shot vp his top among the thycke bowes, and his heart is lift vp
in his heyght:
11 I haue therfore deliuered hym into the handes of the mightiest among the
heathen: he shall handle hym, for in his wickednesse haue I cast hym away.
12 And straungers haue destroyed hym, euen the terrible nations, and haue left
hym: vpon the mountaynes and vpon al valleys haue his bowes fallen, and his
bowes are broken by all the riuers of the land: and all the people of the earth
are departed from his shadowe, & haue forsaken hym.
13 Upon his ruine shall all the foules of the ayre remayne, and all the beastes
of the fielde shalbe vpon his braunches.
14 So that none of all the trees by the waters shalbe exalted in their heyght,
nor shoot vp their toppes among the thycke bowes, neither shall their trees
stande in their heyght, as many of them as drinke water: for they are all
deliuered vnto death in the neather partes of the earth, in the mids of the
children of men among them that go downe to the pit.
15 Thus sayth the Lord God: In the day when he went downe to the graue, I caused
a lamentation to be made, I couered the deepe for hym, I restrayned the fluddes
thereof, and the great waters were stayed, I caused Libanus to mourne for him,
and all the trees of the fielde fainted.
16 I made the heathen shake at the sound of his fall, when I cast hym downe to
hell with them that descend into the pit: all the excellent trees of Eden, & the
best of Libanus, all that drinke waters, shalbe comforted in the neather partes
of the earth.
17 They also went downe to hell with him vnto them that be slayne with the
sword, which were his arme and dwelt vnder his shadowe in the middest of the
nations.
18 To whom art thou thus like in glorie and in greatnesse among the trees of
Eden? yet thou shalt be cast downe with the trees of Eden vnto the neather
partes of the earth: in the middest of the vncircumcised shalt thou sleepe with
them that are slayne with the sworde: This is Pharao and all his multitude,
sayth the Lorde God.

Chapter 32

1 In the twelfth yere, the first day of ye twelfth moneth, the worde of the
Lorde came vnto me, saying:
2 Thou sonne of man, take vp a lamentation vpon Pharao the king of Egypt, and
say vnto him, thou art lyke a lion of the heathen, and as a whale fishe in the
sea: thou drawest out thy riuers, thou troublest the waters with thy feete, and
stampest in their riuers.
3 Thus saith the Lorde God, I wyll spreade my nette ouer thee with a great
multitude of people, these shal make thee come vp into my net.
4 For I wyll leaue thee vpon the lande, and cast thee vpon the open fielde, and
I wyll cause all the foules of the ayre to remaine vpon thee, & fill all the
beastes of the fielde with thee.
5 Thy flesh wyll I lay vpon the hils, and fill the valleyes with thy highnesse.
6 I wyll water thyne ouerflowing lande with thy blood euen to the mountaynes,
and the riuers shalbe ful of thee.
7 When thou art put out, I wyll couer the heauen, and make his starres dim: I
wyll spreade a cloude ouer the sunne, and the moone shall not geue her light.
8 All the lightes of heauen wyll I make darke for thee: and bring darkenesse
vpon thy lande, saith the Lorde God.
9 I wyll stirre vp to anger the heartes of many people, when I bring thy
destruction among the heathen, and vpon the countries which thou knowest not.
10 Yea, I wyll make many people amased at thee, and their kinges shalbe
astonished with feare for thee, when I shall make my sworde to glitter against
their faces: and they shalbe afraide at euery moment euery man for his owne
lyfe, in the day of thy fall.
11 For thus saith the Lorde God, The king of Babylons sworde shal come vpon
thee:
12 With the swordes of the mightie wyll I smyte downe thy multitude: they all
shalbe terrible nations, & they shal destroy the pompe of Egypt, and all the
multitude thereof shalbe consumed.
13 I wyll destroy also al the beastes therof from the great waters sides,
neither shall the foote of man trouble them any more, nor the hooues of beastes
trouble them.
14 Then wyll I make their waters deepe, and cause their riuers to runne lyke
oyle, saith the Lorde God,
15 When I make the lande of Egypt desolate, and when the countrey with all that
is therein shalbe layde waste, and when I smyte all them which dwell in it, then
shall they knowe that I am the Lorde.
16 This is the mourning when they shal lament her, the daughters of the nations
shall lament her, they shall make the lamentation ouer Egypt, and ouer all the
people thereof, saith the Lorde God.
17 In the twelfth yere, the fifteenth day of the moneth, came the worde of the
Lorde vnto me, saying:
18 Thou sonne of man, lament for the multitude of Egypt, and cast them downe,
euen them and the daughters of the famous nations vnto the neather partes of the
earth, with them that go downe into the pit.
19 Whom doest thou passe in beautie? go downe and sleepe with the vncircumcized.
20 Among those that be slaine with the sworde shall they lye: to the sworde is
she alredie delyuered, drawe her downe and all her multitude.
21 The mightie worthies shall speake to her out of the hell, and to her helpers:
they are gone downe and lye vncircumcized with them that be slaine with the
sworde:
22 Assur is there also with all his company, and their graues rounde about him,
which were slaine and fell all with the sworde.
23 Whose graues are made in the side of the pit, and his multitude are rounde
about his graue, to wit all the slaine and fallen by the sworde, which cause a
feare to be in the lande of the liuing.
24 There is Elam also, with all his people rounde about his graue: which all
being slaine & fallen with the sworde, are gone downe vncircumcized vnder the
earth, which neuerthelesse sometime brought feare into the lande of the lyuing:
they beare their owne shame, with the other that be gone downe to the graue.
25 They haue made his bed in the midst of the slaine, with al his multitude,
their graues are rounde about him: all these vncircumcized, slaine by the
sworde, although they caused their feare in the lande of the lyuing, yet haue
they borne their shame with them that go downe to the pit, they are layde in the
midst of them that are slaine.
26 There is Mesech also and Tubal, and their people, & their graues rounde about
him: these al vncircumcized were slaine with the sworde, because aforetime they
made the lande of the lyuing afraide.
27 They shall not lye with the valiaunt which are fallen of the vncircumcized,
which are gone downe to the graue with their weapons of warre, and haue layde
their swordes vnder their heades: but their iniquitie shalbe vpon their bones,
because the terrour of their mightie was in the lande of the lyuing.
28 Yea, among the vncircumcized shalt thou be destroyed, and sleepe with them
that perished through the sworde.
29 There is Edom with her kinges and princes also, which with their strength are
layde by them that were slaine with the sworde: yea among the vncircumcized shal
they sleepe, & with them which are gone downe into the pit.
30 Moreouer, there be al the princes of the north with al the Sidonians, which
are gone downe with the slaine: with their feare and strength they are come to
confusion, and lye there vncircumcized among those that be slaine with the
sworde, and beare their owne shame with them that be gone downe to the pit.
31 Pharao shall see them, and be comforted ouer all his multitude: Pharao and al
his armie shalbe slaine with the sworde, saith the Lorde God.
32 For I haue geuen my feare in the lande of the lyuing: but Pharao and al his
people shalbe layde among the vncircumcized, and among them that be slaine with
the sworde, saith the Lorde God.

Chapter 33

1 Againe, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
2 Thou sonne of man, speake to the children of thy people, and tell them: When I
sende a sworde vpon a lande, if the people of the lande take a man of their
coastes, and set him to be their watchman:
3 If when he seeth the sworde come vpon the lande, he shall blow the trumpet and
warne the people:
4 Then he that heareth the noyse of the trumpet and wyll not be warned, and the
sworde come and take him away, his blood shalbe vpon his owne head.
5 For he heard the sounde of the trumpet, and would not be warned, therefore his
blood be vpon him: but he that receaueth warning, he shall saue his lyfe.
6 Againe, if the watchman see the sword come, and blow not the trumpet, so that
the people is not warned, if the sworde come then, and take any man from among
them: the same shalbe taken away in his owne sinne, but his blood wyl I require
at the watchmans hand.
7 And thou O sonne at man, I haue made thee a watchman vnto the house of Israel:
therefore thou shalt here the worde at my mouth, and thou shalt warne them from
me.
8 If I say vnto the wicked, thou wicked, thou shalt surely dye: & thou speakest
not to admonish the wicked of his way: that wicked man shall dye in his owne
sinne, but his blood wyl I require at thy hande.
9 Neuerthelesse, if thou warne the wicked of his way to tourne from it, and he
yet wyll not be turned from his way: then shal he dye in his iniquitie, but thou
hast deliuered thy soule.
10 Therfore O thou sonne of man, speake vnto the house of Israel, yea say thus:
If our offences and sinnes lye vpon vs, and we be consumed in them, howe should
we then liue?
11 Tell them, as truely as I liue saith the Lorde God, I haue no pleasure in the
death of the wicked, but much rather that the wicked tourne from his way, and
lyue: Turne you, turne you from your wicked wayes, for why wil ye dye O ye of
the house of Israel?
12 Therefore thou sonne of man, tell the children of thy people, the
righteousnes of the righteous shall not saue him in the day of his iniquitie:
againe, the wickednes of the wicked shall not ouerthrow him for it in the day
that he returneth from his wickednes: neither shall the righteous lyue for it in
the day that he sinneth.
13 If I say vnto the righteous, he shall surely lyue, and so he trust to his
owne righteousnes, and do sinne: then shall his righteousnes be no more thought
vpon, but in his wickednes that he hath done, in it he shall dye.
14 Againe, if I say vnto the wicked, thou shalt surely dye: and so he turne from
his sinnes, and do the thing that is lawfull and right,
15 Insomuch that the same wicked man geueth the pledge againe, restoreth that he
had take away by robbery, walketh in the commaundementes of lyfe, and doth none
iniquitie: then shall he surely lyue and not dye.
16 None of the sinnes that he hath committed shalbe mentioned vnto him: for
insomuch as he doth now the thing that is lawfull and right, he shall lyue,
17 And yet the children of thy people say, the way of the Lorde is not equall:
but their owne way is rather vnequall.
18 When the righteous turneth from his righteousnes, and doth the thing that is
wicked, he shall dye therein.
19 But if the wicked turne from his wickednes, doing the thing that is lawfull
and right, he shall lyue therefore.
20 Yet ye say, the way of the Lorde is not equall: O ye house of Israel, I wyll
iudge euery one of you after his wayes.
21 In the twelfth yere, the fift day of the tenth moneth of our captiuitie, one
which was escaped out of Hierusalem, came vnto me and said, The citie is
smitten.
22 Nowe the hande of the Lorde had ben vpon me the euening afore this man which
was escaped came vnto me, and had opened my mouth vntill the morning that he
came to me: yea, my mouth was opened, so that I was no more dumbe.
23 Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto me, and saide:
24 Thou sonne of man, these that dwell in the wasted lande of Israel talke and
say: Abraham was but one man, and he had the lande in possession: nowe are we
many, and the lande is geuen vs to possesse also.
25 And therefore tel them, thus saith the Lorde God, In the blood haue ye eaten,
your eyes haue ye lift vp to idols, and haue shed blood: shall ye then haue the
lande in possession?
26 Ye leane vpon your swordes, ye worke abhominations, euery one defileth his
neighbours wyfe: and shall ye then possesse the lande?
27 Say thou thus vnto them, thus saith the lorde God: As truely as I liue, they
that are in the desolate places shall fall by the sworde, and him that is vpon
the fielde wyll I geue vnto the beastes to be deuoured: and they that be in the
strong holdes and dennes shall dye of the pestilence.
28 For I wyll make the lande so desolate and waste, that the pompe of her
strength shall ceasse: the mountaynes of Israel shalbe so waste, that no man
shall trauaile thereby.
29 Then shall they knowe that I am the Lorde, when I make the land desolate and
waste, because of all their abhominations that they haue wrought.
30 And thou sonne of man, the children of thy people that talke of thee by the
waters and in the doores of their houses, and speake one to another, euery one
to his brother, saying, Come I praye you, let vs heare what worde is gone foorth
from the Lorde:
31 They come vnto thee as the people vseth to come, and my people syt before
thee, and heare thy wordes, but they do not therafter: for in their mouthes they
make a iest of them, and their heart goeth after their couetousnes.
32 And lo, thou art vnto them as a testing song of one that hath a pleasaunt
voyce, and can sing well: for they heare thy wordes, but do them not.
33 When this commeth to passe (lo it commeth:) then shall they knowe that there
hath ben a prophete among them.

Chapter 34

1 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
2 Thou sonne of man, prophecie against the shepheardes of Israel, prophecie and
speake vnto them: thus saith the Lorde God vnto the shepheardes, Wo be vnto the
shepheardes of Israel that feede them selues: should not the shepheards feede
the flockes?
3 Ye eate vp the fat, ye clothe you with the wooll, the best fed do ye slay: but
the flocke do ye not feede.
4 The weake haue ye not strengthened, the sicke haue ye not healed, the broken
haue ye not bounde together, the dryuen away haue ye not brought againe, the
lost haue ye not sought: but with force and crueltie haue ye ruled them.
5 They are scattered without a shephearde, yea all the beastes of the fielde
deuour them, and they go astray.
6 My sheepe go wandring vpon al mountaines, and vpon euery hie hill, yea my
flocke is scattered through all the face of the earth, and there is no man that
seeketh or searcheth after them.
7 Therefore O ye shepheardes, heare the worde of the Lorde.
8 As truely as I lyue saith the Lorde God, forsomuch as my sheepe are robbed, &
deuoured of all the wylde beastes of the fielde, hauing no shepheard, and seeing
that my shepheardes seke not my sheepe, but the shepheardes feede them selues,
and feede not my sheepe:
9 Therefore heare the worde of the Lorde O ye shepheardes,
10 Thus saith the Lorde God: beholde, I wyll vpon the shepheardes, and require
my sheepe from their handes, and make them ceasse from feeding of the sheepe,
yea the shepheardes shall feede them selues no more: for I wyll deliuer my
sheepe out of their mouthes, so that they shall not deuour them after this.
11 For thus saith the Lorde God: behold, I euen I wyll loke to my sheepe my
selfe, and seeke them out.
12 Lyke as a shephearde when he hath ben among the flocke, seeketh after the
sheepe that are scattered abroade: euen so wyll I seeke after my sheepe, and
deliuer them out of all places where they haue ben scattered, in the cloudie and
darke day.
13 I wyll bring them out from the people, and gather them together out of the
landes, I wyl bring them into their owne lande, and feede them vpon the
mountaines of Israel, by the riuers and in all the places of the countrey.
14 I wyll feede them in right good pastures, and vpon the hie mountaines of
Israel shall their foldes be: there shall they lye in a good folde, and in a fat
pasture shall they feede, euen vpon the mountaines of Israel.
15 I wyll feede my sheepe and bring them to their rest, saith the Lorde God.
16 Such as be lost, wyll I seeke: such as are driuen away, wyll I bring againe:
such as be broken, wyl I binde vp: such as be weake, wyll I make strong: such as
be fat and strong, those wyll I roote out, and feede them with iudgement.
17 And as for you O my sheepe, saith the Lorde God, I wyll iudge betweene
cattaile & cattaile, betweene the rammes and the goates.
18 Seemeth it a smal thing to you to haue eaten vp the good pasture, and to
treade downe the residue of your pasture with your feete also? to drinke the
deepe waters, and to trouble the rest also with your feete?
19 Thus my sheepe must be faine to eate the thing that ye haue troden downe with
your feete, and to drinke it that ye with your feete haue defiled.
20 Therefore thus saith the Lorde God vnto them: Beholde I euen I wyll iudge
betweene the fat cattaile and the leane cattaile,
21 Forsomuch as with side and shoulder ye haue shoued, and with your hornes haue
pushed all the weake, till ye haue scattered them abroade.
22 I wyll saue my sheepe, so that they shal no more be spoyled, yea I wil iudge
betweene cattaile and cattaile.
23 I wyll set vp ouer them a shepheard, and he shall feede them, euen my
seruaunt Dauid, he shall feede them, & he shalbe their shepheard.
24 And I the Lorde wyll be their God, and my seruaunt Dauid shalbe their prince:
euen I the Lorde haue spoken it.
25 Moreouer I wyll make a couenaunt of peace with them, & cause euil beastes to
ceasse out of the lande: so that they may dwell safely in the wildernesse, and
sleepe in the woods.
26 And I wyll set them as a blessing euen rounde about my hill, and I wyll cause
raine to come downe in due season, and there shalbe raine of blessing.
27 And the tree of the fielde shal yeelde her fruite, and the earth shall geue
her encrease: they shalbe safe in their lande, and shall knowe that I am the
Lorde, when I haue broke the bondes of their yoke, and deliuered them out of the
handes of those that serued them selues of them.
28 They shall no more be spoyled of the heathen, nor deuoured with the beastes
of the lande: but safely shall they dwel, and no man shall fray them.
29 And I wil raise vp for them a plant of renowme, and they shalbe no more
clungd with hunger in the lande, neither beare the reproche of the heathen any
more.
30 Thus shall they vnderstand that I the Lorde their God am with them, and that
they, euen the house of Israel, are my people, saith the Lorde God:
31 And ye my sheepe, the sheepe of my pasture, are men: and I am your God, saith
the Lorde God.

Chapter 35

1 Moreouer, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
2 Thou sonne of man, set thy face toward the mount Seir, prophecie against it.
3 And say vnto it, thus saith the Lorde God: Beholde O thou mount Seir, I wyll
vpon thee, I wyll reache out my hande ouer thee, yea waste and desolate wyll I
make thee,
4 Thy cities wyll I laye waste, & thou shalt lye voyde, that thou mayst knowe
howe that I am the Lorde,
5 Forsomuch as thou bearest an olde enmitie, and hast put the children of Israel
to flight by the force of the sworde, in the time of their calamitie, when their
iniquitie had an ende.
6 Therefore as truely as I lyue, saith the Lorde God, I wyll prepare thee vnto
blood, yea blood shall folowe vpon thee, except thou hate blood, euen blood
shall persecute thee.
7 Thus wyll I make the mount Seir desolate and waste, and cut out from it him
that passeth out, and him that returneth:
8 His mountaines wyll I fill with his slaine men, thy hils, valleys, and al thy
riuers, the slaine with the sworde shall fall in them.
9 I wyll make thee a perpetuall wildernes, so that thy cities shal not returne:
that ye may knowe that I am the Lorde.
10 And because thou hast saide, both these nations, and both these landes must
be myne, and we wyll haue them in possession, whereas the Lorde was there:
11 Therefore as truely as I lyue saith the Lorde God, I wyll euen do according
to thy wrath, and according to thyne enuiyng which thou hast vsed in thyne
hatred against them: and I wyll make my selfe knowen amongst them when I haue
iudged thee.
12 Yea and thou shalt knowe that I the Lorde haue heard all thy blasphemies,
whiche thou hast spoken against the mountaines of Israel, saying, They are made
waste, & geuen vs to deuour.
13 Thus with your mouthes ye haue made your boastes against me, yea and
multiplied your wordes against me, which I haue heard.
14 Thus saith the Lord God: To the ioy of all the worlde wyll I make thee waste.
15 And lyke as thou wast glad because the heritage of the house of Israel was
destroyed, euen so wyll I do vnto thee: thou shalt be destroyed O mount Seir,
and all Idumea wholly, and they shall knowe that I am the Lorde.

Chapter 36

1 Thou sonne of man prophecie vnto the mountaines of Israel, and speake, heare
the worde of the lord O ye mountaines of Israel.
2 Thus saith the Lord God: Because your enemie hath saide vpon you aha, the hie
places of the worlde are now become ours in possession:
3 Prophecie therefore and speake, thus saith the Lorde God: For because that
they haue made you desolate, and swalowed you vp on euery side, that ye might be
a possession vnto the residue of the gentiles, and ye are taken vp in the lippes
and tongues of men, and to the reproche of the people:
4 Therefore heare the worde of the Lorde God, O ye mountaines of Israel, thus
saith the Lorde God to the mountaines and hils, to the riuers and valleys, to
the waste and desolate places, and to the cities that are forsaken, which are
spoyled and had in derision on euery side, among the residue of the heathen:
5 Therefore thus saith the Lorde God: Surely in the fire of my gelousie haue I
spoken against the residue of the gentiles, and against all Edom, which haue
appoynted my lande for their possession, which also reioyced from their whole
heart with a dispitefull stomake, to cast it out for a pray.
6 Prophecie therefore vpon the lande of Israel, and speake vnto the mountaines
and hils, to the riuers and dales, thus saith the Lorde God: Behold, this haue I
spoken in my gelousie and terrible wrath, because ye haue borne the shame of the
heathen:
7 Therefore thus saith the Lorde God, I haue lyft vp my hande, surely the
heathen that are about you, shall beare their shame.
8 But you, O mountaynes of Israel, ye shall shoote out your braunches, and bring
foorth your fruite to my people of Israel: for they are at hande to come.
9 Beholde I come vnto you, and vnto you wyll I turne my face, that ye may be
tilled and sowen.
10 I wyll multiplie men vpon you, euen al the house of Israel wholly, the cities
shalbe inhabited, and the decayed places shalbe repaired againe.
11 And I wyll multiplie vpon you man and beast, which shal encrease and bring
fruite: and I wyll cause you to dwell after your olde estate, & be better vnto
you then at the beginning: and ye shall knowe that I am the Lorde.
12 Yea I wyll cause men to walke vpon you, euen my people Israel, & they shall
possesse thee, and thou shalt be their inheritaunce, & thou shalt no more
hencefoorth depriue them of men
13 Thus saith the lorde God, Forsomuch as they say vnto you, thou art an eater
vp of men, and a waster of thy people:
14 Therefore thou shalt eate no more men, neither destroy thy people any more,
saith the Lorde God:
15 Neither wyll I cause men to heare in thee the shame of the heathe any more:
neither shalt thou beare the reproche of the people any more, nor cause thy
folke to fall any more, saith the Lorde God.
16 Moreouer, the word of the Lord came vnto me, saying:
17 O thou sonne of man, when the house of Israel dwelt vpon their owne grounde,
they defiled them selues with their owne wayes and imaginations: so that in my
sight, their way was lyke the vncleannes of a remoued woman.
18 Wherfore I powred my wrathful displeasure vpon them, because of the blood
that they had shed in the lande, and because of their idols wherewith they had
defiled it:
19 I scattered them also among the heathen, so that they were strawed about in
the landes: according to their wayes, & after their owne inuentions, so did I
iudge them.
20 And when they entred vnto the heathen whyther they went, they polluted my
holy name, when they saide of them, These are the people of God, & are gone out
of his lande.
21 Then spared I my holy name, which the house of Israel had dishonoured among
the gentiles where they came.
22 Therfore tel the house of Israel, thus saith the Lorde God: I do not this for
your sakes O house of Israel, but for my holy names sake which ye dishonoured
among the heathen where ye came.
23 Therefore I wyll halowe my great name againe, which among the gentiles is
polluted, for ye your selues haue dishonoured it among them: & the gentiles
shall know that I am the Lorde saith the Lorde God, when I shalbe sanctified in
you before your eyes.
24 As for you, I wyll take you from among the heathen, and gather you together
out of all countreys, and bring you againe into your owne lande.
25 Then wyll I sprinckle cleane water vpon you, and ye shalbe cleane: yea from
all your vncleannes and from all your idols shall I cleanse you.
26 A newe heart also wyll I geue you, and a newe spirite wyll I put into you: as
for that stony heart I wyll take it out of your fleshe, and geue you a fleshy
heart.
27 I wyll geue my spirite among you, and cause you to walke in my
comaundementes, and ye shall kepe my iudgementes and do them.
28 And so ye shall dwell in the lande that I gaue to your fathers: & ye shalbe
my people, and I wil be your God.
29 I wyll deliuer you from all your vncleannes, I wyl call for the corne, and
wyll encrease it, and lay no famine vpon you.
30 I wil multiplie the fruites of the trees and the encrease of the fielde: so
that ye shal receaue no more reproche of hunger among the heathen.
31 Then shall ye remember your owne wicked wayes, and your imaginations which
were not good: so that ye shalbe irksum in your owne eyes for your sinnes and
abhominations.
32 But I wyl not do this for your sakes, saith the Lorde God, be ye sure of it:
therefore O ye house of Israel, be ashamed and confounded of your owne wayes.
33 Moreouer, thus saith the Lorde God, what time as I shal cleanse you from al
your iniquities, then wil I make the cities to be inhabited againe, and the
places that be decayed shalbe repaired.
34 The desolate lande shalbe tilled againe, which afore time lay waste in the
sight of al them that went by.
35 And they shal say, this waste lande was like the garden of Eden: and these
waste and desolate and ruinous cities were strong and inhabited.
36 Then the residue of the heathen that lye rounde about you, shall knowe that I
the Lord repaire that was broken downe, and plant againe that that was made
waste: euen I the Lord haue spoken it, and wyl do it in deede.
37 Thus saith the Lorde God: I wyll yet for this be sought of the house of
Israel, to do it for them, I wyll multiplie them as a flocke of men,
38 Like as the holy flocke, and the flocke of Hierusalem are in the hie solempne
feastes, so shall also the wasted cities be filled with flockes of men: and they
shal knowe that I am the Lorde.

Chapter 37

1 The hande of the Lorde was vpon me, and caried me out in the spirite of the
Lorde, and set me downe in the midst of a plaine fielde that was full of bones.
2 And he led me rounde about by them, and beholde, there were very many in the
open fielde, and lo they were very drye.
3 Then saide he vnto me: Thou sonne of man, thinkest thou these bones may liue
againe? I aunswered, O Lorde God, thou knowest.
4 And he saide vnto me, Prophecie thou vpon these bones, & speake vnto them: Ye
drye bones, heare the worde of the Lorde,
5 Thus saith the Lorde God vnto these bones: Beholde, I wyll cause breath to
enter into you, that ye may lyue.
6 I wyll geue you sinowes, and make fleshe growe vpon you, and couer you ouer
with skinne, & so geue you breath, that ye may liue, and knowe that I am the
Lorde.
7 So I prophecied as I was comaunded: and as I was propheciyng, there was a
noyse, and lo a great motion, so that the bones came neare together, bone to his
bone.
8 Now when I had loked, behold they had sinowes, & flesh grewe vpon them, and
aboue they were couered with skin: but there was no breath in them.
9 Then saide he vnto me: Thou sonne of man, prophecie thou towarde the winde,
prophecie & speake to the winde, thus saith the Lorde God: Come, O thou ayre
from the foure windes, and blowe vpon these slaine, that they may lyue.
10 So I prophecied as he had commaunded me: then came the breath into them, and
they receaued lyfe, and stoode vp vpon their feete, a marueilous great armie.
11 Moreouer he said vnto me: Thou sonne of man, these bones are the whole house
of Israel: Behold, they say, Our bones are dryed vp, our hope is gone, and we
are cleane cut of.
12 Therefore prophecie thou, and speake vnto them, thus saith the Lorde God:
Beholde, I wyll open your graues O my people, and cause you to come vp out your
sepulchres, and bring you into the lande of Israel againe.
13 So shal ye know that I am the Lord, when I open your graues O my people, &
bring you out of your sepulchres.
14 My spirite also wil I put in you, and ye shal liue, I wil set you againe in
your owne lande: and ye shall knowe that I the Lorde haue sayde it, and
fulfilled it in deede, sayth the Lorde.
15 The word of the Lord came vnto me, saying:
16 Thou sonne of man, take one sticke, and write vpon it, Unto Iuda and to the
children of Israel his companios. Then take another sticke and write vpon it,
Unto Ioseph the stocke of Ephraim, & to all the housholde of Israel his
companions.
17 And ioyne thee them one to another into one sticke: and they shalbe as one in
thy hande.
18 Now if the children of thy people speake vnto thee, saying: Wilt thou not
shew vs what thou meanest by these?
19 Then geue them this aunswere, thus sayth the Lorde God: Beholde, I will take
the stocke of Ioseph, whiche is in the hand of Ephraim, and of the tribes of
Israel his felowes, and wil put them with him, euen with the stocke of Iuda, and
make them one stocke, and they shalbe one in my hande.
20 And the stickes where vpon thou wrytest, shalt thou haue in thy hand, that
they may see.
21 And thou shalt say vnto them, thus sayth the Lorde God: Beholde, I will take
the children of Israel from among the heathen vnto whom they be gone, and will
gather them together on euery side, and bring them againe into their owne lande.
22 Yea I wil make one people of them in the land vpon the mountaynes of Israel,
and one king shalbe king to them al: they shall no more be two peoples, neither
be deuided from hencefoorth into two kingdomes.
23 They shall also defile them selues no more with their idoles and
abhominations, and al their wicked doynges: I wil saue them out of all their
dwelling places wherin they haue sinned, and will so cleanse them, that they
shalbe my people, and I wilbe their God.
24 Dauid my seruaunt shalbe their king, and they all shall haue one sheepheard
only: they shall walke in my iudgementes, and my commaundementes shall they
kepe, and fulfill them.
25 They shall dwell in the lande that I gaue vnto Iacob my seruaunt, wheras your
fathers also haue dwelt, yea euen in the same land shal they, their children, &
their childers children dwell for euermore: and my seruaunt Dauid shalbe their
prince for euer.
26 Moreouer, I will make a bonde of peace with them, whiche shalbe vnto them an
euerlasting couenaunt: I will settle them also and multiplie them, my sanctuarie
will I set among them for euermore.
27 My tabernacle shalbe with them: yea I wilbe their God, and they shalbe my
people.
28 Thus the heathen also shal know that I the Lorde do sanctifie Israel, when my
sanctuarie shalbe among them for euermore.

Chapter 38

1 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
2 Thou sonne of man, set thy face towarde Gog, the land of Magog, which is the
chiefe prince at Mesech and Tubal: prophecie against him,
3 And say, thus sayth the Lorde God: O Gog, thou chiefe prince of Mesech and
Tubal, beholde, I will vpon thee:
4 And I will turne thee backe, and put hookes in thy chawes, I will bring thee
foorth and all thyne hoast, both horse and horsemen, all armed with all sortes
of armour, a great multitude with speares and shieldes, all handling swordes.
5 They of Paras, of Cush, & Phut, with them euen all hauing shieldes and
helmets.
6 Gomer and all his hoastes, the house of Togarma out of the north quarters and
all his hoastes, yea and much people with thee.
7 Therfore prepare thee, set thy selfe in aray with all thy people that are come
vnto thee by heapes, & be thou their defence.
8 After many dayes thou shalt be visited, and in the latter yeres thou shalt
come into the lande that hath ben turned and cost with the sworde, and gathered
together againe out of many people vpon the mountaynes of Israel, which haue ben
alwayes subiect to waste: but it is brought out of the people, and they dwell
all safe.
9 Thou shalt ascend and come vp like a storme, as a cloude to couer the lande
shalt thou be: thou with al thine hoastes, & a great multitude of people with
thee.
10 Moreouer, thus sayth the Lorde God: At the same time shall thinges come into
thy minde, so that thou shalt thinke euyll thoughtes.
11 And say, I will vp to the lande of vnwalled villages, I will go to them that
be at rest, whiche dwell safely, all dwelling without walles, they haue neither
barres nor gates:
12 To spoyle the pray, and to take a bootie, to turne thy hande vpon the
desolate places that are nowe inhabited, & vpon that people that is gathered
together from among the heathen, whiche haue gotten cattell and goodes, and
dwell in the mids of the lande.
13 Then shall Saba and Dedan, and the marchauntes of Tharsis with all their
lions, say vnto thee: Art thou come to spoyle a pray? hast thou gathered thy
people together to take a bootie, to take away siluer and golde, to cary away
cattel and good, and to haue a great pray?
14 Therfore, O thou sonne of man, thou shalt prophecie and say vnto Gog, thus
sayth the Lord God: In that day when my people Israel dwelleth safe, shalt thou
not knowe it?
15 And thou shalt come from thy place out of the north partes, thou and much
people with thee, which ride al vpon horses, euen a great multitude and a
mightie armie.
16 Yea thou shalt come vpon my people of Israel, as a cloude to couer the lande:
this shall come to passe in the latter dayes, and I will bring thee vp into my
land, that the heathen may knowe me, when I shalbe sanctified in thee O Gog,
before their eyes.
17 Thus sayth the Lorde God: Art not thou he of whom I haue spoken in olde time
by the handes of my seruauntes the prophetes of Israel, which prophecied in
those dayes and yeres, that I should bring thee vpon them?
18 At the same time when Gog commeth vp into the lande of Israel, sayth the
Lorde God, shall myne indignation rise in my wrath:
19 For in my ielousie and fire of my wrath haue I spoken it, surely at that time
ther shalbe a great shaking in the lande of Israel.
20 The very fisshes in the sea, the foules in the ayre, the beastes of the
fielde, and all that moue and crepe vpon the earth, and all the men that are
vpon the earth, shall tremble at my presence: the hilles also shalbe turned
vpside downe, the staires shall fall, and all walles shall fall downe to the
grounde.
21 I will call for a sworde vpon hym in all my mountaynes, sayth the Lorde God:
so that euery mans sworde shalbe vpon another.
22 With pestilence and blood wil I pleade against him: stormie rayne and
haylestones, fire and brimstone wil I cause to rayne vpon him and all his
hoastes, yea and vpon all that great people that is with him.
23 Thus will I be magnified, sanctified, and knowen in the eyes of many nations:
and they shall knowe that I am the Lorde.

Chapter 39

1 Therfore O thou sonne of man, prophecie against Gog, & speake, thus sayth the
Lorde God: Behold O Gog, thou chiefe prince at Mesech and Tubal, I will vpon
thee.
2 And I wil turne thee about, and I wil prouoke thee forward, and cause thee to
come vp from the north partes, and bring thee vp to the mountaynes of Israel.
3 As for thy bow, I wil smite it out of thy left hande, and cause thyne arrowes
to fall out of thy right hande.
4 Thou with all thyne hoast, and all the people that is with thee, shall fall
vpon the mountaynes of Israel: then will I geue thee vnto the flockes of birdes
euen to all fethered foules and beastes of the fielde, to be deuoured.
5 Thou shalt fal vpon the open fielde: for I haue spoken it, sayth the Lorde
God.
6 Into Magog, and among those that sit so carelesse in the Iles will I sende a
fire, and they shall know that I am the Lorde.
7 I will make also the name of my holinesse to be knowen among my people of
Israel, and I will not let them pollute my holy name any more: but the very
heathen also shall knowe that I am the Lord, the holy one of Israel.
8 Behold it is come, and it is done, sayth the Lorde God: this is the day wherof
I haue spoken.
9 They that dwell in the cities of Israel, shall go foorth and set fire vpon the
weapons, and burne them, shieldes and speares, bowes & arowes, hand staues and
swordes, and they shal burne them with fire seuen yeres.
10 So that they shall els bring no wood from the fielde, neither hew downe any
out of the wood: for with weapons shal they make their fire, they shall rob
those that robbed them, and spoyle those that spoyled them, sayth the Lorde God.
11 At the same time wil I geue vnto Gog a place to be buried in Israel, euen the
valley wherethrough men go towarde the east sea: those that trauayle thereby,
shall stop their noses, there shall Gog and all his multitute be buried, & it
shalbe called the valley of the multitude of Gog.
12 Seuen monethes long shall the house of Israel be burying of them, that they
may cleanse the lande.
13 Yea all the people of the land shal burie them, and they shall haue a name
when I shalbe glorified, sayth the Lord God.
14 They shall chose out men to go continually thorowe the lande, to burie as
they passe through those that remayne vpon the ground, to cleanse it: after the
end of seuen monethes, shall they make their searche.
15 And the trauaylers that passe thorowe the land, where they see a mans bone,
they shal set vp a token by it, til the dead buriers haue buried it also in the
valley of the multitude of Gog.
16 And the name of the citie shalbe called Hamonah: thus shall they make the
lande cleane.
17 And thou sonne of man, thus sayth the Lord God: Speake vnto the birdes and
all fethered foules, yea and to all the beastes of the fielde, Assemble you
together, and come, gather you round about to my sacrifice that I sacrifice for
you, euen a great sacrifice vpon the mountaynes of Israel, that ye may eate
fleshe, and drinke blood.
18 Ye shall eate the fleshe of the valiaunt, and drinke the blood of the princes
of the land, of the rammes, of the weathers, of the goates, and of the
bullockes, that be all fed at Basan.
19 Ye shall eate the fat your belly full, and drinke blood till ye be drunken of
my sacrifice, which I haue sacrificed for you.
20 Ye shall fil you at my table with horses & horsemen, with the valiaunt and
men of warre, sayth the Lorde God.
21 I wil set my glorie also among the gentiles, that all the heathen may see my
iudgement that I haue executed, & my hand whiche I haue layde vpon them.
22 And the house of Israel shall knowe that I am the Lorde their God, from that
day, and so forwarde.
23 And the heathen shal know, that wheras the house of Israel was led into
captiuitie, it was for their wickednesse sake, because they offended me: for the
which cause I hyd my face from them, & deliuered them into the handes of their
enemies, that they might all be slayne with the sworde.
24 According to their vncleanesse, & according to their transgressions haue I
done vnto them, & hid my face fro them.
25 Therefore thus sayth the Lorde God: Nowe will I bring againe the captiues of
Iacob, and haue mercie vpon the whole house of Israel, and be ielous for my holy
names sake,
26 After that they haue borne their shame, and all their transgression, wherby
they haue transgressed against me when they dwelt safely in their lande, and no
man to feare them:
27 And when I haue brought them againe from among the people, when I haue
gathered them together out of their enemies landes, and am sanctified in them in
the sight of many nations:
28 Then shall they knowe that I am the Lorde their God, which caused them to be
led into captiuitie among the heathen, but haue gathered them againe into their
owne land, and not left one of them any more there.
29 After that wil I hyde my face no more from them, but will powre out my
spirite vpon the house of Israel, sayth the Lorde God.

Chapter 40

1 In the fyue and twentie yere of our captiuitie, in the beginning of the yere,
the tenth day of the moneth, that is the fourtenth yere after the citie was
smitten, the selfe same day came the hand of the Lorde vpon me, & brought me
thyther:
2 Euen into the land of Israel brought he me in the visions of god, & set me
downe vpon a marueylous hye mountayne, wherevpon there was as it had ben the
buylding of a citie towarde the south.
3 Thyther he caried me, and behold there was a man, whose similitude was like
brasse, whiche had a twisted line of flax in his hand, and a cane to measure
with: and he stoode in the doore.
4 And that man sayde vnto me: Thou sonne of man, marke well with thyne eyes,
hearken to with thyne eares, and fasten it in thy heart, whatsoeuer I shal shewe
thee: for to the intent that they might be shewed thee, therfore art thou
brought hyther, and whatsoeuer thou seest, thou shalt certifie the house of
Israel therof.
5 Behold, there was a wall on the outside of the house, rounde about: the cane
to measure with that he had in his hande, was sixe cubites long by the cubite &
a hande breadth: So he measured the breadth of the building with one cane, and
the heyght with one cane.
6 Then came he to the gate which loketh toward the east, and went vp the staires
therof, and measured the post of the gate one cane broade, and the other post of
the gate one cane broade.
7 And euery chamber was one cane long and one cane broade, and betweene the
chambers were fiue cubites: and the post of the gate by the porche of the gate
within, was one cane.
8 He measured also the porche of the gate within one cane.
9 Then measured he the porche of the gate eyght cubites: & the pentises therof
two cubites, and the porche of the gate was inwarde.
10 And the chambers of the gate eastward, were three on this side, & three on
that side: they three were of one measure, & the pentises had one measure on
this side, and one measure on that side.
11 After this, he measured the breadth of the entrie of the gate ten cubites,
and the heyght of the gate thirteene cubites.
12 The space also before the chambers was one cubite on this side and the space
one cubite on that side: & the chambers sixe cubites on this side, and sixe
cubites on that side.
13 He measured the gate from the roofe of a chamber to his owne roofe the
breadth of fiue and twentie cubites: doore against doore.
14 He made frontes also of threescore cubites, euen vnto the front of the court
rounde about the gate.
15 And from the forefront of the entrie of the gate, vnto the forefront of the
gate within were fiftie cubites.
16 And there were narowe windowes in the chambers, and in the frontes within the
gate rounde about: & so in the arches: and the windowes went rounde about
within, and vpon the frontes were paulme trees.
17 Then brought he me into the outward court, where as were chambers, and a
pauement made for the court rounde about: thirtie chambers were vpon the
pauement.
18 And the pauement was by the side of the gates, ouer against the length of the
gates: and the pauement was beneath.
19 Then he measured the breadth fro the forefront of the lower gate without,
vnto the forefront of the court within, a hundreth cubites eastwarde and
northwarde.
20 And the gate in the outward court that loked toward the north, measured he
after the length and breadth therof.
21 And the chambers therof were three on this side, and three on that side: and
the frontes therof, and the arches thereof were after the measure of the first
gate: the length thereof was fiftie cubites, and the breadth fiue and twentie
cubites.
22 And their windowes and their arches with their paulme trees were after the
measure of the gate that loketh toward the east: and the goyng vp vnto it had
seuen steppes, and the arches thereof were before them.
23 And the gate of the inner court stoode ouer against the gate towarde the
north and toward the east, and he measured from gate to gate a hundreth cubites.
24 After that he brought me towarde the south, where there stoode a gate towarde
the south, and he measured the frontes therof and the arches therof according to
those measures.
25 And there were windowes in it, and in the arches therof round about like
these windowes: the length was fiftie cubites, & the breadth fiue and twentie
cubites.
26 And there were seuen steppes at the goyng vp to it, and the arches therof
before them: & it had paulme trees, one on this side, and an other on that side,
vpon the front therof.
27 And there was a gate in the inner court towarde the south, and he measured
from gate to gate toward the south, a hundred cubites.
28 So he brought me into the inner court thorowe the south gate, and he measured
the south gate according to those measures.
29 And the chambers thereof, the frontes therof, and the arches thereof,
according to these measures, and wyndowes in it: and in the arches thereof round
about, fiftie cubites long, and fiue and twentie cubites broade.
30 And the arches round about were fiue and twentie cubites long, and fiue
cubites broade.
31 And the arches therof were toward the vtter court, and paulme trees vpon the
frontes therof, & the goyng vp to it had eyght steppes.
32 He brought me also into the inmost court toward the east, and measured the
gate according to those measures.
33 And the chambers thereof, and frontes therof, and the arches therof were
according to these measures, & there were windowes therin, and in the arches
therof round about: it was fiftie cubites long, & fiue and twentie cubites
broade.
34 And the arches therof were towarde the vtter court, and paulme trees vpon the
frontes thereof on this side and on that side, & the goyng vp to it had eyght
steppes.
35 And he brought me to the north gate, & measured it according to those
measures.
36 The chambers thereof, the frontes therof, and the arches therof, and there
were windowes therin rounde about: and the length was fiftie cubites, & the
breadth fiue and twentie cubites.
37 And the frontes therof were towarde the vtter court, and paulme trees were
vpon the frontes therof on this side, and on that side, and the goyng vp to it
had eyght steppes.
38 And a chamber and the entrie thereof was vnder the frotes of the gates: there
they washed the burnt offeringes.
39 And in the porche of the gate stoode two tables on this side, and two tables
on that side, vpon the whiche they slue the burnt offering, and the sinne
offering, and the trespasse offering.
40 And at the side without the steppes at the entrie of the north gate stoode
two tables, and on the other side which was at the porche of the gate were two
tables.
41 Foure tables were on this side, and foure on that side by the side of the
gate, euen eyght tables, wherevpon they slue their sacrifices.
42 And the foure tables were of hewen stone for the burnt offring, of a cubite &
a halfe long, and a cubite and a halfe broade, and one cubite hye, wherevpon
were layde the instrumentes wherwith they slue the burnt offring, and the
sacrifice.
43 And within there were hookes one hand breadth long fastened rounde about, and
vpon the tables was the offering fleshe.
44 And without the inner gate were the chambers of the singers in the inwarde
court, whiche was at the side of the north gate, and their prospect was towarde
the south: and one was at the side of the east gate, hauing the prospect towarde
the north.
45 And he sayde vnto me: This chamber, whose prospect is towarde the south, is
for the priestes that haue charge to kepe the house.
46 And the chamber whose prospect is towarde the north is for the priestes that
haue charge to kepe the aulter: these are the sonnes of Sadoc, which of the
sonnes of Leui come neare to the Lorde, to minister vnto him.
47 So he measured the court, which had in length a hundred cubites, and a
hundred in breadth, euen fouresquare: and the aulter stoode before the house.
48 And he brought me to the porche of the house, and measured the porche fiue
cubites on this side, and fiue cubites on that side: and the breadth of the gate
was three cubites on this side, and three cubites on that side.
49 The length of the porche was twentie cubites, the breadth eleuen cubites, and
by steps went men vp to it: by the frontes also were pillers, one on this side,
and another on that side.

Chapter 41

1 After this he brought me to the temple, and measured the frontes sixe cubites
broade on the one side, and sixe cubites broade on the other side, which was the
breadth of the tabernacle.
2 The breadth of the doore was ten cubites, and the sides of the doore were fiue
cubites on the one side and fiue cubites on the other syde, and he measured the
length therof fourtie cubites, and the breadth twentie cubites.
3 Then went he in & measured the front of the doore two cubites: but the doore
it selfe was sixe cubites, and the breadth on the other side of the doore was
seuen cubites.
4 He measured the length therof twentie cubites, and the breadth twentie cubites
before the temple. And he said vnto me, This is the most holy place.
5 He measured also the wall of the house sixe cubites, and the breadth of a
chamber foure cubites round about the house on euery side.
6 And the chambers were chamber vpon chamber, three and thirtie in order: and
they entred the wall whiche was of the house for the chambers rounde about, that
they might be fastened, and not be fastened in the wall of the house.
7 Ther was an enlarging, and a winding about, mounting still vpwarde to the
chabers: for the staire of the house was mounting still vpward round about the
house, therfore the house was larger vpwarde: so they went vp from the lowest
chamber to the highest by the midst.
8 And I saw the house hye round about: the foundatios of the chambers were a ful
cane of sixe cubites vp to the armeholes.
9 The thickenesse of the wall which was for the chamber without was fiue
cubites, and that whiche remayned was the place of the chambers that were
within.
10 And betweene the chambers was the wydenesse of twentie cubites rounde about
the house on euery side.
11 And the doores of the chambers were toward the place that remayned, one doore
toward the north, and another toward the south: & the breadth of the place that
remayned was fiue cubites rounde about.
12 Now the buylding that was before the separate place at the end towarde the
west was seuentie cubites broade: and the wall of the buylding was fyue cubites
thicke round about, and the length ninetie cubites.
13 So he measured the house, which was a hundred cubites long, and the separate
place and the buylding with the walles were a hundred cubites long also.
14 The breadth also of the forefront of the house and of the separate place
towarde the east, was a hundred cubites.
15 And he measured the length of the buylding ouer against the separate place
which was behynde it, and the chambers on the one side & on the other side a
hundreth cubites, with the temple within, and the porches of the court.
16 The doore postes, and the narow windowes, & the chambers round about, on
three sides ouer against the doore, seeled with wood round about, and from the
ground vp to the windowes: and the windowes themselues were seeled.
17 And from aboue the doore vnto the house within and without, and vpon euery
wall rounde about within and without, toke he measure.
18 And it was made with Cherubims and paulme trees, so that a paulme tree was
betweene a Cherub and a Cherub, and euery Cherub had two faces.
19 So that the face of a man was toward the paulme tree on the one side, and the
face of a lion towarde the paulme tree on the other side: thus was it made
through all the house rounde about.
20 From the ground vnto aboue the doore were Cherubims & paulme trees made: and
thus was the wall of the temple.
21 The postes of the temple were foure squared, and the fashion of the
sanctuarie was appearaunce lyke appearaunce.
22 The aulter of wood was three cubites hye, and two cubites long: the corners,
the length, and the walles thereof were of wood. And he sayd vnto me, This is
the table that shalbe before the Lorde.
23 The temple and the holiest of all had either of them two doores.
24 And the doores had two doores a peece, euen two folding doores, two for the
one doore, and two doores for the other.
25 And vpon the doores of the temple, there were made Cherubims & paulme trees,
lyke as was made vpon the walles: & thicke beames vpon the forefront of the
porche without.
26 And there were narow windowes and paulme trees on the one side and on the
other side, by the sides of the porche and vpon the sides of the house, and
thicke beames.

Chapter 42

1 Then led he me into the vtter court by the way toward the north, and he
brought me into the chamber that was ouer against the separate place, whiche was
before the buylding towarde the north.
2 Before the length of a hundred cubites was the north doore: and the breadth
was fiftie cubites.
3 Ouer against the twentie cubites, which were for the inner court, and ouer
against the pauement, which was for the vtter court, was chamber against
chamber, three orders.
4 And before the chambers, ther was a walking place of ten cubites wyde inwarde,
the way of one cubite: and their doores towarde the north.
5 Thus the vpper chambers were alway narower: for those chambers seemed to eate
vp these, to wit the lower and the middlemer of the buylding.
6 For they were in three orders, but had no pillers as the pillers of the
courtes: therfore were they smaller then the nethermost and the middlemost to
recken from the grounde.
7 And the wall that was without ouer against the chambers, towarde the vtter
court on the forefront of the chambers, the length therof was fiftie cubits.
8 For the length of the chambers that were in the vtter court was fyftie
cubites: and lo, before the temple was a hundred cubites.
9 And vnder these chambers was the entrie from the east, as one goeth vnto them
from the vtter court.
10 In the thicknesse of the wall of the court towarde the east before the
separate place, and before the building of the chambers.
11 And the way before them after the appearaunce of the chambers which were
toward the north, as their length, so was their breadth: and all their entries
were according to their fashion, and according to their doores.
12 And according to the doores of the chambers that were toward the south, was a
doore in the head of the way, euen the way directly before the wall towarde the
east, as one entreth.
13 Then sayd he vnto me: The chambers toward the north, and the chambers towarde
the south, whiche are before the separate place, those be holy chambers, wherin
the priestes that approche vnto the Lorde must eate the most holy thinges, &
there must they lay the most holy thinges, and the meate offring, and sinne
offering, and trespasse offering: for it is a holy place.
14 When the priestes come therein, they shall not go out of the holy place into
the vtter court, but there they shall lay vp their garmentes wherin they
minister, for they are holy: & shall put on other garmentes, and so shall
approche to those which are for the people.
15 Now when he had finished the measuring of the house within, he led me foorth
toward the gate whose prospect is towarde the east, and he measured it rounde
about.
16 He measured the east side with the measuring cane fiue hundred canes, euen
with the measuring cane round about.
17 And he measured the north side fyue hundred canes, euen with the measuring
cane round about.
18 The south side also measured he fiue hundred canes, by the measuring cane.
19 He turned about also to the west side, and measured fiue hundred canes, by
the measuring cane.
20 So he measured it by the foure sides: it had a wall round about fyue hundred
canes long, and fiue hundred broade, to make a separation betweene the
sanctuarie, and the prophane place.

Chapter 43

1 So he brought me to the gate euen the gate that turneth towarde the east:
2 And beholde, then came the glorie of the God of Israel from out of the east,
whose voyce was lyke a great noyse of waters, and the earth was lightened with
his glorie.
3 And according to the appearaunce of the vision which I saw, euen according to
the vision which I sawe when I came to destroy the citie: and the visions were
like the visions whiche I sawe by the riuer Chebar, & I fell vpon my face.
4 And the glorie of the Lorde came into the house by the way of the gate whose
prospect is towarde the east.
5 So a winde toke me vp, and brought me into the innermer court: and behold, the
house was full of the glorie of the Lorde.
6 And I heard one speaking vnto me out of the house, & there stoode a man by me,
7 And he sayd vnto me: O thou sonne of man, this roome is my seate, & the place
of my foote steppes, wheras I wil dwel among the children of Israel for
euermore: so that the house of Israel shal no more defile my holy name, neither
they nor their kinges thorowe their whordome, and thorowe the dead bodies of
their kinges in their hye places.
8 Albeit they haue set their thresholdes by my thresholdes, and their postes by
my postes, and a wal betwixt me and them, yet haue they defiled my holy name
with their abominations that they haue committed: wherfore I haue consumed them
in my wrath.
9 But nowe let them put away their whordome, and the dead bodies of their kinges
out of my sight, and I will dwel among them for euermore.
10 Therfore O thou sonne of man, shewe thou the house of Israel this house, that
they may be ashamed of their wickednesse, & measure them selues an example
therat.
11 And if they be ashamed of all their workes, then shew them the fourme of the
house and patterne thereof, the going out, the comming in, all the maner therof,
yea all the ordinaunces thereof, the figures, and all the lawes thereof, and
write it in their sight, that they may kepe the whole fashion thereof, and all
the ordinaunces thereof, and do them.
12 This is the lawe of the house: Upon the top of the mount, shall all the
limits thereof be, rounde about the most holy place: lo, this is the lawe of the
house.
13 And these are the measures of the aulter in cubites: the cubite is a cubite
and a hande breadth, the botome shalbe a cubite, and the breadth a cubite, & the
border therof by the edge thereof rounde about was one span, and this shalbe the
height of the aulter.
14 And from the bottome vpon the groud vnto the lower peece shalbe two cubites,
and the breadth one cubite: and from the litle peece to the great peece shalbe
foure cubites, & the breadth one cubite.
15 The aulter was foure cubites hie, and from the aulter vpwarde stoode foure
hornes.
16 And the aulter was twelue cubites long, and twelue cubites broade, square in
the foure corners thereof.
17 The frame of the aulter shalbe fourteene cubites long, and fourteene broade
in the foure square corners thereof, and the border about it shalbe halfe a
cubite, and the bottome thereof shalbe a cubite about, and the steps thereof
shalbe turned toward the east.
18 And he saide vnto me, Thou sonne of man, thus saith the Lorde God: These are
the ordinaunces of the aulter, in the day when it is made, to offer burnt
offeringes thereupon, & to sprinckle blood thereupon.
19 And thou shalt geue to the priestes, to the Leuites that be of the seede of
Sadoc, and approche vnto me saith the Lord God to minister vnto me, a young
bullocke for a sinne offering.
20 And thou shalt take of the blood therof, & put it on the foure hornes of it,
and on the foure corners of the frame, and vpon the border rounde about: thus
shalt thou cleanse it, and purge it.
21 Thou shalt take the bullocke also of the sinne offering, and burne him in the
appoynted place without the sanctuary.
22 The seconde day, take a goate bucke without blemishe for a sinne offering, to
cleanse the aulter withal, like as it was cleansed with the bullocke.
23 Now when thou hast made an ende of cleansing it, then offer a young bullocke
without blemishe, and a ramme out of the flocke without blemishe also.
24 Offer them before the Lorde, and let the priestes cast salt therupon, and
geue them so vnto the Lorde for a burnt offering.
25 Seuen dayes shalt thou prepare euery day a goate bucke for sinne, a young
bullocke and a ramme of the flocke, both without blemishe shall they prepare.
26 Seuen dayes shall they reconcile and cleanse the aulter, and fill the place
thereof.
27 When these dayes are expired, then vpon the eight day & so foorth, the
priestes shall make your burnt offringes, and peace offringes vpon the aulter:
so I wyll accept you, saith the Lorde God.

Chapter 44

1 After this, he brought me againe to the outward gate of the sanctuarie on the
east side, and that was shut.
2 Then saide the lorde vnto me: This gate shalbe still shut and not opened,
neither shall any man go through it: for the Lorde God of Israel hath entred by
it, and it shalbe shut.
3 It is for the prince, the prince him selfe shal sit in it to eate bread before
the lord: he shal enter by the way of the porche of that gate, and shal go out
by the way of the same.
4 Then brought he me toward the north gate before the house: and as I loked,
beholde the glory of the Lorde filled the house of the Lorde, and I fell vpon my
face.
5 So the Lorde spake vnto me: O thou sonne of man, set thyne heart, and beholde
with thyne eyes, and heare with thyne eares al that I say vnto thee concerning
all the ordinaunces of the house of the Lorde, and all the lawes thereof, and
marke well the entring in of the house, with euery going foorth of the
sanctuarie.
6 And thou shalt say to the rebellious euen to the house of Israel, thus saith
the Lorde God: O house of Israel, ye haue inough of al your abhominations.
7 Seeing ye haue brought into my sanctuary straungers hauing vncircumcized
heartes and vncircumcized fleshe, to be in my sanctuarie to pollute my house,
when ye offer my bread, fat, and blood, and they haue broken my couenaunt
because of all your abhominations:
8 And ye haue not kept the ordinaunces of my holy thinges, and ye haue set
kepers to kepe my sanctuarie for you.
9 Therefore thus saith the Lorde God: Of al the straungers that dwell among the
children of Israel, no straunger vncircumcized in heart, nor vncircumcized in
fleshe, shall enter into my sanctuarie.
10 But the Leuites that went backe from me when Israel went astraye, which
strayed from me after their idols, shal beare their iniquitie:
11 And they shalbe ministers in my sanctuary, and kepe the gates of the house,
and minister in the house: they shall slay the burnt offeringes, and the
sacrifice for the people, and they shal stand before them to serue them.
12 Because they serued before their idols, and caused the house of Israel to
fall into iniquitie: therefore haue I lift vp my hande against them, saith the
Lorde God, and they shal beare their iniquitie.
13 And they shall not come neare vnto me to do the office of a prieste vnto me,
neither shall they come neare vnto any of myne holy thinges in the most holy
place: but they shall beare their owne shame and abhominations which they haue
done.
14 And I wyll make them kepers of the watch of the house for all the seruice
thereof, & for al that shalbe done therin.
15 But the priestes, the Leuites, the sonnes of Sadoc that kept the charge of my
sanctuarie when the children of Israel straied from me, shal come to me to do me
seruice, to stand before me, and to offer me the fat and the blood, saith the
Lorde God.
16 They shall go into my sanctuarie, and apropche vnto my table to do me
seruice, and they shall kepe my charge.
17 Now when they go in at the gates of the innermer court, they shal put on
linnen clothes, so that no woollen come vpon them while they do seruice vnder
the gates of the innermer court, and with in.
18 They shall haue linnen bonnets vpon their heades, and linnen breeches vpon
their loynes: they shal not gird them selues in the sweate.
19 And when they go foorth into the vtter court euen to the vtter court of the
people, they shall put of the clothes wherein they haue ministred, and laye them
in the chamber of the sanctuarie, and put on other apparel, and they shal not
sanctifie the people with their clothes.
20 They shall not shaue their heades, nor suffer their here to growe long, but
poule their heades onely.
21 Al the priestes that go into the inmost court shal drinke no wine.
22 They shall mary no widowe, neither one that is put from her husband: but a
maide of the seede of the house of Israel, or a widowe that hath had a priest
before.
23 They shall shewe my people the difference betweene the holy and vnholy, and
cause them to discerne betwixt the cleane and vncleane.
24 And in controuersie they shall stand to iudge, and geue sentence after my
iudgementes: and my lawes and my statutes shal they kepe in al my solempne
feastes, and halowe my Sabbathes.
25 They shall come at no dead person to defile them selues: but with father or
mother, sonne or daughter, brother or sister, that hath had yet no husband, may
they be defiled.
26 And when he is cleansed, there shalbe reckened vnto him seuen dayes.
27 And when he goeth into the sanctuarie vnto the inner court to minister in the
sanctuarie, he shal bring his sinne offring saith the Lorde.
28 There shalbe to them an inheritauce, euen I their inheritaunce: but
possession shall ye geue them none in Israel, for I am their possession.
29 The meate offering, sinne offring, and trespasse offring shal they eate: &
euery dedicate thing in Israel shalbe theirs.
30 And all the first of all the first borne, and euery oblation, euen all of
euery sort of your oblations shalbe the priestes: ye shall also geue vnto the
priestes the first of your dough, that he may cause the blessing to rest in
thyne house.
31 But the priestes shal eate nothing that is dead by it selfe or torne of foule
or of beaste.

Chapter 45

1 When ye deuide the land by the lot for inheritaunce, ye shall offer an
oblation to the Lorde, a holy portion of the lande, twentie and fiue thousand
canes long, and ten thousand broade: this shalbe holy in all the borders thereof
rounde about.
2 Of this part there shall belong vnto the sanctuarie fiue hundred cubites in
length with fiue hundred in breadth square rounde about: and fiftie cubites
rounde about for the suburbes.
3 And of this measure shalt thou measure, namely of the length of twentie & fiue
thousand, and the breadth of ten thousand: and in it shalbe the sanctuarie and
the most holy place.
4 That holy portion of the lande shall parteyne vnto the priestes which do
seruice in the sanctuarie, which come neare to serue the Lorde: and it shalbe
vnto them a place for their houses, and a holy place for the sanctuarie.
5 And in the twentie and fiue thousand length, and ten thousand breadth, shall
the Leuites that minister in the house haue their possession for twentie
chambers.
6 Ye shal geue also vnto the citie a possession of fiue thousand canes broade,
and twentie and fiue thousand long, ouer against the oblation of the holy
portion, that shalbe for the whole house of Israel.
7 And a portion shalbe for the prince on this side and on that side of the
oblation of the holy portion, and of the possession of the citie, euen before
the oblation of the holy portion, and before the possession of the citie, from
the west corner westwarde, & from the east corner eastwarde: and the length
shalbe by one of the portions, from the west border vnto the east border.
8 In this lande shalbe his possession in Israel: and my princes shall no more
oppresse my people, and the rest of the lande shall they geue to the house of
Israel according to their tribes.
9 Thus saith the Lorde God, Let it suffise you O ye princes of Israel: leaue of
crueltie and oppression, and execute iudgement and iustice: take away your
exactions from my people, saith the lord God.
10 Ye shall haue a true Ballaunce, a true Ephah, and a true Bath.
11 The Ephah and the Bath shalbe alyke: one Bath shall containe the tenth parte
of an Homer, and an Ephah the tenth part of an Homer: the equalitie thereof
shalbe after the Homer.
12 The Sicle maketh twentie Gerrahs: & twentie Sicles, and twentie & fiue, and
fifteene Sicles make a Maneh.
13 This is the oblation that ye shall offer: the sixt part of an Ephah out of an
Homer of wheate, and the sixt part of an Ephah out of an Homer of barlye.
14 Concerning the ordinaunces of the oyle, euen of the Bath of oyle, ye shall
offer the tenth part of a Bath out of the Cor: ten Bathes shalbe a Homer,
because ten Bathes fill a Homer.
15 And one lambe from two hundred sheepe out of the fat pastures of Israel, for
a meate offring, burnt offring, and peace offring, to reconcile them, saith the
Lorde God.
16 All the people of the lande shall geue this oblation for the prince in
Israel.
17 Againe, it shalbe the princes part to offer burnt offringes, meate offringes,
and wine offringes, in the holy dayes, newe moones, Sabbathes, & in all the hie
feastes of the house of Israel: he shal prepare the sinne offring, meate
offring, burnt offring, and peace offring, to reconcile the house of Israel.
18 Thus saith the Lorde God: The first day of the first moneth, thou shalt take
a young bullocke without blemishe, and cleanse the sanctuarie.
19 So the priest shall take of the blood of the sinne offring, and put it vpon
the postes of the house, & vpon the foure corners of the frame of the aulter, &
vpon the postes of the gate of the inner court.
20 And thus shalt thou do also the seuenth day of the moneth for such as haue
sinned of ignoraunce, or being deceaued, to reconcile the house withall.
21 Upon the fourteenth day of the first moneth, ye shall haue the passouer, a
feast of seuen dayes, and ye shall eate vnleauened bread.
22 Upon the same day shal the prince prepare for him selfe and all the people of
the lande a bullocke for a sinne offring.
23 And in the seuen dayes of the feast, he shall make a burnt offring to the
Lord, euen of seuen bullockes & seue rammes without blemishe dayly, for seuen
dayes, and a hee goate dayly for a sinne offring.
24 And he shall prepare a meate offering of an Ephah for a bullocke, & an Ephah
for a ramme, and a Hin of oyle for an Ephah.
25 In the seuenth moneth in the fifteenth day of the moneth on the feast, he
shall do according vnto these for seuen dayes: according to the sinne offering,
according to the burnt offring, and according to the meate offring, and
according to the oyle.

Chapter 46

1 Thus saith the Lorde God: The gate of the inner court towarde the east shalbe
shut the sixe working dayes: but in the Sabbath & in the day of the new moone it
shalbe opened.
2 And the prince shall enter by the way of the porche of the gate without, and
shall stande by the poste of the gate: and the priestes shal make his burnt
offring, and his peace offringes, and he shall worship at the thresholde of the
gate, & go foorth: and the gate shall not be shut till the euening.
3 On the same maner shall the people of the lande also do their worship before
the Lorde, at the doore of this gate vpon the Sabbathes, and new moones.
4 The burnt offring that the prince shal bring vnto the lorde vpon the Sabbath,
shalbe sixe lambes without blemish, and a ramme without blemishe.
5 And the meate offring shalbe an Ephah for a ramme, and the meate offring for
the lambes a gift of his hande, and a Hin of oyle to an Ephah.
6 In the day of the new moneth, it shalbe a young bullocke without blemishe, and
sixelambes, and a ramme also without blemishe.
7 With the bullocke he shall geue an Ephah, & with the ramme an Ephah also for a
meate offring: but to the lambes according as his hande shal take, and a Hin of
oyle to an Ephah.
8 And when the prince shall enter, he shal go in by the way of the porche of
that gate: he shall go foorth by the way thereof.
9 But when the people of the lande come before the Lorde in the hie solempne
feast, as many as come in by the north gate to do worship, shal go out againe at
the south gate: and they that come in at the south gate, shall go foorth againe
at the north gate: there shall none returne by the gate where he came in, but
shall go right foorth ouer on the other side.
10 And the prince he shall go in the midst of them when they go in, and so come
foorth when they come foorth.
11 Upon the solempne & hie feast dayes this shalbe the meate offring: an Ephah
to a bullocke, & an Ephah to a ramme, and to the lambes the gift of his hande,
and a Hin of oyle to an Ephah.
12 Nowe when the prince shall make a free burnt offring, or peace offringes
freely vnto the Lord: one then shal open him the gate that turneth toward the
east, and he shal make his burnt offeringes, and his peace offeringes, as he did
on the Sabbath day: after he shall go foorth, and when he is gone foorth, one
shall shut the gate.
13 Thou shalt dayly make a burnt offering vnto the Lorde of a lambe of one yere
without blemishe, thou shalt do it euery morning.
14 Thou shalt prepare a meate offering for it euery morning, the sixt part of an
Ephah, and the third part of a Hin of oyle to mingle with the fine floure: this
meate offering shalbe continually by a perpetuall ordinaunce vnto the Lorde.
15 Thus shal they prepare the lambe, the meate offering, & oyle, euery morning,
for a continuall burnt offering.
16 Moreouer, thus saith the Lorde God: If the prince geue a gift vnto any of his
sonnes, the inheritaunce thereof shalbe his sonnes: their possession shalbe by
inheritaunce.
17 But if he geue a gift of his inheritaunce to one of his seruauntes, then it
shalbe his to the yere of libertie, and then returne to the prince: but the
inheritaunce thereof is his sonnes and shalbe theirs.
18 The prince also shall take none of the peoples inheritaunce, nor put them
from their possession: but to his sonnes shall he geue his owne possession, that
my people be not scattered abrode euery man from his possession.
19 And he brought me through the entraunce at the side of the gate, to the holy
chambers of the priestes which stoode toward the north, & beholde, there was a
place vpon the west side of them.
20 Then saide he vnto me: This is the place where the priestes shall seethe the
trespasse and sinne offringes, and bake the meate offringes: that they neede not
beare them into the outward court, and to sanctifie the people.
21 So he brought me into the vtter court, & caused me to go by the foure corners
of the court: and beholde, in euery corner of the court, there was a court.
22 In the foure corners of the court there were courtes ioyned, of fourtie
cubites long, and thirtie broade: these foure corners were of one measure.
23 And there went a wall rounde about them, euen about those foure: and vnder
the walles there were kitchins made rounde about.
24 Then saide he vnto me: These are the cookes houses, where the ministers of
the house shall boyle the sacrifice of the people.

Chapter 47

1 Afterwarde he brought me againe vnto the doore of the house, and beholde there
gushed out waters from vnder the thresholde of the house eastwarde: for the
forefront of the house stoode toward the east: & the waters ran downe from vnder
the right side of the house, which lyeth to the aulter southwarde.
2 Then led he me out to the north gate, and led me about by the way without vnto
the vtter gate, by the way that turneth eastward: and behold, there issued
foorth waters from the right side.
3 Now when the man that had the line in his hande went foorth eastward, he
measured a thousand cubites, and then he brought me through the waters, the
waters were to the ancles.
4 So he measured yet a thousande, and brought me through ye waters, the waters
were to the knees: yet measured he a thousand, and brought me through, the
waters were to the loynes.
5 After this he measured a thousand againe, then was it such a riuer that I
might not wade through it, the waters was risen, & the waters did flowe as a
riuer that might not be waded ouer.
6 And he saide vnto me: Hast thou seene this O thou sonne of man? and with that
he brought me and caused me to returne to the riuer banke againe.
7 Now when I returned, beholde at the bancke of the riuer were very many trees
on the one side and on the other.
8 Then saide he vnto me: These waters flowe out toward the east countrey, and
runne downe into the plaine, & come into the sea: which when it commeth into the
sea, the waters shalbe holsome.
9 Yea, all that liue and moue, whereunto this riuer commeth, shall liue: and
there shalbe a very great multitude of fishe, because these waters shal come
thither, for they shalbe holsome: and euery thing shall liue whyther the riuer
commeth.
10 By this riuer shall the fishers stand, from En gaddi vnto En Eglaim, and ther
spreade out their nets: for their fishe shalbe according to their kindes as the
fishe of the maine sea, exceeding many.
11 But the marishes thereof, and the pits thereof, shal not be made holsome,
they shalbe made salt pits.
12 By this riuer vpon the bankes therof on this side and on that side shall grow
all trees for meate, whose leaues shall not fade, neither shall the fruite
thereof fall, but shall bring foorth newe fruite according to his monethes, for
the waters thereof run out of the sanctuarie: and the fruite thereof shalbe for
meate, and the leaues thereof for medicine.
13 Thus saith the Lorde God: Let this be the border whereby ye shall inherite
the lande according to the twelue tribes of Israel, Ioseph shall haue two
portions.
14 And ye shall inherite it one aswell as an other, concerning the which I lift
vp my hande to geue it vnto your fathers: and this lande shall fall vnto you for
inheritaunce.
15 This is the border of the lande vpon the north side, from the maine sea
toward Hethlon, as men go to Zedada.
16 namely Hamah, Berotha, Sabarim, which are betweene the borders of Damascus,
and betweene the borders of Hamah, Hazar Hatichon, that lyeth vpon the coastes
of Hauran.
17 Thus the borders from the sea foorth shalbe Hazar Enan, the border of
Damascus, and the north northwarde, and the borders of Hamah: this is the north
part.
18 The east side shall ye measure from Hauran and Damascus, from Galead and the
land of Israel by Iordane, and from the border vnto the cast sea: & this is the
east part.
19 The south side shalbe toward Teman, from Thamar to the waters of strife in
Cades, and the riuer to the maine sea: and that is the south part towarde Teman.
20 The west part also shalbe the great sea, from the borders till a man come
ouer against Hamah: this is the west part.
21 This lande shall ye part among you according to the tribes of Israel,
22 And deuide it by lot to be an heritage for you, & for the straungers that
dwell among you and beget children among you: for ye shall take them among the
children of Israel lyke as though they were of your owne countrey, and they
shall haue heritage with you among the children of Israel.
23 And in what tribe the straunger dwelleth, in the same tribe shall ye geue him
his heritage, saith the Lorde God.

Chapter 48

1 These are ye names of the tribes: from the north side to the coast towarde
Hethlon, till thou comest vnto Hamah and Hazar, Enan, the borders of Damascus
northward, the coast of Hamah, Dan shall haue his portion from the east quarter
vnto the west.
2 Upon the borders of Dan, from the east side vnto the west, shall Aser haue his
portion.
3 Upon the borders of Aser, from the east part vnto the west, shall Nephthali
haue his portion.
4 Upon the borders of Nephthali, from the east quarter vnto the west, shal
Manasses haue his portion.
5 Upon the borders of Manasses, from the east side vnto the west, shall Ephraim
haue his portion.
6 Upon the borders of Ephraim, from the east part vnto the west, shall Ruben
haue his portion.
7 Upon the borders of Ruben, from the east quarter vnto the west, shall Iuda
haue his portion.
8 Upon the borders of Iuda, from the east part vnto the west part, shalbe the
offering which they shall offer of fiue and twentie thousand canes brode, and of
length as one of the partes, from the east side vnto the west side: and the
sanctuarie shalbe in the midst of it.
9 The oblation that ye shall offer vnto the Lord, shalbe fiue and twentie
thousand long, and ten thousand brode.
10 And for these euen for the priestes shalbe this holy oblation: toward the
north fiue & twentie thousand long & toward the west ten thousand brode, towarde
the east ten thousand brode also, and toward the south fiue and twentie thousand
long, & the sanctuarie of the Lorde shalbe in the midst thereof.
11 This sanctified portion shalbe the priestes that are of the children of
Sadoc, which haue kept my charge, which went not astray in the errour of the
children of Israel like as the Leuites went astray.
12 Therefore this oblation of the lande that is offered, shalbe theirs as a
thing most holy, hard vpon the borders of the Leuites.
13 And ouer against the border of the priestes, shall the Leuites haue fiue and
twentie thousand long, & ten thousand brode: all the length shalbe fiue &
twentie thousand, and the breadth ten thousand.
14 Of this portion they shall sell nothing, nor make any permutation thereof,
nor alienate the first fruites of the lande: for it is holy vnto the Lorde.
15 And the fiue thousande that are left in the breadth ouer against the fiue and
twentie thousand, shalbe a prophane place for the citie, for housing, & for
suburbes: and the citie shalbe in the midst thereof.
16 And these shalbe the measures therof: the north part fiue hundred and foure
thousand, and the south part fiue hundred and foure thousand, and the east part
fiue hundred and foure thousand, and the west part fiue hundred & foure
thousand.
17 The suburbes of the citie shall haue toward the north two hundred and fiftie,
toward the south two hundred and fiftie, toward the east two hundred and fiftie,
toward the west also two hundred and fiftie.
18 And the residue in length ouer against the oblation of the holy portion,
shalbe ten thousand toward the east, and ten thousand toward the west: and it
shalbe ouer against the oblation of the holy portion: and the encrease thereof
shalbe for their meate that serue the citie.
19 And they that serue the citie, they shal serue it out of all the tribes of
Israel.
20 All the oblation shalbe fiue and twentie thousand with fiue and twentie
thousand: ye shall offer this oblation foure square, for the sanctuarie, and for
the possession of the citie.
21 And the residue shalbe for the prince, on the one side and on the other of
the holy oblation, and of the possession of the citie ouer against the fiue and
twentie thousand of the oblation toward the east border: and westward ouer
against the fiue and twentie thousand towarde the west border, ouer against
shalbe the portion for the prince: this shalbe the holy oblation, and the house
of the sanctuarie shalbe in the midst thereof.
22 Moreouer, from the possession of the Leuites, and the cities possession, that
which is in the midst shalbe the princes, betwixt the border of Iuda and the
border of Beniamin shalbe the princes.
23 Nowe of the other tribes: from the east part vnto the west, shall Beniamin
haue his portion.
24 Upon the borders of Beniamin, from the east side vnto the west, shall Simeon
haue his portion.
25 Upon the borders of Simeon, from the east side vnto the west, shal Isachar
haue his portion.
26 Upon the borders of Isachar, from the east side vnto the west, shall Zabulon
haue his portion.
27 Upon the borders of Zabulon, from the east part vnto the west, shall Gad haue
his portion.
28 Upon the borders of Gad at the south side toward Temanah, the border shalbe
from Thamar, vnto the waters of strife to Cades, and to the riuer that runneth
into the maine sea.
29 This is the lande which ye shal deuide by lot for an inheritauce vnto the
tribes of Israel, and these be their portions saith the Lorde God.
30 These be the bondes of the citie, vpon the north part fiue hundred and foure
thousand measures.
31 The gates of the citie shal haue the names of the tribes of Israel, three
gates of the north side: one gate of Ruben, another of Iuda, the third of Leui.
32 Upon the east side fiue hundred and foure thousand measures, with three
gates: the one of Ioseph, another of Beniamin, the third of Dan.
33 Upon the south side fiue hundred and foure thousand measures, with the three
gates: the one of Simeon, another of Isachar, the third of Zabulon.
34 And vpon the west side, fiue hundred and fiue thousand measures, with their
three gates also: the one of Gad, another of Aser, the third of Nephthali.
35 Thus shal it haue eighteene thousand measures rounde about: and the name of
the citie from that time foorth, shalbe, The Lorde is there.


Daniel

Chapter 1

1 In the third yere of the raigne of Iehoachim king of Iuda, came Nabuchodonozor
king of Babylon vnto Hierusalem, & besieged it.
2 And the Lord deliuered Iehoachim the king of Iuda into his hande, with part of
the vessels of the house of God, which he caried away into the lande of Sennar
to the house of his God, and he brought the vessels into his gods treasurie.
3 And the king spake vnto Asphenaz the chiefe chamberlaine, that he should bring
him certaine of the children of Israel, of the kinges seede, and of the princes,
4 Springaldes without any blemishe, but well fauoured, studious in al wisdome,
skilfull for knowledge, able to vtter knowledge, & such as haue liuelinesse in
the that they may stand in the kinges palace: & whom they might teache the
learning & the toung of the Chaldeans.
5 Unto these the king appoynted a dayly prouision euery day, of a portion of the
kinges meate, and of the wine which he dranke, so to norishe them three yeres,
that afterwarde they might stande before the king.
6 Among these nowe were certayne of the children of Iuda: namely Daniel,
Ananias, Misael, and Azarias.
7 Unto these the chiefe chamberlayne gaue other names, and called Daniel,
Baltassar: Ananias, Sidrach: Misael, Misach: and Azarias, Abednego.
8 But Daniel purposed in his heart that he woulde not defile hym selfe with the
portion of the kinges meate, nor with the wyne which he dranke: therefore he
required the chiefe chamberlayne that he might not defile him selfe.
9 (And God brought Daniel into fauour and tender loue with the chiefe
chamberlayne.)
10 And the chiefe chamberlayne sayde vnto Daniel, I am afrayde of my lord the
king whiche hath appoynted you your meate and your drinke: wherfore should he
see your faces worse liking then the springalds of your age, & so ye shal make
me indaunger my head vnto the king.
11 Then Daniel sayde vnto Melassar, whom the chiefe chamberlayne had set ouer
Daniel, Ananias, Misael, and Azarias:
12 O proue but ten dayes with thy seruauntes, and let vs haue pulse to eate, and
water to drinke.
13 Then let our countenaunces be loked vpon before thee, and the countenaunces
of the children that eate of the portion of the kinges meate: and as thou seest,
deale with thy seruauntes.
14 So he consented to them in this matter, and proued them ten dayes.
15 And at the end of ten dayes, their countenaunces appeared fairer and fatter
in fleshe then all the childrens which did eate the portion of the kinges meate.
16 Thus Melassar toke away the portion of their meate, and the wyne that they
shoulde drinke, and gaue them pulse.
17 As for these foure children, God gaue them knowledge and vnderstanding in all
learning & wysdome: also he gaue Daniel vnderstanding of all visions and
dreames.
18 Nowe when the time was expired, that the king had appoynted to bring them in,
the chiefe chamberlayne brought them before Nabuchodonozor.
19 And the king communed with them: but among them all were founde none such as
Daniel, Ananias, Misael, and Azarias: therfore stoode they before the king.
20 In all matters of wysdome and vnderstanding that the king enquired of them,
he founde them ten times better then all the wyse men and soothsayers that were
in all his realme.
21 And Daniel abode still vnto the first yere of king Cyrus.

Chapter 2

1 In the second yere of the raigne of Nabuchodonozor, had Nabuchodonozor a
dreame, wherthorowe his spirite was troubled & his sleepe brake from him.
2 Then the king commaunded to cal the wise men, and soothsayers, & sorcerers,
and the Chaldees, for to shew the king his dreame: So they came, & stoode before
the king.
3 And the king sayde vnto them: I haue dreamed a dreame, and my spirite was
troubled to knowe the dreame.
4 Upon this the Chaldees aunswered the king in the Syrians speache, O king, God
saue thy life for euer: Shewe thy seruauntes the dreame, and we shal shewe the
interpretation.
5 The king aunswered and sayde to the Chaldeans, The thing is gone fro me: If ye
will not make me vnderstand the dreame with the interpretation therof, ye shall
be drawne in peeces, & your houses made a lakes.
6 But if ye tell me the dreame and the interpretation therof, ye shall receaue
of me giftes, rewardes, and great honour, therefore shewe me the dreame and the
interpretation therof.
7 They aunswered againe, and said: The king must shewe his seruauntes the
dreame, and so shal we declare the interpretation therof.
8 Then the king aunswered, saying: I perceaue of a trueth that ye would redeeme
the time, for so much as ye see the thing is gone fro me.
9 Therfore if ye wil not tel me the dreame, this is your only purpose, ye haue
prepared liyng & corrupt wordes to speake before me, til the time be chaunged:
therfore tell me the dreame, that I may knowe that ye can declare me the
interpretation therof.
10 Upon this the Chaldees gaue aunswere before the king, and sayde: There is no
man vpon earth that can tell the thing which the king speaketh of, yea there is
neither king, prince, nor lorde, that euer asked such thinges at a wyse man,
soothsayer, or Chaldean.
11 For it is a rare matter that the king requireth, neither is there any that
can certifie the king therof, except the gods whose dwelling is not with fleshe.
12 For the which cause the king was wroth with great indignation, & commaunded
to destroy al the wise men at Babylon.
13 So the decree went foorth, and the wise men were slayne: they sought also to
slay Daniel, with his companions.
14 Then Daniel stayed the counsell and decree with Arioch the captayne of the
kinges garde, who was gone foorth to put to death the wise men of Babylon.
15 He aunswered and sayde vnto Arioch the kinges captayne: why is the sentence
so hastie from the king? Then Arioch tolde Daniel the matter.
16 Upon this went Daniel, and desired the king that he woulde geue him leysure,
and that he would shewe the king the interpretation.
17 Then Daniel went to his house, and shewed the thing to Ananias, Misael, and
Azarias, his companions:
18 That they shoulde beseche the God of heauen for grace in this secrete, that
Daniel and his felowes, with other such as were wyse in Babylon, perished not.
19 Then was the secrete reuealed vnto Daniel in a vision by night: then Daniel
praysed the God of heauen.
20 Daniel also aunswered, and said: The name of God be praysed for euer & euer:
for wysdome and strength are his.
21 He chaungeth the times and seasons, he taketh away kinges, he setteth vp
kinges: he geueth wysdome vnto the wyse, and vnderstanding to those that
vnderstande.
22 He reuealeth the deepe & secrete thinges, he knoweth the thing that lieth in
darknesse, for the light dwelleth with him.
23 I thanke thee and prayse thee O thou God of my fathers, that thou hast geuen
me wisdome and strength, and hast shewed me now the thing that we desired of
thee: for thou hast declared the kinges matter vnto vs.
24 Upon this went Daniel in vnto Arioch, whom the king had ordeined to destroy
the wise men at Babylon: he went and sayde thus vnto him, Destroy not the wyse
men of Babylon, but bring me before the king, and I shall shewe the king the
interpretation.
25 Then Arioch brought Daniel before the king in all the haste, and sayde thus
vnto him: I haue founde a man among the children of Iuda that were brought
captiues, that will declare vnto the king the interpretation.
26 Then aunswered the king and sayd vnto Daniel, whose name was Baltassar: Art
thou able to shewe me the dreame which I haue seene, and the interpretation
therof?
27 Daniel aunswered in the presence of the king, and sayd: As for this secrete
for the whiche the king maketh inquisition, there can neither the men of
vnderstanding, nor soothsayers, nor the wyse men, nor readers of destinies
declare it vnto the king:
28 But there is a God in heauen that reuealeth secretes, & sheweth the king
Nabuchodonozor what is for to come in the latter dayes. Thy dreame and that
whiche thou hast seene in thyne head vpon thy bed, is this.
29 O king, when thou wast in thy bed, thoughtes came into thy mynde what should
come hereafter: so he that is the opener of misteries, telleth thee what is for
to come.
30 As for me, this secrete is not shewed me for any wysdome that I haue more
then any other liuing: but onely that I might shew the king the interpretation,
and that thou mightest knowe the thoughtes of thyne owne heart.
31 Thou king sawest, and beholde, there was a great image: this great image
whose brightnesse was excellent, stoode before thee, and the fourme therof was
terrible.
32 This images head was of fine gold, his brest and armes of siluer, his belly
and his thighes of brasse.
33 His legges were of iron, his feete were part of iron and part of clay.
34 Thou beheldest it till a stone was cut without handes, which smote the image
vpon his feete that were of iron & clay, and brake them to peeces.
35 Then was the iron, the clay, the brasse, the siluer and gold broken al
together, & became like ye chaffe of sommer floores, and the winde caryed them
away, that no place was found for them: & the stone that smote the image became
a great mountayne, and filled the whole earth.
36 This is the dreame: and now will we shew before the king what it meaneth.
37 O king, thou art a king of kinges: for the God of heaue hath geuen vnto thee
a kingdome, power, strength, & glorie.
38 And in all places whersoeuer the children of men dwell, the beastes of the
fielde, and the foules of the aire hath he geuen into thy hande, and hath made
thee ruler in them all: thou art this head of golde.
39 After thee shall arise another kingdome inferior to thee, & another third
kingdome shalbe of brasse, whiche shall beare rule ouer all the earth.
40 The fourth kingdome shalbe strong as iron: for as iron breaketh in peeces and
subdueth all thinges, and as iron bruiseth all these thinges, so shall it breake
in peeces and bruise all.
41 Where as thou sawest the feete & toes, parte of potters clay & part of iron,
the kingdome shalbe deuided, but there shalbe in it of the strength of the iron,
for so much as thou sawest the iron mixt with the clay and earth.
42 And as the toes of the feete were part of iron and part of clay: so shal the
kingdome be part strong and part broken.
43 And wheras thou sawest iron mixt with clay and earth, they shall mingle
themselues with the seede of men, and yet not ioyne one with another, as iron
will not be mixt with clay.
44 And in the dayes of these kinges, shall the God of heauen set vp a kingdome,
which shall neuer be destroyed, and this kingdome shall not be geuen ouer to
another people: but it shall breake and destroy al these kingdomes, and it shal
stand for euer.
45 Like as thou sawest that without any handes there was cut out of the mount a
stone, whiche brake the iron, the brasse, the clay, the siluer and gold in
peeces: so the great God hath shewed the king what shall come to passe after
this: This is a true dreame, & the interpretation of it is sure.
46 Then the king Nabuchodonozor fell downe vpon his face, and bowed hym selfe
vnto Daniel, and commaunded to ordeine rewardes and sweete odours for hym.
47 The king aunswered Daniel, & sayde: Of a trueth your God is a God of gods,
and the Lorde of kinges, and a reuealer of secretes, seing thou couldest reueale
this secrete.
48 So the king made Daniel a great man, and gaue him many & great giftes: he
made hym ruler of all the countreys of Babylon, and the chiefe of the rulers
aboue all the wyse men of Babylon.
49 Then Daniel made request to the king, and he set Sidrach, Misach, and
Abednego ouer the charge of the prouince of Babylon: but Daniel sate in the
kinges gate.

Chapter 3

1 Nabuchodonozor ye king made an image of gold, whiche was threescore cubites
hie, and sixe cubites thicke: he set it vp in the plaine of Dura, in the
prouince of Babylon.
2 Then Nabuchodonozor the king sent foorth to gather together the dukes, lordes,
and nobles, the iudges and officers, the deputies, and sherifes, with all the
rulers of the prouinces, that they might come to the dedication of the image
whiche Nabuchodonozor the king had set vp.
3 So the dukes, lordes, and nobles, the iudges, & officers, deputies, &
sherifes, with all the rulers of the prouince, gathered them together vnto the
dedicating of the image that Nabuchodonozor the king had set vp, & they stoode
before the image whiche Nabuchodonozor had set vp.
4 Then an herald cryed a loude: To you it is commaunded O people, nations, and
languages,
5 That whe ye heare the noyse of the cornet, trumpet, harpe, shawme, psaltries,
dulcimer, and al maner of instrumentes of musicke, ye fall downe and worship
that golden image that Nabuchodonozor the king hath set vp.
6 Whoso then falleth not downe & worshippeth, shall euen the same houre be cast
into the mids of a hot firie fornace.
7 Therfore when all the folke heard the noyse of the cornet, trumpet, harpe,
shawme, psaltries, and al instrumentes of musicke, then all the people, nations,
and languages fell downe and worshipped the golden image that Nabuchodonozor the
king had set vp.
8 Nowe were there certayne men of the Chaldees, that went euen then, and cried
out an accusation of the Iewes.
9 They spake, and sayde vnto the king Nabuchodonozor: O king, liue for euer.
10 Thou O king, hast made a decree, that euery man that shall heare the sound of
the cornet, trumpet, harpe, shawme, psaltries, dulcimer, & all instrumentes of
musicke, shall fall downe and worship the golden image:
11 And who so then fel not downe, & worshipped not, that he shoulde be cast into
the mids of an hot firie fornace.
12 Now are there certayne Iewes, whom thou hast set ouer the charge of the
prouince of Babylon: namely Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego: these men, O king,
regarded not thy commaundement: yea they will not serue thy gods, nor worship
the golden image that thou hast set vp.
13 Then Nabuchodonozor in his anger and wrath commaunded that Sidrach, Misach, &
Abednego should be brought vnto hym: so these men were brought before the king.
14 Then Nabuchodonozor spake vnto them, and sayde: Is it true, O Sidrach,
Misach, & Abednego, will not you serue my gods, nor worship the golden image
that I haue set vp?
15 Nowe therfore be redy when ye heare the sound of the cornet, trumpet, harpe,
shawme, psaltries, dulcimers, and al instrumentes of musicke, to fal downe and
worship the image whiche I haue made: for if ye worship it not, ye shalbe cast
immediatly into the mids of a hot firie fornace: for who is that God that can
deliuer you out of my handes?
16 Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego aunswered the king, and sayd: O Nabuchodonozor,
we are not carefull to aunswere thee in this matter:
17 Beholde, our God whom we serue, is able to deliuer vs from the hot firie
fornace: and he wil deliuer vs out of thy hande O king.
18 And though he will not, yet shalt thou knowe O king, that we will not serue
thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set vp.
19 Then was Nabuchodonozor full of indignation, so that the countenaunce of his
face chaunged vpon Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego: therefore he charged and
commaunded that they should heate the fornace, one seuen times more then it was
wont to be heat.
20 And he charged the most valiaunt men of warre that were in his armie, to bind
Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego, and to cast them into the hot firie fornace.
21 So these men were bounde in their coates, hosen, head attire, with their
other garmentes, and cast into the mids of the hot firie fornace.
22 Therefore, because the kinges commaundement was straite, & the fornace was
exceeding hot, the men that put in Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego, the flamble of
the fire destroyed them.
23 And these three men Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego, fel downe in the mids of
the hot firie fornace bounde.
24 Then Nabuchodonozor the king was astonied, & rose vp in all haste: he spake
vnto his counsel, and sayd, Dyd not we cast three men bounde into the mids of
the fire? They aunswered and sayde vnto the king: It is true, O king.
25 He aunswered & sayde: Lo, I see foure men loose, walking in the mids of ye
fire, and they haue no hurt: and the fourme of the fourth is like the sonne of
God.
26 Upon this went Nabuchodonozor vnto the mouth of the hot firie fornace, he
spake also, and sayd: O Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego, ye seruauntes of the hye
God, go foorth, and come hyther. And so Sidrach, Misach, & Abednego came foorth
of the mids of the fire.
27 Then the dukes, lordes, and nobles, and the kinges counsel, came together to
see these men, vpon whom the fire had no maner of power in their bodies: in so
much that the very heere of their head was not burnt, and their clothes
vnchaunged, yea there was no smell of fire felt vpon them.
28 Then spake Nabuchodonozor, and sayde: Blessed be the God of Sidrach, Misach,
and Abednego, which hath sent his angel, and deliuered his seruauntes that put
their trust in him, and haue altered the kinges commaundement, and ieoparded
their bodies, rather then they would serue or worship any God, except their owne
God onely.
29 Therfore I make a decree, that euery people, nation, & language, which speake
any blasphemie against the God of Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego, shalbe drawen
in peeces, and their houses shalbe made a takes: because there is no God that
can deliuer after this sort.
30 So the king promoted Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego, in the prouince of
Babylon.

Chapter 4

1 Nabuchodonozor king, vnto all people, natios, and languages that dwel vpon the
whole earth, peace be multiplied among you.
2 I thought it good to shewe the signes & marueylous workes that the hie God
hath wrought vpo me.
3 O how great are his signes, and howe mightie are his wonders? his kingdome is
an euerlasting kingdome, & his dominion is fro generation to generation.
4 I Nabuchodonozor beyng at rest in my house, and florishing in my palace,
5 Sawe a dreame, whiche made me afrayde, and the thoughtes vpon my bed, with the
visios of my head, troubled me.
6 Therfore made I a decree, that they shoulde bring all the wyse men of Babylon
before me, that they might declare vnto me the interpretatio of the dreame.
7 So came the wyse men, the soothsayers, the Chaldeans, and wisardes: to whom I
tolde the dreame, but they coulde not shewe me the interpretation therof.
8 Till at the last Daniel came before me (whose name was Baltassar, according to
the name of my God) which hath the spirite of the holy gods in hym, & before him
I tolde the dreame, saying:
9 O Baltassar, thou prince of wyse men, forsomuch as I knowe that thou hast the
spirite of the holy gods, & no secrete troubleth thee: tell me therefore the
visions of my dreame that I haue seene, and the interpretation therof.
10 Thus were the visions of my head vpon my bed: And behold, I saw a tree in the
mids of the earth, and the heyght therof was great,
11 A great tree and strong, and the heyght therof reached vnto the heauen, and
the sight thereof to the endes of all the earth.
12 The leaues therof were fayre, and the fruite therof much, and in it was meate
for all: the beastes of the fielde had shadowes vnder it, and the foules of the
aire dwelt in the bowes therof: al fleshe fed of it.
13 I sawe in the visions of my head vpon my bed, and beholde a watcher and a
holy one came downe from heauen,
14 And cryed mightily, saying thus: Hew downe the tree, breake of his braunches,
shake of his leaues, & scatter his fruite abroade: that the beastes may get them
away from vnder hym, and the foules from his braunches.
15 Neuerthelesse, leaue the stumpe of his rootes still in the earth, and with a
band of iron and brasse binde it among the grasse of the fielde, & let it be wet
with the deawe of heauen, and let his portion be with the beastes among the
grasse of the fielde.
16 Let his heart be chaunged from mans nature and let a beastes heart be geued
vnto hym, and let seuen times be passed ouer hym.
17 This sentence is according to the decree of the watchers, and the request
according to the word of the holy ones: because liuing men should knowe that the
hyghest hath power ouer the kingdome of men, and geueth it to whom it liketh
hym, and setteth vp ouer it the basese among men.
18 This is the dreame that I king Nabuchodonozor haue seene: therfore thou, O
Baltassar, declare the interpretation therof, forsomuch as al the wyse men of my
kingdome are not able to shewe me what it meaneth: but thou canst do it, for the
spirite of the holy gods is in thee.
19 Then Daniel, whose name was Baltassar, held his peace by the space of one
houre, and his thoughtes troubled him. So the king spake, and sayde, O
Baltassar, let neither the dreame nor the interpretation thereof trouble thee.
Baltassar aunswered, saying: O my Lord, this dreame be to them that hate thee, &
the interpretation therof to thyne aduersaries.
20 As for the tree that thou sawest, which was great and mightie, whose heyght
reached vnto the heauen, and the sight therof through all the world,
21 Whose leaues were fayre, and the fruite therof much, and in it was meate for
all: vnder the which the beastes of the fielde had their habitation, and vpon
whose braunches the foules of the aire did sit:
22 It is thou, O king, whiche are great and mightie, for thy greatnesse
increaseth, & reacheth vnto the heauen, so doth thy dominion to the endes of the
earth.
23 But wheras the king saw a watcher, and a holy one that came downe from
heauen, and sayd, Hewe downe the tree, & destroy it, yet leaue the stumpe of the
rootes therof in the earth, and with a band of iron & brasse binde it among the
grasse of the fielde, & let it be wet with the dewe of the heauen, and let his
portion be with the beastes of the fielde, till seuen times passe ouer him:
24 This O king is the interpretation, yea it is ye very decree of hym that is
hyghest of al, and it toucheth my lord the king.
25 Thou shalt be cast out from men, and thy dwelling shalbe with the beastes of
the fielde: with grasse shalt thou be fed like oxen, thou must be wet with the
deawe of the heauen, yea seue times shall passe ouer thee, till thou knowe that
the hyghest hath power ouer the kingdome of men, & geueth it to whom he list.
26 Moreouer, where as it was sayd, that the stumpe of the roote of the tree
should be left still: it betokeneth, that thy kingdome shall remayne whole vnto
thee, after thou hast learned to knowe that the power commeth from heauen.
27 Wherfore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable vnto thee, and breake of thy
sinnes by righteousnesse, and thyne iniquities by mercie towarde the poore: lo,
let there be a healing of thyne errour.
28 All these thinges touche the king Nabuchodonozor.
29 So after twelue monethes, the king walked in the palace of the kingdome of
Babylon.
30 And the king spake, & sayd: Is not this great Babylon that I haue buylt for
the house of the kingdome by the might of my power, and for the honour of my
maiestie?
31 Whyle these wordes were yet in the kinges mouth, there fell a voyce from
heauen, saying: O king Nabuchodonozor, to thee be it spoken, Thy kingdome is
departed from thee,
32 And thou shalt be cast out of mens companie, thy dwelling shalbe with the
beastes of the fielde: so that thou shalt eate grasse like oxen, and seuen times
shal passe ouer thee, vntil thou knowest that the hyghest hath power vpon the
kingdome of men, and geueth it vnto whom it pleaseth hym.
33 The very same houre was this matter fulfilled vpon Nabuchodonozor, so that he
was cast out of mens companie, & did eate grasse like oxen, and his body was wet
with the deawe of heauen, till his heeres were growen as Egles fethers and his
nayles like byrdes clawes.
34 When this time was past, I Nabuchodonozor lift vp myne eyes vnto heauen, and
mine vnderstanding was restored vnto me: then gaue I thankes vnto the highest, I
magnified & praysed hym that liueth for euermore, whose power is an euerlasting
power, and his kingdome is from one generatio to another.
35 And all they that dwel vpon the earth, are to be reputed as nothing, and
according to his will he worketh in the armie of heauen, among the inhabitours
of the earth: and there is none that may resist his hand, or say vnto him, what
doest thou?
36 At the same time was myne vnderstanding geuen me againe, and I was restored
to the honour of my kingdome, my glorie and my beautie was restored vnto me, &
my counsellers and princes sought vnto me, and I was established in my kingdome,
& my glorie was augmented towarde me.
37 Now therfore I Nabuchodonozor prayse, and extol, & magnifie the king of
heauen, whose workes are all trueth, & his wayes iudgement, and those that walke
in pryde he is able to abase.

Chapter 5

1 King Balthasar made a great feast to a thousand of his princes, and dranke
wine before the thousande.
2 And Balthasar when he had tasted the wine, commaunded to bring hym the golden
and siluer vessels, whiche his father Nabuchodonozor had brought from the temple
in Hierusalem, that the king and his princes, and his wyues, and his concubines,
might drinke therin.
3 So were brought the golde vessels that they had taken out of the temple of the
Lordes house at Hierusalem: and the king, and his princes, his wyues, and his
concubines drunke in them.
4 They drunke wine, & praysed the gods of golde, siluer, brasse, iron, wood, and
stone.
5 In the very same houre there appeared fingers of a mans hande wryting right
ouer against the candlesticke vpon the plaster of the wall of the kinges palace,
and the king sawe the knockles of the hande that wrote.
6 Then chaunged the king his countenaunce, & his thoughtes troubled hym, so that
the ioyntes of his loynes were loosed, and his knees smote one against the
other.
7 Wherfore the king cryed mightyly, that they should bring the soothsayers,
Chaldees, & wysardes: the king spake also to the wise men of Babylon, & said,
Who so can reade this wryting, & shewe me the interpretation thereof, shalbe
clothed with purple, and haue a cheyne of golde about his necke, and shalbe the
third ruler in the kingdome.
8 Upon this came al the kinges wise men, but they coulde neither reade the
wryting, nor shewe the king the interpretation.
9 Then was king Balthasar greatly troubled, and his countenaunce was chaunged in
him, and his princes were astonied.
10 Now the queene by reason of the talke of the king & his princes, came into
the banket house: and the queene spake, and sayde, O king, lyue for euer: let
not thy thoughtes trouble thee, and let not thy countenaunce be chaunged.
11 There is a man in thy kingdome that hath the spirite of the holy Gods within
him: & in the dayes of thy father, light, and vnderstanding, & wysdome, like the
wysedome of the gods, was founde in hym, whom the king Nabuchodonozor thy
father, the king I say thy father made chiefe of the wyse men, soothsayers,
Chaldeans, and wysardes.
12 Because that such an aboundaunt spirite, knowledge, and vnderstanding, to
expound dreames, to open secretes, & to declare harde doubtes, was founde in
him, yea euen in Daniel, whom the king named Baltassar: let Daniel be called,
and he shal declare the interpretation.
13 Then was Daniel brought before the king: so the king spake vnto Daniel, and
sayde, Art thou that Daniel, whiche art of the children of the captiuitie of
Iuda, whom my father the king brought out of Iurie?
14 I haue hearde of thee, that thou hast the spirite of the holy gods, & that
light and vnderstanding, and excellent wysdome is founde in thee.
15 Now haue there ben brought before me wyse men and soothsayers to reade this
wryting, and to shewe me the interpretation therof: but they could not declare
the interpretation of the thing.
16 Then hearde I of thee that thou couldest shewe interpretations, and dissolue
doubtes: nowe if thou canst reade his writing, & shew me the meaning therof,
thou shalt be clothed with purple, and haue a cheyne of gold about thy necke, &
be the thirde ruler in the kingdome.
17 Then Daniel aunswered, and sayd before the king, As for thy rewardes, kepe
them to thy selfe, and geue thy giftes to another: yet I wil reade the writing
vnto the king, and shewe him the interpretation.
18 O thou king, the most high god gaue vnto Nabuchodonozor thy father a
kingdome, and maiestie, and honour, & glorie.
19 And for the maiestie that he gaue him, al people, nations, and languages
trembled and feared before him: he slue whom he would, he smote whom it pleased
him: againe, whom he would he set vp, and whom he list he put downe.
20 But because his heart was loftie, and his minde strengthened in pride, he was
deposed from his kingly throne, and they toke his glory from him.
21 He was driuen out from the sonnes of men, his heart was made lyke the
beastes, and his dwelling was with the wilde Asses, they fed him with grasse
lyke Oxen, and his body was wet with the deawe of the heauen, till he knewe that
the most hie God bare rule ouer the kingdome of men, and that he appoynteth ouer
it whom so euer he pleaseth.
22 And thou his sonne, O Balthasar, hast not submitted thyne heart, though thou
knewest all these thinges:
23 But hast lift vp thy selfe against the Lorde of heauen, so that the vessels
of his house were brought before thee, that thou and thy princes, with thy wyues
and concubines, might drinke wine thereout: and thou hast praysed the gods of
siluer and golde, of brasse and iron, of wood and stone, which neither see,
heare, nor vnderstand: As for the God in whose hande consisteth thy breath and
all thy wayes, thou hast not glorified him.
24 Then was the knockles of the hand sent from him, and hath written this
writing.
25 And this the writing that he hath writte: MENE MENE, THECEL, VPHARSIN.
26 Now the interpretation of the thing is this: MENE, God hath numbred thy
kingdome, and brought it to an ende.
27 THECEL, thou art wayed in the balauce, and art founde wanting.
28 PHERES, thy kingdome is deuided, and geuen to the Medes, and Perses.
29 Then commaunded Balthasar, and they clothed Daniel with purple, and a chayne
of golde about is necke, and made a proclamation concerning him, that he should
be the third ruler in the kingdome.
30 The very same night was Balthasar the king of the Chaldees slaine.
31 And Darius of the Medes toke the kingdome, being threescore & two yeres of
age.

Chapter 6

1 It pleased Darius to set ouer his kingdome a hundred and twentie gouernours,
which should be ouer the whole kingdome.
2 Aboue these he set three princes, of whom Daniel was one, that the gouernours
might geue accomptes vnto them, and the king shoulde haue no damage.
3 Nowe this Daniel was preferred aboue the princes and gouerners, for the
spirite of God was plenteous in him: so that the king was minded to set him ouer
the whole realme.
4 Wherfore the rulers and gouernours sought an occasion against Daniel
concerning the kingdome, but they coulde finde none occasion nor fault: for he
was so faithfull, that there was no blame nor fault founde in him.
5 Then saide these men, We shall finde none occasion against this Daniel, except
we finde it against him concerning the lawe of his God.
6 Upon this went the princes and lordes together vnto the king, and saide this
vnto him: King Darius, liue for euer.
7 All the rulers of thy kingdome, the officers and gouernours, the counsellers
and dukes, haue consulted together to make a decree for the king, & to establish
a statute, That who so desireth any petition either of any god or man within
these thirtie dayes, except of thee O king, he shalbe cast into the lions denne.
8 Now O king confirme the decree, and seale the writing, that it be not chaunged
according to the lawe of the Medes and Persians, which altereth not.
9 Wherefore king Darius sealed the writing and decree.
10 Now when Daniel vnderstoode that he had sealed the writing, he went into his
house, and the windowes of his chamber towarde Hierusalem stoode open, there
kneeled he downe vpon his knees three times a day, he made his petition, and
praysed his God, as he dyd afore time.
11 Then these men assembled and found Daniel making his petition, and praying
vnto his God.
12 So they came to the king, & spake before him concerning his comaundement,
saying: O king, hast thou not sealed the decree, that within thirtie dayes whoso
requireth his petition of any God or man, but onely of thy selfe O king, he
shalbe cast into the denne of lions? The king aunswered and said, Yea it is
true, according to the lawe of the Medes and Perses that altereth not.
13 Then aunswered they, and saide vnto the king: This Daniel which is of the
children of the captiuitie of Iuda, O king, regardeth neither thee, nor thy
decree that thou hast sealed: but maketh his petition three times a day.
14 When the king heard these wordes, he was sore displeased with him selfe, and
set his heart on Daniel to deliuer him, and he laboured till the sonne went
downe, to deliuer him.
15 Then these men assembled vnto the king, and said vnto him: Knowe this O king,
that the lawe of the Medes & Perses is that the commaundement & statute which
the king maketh, may not be altered.
16 Then the king commaunded, and they brought Daniel, and they cast him into the
lions denne. Nowe the king spake vnto Daniel, & saide: Thy God whom thou alway
seruest, euen he wyll deliuer thee.
17 And there was brought a stone, & laide vpon ye mouth of the denne, this the
king sealed with his owne ring and with the signet of his princes, that the
purpose concerning Daniel should not be chaunged.
18 So the king went into his palace, and remayned fasting, neither was there any
instrumentes of musicke brought in before him, & his sleepe went from him.
19 But betimes in the morning at the breake of the day, the king arose, & went
in all haste vnto the denne of the lions.
20 Now as he came nye vnto the denne, he cryed with a pitious voyce vnto Daniel,
yea the king spake and saide vnto Daniel: O Daniel, thou seruaut of the liuing
God, is not thy God whom thou seruest alway, able to deliuer thee from ye lions?
21 Then Daniel saide vnto the king: O king, liue for euer.
22 My God hath sent his angel, which hath shut the lions mouthes, so that they
might not hurt me, for myne vngiltinesse is founde out before him: and as for
thee O king, I neuer offended thee.
23 Then was the king exceeding glad for him, & commaunded to take Daniel out of
the denne: So Daniel was brought out of ye denne, & no maner of hurt was founde
vpon him, for he put his trust in his God.
24 And as for those men which had accused Daniel, the king commaunded to bring
them, & to cast them into the lions denne, them, their children, & their wyues:
so the lions had the maisterie of them, and brake all their bones asunder or
euer they came at the grounde of the denne.
25 After this, wrote king Darius vnto al people, nations, & tongues that dwelt
in all landes: Peace be multiplied vnto you.
26 My commaundement is in all my dominion and kingdome, that men feare and stand
in awe of Daniels God: for he is the liuing God which abideth euer, his kindgome
shall not fayle, and his power is euerlasting.
27 It is he that deliuereth and saueth, he doth wonders and marueylous workes in
heauen and in earth, he hath preserued Daniel from the power of the lions.
28 So this Daniel prospered in the raigne of Darius, and in the raigne of Cyrus
of Persia.

Chapter 7

1 In the first yere of Balthasar king of Babylon, sawe Daniel a dreame, & there
were visions in his head vpon his bead: which dreame he wrote, & declared the
summe of the matter,
2 Daniel spake and saide: I sawe in my vision by night, and beholde, the foure
windes of heauen stroue vpon the great sea,
3 And foure great beastes came vp from the sea, one diuers from an other.
4 The first was as a lion, and had Egles winges: I beheld till his winges were
pluckt from him, and he lifted vp from the earth, & set vpon his feete like a
man, & there was geuen him a mans heart.
5 Behold an other beast, which was the second, was lyke a beare, and stoode vpon
the one side: betwixt his teeth in his mouth he had three ribbes, and it was
saide vnto him thus: Arise, eate vp much fleshe.
6 Then I loked, and beholde, there was an other lyke vnto a leopard, this had
winges as a foule, euen foure vpon the backe: this beast had foure heads, and
there was power geuen him.
7 After this I saw in a vision by night, & beholde, the fourth beast was grimme
and horrible, and marueylous strong: it had great iron teeth, it deuoured &
destroyed, & stamped the residue vnder his feete, it was vnlike yt other beastes
that were before it, for it had ten hornes.
8 As I considered the hornes, beholde, there came vp among them another little
horne, before whom there were three of the first hornes pluckt away: and behold,
this horne had eyes lyke the eyes of a man, & a mouth speaking presumptuous
thinges.
9 I behelde till the thrones were set vp, & the auncient of dayes did sit: whose
garment was white as snowe, and the heeres of his head lyke the pure wooll: his
throne was like the firie flambe, and his wheeles as burning fire.
10 There issued foorth a firie streame, and went out from before him: a thousand
thousandes ministred vnto him, and ten thousand thousandes stoode before him:
the iudgement was set, & the bookes opened.
11 Then toke I heede therunto, because of the voyce of the proude words which
the horne spake: I behelde till the beast was slaine, and his body destroyed,
and geuen to be brent in the fire.
12 As concerning the other beastes, they had their dominion taken away, but
their liues were prolonged for a certaine time and season.
13 I saw in visions by night, and behold there came one in the cloudes of
heauen, lyke the sonne of man: which went vnto the aucient of dayes, before whom
they brought him.
14 And he gaue him dominion & honour, and a kingdome, that al people, nations,
and languages should serue him: his dominion is an euerlasting dominion which
shall neuer be taken away, and his kingdome shall neuer be destroyed.
15 I Daniel was troubled in my spirite in the midst of my body, and the visions
of my head made me afrayde.
16 I gate me vnto one of them that stoode by, and asked him the trueth
concerning all these thinges: so he tolde me, and made me vnderstand the
interpretation of these thinges.
17 These great beastes which are foure, are foure kinges which shall arise out
of the earth:
18 But the High saintes shall receaue a kingdome, and possesse a kingdome for
euer, euen for euer and euer.
19 After this, I required to knowe the trueth concerning ye fourth beast, which
was so vnlyke the other beastes, and so horrible, whose teeth were of iron, and
his nayles of brasse, which deuoured and destroyed, and stamped the residue
vnder his feete:
20 I desired also to knowe the trueth as touching the ten hornes that he had
vpon his head, and this other which came vp afterwarde, before whose face there
fell downe three, which horne had eyes and a mouth that spake presumptuous
thinges, and loked with a grimmer visage then his felowes.
21 I behelde, and the same horne made battaile against the sainctes, yea &
preuayled against them.
22 Until the auncient of dayes came that the iudgement was geuen to the high
sainctes, and till the time came that the sainctes had the kingdome in
possession.
23 He gaue me this aunswer: That fourth beast, shalbe the fourth kingdome vpon
earth, it shalbe vnlike to all the kingdomes: it shall deuour, treade downe, and
destroy all other landes.
24 The ten hornes, are ten kinges that shall arise out of that kingdome: after
whom there shall stande vp another, which shalbe vnlike to the first, and he
shall subdue three kinges:
25 And he shall speake wordes against the highest of all, he shall destroy the
high sainctes, and thinke that he may chaunge times and lawes: they shalbe geuen
into his hande vntill a time, and times, and the deuiding of a time.
26 But the iudgement shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion, to
consume and destroy it vnto the ende.
27 And the kingdome and dominion, & the greatnes of the kingdome vnder the whole
heaue, shalbe geuen to the people of high sainctes, whose kingdome is an
euerlasting kingdome, and all powers shal serue and obey it.
28 Hitherto the ende of the wordes: I Daniel had many cogitations which troubled
me, & my coutenauce chaunged in me: but the wordes I kept still in my heart.

Chapter 8

1 In the third yere of the raigne of king Balthasar, there appeared a vision
vnto me euen vnto me Daniel, after that which I had seene in the beginning.
2 I saw in a vision (and when I saw it, I was in the palace of Susis, which is
in the prouince of Elam) and in the vision me thought I was by the riuer of
Ulai.
3 Then I loked vp and saw, & beholde, there stoode before the riuer a ramme
which had two hornes: and these two hornes were hye, but one was hyer then the
other, & the hyest came vp last.
4 I saw that this ramme pushed with his hornes against the west, against the
north, and against the south: so that no beastes might stand before him, nor
defend them from his power, but he did as him listed, and became great.
5 And as I considered, beholde there came a hee goate from the west, ouer the
whole earth, and touched not the grounde: and this goate had a horne appeared
betwixt his eyes.
6 And he came vnto the ramme that had the two hornes (whom I had seene standing
by the riuer) and ranne fiercely vpon him with his might.
7 And I sawe him drawe nye vnto the ramme, being very fierce vpon him, yea he
smote the ramme and brake his two hornes, neither had the ramme so much strength
as to stande before him: but he cast him downe to the grounde, trode him vnder
his feete, & there was none able to deliuer the ramme out of his power.
8 Therefore the goate waxed exceeding great, & when he was at the strongest, his
great horne was broken: Then grew there other foure notable ones in the steade
of it, towarde the foure windes of the heauen.
9 And out of one of them came foorth a litle horne, which waxed very great
toward the south, toward the east, and toward the pleasaunt lande.
10 It grewe vp vnto the hoast of heauen, whereof it did cast some downe to the
grounde, and of the starres also, and trode them vnder foote.
11 Yea, it grewe vp against the prince of the hoast, from whom the dayly
sacrifice was taken away, and the places of his sanctuarie caste downe.
12 And power was geuen vnto it ouer the dayly sacrifice for the iniquitie, and
it shall cast downe the trueth to the grounde: and thus shall it do, and
prosper.
13 Upon this, I heard one of the sainctes speaking, and one of the sainctes
spake vnto Palmoni, saying: how long shal the vision of the dayly sacrifice and
of the iniquitie of desolation endure, to geue both the sanctuarie and the power
to be troden vnder foote?
14 And he aunswered me: Unto the euening and the morning, two thousand and three
hundred: then shal the sanctuarie be cleansed.
15 Now when I Daniel had seene this vision, and sought for the vnderstanding of
it: beholde, there stoode before me like the similitude of a man.
16 And I heard a mans voyce betweene Ulai, which cryed, and saide: O Gabriel
make this man vnderstande the vision.
17 So he came and stoode by me: but I was afraide at his comming, and fell downe
vpo my face: Then said he vnto me, Understand O thou sonne of man: for at the
time of the ende this vision shalbe.
18 Now as he was speaking vnto me, I fell in a slumber vpon my face to the
grounde: but he touched me, and set me vp in my place.
19 And he saide, Beholde, I wyll shewe thee what shalbe in the last wrath: for
in the time appoynted it shalbe fulfilled.
20 The ramme which thou sawest hauing two hornes, is the king of the Medes and
Perses,
21 And the goate, is the king of Grecia: and the great horne that is betwixt his
eyes, that is the first king.
22 But where as it brake, & foure other rose vp in the steade: it signifieth,
that out of this people shall stande vp foure kingdomes, but not so mightie as
it.
23 And in the ende of their kingdome, when the wicked are come to the full, a
king of a fierce countenaunce, and vnderstanding harde sentences, shall stand
vp.
24 His power shalbe mightie, but not in his strength, & he shall destroy
wonderfully, he shall prosper & practise, and destroy the mightie and the holy
people.
25 And through his policie also he shall cause craft to prosper in his handes,
he shall extoll him selfe in his heart, and in prosperitie he shall destroy
many, & many one shalbe put to death in his wealthinesse: he shall stande vp
against the prince of princes, but he shalbe destroyed without hande.
26 And the vision of the euening and the morning, which is declared, is true:
therfore seale thou vp the vision, for it shalbe after many dayes.
27 Upon this was I Daniel feeble, so that I lay sicke certaine dayes: but when I
rose vp, I went about ye kinges busines, and was astonied at the vision,
neuerthelesse, no man vnderstoode it.

Chapter 9

1 In the first yere of Darius the sonne of Ahasuerus, which was of the seede of
the Medes, & was made king ouer the realme of the Chaldees,
2 Euen in the first yere of his raigne, I Daniel vnderstoode by bookes the
number of the yeres, wherof the Lorde spake vnto Ieremie the prophete, that he
woulde accomplishe seuentie yeres in the desolation of Hierusalem.
3 And I turned my face vnto the Lord God, and sought by prayer and supplication,
with fasting, sackcloth, and asshes.
4 I prayed vnto the Lorde my God, & made my confession, saying. O Lorde God,
great and feare full, which kepeth couenaunt and mercie with them that loue him
and kepe his commaundementes:
5 We haue sinned and haue committed iniquitie, and haue done wickedly, yea we
haue rebelled, & haue departed from thy preceptes, & from thy iudgementes.
6 We woulde not obey thy seruauntes the prophetes, that spake in thy name to our
kinges and princes, to our forefathers, and to all the people of the lande.
7 O Lorde, righteousnesse belongeth vnto thee, vnto vs open shame, as is came to
passe this day vnto euery man of Iuda, and to them that dwel at Hierusalem yea
vnto all Israel, whether they be farre or nye throughout all the landes whither
thou hast driuen them, because of their offences that they haue done against
thee.
8 Yea O Lorde, vnto vs, to our kinges & princes, to our forefathers that haue
offended thee, belongeth open shame.
9 Unto the Lorde our God pertayneth compassion and forgeuenesse, though we haue
rebelled against him.
10 And we haue not obeyed the voyce of the Lorde our God, to walke in his lawes
which he layde before vs, by the hande of his seruauntes the prophetes.
11 Yea all Israel haue transgressed and gone backe from thy lawe, so that they
haue not hearkened vnto thy voyce: wherefore the curse and oth that is written
in the lawe of Moyses the seruaunt of God, against whom we haue offended, is
poured vpon vs.
12 And he hath confirmed his wordes, which he spake against vs and against our
iudges that iudged vs, to bring vpon vs such a great plague as neuer was vnder
heauen, lyke as it is now come to passe in Hierusalem.
13 Yea, all this plague as it is written in the lawe of Moyses, is come vpon vs:
yet made we not our prayers before the Lorde our God, that we might turne againe
from our wickednes, and vnderstand thy trueth.
14 Therfore hath the Lord watched vpon the plague, and brought it vpon vs: for
the Lorde our God is righteous in all his workes which he doth: for we would not
hearken vnto his voyce.
15 And now O Lord our God, thou that with a mightie hande hast brought thy
people out of the lande of Egypt to get thy selfe a name, which remayneth this
day, we haue sinned, we haue done wickedly.
16 O Lorde, according to all thy righteousnes, I beseche thee let thyne anger
and thy wrath be turned away from thy citie of Hierusalem, thy holy hill: for
because of our sinnes, and for the wickednesse of our fathers, Hierusalem and
thy people are a reproche to all them that are about vs.
17 Now therefore O our God heare the prayer of thy seruaunt, and his
intercession: O let thy face thine ouer thy sanctuarie that lyeth waste, for the
Lordes sake.
18 O my God, encline thyne eare & hearken, open thyne eyes, beholde howe we be
desolated, yea and the citie also which is called after thy name: for we do not
present our prayers before thee in our owne righteousnes, but in thy great
mercies.
19 O Lorde heare, O forgeue Lorde, O Lorde consider and do it, defer not, for
thyne owne sake O my God: because thy name is called vpon thy citie, & vpon thy
people.
20 As I was yet a speaking at my prayers, knowledging myne owne sinnes & the
sinnes of my people Israel, presenting so myne intercession before the Lord my
God for the holy hill of my God:
21 Yea, while I was yet speaking in my prayer, the man Gabriel (whom I had seene
afore in the vision) came fleeing, & touched me about the time of the euening
oblation:
22 And he enfourmed me, & talked with me, and saide: O Daniel, I am nowe come
foorth to geue thee knowledge & vnderstanding.
23 At the beginning of thy supplications, the commaundement came foorth, and I
am come to shewe thee, for thou art greatly beloued: therefore vnderstande the
matter and consider the vision.
24 Seuetie weekes are determined ouer thy people, & ouer thy holy citie, to
finish the wickednes, and to seale vp ye sinnes, and to reconcile the iniquitie,
& to bring in euerlasting righteousnes, to seale vp the vision and prophecie, &
to annoynt the most holy.
25 Knowe therfore and vnderstand, that from the going foorth of the
commaudement, to bring againe the people and to builde Hierusalem, vnto Messiah
the prince, there shalbe seuen weekes and threescore and two weekes: and the
streete shalbe built againe, and the wall, euen in the straitnes of time.
26 After these threescore & two weekes shall Messiah be slaine, & not for him
selfe: and the people of the prince that shal come, shall destroy the citie and
the sanctuarie, and the ende thereof shalbe with a fludde, and vnto the ende of
the battel it shalbe destroyed by desolatios.
27 He shall confirme the couenaunt with many for one weeke, and in the midst of
the weeke he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to ceasse, and for the
ouerspreading of the abhominations, he shal make it desolate, euen vntil the
consummation determined shalbe powred vpon the desolate.

Chapter 10

1 In the third yere of Cyrus king of Persia, there was shewed vnto Daniel,
otherwyse called Baltassar, a matter, yea a true matter, but it is yet a long
time vnto it: he vnderstoode the matter, and perceaued what the vision was.
2 At the same time, I Daniel mourned for the space of three weekes of dayes.
3 I ate no pleasaunt bread, as for flesh and wine there came none within my
mouth: no, I did not once annoynt my selfe till the whole three weekes of dayes
were fulfilled.
4 Upon the foure & twentith day of the first moneth, I was by the side of that
great riuer, euen Hiddekel.
5 I lift vp myne eyes, and loked: and beholde a man clothed in linnen, whose
loynes were girded vp with fine golde of Uphaz.
6 His body was lyke the thurkis stone, his face to loke vpon was lyke
lightening, his eyes as lampes of fire, his armes and feete were lyke in colour
to pullished brasse, and the voyce of his wordes was lyke the voyce of a
multitude.
7 And I Daniel alone sawe this vision, for the men that were with me saw not the
vision: but a great fearefulnes fell vpon them, so that they fled away and hid
them selues.
8 Therefore I was left alone, and saw this great vision, and there remayned no
strength in me: for my colour was turned in me into corruption, and I reteyned
no strength.
9 Yet heard I the voyce of his wordes: and when I heard the voyce of his words,
I fell astonied vpon my face and my face toward the earth.
10 And beholde a hande touched me, which set me vp vpon my knees, and vpon the
paulmes of my handes.
11 And he saide vnto me: O Daniel, thou welbeloued man, take good heede to the
wordes that I say vnto thee, and stand in thy place: for vnto thee am I nowe
sent. And when he had said these words vnto me, I stoode vp trembling.
12 Then saide he vnto me, Feare not Daniel: for since the first day that thou
didst set thyne heart to vnderstand, and to chasten thy selfe before thy God,
thy wordes were hearde, and I am come for thy wordes.
13 But the prince of the kingdome of Persia withstoode me one and twentie dayes:
but lo, Michael one of the chiefe princes came to helpe me, & I remained there
by the kinges of Persia.
14 And I am come to shew thee what shall come vnto thy people in the latter
dayes: for it wyll be long yet or the vision be fulfilled.
15 Now whe he had spoken these words vnto me, I cast downe my head to the
grounde, and held my tongue.
16 And beholde, there touched my lippes one very lyke vnto a man: then opened I
my mouth and spake, and saide vnto him that stoode before me, O my lorde, by the
vision my ioyntes are turned out of their place, and I haue reteyned no
strength.
17 For howe can the seruaunt of this my Lorde, talke with my Lorde being such a
one? And as for me, straight way there remayned no strength in me, neither is
there breath left in me.
18 Then there came againe and touched me one lyke the appearaunce of a man, and
he strengthened me:
19 And saide, O man greatly beloued feare not, peace be vnto thee, be strong and
of good courage. So when he had spoken vnto me, I was strengthened and saide,
Speake on my Lorde: for thou hast strengthened me.
20 Thus saide he: Knowest thou wherefore I am come vnto thee? now wyll I returne
to fight with the prince of the Perses: assoone as I go foorth, lo, the prince
of Greke lande shall come.
21 Neuerthelesse, I wyll shew thee that that is noted in the scripture of
trueth: and there is none that helpeth me in these thinges, but Michael your
prince.

Chapter 11

1 And in the first yere of Darius of Media I stoode to comfort him and to
strength him.
2 And nowe wyll I shewe thee the trueth: Behold, there shall stand vp yet three
kinges in Persia, but the fourth shalbe farre richer then they all: and by his
strength & by his richesse he shall stirre vp all against the realme of Greke
lande.
3 Then shall there arise yet a mightie king, that shal rule with great dominion,
and do what him list.
4 And when he shal stand vp, his kingdome shalbe broken, & shalbe deuided toward
the foure windes of the heauen, and not toward his posteritie, nor according to
his dominion which he ruled: for his kingdome shalbe pluckt vp, euen for others
besides these.
5 And the king of the south shalbe mightie, and one of his princes, and he shall
preuayle against him, and beare rule: his dominion shalbe a great dominion.
6 And in the ende of yeres, they shalbe ioyned together, & the kinges daughter
of the south shall come to the kyng of the north for to make an agreement, but
she shall not retayne the power of the arme, neither shall he continue nor his
arme: but she shalbe deliuered to death and they that brought her, and he that
begat her, and he that comforted her in these times.
7 But out of the bud of her rootes, shal one stande vp in his steede, whiche
shall come with an armie, and shall enter into the fortresse of the kyng of the
north, and do with them as he list and shall preuayle.
8 And shall also cary captiues into Egypt their gods, with their molten images,
with their precious vessels of siluer and of gold, and he shall continue more
yeres then the kyng of the north.
9 So the kyng of the south shall come into his kyngdome, and shall returne into
his owne lande.
10 Wherfore his sonnes shalbe styrred vp, and shall gather together a mightie
great hoast of people, & one shal come and ouerflowe and passe through: then
shall he turne agayne and be stirred vp at his fortresse.
11 Then ye king of the south shalbe angry, and shal come foorth to fight with
him euen with the king of the north, for he shall set foorth a great multitude,
& the multitude shalbe geuen into his hande.
12 Then the multitude shalbe proude, and their heartes shalbe lifted vp, for he
shall cast downe thousandes: but he shall not still preuayle.
13 For the kyng of the north shall returne, and shal set foorth a greater
multitude then afore, and shall come foorth (after certayne yeres) with a
mightie armie and great riches.
14 And at the same time there shal manye stande vp against the kyng of the
south, so that the seditious chyldren of thy people also shall exalt them selues
to establishe the vision, but they shal fal.
15 So the kyng of the north shal come & cast vp amount, & take the strong
cities: and the armes of the south shall not resist, neither his chosen people,
neither shal there be any strength to withstand.
16 And when he commeth, he shall handle him as he list, and no man shal stand
against him: he shall stande in the pleasaunt lande, whiche by his hande shalbe
consumed.
17 Agayne, he shall set his face to enter with the power of his whole kyngdome,
and his confederates with hym, thus shall he do: and he shall geue hym the
daughter of women to destroy her, but she shall not stande on his side neither
before hym.
18 After this shall he turne his face vnto the iles, and shall take many: but a
prince shall cause his shame to light vpon him, beside that, he shall cause his
owne shame to turne vpon him selfe.
19 For he shal turne his face toward the fortes of his owne lande: but he shalbe
ouerthrowen and fall, and be no more founde.
20 Then shall stande vp in his place a rayser of taxes in the glory of the
kingdome, & after a fewe dayes he shalbe destroyed, neither in wrath nor in
battel.
21 In his steede there shal stande vp a vyle person, to whom they shal not geue
the honour of the kingdome: but he shall come in peaceably and obtaine the
kingdome with flatteries.
22 And the armes shalbe ouerflowed with a flud before hym, and shalbe broken, &
also the prince of the couenaunt.
23 And after the leage made with him, he shall worke deceiptfully: for he shall
come vp, and ouercome with a small people.
24 He shal enter into the quiet and plentifull prouince, and he shal do that
which his fathers haue not done, nor his rathers fathers: he shall deuide among
them the pray, and the spoyle, and the substaunce, yea and he shall forecast his
deuices against the strong holdes euen for a tyme.
25 Also his power & heart shall he stirre vp with a great armie against the kyng
of the south, the kyng of the south shalbe moued vnto battayle with a great and
a mightie hoast also: neuerthelesse he shal not stande, for they shall forecast
deuices against him.
26 Yea they that feede of the portion of his meate, shal destroy him, and his
armie shall ouerflowe, and many shall fall and be slaine.
27 These two kinges hartes shalbe to do mischiefe, & they shall talke of deceipt
at one table, but it shal not prosper, for yet the ende shalbe at ye time
appointed.
28 Then shall he go home agayne into his lande with great substaunce, and set
his heart against the holy couenaunt, so shall he do, and returne to his owne
lande.
29 At the tyme appointed he shall come agayne, and go towarde the south: but the
last shall not be as the first.
30 For the ships of Chithim shall come against him, therfore he shalbe sorie,
and returne, and fret against the holy couenaunt: so shall he do, he shal euen
returne and haue intelligence with them that forsake the holy couenaunt.
31 And armes shall stande on his part, and they shall pollute the sanctuarie of
strength, and shall take away the dayly sacrifice and they shall set vp the
abhominable desolation.
32 And such as wickedly breake the couenaunt, shall he cause to sinne by
flatterie: but the people that knowe their God, shall preuayle and prosper.
33 Those also that haue vnderstanding among the people, shall enfourme the
multitude, and for a long season thei shall fall with sworde, with fire, with
captiuitie, and with the taking away of their goodes.
34 Nowe when they shall fall, they shalbe holpen with a litle helpe, but many
shall cleaue vnto them faynedly.
35 Yea some of those that haue vnderstanding shall fall, that they may be tryed,
purified, and made whyte, tyll the tyme be out: for there is a tyme appointed.
36 And a kyng shall do what hym list, he shall exalt and magnifie hym selfe
against al that is God, yea he shal speake marueylous thinges against the God of
Gods, and he shall prosper tyll the wrath be fulfilled: for the determination is
made.
37 He shall not regarde the God of his fathers, nor the desires of women, yea he
shall not care for any God: for he shall magnifie himselfe aboue all.
38 But in his place shall he honour the God Mauzzun, and the God whom his
fathers knewe not, shall he honour with golde and siluer, with pretious stones
and pleasaunt thinges.
39 Thus shall he do in the holdes of Mauzzim with a straunge God whom he shall
acknowledge, he shall encrease his glory, & shal cause them to rule ouer many, &
shall deuide the land for gayne.
40 And at the ende of tyme shall the king of the south pushe at hym, & the king
of the north shall come against him lyke a whirlewind, with charets, horsemen,
and with many shippes: he shall enter into the countreys, and shall ouerflowe
and passe through.
41 He shall enter also into the pleasaunt land, and many countreys shalbe
ouerthrowen: but these shall escape out of his hande euen Edom and Moab, and the
chiefe of the chyldren of Ammon.
42 He shall stretche foorth his hande also vpon the countreys, and the lande of
Egypt shall not escape.
43 But he shall haue power ouer the treasures of golde and of siluer, & ouer all
the pretious thinges of Egypt, and of the Libyans and Ethiopians in his passing
by them.
44 Neuerthelesse, the tidinges out of the east and the north shall trouble him,
therfore he shall go foorth with great wrath, to destroy and roote out many.
45 And he shall plant the tabernacles of his palace betweene the seas, in the
glorious and holy mountaine: yet he shall come to his ende, & none shal helpe
him.

Chapter 12

1 And at that tyme shal Michael stande vp, the great prince, which standeth for
the chyldren of thy people: for there shalbe a tyme of trouble, suche as neuer
was since there began to be a nation, vnto that same tyme: and at that tyme thy
people shalbe deliuered euery one that shalbe found written in the booke.
2 And many of them that sleepe in the dust of the earth, shal awake, some to
euerlasting life, & some to shame & perpetuall contempt.
3 They that be wyse, shall shine as the brightnesse of the firmament: and they
that turne many to righteousnesse, as the starres for euer and euer.
4 But thou O Daniel shut vp the wordes, and seale the booke till the time of the
ende: many shall go about here and there, and knowledge shalbe encreased.
5 Then I Daniel looked, and beholde there stoode other two, the one on this side
of the banke of the riuer, and the other on that side of the banke of the riuer.
6 And one sayde vnto the man clothed in linnen, whiche was ouer the waters of
the riuer, When shal the ende of these wonders be?
7 And I hearde the man clothed in linnen, which was ouer the waters of the
riuer, when he held vp his right hand and his left hande vnto heauen, and sware
by hym that liueth for euer, that it shall tary for a tyme, tymes, and a halfe:
and when he shall haue accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, all
these thinges shalbe finished.
8 Then I hearde it, but I vnderstoode it not: then sayde I, O my Lord, what
shall be the ende of these thinges?
9 And he saide, Go thy way Daniel, for the wordes are closed vp and sealed tyll
the tyme of the ende.
10 Many shalbe purified, made white, and tryed: but the wicked shall do
wickedly, and none of the wicked shal haue vnderstanding, but the wyse shall
vnderstande.
11 And from the tyme that the dayly sacrifice shalbe taken away, and the
abhominable desolation set vp, there shalbe a thousande two hundred, and ninetie
dayes.
12 Blessed is he that wayteth and commeth to the thousande, three hundred, and
fiue and thirtie dayes.
13 But go thou thy way tyll the ende be, for thou shalt rest, and stande vp in
thy lot at the ende of the dayes.


Hosea

Chapter 1

1 The worde of the Lorde came vnto Osea the sonne of Beeri, in the dayes of
Ozea, Ioathan, Ahas, and Hezekias, kynges of Iuda, and in the tyme of Ieroboam
the sonne of Ioas kyng of Israel.
2 When the Lord spake first vnto Osea, he sayd vnto hym: Go, take vnto thee a
wife of fornications, and chyldren of fornications: for the lande hath committed
great fornication departing from the Lorde.
3 So he went and toke Gomer the daughter of Deblaim: whiche conceaued and bare
him a sonne.
4 And the Lorde sayde vnto hym, Call his name Iezrahel: for I wyll shortlye
auenge the blood of Iezrahel vpon the house of Iehu, and wyll bryng the kyngdome
of the house of Israel to an ende.
5 And in that day wyll I also breake the bowe of Israel, in the valley of
Iezrahel.
6 And she conceaued agayne, and bare a daughter: and the Lorde sayde vnto hym,
Call her name Loruhamah that is, not obtayning mercy for I wyll no more haue
pitie vpon the house of Israel, but I wyll vtterly take them away.
7 Yet I wyll haue mercy vpon the house of Iuda, and wil saue them, euen thorowe
the Lorde their God: and wil not saue them by bowe, sworde, battell, horses, or
horsemen.
8 Nowe when she had wayned Loruhamah, she conceaued againe, and bare a sonne.
9 Then sayd he, Call his name Loammi that is, not my people: for ye are not my
people, therefore I wyll not be your God.
10 Yet the number of the chyldren of Israel shalbe as the sand of the sea, which
can neither be measured nor tolde: and in the place where it was sayde vnto
them, Ye are not my people: it shall be saide vnto them, Ye are the chyldren of
the liuing God.
11 Then shall the children of Iuda and the chyldren of Israel be gathered
together, and appoynt them selues one head, and they shall come vp out of the
lande: for great shalbe the day of Iezrahel.

Chapter 2

1 Tell your brethren that they are my people, and your sisterne, that they haue
obtayned mercy.
2 As for your mother, ye shall chyde with her and reproue her, for she is not my
wyfe, neither am I her husbande: let her therefore put away her whordome from
her face, and her adulterie from her brestes:
3 Lest I strip her naked, and set her euen as she came into the worlde, and make
her as a wyldernesse, and as a drye lande, and slay her for thyrste.
4 And I wyll haue no pitie vpon her chyldren: for they be the children of
fornication.
5 Their mother hath played the harlot, and she that bare them is come to
confusion: for she sayde, I wyll go after my louers, that geue me my bread and
my water, my wooll and flaxe, my oyle and my drinke.
6 Therefore beholde, I wyll stop thy way with thornes, and make a hedge, that
she shall not finde her pathes.
7 And though she runne after her louers, yet shall she not ouertake them: she
shall seeke them, but not finde them. Then shall she say, I wyll go and returne
to my first husbande: for at that tyme it was better with me then nowe.
8 And she dyd not knowe that I gaue her corne, and wine, and oyle, and
multiplied her siluer and golde, which they bestowed on Baal.
9 Therefore wyll I returne and take away my corne in the tyme thereof, and my
wine in the season thereof, and fet agayne my wooll and my flaxe whiche I gaue
her to couer her shame.
10 And nowe wyll I discouer her shame euen in the sight of her louers, and no
man shall deliuer her out of my handes.
11 Moreouer, I wyll take away all her myrth, her holy dayes, her newe moones,
her Sabbathes, and all her solempne feastes.
12 I wyll destroy her vineyardes and figtrees, whereof she sayde: These are my
rewardes that my louers haue geuen me, I wyll make them as a wood, and wylde
beastes shall eate them vp.
13 I wyll visite vpon her the dayes of Baal wherein she burned incense to hym,
and decked her selfe with eareringes and iewels, she folowed her louers, and
forgate me saith the Lorde.
14 Wherefore beholde, I wyll allure her and bryng her into the wildernesse, and
speake frendly vnto her.
15 From thence wyll I geue her her vineyardes agayne, yea and the valley of
Achor for an entry of hope: and she shall sing there as in the dayes of her
youth, and as in the day when she came vp out of the lande of Egypt.
16 And at that day (saith the Lord) thou shalt call me, O my husbande, and shalt
call me no more Baal.
17 For I wyll take away those names of Baal from her mouth, yea she shall neuer
remember their names any more.
18 Then wyll I make a couenaunt for them, with the beastes of the fielde, with
the foules of the ayre, and with euery thing that creepeth vpon the earth: As
for bowe, sworde, and battayle, I wyll destroy out of the lande, and wyll make
them to sleepe safely.
19 And I wyll marry thee vnto myne owne selfe for euer, yea euen to my selfe
wyll I marry thee in righteousnes, in iudgement, in louing kindnesse and mercy.
20 In faythfulnesse also wyll I marry thee vnto my selfe, and thou shalt know
the Lorde.
21 At the same tyme wyll I shewe my selfe gratious vnto the heauens saith the
Lorde, and the heauens shall helpe the earth:
22 And the earth shall helpe the corne, wine, and oyle: and they shall helpe
Iezrahel.
23 And I wyll sowe her for my selfe in the earth, and wyll haue mercy vpon her
that had not obtayned mercy: And to them whiche were not my people, I wyll say,
Thou art my people: and they shall say, Thou art my God.

Chapter 3

1 Then sayd the Lorde to me: Go yet and loue a woman beloued of her husbande,
and yet an adultresse, according to the loue of the Lorde towarde the chyldren
of Israel: and yet they haue respect to straunge gods, and loue the wine pottes.
2 So I gat her for fifteene siluerlinges, and for an homer and an halfe of
barley.
3 And sayde vnto her: Thou shalt bide with me a long season, thou shalt not play
the harlot, thou shalt be to no other man, and I wyll be so vnto thee.
4 For the chyldren of Israel shall sit a great whyle without kyng, without
prince, without sacrifice, without image, without Ephod, and without Theraphim.
5 But afterward the chyldren of Israel shalbe conuerted and seeke the Lord their
God, and Dauid their kyng, and in the latter dayes they shall worship the Lorde,
and his louing kindnesse.

Chapter 4

1 Heare the worde of the Lorde O ye chyldren of Israel, for the Lord hath a
controuersie with the inhabitauntes of the lande: for there is no trueth, there
is no mercy, there is no knowledge of God in the lande.
2 But swearing, lying, manslaughter, theft, and adulterie, hath gotten the ouer
hande, and one bloodgiltinesse foloweth another.
3 Therfore shall the lande mourne, and all they that dwell therein shalbe rooted
out, the beastes of the fielde, the foules of the ayre, and the fisshes in the
sea, shalbe consumed.
4 Yet let no man rebuke or reproue another, for thy people are as they that are
at controuersie with the priest.
5 Therefore shalt thou fall in the day tyme, and the prophete with thee in the
night, and I wyll bryng thy mother to destruction.
6 My people perishe for lacke of knowledge: because thou hast refused knowledge,
therfore wyll I refuse thee also, so that thou shalt no more be my priest: and
forsomuche as thou hast forgotten the lawe of thy God, I wyll also forget thy
chyldren.
7 The more they increased in multitude, the more they sinned against me,
therfore wyll I chaunge their honour into shame.
8 They eate vp the sinnes of my people, and encourage them in their wickednesse.
9 Thus the priest is become lyke the people: Wherfore I wyll punishe them for
their wicked wayes, and rewarde them according to their owne imaginations.
10 They shal eate and not haue inough, they haue vsed whordome, but shall not
prosper, they haue forsaken the Lorde, and not regarded him.
11 Whordome, wine, and newe wine, take the heart away.
12 My people aske counsell at their stockes, and their staffe teacheth them: for
the spirite of fornication hath caused them to go astray, and they haue
committed fornication against their God.
13 They make sacrifices vpon the tops of the mountaines, and burne their incense
vpon the hilles, yea vnder the okes, poplars, and elmes, for there are good
shadowes: therfore your daughters are become harlots, and your spouses haue
broken their wedlocke.
14 I wyll not punishe your daughters for beyng defiled, and your spouses that
became whoores: seeing the fathers them selues haue medled with harlots, and
sacrificed with whoores: but the people that wyll not vnderstande, must be
punished.
15 Though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not Iuda sinne, come not ye vnto
Gilgal, neither go ye to Bethauen, neither sweare ye, The Lorde liueth.
16 For Israel is rebellious like an vnrulye heysfer: nowe the Lorde wyll feede
them as a lambe in a large place.
17 Ephraim is become partaker of idols, let hym alone.
18 Their drunkennesse stinketh, they haue committed whordome: their rulers loue
to say with shame, Bryng ye.
19 The winde hath bounde them vp in her winges, and they shall be ashamed of
their sacrifices.

Chapter 5

1 O ye priestes heare this, take heede O thou housholde of Israel, geue eare O
thou house of the king, for iudgement is against you, because you are become as
a snare on Mizphah, and a spread net vpon the mount of Thabor.
2 They kyll sacrifices by heapes, and turne farre from the Lord, and I haue ben
a rebuker of them all.
3 I knowe Ephraim well inough, and Israel is not hid fro me: for nowe O Ephraim
thou art become an harlot, and Israel is defiled.
4 They wyll not geue their myndes to turne vnto their God: for the spirite of
fornication is in the middest of them, and they haue not knowen the Lorde.
5 And the pryde of Israel doth testifie to his face: therefore both Israel and
Ephraim shal fal for their wickednesse, and Iuda with them also.
6 They shall come with their sheepe and bullockes to seeke the Lorde, but they
shall not finde hym: for he is gone from them.
7 They haue transgressed against the Lorde, and brought vp bastarde chyldren: a
moneth therefore shall deuour them, with their portions.
8 Blowe with the shawmes at Gibea, and with the trumpet in Ramah, crye out at
Bethauen, after thee O Beniamin.
9 In the tyme of the plague shall Ephraim be layde waste: in the tribes of
Israel haue I shewed the trueth.
10 The princes of Iuda haue ben lyke them that remoue the lande markes:
therefore wyll I powre out my wrath vpon them like water.
11 Ephraim is oppressed and broken in iudgement, because he wyllyngly folowed
the commaundement.
12 Therefore wyll I be vnto Ephraim as a moth, and to the house of Iuda as a
caterpiller.
13 When Ephraim sawe his sicknesse, and Iuda his disease, Ephraim went vnto
Assur, and sent vnto kyng Iareb, yet coulde not he helpe you, nor ease you of
your payne.
14 I wyll be vnto Ephraim as a lion, and as a lions whelpe to the house of Iuda:
I euen I wyll spoyle, and go my away: I wyll take away, and no man shall rescue.
15 I wyll go and returne to my place, tyll they knowledge that they haue sinned
and seeke me. In their aduersitie they shall early seeke me.

Chapter 6

1 Come, let vs turne agayne to the Lorde: for he hath smitten vs, and he shall
heale vs, he hath wounded vs, and he shall binde vs vp agayne.
2 After two dayes shall he quicken vs, in the thirde day he shall rayse vs vp,
so that we shall liue in his sight.
3 Then shall we haue vnderstanding, and endeuour our selues to knowe the Lord:
he shal go foorth as the spring of the day, & come vnto vs as the rayne, and as
the latter rayne vnto the earth.
4 O Ephraim, what shall I do vnto thee? O Iuda, howe shall I intreate thee? for
your goodnesse is lyke a morning cloude, & like a deawe that goeth early away.
5 Therfore haue I cut downe the prophetes, and let them be slayne for my wordes
sake, so that thy punishment shall come to light.
6 For I desired mercy, and not sacrifice: and the knowledge of God more then
burnt offeringes.
7 But euen like as Adam did, so haue they broken my couenaunt, and set me at
naught.
8 Gilead is a citie of wicked doers, and is polluted with blood.
9 And as theeues armed wayte for him that passeth by the way: suche is the
counsell of the priestes, which with one agreed counsell murther cruelly suche
as kepe the way, yea they dare do all vnspeakable mischiefe.
10 Horrible thinges haue I seene in the house of Israel: there is the
fornication of Ephraim, and Israel is defiled.
11 Yea, and thou Iuda kepest an haruest for thy selfe, when I returne the
captiuitie of my people.

Chapter 7

1 When I vndertoke to make Israel whole, then the vngraciousnesse of Ephraim,
and the wickednes of Samaria came to light, for thei go about with lyes,
therfore the theefe robbeth within, and the spoyler destroyeth without.
2 They consider not in their heartes that I remember al their wickednesse: Nowe
their owne inuentions haue beset them, whiche I see well inough.
3 They make the kyng glad with their wickednesse, and the princes with their
lyes.
4 All these burne in adulterie, as it were an ouen that the baker heateth when
he hath left kneading, tyll the dowe be leauened.
5 This is the day of our kyng, the princes haue made hym sicke with bottels of
wine, he hath stretched out his hande to scorners.
6 For whyles they lye in wayte, they haue made redye their heart lyke an ouen,
their baker sleepeth all night, in the morning it burneth as a flambe of fire.
7 They are altogether as hotte as an ouen, and haue deuoured their owne iudges,
all their kinges are fallen, yet is there none of them that calleth vpon me.
8 Ephraim hath mixt him selfe among heathen people, Ephraim is become like a
cake that no man turneth.
9 Straungers haue deuoured his strength, and he regardeth it not: he waxeth full
of gray heeres, yet wyll he not knowe it.
10 And the pryde of Israel testifieth to his face, yet wyll they not turne to
the Lorde their God, nor seeke hym for all this.
11 Ephraim is like a doue that is begyled and hath no heart: nowe call they vpon
the Egyptians, now go they to the Assyrians.
12 But whyle they be goyng here and there I shal spreade my net ouer them, and
drawe them downe as the foules of the ayre: and according as they haue ben
warned, so wyll I punishe them.
13 Wo be vnto them, for they haue forsaken me, they must be destroyed, for they
haue set me at naught: I am he that hath redeemed them, yet haue they spoken
lyes agaynst me.
14 They call not vpon me with their heartes, but lye howlyng vpon their beddes:
they wyll assemble them selues for corne and wine, but rebel against me.
15 I haue bounde vp and strengthened their arme: yet do they imagine mischiefe
agaynst me.
16 They turne them selues, but not to the most hyest, and are become as a broken
bowe, their princes shalbe slayne with the sworde for the malice of their
tongues: this shalbe their derision in the lande of Egypt.

Chapter 8

1 Set the trumpet to thy mouth, swiftly as an Egle shall the enemie come agaynst
the house of the Lorde: for they haue broken my couenaunt, and transgressed my
lawe.
2 Israel shoulde haue sayde vnto me: Thou art my God, we knowe thee.
3 But he hath refused the thyng that is good, therfore shall the enemie pursue
him.
4 They haue ordeyned kinges, but not through me, they haue made princes, and I
knewe it not: of their siluer and golde haue they made them idols, therfore
shall they be destroyed.
5 Thy Calfe O Samaria hath cast thee of, for my wrathfull indignation is gone
foorth agaynst them: howe long wyll they be without innocencie?
6 For the calfe came from Israel, the workman made it, therfore can it be no
God: but euen in peeces shall the calfe of Samaria be broken.
7 They haue sowen winde, therfore shall they reape a whirlewinde: it hath no
stalke, the bud shall bryng foorth no meale: and if haplie it do, straungers
shall deuour it vp.
8 Israel is deuoured, nowe shall they be among the gentiles as a vessell of no
reputation.
9 For they haue gone vp to Assyria and are as a wilde asse solitarie by him
selfe: Ephraim hath hired louers.
10 And though they haue hired them among the heathen, yet nowe wyll I gather
them, and they shall begyn to be weery with the burthen of the king and the
prince.
11 Ephraim hath made many aulters to do wickednesse, his aulters I say he had to
his sinne.
12 I haue written to them the great thinges of my lawe, but they are counted as
a straunge thing.
13 They sacrifice fleshe for the sacrifice of mine offeringes, & eate it, but
the Lord hath no pleasure in it: nowe wyll he remember their iniquitie, and
visite their sinnes, they shall returne into Egypt.
14 For Israel hath forgotten him that made him, & hath builded faire palaces,
and Iuda hath encreased strong cities: but I wyll sende a fire into their
cities, and it shall consume their palaces.

Chapter 9

1 Do not thou triumph O Israel, make no boastyng ouer ioyous thinges as do the
heathen: for thou hast committed adulterie agaynst thy God, whorishe rewardes
hast thou loued more then all the corne floores.
2 The corne floore and the wine presse shall not feede them: and the newe wine
shall fayle them.
3 They shall not dwell in the Lordes lande, but Ephraim shall turne agayne into
Egypt, and eate vncleane thinges among the Assyrians.
4 They powre out no wine for a drynke offeryng vnto the Lorde, neither shall
their slayne offeringes be pleasaunt vnto him, they shalbe vnto them as the
bread of mourners, all they that eate shalbe defiled: for their bread for their
soules shall not come into the house of the Lorde.
5 What wyll ye do then in the solempne day, and in the feast day of the Lorde?
6 For beholde they are gone away for destruction, but Egypt shall gather them,
and Memphis shall bury them: the nettles shall possesse the pleasaunt places of
their siluer, thornes shalbe in their tabernacles.
7 The dayes of visitation are come, the dayes of recompence are come: and then
shall Israel knowe that they were deceaued by a foolishe, mad, & franticke
prophete: for the multitude of thine iniquitie God shall multiplie enemies
agaynst thee.
8 The watchman of Ephraim was with my God but the prophete is the snare of a
fouler in all his wayes, and an abhomination in the house of his God.
9 They haue gone to the bottome, they are corrupt as in the dayes of Gibea:
therfore he wyll remember their iniquitie, and visite their sinnes.
10 I founde Israel like grapes in the wildernesse, & sawe their fathers as the
first ripe in ye figge tree at her first season: but they went to Baal Peor, &
seperated them selues to that shame, and became as abhominable as their louers.
11 Ephraim their glorie shall flee away like a birde: for birth, for wombe, and
conception.
12 And though they bryng vp children, yet I wyll destroy them before they be
men: Yea wo shall come to them when I depart from them.
13 Ephraim (as me thinke) is planted in a pleasaunt place, like as is Tyrus: but
nowe must she bryng her owne children foorth to the manslayer.
14 O Lorde geue them: what shalt thou geue them? Geue them an vnfruitfull wombe,
and drye breastes.
15 All their wickednesse is done at Gilgall, there do I abhorre them: for the
vngratiousnesse of their owne inuentions I wyll driue them out of my house, I
wyll loue them no more, for all their princes are vnfaithfull.
16 Ephraim is hewen downe, their roote is dried vp, so that they shall bryng no
more fruite: yea and though they bryng foorth any, yet wyll I slay euen the best
beloued of their body.
17 My God shall cast them away, for they haue not ben obedient vnto him,
therfore shall they wander among the heathen.

Chapter 10

1 Israel is an emptie vine, yet hath it brought foorth fruite to it selfe,
accordyng to the multitude of the fruite therof he hath encreased alwayes:
accordyng to the goodnesse of their lande they haue made them faire images.
2 Their heart is deuided, therfore shall they nowe be destroyed, the Lorde shall
breake downe their images, he shall destroy their aulters.
3 For nowe shall they say, We haue no king, because we haue not feared the
Lorde: and what shoulde then a king do to vs?
4 They haue spoken wordes, swearyng falslye in makyng a couenaunt: thus
iudgement groweth as wormewood in the furrowes of the fielde.
5 They that dwell in Samaria shall feare because of the Calfe of Bethauen, for
the people therof shall mourne ouer it, yea and the priestes also reioyced on it
for the glorie therof, because it is departed from it.
6 It shalbe brought to the Assyrian for a present to the king Iareb: Ephraim
shall receaue shame, and Israel shalbe confounded for his owne imaginations.
7 Samaria with his king shall vanishe away, as the fome vpon the water.
8 The hye places of Auen where Israel doth sinne shalbe destroyed, thistles and
thornes shal growe vpon their aulters: then shall they say to the mountaynes,
Couer vs, & to the hylles, Fall vpon vs.
9 O Israel, thou hast sinned from the dayes of Gabaa: there they stoode, the
battayle in Gabaa agaynst the children of iniquitie did not touche them.
10 It is my desire that I shoulde chastise them: and the people shalbe gathered
agaynst them, when they shall ioyne them selues together in their two furrowes.
11 And Ephraim is as an heyffer vsed to delyte in treadyng out the corne: but I
wyll passe by her faire necke, I wyll make Ephraim to ride: Iuda shall plowe,
and Iacob shall breake his cloddes.
12 Sowe to your selues in righteousnesse, and reape the fruites of well doyng,
plowe vp your freshe lande: for it is tyme to seeke the Lorde tyll he come and
rayne righteousnesse vpon you.
13 For you haue plowed vngodlinesse, ye haue reaped iniquitie, you haue eaten
the fruite of lyes, because thou puttest thy confidence in thine owne wayes, and
leanest to the multitude of thy strong men.
14 There shall growe a sedition among thy people, all thy strong cities shalbe
layde waste, euen as Salma destroyed Beth Arbel in the day of battayle, where
the mother with the children were dasshed in peeces.
15 Euen so shall Bethel do vnto you because of your malitious wickednesse: in a
mornyng shall the king of Israel be destroyed.

Chapter 11

1 When Israel was young, I loued him, and called my sonne out of the lande of
Egypt.
2 They called them but they went thus from them: they sacrificed vnto Baal, and
burned incense to images.
3 I gaue to Ephraim one to leade him, who shoulde beare him in his armes: but
they knew not that I healed them.
4 I led them with cordes of a man euen with bandes of loue: and I was to them as
he that taketh of the yoke from their iawes, and I layde meate to them.
5 He shall no more returne into Egypt, but Asshur shalbe his king, because he
refused to conuert.
6 Therfore shall the sworde fall on his cities, & shall consume his braunches,
and deuour them, because of their owne counsayles.
7 And my people shall stande in a doubt whither to turne them: for when the
prophetes called them to the most hyest, not one yet woulde geue him his glorie.
8 Howe shall I geue thee vp Ephraim? howe shal I deliuer thee Israel? howe shall
I make thee as Adama? howe shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is turned
within me, my repentinges are kindled within me.
9 I wyll not execute the fiercenesse of my wrath, I wyl not returne to destroy
Ephraim: for I am God and not man, the holy one in the middest of thee, and I
wyll not enter into the citie.
10 They shall walke after the Lorde, he shall rose like a lion: when he shall
rose, then the children of the west shall feare.
11 They shall feare a as sparowe out of Egypt, and as a doue out of the lande of
Asshur, and I wyll place them in their houses, saith the Lorde.
12 Ephraim compasseth me about with lyes, & the house of Israel with deceipt:
but Iuda yet ruleth with God, and is faithfull with the saintes.

Chapter 12

1 Ephraim is fed with the wynde, & foloweth after the east winde, he dayly
encreaseth lyes & destruction, they be confederate with the Assyrians, their
oyle is caryed into Egypt.
2 The Lorde hath a controuersie with Iuda, and wyll visite Iacob accordyng to
his wayes, accordyng to their owne inuentions wyll he recompence them.
3 He toke his brother by the heele when he was yet in his mothers wombe, and in
his strength he wrestled with God:
4 He stroue with the angel and gat the victorie, he wept and prayed to him: he
founde him at Bethel, and there he spake with vs.
5 Yea the Lorde God of hoastes, euen the Lorde himselfe remembred him.
6 Therfore turne to thy God, kepe mercie and iudgement, and hope styll in thy
God.
7 He is Chanaan, the ballaunces of deceipt are in his hande, he loueth to
oppresse.
8 And Ephraim hath sayde, Tushe I am riche, I haue good enough: in all my workes
shall not one iniquitie be founde wherin I haue offended.
9 Yet am I the Lorde thy God from the lande of Egypt, I wyll yet make thee dwell
in the tabernacles as in the hye feast dayes.
10 I haue spoken through the prophetes, and haue multiplied visions, & shewed
similitudes by the ministerie of the prophetes.
11 In Galaad is iniquitie, they are fallen to vanitie: at Gilgal they haue
sacrificed oxen, & their aulters are as heapes in the furrowes of the fielde.
12 Iacob fled into the lande of Syria, and Israel serued for a wife, and for a
wife he kept sheepe.
13 By a prophete the Lorde brought them out of Egypt, and by a prophete was he
preserued.
14 But Ephraim hath prouoked him to displeasure through his abhominations,
therfore shall his blood be powred vpon him selfe, and the Lorde his God shall
rewarde him his blasphemies.

Chapter 13

1 When Ephraim spake, there was tremblyng, he was exalted among the Israelites:
but he hath sinned in Baal, and is dead.
2 And nowe they sinne more and more, and of their siluer they haue made them
molten images after the imaginatios of their owne braynes, that is very idols,
and yet all is nothing but the worke of the craftesman: they say one to another,
Whiles they sacrifice a man let them kisse the calues.
3 Therfore they shalbe as the mornyng cloude, and as the deawe that early
passeth away, and like as dust that the whirlewinde taketh away from the floore,
and as smoke that goeth out of the chimney.
4 Yet I am the Lorde thy God which brought thee out of the lande of Egypt, &
thou shalt knowe no God but me only, neither is there any sauiour besides me.
5 I did knowe thee in the wildernesse, in the lande of drought.
6 But when they were well fed, and had enough, they waxed proude, & forgat me.
7 Therfore wyll I be vnto them as a lion, and as a leoparde in the wayes to the
Assyrians.
8 I wyll meete them as a she beare that is robbed of her whelpes, and I wyll
breake that stubburne heart of theirs, there wyll I deuour them like a lion, yea
the wylde beastes shall teare them.
9 O Israel thine iniquitie hath destroyed thee: but in me only is thy helpe.
10 I am: where is thy king nowe that shoulde helpe thee in all thy cities? Yea
and thy iudges of whom thou saydest, Geue me a king and princes.
11 I gaue thee a king in my wrath, and in my displeasure I toke him from thee
agayne.
12 The wickednesse of Ephraim is bound together, and his sinne lyeth hyd.
13 Therfore shall sorowes come vpon him as vpon a woman that trauayleth: an
vndiscrete sonne is he, els woulde he not stande styll at the tyme of birth of
children.
14 I wyll redeeme them from the power of the graue, and deliuer them from death:
O death, I wyll be thy death: O hell, I wyll be thy styng: yet can I see no
comfort.
15 Though he grewe among his brethren, the east wynde euen the wynde of the
Lorde shall come vp from the wildernesse, and drye vp his veyne, and his
fountaynes shalbe dryed vp: he shall spoyle the treasure of all pleasaunt
vessels.
16 Samaria shalbe made waste, for she is disobedient vnto her God: they shall
perishe with the sworde, their children shalbe dasshed in peeces, and their
women great with childe shalbe ript vp.

Chapter 14

1 O Israel, returne vnto the Lorde thy God, for thou hast fallen through thine
owne wickednesse.
2 Take these wordes with you, whe ye turne to the Lorde, and say vnto him, O
forgeue vs all our sinnes, receaue vs graciously, and then wyll we offer the
Calues of our lippes vnto thee.
3 Asshur shalbe no more our helper, neither will we ride vpon horses any more,
neither wyll we say any more to the worke of our handes, Ye are our gods: for in
thee the fatherlesse findeth mercie.
4 I wyll heale their rebellion, I wyll loue them freely: for mine anger is
turned away from hym.
5 I wyll be vnto Israel as the deawe, and he shall growe as the lilie, and his
roote shall breake out as the trees of Libanus.
6 His braunches shal spreade out abrode, and be as faire as the oliue tree, &
smell as Libanus.
7 They that dwell vnder his shadowe, shall returne & growe vp as the corne, and
florishe as the vine: he shall haue as good a name as the wine of Libanus.
8 Ephraim shall say what haue I to do with idols any more? I haue hearde him,
and loked vpon him, I am like a greene firre tree, vpon me is thy fruite founde.
9 Who so is wise, shall vnderstande these thinges, and he that is right instruct
wyll regarde them: for the wayes of the Lorde are righteous, such as be godly
wyll walke in them: as for the wicked, they shall stumble therin.


Joel

Chapter 1

1 The worde of the Lorde that came to Ioel the sonne of Pethuel.
2 Heare ye this you elders, & hearken with your eares all you that dwel in this
lande: was there euer such a thyng in your dayes, or in the dayes of your
fathers?
3 Of this thyng tell your children, and let your children shewe it to their
children, and their children to their posteritie afterwarde.
4 That which the caterpiller hath left the grashopper hath eaten, and what the
grashopper left hath the canker worme eaten, and what the canker worme left the
locust hath deuoured.
5 Awake ye drunkardes, & weepe, howle all ye wine bibbers for lacke of newe
wine: for it is cleane taken away from your mouth.
6 For a nation is come vp vpon my lande, mightie and without number: his teeth
are as the teeth of a lion, and he hath the iawes of a great lion.
7 He hath destroyed my vine, & barked my figge tree, he hath pilled it and cast
it from him, and hath left bowes therof whyte.
8 Lament as a virgin girded with sackcloth, for the husbande of her youth.
9 The meate offeryng and drinke offeryng is cut of from the house of the Lorde,
the priestes I meane the Lordes ministers mourne.
10 The fielde is wasted, the lande mourneth: for corne is destroyed, the newe
wine is dryed vp, the oyle is vtterly taken away.
11 Be ye ashamed O ye husbandemen, howle O ye wine dressers for ye wheate and
for the barly: for the haruest of the fielde is perished.
12 The wine is dryed vp, and the figge tree is decayed, the pomgranate tree, and
the paulme, & the apple tree, euen all the trees of the fielde are withered vp:
for ioy is withered away from the sonnes of men.
13 Girde your selues and lament O ye priestes, howle ye out ye ministers of the
aulter, come and lye all night in sackcloth ye seruauntes of my God: for the
meate and drynke offerynges are taken away from the house of your God.
14 Proclayme a fast, call a congregation, gather the elders together, with all
the inhabitauntes of the lande vnto the house of the Lorde your God, and crye
vnto the Lorde,
15 Alas for this day, for the day of the Lorde is at hande, euen as a
destruction from the almightie shall it come.
16 Is not the meate cut of before our eyes, yea mirth and ioy from the house of
our God?
17 The seede is rotte vnder their cloddes, the garners are destroyed, the barnes
are ouerthrowen: for the corne is withered.
18 O howe cattell mourne? the heardes of beastes are in wofull case for lacke of
pasture, and the flockes of sheepe are destroyed?
19 Unto thee O Lorde wyll I crye, for feare hath destroyed the fruitfull places
of the desert, and the flambe hath burnt vp all the trees of the fielde.
20 The beastes also of the fielde crye out vnto thee: for the riuers of waters
are dryed vp, and fire hath deuoured vp the fruitfull places of the desert.

Chapter 2

1 Blowe vp a trumpet in Sion, and showte in my holy hyll, let all the
inhabitauntes of the earth tremble: for the day of the Lorde is come, for it is
nye at hande.
2 A darke and glomie day, a cloudie and blacke day: as the mornyng is spread
ouer the mountaynes so is this populus & strong people, like it there was none
from the beginning, nor shalbe herafter for euermore.
3 Before him is a deuouryng fire, and behynde him a burnyng flambe: the lande is
as a pleasaunt garden before him, and behinde him a waste desert, yea and
nothyng shall escape him.
4 The shewe of him is as the shewe of horses, and like horsemen, so shall they
runne.
5 Lyke the noyse of charrettes vpon the toppes of the mountaynes they shall
skip, like the noyse of a flamyng fire deuouryng the stubble, and as a strong
people prepared to battayle.
6 Before his face shall the people tremble, the countenaunce of all folkes shall
waxe blacke as a pot.
7 They shall runne like strong men, and climbe the walles like men of warre: &
euery one shall march on in his way, and they shal not linger in their pathes.
8 No man shall thrust another, but euery one shall walke in his path: and if
they shall fall on the sworde, they shall not be wounded.
9 They shall runne to and fro in the citie, they shall runne vp & downe vpon the
wall, they shall climbe into the houses, they shall enter in at the windowes
like a theefe.
10 The earth shall quake before him, the heauens shall tremble, the sunne and
the moone shalbe darke, and the starres shall withdrawe their shinyng.
11 And the Lorde shall geue his voyce before his hoast, for his campe is
exceeding great, for he is mightie that executeth his commaundement: for the day
of the Lorde is great and very terrible, and who can abide it?
12 But nowe saith ye Lord, turne you vnto me with all your heartes, with
fasting, with weepyng, and with mournyng.
13 And rent your heartes and not your garmentes, & turne you vnto the Lorde your
God, for he is gratious & mercifull, slowe to anger, and of great goodnesse, and
he wyll repent him of the euyll.
14 Who knoweth whether the Lorde wyll returne and take compassion, and wyll
leaue behinde him a blessing, euen meate offeryng and drynke offeryng vnto the
Lorde your God?
15 Blowe vp a trumpet in Sion, proclayme a fast, call an assemblye, sanctifie
the congregation.
16 Gather the people, gather the elders, assemble the children & suckyng babes:
let the bridegrome come foorth of his chamber, and the bride out of her closet.
17 Let the priestes the Lordes ministers weepe betwixt the porche & the aulter,
and let them say, Spare thy people O Lord, and geue not ouer thine heritage to
reproche, that the heathen shoulde rule ouer them: Wherfore shoulde they say
amongst the heathen, Where is their God?
18 And then the Lorde wyll be ielous ouer his lande, & wyll spare his people.
19 Yea the Lorde wyll aunswere, and say to his people, Beholde I wyll sende you
corne, and wine, and oyle, and wyll satisfie you therwith, and wyll not geue you
ouer any more to be a reproche among the heathen.
20 And I wyll remoue farre of from you the northen armie and I wyll driue him
into a lande barren and desolate, with his face towardes the east sea, and his
hinder partes towardes the vttermost sea: and his stinch shall arise, and his
corruption shall ascende, because he hath exalted him selfe to do this.
21 Feare not O thou lande, be glad and reioyce: for the Lorde wyll do great
thinges.
22 Be not afrayde ye beastes of the fielde, for the fruitfull places of the
desert are greene: for the tree beares her fruite, the figge tree and the vine
yeelde their strength.
23 Be glad then ye children of Sion, and reioyce in the Lorde your God: for he
hath geuen you moderate rayne, & he wyll sende downe for you the rayne, euen the
first rayne & the latter rayne, in the first moneth.
24 And the barnes shalbe fylled with corne, and the presses shall ouerflowe with
wine and oyle.
25 And I wyll restore to you the yeres which the grashopper, the canker worme,
the locust, and the caterpiller haue deuoured, my great armie which I sent
amongst you.
26 And you shall eate in plentie and be satisfied, and shall prayse the name of
the Lorde your God which hath dealt wonderously with you, and my people shall
not be ashamed any more.
27 And you shall knowe that I am in the middle of Israel, and that I am the
Lorde your God, and none but I: and my people shall neuer be ashamed.
28 And it shall come to passe after this: I wyll powre out my spirite vpon all
fleshe, and your sonnes and your daughters shall prophecie, your olde men shall
dreame dreames, your young men shall see visions.
29 Also in those dayes vpon the seruauntes and vpon the handmaydens wyll I powre
out my spirite.
30 And I will shewe wonders in heauen and in earth, blood, and fire, and pillers
of smoke.
31 The sunne shalbe turned into darknesse, and the moone into blood, before that
great and terrible day of the Lord come.
32 But whosoeuer shall call on the name of the Lord, shalbe saued: for there
shalbe deliueraunce in mount Sion and in Hierusalem, as the Lord hath promised,
and also in the remnaunt whom the Lorde shall call.

Chapter 3

1 For beholde, in those dayes and in that time when I shall bryng agayne the
captiuitie of Iuda & Hierusalem,
2 I wyll also gather all the gentiles, and cause them to come into the valley of
Iehosaphat, and I will pleade with them there for my people and heritage Israel,
which they haue scattered amongst the nations, and haue parted my lande.
3 And thei haue cast lottes for my people, and chaunged the boy for an harlot,
and solde the gyrle for wine, that they might drynke.
4 And what haue you to do with me O Tyre and Sidon, and all the coastes of
Palestine? wyll ye render me recompence? and if you recompence me, I shal
swiftly and speedyly returne your recompence vpon your owne heades.
5 For ye haue taken my siluer and my golde, my pleasaunt & pretious thinges, &
haue caryed them into your temples.
6 You haue solde also the children of Iuda and the children of Hierusalem to the
Gretians, that you might send them farre from their owne countrey.
7 Beholde, I will rayse them out of that place whither you haue solde them, and
wyll returne your recompence vpon your owne heades.
8 And I wyll sell your sonnes and your daughters into the handes of the children
of Iuda, and they shall sell them vnto the Sabeans, to a nation that dwelleth
farre of: for the Lorde hath spoken it.
9 Publishe this thyng among the gentiles, proclayme warre, wake vp the mightie
men, let all the men of warre drawe neare and come vp.
10 Breake your plowe shares into swordes, and your sithes into speares, let the
weake say, I am strong.
11 Assemble your selues and come all you heathen, and gather your selues
together rounde about, there shall the Lord cast downe thy mightie men.
12 Let the heathen arise and come vp to the valley of Iehosaphat: for there will
I sit to iudge all nations rounde about.
13 Put in your sithes, for ye haruest is ripe: come ye and descende, for the
wine presse is full, yea the presses ouerflowe: for their wickednesse is
multiplied.
14 O people, people come into the valley of finall iudgement: for the day of the
Lorde is at hande in the valley of finall iudgement.
15 The sunne and the moone shalbe darkned, and the starres shall withdrawe their
light.
16 The Lord also shall rose out of Sion, and out of Hierusalem shall he geue his
voyce, the heauens and the earth shall shake: but the Lorde wyll be the hope of
his people, and the strength of the children of Israel.
17 So shall you knowe that I am the Lorde your God dwellyng in Sion my holy
mountayne: then shall Hierusalem be holy, and there shall no straungers passe
through here any more.
18 And in that day shall the mountaynes drop downe sweete wine, and the hylles
shall flowe with mylke, & all the riuers of Iuda shall runne with water, and a
fountayne shall come out of the house of the Lorde, and shall water the valley
of Sittim.
19 Egypt shalbe waste, and Edom shalbe a desolate wildernesse: for the iniuries
done to the children of Iuda: because they haue shed innocent blood in their
lande.
20 But Iuda shal dwel for euermore, and Hierusalem from generation to
generation.
21 I wil also clense the blood of them that I haue not clensed, and the Lord
dwelleth in Sion.


Amos

Chapter 1

1 The wordes of Amos, who was among the sheepheardes at Thecua, whiche he sawe
vpon Israel in the dayes of Ozia king of Iuda, and in the dayes of Ieroboam the
sonne of Ioas king of Israel, two yere before the earth quake.
2 And he sayde, The Lord shal roare out of Sion, and vtter his voyce from
Hierusalem: and the dwelling places of the sheepheardes shall mourne, & the top
of Charmel shall wyther.
3 Thus sayth the Lord, For three wickednesses of Damascus, and for foure I will
not spare her: because they haue threshed Gilead with iron flales.
4 But I will send a fire into the house of Hazael, and it shall deuoure the
palaces of Benhadad.
5 I will breake also the barres of Damascus, and roote out the inhabitoures from
the playne of Auen, and him that holdeth the scepter out of the house of Eden,
and the people of Syria shall go into captiuitie vnto Kir, sayth the Lord.
6 Thus sayth the Lorde, For three wickednesses of Azza, and for foure I will not
spare her: because they raried away prisoners into captiuitie to shut them vp in
Edom.
7 Therfore will I sende a fire vpon the walles of Azza, whiche shall deuoure her
palaces.
8 And I will cut of the inhabiter from Asdod, and him that holdeth the scepter
from Ascalon, & turne my hande to Ecron, & the remnaunt of the Philistines shall
perishe, sayth the Lorde God.
9 Thus sayth the Lorde, For three wickednesses of Tyre, and for foure I will not
spare her: because they shut the whole captiuitie in Edom, and haue not
remembred the brotherly couenaunt.
10 Therfore will I send a fire vpon the wall of Tyre, and it shall consume the
palaces therof.
11 Thus sayth the Lord, For three wickednesses of Edom, and for foure I wil not
spare him: because he pursued his brother with the sworde, and did cast of al
pitie, and in his anger spoyled him continually, and his indignation he kept
alwayes.
12 Therfore will I send a fire into Theman, which shal deuoure the palaces of
Bozra.
13 Thus saith the Lord, For three wickednesses of the children of Ammon, and for
foure I will not spare them: because they haue ript vp the women with childe of
Gilead, that they might enlarge their borders.
14 Therefore will I kindle a fire in the walles of Rabbah that shall consume her
palaces with a great crye in the day of battell, and with a tempest in the day
of the whirlewinde.
15 And their king shall go into captiuitie, he and his princes together, sayth
the Lorde.

Chapter 2

1 Thus sayth the Lorde, For three wickednesses of Moab, & for foure I will not
spare him: because he burnt the bones of the king of Edom into lime.
2 Therfore will I send a fire into Moab, which shal consume the palaces of
Carioth, and Moab shall die with tumult, with showting, and with the sounde of
the trumpet.
3 And I will cut of the iudge out of the mids therof, and wil slay all the
princes therof with him, sayth the Lorde.
4 Thus sayth the Lorde, For three wickednesses of Iuda, and for foure I will not
spare hym: because they haue cast away the lawe of the Lord, and haue not kept
his ordinaunces, and their lies caused them to erre, after the which their
fathers walked.
5 Therfore will I send a fire into Iuda, which shall consume the palaces of
Hierusalem:
6 Thus sayth the Lorde, For three wickednesses of Israel, and for foure I wil
not spare hym: because they solde the righteous for siluer, and the poore for a
paire of shoes.
7 They gape for breath ouer the head of the poore in the dust of the earth, &
peruert the way of the meke: A man and his father will go in to one mayde, to
dishonour my holy name.
8 And they lye vpon clothes layde to pledge by euery aulter: and in the house of
their god, they drinke the wine of the condempned.
9 Yet destroyed I the Amorite before them, whose heyght was like the height of
the Cedar trees, and he was strong as the okes: notwithstanding I destroyed his
fruite from aboue, and his roote from beneath.
10 Also I brought you vp from the lande of Egypt, & led you fourtie yeres thorow
the wildernesse, to possesse the lande of the Amorites.
11 And I raysed vp of your sonnes for prophetes, and of your young men for
Nazarites: Is it not euen thus, O ye children of Israel, sayth the Lorde?
12 But ye gaue the Nazarites wine to drinke, and commaunded the prophetes,
saying, Prophecie not.
13 Beholde, I am pressed vnder you, as a cart is pressed that is full of
sheaues.
14 Therfore the flight shall perishe from the swift, and the strong shal not
strengthen his force, neither shall the mightie saue his life.
15 Nor he that handleth the bowe shall stande, nor he that is swift of foote
shall escape, neither shall he that rydeth the horse, saue his life.
16 And he that is of mightie courage among the strong men, shal flee away naked
in that day, sayth the Lorde.

Chapter 3

1 Heare this worde that the Lord pronounceth against you O children of Israel
euen against the whole familie whiche I brought vp from the lande of Egypt,
saying:
2 You only haue I knowen of al the families of the earth, therfore I will visite
you for all your iniquities.
3 Can two walke together, except they be agreed?
4 Wyll a lion roare in the forest when he hath no pray? or wil a lions whelpe
crye out of his denne, if he haue taken nothing?
5 Can a birde fal in a snare vpon the earth where no fouler is? or wil he take
vp the snare from the earth, and haue taken nothing at all?
6 Or shall a trumpet be blowen in the citie, & the people be not afrayde? or
shall there be euyll in a citie, and the Lorde hath not done it?
7 Surely the Lord God wil do nothing, but he reuealeth his secrete vnto his
seruauntes the prophetes.
8 The lion hath roared, who wil not be afrayde? The Lorde God hath spoken, who
can but prophecie?
9 Proclame in the palaces at Asdod, and in the palaces in the lande of Egypt,
and say: Assemble your selues vpon the mountaynes of Samaria, and beholde the
great tumultes in the mids thereof, and the oppressed in the mids therof:
10 For they know not to do right, sayth the Lorde, they store vp violence and
robberie in their palaces.
11 Therfore thus sayth the Lord God, An aduersarie shall come euen round about
the countrey, and shall bring downe thy strength from thee, and thy palaces
shalbe spoyled.
12 Thus sayth the Lorde, As the sheephearde taketh out of the mouth of the lion
two legges or a peece of an eare: so shall the children of Israel be taken out
that dwell in Samaria, in the corner of a bed, and in Damascus as in a couche.
13 Heare and testifie in the house of Iacob, saith the Lord God, the God of
hoastes:
14 That in the day that I shall visite the transgressions of Israel vpon hym, I
wil also visite the aulters of Bethel, and the hornes of the aulter shalbe
broken of, and fall to the grounde.
15 And I will smite the winter house with the sommer house, and the houses of
yuorie shall perishe, and the great houses shalbe consumed, saith the Lord.

Chapter 4

1 Heare this worde ye kyne of Basan, that are in the mountaine of Samaria, which
oppresse the poore, & destroy the needy, which say to their maisters, Bring and
let vs drinke.
2 The Lord God hath sworne by his holinesse, that lo, the dayes shal come vpon
you, that he will take you away with thornes, and your posteritie with fishe
hookes.
3 And ye shall go out at the breaches, euery kowe forward: and ye shal cast your
selues out of the palace, sayth the Lorde.
4 Come to Bethel, and transgresse: to Gilgal, and multiplie transgression: and
bring your sacrifices in the morning, and your tythes after three yeres.
5 And offer a thankes geuing of leauen, publishe & proclayme the free offringes:
for this liketh you O ye children of Israel, sayth the Lorde God.
6 Therfore haue I geue you cleannesse of teeth in all your cities, & scarsenesse
of bread in all your places: yet haue ye not returned vnto me, sayth the Lorde.
7 And also I haue withholden the rayne from you when there were yet three
monethes to the haruest, and I caused it to rayne vpon one citie, and haue not
caused it to rayne vpon an other citie: one peece was raigned vpon, & the peece
whervpon it rayned not, withered.
8 So two or three cities wandred vnto one citie to drinke water, but they were
not satisfied: yet haue ye not returned vnto me, sayth the Lorde.
9 I haue smitten you with blasting and mildeaw, your great gardens, and your
vineyardes, and your figge trees, & your oliue trees, dyd the palmer worme
denoure: yet haue ye not returned vnto me sayth the Lorde.
10 Pestilence haue I sent among you after the maner of Egypt: your young men
haue I slayne with the sworde, & haue taken away your horses, and I haue made
the stinke of your tentes to come euen vp into your nostrels: yet haue ye not
returned vnto me, sayth the Lorde.
11 I haue ouerthrowen you, as God ouerthrewe Sodoma and Gomorra: and ye were as
a fire brande pluckt out of the burning: yet haue ye not returned vnto me, sayth
the Lorde.
12 Therfore thus will I do vnto thee O Israel, and because I will do this vnto
thee, prepare to meete thy God O Israel.
13 For lo, he that fourmeth the mountaynes, and createth the winde, and
declareth vnto man what is his thought, whiche maketh the morning darkenesse,
and walketh vpon the hie places of the earth, the Lorde God of hoastes is his
name.

Chapter 5

1 Heare ye this worde whiche I lift vp vpon you, euen a lamentation of the house
of Israel.
2 The virgin Israel is fallen, & shall no more rise: she is left vpon her lande,
and there is none to rayse her vp.
3 For thus sayth the Lorde God, The citie which went out by a thousand, shall
leaue an hundreth, & that whiche went foorth by an hundreth, shall leaue ten, to
the house of Israel.
4 For thus sayth the Lord vnto the house of Israel, Seke ye me, and ye shall
liue.
5 But seke not Bethel, nor enter into Gilgal, and go not to Beerseba: for Gilgal
shall go into captiuitie, and Bethel shall come to naught.
6 Seke the Lord, and ye shall liue: lest he breake out like fire in the house of
Ioseph, and deuoure it, and there be noone to quenche it in Bethel.
7 They turne iudgement to wormewood, and forsake righteousnesse in the earth.
8 He maketh the seuen starres and Orion, and he turneth the shadowe of death
into the morning, and he maketh the day darke as night: he calleth the waters of
the sea, and powreth them out vpon the open earth, the Lorde is his name.
9 He strengthneth the destroyer against the mightie, & the destroyer shall come
against the fortresse.
10 They hate him that rebuketh in the gate, and they abhorre him that speaketh
vprightly.
11 Forasmuch then as your treading is vpon the poore, and ye take from hym
burdens of wheate: ye haue buylt houses of hewen stone, but ye shall not dwell
in them: ye haue planted pleasaunt vineyardes, but ye shall not drinke wine of
them.
12 For I knowe your manyfolde transgressions, and your mightie sinnes: they
afflict the iust, they take rewardes, and they oppresse the poore in the gate.
13 Therfore the wise shall kepe scilence in that time: for it is an euyll time.
14 Seke good and not euill, that ye may liue: & so the Lord God of hoastes
shalbe with you, as you haue spoken.
15 Hate the euill and loue the good, and establishe iudgement in the gate: it
may be, that the Lord God of hoastes wilbe mercifull vnto the remnaunt of
Ioseph.
16 Therfore the Lorde God of hoastes the Lord sayth thus, Mourning shalbe in all
streetes, and they shall say in al the hye wayes, Alas, alas: and they shall cal
the husbandman to lamentation, and such as can mourne, to mourning.
17 And in all the vines shalbe lamentation: for I will passe through thee, sayth
the Lorde.
18 Wo vnto you that desire the day of the Lorde, what haue ye to do with it? the
day of the Lorde is darkenes, and not light.
19 As if a man dyd flee from a lion, and a beare meete him, & went into the
house, and leaned his hand vnto the wal, and a serpent bite hym.
20 Shall not the day of the Lorde be darkenesse, and not light? euen darkenesse
and no light in it.
21 I hate, I abhorre your feast dayes, and I will not smell in your solemne
assemblies.
22 Though ye offer me burnt offeringes, and meate offeringes, I will not accept
them, neither will I regarde the peace offering of your fat beastes.
23 Take thou away from me the multitude of thy songues, for I will not heare the
melodie of thy violes.
24 And let iudgement run downe as water, and righteousnesse as a mightie riuer.
25 Haue ye offered vnto me sacrifices and offringes in the wildernesse fourtie
yeres, O house of Israel?
26 But ye haue borne Siccuth your king, and Chiun your images, and the starre of
your gods, which ye made to your selues.
27 Therfore will I cause you to go into captiuitie beyonde Damascus, sayth the
Lorde, whose name is the God of hoastes.

Chapter 6

1 Wo to them that are at ease in Sion, and trust in the mountayne of Samaria,
which were famous at the beginning of the nations, & the house of Israel came to
them.
2 Go you vnto Calneh, and see, and from thence go you to Hemath the great, then
go downe to Gath of the Philistines: be they better then these kingdomes? or the
border of their lande greater then your border?
3 Ye that put farre away the euyll day, and approche to the seate of iniquitie.
4 They lye vpon beddes of yuorie, and stretche them selues vpon their couches,
and eate the lambes out of the flocke, and the calues out of the stall.
5 They sing to the sounde of the viole, they inuent to them selues instrumentes
of musicke, like Dauid.
6 They drinke wine in bowles, and annoynt them selues with chiefe ointmentes:
but no man is sorie for the affliction of Ioseph.
7 Therfore nowe shall they go captiue with the first that go captiue, and the
sorowe of them that stretched them selues is at hande.
8 The Lorde God hath sworne by hym selfe, sayth the Lorde God of hoastes: I
abhorre the excellencie of Iacob, and hate his palaces, therfore will I deliuer
vp the citie, with all that is therin.
9 And if there remayne ten men in one house, they shall dye,
10 And his vncle shall take him vp, and burne him, to cary out the bones out of
the house, & shall say vnto him that is by the sides of the house, Is there yet
any with thee? And he shal say, None. Then shal he say, Hold thy tongue: for we
may not remember the name of the Lorde.
11 For behold the Lord commaundeth, and he will smyte the great house with
breaches, & the litle houses with cleftes.
12 Shal horses run vpo the rocke? or wil one plowe there with oxen? for ye haue
turned iudgement into gall, & the fruite of righteousnesse into wormewood.
13 Ye reioyce in a thing of naught, ye say: Haue not we gotten vs hornes by our
owne strength?
14 But behold, I wil rayse vp against you a nation O house of Israel, sayth the
Lorde God of hoastes, and they shall afflict you from the entring of Hemath,
vnto the riuer of the wildernesse.

Chapter 7

1 Thus hath the Lorde God shewed vnto me, & beholde, he fourmed grashoppers in
the beginning of the shooting vp of ye latter growth, and lo it was in the
latter growth, after the kinges mowing.
2 And when they hath made an end of eating the grasse of the lande, then I
sayde, O Lorde God, spare I beseche thee: who shall rayse vp Iacob? for he is
smal.
3 So the Lorde repented for this: it shall not be, sayth the Lorde.
4 Thus also hath the Lord God shewed vnto me, and behold, the Lord God called to
iudgement, by fire, & it deuoured the great deepe, and did eate vp a part.
5 Then sayde I, O Lorde God, ceasse I beseche thee: who shall rayse vp Iacob?
for he is smal.
6 So the Lord repented for this: this also shall not be, sayth the Lorde God.
7 Thus againe he shewed me, & beholde the Lorde stoode vpon a wall made by line,
with a line in his hande.
8 And the Lorde sayde vnto me, Amos what seest thou? And I sayde, A line. Then
sayd the Lorde, Beholde I will set a line in the mids of my people Israel, and
wyll passe by them no more.
9 And the hie places of Isaac shalbe desolate, and the temples of Israel shalbe
destroyed, and I will rise against the house of Ieroboam with the sworde.
10 Then Amazia the priest of Bethel sent to Ieroboam king of Israel, saying:
Amos hath conspired against thee in the mids of the house of Israel: the lande
is not able to beare all his wordes.
11 For thus Amos sayth: Ieroboam shal die by the sworde, and Israel shalbe led
away captiue out of their owne lande.
12 Also Amazia sayde to Amos, O thou the sear, Go, flee thou away into the lande
of Iuda, and there eate thy bread, and prophecie there.
13 But prophecie no more at Bethel: for it is the kinges chappell, & it is the
kinges court.
14 Then aunswered Amos, and sayde to Amazia, I was no prophete, neither was I a
prophetes sonne: but I was an heardeman, and a gatherer of wilde figges.
15 And the Lorde toke me as I folowed the flocke, and the Lord sayde vnto me,
Go, prophecie vnto my people Israel.
16 Now therfore heare thou the word of the Lorde: Thou sayest, Prophecie not
against Israel, and speake nothing against the house of Isaac.
17 Therfore thus sayth the Lorde, Thy wyfe shalbe an harlot in the citie, and
thy sonnes and thy daughters shall fall by the sworde, and thy land shalbe
deuided by line, and thou shalt die in a polluted land, and Israel shall surely
go into captiuitie foorth of his lande.

Chapter 8

1 Thus hath the Lorde God shewed vnto me: and beholde, a basket of sommer
fruite.
2 And he sayde: Amos, what seest thou? And I sayde: A basket of sommer fruite.
Then sayd the Lord vnto me, The end is come vpon my people of Israel, I wil
passe by them no more.
3 And the songues of the temple shalbe howlinges in that day sayth the Lorde
God: many dead bodies shalbe in euery place, they shal cast them foorth with
scilence.
4 Heare this, O ye that swallow vp the poore, that ye may make the needy of the
lande to fayle,
5 Saying, When will the new moneth be gone, that we may sell corne? & the
Sabbath, that we may set foorth wheate, and make the Epha small, & the sicle
great, & falsifie the wayghtes by deceite?
6 That we may bie the poore for siluer, and the needy for shoes, yea and sell
the refuse of the wheate?
7 The Lorde hath sworne by the excellencie of Iacob, surely I will neuer forget
any of their workes.
8 Shall not the lande tremble for this, and euerie one mourne that dwelleth
therin? And it shall rise vp wholly as a flood, and it shalbe cast out, and
drowned, as by the flood of Egypt.
9 And in that day, sayth the Lord God, I will euen cause the sunne to go downe
at noone, and I wil darken the earth in the cleare day.
10 And I will turne your feastes into mourning, and all your songues into
lamentation: and I will bring sackecloth vpon all loynes, and baldnesse vpon
euery head, & I will make it as the mourning of an only sonne, and the end
therof as a bitter day.
11 Behold the dayes come sayth the Lord God, that I will sende a famine in the
land, not a famine of bread, nor thirst for water, but of hearing the worde of
the Lorde.
12 And they shall wander from sea to sea, & from the north euen vnto the east
shal they run to and fro to seke the worde of the Lord, and shall not finde it.
13 In that day shall the fayre virgins, and the young men perishe for thirst.
14 They that swere by the sinne of Samaria, & that say, Thy God O Dan liueth, &
the maner of Beerseba liueth, euen they shall fall, and neuer rise vp againe.

Chapter 9

1 I saw the Lorde standing vpon the aulter, and he sayd: Smite the lintel of the
doore, that the postes may shake, & cut them in peeces, euen the heades of them
all, and I wil slay the last of them with the sworde: he that fleeth of them,
shall not flee away, and he that escapeth of them, shall not be deliuered.
2 Though they dig into hell, thence shall my hande take them, though they clime
vp to heauen, thence will I bring them downe.
3 And though they hyde them selues in the top of Charmel, I will searche, and
take them out thence: and though they be hyd from my sight in the bottome of the
sea, thence will I commaunde the serpent, and he shall bite them.
4 And though they go into captiuitie before their enemies, thence wil I
commaunde the sworde & it shall slay them: and I will set myne eyes vpon them
for euill, and not for good.
5 And the Lorde God of hoastes shall touche the land, and it shall melt away:
and all that dwell therin shall mourne, and it shal rise vp whole like a flood,
and shalbe drowned as by the flood of Egypt.
6 He buyldeth his spheres in the heauen, & hath layde the foundation of his
globe of elementes on the earth: he calleth the waters of the sea, and poureth
them out vpon the open earth, the Lorde is his name.
7 Are ye not as the Ethiopians vnto me O children of Israel, sayth the Lorde?
haue not I brought vp Israel out of the lande of Egypt? & the Philistines from
Cappadocia, and the Syrians from Cyrene?
8 Behold, the eyes of the Lorde God are vpon the sinful kingdome, and I wil
destroy it cleane out of the earth: neuerthelesse, I wil not vtterly destroy the
house of Iacob, sayth the Lorde.
9 For lo, I will commaunde, and I will sifte the house of Israel among all
nations, like as corne is sifted in a siue: yet shall not the least stone fall
vpon the earth.
10 But all the sinners of my people shall die by the sword, which say, The euyll
shall not come, nor hasten for vs.
11 In that day will I rayse vp the tabernacle of Dauid that is fallen downe, and
close vp the breaches thereof, and I will rayse vp his ruines, & I will buyld
it, as in the dayes of olde:
12 That they may possesse the remnaunt of Edom, & of all the heathen, because my
name is called vpon them, sayth the Lorde that doeth this.
13 Behold the dayes come, saith the Lord, that the plowman shall touche the
mower, and the treader of grapes hym that soweth seede, and the mountaynes shal
drop sweete wine, & all the hilles shall melt.
14 And I wil bring againe the captiuitie of my people of Israel, and they shall
buyld the wast cities, and inhabite them: and they shall plante vineyardes, and
drinke the wine therof, they shall also make gardens, and eate the fruites of
them.
15 And I will plant them vpon their land, and they shal no more be pulled vp
againe out of their lande which I haue geuen them, sayth the Lorde thy God.


Obadiah

Chapter 1

1 The vision of Abdi, thus sayth the lord God against Edom: We haue hearde a
rumor from the Lorde, & an ambassadour is sent among the heathen: arise, and let
vs ryse vp against her to battayle.
2 Behold, I haue made thee smal among the heathen, thou art vtterly despised.
3 The pride of thyne heart hath deceaued thee, thou that dwellest in the cleftes
of the rockes, whose habitation is hie, that saith in his heart, Who shall bring
me downe to the grounde?
4 Yea though thou exalt thy selfe as the egle, and make they nest among the
starres, thence wil I bring thee downe, sayth the Lorde.
5 Came theeues to thee, or robbers by night? how wast thou brought to silence?
woulde they not haue stollen till they had inough? If the grape gatherers came
to thee, woulde they not leaue some grapes?
6 Howe are the thinges of Esau sought vp, and his treasures searched?
7 All the men of thy confederacie haue driuen thee to the borders, the men that
were at peace with thee haue deceaued thee, and preuailed against thee, they
that eate thy bread haue layd a wounde vnder thee, there is none vnderstanding
in him.
8 Shal not I in that day, saide the lord, euen destroy the wise men out of Edom,
and vnderstanding from the mount of Esau?
9 And thy strong men O Theman shalbe afraid: because euery one of the mout of
Esau shalbe cut of by slaughter.
10 For thy crueltie against thy brother Iacob shame shall couer thee, and thou
shalt be cut of for euer.
11 When thou stoodest on the other side, in the day that the straungers caried
away his substaunce, and straungers entred into his gates, and cast lottes vpon
Hierusalem, euen thou wast as one of them.
12 But thou shouldest not haue beholden the day of thy brother in the day that
he was made a straunger, neither shouldest thou haue reioyced ouer the childre
of Iuda in the day of their destruction, thou shouldest not haue spoken proudly
in the day of affliction:
13 Thou shouldest not haue entred into the gate of my people in the day of their
destruction, neither shouldest thou haue once loked on their affliction in the
day of their destructio, nor haue layd handes on their substaunce in the day of
their destruction:
14 Neither shouldest thou haue stand in the crosse wayes to cut of them that
shoulde escape, neither shouldest thou haue shutte vp the remnaunt thereof in
the day of affliction.
15 For the day of the Lorde is neare vpon all the heathen: as thou hast done, it
shalbe done to thee, thy rewarde shall returne vpon thyne head.
16 For as ye haue drunke vpon myne holy mountaine, so shall all the heathen
drinke continually: yea, they shal drinke and swalowe vp, and they shalbe as
though they had not ben.
17 But vpon mount Sion shalbe deliueraunce, and it shalbe holy, and the house of
Iacob shal possesse their possessions.
18 And the house of Iacob shalbe a fire, and the house of Ioseph a flambe, and
the house of Esau as stubble, and they shall kindle in them and deuoure them,
and there shalbe no remnaunt of the house of Esau: for the Lorde hath spoken it.
19 And they shall possesse the south side of the mount of Esau, and the plaine
of the Philistines, and they shall possesse the fieldes of Ephraim, and the
fieldes of Samaria, and Beniamin shall haue Gilead.
20 And the captiuitie of his hoast of the children of Israel, which were among
the Chanaanites shall possesse vnto Zarephath, and the captiuitie of Hierusalem
which is in Sepharad, shall possesse the cities of the south.
21 And they that shall saue, shall come vp to mount Sion to iudge the mount of
Esau, and the kingdome shalbe the Lordes.


Jonah

Chapter 1

1 The worde of the Lorde came vnto Ionas the sonne of Amittai, saying:
2 Aryse, & go to Niniue that great citie, and crye against it: for their
wickednesse is come vp before me.
3 And Ionas rose vp to flee into Tharsis from the presence of the Lorde, and
went downe to Ioppa, and founde a ship going to Tharsis: so he payed his fare,
and went downe into it, that he might go with them vnto Tharsis from the
presence of the Lorde.
4 But the Lorde sent out a great winde into the sea, and there was a mightie
tempest in the sea, so that the shippe was in daunger of splitting in sunder.
5 Then the maryners were afrayde, and cryed euery man vnto his God, and cast the
wares that were in the shippe into the sea, to lighten it of them: but Ionas was
gone downe into the sides of the shippe, & he laye downe sleeping.
6 And the shippe maister came to him, and saide: What meanest thou sleeper? Up,
and call vpon thy God, if so be that God wyl shine vnto vs, that we perishe not.
7 And they saide euery one to his felow, Come, let vs cast lottes: that we may
know for whose cause this euil is on vs. And they cast lottes: and the lotte fel
on Ionas.
8 Then saide they vnto him: Tell vs for whose cause is this euill come vpon vs?
what is thyne occupation? whence camest thou? what countrey man art thou, and of
what nation?
9 And he aunswered them: I am an Hebrue, and I feare the Lorde God of heauen,
which hath made the sea, and the drye lande.
10 Then were the men exceedingly afraide, & saide vnto him: Why hast thou done
this? (for the men knewe that he fled from the presence of the Lorde, because he
had tolde them.)
11 And they saide vnto him: What shal we do vnto thee, that the sea may be calme
vnto vs? For the sea wrought and was troublous.
12 And he saide vnto them, Take me, and cast me into the sea, and the sea shalbe
calme vnto you: for I know that for my sake this great tempest is vpon you.
13 Neuerthelesse, the men assayed with rowing to bring the shippe to lande, but
they could not, because the sea wrought, and was troublous against them.
14 Wherfore they cryed vnto the Lorde, and saide: We beseche thee O Lord, we
beseche thee, let not vs perishe for this mans lyfe, and lay not to our charge
innocent blood: for thou O Lorde hast done as it pleased thee.
15 So they toke vp Ionas, and cast him into the sea, and the sea left raging.
16 And the men feared the Lorde exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice vnto the
Lorde, and made vowes.
17 And the Lorde prepared a great fishe to swalowe vp Ionas: & Ionas was in the
belly of the fishe three dayes and three nightes.

Chapter 2

1 And Ionas prayed vnto the Lorde his God out of the fisshes belly.
2 And saide: In affliction I cryed vnto the Lorde, and he heard me: out of the
belly of hell cryed I, and thou heardest my voyce.
3 Thou haddest cast me downe into the deepe, into the middest of the sea, and
the floods compassed me about: all thy billowes and waues passed ouer me.
4 And I saide: I am cast away out of thy sight, yet wyll I loke againe toward
thyne holy temple.
5 The waters compassed me euen vnto the soule, the deapth closed me on euery
side, and the weedes were wrapt about my head.
6 I went downe to the bottome of the mountaines, the earth with her barres was
about me for euer: yet hast thou brought vp my lyfe from corruption, O Lorde my
God.
7 When my soule fainted within me, I remembred the Lorde, and my prayer came in
vnto thee into thy holy temple.
8 They that holde vpon lying vanitie, forsake his mercie.
9 But I wyll sacrifice vnto thee with the voyce of thankesgeuing, and wyll pay
that that I haue vowed: for saluation is of the Lorde.
10 And the Lorde spake vnto the fisshe, and it cast out Ionas vpon the drye
lande.

Chapter 3

1 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto Ionas the second time, saying:
2 Aryse, and go to Niniue that great citie, and preache against it the preaching
which I speake vnto thee.
3 So Ionas arose, and went to Niniue according to the word of the Lord (Niniue
was a great citie and excellent, of three dayes iourney.)
4 And Ionas began to enter into the citie a dayes iourney, and he cryed & saide:
Yet fourtie dayes, & Niniue shalbe destroyed.
5 And the men of Niniue beleued God, and proclaymed a fast, and put on
sackecloth from the greatest of them to the leaste of them.
6 And worde came vnto the king of Niniue: which arose from his throne, and put
of his robe, and couered him selfe with sackcloth, & sate downe in asshes.
7 And he caused a cryer to crye, and say through the citie by the counsell of
the king & his nobles, Let neither man nor beast, bullocke nor sheepe, taste
ought at all, neither feede, nor drinke water.
8 And let both man & beast put on sackcloth, and crye mightyly vnto God: yea let
euery man turne from his euill way, and from the wickednesse that is in his
handes.
9 Who can tel whether God wyl turne and be moued with repentaunce, and turne
from his fierce wrath, that we perishe not?
10 And God sawe their workes, that they turned from their euil wayes, and he
repented of the euill that he saide he woulde do vnto them, and did it not.

Chapter 4

1 And this displeased Ionas greatly, and he was angrye within him selfe.
2 And he prayed vnto the Lorde, and saide: I pray thee O Lorde, was not this my
saying when I was yet in my countrey? therfore I hasted to flee into Tharsis:
For I knewe that thou art a gratious God, and mercifull, long suffering, and of
great kindnesse, and repentest thee of euill.
3 And nowe O Lorde, take I beseche thee my lyfe from me: for it is better for me
to dye, then to lyue.
4 Then saide the Lord, Doest thou wel to be angry?
5 And Ionas went out of the citie, and sate him downe on the east side thereof,
and there made him a boothe, and sate vnder it in the shadowe, till he might see
what should be done in the citie.
6 And the Lord God prepared a gourd, and made it spring vp ouer Ionas, that it
might be a shadowe ouer his head, to deliuer him from his griefe: So Ionas was
exceeding glad of the gourde.
7 But God prepared a worme, when the morning rose the next day, which smote the
gourde, that it withered.
8 And when the sunne rose, God prepared a seruent east winde, and the sunne beat
vpon the head of Ionas that he fainted: and wished vnto his soule, that he might
dye, and saide, It is better for me to dye, then to lyue.
9 And the Lord saide vnto Ionas: Doest thou well to be so angry within thy selfe
for the gourde? And he saide: I do well to be angry euen vnto death.
10 Then saide the Lorde, Thou hast had compassion on the gourde about the which
thou bestowedst no labour, neither madest it growe: which came vp in a night,
and perished in a night:
11 And shall not I spare Niniue that great citie, in the which are more then
sixscore thousand persons that knowe not their right hand and their left, and
also much cattaile?


Micah

Chapter 1

1 The worde of the Lorde came vnto Micheas the Morasthite, in the dayes of
Iotham, Ahas, & Hezekiah, kinges of Iuda, which he sawe concerning Samaria and
Hierusalem.
2 Heare all ye people, marke this well O earth and all that therein is: yea let
the Lorde God him selfe be witnesse against you, euen the Lorde from his holy
temple.
3 For beholde, the Lorde shall come out of his holy place, and come downe and
treade vpon the hie thinges of ye earth.
4 The mountaines shal melt vnder him, and the valleyes shall cleaue a sunder,
lyke as wax melteth before the fire, and as the waters runne downeward.
5 And all this shalbe for the wickednes of Iacob, and the sinnes of the house of
Israel: but what is the wickednesse of Iacob? is not Samaria? which are the hie
places of Iuda? is not Hierusalem?
6 Therefore I wyll make Samaria an heape of the fielde meete for the planting of
a vineyarde: her stones wyll I tumble downe into the valley, and discouer her
foundations.
7 All her images shalbe broken downe, and all her garmentes shalbe brent in the
fire, yea: al her idols wyl I destroy: for they are gathered out of the hyre of
an harlot, and into an harlots hyre shall they be turned againe.
8 Wherefore I wyll mourne and make lamentation, bare and naked wyl I go: I wyll
mourne lyke the Dragons, and take sorowe as the Ostriches.
9 For their wounde is past remedie, it is come into Iuda, and hath touched the
gate of my people at Hierusalem alredie.
10 Declare it not at Gath, neither weepe ye: for the house of Aphra roule thy
selfe in the dust.
11 Thou that dwellest at Saphir gette thee hence naked with shame: she that
dwelleth at Zaanan, shall not come foorth in the mourning of Bethezel: the
enemie shal receaue of you for his standing.
12 For the inhabitautes of Maroth wayled for good, but the plague shall come
from the Lorde, euen vnto the gates of Hierusalem.
13 O thou inhabitaunt of Lachis, binde the charette to the swiftest beast, she
is the beginning of the sinne of the daughter of Sion: for the transgressions of
Israel were founde in thee.
14 Therfore shalt thou bring presentes to Moresheth Gath: ye houses of Achzib
shalbe as a lye to the kinges of Israel.
15 And as for thee O thou that dwellest at Maresa, I shall bring a possessioner
vpon thee, he shal come to Adullam, the glory of Israel.
16 Make thee baulde, and shaue thee because of thy tender children: make thee
cleane baulde as an Egle, for they shalbe caried away captiue from thee.

Chapter 2

1 Wo vnto them that imagine iniquitie, and worke wickednesse vpon their beddes:
when the morning is light they practise it, because their hande hath power.
2 And they couet fieldes, and take them by violence, and houses, and take them
away: so they oppresse a man and his house, euen man and his heritage.
3 Therefore thus saith the Lorde: Beholde, against this housholde haue I deuised
a plague, whereout ye shall not plucke your neckes: ye shall no more go so
proudly, for it wyl be a perilous time.
4 In that day shal this parable be vsed, and a mourning shalbe made ouer you on
this maner: We be vtterly desolate, the portion of my people is translated: how
wyll he parte vnto vs the lande that he hath taken from vs?
5 Therefore there shalbe no man to deuide thee thy portion in the congregation
of the Lorde.
6 Ye shal not prophecie say they to them that prophecie: they shal not prophecie
to them, neither shall they take shame.
7 O thou that art named the house of Iacob, is the spirite of the Lorde
shortened? are these his workes? are not my words good vnto him that walketh
vprightly?
8 But he that was yesterday my people, is rysen vp on the other side as against
an enemie: they spoyle the beawtifull garment from them that passe by peaceably,
as though they returned from the warre.
9 The women of my people haue ye shut out from their pleasaunt houses, and taken
away myne excellent giftes from their children.
10 Up, get you hence, for here shall ye haue no rest: because the lande is
defiled, it shall destroy you which vtter destruction.
11 If a man walke in the spirite, and would lye falsely saying I wyl prophecie
to thee of wine and strong drinke: that were a prophete for this people.
12 I wyll surely gather thee wholly O Iacob, I wyll surely gather the remnaunt
of Israel, I wyll put them together as the sheepe of Bozra, as the flocke in the
middest of their folde, they shall make great noyse by reason of the multitude
of men.
13 The breaker shall come vp before them, they shall breake out, and passe by
the gate, and go out by it: and their king shall go before them, and the Lorde
shalbe vpon their heades.

Chapter 3

1 And I saide, heare I pray you O heads of Iacob, & ye princes of the house of
Israel, shoulde not ye know iudgement?
2 But they hate the good, and loue the euill, they plucke of their skinnes from
them, and their fleshe from their bones.
3 And they eate also the fleshe of my people, & flay of their skinne from them:
and they breake their bones, and chop them in peeces as for the pot, and as
fleshe within the cauldron.
4 Then shall they crye vnto the Lorde, but he wyll not heare them: he wyll euen
hide his face from them at that time, because they haue done wickedly in their
workes.
5 Thus saith the Lorde concerning the prophetes that deceaue my people and bite
them with their teeth, and crye peace: but if a man put not into their mouthes,
they prepare warre against him.
6 Therfore night shalbe vnto you for a vision, and darkenesse shalbe vnto you
for a diuination: and the sunne shall go downe ouer the prophetes, and the day
shalbe darke ouer them.
7 Then shall the sears be ashamed, and the soothsayers confounded: yea, they
shal al couer their lippes, for they haue none aunswere of God.
8 Yet notwithstanding, I am full of power by the spirite of the Lorde, and of
iudgement, and of strength, to declare vnto Iacob his transgression, and to
Israel his sinne.
9 Heare this I pray you ye heades of the house of Iacob, and princes of the
house of Israel: they abhorre iudgement, and peruert all equitie.
10 They builde vp Sion with blood, and Hierusalem with iniquitie.
11 (The heades therof iudge for rewards, and the priestes thereof teache for
hyre, and the prophetes thereof prophecie for money: yet wyll they leane vpon
the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among vs? no euill can come vpon vs.)
12 Therefore shall Sion for your sake be plowed as a fielde, & Hierusalem shalbe
an heape, and the mountaine of the house as the hie places of the forest.

Chapter 4

1 But in the latter dayes it wyll come to passe that the hill of the Lordes
house shalbe prepared in the toppe of the mountaines, and shalbe set vp hygher
then any mountaynes or hilles, and people shall prease vnto it.
2 Yea, the multitude of the Gentiles shall haste them thither, saying: Come, let
vs go vp the to hill of the Lorde, and to the house of the God of Iacob, and he
shall teache vs his wayes, and we wyll walke in his pathes: for the lawe shall
come out of Sion, and the word of God from Hierusalem.
3 And he shall iudge many people, and rebuke mightie nations of farre countreys:
so that of their swordes they shal make ploughshares, and sythes of their
speares: one people shall not lift vp a sworde against another, yea they shall
no more learne to fight.
4 But euery man shall sit vnder his vineyarde, and vnder his figtree, and no man
shall make them afraide: for the mouth of the Lorde of hoastes hath spoken it.
5 Therfore all people wyll walke euery man in the name of his God: and we wyll
walke in the name of our lord God for euer and euer.
6 At the same time saith the Lorde, wyl I gather vp the lame and the outcast,
and such as I haue chastened,
7 And wyll geue a remnaunt vnto the lame, and make of the outcast a mightie
people: and the Lorde him selfe shalbe their king vpon the mount Sion, from this
time foorth for euermore.
8 And vnto thee O thou towre of the flocke, thou strong holde of the daughter
Sion, vnto thee shall it come, euen the lordeship and kingdome to the daughter
Hierusalem.
9 Why then doest thou crye and lament? is there no king in thee? are thy
counsellers perished, that thou art so payned as a woman in her trauaile?
10 And now O thou daughter Sion, sorowe and lament as a woman in her trauaile:
for nowe must thou get thee out of the citie, & dwelt vpon the plaine fielde:
yea vnto Babylon shalt thou go, but there shalt thou be deliuered, and there the
Lord shall redeeme thee from the hande of thyne enemies.
11 Now also are there many people gathered together against thee, saying: Sion
shalbe condempned, and our eye shall loke vpon Sion.
12 But they know not the thoughtes of the Lord, they vnderstand not his counsel:
for he shall gather them together as the sheaues in the barne.
13 Therefore get thee vp, O thou daughter Sion, and thresshe out the corne: for
I wyll make thy horne iron, and thy hooues brasse, that thou mayst breake in
peeces many people: their goodes shalt thou consecrate vnto the Lorde, and their
substaunce vnto the ruler of the whole worlde.

Chapter 5

1 Now shalt thou be robbed thy selfe O thou robbers daughter: they shall laye
siege against vs, & smyte the iudge of Israel with a rodde vpon the cheeke.
2 And thou Bethlehem Ephrata art little among the thousandes of Iuda, out of
thee shal he come foorth vnto me which shalbe the gouernour in Israel, whose out
going hath ben from the beginning, and from euerlasting.
3 Therefore wyll he geue them vp for a season, vntill the time that she which
shall beare haue borne: then shall the remnaunt of his brethren be conuerted
vnto the children of Israel.
4 He shall stande faste, and geue foode in the strength of the Lorde, and in the
maiestie of the name of the Lorde his God: and when they be conuerted, he shalbe
magnified vnto the farthest partes of the worlde.
5 And he shall be our peace: when the Assirians shall come into our lande, when
he shal treade in our palaces, then shall we raise against him seuen
sheepheardes, and eyght principall men.
6 These shall subdue the lande of Assur with the sworde, and the lande of Nimrod
with their naked weapons: Thus shall he deliuer vs from the Assirian when he
commeth within our lande, and setteth his foote within our borders.
7 And the remnaunt of Iacob shalbe among the multitude of people as the deawe of
the Lord, and as the droppes vpon the grasse, that taryeth for no man and
wayteth on no body.
8 Yea the residue of Iacob shalbe among the gentiles and the multitude of
people, as the lion among the beastes of the wood, and as the lions whelpe among
the flockes of sheepe: which whe he goeth through, treadeth downe, teareth in
peeces, and there is no man that can deliuer.
9 Thyne hand shalbe lyft vp vpon thyne enemies, and all thyne aduersaries shall
perishe.
10 And it shall come to passe in that day saith the Lorde, that I wyll take
thyne horses from thee, and destroy thy charrettes.
11 I wyll breake downe the cities of thy lande, and ouerthrowe all thy strong
holdes.
12 All witchcraftes wyll I roote out of thyne hande, there shall no mo
soothsayinges be within thee.
13 Thyne idols and thyne images wyll I destroy out of thee, so that thou shalt
no more bowe thy selfe vnto the workes of thyne owne handes.
14 Thy groues wyll I plucke vp by the rootes, and breake downe thy cities.
15 And I wyll execute a vengeaunce in my wrath & indignation vpon the heathen,
such as they haue not heard.

Chapter 6

1 Hearken ye nowe what the Lorde sayth: Arise thou, and contend with the
mountaynes, and let the hilles heare thy voyce.
2 Heare O ye mountaines the Lordes quarel, and ye mightie foundations of the
earth: for the Lorde hath a quarell against his people, and wyll pleade with
Israel.
3 O my people what haue I done vnto thee? or wherein haue I greeued thee? geue
me aunswere.
4 For I brought thee out of the lande of Egypt, & deliuered thee out of the
house of bondage, and I made Moyses, Aaron, and Miriam to leade thee.
5 Remember O my people, what Balach the king of Moab had deuised against thee,
and what aunswere that Balaam the sonne of Beor gaue him, from Sethin vnto
Galgal, that ye may knowe the righteousnesse of the Lorde.
6 Wherewith shall I come before the Lorde, and bowe my selfe to the hye God?
Shall I come before him with burnt offeringes, and with calues of a yere olde?
7 Hath the Lorde a pleasure in many thousandes of Rammes, or innumerabic
streames of oyle? shall I geue my first borne for myne offences, and the fruite
of my body for the sinne of my soule?
8 He hath shewed thee O man what is good, and what the Lorde requireth of thee:
namely to do iustly, to loue mercie, and to humble thy selfe to walke with thy
God.
9 The Lordes voyce cryeth vnto the citie, and the man that shalbe saued
considereth thy name: hearken what is your rodde, & heare him that warneth you.
10 Are not yet the treasures of wickednesse in the house of the wicked, and the
scant measure which is abhominable?
11 Should I iustifie the false balaunces, and the bagge of deceitfull weightes?
12 For the riche men thereof are full of crueltie, and the inhabitantes thereof
haue spoken lyes, and haue deceitfull tongues in their mouthes.
13 Therefore I wyll take in hande to punishe thee, and to make thee desolate,
because of thy sinnes.
14 Thou shalt eate, and not haue inough: yea, thou shalt bring thy selfe downe
in the middes of thee, thou shalt flee, but not escape, and those that thou
wouldest saue, wyll I deliuer to the sworde.
15 Thou shalt sowe, but not reape, thou shalt presse out Oliues, but oyle shalt
thou not haue to annoynt thy selfe withall: thou shalt tread out sweete must,
but shalt drincke no wine.
16 Ye kepe the ordinaunces of Amri, and all the customes of the house of Ahab,
ye walke in their counsels: therfore wyl I make thee waste, and cause thy
inhabiters to be hissed at, and ye shall beare the reproche of my people.

Chapter 7

1 Wo is me, I am become as one that goeth a gleanyng in the haruest: there are
no mo grapes to eate, yet would I faine with al my hearte haue of the best
fruite.
2 There is not a godly vpon earth, there is not one righteous among men: they al
lye in wayte for blood, and euery man hunteth his brother to death.
3 Yet they say they do wel, when they do euyll: the prince asketh, and the iudge
iudgeth for a rewarde, therfore the great man speaketh out of the corruption of
his soule, and so they wrappe it vp.
4 The best of them is as bryer, and the most righteous of them is sharper then a
thorne hedge: the day of thy watchmen, and of thy visitation commeth: then
shalbe their confusion.
5 Let no man beleeue his friende, nor put his confidence in his brother: kepe
the doore of thy mouth from her that lyeth in thy bosome.
6 For the sonne dishonoreth his father, the daughter riseth against her mother,
the daughter in law against her mother in lawe: and a mans foes are euen they of
his owne housholde.
7 Neuerthelesse, I wil looke vp vnto the Lorde, I will patiently abyde God my
sauiour: my God shall heare me.
8 O thou enemie of myne reioyce not at my fall, for I shall rise againe: &
though I sit in darkenesse, yet the Lorde is my light.
9 I will beare the wrath of the Lord, for I haue offended hym till he sit in
iudgement vpon my cause, and see that I haue right: then will he bring me foorth
to the light, and I shall see his righteousnesse.
10 She that is myne enemie, shall loke vpon it and be confounded, which nowe
sayth, Where is the Lorde thy God? myne eyes shall beholde her when she shalbe
troden downe as the myre in the streetes.
11 This is the day that thy walles shalbe buylt, this day shall dryue farre away
the decree.
12 And at that time shall they come vnto thee from Assur, from the strong
cities, and from the strong holdes, euen vnto the riuer: from the one sea to the
other, and from mountayne to mountayne.
13 Notwithstanding, the land must be wasted, because of them that dwell therin,
and for the fruites of their owne imaginations.
14 Therfore feede thy people with thy rod, the flocke of thyne heritage whiche
dwel desolate in the wood, that they may be fed vpon the mount of Carmel, Basan,
and Gilead, as aforetime.
15 Maruelous thinges wil I shewe thee, like as when thou camest out of the lande
of Egypt.
16 This shall the heathen see, and be ashamed for all their power: so that they
shall lay their hande vpon their mouth, and stoppe their eares.
17 They shal licke the dust like a serpente, and as the wormes of the earth that
tremble in their holes: they shalbe afrayde of the Lorde our God, and they shall
feare thee.
18 Who is such a God as thou, that pardonest wickednesse, and forgeuest the
offences of the remnaunt of thyne heritage? He kepeth not his wrath for euer:
for his delite is to haue compassion.
19 He shall turne againe, and be merciful to vs, he shall put downe our
wickednesses, and cast all our sinnes into the bottome of the sea?
20 Thou wilt perfourme to Iacob thy trueth, and thy mercie to Abraham, like as
thou hast sworne vnto our fathers in olde time.


Nahum

Chapter 1

1 The burden of Niniue: The boke of the vision of Nahum the Elkoshite.
2 God is ielous, & the Lorde auengeth, the Lorde auengeth and hath wrath in
store: the Lord auengeth vpon them that trouble hym, and he remembreth his
enemies.
3 The Lorde is slowe to anger, and also of great power, and in no case will not
acquite the wicked, the Lordes dealing is with blustring tempest and whirle
winde, and the cloudes are the dust of his feete.
4 He rebuketh the sea and dryeth it vp, all the riuers also he maketh drye:
Basan and Carmel are destroyed, the spring also of Libanon is destroyed.
5 The mountaynes quake at his power and the hilles are resolued: the earth also
burneth at his countenaunce, the worlde, and all that dwelleth therin.
6 Who can stande before his wrath? or who can rise vp before the anger of his
countenaunce, his fiercenesse is powred out like fire, yea the rockes cleaue in
peeces at his might.
7 The Lord is gratious, a strong holde in the day of trouble, and knoweth them
that trust in hym.
8 But with an ouerrunning flood he wil destroy her place, and will pursue his
enemies with darkenesse.
9 What imagine ye against the Lorde? he makes an vtter destruction: ye shall not
be troubled twyse.
10 For whyles the thornes cleaue together, and whyles they banquet out their
feastes, they are deuoured vp as very drie stubble.
11 There came out of thee such as thought euyll against the Lorde, such as gaue
wicked counsell.
12 Thus sayth the Lorde: Though ye be in concorde, and also many, yet so shall
ye be cut downe, and passe: & though I haue afflicted thee O Hierusalem yet will
I trouble thee no more.
13 And nowe I will breake of his yoke from vpon thee, and I will breake thy
bondes in sunder.
14 The Lorde also hath geuen a commaundement touching thee that, there shalbe no
more offpring of thy name: from the house of thy God, I will cut of carued and
molten image, I will make it thy graue, for thou art vile.
15 Behold vpon the mountaynes the feete of him that bringeth good tidinges, that
preacheth peace: kepe thy festiual dayes O Iuda, paye thy vowes: for the wicked
tiraunt shal hereafter passe no more through thee, he is vtterly cut of.

Chapter 2

1 The destroyer is come vp before thy face, kepe thy forte, see to the way,
strenghten thy loynes, increase thy strength mightyly:
2 For the Lord restores againe the glorious estate of Iacob, as also the
glorious estate of Israel: for spoylers hath spoyled them, and hath wasted their
braunches.
3 The shielde of his valiaunt souldiours is died red, his captaynes of warre are
clad with scarlet: the charret is compassed with flammig torches in the day of
his expedition, and the firre staues are drenched in poyson.
4 The charrets shal rage in the streetes, they shall make a terrible noyse in
the broade wayes, to loke to like flaming cressets, shooting as lightning.
5 He shall remember his notable souldiours, they shal stumble in goyng, they
shall hasten to the wall, the couering fence is prepared.
6 The riuer gates are opened, and the palace dissolued.
7 Huzab is brought foorth captiue, made to ascend into the charets her
handmaydens also leading one another as in the voyce of doues, knocking vpon
their brestes.
8 Yea many a day Niniue was as a ponde full of water, yet now they flee, Stand
ye, stande ye, and no man loketh backe.
9 Take your spoyle of siluer, take your spoyle of golde, for there is no ende of
riches: treasure, pashing all treasure.
10 Sacking, resacking, rasing, a dissolued heart and collision of knees, sorow
in all loynes also, and the faces of them all as blacke as a pot.
11 Where is the abiding place of lions, and the feding plot of lions whelpes
become, whyther the young and olde lion had their resort? there dwelt the lion,
& there was no man to put him in feare.
12 The lion made his praye aboundauntly for his whelpes, and strangled for his
she lions, and hath filled his dennes with pray, and his abyding places with
spoyle.
13 Behold me against thee sayth the Lord of hoastes, & I will burne in smoke her
charets, and the sworde shall deuoure thy lions, I will roote out also from the
earth thy spoyling, and the voyce of thy messengers shalbe hearde no more.

Chapter 3

1 O bloody citie, stuffed throughout with falsehood, with extreme dealing, nor
wilbe brought from spoyling.
2 The noyse of the whippe, the noyse of ratling of wheales, the praunsing of
horses, and the iumping of charets:
3 The horseman lifting vp both the glistering blade of the sword & also the
shining speare, many wounded, many corpses, and no end of carcasses, they shall
stumble at dead bodies.
4 Because of the manyfolde fornication of the beautifull harlot, ful of charmes,
that selles nations by the meanes of her whordome, and the people through her
charminges.
5 Lo I against thee sayth the Lorde of hoastes, and will turne vp thy skirtes
ouer thy face, and wil shewe the gentiles thy fylth, and kingdomes thy shame:
6 And will cast vpon thee abominable filth, and wil bring thee downe, and wil
make thee as vile as doung.
7 And it shall come to passe that all that shall behold thee, shall flee from
thee, and shall say, Niniue is destroyed, and who is greeued therwith? from
whence shall I seke out comforters for thee?
8 Wilt thou count thy selfe better then Alexandria the great, that was scituate
amonges the riuers, compassed round about with water, whose fortresse was the
sea and had her wall from the sea?
9 Ethiopia and Egypt were thy strength, and there was none end of ayde, Phut and
Lubim were thy helpers.
10 Notwithstanding she passed away, she went into captiuitie, her children also
were dashed in peeces in the top of all the streetes: for her horrible men they
cast lottes, and all her great states they chayned in fetters.
11 And thou also shalt be drunke with trouble thou shalt be hyd: thou also shalt
seke after strength against thine enemie.
12 All thy strong aydes are as figge trees with the first ripe figges: if they
be stirred, they fal into the mouth of the eater.
13 Behold thy men are as baren women in the middest of thee, the gates of thy
lande shalbe set wyde open to thine enemies, fire hath deuoured thy barres.
14 Drawe thee water for the siege, strengthen thy fortes, go into the clay,
treade the morter, make strong the brickyll.
15 There the fire shall deuoure thee, the sword shall cut thee of, shall deuoure
as the locust, though thou be multiplied as the locust, though thou be as many
as the grashopper.
16 Thou hast increased thy marchauntes as the starres of heauen, the locust
spoyleth, and fleeth away.
17 Thy princes are as grashoppers, and thy rulers as great locustes, they swarme
in hedges in cold weather, the sunne ariseth and they flee, and the place where
they were is not knowen.
18 Thy sheepheardes O king of Assur slumber, thy noble men shall dwell in death
thy people is scattered vpon the mountaynes, & there is none to gather them
together.
19 Thy wound shall not be healed, thy plague is great, all that heare of thee,
clap their handes: For to whom hath not thy euil dealing pearsed continually?


Habakkuk

Chapter 1

1 The burde which Habacuc the prophete dyd see.
2 O Lorde, howe long shall I crye, and thou wilt not heare? euen crye out vnto
thee for violence, and thou wilt not helpe?
3 Why doest thou shew me iniquitie, and cause me to beholde sorowe? for spoyling
and violence are before me, & there are that rayse vp stryfe and contention,
4 Therfore the law is dissolued, & iudgement doth neuer go foorth: for the
wicked doth compasse about the righteous, therfore wrong iudgement proceedeth.
5 Behold among the heathen, and regarde, and wonder, and marueyll: for I will
worke a worke in your dayes, ye will not beleue it though it be tolde you.
6 For lo, I rayse vp the Chaldeans, that bitter and furious nation, whiche shall
go vpon the breadth of the land, to possesse the dwelling places that are not
theirs.
7 They are terrible and fearfull: their iudgement and their dignitie shall
procede of them selues.
8 Their horses also are swifter then the leopardes, and are more fierce then the
wolues in the euening, and their horsemen shall come from farre: they shall flee
as the Egle hasting to meate.
9 They come all to spoyle: before their faces shalbe an eastwinde, and they
shall gather the captiuitie as the sande.
10 And they shall mocke the kinges, and the princes shalbe a scorne vnto them:
they shall deride euery stronghold, for they shall gather dust, and take it.
11 Then shall they take a courage, and transgresse, and do wickedly, imputing
this their power vnto their god.
12 Art not thou of olde, O Lord my God, my holy one? we shall not dye, O Lord
thou hast ordeined them for iudgement, and O God thou hast established them for
correction.
13 Thou art of pure eyes, and canst not see euyl, thou canst not behold
wickednesse: wherfore then doest thou loke vpo the transgressours, and holdest
thy tongue, when the wicked deuoureth the man that is more righteous then he?
14 And makest men as the fishe of the sea, and as the creeping thinges that haue
no ruler ouer them.
15 They take vp all with the angle, they catche it in their net, and gather it
in their yarne: wherof they reioyce and are glad.
16 Therfore they sacrifice vnto their net, and burne incense vnto their yarne:
because by them their portion is fat, and their meate plenteous.
17 Shall they therfore stretche out their net, and not spare continually to slay
the nations?

Chapter 2

1 I will stande vpon my watche, and set me vpon the towre, & will loke, and see
what he will say vnto me, and what I shall aunswere to him that rebuketh me.
2 And the Lord aunswered me, and said: write the vision, and make it plaine vpon
tables, that he may run that readeth it.
3 For the vision is yet for an appoynted time, but at the last it shall speake,
and not lye: though it tary, wayte: for it shall surely come, and shall not
stay.
4 Behold, he that lifteth vp him selfe, his minde is not vpright in him: but the
iust shall liue by his fayth.
5 Yea in deede the proude man is as he that transgresseth by wine, therfore
shall he not endure, because he hath enlarged his desire as the hell, & is as
death, and can not be satisfied, but gathereth vnto him all nations, and heapeth
vnto him all people.
6 Shall not all these take vp a parable against him? and a taunting prouerbe
against him, and say: Wo he that increaseth that which is not his? how long? and
he that ladeth him selfe with thicke clay?
7 Shall they not rise vp sodenly that shall byte thee? and awake that shall
stirre thee, & thou shalt be their pray?
8 Because thou hast spoyled many nations, all the remnaunt of the people shall
spoyle thee, because of mens blood, and for the wrong done in the lande, in the
citie, and vnto all that dwell therin.
9 Wo he that coueteth an euyll couetousnesse to his house, that he may set his
nest on hie, to escape from the power of euyll.
10 Thou hast consulted shame to thyne owne house, by destroying many people, &
hast sinned against thyne owne soule.
11 For the stone shall crye out of the wal, and the beame out of the timber
shall aunswere it.
12 Wo vnto him that buyldeth a towne with blood, and erecteth a citie by
iniquitie.
13 Behold, is it not of the Lord of hoastes that the people shall labour in the
very fire? the people shall euen weery them selues for very vanitie.
14 For the earth shalbe filled with the knowledge of the glorie of the Lorde, as
the waters couer the sea.
15 Wo vnto him that geueth his neyghbour drinke, thou ioynest thy heate, and
makest him drunken also, that thou mayest see their priuities.
16 Thou art filled with shame for glorie, drinke thou also and be made naked:
the cup of the Lordes right hand shalbe turned vnto thee, and shamefull spuyng
shalbe for thy glorie.
17 For the crueltie of Libanus shall couer thee: so shal the spoyle of the
beastes which he made afrayde, because of mens blood, and for the wrong done in
the land, in the citie, and vnto all that dwell therin.
18 What profiteth the image? for the maker therof hath made it an image and a
teacher of lyes, though he that made it trust therin when he maketh dumbe
idoles.
19 Wo vnto hym that sayth to the wood, Awake: and to the dumbe stone, Rise vp,
it shall teache thee: beholde it is layde ouer with gold and siluer, & there is
no breath in it.
20 But the Lord is in his holy temple: let all the earth kepe scilence before
hym.

Chapter 3

1 A prayer of Habacuc the prophete for the ignoraunces.
2 O lord I haue heard thy voyce, and was afrayde: O Lorde reuiue thy worke in
the middes of the yeres, in the middes of the yeres make it knowen, in wrath
remember mercie.
3 God commeth from Theman, and the holy one from mount Paran, Selah. his glorie
couereth the heauens, and the earth is full of his prayse.
4 And his brightnesse was as the light: he had hornes comming out of his handes,
and there was the hyding of his power.
5 Before him went the pestilence, and burning coales went foorth before his
feete.
6 He stoode, and measured the earth, he behelde, and dissolued the nations, and
the euerlasting mountaynes were broken, and the auncient hilles did bowe, his
wayes are euerlasting.
7 For iniquitie I saw the tentes of Chusan, and the curtaynes of the lande of
Madian dyd tremble.
8 Was the Lorde angry against the riuers? or was thyne anger against the
floodes? or was thy wrath against the sea, that thou diddest ryde vpon thy
horses? thy charets brought saluation.
9 Thy bow was manyfestly reuealed, and the othes of the tribes were a sure word.
Selah. thou diddest cleaue the earth with riuers.
10 The mountaynes sawe thee and they trembled, the streame of the water passed
by, the deepe made a noyse, and lift vp his handes on hye.
11 The sonne and moone stoode still in their habitation, at the light of thyne
arrowes they went, and at the bright shining of thy speares.
12 Thou trodest downe the land in anger: and dyddest threshe the heathen in
displeasure.
13 Thou wentest foorth for the saluation of thy people, euen for saluation with
thyne annoynted: thou hast wounded the head of the house of the wicked, and
discoueredst the foundations vnto the necke. Selah.
14 Thou diddest strike thorow with his owne staues the heades of his villages,
they came out as a whirlewinde to scatter me: their reioycyng was as to deuour
the poore secretly.
15 Thou diddest walke in the sea with thyne horses, vpon the heape of great
waters.
16 When I hearde, my belly trembled, my lippes shoke at the voice, rottennesse
entred into my bones, & I trembled in my selfe, that I might rest in the day of
trouble: for when he commeth vp vnto the people, he shall destroy them.
17 For the figgetree shall not floorish, neither shall fruite be in the vines:
the labour of the oliue shall fayle, & the fieldes shall yelde no meate: the
sheepe shalbe cut of from the folde, and there shalbe no bullocke in the
stalles.
18 But I will reioyce in the Lord, I will ioy in the God of my saluation.
19 The Lord God is my strength, he wil make my feete like hindes feete & he wil
make me to walke vpon my hye places. To the chiefe singer on Neginothai, or vpon
the instrumentes of musicke.


Zephaniah

Chapter 1

1 The worde of the Lord which came vnto Sophoni the sonne of Chusi, the sonne of
Gedaliah, the sonne of Amariah, the sonne of Hezekiah in the time of Iosia the
sonne of Amon king of Iuda.
2 I will surely destroy all thinges in the land, sayth the Lorde.
3 I will destroy man and beast, I will destroy the foules in the ayre, and the
fishe in the sea, and great ruine shall fall on the wicked, and I wil vtterly
destroy the men out of the land, sayth the Lorde.
4 I wil stretch out myne hand vpon Iuda and vpon all such as dwell at
Hierusalem: thus will I roote out the remnaunt of Baal from this place, and the
names of the Kemurins and priestes:
5 Yea & such as vpon their house toppes worship and bowe them selues vnto the
hoast of heauen, whiche sweare by the Lorde, and by their Malchom also:
6 Which start backe from the Lorde, and neither seke after the Lorde nor regard
hym.
7 Be still at the presence of the Lorde God, for the day of the Lord is at hand:
yea the Lord hath prepared a sacrifice, and called his ghestes therto.
8 And thus shall it happen, in the day of the Lordes sacrifice I will visite the
princes and the kinges children, and al such as weare straunge clothing.
9 In the same day also will I visite all those that leape ouer the thresholde so
proudly, whiche fill their lordes house with robberie and falshood.
10 At the same time sayth the Lord, there shalbe hearde a great crye from the
fishe porte, and an howling from the seconde porte, and a great destruction from
the hylles.
11 Howle ye that dwel in the lowe places, for al the marchaunt people are
destroyed, and all they that were laden with siluer, are rooted out.
12 At the same time will I searche Hierusalem with lanternes, and visite them
that continue in their dregges, and say in their heartes, Tush, the Lorde will
do neither good nor euyll.
13 Therfore their goodes shalbe spoyled, & their houses layed waste: they shall
buylde houses, and not dwell in them, they shall plante vineyardes, but not
drinke the wine therof.
14 For the great day of the Lorde is at hande, it is harde by, and commeth on a
pace, euen the bitter voyce of the Lordes day, then shall the strong man crye
out.
15 That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and heauinesse, a day of vtter
destruction and miserie, a darke & glowming day, a cloudy and stormie day.
16 A day of the trumpet and alarum against the strong cities, and hie towres.
17 I will bring the people into such vexation, that they shall go about like
blinde men, because they haue sinned against the Lorde, their blood shalbe
powred out as dust, & their bodies as the myre.
18 Neither their siluer nor their gold shalbe able to deliuer them in that
wrothful day of the Lorde, but the who e lande shalbe consumed thorowe the fire
of his ielousie: for he shall soone make cleane riddaunce of all them that dwell
in the lande.

Chapter 2

1 Gather your selues, eue gather you, O nation not worthy to be loued,
2 Before the decree go foorth that God hath concluded and ye be as chaffe that
passeth in a day, & before the fearfull wrath of the Lorde come vpon you, &
before the day of the Lordes sore displeasure come vpon you.
3 Seke the Lorde all ye meeke hearted vpon earth, ye that worke after his
iudgement: seke righteousnesse, seke lowlinesse, that ye may be defended in the
wrothfull day of the Lorde:
4 For Gaza shalbe destroyed, and Ascalon shalbe layde waste, they shall cast out
Asdod at the noone day, and Accaron shalbe rooted vp.
5 Wo vnto you that dwell vpon the sea coast, the nation of the Cherethims: the
worde of the Lord shal come vpon you O Chanaan thou lande of the Philistines, I
will destroy thee, so that there shall no man dwell in thee any more.
6 And as for the sea coast, it shalbe heardmens cotages, and sheepefoldes.
7 Yea it shalbe a portion for such as remayne of the house of Iuda, to feede
therevpon, in the houses of Ascalon shal they rest towarde night: for the Lorde
their God shall visite them, and turne away their captiuitie.
8 I haue heard the despite of Moab, and the blasphemies of the children of
Ammon, how they haue shamefully intreated my people, & magnified them selues
within the borders of their lande.
9 Therefore as I liue, sayth the Lord of hoastes the God of Israel, Moab shalbe
as Sodoma, & Ammon as Gomorra, euen the breeding of nettles, and salt pittes, &
a perpetuall wildernesse: The residue of my folke shal spoyle them, the remnaunt
of my people shall haue them in possession.
10 This shall happen vnto them for their pryde, because they haue dealt so
shamefully with the Lorde of hoastes people, and magnified them selues aboue
them.
11 The Lord shalbe terrible vnto them, and destroy all the gods in the lande:
and all the Iles of the Heathen shall worship hym, euery man in his place.
12 Ye Morians also shall perishe with my sworde.
13 Yea he shall stretch out his hande ouer the north, and destroy Assur: As for
Niniue he shall make it desolate, drye, and waste.
14 The flockes and all the beastes of the people shall lye in the middest of it,
pellicanes and owles shal abide in the vpper postes of it, foules shall sing in
the wyndowes, and desolation shalbe vpon the postes, for the Cedars are
vncouered.
15 This is the proude and carelesse citie that sayd in her heart, I am, and
there is els none besides me: O howe is she made so wast that the beastes lie in
her? Who so goeth by, mocketh her, & poynteth at her with his finger.

Chapter 3

1 Wo to that abhominable, filthy, and cruel citie.
2 She hearde not the voyce, she receaued not correction, she trusted not in the
Lorde, she drewe not neare to her God.
3 Her rulers within her are as roaring lions, her iudges are as wolues in the
euening, whiche leaue nothing behinde them till the morowe.
4 Her prophetes are light persons & vnfaythful men, her priestes haue polluted
the sanctuarie, & haue wrested the law.
5 But the iust Lord that doth no vnright, was in the middes therof, euery
morning shewing them his lawe clearly, and ceassed not: but the vngodly will not
learne to be ashamed.
6 I haue destroyed the nations, their towres are desolate, I haue made their
streetes wast, that none shall passe by: their cities are destroyed, without
man, and without inhabitaunt.
7 I sayde vnto them, O feare me, and be content to be refourmed, so their
dwelling shoulde not be destroyed howe soeuer I visited them: But neuerthelesse,
they rose vp early, and corrupted all their workes.
8 Therfore wayte ye vpon me, sayth the Lorde, vntill the time that I ryse vp to
the pray: for I am determined to gather the people, & to bring the kingdomes
together, that I may poure out myne anger, yea all my wrathfull displeasure vpon
them: For all the earth shalbe consumed with the fire of my ielousie.
9 And then will I clense the lippes of the people, that they may euery one call
vpon the name of the Lorde, and serue him with one consent.
10 From beyonde the riuers of Ethiopia, the daughter of my dispearsed prayng
vnto me, shall bring me an offering.
11 In that time shalt thou no more be confounded, because of all the
imaginations wherethorowe thou haddest offended me: for I will take away the
proude boasters of thyne honour from thee, so that thou shalt no more triumph
because of my holy hill.
12 In thee also will I leaue a smal poore simple people, whiche shall trust in
the name of the Lorde.
13 The remnaunt of Israel shall do no wickednesse, nor speake lyes, neither
shall there any deceytfull tongue be found in their mouthes: For they shalbe
fed, and take their rest, and no man shall make them afrayde.
14 Reioyce O daughter Sion, be ioyfull O Israel: reioyce and be glad from thy
whole heart O daughter Hierusalem,
15 For the Lorde hath taken away thy punishment, & hath cast out thyne enemies:
The king of Israel, euen the Lord him selfe is with thee, so that thou nedest no
more to feare any misfortune.
16 In that time it shalbe sayde to Hierusalem, Feare not: and to Sion, Let not
thyne handes be flacke:
17 For the Lorde thy God in the mids of thee is mightie, he will saue thee he
wil reioyce ouer thee with ioy, he wil quiet him selfe in his loue, he will
reioyce ouer thee with gladnesse.
18 After a certayne time will I gather the afflicted that were of thee, and them
that bare the reproche for it.
19 And behold, in that time will I destroy all those that vexe thee, I will
helpe the lame, and gather vp the castaway: yea I will get them prayse and
honour in al landes, where they haue ben put to shame.
20 At the same time will I bring you againe, & at the same time will I gather
you: I will get you a name and a good report among all people of the earth, when
I turne backe your captiuitie before your eyes, sayth the Lorde.


Haggai

Chapter 1

1 In the second yere of king Darius, in the sixth moneth, the first day of the
moneth, came the word of the Lord by the ministerie of ye prophete Aggeus vnto
Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel a prince of Iuda, and to Iosua the sonne of
Iosedech the hye priest, saying:
2 Thus speaketh the Lorde of hoastes, saying: This people sayth, The time is not
yet come for the Lordes house to be buylded.
3 Then came the worde of the Lorde by the ministerie of the prophete Aggeus,
saying:
4 Is it time for you your selues to dwel in seeled houses, and this house lie
wast?
5 Nowe thus sayth the Lord of hoastes, Consider your owne wayes in your heartes.
6 Ye haue sowen much, but ye bryng litle in: ye eate, but ye haue not inough: ye
drinke, but ye are not filled: ye cloth you, but ye be not warme: and he that
earneth wages, putteth the wages into a broken bagge.
7 Thus sayth the Lorde of hoastes, Consider your owne wayes in your heartes.
8 Get you vp to the mountayne, and fetche wood, and buyld this house, & I wil
take pleasure in it, and I wilbe glorified, sayth the Lorde.
9 Ye loked for much, and lo it came to litle, and when ye brought it home, I dyd
blowe vpon it: and why, sayth the Lord of hoastes? because of my house that is
waste, and you run euery man into his his owne house.
10 Therfore vpon you the heauen is stayed from deawe, & the earth is stayed from
yeelding her increase.
11 And I haue called for a drought vpon the land, and vpon the mountaynes, and
vpon the corne, & vpon the wine, and vpon the oyle, and vpon al that the ground
bringeth foorth, vpon men, & vpon cattel, and vpon all the labour of the handes.
12 When Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel, and Iosua the sonne of Iosedech the
hye priest, with all the remnaunt of the people, hearde the voyce of the Lorde
their God, and the wordes of the prophete Haggeus, as the Lorde their God had
sent him, then the people hyd feare before the Lorde.
13 Then Haggeus the Lordes messenger sayd in the Lordes message vnto the people,
saying: I am with you saith the Lorde.
14 And the Lorde stirred vp the spirite of Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel a
prince of Iuda, and the spirite of Iosua the sonne of Iosedech the hie priest,
and the spirite of all the people: & they came and dyd the worke in the house of
the Lorde of hoastes their God.
15 In the twentie and fourth day of the sixt moneth, in the seconde yere of king
Darius,

Chapter 2

1 In the seuenth moneth in the twentie and one day of the moneth, came the worde
of the Lord by the ministerie of the prophete Haggeus, saying:
2 Say nowe to Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel prince of Iuda, and to Iosua the
sonne of Iosedech the hie priest, and to rest of the people, saying:
3 Who is among you left, whiche sawe this house in her first glorie, and howe do
you see it now? Is it not in your eyes in comparison of it, as nothing?
4 Yet nowe be of good cheare O Zorobabel, sayth the Lord, and be of good comfort
O Iosua thou hye priest sonne of Iosedech, and be strong all ye people of the
lande, sayth the Lorde, and worke: for I am with you sayth the Lorde of hoastes,
5 According to the worde that I couenaunted with you, when ye came out of Egypt:
and my spirite shall remayne with you, feare ye not.
6 For thus sayth the Lorde of hoastes Yet a litle whyle, and I will shake the
heauens, and the earth, and the sea, and the drie lande:
7 And I will moue all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come, and I
will fill this house with glorie, sayth the Lorde of hoastes.
8 The siluer is myne, and the golde is myne, sayth the Lorde of hoastes.
9 The glorie of the seconde house, shalbe greater then the glorie of the first,
sayth the Lorde of hoastes: and in this place will I geue peace, sayth the Lorde
of hoastes.
10 In the twentie and fourth day of the nynth moneth in the second yere of king
Darius, came the word of the Lord vnto the prophete Haggeus, saying:
11 Thus sayth the Lord God of hoastes, Aske nowe ye priestes concernyng the
lawe, saying:
12 If one beare holy fleshe in the skirt of his coate, & with his skirt do
touche the bread, potage, wine, oyle, or any other meate, shall it be holy? And
the priestes aunswered and sayde, No.
13 And Haggeus sayd: If a polluted person touche any of these, shall he not be
polluted? And the priestes aunswered, and saide, He shalbe polluted.
14 Then Haggeus aunswered, and sayde: So is this people, and so is this nation
before me sayth the Lord, and so is al the worke of their handes: & that which
they offer there is vncleane.
15 And nowe consider I pray you in your mindes from this day, and vpward, before
there was layed one stone vpon an other in the house of the Lorde,
16 Before these thinges were done when one came to a heape of twentie measures
there were but ten: so who came to the wyne presse for to drawe out fiftie
vessels of wyne out of the presse, there were but twentie.
17 I smote you with blasting, and with mildeawe, and with hayle, in all the
worke of your handes, and you turned not vnto me, sayth the Lorde.
18 Consider nowe in your mindes from this day, and afore, from the foure and
twentie day of the nynth moneth, vnto the day that the foundation of the lordes
temple was layde, consider it in your mindes:
19 Is the seede yet in the barne? as yet the vines, and the figge tree, and the
pomegranate, & the oliue tree hath not brought foorth: from this day will I
blesse you.
20 And againe the worde of the Lorde came vnto Haggei in the foure & twentie day
of the moneth, saying:
21 Speake to Zorobabel the prince of Iuda, and say, I will shake the heauens and
the earth:
22 And I will ouerthrow the throne of kingdomes, & I wil destroy the strength of
the kingdomes of the heathen, and I will ouerthrowe the charettes and the
sitters thereon, and the horse and the riders shall fall downe euery one by the
sworde of his brother.
23 In that day, saith the Lord of hoastes, will I take thee Zorobabel my
seruaunt sonne of Salathiel, sayth the Lord, & will make thee as a signet: for I
haue chosen thee, sayth the Lorde of hoastes.


Zechariah

Chapter 1

1 In the eyght moneth of the seconde yere of king Darius, came the worde of the
Lord vnto Zacharias the sonne of Barachias the sonne of Addo the prophete,
saying:
2 The Lorde hath ben sore displeased with your forefathers.
3 And say thou vnto them, thus sayth the Lorde of hoastes: Turne you vnto me
saith the Lord of hoastes, & I wil turne vnto you, sayth the Lord of hoastes.
4 Be ye not like your forefathers, vnto whom prophetes cryed, saying, thus sayth
the Lorde of hoastes, Turne you from your euyl wayes, and from your wicked
imaginations: But they woulde not heare nor regarde me, sayth the Lorde.
5 What is nowe become of your forefathers? & do the prophetes liue for euer?
6 But did not my wordes and statutes whiche I commaunded by my seruauntes the
prophetes take hold of your forefathers? and they returned, & sayde: Like as the
Lorde of hoastes determined to do vnto vs according to our owne wayes and
imaginations, euen so hath he dealt with vs.
7 Upon the twentie and fourth day of the eleuenth moneth, (whiche is the moneth
Sebah) in the seconde yere of Darius, came the word of the Lord vnto Zacharias
the sonne of Barachias the sonne of Addo the prophete, saying:
8 I sawe by night, and behold, there sate one vpon a red horse, and stoode still
among the myrre trees that were in a botome: and behinde hym were there red,
speckled, and whyte horses.
9 Then sayde I, O my Lorde, what are these? And the angel that talked with me,
sayde vnto me: I will shewe thee what these be.
10 And the man that stoode among the myrre trees aunswered, and said: These are
they whom the Lorde hath sent to go thorowe the world.
11 And they aunswered the angel of the Lorde that stoode among the myrre trees,
and sayd: We haue gone thorowe the world, and beholde all the world sitteth
still, and is carelesse.
12 Then the lordes angel gaue aunswere, and saide: O lorde of hoastes, how long
wylt thou be vnmerciful to Hierusalem, and to the cities of Iuda, with whom thou
hast ben displeased now these three score and ten yeres?
13 So the Lorde gaue a louing and a comfortable aunswere vnto the angel that
talked with me.
14 And the angel that communed with me, saide vnto me: Crye thou, & speake, Thus
saith the Lorde of hoastes: I am exceeding ielous ouer Hierusalem and Sion,
15 And sore displeased at the carelesse heathen: for where as I was but a litle
angry, they helped forward the affliction.
16 Therfore thus saith the Lorde: I wyl returne vnto Hierusalem in tender
mercie, so that my house shalbe builded in it, saith the Lorde of hoastes: yea,
and the lyne shalbe stretched vpon Hierusale
17 Crye also and speake, thus saith the Lorde of hoastes: My cities shalbe in
good prosperitie againe, the Lorde shall yet comforte Sion, & choose Hierusalem.
18 Then lyft I vp myne eyes and sawe, and beholde, foure hornes.
19 And I saide vnto the angel that talked with me, what be these? He aunswered
me, These are the hornes which haue scattered Iuda, Israel, and Hierusalem.
20 And the Lorde shewed me foure carpenters.
21 Then saide I: what wyll these do? He aunswered & said: These are the hornes
which haue scattered Iuda, so that no man durst lyft vp his head: but these are
come to fray them away, and to cast out the hornes of the Gentiles which lyft vp
their horne ouer the lande of Iuda to scatter it abroade.

Chapter 2

1 I Lyft vp myne eyes agayne and loked: and beholde a man, with a measure lyne
in his hande.
2 Then saide I: whyther goest thou? And he said vnto me: To measure Hierusalem,
that I may see how long and how broade it is.
3 And behold, the angel that talked with me, went his way foorth: Then went
there out another angel to meete him,
4 And saide vnto him, Runne, speake to this young man, and say: Hierusalem
shalbe inhabited without any wall for the very multitude of people and cattaile
that shalbe therein.
5 For I my selfe, saith the Lorde, wyl be vnto her a wall of fire rounde about,
& wyl be the glory in the middest of her.
6 O get you foorth, O flee from the land of the north, saith the Lorde: for I
haue scattred you into the foure windes of the heauen, saith the Lorde.
7 Saue thy selfe O Sion, thou that dwellest with the daughter of Babylon:
8 For thus saith the Lorde of hoastes, After this glory hath he sent me out to
the heathen which spoyled you: for who so toucheth you, shal touche the apple of
his owne eye.
9 Beholde, I wyll lyft vp myne hande ouer them, so that they shall be spoyled of
those which afore serued them: and ye shall knowe that the Lorde of hoastes hath
sent me.
10 Be glad and reioyce O daughter Sion: for lo, I am come to dwell in the
middest of thee, saith the Lorde.
11 At the same time there shal many heathen cleaue to the lord, & shalbe my
people: Thus wyll I dwell in the middest of thee, and thou shalt knowe that the
lorde of hoastes hath sent me vnto thee.
12 The Lorde shall haue Iuda in possession for his part in the holy lande, and
shall choose Hierusalem yet againe.
13 Let all fleshe be still before the Lorde: for he is raysed vp out of his holy
place.

Chapter 3

1 And he shewed me Iosua the hie priest standing before the angell of the Lord,
and Satan stoode at his right hande to resist him.
2 And the Lorde saide vnto Satan: The Lorde reproue thee thou Satan, yea the
Lorde that hath chosen Hierusalem reproue thee: Is not this a brand taken out of
the fire?
3 Now Iosua was clothed in vncleane rayment, and stoode before the angel.
4 And he aunswered & saide vnto those that stoode before him, Take away the
foule clothes fro him. And vnto him he saide: Beholde, I haue taken away thy
sinne from thee, and I wyll clothe thee with chaunge of rayment.
5 And I saide, Let them set a fayre miter vpon his head: So they set a fayre
miter vpon his head, & put on clothes vpon him, and the angell of the Lorde
stoode there.
6 Then the angell of the Lorde testified vnto Iosua, and spake,
7 Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes: If thou wylt walke in my wayes, & keepe my
watch, thou shalt iudge my house, & kepe my courtes, and I wyll geue thee place
among these that stande here.
8 Heare O Iosua thou hie priest, thou & thy felowes that sit before thee, for
they are monstruous persons: behold, I wyl bring foorth the braunche my
seruaunt.
9 For lo, the stone that I haue layde before Iosua, vpon one stone shalbe seuen
eyes: beholde, I wyll cut out the grauing therof, saith the Lorde of hoastes,
and I wyll take away the sinne of the lande in one day.
10 In that day shall euery man call his neighbour vnder the vine, and vnder the
figtree, saith the Lorde of hoastes.

Chapter 4

1 And the angell that talked with me, came againe, and waked me, as a man that
is raysed out of his sleepe,
2 And saide vnto me: what seest thou? And I saide: I haue loked, and beholde, a
candelsticke all of golde, with a boule vpon it, and his seuen lampes therein, &
vpon euery lampe seuen pypes.
3 And two olyue trees thereby: one vpon the right side of the boule, & the other
vpon the left side.
4 So I aunswered, and spake to the angell that talked with me, saying, O my
Lorde, what are these?
5 The angell that talked with me aunswered and saide vnto me: Knowest thou not
what these be? And I said, No my Lorde.
6 He aunswered and saide vnto me: This is the worde of the Lorde vnto Zorobabel,
saying, Neither through an hoast of men, nor through strength: but through my
spirite, saith the Lorde of hoastes.
7 What art thou great mountaine before Zorobabel? thou must be made euen, and he
shall bring foorth the head stone therof, with showtinges, crying, Grace grace
vnto it.
8 Moreouer, the word of the Lord came vnto me, saying:
9 The handes of Zorobabel haue layde the foundation of this house, his hands
shal also finishe it: and thou shalt knowe that the Lorde of hoastes hath sent
me vnto you.
10 For who hath despised the day of small thinges? they shall reioyce, and shall
see the stone of tynne in the hande of Zorobabel: these seuen are the eyes of
the lord, which go through ye whole worlde.
11 Then aunswered I, & saide vnto him: What are these two olyue trees vpon the
right & left side of the candelsticke?
12 I spake moreouer, and saide vnto him: What be these two olyue braunches which
through the two golden pypes emptie them selues into the golde?
13 He aunswered me & said: Knowest thou not what these be? & I said, no my lord.
14 Then said he: These are the two oliue braunches, that stand with the ruler of
the whole earth.

Chapter 5

1 So I turned me, lifting vp myne eyes, & loked, and beholde, a fleeing booke.
2 And he saide vnto me: what seest thou? I aunswered: I see a fleeing booke of
twentie cubites long, and ten cubites broade.
3 Then saide he vnto me, This is the curse that goeth foorth ouer the whole
earth: for al theeues shalbe iudged after this booke, & al pariured persons
shalbe iudged according to the same.
4 And I wil bring it foorth saith the lord of hoastes, so that it shall enter
into the house of the theefe, and into the house of him that falsely sweareth by
my name: and shall remayne in his house, and consume it, with the timber &
stones therof.
5 Then the angel that talked with me, went foorth, and saide vnto me: Lyft vp
thyne eyes, and see what is this that goeth foorth.
6 And I said, what is it? He aunswered: This is a measure going out. He saide
moreouer: Eue thus are they that dwel vpon the whole earth to loke vpon.
7 And behold, there was lyft vp a talent of lead: and lo, a woman sate in the
middest of the measure.
8 And he said, This is vngodlinesse: So he cast her into the middest of the
measure, and threwe the lumpe of lead into the mouth of the measure.
9 Then lyft I vp myne eyes, and loked, & beholde, there came out two women, and
the winde was in their winges: for they had winges lyke the winges of a storke,
and they lyft vp the measure betwixt the earth and the heauen.
10 Then spake I to the angel that talked with me: Whyther wyll these beare the
measure?
11 And he saide vnto me: Into the land of Sinnaar to builde it an house, & it
shal be established, & set there vpon her owne place.

Chapter 6

1 Moreouer, I turned me, lyfting vp myne eyes, and loked, and behold there came
foure charrets out from betwixt two hylles, which hylles were of brasse.
2 In the first charret were red horses, in ye seconde charret were blacke
horses,
3 In the third charret were white horses, in the fourth charret were horses of
diuers colours, and strong.
4 Then spake I, and saide vnto the angel that talked with me: O Lord, what are
these?
5 The angel aunswerd & saide vnto me: These are the foure spirites of the
heauen, which be come foorth to stand before the ruler of all the earth.
6 That with the blacke horse went foorth into the lande of the north, & the
white folowed them, and the speckled horses went foorth toward the south:
7 And the strong horses went out, & required to go and take their iourney ouer
the whole earth: And he saide, Get you hence, & go through the worlde: So they
went throughout the worlde.
8 Then cryed he vpon me, & spake vnto me, saying: Beholde, these that go toward
the north, shal stil my wrath in the north countrey.
9 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
10 Take of the prisoners that are come from Babylon, namely, Heldai, Tobiah, &
Idaia: and come thou the same day, and go vnto the house of Iosiah the sonne of
Zophonia.
11 Then take golde and siluer, & make crownes therof, and set them vpon the head
of Iosua the sonne of Iosedech the hie priest,
12 And speake vnto him, thus saith the lord of hoastes: Behold the man whose
name is the braunche, & he shall growe vp out of his place, and he shal build vp
the temple of the Lorde.
13 Yea, euen he shal builde vp the temple of the lord, & he shal beare the
prayse: he shal sit vpon the lordes throne, and haue the domination: A priest
shal he be also vpon his throne, & a peaceable counsell shalbe betwixt them
both.
14 And the crowne shalbe to Helem, & to Tobiah, & to Idaia, & to Hen the sonne
of Zophoni, for a memoriall in the temple of the Lorde.
15 And such as be farre of shall come, and build in ye temple of the lord, that
ye may know how that the lord of hoastes hath sent me vnto you: And this shal
come to passe, if ye wyll hearken diligently vnto the voyce of the Lorde your
God.

Chapter 7

1 And in the fourth yere of king Darius, the word of the lorde came vnto
Zacharia in the fourth day of the ninth moneth, which is called Casleu,
2 What time as Sarasar & Rogommelech, and the men that were with them, sent vnto
the house of God for to pray before the Lorde:
3 And that they shoulde speake vnto the priestes which were in the house of the
Lorde of hoastes, and to the prophetes, saying: should I wepe in the fifth
moneth, & abstayne as I haue done nowe certaine yeres?
4 Then came the worde of the Lorde of hoastes vnto me, saying:
5 Speake vnto al the people of the land, and to the priestes, & say: When ye
fasted and mourned in the fifth & seuenth moneth now this threescore & ten
yeres, did ye fast vnto me?
6 When ye did eate also & drincke, did ye not eate & drincke for your owne
selues?
7 Are not these the wordes which the Lord spake by his prophetes aforetime, when
Hierusalem was yet inhabited & wealthy, she and the cities round about her, whe
there dwelt men both toward the south and in the playne countreys?
8 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto Zachari, saying:
9 Thus saith the Lord of hoastes: Execute true iudgement, shew mercie & louing
kindnes euery man to his brother.
10 Do the wydow, the fatherlesse, the straungers and poore no wrong, and let no
man imagine euil against his brother in his heart.
11 Neuerthelesse, they would not take heede, but turned their backes, & stopped
their eares that they should not heare:
12 Yea, they made their heartes as an Adamant stone, lest they should heare the
law and wordes which the Lorde of hoastes sent in his holy spirite by the
prophetes aforetime: Wherfore the lord of hoastes was very wroth at them.
13 And thus is it come to passe, that like as he cryed, and they would not
heare: euen so they cryed, & I would not heare saith the Lord God of hoastes:
14 But scattred them among al the nations whom they knew not: Thus the land was
made so desolate after them, that there trauayled no man in it neither to nor
fro: for that plesaunt lande was vtterly layd waste.

Chapter 8

1 So the word of the lord of hoastes came vnto me, saying:
2 Thus saith the lorde of hoastes: I was in great ielousie for Sion, yea I haue
ben very ielous for her with great wrath.
3 Thus saith the Lord: I wyl returne vnto Sion, & wyll dwell in the middest of
Hierusalem: so that Hierusalem shalbe called, A faithful and true citie, the hil
of the Lorde of hoastes, an holy hill.
4 Thus saith the lord of hoastes: There shal yet olde men & olde women dwel
againe in the streetes of Hierusalem: yea, & such as go with staues in their
handes for very age.
5 The streetes of the citie also shalbe ful of young boyes and damsels playing
in the streetes thereof.
6 Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes: If the residue of this people thinke it to be
vnpossible in their eyes in these dayes: shoulde it therfore be vnpossible in my
sight, saith the Lorde of hoastes?
7 Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes: Beholde, I wyll deliuer my people from the
countryes of the east and west,
8 And wyl bring them againe, that they may dwel in the middest of Hierusalem:
they shalbe my people, and I wyl be their God in trueth and righteousnesse.
9 Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes: Let your hands be strong ye that now heare
these wordes by the mouth of the prophetes which are in these dayes, that the
foundation of the house of the Lord of hoastes is layde, that the temple may be
builded.
10 For before these dayes neither men nor cattaile could winne any thing,
neither might any man come in and out in reste for trouble: but I let euery man
go against his neighbour.
11 Neuerthelesse, I wyl now intreate the residue of this people no more as afore
time, saith the Lorde of Hoastes.
12 For the seede shal prosper, the vine shal geue her fruite, the grounde shall
geue her encrease, and the heauens shal geue their deawe, and I shall cause the
remnaunt of this people to haue all these in possession.
13 And it shal come to passe, that like as ye were a curse among the heathen O
ye house of Iuda and ye house of Israel, euen so wyll I deliuer you, that ye
shal be a blessing: feare not, but let your handes be strong:
14 For thus saith the Lorde of hoastes: Like as I thought to punishe you, what
time as your fathers prouoked me vnto wrath, saith the Lorde of hoastes, and
spared not:
15 Euen so am I determined now in these dayes for to do well vnto the house of
Iuda & Hierusale: therfore feare ye not.
16 Now the thinges that ye shall do, are these: Speake euery man the trueth vnto
his neighbour, execute iudgement truely & peaceably within your portes:
17 And let none of you imagine euil in his heart against his neighbour, and loue
no false othes: for all these are ye thinges that I hate, saith the Lorde.
18 And the word of the Lorde of hoastes came vnto me, saying:
19 Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes: The fast of the fourth moneth the fast of
the fifth, the fast of the seuenth, and the fast of the tenth, shalbe ioy &
gladnesse and prosperous hie feastes vnto the house of Iuda: onely loue the
trueth & peace.
20 Thus saith the lord of hoastes: There shal yet come people, and the
inhabiters of many cities:
21 And they that dwell in one citie shall go to another saying, Up, let vs go
and pray before the Lorde, let vs seeke the Lorde of hoastes: I wyll go with
you.
22 Yea much people and mightie nations shal come to seeke the lorde of hoastes
at Hierusalem, & to pray before the Lorde.
23 Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes: In that time shall ten men (out of al maner
of language of the Gentiles) take one Iewe by the hemme of his garment, and say,
We wyll go with you: for we haue heard that God is among you.

Chapter 9

1 The burden of the word of the lord in the lande of Hadrach: & Damascus shalbe
his rest, when the eyes of man, euen of all the tribes of Israel shalbe towards
the Lorde.
2 The borders of Hemath shalbe harde therby, Tyrus also and Sidon, for they are
very wyse.
3 Tyrus shall make her selfe strong, heape vp siluer as the sand, and golde as
the clay of the streetes.
4 Beholde, the Lorde shall spoyle her, he shall smite downe her power in the
sea, and she shalbe consumed with fire.
5 This shall Ascalon see, and be afraide: Gaza shalbe very sory, so shal Accaron
also, because her hope is come to confusion: For the king of Gaza shall perishe,
and at Ascalon shall no man dwell.
6 Straungers shall dwel at Asdod, and as for the pride of the Philistines I shal
roote it out.
7 Their blood wyl I take away from their mouth, & their abhominatios from
betweene their teeth: Thus they that shalbe left shalbe for our God, he shalbe
as a prince in Iuda, and Accaron like as a Iebusite.
8 And I wyll pitche a campe about myne house against the armie, against him that
passeth by, & against him that returneth, and no oppressour shall come vpon them
any more: For now I haue seene with myne eyes.
9 Reioyce thou greatly O daughter Sion, be glad O daughter Hierusalem: For lo,
the king commeth vnto thee, euen the righteous and sauiour, lowly & simple is
he, he rydeth vpon an Asse and vpon the foale of an Asse.
10 I wyl roote out the charrets from Ephraim, and the horse from Hierusalem, the
battaile bowes shalbe destroyed, he shal geue the doctrine of peace vnto the
heathen: and his dominion shalbe from the one sea to the other, & from the ryuer
to the ende of the worlde.
11 Thou also shalt be saued through the blood of thy couenaunt: I haue loosed
thy prisoners out of the pit wherin is no water.
12 Turne you now to the strong holde ye that be in prison & long sore to be
deliuered: euen this day I bring thee word that I wyl reward thee double againe.
13 For Iuda haue I bent as a bowe for me, Ephraim his hande haue I filled, & thy
sonnes O Sion wyl I rayse vp against the Grekes, and make thee as a Giauntes
sworde.
14 The Lorde God shalbe seene aboue them, and his dartes shall go foorth as the
lightning: the Lorde God shall blowe the trumpet, & shall come foorth as a
storme out of the south.
15 The lord of hoastes shal defend them, they shal consume & deuour, and subdue
them with sling stones, they shall drincke & rage as it were through wine, they
shalbe filled lyke the basons, and as the hornes of the aulter.
16 The Lorde their God shall deliuer them in that day, as the flocke of his
people: For as precious stones of a Diademe they shalbe set vp ouer his lande.
17 O how prosperous and goodly a thing shall that be? For the corne shall make
the young men cheareful, and the newe wine the maydens.

Chapter 10

1 Pray the Lorde then betimes to geue the latter rayne, so shall the Lorde make
bright cloudes, and geue you rayne inough, and to euery one grasse in the
fielde.
2 For vaine is the aunswere of idols, the soothsayers see lyes, & the dreamers
tell but vaine thinges, the comfort that they geue is nothing worth: therefore
they went away lyke a flocke of sheepe, and were troubled, because they had no
shephearde.
3 My wrothfull displeasure was moued against the shepheardes, and I wyll visite
the goates: for the Lorde of hoastes wyl visite his flocke the house of Iuda,
and wyll make them as a goodly fayre horse in the battaile.
4 Out of Iuda shall come the corner, the nayle, the battel bowe, and the
appoynter of tribute also.
5 They shalbe as giauntes, which in the battaile treade downe their enemies in
the myre of the streetes: they shal fight, for the Lorde shalbe with them, and
the horsemen shalbe confounded.
6 I wyll comfort the house of Iuda, & preserue the house of Ioseph, I wyll bring
them againe, for I pitie them, and they shalbe like as they were when I had not
cast them of: for I the lord am their God, and wyll heare them.
7 Ephraim shalbe as a giaunt, and their heart shalbe cheareful as through wine:
yea their children shal see it, and be glad, and their heart shal reioyce in the
Lord.
8 I wyll hisse for them, & gather them together, for I wyl redeeme them: they
shal encrease, as they encreased afore.
9 I wyll sowe them among the people, that they may thincke vpon me in farre
countryes, they shal liue with their children, and turne againe.
10 I wyll bring them againe also from the land of Egypt, and gather them out of
Assyria: I wyll cary them into the lande of Gilead & to Libanus, and place shall
not be founde for them.
11 He shal go vpon the sea of trouble, and smyte the sea waues, so that all the
depe floodes shalbe dryed vp: the proude boasting of Assur shalbe cast downe, &
the scepter of Egypt shalbe taken away.
12 I wil comfort them in ye lord, that they may walke in his name, saith the
Lord.

Chapter 11

1 Open thy doores O Libanus, that ye fire may consume thy Cedar trees.
2 Howle ye firre trees, for the Cedar is fallen, yea all the proude are wasted
away: Howle O ye Oke trees of Basan, for the mightie strong wood is cut downe.
3 Men may heare the shepheardes mourne, for their glory is destroyed: men may
heare the lions whelpes roare, for the pride of Iordane is wasted away.
4 Thus saith the Lorde my God: Feede the sheepe of the slaughter,
5 Which haue ben slaine of those that possessed them, yet they toke it for no
sinne, but they that solde them said, The Lorde be thanked, for I am riche: yea
their owne shepheardes spare the not.
6 Therefore wyl I no more spare those that dwell in the lande saith the Lorde:
but lo, I wyll deliuer the people, euery man into his neighbours hande, and into
the hande of his king, that they may smite the lande, and out of their handes I
wyll not deliuer them.
7 I my selfe fed the slaughter sheepe, a poore flocke veryly, and toke vnto me
two staues: the one called Beautie, the other called Bandes: and so fedde the
sheepe.
8 Three shepheardes I put out of office in one moneth, for I might not away with
them: neither had they any delight in me.
9 Then saide I, I wyll feede you no more: the thing that dyeth, let it dye: and
that that wyll perishe, let it perishe: and let the remnaunt eate euery one the
fleshe of his neighbour.
10 I toke also my staffe euen Beautie, and brake it, that I might disanull the
couenaunt which I made with all people.
11 And so it was broken in that day: Then the poore simple sheepe that had a
respect vnto me, knewe therby that it was the worde of the Lorde.
12 And I saide vnto them, If ye thinke it good, bring hither my wages: if no,
then leaue. So they wayed downe thirtie siluer pence, the value that I was
prysed at.
13 And the Lorde saide vnto me, Cast it vnto the potter, a goodly pryce for me
to be valued at of them. And I toke the thirtie siluer pence, and cast them to
the potter in the house of the Lorde.
14 Then broke I my other staffe also namely Bandes, that I might loose the
brotherhood betwixt Iuda and Israel.
15 And the Lorde saide vnto me: Take thee also the staffe of a foolishe
shephearde.
16 For lo, I wyll rayse vp a shepheard in the lande, which shal not seeke after
the thinges that be lost, nor seeke the tender lambes, he shal not heale the
wounded, he shal not nourish the thinges that are whole: but he shal eate the
fleshe of such as be fat, and teare their clawes in peeces.
17 O idol shepheard that leaueth the flocke, the sworde shall come vpon his
arme, and vpon his right eye: his arme shalbe cleane dryed vp, and his right eye
shalbe sore blynded.

Chapter 12

1 The heauy burthen which the Lorde hath deuised for Israel. Thus saith the
Lorde which spread the heauens abrode, layde the foundatio of the earth, and
gaue man the breath of lyfe,
2 Beholde, I wyll make Hierusalem a cuppe of surfet vnto all the people that are
rounde about her: yea Iuda him selfe also shalbe in the siege against
Hierusalem.
3 At the same time wyll I make Hierusalem an heauy stone for all people, so that
al such as lyft it vp shalbe torne and rent, and all the people of the earth
shal be gathered together against it.
4 In that day saith the Lorde, I wyll make al horses astonyed, and those that
ryde vpon the to be out of their wittes: I wyll open myne eyes vpon the house of
Iuda, and smite all the horses of the people with blindnesse.
5 And the princes of Iuda shall say in their heartes, The inhabiters of
Hierusalem shall geue me consolation in the Lorde of hoastes their God.
6 In that time wyll I make the princes of Iuda lyke an hot burning ouen with
wood, and like a fire brand among the strawe, so that they shall consume al the
people rounde about them both vpon the right hande and the left: Hierusalem also
shalbe inhabited againe, namely in the same place where Hierusalem standeth.
7 The Lorde shall preserue the tentes of Iuda as afore time, so that the glorye
of the house of Dauid and the glory of the citezins of Hierusalem shal not be
exalted against Iuda.
8 In that day shall the Lorde defende the citezins of Hierusalem, so that the
weakest then among them shalbe as Dauid: and the house of Dauid shalbe as gods
house, and as the angel of the Lorde before them.
9 At the same tyme wyll I go about to destroy all such people as come against
Hierusalem.
10 Moreouer, vpon the house of Dauid & vpon the citezins of Hierusalem wyll I
poure out the spirite of grace & compassion, so that they shall loke vpon me
whom they haue pearsed, and they shal lamet for him as men mourne for their
onely begotten sonne: yea, and be sory for him, as men are sory for their first
childe.
11 Then shal there be a great mourning at Hierusalem, like as the lamentation at
Adadremmon in the fielde of Mageddon.
12 And the lande shal bewaile, euery kindred by them selues alone: the kindred
of the house of Dauid by them selues, and their wyues by them selues: the
kindred of the house of Nathan them selues, and their wyues by them selues:
13 The kindred of the house of Leui them selues alone, and their wyues by them
selues: the kindred of the house of Semei them selues alone, and their wyues by
them selues.
14 In lyke maner, all the other generations euery one by them selues alone, and
their wyues by them selues.

Chapter 13

1 In that time shall the house of Dauid and the citezins of Hierusalem haue an
open wel to washe of sinne and vncleannesse.
2 And then saith the Lorde of hoastes, I wyll destroy the names of the idols out
of the lande: so that they shal no more be put in remembraunce: As for the false
prophetes also, and the vncleane spirites, I wyl take them out of the lande.
3 So that if any of them prophecie any more, his owne father and mother that
begat him, shal say vnto him, Thou shalt dye, for thou speakest lyes vnder the
name of the Lord: yea his owne father and mother that begat him shall wounde
him, when he prophecieth.
4 And then shal those prophetes be confounded euery one of his vision when he
prophecieth: neither shal they weare heere cloth any more to deceaue men
withall.
5 But he shalbe fayne to say, I am no prophete, I am an husbandman: for so am I
taught by man from my youth vp.
6 And if it be saide vnto him, How came these woundes then in thyne handes? He
shal aunswere: Thus was I wounded in the house of myne owne friendes.
7 Aryse O thou sworde vpon my shephearde, and vpon the man that is my felow,
saith the lord of hoastes: smite the shepheard, & the sheepe shalbe scattred
abroade: and so wyll I turne my hande to the litle ones.
8 And it shall come to passe saith the Lorde, that in all the lande two partes
shalbe rooted out, but the third part shall remayne therein.
9 And the same third part wyl I bring through the fire, & wyl cleanse them as
the siluer is cleansed, yea and trye them lyke as golde is tryed: then shal they
call vpon my name and I wyll heare them, I wyll say it is my people, and they
shall say, Lorde my God.

Chapter 14

1 Beholde, the day of the Lorde commeth, and thy spoyle shalbe deuided in the
middest of thee.
2 For I wyll gather together all the heathen to fight against Hierusalem, so
that the citie shalbe wonne, the houses spoyled, and the women defiled: the
halfe of the citie shall go away into captiuitie, and the residue of the people
shal not be caryed out of the citie.
3 After that, shall the Lorde go foorth to fight against those heathen, as men
vse to fight in the day of battaile.
4 Then shall his feete stand vpon the mount Oliuet that lyeth vpon the east side
of Hierusalem, and the mount Oliuet shall cleaue in two eastwarde and westwarde,
so that there shalbe a great valley: and the halfe mount shal remoue toward the
north, & the other towarde the south.
5 And ye shall flee vnto the valley of my hylles, for the valley of the hylles
shall reache vnto Asal: yea, flee shall ye lyke as ye fled for the earthquake in
the dayes of Oziah king of Iuda: and the Lorde my God shall come, and all the
sainctes with him.
6 In that day shall there be no cleare light, but darke.
7 This shalbe that speciall day which is knowen vnto the Lorde, neither day nor
night: but about the euening time it shalbe light.
8 In that time shall there waters of lyfe runne out from Hierusalem: the halfe
part of them towarde the cast sea, and the other halfe towarde the vttermost
sea, and shall continue both sommer and winter.
9 And the Lorde him selfe shal be king ouer all the earth: At that time shall
there be one Lorde onely, and his name shall be but one.
10 All the lande shalbe turned as a plaine from Gibea to Remmon, towardes the
south of Hierusalem: She shalbe set vp, and inhabited in her place, from
Beniamins port vnto the place of the first port, and vnto the corner port, and
from the towre of Hananeel vnto the kinges wine presses.
11 There shal men dwell, and there shal be no more destruction, but Hierusalem
shalbe safely inhabited.
12 This shalbe the plague wherewith the Lorde wyll smyte all people that haue
fought against Hierusalem, Their fleshe shall consume away, though they stand
vpon their feete, their eyes shalbe corrupt in their holes, and their tongue
shall consume in their mouth.
13 In that day shall the Lorde make a great sedition among them: so that one man
shall take another by the hande, and laye his handes vpon the handes of his
neighbour.
14 Iuda shall fight against Hierusalem, and the armies of al the heathen shalbe
gathered together rounde about, with golde and siluer, and a very great
multitude of apparell.
15 And this plague shall go ouer horses, mules, cammels, asses, & all the
beastes that shalbe in the hoast, like as yonder plague was.
16 Euery one that remayneth then of all the people which came against
Hierusalem, shall go vp early to worship the king euen the Lorde of hoastes, and
to kepe the feast of tabernacles.
17 And loke what generation vpon the earth goeth not to Hierusalem for to
worshippe the king the Lorde of hoastes, vpon the same shall come no rayne.
18 If the kindred of Egypt go not vp, and come not, it shall not rayne vpon
them: This shalbe the plague wherewith the Lorde wyll smyte all the heathen that
come not vp to kepe the feast of tabernacles,
19 Yea this shalbe the plague of Egypt, and the plague of all people that go not
vp to kepe the feast of tabernacles.
20 At that time shall the ryding geare of the horses be holy vnto the Lorde: the
kettels in the lordes house shalbe lyke the basons before the aulter.
21 Yea, all the kettels in Hierusalem and Iuda shalbe holy vnto the Lorde of
hoastes: and al they that slay offringes, shall come and take of them, and
seethe therein: And at that time there shalbe no mo Chanaanites in the house of
the Lorde of hoastes.


Malachi

Chapter 1

1 The burthen of the word of the Lorde to Israel, by the ministerie of Malachi.
2 I haue loued you saith the Lord: yet ye say, wherein hast thou loued vs? Was
not Esau Iacobs brother, saith the Lorde, yet loued I Iacob?
3 And I hated Esau, & made his mountaynes waste, and his heritage a wildernesse
for Dragons.
4 Though Edom say, We are impouerished, but we wil returne and builde the
desolate places: yet saith the Lorde of hoastes, They shal builde, but I wil
destroy: & they shal cal them, The border of wickednes, & the people with whom
the Lorde is angry for euer.
5 And your eyes shall see: and you shal say, The Lorde wylbe magnified vpon the
borders of Israel.
6 A sonne honoureth his father, and a seruaunt his maister: If then I be a
father, where is myne honour? if I be a maister, where is my feare? Saith the
Lorde God of hoastes to you O ye pristes that despise my name, and ye say,
Wherein haue we despised thy name?
7 Ye offer vpon myne aulter vncleane bread, and say, Wherein haue we polluted
thee? In that ye say, The table of the Lorde is not to be regarded.
8 When ye bring the blinde for sacrifice, you say it is not euil: and when ye
bring the lame and sicke, you say it is not euil: offer it nowe to thy prince,
wyll he be content with thee, or accept thy person, saith the Lorde of hoastes?
9 And now I pray you, pray before God, that he may haue mercie vpon vs: (this
euill hath ben done by your meanes) wyll he regarde your persons, saith the
Lorde of hoastes?
10 Who is there euen among you that would shutte the doores, and kindle not fire
on myne aulter in vaine? I haue no pleasure in you, saith the Lorde of hoastes,
neither wyll I accept an offering at your hande.
11 From the rysing of the sunne vnto the going downe of the same my name is
great among the gentiles, and in euery place incense shalbe offred to my name, &
a pure offering: for my name is great among the very heathen, saith the Lord of
hoastes.
12 But ye haue polluted it, in that ye say, The table of the Lord is polluted, &
the fruite thereof, euen his meate is not to be regarded.
13 And ye saide, beholde it is a weerynesse, and you haue snuffed at it saith
the Lorde of hoastes, and ye haue offered the stolne, and the lame, and the
sicke, ye haue offered an offering: shoulde I accept this of your handes, saith
the lorde?
14 Cursed be the deceitfull which hath in his flocke a male, and voweth, and
sacrificeth a corrupt thing to the Lorde: because I am a great king, saith the
lord of hoastes, and my name is fearefull among the heathen.

Chapter 2

1 And now O ye priestes this comaundement is for you.
2 If ye wyl not heare it nor regard it, to geue the glory to my name, saith the
Lorde of hoastes, I wyll sende a curse vpon you, and wyll curse your blessinges,
yea I haue cursed them alredie, because ye do not consider it in your heart.
3 Beholde, I wyll corrupt your seede, and cast doung on your faces, euen the
doung of your solempne feastes, & you shalbe like vnto it.
4 And you shall know that I haue sent this comaundement vnto you, that my
couenaunt which I haue made with Leui might stand, saith the Lorde of hoastes.
5 My couenaunt was with him, of lyfe and peace, and I gaue them him for the
feare wherwith he feared me and was afrayde before my name.
6 The lawe of trueth was in his mouth, and there was no iniquitie found in his
lippes, he walked with me in peace and in equitie, and he turned many from their
iniquitie.
7 For the priestes lippes shall kepe knowledge, and they shall seeke the lawe at
his mouth: because he is the messenger of the Lorde of hoastes.
8 But ye haue gone out of the way, ye haue caused many to fall by the lawe: ye
haue corrupted the couenaunt of Leui, saith the Lorde of hoastes.
9 Therefore haue I also made you despised and vyle before all the people,
because you kept not my wayes, but haue ben parciall in the lawe.
10 Haue we not all one father? hath not God made vs al? why then is euery one
deceaued of his brother, to violate the couenaunt of our fathers?
11 Iuda hath offended, & abhomination is committed in Israel and in Hierusalem?
for Iuda hath defiled the holynesse of the Lorde which he loued, and hath maried
the daughter of a straunge God.
12 The Lorde wyll destroy the man that doth this, both the rayser vp and the
aunswerer out of the tabernacle of Iacob, and him that offereth an offering vnto
the Lorde of hoastes.
13 And this againe haue ye done, in couering the aulter of the Lorde with
teares, with weeping and mourning, and therfore there is no more respect to the
offring, neither acceptable receauing of it at your handes.
14 Yet ye say, wherin? Because the Lord hath ben witnesse betweene thee and thy
wyfe of thy youth, against whom thou hast transgressed, yet is she thyne owne
companion, and the wyfe of thy couenaunt.
15 And did not he make one? yet had he aboundaunce of spiritie: And wherfore
one? Because he sought a godly seede: therefore kepe your selues in your
spirite, and let none transgresse against the wyfe of his youth.
16 If thou hatest her, put her away, saith the lorde God of Israel: yet he
couereth the iniurie vnder his garment, saith the Lorde of hoastes, and be ye
kept in your spirite, and transgresse not.
17 Ye haue weeryed the Lord with your wordes, and you haue sayde, Wherein haue
we weeried him? Whylest you say, Euery one that doth euil, is good in the sight
of the Lorde, and he is pleased in them: or where is the God of iudgement?

Chapter 3

1 Beholde, I wyll sende my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me,
and the lord whom ye seeke, shal speedyly come to his temple, and the messenger
of the couenaunt whom ye desire, beholde he commeth, saith the Lorde of hoastes.
2 But who may abyde the day of his comming? and who shall stand when he
appeareth? for he is lyke a purging fire, and lyke fullers sope.
3 And he shall sit downe to trye and fine the siluer, and he shal purge the
children of Leui, and purifie them as golde and siluer: and they shal bring vnto
the lorde offeringes in righteousnesse.
4 Then shall the offeringes of Iuda and Hierusalem be acceptable vnto the Lorde,
as in olde tyme, and as in the yeres afore.
5 And I wyl come neare to you in iudgement, and I wyll be a swyft witnesse
against the soothsayers, and against the adulterers, and against false swearers,
and against those that wrongfully keepe backe the hirelynges wages, and vexe the
widowe and the fatherlesse, and oppresse the straunger, and feare not me, saith
the Lorde of hoastes.
6 For I am the Lorde, I chaunge not: and you sonnes of Iacob are not consumed.
7 From the dayes of your fathers ye are gone away from myne ordinaunces, and
haue not kept them: turne you to me, and I wyll turne to you, saith the Lorde of
hoastes. And ye saide, Wherein shall we returne?
8 Wyll a man spoyle his Gods? yet ye haue spoyled me: and ye say, Wherein haue
we spoyled thee? In tythes and offeringes?
9 Ye are cursed with a curse, & me haue ye spoyled, euen this whole nation.
10 Bryng euery tythe into the store house, that there may be meate in myne
house, and prooue me withal, saith the Lorde of hoastes: if I wyl not open the
windowes of heauen vnto you, and poure you out a blessing without measure.
11 And I wyl reprooue the deuourer for your sakes, and he shall not destroy the
fruite of the grounde, neither shall your vine be barren in the fielde, saith
the Lorde of hoastes.
12 And al nations shal call you blessed: because you shalbe a pleasaunt lande,
saith the Lorde of hoastes.
13 Your wordes haue ben stout against me saith the lorde: and you saide, Wherein
haue we spoken against thee?
14 Ye haue saide: it is but vayne to serue God, and what profite is it that we
haue kept his commaundement, & that we haue walked humbly before the face of the
Lorde of hoastes?
15 And nowe we call the proude happie: yea the workers of wickednesse are set
vp, and also they that tempt God, yea they are deliuered.
16 Then they that feared God, saide euery one to his neighbour: and the Lorde
considered and hearde, and there was written a booke of remebraunce before him
for them that feared the Lorde, and for them that thinke vpon his name.
17 And they shalbe to me, saith the Lorde of hoastes, in that day wherein I
shall do iudgement, a stocke: and I wyl spare them as a man spareth his owne
sonne which serueth him.
18 Then shall ye returne, and discerne betweene the iust and the wicked,
betweene him that serueth God, and him that serueth him not.

Chapter 4

1 For marke, the day commeth burning like an ouen: and all the proude, and all
that worke wickednesse shalbe stubble, and the day that is for to come shall
burne them, saith the Lorde of hoastes, and shall leaue them neither roote, nor
braunche.
2 But to you that feare my name shall that sunne of righteousnesse aryse, and
health shalbe vnder his winges: and ye shall go foorth and skippe lyke fatte
calues.
3 And ye shall treade downe the vngodly, for they shalbe dust vnder the soles of
your feete in the day that I shall do this, saith the Lorde of hoastes.
4 Remember the lawe of Moyses my seruaunt, which I commaunded him in Horeb for
all Israel, with the ordinaunces and iudgementes.
5 Beholde, I wyll send you Elias the prophete, before the comming of the great
and fearefull day of the Lorde.
6 He shal turne the heart of the fathers to their children, and the heart of the
children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with cursing.


Matthew

Chapter 1

1 This is the booke of the generation of Iesus Christ, the sonne of Dauid, the
sonne of Abraham.
2 Abraham begat Isaac, Isaac begat Iacob, Iacob begat Iudas, and his brethren.
3 Iudas begat Phares, and Zara of Thamar, Phares begat Esrom, Esrom begat Aram.
4 Aram begat Aminadab, Aminadab begat Naasson, Naasson begat Salmon.
5 Salmon begat Boos, of Rachab, Boos begat Obed of Ruth, Obed begat Iesse.
6 Iesse begat Dauid the kyng, Dauid the kyng begat Solomon, of her that was the
wyfe of Urie.
7 Solomon begat Roboam, Roboam begat Abia, Abia begat Asa.
8 Asa begat Iosaphat, Iosaphat begat Ioram, Ioram begat Ozias.
9 Ozias begat Ioatham, Ioatham begat Achas, Achas begat Ezekias.
10 Ezekias begat Manasses, Manasses begat Amon, Amon begat Iosias.
11 Iosias begat Iacim, Iacim begat Iechonias and his brethren, about the tyme
they were caryed away to Babylon.
12 And, after they were brought to Babylon, Iechonias begat Salathiel, Salathiel
begat Zorobabel.
13 Zorobabel begat Abiud, Abiud begat Eliakim, Eliakim begat Azor.
14 Azor begat Sadoc, Sadoc begat Achen, Achen begat Eliud.
15 Eliud begat Eleazar, Eleazar begat Matthan, Matthan begat Iacob.
16 Iacob begat Ioseph, the husband of Marie, of who was borne Iesus, that is
called Christe.
17 And so, all the generations from Abraham to Dauid, are fourteene generations:
and from Dauid vntyll the carying away into Babylo, are fourteene generations:
and fro the carying away into Babylon vnto Christe, are fourteene generations.
18 The birth of Iesus Christe was on this wise. When as his mother Marie was
betrouthed to Ioseph (before they came together) she was founde with chylde of
the holy ghost.
19 Then Ioseph her husbande, beyng a ryghteous man, and not wyllyng to make her
a publique example, was mynded priuily to put her away.
20 But whyle he thought these thinges, beholde, the Angell of the Lord appeared
vnto hym in a dreame, saying: Ioseph, thou sonne of Dauid, feare not to take
vnto thee Marie thy wife, for that which is conceaued in her, is of the holy
ghost.
21 She shall bryng foorth a sonne, and thou shalt call his name Iesus: for he
shall saue his people from their sinnes.
22 (All this was done, that it myght be fulfilled, which was spoken of the lorde
by the prophete, saying:
23 Behold, a virgin shalbe with childe, and shall bryng foorth a sonne, and they
shall call his name Emmanuel, whiche is by interpretation, God with vs.)
24 Then Ioseph, being raysed fro slepe, dyd as the Angel of the Lorde had bidden
hym, and he toke his wyfe:
25 And knewe her not, tyll she hadde brought foorth her first borne sonne, &
called his name Iesus.

Chapter 2

1 When Iesus was borne in Bethlehem, a citie of Iurie, in the dayes of Herode
the kyng: beholde, there came wise men from the east to Hierusalem,
2 Saying: Where is he that is borne kyng of Iewes? For we haue seene his starre
in the east, and are come to worship hym.
3 When Herode the kyng had hearde these thynges, he was troubled, and all the
citie of Hierusalem with hym.
4 And when he hadde gathered all the chiefe Priestes and Scribes of the people
together, he demaunded of them where Christe shoulde be borne.
5 And they saide vnto him: At Bethlehem in Iurie. For thus it is written by the
prophete.
6 And thou Bethlehem in the lande of Iuda, art not the least among the princes
of Iuda. For out of thee shall there come a capitain, that shal gouerne my
people Israel.
7 Then Herode, when he had priuilye called the wyse men, inquired of the
diligently, what tyme the starre appeared.
8 And he sent them to Bethlehem, and sayde: Go, and search diligently for the
young childe, and when ye haue founde hym, bryng me worde agayne, that I may
come, and worship hym also.
9 When they had hearde the kyng, they departed, and loe, the starre which they
sawe in the east, went before them, tyl it came & stoode ouer the place wherin
the young chylde was.
10 When they sawe the starre, they reioyced excedyngly with great ioy.
11 And went into the house, and founde the young chylde with Marie his mother,
and fell downe, and worshypped hym, and opened their treasures, and presented
vnto hym gyftes, golde, and frankensence, and mirre.
12 And after they were warned of God in a dreame, that they shoulde not go
agayne to Herode, they returned into their owne countrey another way.
13 When they were departed, beholde, the Angel of the Lord appeared to Ioseph in
a dreame, saying: Aryse, & take the young chylde and his mother, and flee into
Egipte, and be thou there, tyll I bryng thee worde. For it wyll come to passe,
that Herode shall seke ye young chylde, to destroy hym.
14 When he arose, he toke the young chylde and his mother, by nyght, and
departed into Egipt.
15 And was there, vnto the death of Herode, that it myght be fulfylled whiche
was spoken of the Lorde, by the prophete, saying: Out of Egipte haue I called my
sonne.
16 Then Herode, when he sawe that he was mocked of the wyse men, was excedyng
wroth, and sent foorth, and slew all the chyldren that were in Bethlehe, and in
all the coastes, as many as were two yere olde, or vnder, according to the tyme,
which he had diligently searched out, of the wyse men.
17 Then was fulfylled that, which was spoken by Ieremie the prophete, saying.
18 In Rama was there a voyce hearde, lamentation, wepyng, & great mournyng,
Rachel weping for her children, and woulde not be comforted, because they were
not.
19 But when Herode was dead, beholde, an Angel of the Lorde appeared to Ioseph
in a dreame, in Egipt, saying.
20 Aryse, and take the young chylde and his mother, and go into the lande of
Israel. For they are dead, whiche sought the young chyldes lyfe.
21 And he arose, & toke the young chylde and his mother, & came into the lande
of Israel.
22 But when he hearde, that Archelaus dyd reigne in Iurie in the rowme of his
father Herode, he was afrayde to go thyther. Notwithstandyng, after he was
warned of God in a dreame, he turned aside, into the parties of Galilee,
23 And went and dwelt in a citie, which is called Nazareth, that it myght be
fulfylled, which was spoken by the prophetes: He shalbe called a Nazarite.

Chapter 3

1 In those dayes, came Iohn the Baptist, preachyng in the wyldernesse of Iurie,
and saying.
2 Repent, for the kingdome of heauen is at hande.
3 For this is he, of whom it is spoken by the prophete Esayas, saying. The voyce
of one crying in the wyldernesse: prepare ye the way of the Lorde, make his
pathes strayght.
4 This Iohn had his rayment of Camels heere, and a girdle of a skynne about his
loynes, his meate was locustes, and wylde hony.
5 Then went out to hym Hierusalem, and all Iurie, and all the region rounde
about Iordane,
6 And were baptized of hym in Iordane, confessyng their sinnes.
7 But when he sawe many of the Pharisees, and Saducees come to his baptisme, he
sayde vnto them. O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the
anger to come?
8 Bryng foorth therefore fruites meete for repentaunce.
9 And be not of suche mynde, that ye woulde say within your selues, we haue
Abraham to our father. For I say vnto you, that God is able, of these stones to
rayse vp chyldren vnto Abraham.
10 Euen now is the axe also put vnto the roote of the trees: therefore, euery
tree which bryngeth not foorth good fruite, is hewen downe, and cast into the
fire.
11 I baptize you in water vnto repentaunce: But he that shall come after me, is
mightier then I, whose shoes I am not worthy to beare, he shall baptize you with
the holy ghost, and with fire.
12 Whose fanne is in his hande, and he wyll purge his floore, and gather his
wheate into his garner: but wyl burne vp the chaffe with vnquencheable fire.
13 Then commeth Iesus from Galilee to Iordane, vnto Iohn, to be baptized of hym.
14 But Iohn forbad hym, saying. I haue nede to be baptized of thee, and commest
thou to me?
15 Iesus aunsweryng, sayde vnto hym: Suffer it to be so nowe. For thus it
becommeth vs, to fulfyll all righteousnes. Then he suffred hym.
16 And Iesus, when he was baptized, came strayghtwaye out of the water, and loe
the heauens was open vnto hym, and (Iohn) sawe the spirite of God descendyng
lyke a doue, and lyghtyng vpon hym.
17 And loe, there (came) a voyce from the heauens, saying: This is my beloued
sonne, in whom I am well pleased.

Chapter 4

1 Then was Iesus ledde away of the spirite into wyldernesse, to be tempted of
the deuyll.
2 And when he had fasted fourtie dayes, and fourtie nightes, he was afterwarde
an hungred.
3 And when the tempter came to hym, he sayde: If thou be the sonne of God,
commaunde that these stones be made breade.
4 But he aunswered, and sayde, it is written: Man shall not lyue by breade only,
but by euery worde that proceadeth out of the mouth of God.
5 Then the deuyll taketh hym vp into the holy citie, and setteth hym on a
pinacle of the temple,
6 And saith vnto hym: If thou be the sonne of God, cast thy selfe downe. For it
is written: He shall geue his Angels charge ouer thee, & with their handes they
shall lyft thee vp, lest at any tyme thou dashe thy foote agaynst a stone.
7 And Iesus sayde to hym. It is written agayne: Thou shalt not tempt the Lorde
thy God.
8 Agayne, the deuyll taketh hym vp, into an exceadyng hye mountayne, and sheweth
hym all the kyngdomes of the worlde, and the glorie of them,
9 And sayth vnto hym: All these wyll I geue thee, yf thou wylt fall downe, and
worshyp me.
10 The sayth Iesus vnto hym: Auoyde Sathan. For it is written: Thou shalt
worshyp the Lorde thy God, and hym only shalt thou serue.
11 Then the deuyll leaueth him, and beholde, the Angels came, and ministred vnto
hym.
12 When Iesus had hearde that Iohn was delyuered vp, he departed into Galilee,
13 And left Nazareth, and went & dwelt in Capernaum, whiche is (a citie) vpon
the sea coast, in the borders of Zabulon and Nephthalim.
14 That it myght be fulfylled, whiche was spoken by Esayas the prophete, saying:
15 The lande of Zabulon, & Nephthalim, (by) the way of the sea beyonde Iordane,
Galilee of the Gentiles.
16 The people, which sate in darknesse, sawe great lyght: And to them whiche
sate in the region and shadowe of death, lyght is sprong vp.
17 From that tyme, Iesus began to preache, and to saye: Repent, for the kyngdome
of heauen is at hande.
18 And Iesus, walkyng by the sea of Galilee, sawe two brethren, Simon (which
was) called Peter, and Andrewe his brother, castyng a nette into the sea, (for
they were fysshers.)
19 And he saith vnto them: Folowe me, and I wyl make you fysshers of men.
20 And they strayghtwaye lefte their nettes, and folowed hym.
21 And when he was gone foorth from thence, he sawe other two brethren, Iames,
the sonne of Zebedee, & Iohn his brother, in the shippe with Zebedee their
father, mendyng their nettes, and he called them.
22 And they immediatly, left the shippe and their father, and folowed hym.
23 And Iesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and preachyng
the Gospell of the kingdome, and healyng all maner of sicknesse, and all maner
of disease among the people.
24 And his fame spread abrode, throughout all Syria: and they brought vnto hym
all sicke people, that were taken with diuers diseases, and grypynges, and them
that were possessed with deuyls, and those which were lunaticke, and those that
had the paulsie, and he healed them.
25 And there folowed him great multitudes of people, from Galilee, and from the
ten cities, and from Hierusalem, and from Iurie, and from the regions (that lye)
beyonde Iordane.

Chapter 5

1 When he saw the multitude, he went vp into a mountayne: & when he was set, his
disciples came to hym.
2 And he opened his mouth, & taught them, saying.
3 Blessed (are) the poore in spirite: for theirs is the kyngdome of heauen.
4 Blessed (are) they that mourne: for they shalbe comforted.
5 Blessed (are) the meke: for they shall inherite the earth.
6 Blessed (are) they, which do hunger and thirste (after) righteousnes: for they
shalbe satisfied.
7 Blessed (are) the mercyfull: for they shall obteyne mercy.
8 Blessed (are) the pure in heart: for they shall see God.
9 Blessed (are) the peace makers: for they shalbe called the chyldren of God.
10 Blessed (are) they which suffer persecution for righteousnes sake: for theirs
is the kyngdome of heauen.
11 Blessed are ye, whe (men) reuyle you, and persecute (you) and, lying, shall
say all maner of euyll saying agaynst you, for my sake.
12 Reioyce, and be glad: for great is your rewarde in heauen. For so persecuted
they the prophetes, whiche were before you.
13 Ye are the salt of the earth. But yf the salt become vnsauery, where in shall
it be salted? It is thencefoorth good for nothing, but to be caste out, and to
be troden vnder foote of men.
14 Ye are the lyght of the worlde. A citie that is set on an hyll, can not be
hyd.
15 Neyther do men lyght a candell, and put it vnder a busshell: but on a
candelsticke, and it geueth lyght vnto all that are in the house.
16 Let your lyght so shyne before men, that they may see your good workes, and
glorifie your father, whiche is in heauen.
17 Thynke not that I am come to destroy the lawe, or the prophetes. I am not
come to destroy, but to fulfyll.
18 For truely I say vnto you, tyll heauen and earth passe, one iotte, or one
title of the lawe shall not scape, tyll all be fulfylled.
19 Whosoeuer therfore breaketh one of these least commaundementes, and teacheth
men so, he shalbe called the leaste in the kyngdome of heauen. But who so euer
doeth, and teacheth (so) the same shalbe called great in the kyngdome of heauen.
20 For I say vnto you: except your righteousnes, excede the righteousnes of the
Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the kyngdome of heauen.
21 Ye haue hearde, that it was sayde to them of the olde tyme, thou shalt not
kyll: who so euer kylleth, shalbe in daunger of iudgement.
22 But I say vnto you, that who so euer is angry with his brother, vnaduisedly,
shalbe in daunger of iudgement. And who so euer shall say vnto his brother,
racha, shalbe in daunger of a councell: But, whosoeuer shall saye (thou) foole,
shalbe in daunger of hell fire.
23 Therfore, if thou bring thy gyft to the aulter, and there remembrest, that
thy brother hath ought agaynst thee:
24 Leaue there thy gyft, before the aulter, and go thy way, first and be
reconciled to thy brother: and then, come and offer thy gyft.
25 Agree with thyne aduersarie quicklye, whyles thou art in the waye with him:
lest at any tyme the aduersarie deliuer thee to the iudge, and the iudge deliuer
thee to the minister, and then thou be cast into pryson.
26 Ueryly I say vnto thee, thou shalt not come out thence, tyll thou hast payde
the vtmost farthyng.
27 Ye haue hearde, that it was sayde vnto them of olde tyme: Thou shalt not
commit adultry.
28 But I say vnto you, that whosoeuer loketh on a woman, to luste after her,
hath committed adultry with her alredy, in his heart.
29 If thy ryght eye offende thee, plucke it out, and cast it from thee. For
better it is vnto thee, that one of thy members perishe, the that thy whole body
should be cast into hell.
30 And yf thy ryght hande offende thee, cut it of, and cast it from thee. For
better it is vnto thee, that one of thy members perishe, then that all thy body
shoulde be cast into hell.
31 It is saide: whosoeuer putteth away his wyfe, let hym geue her a wrytyng of
diuorcement.
32 But I say vnto you, that whosoeuer doeth put awaye his wyfe, except it be for
fornication, causeth her to commit adultry. And whosoeuer maryeth her that is
diuorced, committeth adultry.
33 Agayne, ye haue hearde that it was sayde vnto them of olde tyme: Thou shalt
not forsweare thy selfe, but shalt perfourme vnto the Lorde thine othes.
34 But, I say vnto you: Sweare not at all, neither by heauen, for it is gods
seate,
35 Nor by the earth, for it is his footestoole, neither by Hierusalem, for it is
the citie of the great kyng.
36 Neither shalt thou sweare by thy head, because thou canst not make one heere
whyte or blacke.
37 But let your communication be yea, yea, nay nay. For whatsoeuer is more then
these, commeth of euyll.
38 Ye haue hearde, that it is sayde, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth.
39 But, I say vnto you, that ye resist not euyll. But, whosoeuer geueth thee a
blowe on thy right cheeke, turne to him the other also.
40 And yf any man wyll sue thee at the lawe, and take away thy coate, let him
haue thy cloke also.
41 And whosoeuer wyll compell thee to go a myle, go with hym twayne.
42 Geue to hym that asketh thee: & from hym that woulde borowe of thee, turne
not thou away.
43 Ye haue heard, that it is saide: Thou shalt loue thy neyghbour, & hate thyne
enemie.
44 But I saye vnto you, loue your enemies, blesse them that curse you, do good
to them that hate you, pray for the which hurt you, and persecute you:
45 That ye may be the chyldren of your father, which is in heauen. For he maketh
his sonne to aryse on the euyll, and on the good, and sendeth rayne on the iust,
and on the vniust.
46 For yf ye loue them which loue you, what rewarde haue ye? Do not the
publicans also euen the same?
47 And yf ye salute or greete your brethre only, what singuler thyng do ye? Do
not also the publicans lykewyse?
48 Ye shall therfore be perfecte, euen as your father, which is in heauen, is
perfecte.

Chapter 6

1 Take heede to your almes, that ye geue it not in the sight of men, to the
intente that ye woulde be sene of the, or els ye haue no rewarde of your father,
which is in heauen.
2 Therefore, when thou geuest thyne almes, thou shalt not make a trumpet to be
blowen before thee, as hypocrites do, in the synagogues, & in the streates, yt
they might be esteemed of me. Uerily I say vnto you, they haue their reward.
3 But when thou doest thyne almes, let not thy left hande knowe, what thy ryght
hande doeth,
4 That thyne almes may be in secrete: And thy father, which seeth in secrete,
shall rewarde thee openly.
5 And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are. For they loue
to stande, praying in the synagogues, and in the corners of the streates, that
they may be sene of men. Ueryly I say vnto you, they haue theyr rewarde.
6 But when thou prayest, enter into thy chaumber, and when thou hast shut thy
dore, pray to thy father, which is in secrete, and thy father which seeth in
secrete, shall rewarde thee openly.
7 But when ye pray, babble not much, as the heathen do. For they thynke it wyl
come to passe, that they shalbe heard, for theyr much bablinges sake.
8 Be not ye therfore lyke vnto them. For your father knoweth, what thynges ye
haue nede of, before ye aske of hym.
9 After this maner therfore pray ye. O our father, which art in heauen, halowed
be thy name.
10 Let thy kyngdome come. Thy wyll be done, as well in earth, as it is in
heauen.
11 Geue vs this day our dayly breade.
12 And forgeue vs our dettes, as we forgeue our detters.
13 And leade vs not into temptation, but delyuer vs from euyll. For thyne is the
kyngdome, and the power, and the glory, for euer. Amen.
14 For, yf ye forgeue men theyr trespasses, your heauenly father shall also
forgeue you.
15 But, yf ye forgeue not men theyr trespasses: no more shall your father,
forgeue you your trespasses.
16 Moreouer, when ye fast, be not of an heauy countenaunce, as hypocrites are.
For they disfigure theyr faces, that they myght appeare vnto men, to fast.
Ueryly I say vnto you, they haue theyr rewarde.
17 But thou, when thou fastest, annoynt thyne head, and washe thy face:
18 That thou appeare not vnto men, to fast: but vnto thy father, which is in
secrete, and thy father, which seeth in secrete, shall rewarde thee openly.
19 Hoorde not vp for your selues, treasures vpon earth, where the moth and rust
doth corrupt, and where theeues breake through, and steale.
20 But laye vp for you, treasures in heauen, where neyther moth nor rust doth
corrupt, and where theeues do not breake through, nor steale.
21 For, where your treasure is, there wyll your heart be also.
22 The lyght of the body, is the eye. Wherfore, yf thyne eye be single, all thy
body shalbe full of lyght.
23 But and yf thyne eye be wicked, all thy body shalbe ful of darknesse.
Wherfore, yf the lyght that is in thee, be darknesse, howe great is that
darknesse?
24 No man can serue two maisters. For either he shall hate the one, & loue the
other: or els leane to the one, and dispise the other. Ye can not serue God, and
mammon.
25 Therfore I say vnto you, be not carefull for your lyfe, what ye shall eate,
or drynke: nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not the lyfe more
worth then meate? & the body then rayment?
26 Beholde the fowles of the ayre: For they sowe not, neither do they reape, nor
cary into the barnes: yet your heauenly father feedeth them. Are ye not much
better then they?
27 Which of you, by takyng of carefull thought, can adde one cubite vnto his
stature?
28 And why care ye for rayment? Learne of the Lylies of the fielde, howe they
growe. They weery not them selues with labour, neither do they spinne:
29 And yet I say vnto you, that euen Solomon in all his royaltie, was not arayed
lyke one of these.
30 Wherfore, yf God so clothe the grasse of the fielde, which though it stande
to day, is to morowe cast into the ouen: shall he not much more do the same for
you, O ye of litle fayth?
31 Therefore take no thought, saying: What shall we eate? or, what shall we
drynke? or, wherewith shall we be clothed?
32 (For after all these thynges, do the Gentiles seke:) for your heauenly father
knoweth, that ye haue nede of all these thynges.
33 But rather, seke ye first the kyngdome of God, and his ryghteousnesse, and
all these thynges shalbe ministred vnto you.
34 Care not then for the morowe: for the morowe shall care for it selfe.
Sufficient vnto the day, is the euyll therof.

Chapter 7

1 Iudge not, that ye be not iudged.
2 For with what iudgement ye iudge, ye shalbe iudged: And with what measure ye
meate, it shalbe measured to you agayne.
3 Why seest thou a mote in thy brothers eye, but perceiuest not the beame that
is in thyne owne eye?
4 Or, howe sayest thou to thy brother: suffer me, I wyll plucke out a mote out
of thyne eye: and beholde, a beame is in thyne owne eye?
5 Thou hypocrite, first caste out the beame out of thine owne eye: and then
shalt thou see clearely, to plucke out the mote out of thy brothers eye.
6 Geue not that which is holy, vnto dogges, neyther caste ye your pearles before
swyne, lest they treade them vnder their feete, and turning agayne, all to rent
you.
7 Aske, and it shalbe geuen you: seke, and ye shall fynde: knocke, and it shalbe
opened vnto you.
8 For he that asketh, receaueth: and he that seketh, fyndeth: and to hym that
knocketh, it shalbe opened.
9 Is there any among you, which, yf his sonne aske hym bread, wyll geue hym a
stone?
10 Or yf he aske fyshe, wyll he geue hym a serpent?
11 If ye then, beyng euyll, knowe to geue your chyldren good gyftes: howe much
more shall your father, which is in heauen, geue good thynges, to them that aske
hym?
12 Therfore all thynges, whatsoeuer ye woulde that men shoulde do to you, do ye
euen so to them: For this is the lawe, and the prophetes.
13 Enter in at the strayte gate. For wyde is the gate, and brode is the way,
that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in therat.
14 Because, strayte is the gate, and narowe is the way, which leadeth vnto lyfe,
and fewe there be that fynde it.
15 Beware of false prophetes, which come to you in sheepes clothyng: but
inwardly they are rauenyng woolfes.
16 Ye shall knowe them by theyr fruites, Do men gather grapes of thornes? or
fygges of thystles?
17 Euen so, euery good tree, bryngeth foorth good fruite: But a corrupt tree,
bryngeth foorth euyll fruite.
18 A good tree, can not bryng foorth bad fruite: neither can a bad tree, bryng
foorth good fruite.
19 Euery tree that bryngeth not foorth good fruite, is hewen downe, and cast
into the fyre.
20 Wherfore, by theyr fruites, ye shall knowe them.
21 Not euery one, that sayeth vnto me Lorde, Lorde, shall enter into the
kyngdome of heauen: but he that doeth the wyll of my father, which is in heauen.
22 Many wyll say to me in that day, Lorde Lorde, haue we not prophesied thorowe
thy name? and thorowe thy name haue cast out deuyls? & done many great workes
thorowe thy name?
23 And then wyll I confesse vnto them, I neuer knewe you: Depart from me, ye
that worke iniquitie.
24 Therfore, whosoeuer heareth of me these sayinges, and doeth the same, I wyll
lyken hym vnto a wyse man, which buylt his house vpon a rocke:
25 And the rayne descended, and the fluddes came, and the wyndes blewe, and beat
vpon that house, and it fell not, because it was grounded on a rocke.
26 And euery one that heareth of me these sayinges, and doeth them not, shalbe
lykened vnto a foolyshe man, which buylt his house vpon the sande:
27 And the rayne descended, and the fluddes came, and the wyndes blewe, and beat
vpon that house, and it fell, and great was the fall of it.
28 And it came to passe, that when Iesus had ended these sayinges, the people
were astonied at his doctrine.
29 For he taught them, as one hauyng power, and not as the Scribes.

Chapter 8

1 When he was come downe fro the mountayne, great multitudes folowed hym.
2 And beholde, there came a leper, and worshipped hym, saying: Lorde, yf thou
wylt, thou canst make me cleane.
3 And Iesus put foorth his hande, and touched hym, saying: I wyll, be thou
cleane. And immediatlye his leprosie was clensed.
4 And Iesus sayth vnto hym: See thou tell no man, but go, and shewe thy selfe to
the priest, and offer the gift that Moyses commaunded, for a witnes vnto them.
5 And when Iesus was entred into Capernaum, there came vnto hym a Centurion,
besechyng hym.
6 And saying: Lorde, my seruaunt lyeth at home sicke of the paulsie, greeuously
payned.
7 And Iesus sayth. When I come, I wyll heale hym.
8 The Centurion aunswered, & sayde: Lorde, I am not worthy that thou shouldest
come vnder my roofe: but speake the worde only, & my seruaunt shalbe healed.
9 For I also my selfe am vnder aucthoritie, and haue souldiers vnder me: and I
say to this man go, and he goeth: and to another, come, and he commeth: and to
my seruaunt, do this, and he doth it.
10 When Iesus hearde him, he marueyled, & sayde to them that folowed him: Ueryly
I say vnto you, I haue not founde so great fayth in Israel.
11 I say vnto you, that many shall come from the east and west, and shall rest
with Abraham, and Isaac, & Iacob, in the kyngdome of heauen.
12 But the chyldren of the kyngdome shalbe caste out, into vtter darcknesse:
there shalbe wepyng, and gnashyng of teeth.
13 And Iesus sayde vnto the Centurion: Go thy way, and as thou hast beleued, so
be it vnto thee. And his seruaunt was healed, in the selfe same houre.
14 And when Iesus was come into Peters house, he sawe his wyues mother layed,
and sicke of a feuer.
15 And he touched her hande, and the feuer left her, and she arose, and
ministred vnto them.
16 When the euen was come, they brought vnto hym many, that were possessed with
deuyls, and he cast out the spirites with a worde, and healed all that were
sicke.
17 That it myght be fulfylled, which was spoken by Esayas the prophete, saying:
He toke on hym our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses.
18 When Iesus sawe great multitudes about hym, he commaunded that they shoulde
go ouer the water.
19 And a certayne Scribe came, & sayde vnto hym: Maister, I wyll folowe thee,
whyther soeuer thou goest.
20 And Iesus sayth vnto hym. The foxes haue holes, and the birdes of the ayre
haue nestes: but the sonne of man, hath not where to rest his head.
21 And another, of the number of his disciples, sayde vnto hym: Lorde, suffer me
first to go and bury my father.
22 But Iesus sayde vnto hym: Folowe me, and let the dead bury theyr dead.
23 And when he entred into a shippe, his disciples folowed hym:
24 And beholde, there arose a great tempest in the sea, in so much that the
shippe was couered with waues: but he was a slepe.
25 And his disciples came to hym, and awoke hym, saying: Lorde saue vs, we
peryshe.
26 And he sayth vnto them: Why are ye fearefull, O ye of litle fayth? Then he
arose, and rebuked the windes, and the sea: and there folowed a great calme.
27 But the men marueyled, saying: What maner of man is this, that both wyndes
and sea obey hym?
28 And when he was come to the other syde, into the countrey of the Gergesenes,
there met hym two, possessed with deuyls, which came out of the graues, and were
very fierce, so that no man myght go by that way.
29 And beholde, they cryed out, saying: O Iesu, thou sonne of God, what haue we
to do with thee? Art thou come hyther, to torment vs before the tyme?
30 And there was, a good way of from them, a hearde of many swyne, feedyng.
31 So, the deuyls besought hym, saying: Yf thou cast vs out, suffer vs to go
away into the hearde of swyne.
32 And he sayde vnto them, go. Then went they out, and departed into the hearde
of swyne: And beholde, ye whole hearde of swyne russhed headlong into the sea,
and peryshed in the waters.
33 Then they that kept them, fledde, and went theyr wayes into the citie, and
tolde euery thyng, and what was done of the possessed with the deuyls.
34 And beholde, the whole citie came out to meete Iesus: and when they sawe hym,
they besought hym, that he woulde depart out of theyr coastes.

Chapter 9

1 And he entred into a shippe, & passed ouer, & came into his owne citie.
2 And beholde, they brought to him a man, sicke of the paulsie, lying in a
bedde. And when Iesus sawe the fayth of them, he sayde vnto the sicke of the
paulsie: Sonne, be of good cheare, thy sinnes be forgeuen thee.
3 And beholde, certayne of the Scribes sayde, within them selues: This man
blasphemeth.
4 And whe Iesus saw their thoughtes, he sayde: Wherefore thynke ye euyll in your
heartes?
5 Whether is easyer to say, thy sinnes be forgeuen thee? Or to say, aryse and
walke?
6 But that ye may knowe, that the sonne of man hath power to forgeue sinnes in
earth (then sayde he to the sicke of the paulsie) Aryse, take vp thy bedde, and
go vnto thyne house.
7 And he arose, and departed to his house.
8 But when the multitudes sawe it, they marueyled, & glorified God, which had
geuen such power vnto men.
9 And as Iesus passed foorth from thence, he sawe a man, named Matthewe, syttyng
at the receipte of custome: & he sayth vnto hym, folowe me. And he arose, and
folowed hym.
10 And it came to passe, as Iesus sate at meate in his house, beholde, many
publicans also and sinners came, and sate downe with Iesus and his disciples.
11 And when the Pharisees sawe it, they sayde vnto his disciples: Why eateth
your maister with publicans and sinners?
12 But when Iesus hearde that, he sayde vnto them: They that be whole, nede not
the phisition, but they that are sicke.
13 Go ye, and learne what that meaneth, I wyll haue mercie, and not sacrifice:
for I am not come, to call the righteous, but sinners to repentaunce.
14 Then came the disciples of Iohn vnto hym, saying: Why do we and the Pharisees
fast oft, but thy disciples fast not?
15 And Iesus sayde vnto them: Can the chyldren of the bryde chaumber mourne, as
long as the brydegrome is with them? But the dayes wyll come, when the
brydegrome shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast.
16 No man putteth a peece of newe cloth in an olde garment: for then, the peece
taketh away somethyng from the garment, and the rent is made worse.
17 Neither do men put newe wine into olde vessels: els, the vessels breake, and
the wyne runneth out, and the vessels peryshe: But they put newe wyne, into newe
vessels, and both are preserued together.
18 Whyle he spake these thynges vnto them, beholde, there came a certayne ruler,
and worshypped hym, saying: My daughter is euen nowe dead, but come and lay thy
hande vpon her, and she shall lyue.
19 And Iesus arose, and folowed hym, and so dyd his disciples.
20 ( And beholde, a woman which was diseased with an issue of blood twelue
yeres, came behynde hym, and touched the hemme of his vesture.
21 For she sayde within her selfe: If I may touche but euen his vesture only, I
shalbe safe.
22 But Iesus turned hym about, and when he sawe her, he saide: Daughter be of
good comfort, thy faith hath made thee safe. And the woman was made whole from
that same houre.)
23 And, when Iesus came into the rulers house, and sawe the minstrels, and the
people, makyng a noyse,
24 He sayde vnto them: Geue place, for the maide is not dead, but slepeth. And
they laughed hym to scorne.
25 But when the people were put foorth, he went in, and toke her by the hande,
and the mayde arose.
26 And the fame of this went abrode into all that lande.
27 And when Iesus departed thence, two blynde men folowed hym, crying, and
saying: O thou sonne of Dauid, haue mercy on vs.
28 And whe he was come into the house, the blynde came to hym. And Iesus sayth
vnto them: Beleue ye that I am able to do this? They sayde vnto hym, yea Lorde.
29 Then touched he their eyes, saying: Accordyng to your fayth, be it vnto you.
30 And their eyes were opened. And Iesus straytly charged them, saying: see that
no man knowe of it.
31 But they, when they were departed, spread abrode his name in all that lande.
32 As they went out, beholde, they brought to him a dumbe man, possessed with a
deuyll.
33 And when the deuyll was cast out, the dumbe spake, and the multitudes
marueyled, saying, that it was neuer so seene in Israel.
34 But the Pharisees sayde: He casteth out deuils, through the prince of deuils.
35 And Iesus went about all cities and townes, teachyng in their synagogues, and
preachyng the Gospell of the kyngdome, and healyng euery sicknesse, and euery
disease among the people.
36 But when he sawe the multitudes, he was moued with compassion on them,
because they were destitute, and scattered abrode, euen as sheepe, hauing no
shephearde.
37 Then sayth he vnto his disciples: the haruest truely is plenteous, but the
labourers are fewe.
38 Pray ye therfore the lorde of the haruest, that he wyl thrust foorth
labourers into the haruest.

Chapter 10

1 And when he had called his twelue disciples vnto hym he gaue them power
agaynst vncleane spirites, to cast them out, and to heale all maner of
sicknesse, and all maner of disease.
2 The names of the twelue Apostles are these. The first, Simon, whiche is called
Peter, and Andrewe his brother, Iames, the sonne of Zebedee, & Iohn his brother,
3 Philip, & Bartholomewe, Thomas and Matthewe, which had ben a Publicane, Iames,
ye sonne of Alphee, & Lebbeus, whose surname was Taddeus,
4 Simon the Cananite, & Iudas Iscariot, which also betrayed hym.
5 Iesus sent foorth these twelue, who he comaunded, saying. Go not into the way
of the Gentiles, and into the citie of the Samaritanes enter ye not.
6 But go rather to the lost sheepe of the house of Israel.
7 As ye go, preache, saying: The kyngdome of heauen is at hande.
8 Heale the sicke, cleanse ye lepers, rayse the dead, cast out deuyls. Freely ye
haue receaued, freely geue.
9 Possesse not golde, nor syluer, nor brasse in your purses,
10 Nor yet scrippe, towardes your iourney, neither two coates, neither shoes,
nor yet a staffe. For the workman is worthy of his meate.
11 But to whatsoeuer citie or towne ye shall come, inquire who is worthy in it,
and there abyde, tyll ye go thence.
12 And when ye come into an house, salute the same.
13 And if the house be worthy, let your peace come vpon it: but if it be not
worthy, let your peace returne to you again.
14 And whosoeuer shal not receaue you, nor wyll heare your preachyng: when ye
depart out of that house, or that citie, shake of the dust of your feete.
15 Ueryly I say vnto you, it shalbe easier for the lande of the Sodomites and
Gomorreans, in the day of iudgement, then for that citie.
16 Beholde, I sende you foorth, as sheepe in the middest of woolfes. Be ye
therfore wyse as serpentes, and harmelesse as doues.
17 But beware of men. For they shall delyuer you vp to the councels, and shal
scourge you in their synagogues.
18 And ye shalbe brought to the head rulers, and kynges, for my sake, in
witnesse to them, and to the Gentiles.
19 But whe they delyuer you vp, take ye no thought, how or what ye shal speake.
For it shalbe geuen you, euen in that same houre, what ye shall speake.
20 For it is not ye that speake, but ye spirite of your father, which speaketh
in you.
21 The brother shall delyuer vp the brother to death, and the father the sonne,
& the chyldren shall ryse agaynst their fathers, and mothers, and shall put them
to death.
22 And ye shalbe hated of all men, for my names sake: but he that endureth to
the ende, shalbe saued.
23 But, when they persecute you in this citie, flee ye into another. For verily
I say vnto you, ye shall not ende all the cities of Israel, tyll the sonne of
man be come.
24 The disciple is not aboue the maister, nor the seruaunt aboue his lorde.
25 It is enough for the disciple, that he be as his maister is: and that the
seruaunt, be as his lorde is. If they haue called the lorde of the house
Beelzebub: howe much more shall they call them of his householde so?
26 Feare them not therfore. For there is nothing close, that shal not be opened:
& nothing hyd, that shall not be knowen.
27 What I tell you in darknesse, that speake ye in lyght: And what ye heare in
the eare, that preach ye on the houses.
28 And feare ye not them, which kyll the body, but are not able to kyll the
soule. But rather feare hym, which is able to destroy both soule and body in
hell.
29 Are not two litle sparowes solde for a farthyng? And one of the shall not
light on the grounde, without your father.
30 Yea, euen all the heeres of your head are numbred.
31 Feare ye not therefore, ye are of more value then many sparowes.
32 Euery one therfore, that shall confesse me before men, hym wyll I confesse
also, before my father, which is in heaues.
33 But whosoeuer shall denye me before men, hym wyll I also denye, before my
father, which is in heauens.
34 Thinke not that I am come to sende peace into the earth. I came not to sende
peace, but a sworde.
35 For I am come to set a man at varyaunce agaynst his father, & the daughter
agaynst her mother, and the daughter in lawe agaynst her mother in lawe.
36 And a mans foes shalbe they of his owne householde.
37 He that loueth father or mother, more then me, is not worthy of me. And he
that loueth sonne or daughter, more the me, is not worthy of me.
38 And he that taketh not his crosse, & foloweth me, is not worthy of me.
39 He that findeth his life, shall lose it: and he that loseth his lyfe, for my
sake, shall fynde it.
40 He that receaueth you, receaueth me: & he that receaueth me, receaueth hym
that sent me.
41 He that receaueth a prophete, in the name of a prophete, shall receaue a
prophetes rewarde. And he that receaueth a ryghteous man, in the name of a
ryghteous man, shall receaue a ryghteous mans rewarde.
42 And whosoeuer shall geue vnto one of these litle ones, to drynke, a cuppe of
colde water only, in the name of a disciple, veryly I say vnto you, he shall not
lose his rewarde.

Chapter 11

1 And it came to passe, that when Iesus had made an ende of commaundyng his
twelue disciples, he departed thence to teache and to preache in their cities.
2 When Iohn being in prison heard the workes of Christe, he sent two of his
disciples, and sayde vnto him:
3 Art thou he that shoulde come? or do we loke for another?
4 Iesus aunswered and sayd vnto them: Go and shewe Iohn agayne what ye haue
hearde and seene.
5 The blinde receaue their sight, the halt do walke, the lepers are cleansed,
and the deafe heare, the dead are raised vp, and the poore receaue the Gospell.
6 And happy is he that is not offended in me.
7 And as they departed, Iesus began to say vnto the multitude cocerning Iohn:
What went ye out into the wildernesse to see? A reede shaken with the winde?
8 Or what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft rayment? Beholde, they
that weare soft clothyng are in kinges houses.
9 But what went ye out for to see? A prophete? yea I say vnto you, and more then
a prophete.
10 For this is he of whom it is written: Beholde I sende my messenger before thy
face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.
11 Ueryly I say vnto you, among them that are borne of women, arose not a
greater then Iohn the Baptist: Notwithstandyng, he that is lesse in the kingdome
of heauen, is greater then he.
12 From the dayes of Iohn the Baptist vntyll nowe, the kingdome of heauen
suffereth violence, & the violent plucke it vnto them.
13 For all the prophetes and the lawe it selfe prophecied vnto Iohn.
14 And if ye wyll receaue it, this is Elias which was for to come.
15 He that hath eares to heare, let him heare.
16 But whervnto shall I liken this generation? It is like vnto litle children,
which sit in the markettes, and call vnto their felowes,
17 And say: We haue pyped vnto you, and ye haue not daunsed: we haue mourned
vnto you, and ye haue not sorowed.
18 For Iohn came neither eatyng nor drinking, and they say, he hath the deuil.
19 The sonne of man came eatyng and drinking, and they say, behold a glutton and
an vnmeasurable drinker of wine, and a friende vnto publicans & sinners: And
wisdome is iustified of her children.
20 Then began he to vpbrayd the cities which most of his mightie workes were
done in, because they repented not.
21 Wo vnto thee Chorazin, wo vnto thee Bethsaida: for if the mightie workes
which were shewed in you had ben done in Tyre or Sidon, they had repented long
ago in sackcloth and asshes.
22 Neuerthelesse I say vnto you, it shalbe easier for Tyre and Sidon at the day
of iudgement, then for you.
23 And thou Capernaum, which art lift vp vnto heauen, shalt be brought downe to
hell: For if the mightie workes which haue ben done in thee had ben done among
them of Sodome, they had remayned vntyll this day.
24 Neuerthelesse, I say vnto you, that it shalbe easier for the lande of Sodome
in the day of iudgement, then for thee.
25 At that tyme Iesus aunswered and sayde: I thanke thee O father, Lorde of
heauen and earth, because thou hast hid these thinges from the wise and prudent,
and hast shewed them vnto babes.
26 Euen so it is O father, for so was it thy good pleasure.
27 All thinges are geuen vnto me of my father: And no man knoweth the sonne but
the father, neither knoweth any man the father saue the sonne, and he to
whomsoeuer the sonne wyll open him.
28 Come vnto me all ye that labour sore, and are laden, and I wyll ease you.
29 Take my yoke vpon you and learne of me, for I am meeke & lowly in heart: and
ye shall finde rest vnto your soules.
30 For my yoke is easie, and my burthen is lyght.

Chapter 12

1 At that tyme Iesus went on the Sabbath dayes through the corne, and his
disciples were an hungred, and began to plucke the eares of corne, & to eate.
2 But when the Pharisees sawe it, they sayde vnto hym: Beholde, thy disciples do
that which is not lawfull to do vpon the Sabbath day.
3 But he sayde vnto them: Haue ye not read what Dauid did when he was an
hungred, and they that were with him:
4 Howe he entred into the house of God, and did eate the shew bread, which was
not lawfull for hym to eate, neither for them which were with hym, but only for
the priestes?
5 Or haue ye not read in the lawe, howe that on the Sabbath dayes the priestes
in the temple prophane the Sabbath, and are blamelesse?
6 But I say vnto you, that in this place is one greater then the temple.
7 Wherfore if ye wist what this meaneth, I will mercie & not sacrifice: ye
woulde not haue condempned the giltlesse.
8 For the sonne of man also is Lorde euen of the Sabbath day.
9 And he departed thence, and went into their synagogue,
10 And beholde there was a man which had his hande dryed vp, and they asked him,
saying: Is it lawfull to heale vpon the Sabbath dayes? that they might accuse
him.
11 And he sayde vnto them: What man of you wyll there be that shall haue a
sheepe, & if it fall into a pit on the Sabbath day, wyll he not take holde of
it, and lift it out?
12 Howe much more then is a man better then a sheepe? Wherfore it is lawfull to
do a good deede on the Sabbath dayes.
13 Then saith he to the man, Stretch foorth thy hande. And he stretched it
foorth: and it was made whole like as the other.
14 Then the Pharisees went out, and helde a counsayle agaynst him, howe they
might destroy hym.
15 But when Iesus knewe it, he departed thence: and great multitudes folowed
him, and he healed them all,
16 And charged them that they shoulde not make him knowen:
17 That it might be fulfylled which was spoken by Esaias the prophete, saying:
18 Beholde my childe whom I haue chosen, my beloued in whom my soule well
delighteth: I wyll put my spirite vpon him, and he shall shewe iudgement to the
gentiles.
19 He shall not striue nor crye, neither shal any man heare his voyce in the
streetes.
20 A bruised reede shall he not breake, and smokyng flaxe shall he not quenche,
tyll he sende foorth iudgement vnto victorie:
21 And in his name shall the gentiles trust.
22 Then was brought to him one possessed with a deuyll, blinde, and dumbe: and
he healed him, insomuch that the blinde and dumbe both spake and sawe.
23 And all the people were amased and sayde: Is not this that sonne of Dauid?
24 But when the Pharisees hearde it, they sayde: This felowe driueth the deuils
no otherwise out, but by Beelzebub the prince of the deuils.
25 But whe Iesus knew their thoughtes, he sayde vnto them, Euery kingdome
deuided agaynst it selfe shalbe brought to naught: and euery citie or house
deuided agaynst it selfe shall not stande.
26 And if Satan cast out Satan, then is he deuided agaynst him selfe: howe shall
then his kingdome endure?
27 Also if I by Beelzebub cast out deuils, by whom do your children cast them
out? Therfore they shalbe your iudges.
28 But if I cast out the deuils by the spirite of God: then is the kingdome of
God come vpon you.
29 Or els howe can one enter into a strong mans house, & spoyle his goodes,
except he first binde the strong man, and then spoyle his house?
30 He that is not with me, is agaynst me: and he that gathereth not with me,
scattereth abrode.
31 Wherfore, I say vnto you, all maner of sinne and blasphemy shalbe forgeuen
vnto men, but the blasphemy agaynst the spirite, shall not be forgeuen vnto men.
32 And whosoeuer speaketh a worde agaynst the sonne of man, it shalbe forgeuen
hym: But whosoeuer speaketh agaynst the holy ghost, it shall not be forgeuen
hym, neither in this worlde, neither in the worlde to come.
33 Either make the tree good, and his fruite good: or els make the tree euyll,
and his fruite euyll. For the tree, is knowen by his fruite.
34 O generation of vipers, howe can ye speake good thynges, when ye your selues
are euyll? For out of the aboundauce of the heart, the mouth speaketh.
35 A good man, out of the good treasure of the heart, bryngeth foorth good
thynges: And an euyll man, out of euyll treasure, bryngeth foorth euyll thynges.
36 But I say vnto you, of euery idell worde that men shall speake, they shall
geue accompt therof, in the day of iudgment.
37 For of thy wordes, thou shalt be iustified: and of thy wordes, thou shalt be
condemned.
38 Then certayne of the Scribes, and of the Pharisees, aunswered hym, saying.
Maister, we wyl see a signe of thee.
39 But he aunswered and sayde to them. The euyll and adulterous generation
seketh a signe, and there shall no signe be geuen to it, but the signe of the
prophete Ionas.
40 For as Ionas was three dayes, and three nyghtes, in the Whales belly: so
shall the sonne of man be three dayes, and three nyghtes, in the heart of the
earth.
41 The men of Niniue shall ryse in the iudgement, with this nation, and condemne
it, because they repented at the preachyng of Ionas: and beholde, here is one
greater then Ionas.
42 The Queene of the south shall ryse in the iudgement, with this generation,
and shall condemne it: for she came from the vtmost partes of the earth, to
heare the wisdome of Solomon. And beholde, in this place is one greater then
Solomon.
43 When the vncleane spirite is gone out of a man, he walketh throughout drye
places, sekyng rest, and fyndeth none.
44 Then he sayeth: I wyll returne into my house, from whence I came out. And
when he is come, he fyndeth it emptie, swept, and garnyshed.
45 Then goeth he, and taketh vnto hym seuen other spirites, worse then hym
selfe, and they enter in, and dwell there: And the ende of that man, is worse
then the begynnyng. Euen so shall it be also, vnto this frowarde generation.
46 Whyle he yet talked to the people, beholde, his mother, and his brethren
stoode without, desyryng to speake with hym.
47 Then one sayde vnto hym: beholde, thy mother, and thy brethren, stande
without, desyryng to speake with thee.
48 But he aunswered, and sayde vnto hym that had tolde hym: Who is my mother? or
who are my brethren?
49 And he stretched foorth his hande towarde his disciples, & sayde, beholde my
mother, and my brethren.
50 For whosoeuer shall do the wyll of my father which is in heauen, the same is
my brother, sister, and mother.

Chapter 13

1 The same day, went Iesus out of the house, & sate by the sea syde.
2 And great multitudes were gathered together vnto hym, so greatly that he went
and sate in a shippe, and the whole multitude stoode on the shore.
3 And he spake many thynges to them in parables, saying: Beholde, the sower went
foorth to sowe.
4 And when he sowed, some seedes fell by the wayes side, and the fowles came,
and deuoured them vp.
5 Some fell vpon stony places, where they had not much earth, and anone they
sprong vp, because they had no depenesse of earth.
6 And when the sonne was vp, they caught heate, and because they had not roote,
they wythered away.
7 Agayne, some fell among thornes, and the thornes sprong vp and choked them.
8 But some fell into good grounde, and brought foorth fruite, some an hundred
folde, some sixtie folde, some thirtie folde.
9 Who hath eares to heare, let hym heare.
10 And the disciples came, and sayde vnto hym: Why speakest thou to them by
parables?
11 He aunswered and sayde vnto them: because it is geuen vnto you, to knowe the
secretes of the kyngdome of heauen, but to them, it is not geuen.
12 For whosoeuer hath, to hym shalbe geuen, and he shall haue more aboundaunce:
But whosoeuer hath not, from hym shalbe taken away, euen that he hath.
13 Therfore speake I to them in parables: because they seeyng, see not: and
hearyng, they heare not: neither do they vnderstande.
14 And in them is fulfylled the prophesie of Esaias, saying: by hearyng ye shall
heare, and shall not vnderstande, and seeyng, ye shall see, & shall not
perceaue.
15 For this peoples heart is waxed grosse, and their eares are dull of hearyng,
and their eyes haue they closed: lest at any tyme they shoulde see with their
eyes, and heare with their eares, and shoulde vnderstande with their heart, &
shoulde conuert, that I myght heale them.
16 But blessed are your eyes, for they see: and your eares, for they heare.
17 Ueryly I say vnto you, that many prophetes and ryghteous men haue desired to
see those thynges which ye see, and haue not seene: and to heare those thynges
which ye heare, and haue not hearde.
18 Heare ye therfore the similitude of the sower.
19 When one heareth the worde of the kyngdome, and vnderstandeth it not, then
commeth that euyll, and catcheth away that which was sowen in his heart: this is
he, which receaued seede by the way syde.
20 But he that receaued the seede into stony places, the same is he that heareth
the worde, and anone with ioy, receaueth it:
21 Yet hath he not roote in hym selfe, but dureth for a season: for when
tribulation or persecution aryseth because of the worde, by and by he is
offended.
22 He also that receaued seede into the thornes, is he that heareth the worde:
and the care of this worlde, and the disceiptfulnes of ryches, choke vp the
worde, and so is he made vnfruitfull.
23 But he that receaued seede into the good grounde, is he that heareth the
worde, and vnderstandeth it, which also beareth fruite: and bryngeth foorth,
some an hundred folde, some sixtie folde, some thirtie folde.
24 Another parable put he foorth vnto them, saying: The kyngdome of heauen is
likened vnto a man, which sowed good seede in his fielde.
25 But whyle men slept, his enemye came & sowed tares among the wheate, and went
his way.
26 But when the blade was sprong vp, and had brought foorth fruite, then
appeared the tares also.
27 So, the seruauntes of the housholder came, and sayde vnto hym. Sir, diddest
not thou sowe good seede in thy fielde? from whence then hath it tares?
28 He sayde vnto them: the malicious man hath done this. The seruauntes sayde
vnto hym: wylt thou then that we go, and gather them vp?
29 But he sayde, nay: lest whyle ye gather vp the tares, ye rote vp also the
wheate with them.
30 Let both growe together vntyll the haruest: & in tyme of haruest, I wyl say
to the reapers, gather ye together first the tares, and bynde them in bundels to
burne them: but carrie the wheate into my barne.
31 Another parable put he foorth vnto them, saying. The kyngdome of heauen is
like to a grayne of mustard seede, which a man toke & sowed in his fielde.
32 Which in dede is the least of all seedes: But when it is growen, it is the
greatest among hearbes: and is a tree, so that the byrdes of the ayre come &
make their nestes in the braunches therof.
33 Another parable spake he vnto them: The kyngdome of heauen is lyke vnto
leuen, which a woman taketh & hydeth in three peckes of meale, tyll all be
leuened.
34 All these thynges spake Iesus vnto the people in parables: and without a
parable spake he not vnto them.
35 That it myght be fulfylled, which was spoken by the prophete, that sayth: I
wyll open my mouth in parables, I wyll speake foorth thynges which haue ben kept
secrete from the foundation of the worlde.
36 Then Iesus sent the people away, & went into the house: And his disciples
came vnto hym, saying: Declare vnto vs the parable of the tares of the fielde.
37 He aunswered and sayde vnto them: He that soweth the good seede, is the sonne
of man.
38 The fielde, is the worlde: & the good seede, they are the childre of ye
kingdom: the tares, are the chyldren of ye wicked.
39 The enemie that soweth them, is the deuyll: the haruest, is the ende of the
worlde: the reapers, be the Angels.
40 Euen as the tares therfore, are gathered and brent in the fyre: so shall it
be in the ende of this worlde.
41 The sonne of man shall sende foorth his Angels, and they shall gather out of
his kyngdome, all thynges that offende, and them which do iniquitie:
42 And shall cast them into a furnesse of fyre: There shalbe waylyng and
gnasshyng of teeth.
43 Then shall the ryghteous shine as the Sunne, in the kingdome of their father.
Who hath eares to heare, let hym heare.
44 Agayne, the kyngdome of heauen is lyke vnto treasure hyd in the fielde: the
which a man hath founde, and hyd, and for ioy therof, goeth and selleth all that
he hath, and byeth the fielde.
45 Agayne, the kyngdome of heauen is lyke vnto a marchaunt man, seekyng goodly
pearles.
46 Which, when he founde one precious pearle, went and solde all that he had,
and bought it.
47 Agayne, the kyngdome of heauen is lyke vnto a net, that was cast into the
sea, and gathered of all kynde:
48 Which when it was full, men drewe to lande, and sat downe, and gathered the
good into vessels, but cast the bad away.
49 So shall it be at the ende of the world: The Angels shall come foorth, and
seuer the bad from among the iuste:
50 And shall cast them into a furnesse of fyre: there shalbe waylyng and
gnasshyng of teeth.
51 Iesus sayth vnto them: haue ye vnderstande all these thynges? They say vnto
hym: yea Lorde.
52 Then sayde he vnto them: Therfore, euery Scribe which is taught vnto the
kyngdome of heauen, is lyke vnto a man that is an householder, whiche bryngeth
foorth out of his treasure, thynges newe and olde.
53 And it came to passe, that when Iesus had finished these parables, he
departed thence.
54 And when he came into his owne countrey, he taught them in their synagogues,
in so much, that they were astonyed, and sayde: whence commeth this wysdome and
powers vnto hym?
55 Is not this the carpenters sonne? Is not his mother called Marie? and his
brethren, Iames, and Ioses, and Simon, and Iudas?
56 And are not all his sisters with vs? whence hath he then all these thynges?
57 And they were offended in hym. Iesus sayde vnto them: A prophete is not
without honour, saue in his owne countrey, and in his owne house.
58 And he did not many mightie workes there, because of their vnbeliefe.

Chapter 14

1 At that tyme Herode the Tetrarch, hearde of the fame of Iesu.
2 And sayde vnto his seruauntes: this is Iohn the Baptist, he is risen from the
dead, and therfore great workes do shewe foorth them selues in hym.
3 For Herode had taken Iohn, and bounde hym, and put hym in prison, for Herodias
sake, his brother Philips wyfe.
4 For Iohn sayde vnto hym: it is not lawfull for thee to haue her.
5 And when he woulde haue put hym to death, he feared the people: because they
counted hym as a prophete.
6 But when Herodes birth day was kept, the daughter of Herodias daunsed before
them, and pleased Herode.
7 Wherfore he promised with an othe, that he woulde geue her whatsoeuer she
woulde aske.
8 And she, beyng instruct of her mother before, sayde: geue me here Iohn
Baptistes head in a platter.
9 And the kyng was sory: Neuerthelesse, for the othes sake, and them which sate
also at the table, he commaunded it to be geuen her:
10 And sent, and beheaded Iohn in the pryson.
11 And his head was brought in a platter, and geuen to the damsell: and she
brought it to her mother.
12 And his disciples came, and toke vp his body, and buryed it: and went, and
tolde Iesus.
13 When Iesus hearde of it, he departed thence in a shyp, vnto a desert place,
out of the way: And when the people had hearde therof, they folowed hym on foote
out of the cities.
14 And Iesus went foorth, and sawe much people: and was moued with mercye
towarde them, and he healed their sicke.
15 And when the euen drewe on, his disciples came to hym, saying: this is a
desert place, and the hour is nowe past, let the people depart, that they may go
into the townes, and bye them vittels.
16 But Iesus sayde vnto them: They haue no nede to go away, geue ye them to
eate.
17 They saye vnto hym: we haue here but fyue loaues, and two fisshes.
18 He sayde: bryng them hyther to me.
19 And he commaunded the people to sit downe on the grasse, and he toke the fyue
loaues, and the two fisshes, and lift vp his eyes towarde heauen, & blessed: And
when he had broken them, he gaue the loaues to his disciples, and his disciples
to the people.
20 And they dyd all eate, and were suffised. And they gathered vp (of the
fragmentes that remayned) twelue baskets full.
21 And they that had eaten, were about fyue thousande men, besyde women and
chyldren.
22 And strayghtway Iesus constrayned his disciples to get vp into a shippe, and
to go before hym vnto the other syde, whyle he sent the people away.
23 And when the people were sent away, he went vp into a mountayne alone to
pray: And when nyght was come, he was there hym selfe alone.
24 But the shippe was nowe in the middes of the sea, & was tost with waues: for
it was a contrary wynde.
25 And in the fourth watch of the nyght, Iesus went vnto them, walkyng on the
sea.
26 And when the disciples sawe hym walking on the sea, they were troubled,
saying, it is a spirite: and they cryed out for feare.
27 But strayght way, Iesus spake vnto them, saying: be of good cheare, it is I,
be not afrayde.
28 Peter aunswered hym, and sayde: Lorde, yf it be thou, byd me come vnto thee,
on the water.
29 And he sayde: come. And when Peter was come downe out of the shippe, he
walked on the water, to go to Iesus.
30 But when he sawe a myghty wynde, he was afrayde: And when he began to sincke,
he cryed, saying, Lorde saue me.
31 And immediatly Iesus stretched foorth his hande, and caught hym, and sayde
vnto hym: O thou of litle fayth, wherefore diddest thou doubt?
32 And when they were come into the shippe, the wynde ceassed
33 Then they that were in the shippe, came and worshypped hym, saying: of a
trueth thou art the sonne of God.
34 And when they were gone ouer, they came into the lande of Gennezaret.
35 And when the men of that place, had knowledge of hym, they sent out into all
that countrey rounde about: and brought vnto hym all that were sicke.
36 And besought hym, that they myght touche the hemme of his garment only: And
as many as touched it were made whole.

Chapter 15

1 Then came to Iesus Scribes and Pharisees, which were come from Hierusalem,
saying:
2 Why do thy disciples transgresse the traditions of the elders? for they washe
not their handes when they eate bread.
3 But he aunswered and sayde vnto them: why do ye also transgresse the
commaundement of God, by your tradition?
4 For God comaunded, saying: honour father and mother, and he that curseth
father or mother, let hym dye the death.
5 But ye say, whosoeuer shall say to father or mother: by the gyft that is
offered of me, thou shalt be helped:
6 And so shall he not honour his father or his mother. And thus haue ye made the
commaundement of God, of none effect, by your tradition.
7 Hypocrites, full well dyd Esayas prophecie of you, saying:
8 This people draweth nye vnto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with their
lippes: howbeit, their hearts are farre from me.
9 But in vayne do they worshippe me, teachyng doctrine, preceptes of men.
10 And he called the people to hym, and sayde vnto them: heare, & vnderstande.
11 That which goeth into the mouth, defyleth not the man: but that which commeth
out of the mouth, defyleth the man.
12 Then came his disciples, and sayde vnto hym: knowest thou not, that the
Pharisees were offended after they hearde this saying?
13 But he aunswered and sayde: Euery plantyng which my heauenly father hath not
planted, shalbe rooted vp.
14 Let them alone, they be the blynde leaders of the blynde. If the blynde leade
the blynde, both shall fall into the dytche.
15 Then aunswered Peter, and sayde vnto hym: Declare vnto vs this parable.
16 Iesus sayde: Are ye also without vnderstandyng?
17 Do not ye yet vnderstande, that whatsoeuer entreth in at the mouth, goeth
into the belly, and is cast out into the draught?
18 But those thynges which proceade out of the mouth, come foorth from the
heart, and they defyle the man.
19 For out of the heart, proceade euyll thoughtes, murders, adulteries,
whordomes, theftes, false witnesse, blasphemyes.
20 These are the thynges, which defyle a man: But to eate with vnwasshen handes,
defyleth not a man.
21 And Iesus went thence, and departed into the coastes of Tyre and Sidon.
22 And beholde, a woman of the Chananites, which came out of the same coastes,
cryed vnto hym, saying: Haue mercie on me O Lorde, thou sonne of Dauid: My
daughter is greeuously vexed with a deuyll.
23 But he aunswered her not a worde: and his disciples came, and besought hym,
saying: sende her away, for she cryeth after vs.
24 But he aunswered, and sayde: I am not sent but vnto the lost sheepe of the
house of Israel.
25 Then came she, and worshipped him, saying: Lorde, helpe me.
26 He aunswered, and sayde: it is not meete to take the chyldrens bread, and to
cast it to litle dogges.
27 She aunswered and sayde, trueth Lorde: and yet litle dogges eate of the
crummes, which fall fro their maisters table.
28 Then Iesus aunswered, and sayde vnto her: O woman, great is thy fayth, be it
vnto thee, euen as thou wylt. And her daughter was made whole, euen from that
same tyme.
29 And Iesus went from thence, and came nye vnto the sea of Galilee, and went vp
into a mountayne, and sate downe there.
30 And great multitudes came vnto him, hauyng with them those that were lame,
blynde, dumbe, maymed, & other many, and cast them downe at Iesus feete: And he
healed them.
31 In so much that the people wondred, when they sawe the dumbe speake, the
maymed to be whole, the lame to walke, and the blynde to see: And they glorified
the God of Israel.
32 Then Iesus called his disciples vnto hym, and sayde: I haue compassion on the
people, because they continue with me nowe three dayes, and haue nothing to
eate: and I wyll not let them depart fastyng, lest they faynt in the way.
33 And his disciples say vnto hym: whence shoulde we get so much bread in the
wyldernesse, as to suffise so great a multitude?
34 And Iesus sayeth vnto them: howe many loaues haue ye? And they say, seuen,
and a fewe litle fisshes.
35 And he commaunded the people to sit downe on the grounde:
36 And toke the seuen loaues, and the fisshes: and after that he had geuen
thankes, he brake them, and gaue to his disciples, and the disciples gaue them
to the people.
37 And they dyd all eate, and were suffised: And they toke vp, of the broken
meate that was left, seuen baskets full.
38 And yet they that did eate, were foure thousande men, besyde women and
chyldren.
39 And he sent away the people, and toke shippe, and came into the parties of
Magdala.

Chapter 16

1 The Pharisees also, with the Saducees, came, and temptyng, desired hym that he
woulde shewe them a signe from heauen.
2 He aunswered & sayde vnto them: when it is euenyng, ye say, it wyll be fayre
weather: for the sky is redde.
3 And in the mornyng, It wyll be foule weather to day: for the sky is lowryng
redde. O ye hypocrites, ye can discerne the outwarde appearaunce of the sky: but
can ye not discerne the signes of the tymes?
4 The froward and adulterous nation requireth a signe: and there shall no signe
be geuen vnto it, but the signe of the prophete Ionas. And he left them, and
departed.
5 And when his disciples were come to the other syde of the water, they had
forgotten to take bread with them.
6 Then Iesus sayde vnto them: Take heede and beware of the leuen of the
Pharisees, and of the Saducees.
7 And they thought in them selues, saying: for we haue taken no bread with vs.
8 Which when Iesus vnderstoode, he sayde vnto them: O ye of little fayth, why
thynke you within your selues, because ye haue brought no bread?
9 Do ye not yet perceaue, neither remember those fyue loaues, when there were
fyue thousande men, and howe many baskets toke ye vp?
10 Neither the seuen loaues, when there were foure thousande men, and howe many
baskets toke ye vp?
11 Howe is it that ye do not vnderstande, that I spake it not vnto you
concernyng bread, warnyng you that ye shoulde beware of the leuen of the
Pharisees, and of the Saducees?
12 Then vnderstoode they, howe that he bad not them beware of the leuen of
bread: but of the doctrine of the Pharisees, and of the Saducees.
13 When Iesus came into the coastes of Cesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples,
saying: Whom do men say that I the sonne of man am?
14 They sayde: some say that thou art Iohn Baptist, some Helias, some Ieremias,
or one of the prophetes.
15 He sayth vnto them: but whom say ye that I am?
16 Simon Peter aunswered and sayde: Thou art Christe, the sonne of the lyuyng
God.
17 And Iesus aunswered, and sayde vnto hym: happy art thou Simon Bar Iona, for
flesh & blood hath not opened that vnto thee, but my father which is in heauen.
18 And I say also vnto thee, that thou art Peter, and vpon this rocke I wyll
buylde my congregation: And the gates of hell shall not preuayle agaynst it.
19 And I wyll geue vnto thee, the keyes of the kingdome of heauen: And
whatsoeuer thou byndest in earth, shalbe bounde in heauen: and whatsoeuer thou
loosest in earth, shalbe loosed in heauen.
20 Then charged he his disciples, that they shoulde tell no man, that he was
Iesus Christe.
21 From that tyme foorth, began Iesus to shewe vnto his disciples, howe that he
must go vnto Hierusalem, and suffer many thynges of the elders, and hye
priestes, & scribes, and must be kylled, and be raysed agayne the thyrde day.
22 And when Peter had taken him aside, he began to rebuke hym, saying: Lorde,
fauour thy selfe, this shall not be vnto thee.
23 But he turned hym about, and sayde vnto Peter: go after me Satan, thou art an
offence vnto me: for thou sauerest not the thynges that be of God, but those
that be of men.
24 Then sayde Iesus vnto his disciples: If any man wyll folowe me, let hym
forsake him selfe, and take vp his crosse, and folowe me.
25 For, who so wyll saue his lyfe, shall lose it: Agayne, who so doth lose his
lyfe for my sake, shall fynde it.
26 For what doth it profite a man, yf he wynne all the whole worlde, and lose
his owne soule? Or what shall a man geue for a raunsome of his soule?
27 For the sonne of man shall come in the glory of his father, with his Angels:
and then shall he rewarde euery man accordyng to his workes.
28 Ueryly I say vnto you, there be some standyng here, which shall not taste of
death, tyll they see the sonne of man come in his kyngdome.

Chapter 17

1 And after sixe dayes, Iesus taketh Peter, Iames, and Iohn his brother, and
bryngeth them vp into an hye mountayne, out of the way,
2 And was transfigured before them, and his face did shyne as the sunne, and his
clothes were as whyte as the lyght.
3 And beholde, there appeared vnto them, Moyses, and Elias talkyng with hym.
4 Then aunswered Peter, and sayde vnto Iesus: Lorde, it is good for vs to be
here. If thou wylt, let vs make here three tabernacles: one for thee, and one
for Moyses, and one for Elias.
5 Whyle he yet spake, beholde, a bryght cloude shadowed them: And beholde, there
came a voyce out of the cloude, which sayde, this is my beloued sonne in whom I
am well pleased, heare hym.
6 And when the disciples hearde these thynges they fell on their face, and were
sore afrayde.
7 And Iesus came, and touched them, and sayde: aryse, and be not afrayde.
8 And when they had lyft vp their eyes, they sawe no man, saue Iesus only.
9 And when they came downe from the mountayne, Iesus charged them, saying: shewe
the vision to no man, vntyll the sonne of man be rysen agayne from the dead.
10 And his disciples asked hym, saying: Why then say the scribes, that Elias
must first come?
11 Iesus aunswered, & sayde vnto them: Elias truely shall first come, and
restore all thynges:
12 But I say vnto you, that Elias is come alredy, and they knewe hym not, but
haue done vnto hym, whatsoeuer they lusted.
13 Lykewyse, shall also the sonne of man suffer of them. Then the disciples
vnderstode, that he spake vnto them of Iohn Baptist.
14 And when they were come to the people, there came to hym a certayne man,
knelyng downe to hym, and saying:
15 Lorde, haue mercy on my sonne, for he is lunaticke, and sore vexed: for oft
tymes he falleth into the fyre, and oft into the water.
16 And I brought hym to thy disciples, and they coulde not heale hym.
17 Iesus aunswered and sayde: O faythlesse and croked nation, howe long shall I
be with you? howe long shal I suffer you? bryng hym hyther to me.
18 And Iesus rebuked the deuyll, and he departed out of hym: And the chylde was
healed euen that same tyme.
19 Then came the disciples to Iesus secretely, and sayde: why coulde not we cast
hym out?
20 Iesus sayde vnto them: because of your vnbeliefe. For veryly I say vnto you:
If ye haue fayth as a grayne of mustarde seede, ye shall say vnto this
mountayne: remoue hence to yonder place, and it shall remoue, neither shall any
thyng be vnpossible vnto you.
21 Howebeit, this kynde goeth not out, but by prayer and fastyng.
22 Whyle they were occupyed in Galilee, Iesus sayde vnto them: it wyll come to
passe, that the sonne of man shalbe betrayed into the handes of men:
23 And they shall kyll hym, & the thyrde day shall he ryse agayne: And they were
exceadyng sory.
24 And when they were come to Capernaum, they that receaued tribute money, came
to Peter, and sayde: Doth not your maister pay tribute?
25 He sayth: yes. And when he was come into the house, Iesus preuented hym,
saying: What thynkest thou Simon? of whom do the kynges of the earth take
tribute or toule? of the chyldren, or of straungers?
26 Peter sayth vnto hym: of straungers. Iesus sayth vnto hym: Then are the
chyldren free.
27 Notwithstandyng, lest we shoulde offende them, go thou to the sea, and cast
an angle, and take the fisshe that first commeth vp: and when thou hast opened
his mouth, thou shalt fynde a peece of twenty pence: that take, and geue it vnto
them for me, and thee.

Chapter 18

1 At the same time, came the disciples vnto Iesus, saying: Who is the greatest
in ye kyngdome of heauen?
2 Iesus called a litle chylde vnto hym, and set hym in the myddest of them,
3 And sayde. Ueryly I say vnto you: except ye turne, and become as litle
chyldren, ye shall not enter into the kyngdome of heauen.
4 Whosoeuer therfore shall humble hym selfe as this litle chylde, the same is ye
greatest in the kingdome of heauen.
5 And who so shall receaue such a litle chylde in my name, receaueth me.
6 But who so shall offende one of these litle ones, which beleue in me, it were
better for hym, that a myll stone were hanged about his necke, & that he were
drowned in the deapth of the sea.
7 Wo vnto the worlde, because of offences. It must nedes be, that offences come:
But wo to that man, by whom the offence commeth.
8 If then thy hande or thy foote offende thee, cut them of, and cast them from
thee. It is better for thee to enter into lyfe, halt or maymed, rather then thou
shouldest, hauyng two handes, or two feete, be cast into euerlastyng fyre.
9 And yf thyne eye offende thee, plucke it out, and cast it from thee: It is
better for thee to enter into lyfe with one eye, rather then, hauyng two eyes,
to be cast into hell fyre.
10 Take heede that ye despise not one of these litle ones: For I say vnto you,
that in heaue their Angels do alwayes beholde the face of my father, which is in
heauen.
11 For the sonne of man, is come to saue that which was lost.
12 Howe thynke ye? If a man haue an hundred sheepe, and one of them be gone
astray, doth he not leaue ninetie & nine, and goeth into the mountaynes, and
seketh that which went astray?
13 And yf it so be that he fynde it, veryly I say vnto you, he reioyceth more of
that sheepe, then of the ninetie and nine, which went not astray.
14 Euen so, it is not the wyll of your father in heauen, that one of these litle
ones shoulde peryshe.
15 Moreouer, yf thy brother trespas agaynst thee, go and tell hym his faulte
betwene thee and hym alone: If he heare thee, thou hast wonne thy brother.
16 But yf he heare thee not, then take yet with thee one or two: that in the
mouth of two or three witnesses, euery worde may be stablyshed.
17 If he heare not them, tell it vnto the Churche: If he heare not the Churche,
let hym be vnto thee as an Heathen man, and a publicane.
18 Ueryly I say vnto you: Whatsoeuer ye bynde on earth, shalbe bounde in heauen:
And whatsoeuer ye loose on earth, shalbe loosed in heauen.
19 Agayne, truely I say vnto you, that if two of you agree in earth, as touching
any thyng that they shall aske, it shalbe done for them, of my father, which is
in heauen.
20 For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
myddes of them.
21 Then came Peter to hym, and sayde: Lorde howe oft shall my brother sinne
agaynst me, and I forgeue hym? tyll seuen tymes?
22 Iesus sayth vnto hym, I say not vnto thee vntyll seuen tymes: but, vntyll
seuentie tymes seuen.
23 Therfore is the kyngdome of heauen, lykened vnto a certayne man, that was a
kyng, which woulde take accomptes of his seruauntes.
24 And when he had begunne to recken, one was brought vnto hym, which ought hym
ten thousande talentes.
25 But forasmuch as he had not to pay, his Lorde commaunded hym to be solde, and
his wyfe, and chyldren, and all that he had, and payment to be made.
26 The seruaunt fell downe, & besought hym, saying: Lorde, haue pacience with
me, and I wyll pay thee all.
27 Then the Lorde of that seruaunt, moued with pitie, loosed hym, and forgaue
hym the debt.
28 But the same seruaunt went out, and founde one of his felowes, which ought
hym an hundred pence: and he layde handes on hym, and toke hym by the throte,
saying: pay me that thou owest.
29 And his felowe fel downe at his feete, and besought him, saying: haue
pacience with me, and I wyll pay thee all.
30 And he woulde not: but went, and cast hym into prison, tyll he shoulde pay
the debt.
31 So, when his felowes sawe what was done, they were very sory: & came, and
tolde vnto their Lorde all that was done.
32 Then his Lorde called hym, and sayd vnto him: O thou vngracious seruaunt, I
forgaue thee all that debt, when thou desiredst me:
33 Shouldest not thou also, haue had compassion on thy felowe, euen as I had
pitie on thee?
34 And his Lorde was wroth, and delyuered hym to the tormentours, tyll he
shoulde pay all that was due vnto him.
35 So lykewyse, shall my heauenly father do also vnto you, yf ye from your
heartes, forgeue not, euery one his brother, their trespasses.

Chapter 19

1 And it came to passe, that when Iesus had finished these sayinges, he gat hym
from Galilee, and came into the coastes of Iurie, beyonde Iordane:
2 And great multitudes folowed hym: and he healed them there.
3 The pharisees also came vnto hym, temptyng hym, and saying vnto hym: Is it
lawfull for a man to put away his wyfe, for euery cause?
4 He aunswered and sayde vnto them: Haue ye not read, that he which created at
the begynnyng, made them male and female,
5 And sayde: For this cause, shall a man leaue father and mother, and shall be
knit to his wyfe: and they twayne shall be one fleshe.
6 Wherfore, they are no more twayne, but one fleshe. Let not man therefore put a
sunder, that which God hath coupled together.
7 They say vnto hym: why did Moyses then commaunde to geue a writyng of
diuorcement, and to put her away?
8 He sayde vnto them: Moyses, because of the hardnes of your heartes, suffred
you to put away your wyues: But from the begynnyng it was not so.
9 I say vnto you: whosoeuer putteth away his wyfe, except it be for fornication,
and maryeth another, committeth adulterie: And who so maryeth her which is
diuorced, doth comit adulterie.
10 His disciples say vnto hym: If the matter be so betwene man and wyfe, then is
it not good to mary.
11 He sayde vnto them: all men can not receaue this saying, saue they to whom it
is geuen.
12 For there are some chaste, which are so borne, out of their mothers wombe:
And there are some chaste, which be made chaste of me: And there be chaste,
which haue made themselues chaste, for the kyngdome of heauens sake. He that is
able to receaue it, let him receaue it.
13 Then were there brought vnto hym young chyldren, that he shoulde put his
handes on them, and pray: And the disciples rebuked them.
14 But Iesus sayde vnto them: suffer the young chyldren, and forbyd them not to
come vnto me: for of such, is the kyngdome of heauen.
15 And when he had put his handes on them, he departed thence.
16 And beholde, one came, and sayde vnto hym: good maister, what good thyng
shall I do, that I may haue eternall lyfe?
17 He sayde vnto hym: why callest thou me good? there is none good but one, and
that is God. But yf thou wylt enter into lyfe, kepe the commaundementes.
18 He sayth vnto hym: Which? Iesus sayde: Thou shalt do no murther, Thou shalt
not commit adulterie, Thou shalt not steale, Thou shalt not beare false
witnesse,
19 Honour father and mother: and thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe.
20 The young man sayth vnto hym: All these thynges haue I kept, from my youth
vp: what lacke I yet?
21 Iesus sayde vnto hym: yf thou wylt be perfect, go & sell that thou hast, and
geue to the poore, & thou shalt haue treasure in heauen: and come & folowe me.
22 But when the young man hearde that saying, he went away sory: For he had
great possessions.
23 Then Iesus sayde vnto his disciples: Ueryly I say vnto you, that a riche man
shall hardly enter into the kyngdome of heauen.
24 And agayne I say vnto you: it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of
a nedle, then for the riche, to enter into the kyngdome of God.
25 When the disciples hearde this, they were exceadyngly amazed, saying: who
then can be saued?
26 But Iesus behelde them, and sayde vnto them: with men this is vnpossible, but
with God all thynges are possible.
27 Then aunswered Peter, and sayde vnto hym: Beholde, we haue forsaken all, and
folowed thee, what shall we haue therfore?
28 Iesus sayde vnto them: veryly I say vnto you, that when the sonne of man
shall syt in the throne of his maiestie, ye that haue folowed me in the
regeneration, shall syt also vpon twelue seates, and iudge the twelue tribes of
Israel.
29 And euery one that forsaketh house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or
mother, or wyfe, or chyldren, or landes, for my names sake, shall receaue an
hundred folde, and shall inherite euerlastyng lyfe.
30 But many that are first, shalbe last, and the last, shalbe first.

Chapter 20

1 For the kyngdome of heauen is lyke vnto a man, that is an householder, whiche
went out earlye in the mornyng to hire labourers into his vineyarde.
2 And he agreed with the labourers for a peny a day, & sent them into his
vineyarde.
3 And he went out about the thirde houre, and sawe other standyng idle in the
market place,
4 And saide vnto them: Go ye also into ye vineyard, & whatsoeuer is right, I wyl
geue you. And they went their way.
5 Agayne, he went out about the sixth and nynth houre, and dyd lykewyse.
6 And about the eleuenth houre, he wet out, and founde other standyng idle, and
saide vnto them: why stande ye here all the day idle?
7 They saye vnto him: because no man hath hyred vs. He sayth vnto them: go ye
also into the vineyarde, and whatsoeuer is ryght, that shall ye receaue.
8 So, when euen was come, the lorde of the vineyard sayth vnto his steward: Call
the labourers, and geue them their hire, beginning at ye last, vntyll the first.
9 And when they came, that were hired about the eleuenth houre, they receaued
euery man a peny.
10 But when the firste came also, they supposed that they shoulde haue receaued
more: and they lykewyse receaued euery man a peny.
11 And when they had receaued it, they murmured against the good man of the
house,
12 Saying: These laste haue wrought but one houre, & thou hast made them equall
vnto vs, whiche haue borne the burthen and heate of the day.
13 But he aunswered to one of the, & said: Frende, I do thee no wrong: dyddest
thou not agree with me for a peny?
14 Take that thyne is, and go thy way: I wyll geue vnto this last, euen as vnto
thee.
15 Is it not lawfull for me, to do that I wyll with myne owne? Is thyne eye
euyll, because I am good?
16 So the last, shalbe the first, & the first shalbe last: For many be called,
but fewe be chosen.
17 And Iesus, goyng vp to Hierusale, toke the twelue disciples asyde in the way,
and sayde vnto them:
18 Beholde, we go vp to Hierusalem, and the sonne of man shalbe betrayed vnto
the chiefe priestes, and vnto the scribes, and they shall condempne hym to
death:
19 And shall deliuer him to the Gentiles to be mocked, and to be scourged, and
to be crucified: and the thirde day, he shall ryse agayne.
20 Then came to hym the mother of Zebedees chyldren, with her sonnes,
worshyppyng hym, and desiryng a certayne thyng of hym.
21 And he sayth vnto her: what wylt thou? She saith vnto him: graunt, that these
my two sonnes may syt, the one on thy ryght hande, and the other on the left, in
thy kyngdome.
22 But Iesus aunswered, and saide: Ye wote not what ye aske. Are ye able to
drynke of the cuppe that I shall drynke of? and to be baptized with the baptisme
that I am baptized with? They say vnto hym: we are able.
23 He sayth vnto them: Ye shall drynke in deede of my cuppe, and be baptized
with the baptisme that I am baptized with: But to syt on my ryght hande, & on my
lefte, is not myne to geue, but to them for whom it is prepared for of my
father.
24 And when the ten hearde this, they disdayned at the two brethren.
25 But Iesus called them vnto him, and sayde: Ye know that the princes of the
gentiles haue dominion ouer them: and they that are great, exercise aucthoritie
vpon them.
26 It shall not be so among you: But whosoeuer wyll be great among you, let hym
be your minister:
27 And who so wyl be chiefe among you, let hym be your seruaunt.
28 Euen as the sonne of man came, not to be ministred vnto, but to minister, and
to geue his lyfe a raunsome for many.
29 And as they departed from Hierico, much people folowed hym.
30 And behold, two blind men syttyng by the waye syde, when they hearde that
Iesus passed by, they cryed, saying: O Lorde, thou sonne of Dauid, haue mercie
on vs.
31 And the people rebuked them, because they should holde their peace. But they
cryed the more, saying: haue mercy on vs, O Lorde, thou sonne of Dauid.
32 And Iesus stode styll, & called them, and sayde: what wyll ye that I shall do
vnto you?
33 They saye vnto hym? Lord, that our eyes may be opened.
34 So Iesus had compassion on them, and touched their eyes: and immediatly theyr
eyes receaued syght. And they folowed hym.

Chapter 21

1 And when they drewe nye vnto Hierusalem, & were come to Bethphage, vnto the
mout of Oliues, the sent Iesus two disciples,
2 Saying vnto the: Go into the towne that lyeth ouer agaynste you, and anone ye
shall fynde an Asse tyed, & a colt with her: loose them and bryng them vnto me.
3 And yf any man saye ought vnto you, saye ye, the Lorde hath nede of them: and
strayghtway he wyll let them go.
4 All this was done, that it myght be fulfylled which was spoken by the
prophete, saying:
5 Tell ye the daughter of Sion: behold, thy kyng commeth vnto thee meke, and
syttyng vpon an Asse, & a colt, the foale of the Asse vsed to the yoke.
6 The disciples went, and did as Iesus commaunded them,
7 And brought the Asse, and the colt, and put on them their clothes, and set hym
theron.
8 And many of the people spread their garmetes in the way. Other cut downe
braunches from the trees, and strawed them in the way.
9 Moreouer, the multitudes that went before, & that came after, cryed, saying:
Hosanna to the sonne of Dauid. Blessed is he that commeth in the name of the
Lorde, Hosanna in the hyest.
10 And when he was come into Hierusale, all the citie was moued, saying: who is
this?
11 And the multitude saide: This is Iesus that prophete of Nazareth in Galilee.
12 And Iesus went into the temple of God, and cast out all them that sold and
bought in the temple, and ouerthrewe the tables of the money chaungers, and the
seates of them that solde doues,
13 And sayde vnto them, it is written: My house shalbe called the house of
prayer, but ye haue made it a denne of thieues.
14 And the blynde and the halt came to hym in the temple, and he healed them.
15 When the chiefe priestes and scribes sawe the wonders that he dyd, and the
chyldren crying in the temple, and saying, Hosanna to the sonne of Dauid, they
disdayned,
16 And sayde vnto hym: Hearest thou what these saye? But Iesus sayth vnto them,
yea, haue ye neuer read: Out of the mouth of babes & suckelynges thou hast
ordeyned prayse?
17 And he left them, and went out of the citie, vnto Bethanie: and he lodged
there.
18 In the mornyng, as he returned into the citie, he hungred.
19 And when he sawe one fygge tree in the waye, he came to it, and founde
nothyng theron but leaues only, & said vnto it: neuer fruite growe on thee
henceforwarde. And anone the figge tree withered away.
20 And when his disciples sawe it, they marueyled, saying: Howe soone is the
figge tree wythered away?
21 Iesus aunswered, and saide vnto the: Ueryly I saye vnto you, yf ye haue
fayth, and doubt not, ye shall not onlye do this which is done to the figge
tree: but also, yf ye shall say vnto this mountayne, be thou remoued, and, be
thou cast into the sea, it shalbe done.
22 And all thynges, whatsoeuer ye aske in prayer, beleuyng, ye shall receaue
them.
23 And when he was come into the temple, the chiefe priestes, & the elders of
the people, came vnto hym teaching, and saye: By what aucthoritie doest thou
these thynges? and who gaue thee this power?
24 Iesus aunswered, & saide vnto them: I also wyll aske you one questio, which
yf ye tell me, I in likewise wyll tell you by what aucthoritie I do these
thinges:
25 The baptisme of Iohn, whence was it, from heauen, or of men? And they
reasoned with them selues saying: if we shall say from heauen, he wyll say vnto
vs, why dyd ye not then beleue hym?
26 But yf we shall say of men, then feare we the people: for all men holde Iohn
as a prophete.
27 And they aunswered vnto Iesus, and sayde: we can not tell. And he saide vnto
them: neither tell I you, by what aucthoritie I do these thynges.
28 But what thynke you? A man had two sonnes, and came to the firste, and saide:
sonne, go and worke to day in my vineyarde.
29 He aunswered and saide, I wyll not: but afterwarde he repented, and went.
30 Then came he to the seconde, & sayde lykewyse. And he aunswered & saide, I
wyll sir, and went not.
31 Whether of them twayne did the wyl of the father? And they saide vnto him,
the first. Iesus sayth vnto them: Ueryly I saye vnto you, that publicanes &
harlottes go into the kingdome of God, before you.
32 For Iohn came vnto you by the way of righteousnes, & ye beleued hym not: but
publicanes & harlottes beleued him. And ye, when ye had sene it were not moued
afterwarde with repentaunce, that ye myght haue beleued hym.
33 Hearken another similitude. There was a certayne man, an householder, which
made a vineyarde, & hedged it rounde about, and made a wynepresse in it, and
buylt a towre, and let it out to husbande men: and went into a strange countrey.
34 And when the time of the fruite drewe neare, he sent his seruauntes to the
husbande men, that they might receaue the fruites of it.
35 And the husbande men caught his seruauntes, and beatte one, killed another,
and stoned another.
36 Agayne, he sent other seruauntes, mo then the first: and they dyd vnto them
lykewyse.
37 But laste of all, he sent vnto them his owne sonne, saying: they wyll stande
in awe of my sonne.
38 But when the husband men sawe the sonne, they sayde among them selues: this
is the heire, come, let vs kyll hym, and let vs enioy his inheritaunce.
39 And they caught hym, and thrust him out of the vineyarde, and slewe hym.
40 When the Lorde therfore of the vineyarde commeth, what wyll he do vnto those
husbande men?
41 They sayde vnto hym: He wyll miserably destroy those wicked men & wyll let
out his vineyard vnto other husband men, which shall delyuer him the fruite in
due seasons.
42 Iesus sayth vnto them. Did ye neuer reade in the Scriptures: The stone which
the buylders refused, the same is become the head of the corner. This is the
Lordes doing, and it is marueylous in our eyes.
43 Therefore saye I vnto you, the kyngdome of God shalbe taken from you, & geuen
to a nation bryngyng foorth the fruites therof.
44 And whosoeuer falleth on this stone, shalbe broken in peeces: but on
whomsoeuer it falleth, it shal all to grynd him.
45 And when the chiefe priestes and pharisees had heard his parables, they
perceaued that he spake of them.
46 And they went about to laye handes on hym, but they feared the multitudes,
because they toke him as a prophet.

Chapter 22

1 And Iesus aunswered, and spake vnto them againe by parables, and sayde:
2 The kyngdome of heauen is lyke vnto a man that was a kyng, which made a
mariage for his sonne.
3 And sent foorth his seruauntes, to call them that were bidden to the wedding:
and they woulde not come.
4 Agayne, he sent foorth other seruauntes, saying: Tell them which are bidden,
beholde, I haue prepared my dinner, my oxen and my fatlynges are kylled, and all
thynges are redy: come vnto the mariage.
5 But they made lyght of it, and went their wayes, one to his farme, another to
his marchaundize:
6 And the remnaunt toke his seruauntes, and entreated them spitefully, and slewe
them.
7 But when the kyng hearde therof, he was wroth, and sent foorth his men of
warre, and destroyed those murtherers and brent vp their citie.
8 Then sayde he to his seruauntes, the mariage in dede is prepared: But they
which were bidden, were not worthy.
9 Go ye therfore out into the hye wayes: and as many as ye fynde, bid them to
the mariage.
10 And the seruauntes went out into the hye wayes, and gathered together all, as
many as they coulde fynde, both good and bad: and the weddyng was furnished with
ghestes.
11 Then the kyng came in, to see the ghestes: and whe he spyed there a man,
which had not on a weddyng garmet,
12 He sayde vnto hym: frende, howe camest thou in hyther, not hauyng a weddyng
garment? And he was euen speachlesse.
13 Then sayde the kyng to the ministers: bynde hym hande and foote, and cast hym
into vtter darknesse: there shalbe wepyng and gnasshyng of teeth.
14 For many be called, but fewe are chosen.
15 Then went the Pharisees, and toke councell how they myght intangle hym in his
talke.
16 And they sent out vnto hym their disciples, with the Herodians seruauntes,
saying: Maister, we knowe that thou art true, and teachest the way of God
truely, neither carest thou for any man: for thou doest not respect mens
persons.
17 Tell vs therfore, howe thynkest thou? Is it lawfull that tribute be geuen
vnto Caesar, or not?
18 But Iesus perceauyng their wickednesse, sayde: Why tempt ye me, ye
hypocrites?
19 Shewe me the tribute money. And they brought vnto hym a peny.
20 And he sayde to them: whose is this image and superscription?
21 They say vnto hym, Caesars. Then sayde he vnto them: Geue therfore vnto
Caesar, the thynges which are Caesars: and vnto God, those thynges that are
gods.
22 When they had hearde these wordes they marueyled, and left hym, and went
their way.
23 The same day came to hym the Saducees, which say that there is no
resurrection, and asked hym,
24 Saying: Maister, Moyses sayde, that if a man dye, hauing no childre, his
brother shoulde mary his wyfe, and rayse vp seede vnto his brother.
25 Ther were with vs seuen brethren, and the first maryed a wyfe, and deceassed
without issue, and left his wyfe vnto his brother.
26 Likewyse, the seconde, and the thirde, vnto the seuenth.
27 Last of all, the woman dyed also.
28 Therfore, in the resurrection, whose wyfe shall she be of the seuen? For they
all had her.
29 Iesus aunswered & sayde vnto them: ye do erre, not knowyng the Scriptures,
nor the power of God.
30 For in the resurrection, they neither mary, nor are geuen in maryage: but are
as the Angels of God in heauen.
31 But as touchyng the resurrection of the dead: haue ye not read that which is
spoken vnto you of God, which sayth.
32 I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob? God is
not the God of the dead, but of the lyuyng.
33 And when the multitudes hearde this, they were astonyed at his doctrine.
34 But when the Pharisees had heard that he had put the Saducees to silence,
they came together.
35 And one of them, which was a lawyer, asked hym a question, temptyng hym, and
saying:
36 Maister, which is the great commaundent in the lawe?
37 Iesus sayde vnto hym: Thou shalt loue the Lorde thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy soule, and with all thy mynde.
38 This is the first and great commaundement.
39 And the seconde is lyke vnto this. Thou shalt loue thy neyghbour as thy
selfe.
40 In these two commaundementes, hang all the lawe and the prophetes.
41 Whyle the Pharisees were gathered together, Iesus asked them,
42 Saying: what thynke ye of Christe? whose sonne is he? They sayde vnto hym the
sonne of Dauid.
43 He sayde vnto them: howe then doth Dauid in spirite call him Lorde, saying:
44 The Lorde sayd vnto my Lorde: sit thou on my ryght hande, tyll I make thyne
enemyes thy footestoole?
45 If Dauid then call him Lorde, howe is he then his sonne?
46 And no man was able to aunswere hym a worde: neither durst any man (from that
day foorth) aske hym any mo questions.

Chapter 23

1 Then spake Iesus to the multitudes, and to his disciples,
2 Saying: The Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moyses seate.
3 All therfore, whatsoeuer they bid you obserue, that obserue and do: but do not
ye after their workes, for they say, and do not.
4 Yea, they bynde together heauy burthens, and greeuous to be borne, and lay
them on mens shoulders: but they them selues wyll not moue them with one of
their fingers.
5 All their workes they do, for to be sene of men: They make broade their
philacteries, and enlarge the hemmes of their garmentes.
6 And loue the vppermost seates at feastes, and to syt in the chiefe place in
councels,
7 And greetynges in the markettes, and to be called of men, Rabbi.
8 But be not ye called Rabbi: For one is your maister, euen Christe, and all ye
are brethren.
9 And call no man your father, vpon the earth: for one is your father, which is
in heauen.
10 Neither be ye called maisters: for one is your maister euen Christe.
11 He that is greatest among you, shalbe your seruaunt.
12 But whosoeuer exalteth hym selfe, shalbe brought lowe: And he that humbleth
hym selfe, shalbe exalted.
13 Wo vnto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites: for ye shut vp the kingdome of
heauen before men: ye neither go in your selues, neither suffer ye them that
come, to enter in.
14 Wo vnto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites: for ye deuoure widdowes
houses, and that vnder a pretence of long prayer: therfore ye shall receaue the
greater dampnation.
15 Wo vnto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites: for ye compasse sea and lande,
to make one proselite: & when he is become one, ye make hym two folde more the
chylde of hell, then ye your selues are.
16 Wo be vnto you ye blynde guides: for ye say, whosoeuer doth sweare by the
temple, it is nothyng: but whosoeuer sweareth by the golde of the temple, he is
a detter.
17 Ye fooles and blynde. For whether is greater, the golde, or the temple that
sanctifieth the golde?
18 And whosoeuer sweareth by the aulter, it is nothyng: but whosoeuer sweareth
by the gyft that is vpon it, he is a detter.
19 Ye fooles and blynde, for whether is greater, the gyft: or the aulter that
sanctifieth the gyft?
20 Who so therfore sweareth by the aulter, sweareth by it, and by all thynges
theron.
21 And who so sweareth by the temple, sweareth by it, and by hym that dwelleth
therin.
22 And he that sweareth by heauen, sweareth by the seate of God, and by hym that
sitteth theron.
23 Wo vnto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye tythe mynt, and annise,
and cummyn: and haue left the wayghtier matters of the lawe, iudgement, mercy,
and fayth. These ought ye to haue done, and not to leaue the other vndone.
24 Ye blynde guides, which strayne out a gnat, and swalowe a Camel.
25 Wo vnto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites: for ye make cleane the vtter
syde of the cup, & of the platter: but within they are full of brybery &
excesse.
26 Thou blynde Pharisee, cleanse first that which is within the cup and platter,
that the outsyde of them may be cleane also.
27 Wo vnto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites: for ye are lyke vnto paynted
sepulchres, which in dede appeare beautifull outwarde, but are within full of
dead mens bones, and of all fylthynes.
28 Euen so, ye also, outwardly appeare ryghteous vnto men: But within, ye are
full of hypocrisie and iniquitie.
29 Wo vnto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites: ye builde the tombes of the
Prophetes, and garnishe the sepulchres of the ryghteous:
30 And say, yf we had ben in the dayes of our fathers, we woulde not haue ben
parteners with them in the blood of the prophetes.
31 And so ye be witnesses vnto your selues, that ye are the chyldren of them
which kylled the prophetes.
32 Fulfyll ye lykewyse, the measure of your fathers.
33 Ye serpentes, ye generation of vipers, howe wyll ye escape the dampnation of
hell?
34 Wherfore, beholde I sende vnto you prophetes, and wyse men, and Scribes, and
some of them ye shall kyll and crucifie: and some of them shall ye scourge in
your synagogues, and persecute them from citie to citie.
35 That vpon you may come all the ryghteous blood, which hath ben shed vpon the
earth, from the blood of ryghteous Abel, vnto the blood of Zacharias, sonne of
Barachias, whom ye slewe betwene the temple & the aulter.
36 Ueryly I say vnto you: all these thynges shal come vpon this generatio.
37 O Hierusalem, Hierusalem, thou that kyllest the prophetes, and stonest them
which are sent vnto thee: Howe often woulde I haue gathered thy chyldren
together, euen as the henne gathereth her chickens vnder her wynges, and ye
woulde not?
38 Beholde, your house is left vnto you desolate.
39 For I say vnto you: ye shall not see me hencefoorth, tyll that ye say,
blessed is he that commeth in the name of the Lorde.

Chapter 24

1 And Iesus went out, and departed from the temple: and his disciples came to
hym, for to shewe hym the buildynges of the temple.
2 Iesus sayde vnto them: See ye not all these thynges? Ueryly I say vnto you
there shall not be here left one stone vpon another, that shall not be
destroyed.
3 And as he sat vpon a mount of Oliues, his disciples came vnto hym secretly,
saying: Tell vs, when shall these thynges be? & what shall be the token of thy
commyng, & of the ende of the worlde?
4 And Iesus aunswered, and sayde vnto them: take heede, that no man deceaue you.
5 For many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christe: and shall deceaue many.
6 Ye shal heare of warres, & rumours of warres: See that you be not troubled.
For all these thynges must come to passe, but the ende is not yet.
7 Nation shall ryse agaynst nation, and realme agaynst realme: and there shalbe
pestilence, and famine, and earthquakes, in certayne places.
8 All these are the begynnynges of sorowes.
9 Then shall they put you to trouble, and shall kyll you, and ye shalbe hated of
all nations for my names sake.
10 And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate
one another.
11 And many false prophetes shall aryse, and shall deceaue many.
12 And because iniquitie shall abounde, the loue of many shall waxe colde.
13 But he that endureth to the ende, the same shalbe saued.
14 And this Gospell of the kyngdome, shalbe preached in all the worlde, for a
witnesse vnto all nations: and then shall the ende come.
15 When ye therefore, shall see the abhomination of desolation, spoken of by
Daniel the prophete, stande in the holy place, (who so readeth, let hym
vnderstande.)
16 Then let them which be in Iurie, flee into the mountaynes:
17 And let hym which is on the house toppe, not come downe to fet any thyng out
of his house:
18 Neither let hym which is in the fielde, returne backe to fetche his clothes.
19 Wo shalbe in those dayes, to them that are with chylde, and to them that geue
sucke.
20 But pray ye that your flyght be not in the Winter, neither on the Sabboth
day:
21 For then shalbe great tribulation, such as was not since the begynnyng of the
worlde, to this tyme, nor shalbe.
22 Yea, and except those dayes shoulde be shortened, there shoulde no fleshe be
saued: but for the chosens sake, those dayes shalbe shortened.
23 Then yf any man saye vnto you: lo, here is Christe, or there: beleue it not.
24 For there shall aryse false Christes, and false prophetes, and shall shewe
great signes, and wonders: In so much, that yf it were possible, the very elect,
shoulde be deceaued.
25 Beholde, I haue tolde you before.
26 Wherfore, yf they say vnto you, beholde, he is in the desert: go not foorth.
Beholde, he is in the secrete places: beleue it not.
27 For as the lyghtnyng commeth out of the east, and shineth into the west: so
shall the commyng of the sonne of man be.
28 For whersoeuer a dead carkas is, euen there wyll the Egles also be gathered
together.
29 Immediatly after the tribulation of those dayes, shal the sunne be darkened,
and the moone shall not geue her lyght, and the starres shall fall from heauen,
and the powers of heauen shalbe shaken.
30 And then shall appeare the signe of the sonne of man, in heauen: And then
shall all the kynredes of the earth mourne, and they shall see the sonne of man
comming in the cloudes of heauen, with power and great glory.
31 And he shall sende his Angels, with the great sounde of a trumpet, and they
shall gather together his chosen, from the foure wyndes, euen from one ende of
heauen, to the other.
32 Learne a parable of the fygge tree: when his braunche is yet tender, and the
leaues sprong, ye knowe that somer is nye:
33 So lykewyse ye, when ye see all these thynges, be ye sure that it is neare,
euen at the doores.
34 Ueryly I say vnto you: this generation shall not passe, tyll all these
thynges be fulfylled.
35 Heauen and earth shall passe away but my wordes shall not passe away.
36 But of that day and houre knoweth no man, no not the Angels of heauen, but my
father only.
37 But as the dayes of Noe were, so shall also the commyng of the sonne of man
be.
38 For as in the dayes that went before the fludde, they dyd eate, and drynke,
marry, and geue in maryage, euen vntyll the day that Noe entred into the Arke:
39 And knewe not, tyll the fludde came, and toke them all away: So shall also
the commyng of the sonne of man be.
40 Then shall two be in the fielde, the one receaued, and the other refused.
41 Two women shalbe gryndyng at the myll, the one receaued, and the other
refused.
42 Watch therfore, for ye knowe not what houre your Lorde doth come.
43 Of this yet be sure, that yf the good man of the house, knewe what watche the
thiefe woulde come, he woulde surely watche, and not suffer his house to be
broken vp.
44 Therfore, be ye also redy: for in such an houre as ye thynke not, the sonne
of man commeth.
45 Who is a faythfull and wise seruaunt, whom his Lorde hath made ruler ouer his
householde, to geue them meate in season.
46 Blessed is that seruaunt, whom his Lorde when he commeth, shall fynde so
doyng.
47 Ueryly I say vnto you, that he shall make hym ruler ouer all his goodes.
48 But and yf that euyll seruaunt say in his heart, my Lorde wyll be long a
commyng:
49 And so begyn to smyte his felowes, yea, and to eate and drynke with the
dronken:
50 The same seruauntes Lorde shall come in a day, when he loketh not for hym,
and in an houre that he is not ware of:
51 And shall hewe hym in peeces, & geue hym his portion with hypocrites: there
shalbe wepyng and gnasshyng of teeth.

Chapter 25

1 Then shall the kyngdome of heauen be lykened vnto ten virgins, which toke
their lampes, and went to meete the brydegrome.
2 But fyue of them were foolyshe, and fyue were wyse.
3 They that were foolyshe, toke their lampes, but toke none oyle with them:
4 But the wise, toke oyle in their vessels, with their lampes also.
5 Whyle the brydegrome taryed, they all slumbred and slept.
6 And euen at mydnyght, there was a crye made: beholde, the brydegrome commeth,
go out to meete hym.
7 Then all those virgins arose, and prepared their lampes.
8 So the foolyshe sayde vnto the wyse: geue vs of your oyle, for our lampes are
gone out.
9 But the wyse aunswered, saying: not so lest there be not inough for vs & you:
but go ye rather to them that sell, and bye for your selues.
10 And whyle they went to bye, the brydegome came: and they that were redy, went
in with hym, to ye maryage, and the gate was shut vp.
11 Afterwarde came also the other virgins, saying: Lorde, Lorde, open to vs.
12 But he aunswered and sayde: veryly I say vnto you, I knowe you not.
13 Watch therfore, for ye knowe neither the day, nor yet the houre, wherin the
sonne of man shall come.
14 Lykewyse, as a certayne man, redy to take his iourney into a straunge
countrey, called his owne seruauntes, and delyuered vnto them his goodes.
15 And vnto one, he gaue fyue talentes, to another two, and to another one: to
euery man after his habilitie, & strayght way departed.
16 Then he that had receaued the fyue talentes, went, and occupyed with the
same, & made them other fyue talentes.
17 And lykewyse, he that receaued two: he also gayned other two.
18 But he that receaued that one, went and digged in the earth, and hyd his
Lordes money.
19 After a long season, the Lorde of those seruauntes commeth, and reckeneth
with them.
20 And so, he that had receaued fyue talentes, came, and brought other fyue
talentes, saying: Lorde, thou delyueredst vnto me fyue talentes, beholde, I haue
gayned with them fyue talentes mo.
21 His Lorde saide vnto him: Well done, thou good and faythfull seruaut. Thou
hast ben faythfull ouer fewe thynges, I wyll make thee ruler ouer manye thynges:
enter thou into the ioy of thy Lorde.
22 He also that had receaued two talentes, came, and sayde: Lorde thou
delyueredst vnto me two talentes, beholde, I haue wonne two other taletes with
them.
23 His Lorde saide vnto him? Well done, good and faithfull seruaunt. Thou hast
ben faythfull ouer fewe thinges, I wyl make thee ruler ouer many thynges: enter
thou into the ioy of thy Lorde.
24 Then he which had receaued the one talent, came, and saide: Lorde I knew
thee, that thou art an harde man, reapyng where thou hast not sowen, & gatheryng
where thou hast not strowed.
25 And therfore was I afrayde, & went and hid thy talent in the earth: loe,
there thou hast that thyne is.
26 His Lorde aunswered, and sayde vnto hym: Thou euyll and slouthfull seruaut,
thou knewest that I reape where I sowed not, and gather where I haue not
strowed,
27 Thou oughtest therfore to haue delyuered my money to the exchaungers, and
then at my commyng shoulde I haue receaued myne owne with vauntage.
28 Take therfore the talent from hym, and geue it vnto hym whiche hath ten
talentes.
29 For vnto euery one that hath, shalbe geuen, and he shall haue aboundaunce:
But he that hath not, from hym shalbe taken away, euen that which he hath.
30 And cast the vnprofitable seruaunt into vtter darknesse, there shalbe wepyng,
and gnasshyng of teeth.
31 When the sonne of man shall come in his glorie, and all the holy Angels with
hym, then shall he sitte vpon the throne of his glorie.
32 And before hym shalbe gathered all nations: and he shall seperate them one
from another, as a shephearde deuideth his sheepe from the goates.
33 And he shall set the sheepe on his right hande, but the goates on the lefte.
34 Then shall the king say vnto them on his right hande: Come ye blessed of my
father, inherite the kyngdome, prepared for you from the foundation of the
worlde.
35 For I was an hungred, and ye gaue me meate: I was thirstie, and ye gaue me
drynke: I was harbourlesse, and ye toke me in:
36 Naked, and ye clothed me: Sicke, and ye visited me: I was in pryson, and ye
came vnto me.
37 Then shall the ryghteous aunswere hym, saying: Lorde, when sawe we thee an
hungred, & fedde thee? or thirstie and gaue thee drynke?
38 When sawe we thee harbourlesse, and toke thee in? or naked, and clothed thee?
39 Or when sawe we thee sicke, or in prison, and came vnto thee?
40 And the kyng shall aunswere, and say vnto them: Ueryly I say vnto you, in as
much as ye haue done it vnto one of the least of these my brethren, ye haue done
it vnto me.
41 Then shall he saye vnto them on the left hande: Depart from me ye cursed into
euerlasting fire, which is prepared for the deuyll and his angels.
42 For I was an hungred, and ye gaue me no meate: I was thirstie, and ye gaue me
no drynke.
43 I was harbourlesse, and ye toke me not in: I was naked, and ye clothed me
not: I was sicke, and in prison, and ye visited me not.
44 Then shall they also aunswere hym, saying: Lorde, when sawe we thee an
hungred, or a thirste, or harbourlesse, or naked, or sicke, or in pryson, and
did not minister vnto thee?
45 Then shall he aunswere them, saying: Ueryly I say vnto you, in as much as ye
dyd it not to one of the least of these, ye dyd it not to me.
46 And these shall go into euerlastyng payne: the ryghteous into lyfe eternall.

Chapter 26

1 And it came to passe, when Iesus had finished all these sayinges, he sayde
vnto his disciples:
2 Ye knowe, yt after two dayes is ye feast of Passouer, and the sonne of man is
betrayed, to be crucified.
3 Then assembled together the chiefe priestes, and the scribes, and the elders
of the people, vnto the palace of the hye prieste, which was called Caiaphas:
4 And helde a councell, that they might take Iesus by subtiltie, and kyll hym.
5 But they sayde: Not on the feast day lest there be an vprore among ye people.
6 When Iesus was in Bethanie, in the house of Simon the leper,
7 There came vnto him a woman, hauing an Alabaster boxe of precious oyntment,
and powred it on his head, as he sate at the boorde.
8 But when his disciples sawe it, they had indignation, saying: to what purpose
is this waste?
9 This oyntment might haue ben well solde, and geuen to the poore.
10 When Iesus vnderstode that, he saide vnto them: Why trouble ye the woma? for
she hath wrought a good worke vppon me.
11 For ye haue the poore alwayes with you: but me shall ye not haue alwayes.
12 For in that she hath cast this oyntment on my body, she dyd it to bury me.
13 Ueryly I say vnto you, wheresoeuer this Gospell shalbe preached in the world,
there shall also this that she hath done, be tolde for a memoriall of her.
14 Then one of the twelue, called Iudas Iscariot, wet vnto ye chiefe priestes,
15 And sayde vnto them: What wyll ye geue me, and I wyll delyuer hym vnto you?
And they appoynted vnto hym thirtie peeces of syluer.
16 And from that tyme foorth, he sought oportunitie to betray hym.
17 The first day of sweete bread, the disciples came to Iesus, saying vnto him:
Where wylt thou that we prepare for thee, to eate the Passouer?
18 And he saide: Go into the citie, to such a man, and say vnto hym, the maister
sayth, my tyme is at hand, I wyll kepe the Passouer at thy house, with my
disciples.
19 And the disciples dyd as Iesus had appoynted them: and they made redye the
Passouer.
20 When the euen was come, he sate downe with the twelue.
21 And as they dyd eate, he sayde: Ueryly I say vnto you, that one of you shall
betray me.
22 And they were exceadyng sorowfull, and began euery one of them to say vn hym,
Lorde is it I?
23 He aunswered, and saide: He that dippeth his hand with me in the disshe, the
same shall betray me.
24 The sonne of man truely goeth, as it is writte of him: but wo vnto that man
by whom the sonne of man is betrayed: It had ben good for that man, yf he had
not ben borne.
25 Then Iudas, which betrayed hym aunswered and sayde: Maister, is it I? He
sayde vnto hym, thou hast sayde.
26 When they were eatyng, Iesus toke bread, and when he had geuen thankes, he
brake it, and gaue it to the disciples, and saide: Take, eate, this is my body.
27 And he toke the cuppe, and after he had geuen thankes, gaue it them, saying:
Drinke ye all of this,
28 For this is my blood, whiche is of the newe testament, that is shedde for
many, for the remission of sinnes.
29 But I say vnto you, I wyll not drinke henceforth of this fruite of the vine
tree, vntyll that day when I shall drynke it newe with you, in my fathers
kyngdome.
30 And when they hadde praysed God they wet out vnto the mount of Oliues.
31 Then sayth Iesus vnto them: All ye shalbe offeded because of me this night.
For it is written: I wyll smyte the shephearde, and the sheepe of the flocke
shalbe scattered abrode.
32 But after I am rysen againe, I wyll go before you into Galilee.
33 Peter aunswered, and said vnto him: though all men be offended, because of
thee, yet wyll I neuer be offended.
34 Iesus sayde vnto hym: Ueryly I say vnto thee, that in this same nyght, before
the Cocke crowe, thou shalt denie me thryse.
35 Peter sayde vnto hym: Though I shoulde dye with thee, yet wyll I not denie
thee. Lykewyse also sayde all the disciples.
36 Then came Iesus with them vnto a place, which is called Gethsemane, and sayde
vnto the disciples: Sit ye here, whyle I go and pray yonder.
37 And he toke with him Peter, and the two sonnes of Zebedee, and began to waxe
sorowfull and heauy.
38 Then sayde Iesus vnto them: My soule is heauy, euen vnto the death, tary ye
here, and watche with me.
39 And he went a litle farther, and fell flat on his face, and prayed, saying: O
my father, if it be possible, let this cuppe passe from me: Neuerthelesse, not
as I wyll, but as thou wylt.
40 And he came vnto the disciples, and founde them a slepe, and sayth vnto
Peter: What, coulde ye not watche with me one houre?
41 Watche, and praye, that ye enter not into temptation: The spirite in deede is
wyllyng, but the fleshe is weake.
42 He went away once againe, & prayed, saying: O my father, if this cuppe may
not passe away fro me, except I drinke it, thy wyll be fulfylled.
43 And he came, and founde them a slepe agayne: for, their eyes were heauy.
44 And he left them, and went agayne, and prayed the thirde tyme, saying the
same wordes.
45 Then commeth he to his disciples, and sayth vnto them: Slepe hencefoorth, &
take your rest, beholde, the houre is at hande, and the sonne of man is betrayed
into the handes of synners.
46 Ryse, let vs be goyng: beholde, he is at hande that doth betray me.
47 Whyle he yet spake, loe Iudas, one of the twelue, came, and with hym a great
multitude, with swordes & staues, from the chiefe priestes and elders of the
people.
48 But he that betrayed him, gaue them a token, saying: Whomsoeuer I kysse, that
same is he, holde hym fast.
49 And foorthwith, he came to Iesus, and sayde, hayle maister: and kyssed hym.
50 And Iesus sayde vnto hym: Frende, wherefore art thou come? Then came they,
and layed handes on Iesus, and toke hym.
51 And beholde, one of them which were with Iesus, stretched out his hande, and
drewe his sworde, and stroke a seruaunt of the hye priestes, and smote of his
eare.
52 Then saide Iesus vnto hym: Put vp thy sworde into his sheathe. For all they
that take the sworde, shall peryshe with the sworde.
53 Thynkest thou that I can not nowe pray to my father, and he shall geue me
more then twelue legions of Angels?
54 But howe then shall the scriptures be fulfylled? For thus must it be.
55 In that same houre, sayde Iesus to the multitudes: Ye be come out, as it were
vnto a thiefe, with swordes and staues, for to take me. I sate dayly with you,
teachyng in the temple, and ye toke me not.
56 But all this is done, that the scriptures of the prophetes myght be
fulfylled. Then all the disciples forsoke him, and fledde.
57 And they toke Iesus, and ledde hym to Caiaphas the hye prieste, where the
scribes and the elders were assembled.
58 But Peter folowed hym a farre of, vnto the hye priestes palace, and went in,
and sate with the seruauntes to see the ende.
59 The chiefe priestes, and elders, and all the councell, sought false witnesse
agaynst Iesus, for to put hym to death,
60 But founde none: yea, when many false witnesses came, yet founde they none.
At the last, came two false witnesses,
61 And sayde: This felowe sayde: I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to
buylde it agayne in three dayes.
62 And the chiefe priest arose, and sayde vnto hym: Aunswerest thou nothyng? Why
do these beare witnesse agaynst thee?
63 But Iesus helde his peace. And the chiefe priest aunswered, and sayde vnto
hym: I charge thee by the liuing God, that thou tel vs, whether thou be Christ
the sonne of God?
64 Iesus saith vnto him: thou hast said. Neuerthelesse, I saye vnto you,
hereafter shall ye see the sonne of man sitting on the ryght hande of power, and
commyng in the cloudes of the skye.
65 Then the hye priest rent his clothes, saying: He hath spoken blasphemie, what
nede we of any mo witnesses? Beholde, now ye haue hearde his blasphemie,
66 What thynke ye? They aunswered and sayde: he is worthy to dye.
67 Then dyd they spyt in his face, and buffeted hym with fistes. And other smote
hym on his face with the paulme of their handes,
68 Saying: prophecie vnto vs, O Christ, who is he that smote thee?
69 Peter sate without in the palace: And a damsell came to hym, saying, Thou
also wast with Iesus of Galilee.
70 But he denied before them all, saying: I wote not what thou sayest.
71 When he was gone out into the porch, another wenche sawe hym, and sayde vnto
them that were there: This felowe was also with Iesus of Nazareth.
72 And agayne he denyed with an oth: I do not knowe the man.
73 And after a whyle, came vnto hym they that stode by, and sayde vnto Peter:
Surely thou art euen one of them, for thy speache bewrayeth thee.
74 Then began he to curse, & to sweare, that he knewe not the man. And
immediatly the Cocke crewe.
75 And Peter remembred the worde of Iesu, which sayde vnto hym, before the Cocke
crowe, thou shalt denie me thrise: and he went out, and wept bytterly.

Chapter 27

1 When the mornyng was come, all the chiefe priestes, and the elders of the
people, helde a councell agaynst Iesus to put hym to death.
2 And brought hym bounde, and deliuered hym to Pontius Pilate the deputie.
3 Then Iudas, whiche had betrayed hym, seyng that he was condempned, repented
hym selfe, and brought agayne the thirtie peeces of syluer, to the chiefe
priestes and elders,
4 Saying: I haue synned, betraying the innocent blood. And they said: what is
that to vs? see thou to that.
5 And he cast downe the peeces of siluer in the temple, and departed, and went
and hanged hym selfe.
6 And the chiefe priestes toke the peeces of syluer, and sayde: It is not
lawfull for to put the into the treasurie, because it is the price of blood.
7 And they toke councell, and bought with them a potters fielde, to burye
straungers in.
8 Wherfore that fielde is called the fielde of blood, vntyll this day.
9 (Then was fulfylled that, which was spoken by Ieremie the prophet, saying: And
they toke thirtie siluer peeces, the price of hym that was valued, whom they
bought of the children of Israel:
10 And gaue them for the potters fielde, as the Lorde appoynted me.)
11 Iesus stode before the deputie, and the deputie asked him, saying: Art thou
the king of the Iewes? Iesus saith vnto hym: thou sayest.
12 And when he was accused of the chiefe priestes and elders, he aunswered
nothyng.
13 Then sayth Pilate vnto him: hearest thou not how many witnesses they lay
agaynst thee?
14 And he aunswered hym to neuer a worde: insomuch, that the deputie marueyled
greatly.
15 At that feast, the deputie was wont to delyuer vnto the people a prysoner,
whom they woulde desire.
16 He had then a notable prysoner, called Barabbas.
17 Therfore, when they were gathered together, Pilate saide vnto them: whether
wyll ye that I geue loose vnto you Barabbas, or Iesus, whiche is called Christe?
18 For he knewe, that for enuy they had delyuered hym.
19 When he was set downe to geue iudgment, his wyfe sent vnto hym, saying: haue
thou nothing to do with that iuste man: For I haue suffred many thynges this day
in a dreame because of him.
20 But the chiefe priestes & elders perswaded the people, that they shoulde aske
Barabbas, and destroy Iesus.
21 The deputie aunswered, and saide vnto them: Whether of the twayne wyll ye
that I let loose vnto you? They saide, Barabbas.
22 Pilate sayde vnto them: What shall I do then with Iesus, whiche is called
Christe? They all sayde vnto hym: let hym be crucified.
23 The deputie sayde: What euyll hath he done? But they cryed the more, saying:
let hym be crucified.
24 When Pilate sawe that he coulde preuayle nothyng, but that more busynesse was
made, he toke water, and washed his handes before the people, saying: I am
innocent of the blood of this iust person, see ye to it.
25 Then aunswered all the people, and sayde: His blood be on vs, and on our
chyldren.
26 Then let he Barabbas loose vnto them, and scourged Iesus, and deliuered hym
to be crucified.
27 Then the souldiours of the deputie toke Iesus in the common hall, and
gathered vnto hym all the bande of souldiours.
28 And they stripped hym, and put on hym a skarlet robe:
29 And platted a crowne of thornes, and put vppon his head, and a reede in his
right hande, and bowed the knee before hym, and mocked hym, saying: Hayle kyng
of the Iewes.
30 And when they had spyt vpon hym, they toke the reede, and smote hym on the
head.
31 And after that they had mocked him, they toke the robe of hym agayne, and put
his owne rayment on hym, and led hym away, to crucifie hym.
32 And as they came out, they founde a man of Cyrene, named Simon: hym they
compelled to beare his crosse.
33 And they came vnto the place, which is called Golgotha, that is to say, a
place of dead mens skulles.
34 And gaue him vineger to drinke, mingled with gall: And when he had tasted
therof, he woulde not drynke.
35 When they had crucified hym, they parted his garmentes, & did cast lottes,
that it myght be fulfylled whiche was spoken by the prophete: They departed my
garmentes among them, & vpon my vesture dyd they cast lottes.
36 And they sate, & watched him there.
37 And set vp ouer his head, the cause of his death written: This is Iesus, the
king of the Iewes.
38 Then were there two thieues crucified with hym: one on the ryght hande, and
another on the left.
39 They that passed by, reuyled hym, waggyng their heades,
40 And saying: Thou that destroyedst the temple, & buyldest it in three dayes,
saue thy selfe. If thou be the sonne of God, come downe from the crosse.
41 Lykewyse also the hye priestes, mockyng hym, with the scribes, and elders,
and pharisees sayde:
42 He saued other, hym selfe can he not saue. If he be the kyng of Israel, let
him nowe come downe from the crosse, and we wyll beleue hym.
43 He trusted in God, let hym delyuer hym nowe, yf he wyll haue hym: for he
sayde, I am the sonne of God.
44 The thieues also which were crucified with hym, cast the same in his teeth.
45 Fro the sixth houre, was there darknesse ouer all the lande, vnto the nynth
houre.
46 And about the nynth houre, Iesus cried with a loude voyce, saying: Eli, Eli,
lama sabachthani, that is to say: My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?
47 Some of them that stode there, when they hearde that, saide: This man calleth
for Elias.
48 And straightway one of them ranne, and toke a sponge, and when he had filled
it full of vineger, he put it on a reede, and gaue hym to drynke.
49 Other sayde, let be, let vs see whether Elias wyll come and saue hym.
50 Iesus, when he had cryed agayne with a loude voyce, yeelded vp ye ghost.
51 And beholde, the vayle of the temple dyd rent into two partes, fro the toppe
to the bottome, and the earth did quake and the stones rent.
52 And graues dyd open, and many bodyes of saintes which slept, arose:
53 And went out of the graues, after his resurrection, and came into the holy
citie, and appeared vnto many.
54 When the Centurion, and they that were with hym watchyng Iesus, sawe the
earthquake, and those thynges that were done, they feared greatly, saying:
truely, this was the sonne of God.
55 And many wome were there (beholdyng hym a farre of) whiche folowed Iesus fro
Galilee, ministring vnto him.
56 Among which, was Marie Magdalene, and Marie the mother of Iames and Ioses, &
the mother of Zebedees chyldren.
57 When the euen was come, there came a ryche man of Aramathia, named Ioseph,
which also hym selfe was Iesus disciple.
58 He went to Pilate, and begged the body of Iesus. Then Pilate comaunded the
body to be delyuered.
59 And when Ioseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a cleane lynnen cloth:
60 And layde it in his newe tombe, which he had hewen out, euen in the rocke,
and rolled a great stone to the dore of the sepulchre, and departed.
61 And there was Marie Magdalene, & the other Marie, syttyng ouer against the
sepulchre.
62 The next day that folowed the day of preparyng, the hye priestes and
pharisees came together vnto Pilate,
63 Saying. Sir, we remember that this deceauer sayde whyle he was yet aliue:
After three dayes I wil arise agayne.
64 Commaunde therfore, that the sepulchre be made sure, vntyll the thirde day:
lest his disciples come by nyght & steale hym away, and say vnto the people, he
is rysen from the dead: & the last error shalbe worse then the first.
65 Pilate sayde vnto them: Ye haue the watche, go your way, make it as sure as
ye knowe.
66 So they went, and made the sepulchre sure with the watch, and sealed the
stone.

Chapter 28

1 In the later ende of the Sabboth day, whiche dawneth the first daye of the
weke, came Marie Magdalen, and the other Marie, to see the sepulchre.
2 And behold, there was a great earthquake, for the Angell of the Lorde
descended from heauen, and came & roulled backe the stone from the doore, and
sate vpon it.
3 His countenaunce was lyke lyghtnyng, and his rayment white as snowe.
4 And for feare of him, the kepers were astonyed, and became as dead men.
5 The Angell aunswered, and sayde vnto the women, feare ye not: For I knowe that
ye seke Iesus whiche was crucified.
6 He is not here, he is rysen, as he saide. Come, se the place where that the
Lord was layde.
7 And go quickly, & tell his disciples that he is rysen agayne from the dead.
And beholde, he goeth before you into Galilee, there shall ye see hym. Loe, I
haue tolde you.
8 And they departed quickly from the sepulchre, with feare, and great ioy, and
dyd runne, to bryng his disciples worde.
9 And as they went to tell his disciples, beholde, Iesus met them, saying: All
hayle. And they came and helde him by the feete, and worshypped hym.
10 Then sayde Iesus vnto them: be not afrayde. Go tell my brethren that they go
into Galilee, & there shal they see me.
11 When they were gone, beholde, some of the watche came into the citie, and
shewed vnto the hye priestes all the thynges that were done.
12 And they gathered the together, with the elders, and toke councell, and gaue
large money vnto the souldiers,
13 Saying. Saye ye, that his disciples came by nyght, & stole hym away while ye
slept.
14 And yf this come to the deputies eares we wyll perswade hym, and saue you
harmelesse.
15 So they toke the money, & dyd as they were taught. And this saying is noysed
among the Iewes, vntyl this day.
16 Then the eleuen disciples went awaye into Galilee, into a mountayne, where
Iesus had appoynted them.
17 And when they sawe hym, they worshypped hym: But some doubted.
18 And Iesus came, and spake vnto the, saying: All power is geuen vnto me in
heauen and in earth.
19 Go ye therfore, & teache all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
father, and of the sonne, and of the holye ghost:
20 Teachyng the to obserue all thynges, whatsoeuer I haue commaunded you. And
loe, I am with you alway, euen vnto the ende of the worlde.


Mark

Chapter 1

1 The begynnyng of the Gospel of Iesu Christ, the sonne of God.
2 As it hath ben written in the prophetes: Beholde, I sende my messenger before
thy face, whiche shall prepare thy waye before thee.
3 A voyce of hym that crieth in the wyldernesse: Prepare ye the waye of the
Lorde, and make his pathes strayght.
4 Iohn did baptize in the wyldernesse, and preached the baptisme of repentaunce,
for the remission of sinnes.
5 And all the land of Iurie, and they of Hierusalem, went out vnto hym, and were
all baptized of hym in the ryuer of Iordane, confessyng their synnes.
6 Iohn was clothed with Camelles heere, and with a girdle of a skynne about his
loynes: and he did eate locustes and wylde hony.
7 And preached, saying: He that is stronger then I, commeth after me, whose shoe
latchet I am not worthy to stowpe downe, and vnloose.
8 I haue baptized you with water: but he shal baptize you with the holy ghost.
9 And it came to passe in those dayes, that Iesus came fro Nazareth, of Galilee,
& was baptized of Iohn in Iordane.
10 And assone as he was come vp out of the water, he sawe heauen open, & the
spirite descending vpon him like a doue.
11 And there came a voyce from heauen: Thou art my deare sonne, in whom I am
well pleased.
12 And immediatly the spirite driueth hym into wyldernesse.
13 And he was there in the wyldernesse fourtie dayes, and was tempted of Satan,
& was with wylde beastes. And the Angels ministred vnto hym.
14 After that Iohn was deliuered to prison Iesus came into Galilee, preachyng
the Gospell of the kyngdome of God,
15 And saying: The tyme is come, and the kyngdome of God is at hande: repent,
and beleue the Gospell.
16 As he walked by the sea of Galilee, he sawe Simon, and Andrewe his brother,
castyng nettes into the sea (for they were fysshers.)
17 And Iesus saide vnto them: Folowe me, and I wyll make you to become fysshers
of men.
18 And strayghtway they forsoke their nettes, and folowed hym.
19 And when he had gone a litle further thence, he saw Iames the sonne of
Zebedee, and Iohn his brother, which also were in the shippe, mendyng their
nettes.
20 And anone he called them: And they lefte their father Zebedee in the shippe
with the hired seruauntes, and folowed hym.
21 And they came into Capernaum, & strayghtway, on the Sabboth dayes, he entred
into the synagogue, & taught.
22 And they were astonyed at his learnyng: For he taught them, as one that had
aucthoritie, & not as the Scribes.
23 And there was in their synagogue, a man vexed with an vncleane spirite, & he
cried,
24 Saying: Alas, what haue we to do with thee, thou Iesus of Nazareth? Art thou
come to destroy vs? I knowe thee what thou art, euen that holy one of God.
25 And Iesus rebuked hym, saying: holde thy peace, and come out of hym.
26 And when the vncleane spirite hadde torne hym, & cryed with a loude voyce, he
came out of hym.
27 And they were all amased, insomuch that they demaunded one of another among
them selues, saying: What thing is this? What newe doctrine is this? For with
aucthoritie commaunded he the fowle spirites, and they obeyed him.
28 And immediatly his fame spread abrode throughout all the region borderyng on
Galilee.
29 And foorthwith, when they were come out of the synagogue, they entred into
the house of Simon, and Andrewe, with Iames, and Iohn.
30 But Simons wyues mother lay sicke of a feuer: & anone they tell hym of her.
31 And he came, & toke her by the hande, and lyft her vp: and immediatly the
feuer forsoke her, and she ministred vnto them.
32 And at euen, when the sonne was downe, they brought vnto hym all that were
diseased, and them that were vexed with deuyls:
33 And all the citie was gathered together at the dore.
34 And he healed many, that were sicke of diuers diseases, and caste out many
deuyls: and suffred not the deuyls to speake, because they knewe hym.
35 And in the mornyng, before day, Iesus, when he was rysen vp, departed, and
went out into a solitarie place, and there prayed.
36 And Simon, & they that were with hym, folowed after hym:
37 And when they had founde hym, they sayde vnto hym: all men seke for thee.
38 And he saide vnto them: let vs go into the nexte townes, that I may preache
there also: for, therfore am I come.
39 And he preached in their synagogues, in all Galilee, and cast the deuyls out.
40 And there came a leper to hym, besechyng him, and knelyng downe to him, and
saying vnto hym: If thou wylt, thou canst make me cleane.
41 And Iesus had compassion on hym, and put foorth his hande, touched hym, and
sayth vnto hym: I wyll, be thou cleane.
42 And assoone as he had spoken, immediatly the leprosie departed from hym, and
he was made cleane.
43 And after he had geuen hym a strayte commaundement, he sent hym away
foorthwith.
44 And sayth vnto hym: See thou saye nothing to any man, but get thee hence,
shew thy selfe to the priest, and offer for thy clensyng those thinges which
Moyses commaunded, for a witnesse vnto them.
45 But he, assoone as he was departed, began to tell many thynges, and to
publishe the saying: insomuch, that Iesus could no more openly enter into the
citie, but was without in desert places: And they came to him from euery
quarter.

Chapter 2

1 After a fewe dayes also, he entred into Capernaum agayne, and it was noysed yt
he was in the house.
2 And anone many were gathered together, in somuch that nowe there was no rowme
to receaue them, no, not so muche as about the dore: and he preached the word
vnto them.
3 And they came vnto hym, bryngyng one sicke of the paulsie, whiche was borne of
foure men.
4 And when they coulde not come nye vnto hym for prease, they vncouered the
roofe of the house that he was in: And whe they had broken vp the roofe, they
dyd with cordes let downe the bedde, wherin the sicke of the paulsie lay.
5 When Iesus sawe their fayth, he saide vnto the sicke of the paulsie: Sonne,
thy synnes be forgeuen thee.
6 But there were certayne of the scribes syttyng there, and reasonyng in theyr
heartes:
7 Why doeth he thus speake blasphemies? Who can forgeue sinnes, but God only?
8 And immediatly, when Iesus perceaued in his spirite, that they so reasoned
within them selues, he saith vnto them: why reason ye suche thynges in your
heartes?
9 Whether is it easyer to say to the sicke of the paulsie, thy synnes be
forgeuen thee: or to say, aryse, take vp thy bedde, and walke?
10 But that ye may know, that the sonne of man hath power in earth to forgeue
synnes (He spake vnto the sicke of the paulsie)
11 I saye vnto thee, aryse, and take vp thy bedde, and get thee hence vnto thine
house.
12 And immediatly he arose, toke vp the bedde, and went foorth before them all:
insomuch that they were all amazed, & glorified God, saying: we neuer sawe it on
this fashion.
13 And he went againe vnto the sea: and all the people resorted vnto him, and he
taught them.
14 And as Iesus passed bye, he sawe Leui the sonne of Alphee, sittyng at the
receipt of custome, and sayde vnto hym: folowe me. And he arose, and folowed
hym.
15 And it came to passe, that when Iesus sate at meate in his house, many
publicanes and sinners sate also together at meate with Iesus and his disciples:
for there were many that folowed him.
16 And when the scribes and pharisees sawe hym eate with publicanes and sinners,
they saide vnto his disciples: howe is it that he eateth and drynketh with
publicanes and synners?
17 When Iesus hearde that, he saide vnto them: They that be whole, haue no nede
of the phisition, but they that are sicke: I came not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentaunce.
18 And the disciples of Iohn, & the Pharisees dyd fast. And they come, and say
vnto him: Why do ye disciples of Iohn, and of the Pharisees fast, but thy
disciples fast not?
19 And Iesus sayde vnto them: Can the chyldren of the brydechaumber fast, whyle
the brydegrome is with them? As long as they haue the brydegrome with them, they
can not fast.
20 But the dayes wyll come, when the brydegrome shalbe taken awaye from them,
and then shall they fast in those dayes.
21 No man also soweth a peece of newe cloth, vnto an olde garment: otherwayes,
his newe peece taketh awaye from the olde, and so the rent is made worse.
22 And no man powreth newe wine into olde vessels: els the newe wine doth burst
the vessels, and the wine runneth out, and the vessels are marred: But newe
wine, must be put into newe vessels.
23 And it came to passe, that he went thorowe the corne fieldes on the Sabboth
dayes, and his disciples began by ye way to plucke the eares of corne.
24 And the pharisees sayde vnto hym: Beholde, why do they on the Sabboth dayes,
that which is not lawfull?
25 And he sayde vnto them: Haue ye neuer read what Dauid did, when he had nede,
and was an hungred, both he, and they that were with hym?
26 Howe he went into the house of God in the dayes of Abiathar the hye prieste,
and dyd eate the shewe bread, which is not lawfull to eate, but for the
priestes, and gaue also to them which were with hym?
27 And he sayde vnto them: The Sabboth was made for man, and not man for the
Sabboth.
28 Therfore is the sonne of man, Lorde also of the Sabboth.

Chapter 3

1 And he entred agayne into the synagogue, & a man was there whiche had a
wythered hande:
2 And they watched hym, whether he woulde heale hym on the Sabboth daye, that
they myght accuse hym.
3 And he saide vnto the man which had the wythered hande: Aryse, and stande in
the myddes.
4 And he saide vnto them: Is it lawful to do good on the Sabboth dayes, or to do
euyl? to saue lyfe, or to kyll? But they helde their peace.
5 And when he had loked rounde about on them with anger, mournyng for the
hardnesse of their heartes, he sayth to the man: stretch foorth thyne hande. And
he stretched it out: And his hande was restored, euen as whole as the other.
6 And the pharisees departed, and strayghtway gathered a councell, with the
Herodians, agaynst hym, that they myght destroy hym.
7 But Iesus auoyded, with his disciples, to the sea: And a great multitude
folowed hym from Galilee, and from Iurie,
8 And from Hierusalem, & from Idumea, and from beyonde Iordane, and they that
dwelled about Tyre & Sidon, a great multitude of men: Which, whe they had hearde
what thynges he dyd, came vnto hym.
9 And Iesus comaunded his disciples, that a shippe shoulde wayte on hym, because
of the people, leste they shoulde thronge hym.
10 For he had healed many: insomuche, that they preassed vpon him for to touch
hym, as many as had plagues.
11 And when the vncleane spirites sawe hym, they fell downe before hym, and
cryed, saying: Thou art the sonne of God.
12 And he straytely charged them, that they shoulde not make hym knowen.
13 And he went vp into a mountayne, & called vnto him whom he woulde: and they
came vnto hym.
14 And he ordeyned twelue, that they shoulde be with him, and that he might
sende them foorth to preache,
15 And that they myght haue power to heale sicknesses, and to cast out deuyls.
16 And he gaue vnto Simon to name, Peter.
17 And he called Iames the sonne of Zebedee, and Iohn, Iames brother (and gaue
them to name Boanarges, which is to say, the sonnes of thunder.)
18 And Andrewe, and Philip, and Bartholomewe, and Matthewe, and Thomas, and
Iames the sonne of Alphee, and Thaddeus, and Simon Cananite,
19 And Iudas Iscariot, which also betrayed hym. And they came into the house:
20 And the people assembled together agayne, so that they had no leysure so much
as to eate bread.
21 And when they that belonged vnto hym, hearde of it, they went out to laye
handes vpon hym: For they sayde, he is madde.
22 And the scribes whiche came downe from Hierusalem, sayde: He hath Beelzebub,
and by the chiefe deuyll, casteth he out deuyls.
23 And he called them vnto hym, & sayde vnto them in parables: Howe can Satan
driue out Satan?
24 And yf a realme be deuided agaynst it selfe, that realme can not endure.
25 And yf a house be deuided agaynst it selfe, that house can not continue.
26 And yf Satan make insurrection agaynst him selfe & be deuided, he can not
continue, but hath an ende.
27 No man can enter into a strong mans house, and take away his goodes, except
he first bynde the strong man, and then spoyle his house.
28 Ueryly I say vnto you, al sinnes shalbe forgeuen vnto the chyldren of men, &
blasphemies wherewith so euer they haue blasphemed:
29 But he that speaketh blasphemie agaynst the holy ghoste, hath neuer
forgeuenesse, but is in daunger of eternall dampnation.
30 For they sayde: he hath an vncleane spirite.
31 There came also his mother, and his brethren, and stoode without, and sent
vnto hym, to call hym out.
32 And the people sate about him, & saide vnto hym: Beholde, thy mother and thy
brethren seke for thee without.
33 And he aunswered them, saying: who is my mother, and my brethren?
34 And when he had loked rounde about on his disciples, which sate in compasse
about hym, he sayde: Beholde my mother, and my brethren.
35 For whosoeuer doeth the wyl of God, the same is my brother, and my sister,
and mother.

Chapter 4

1 And he began agayne to teache by the sea syde: And ther gathered vnto hym much
people, so greatly, that he entred into a shippe, and sate in the sea: and all
the people was by the sea syde on the shore:
2 And he taught them many thinges by parables, and sayde vnto them in his
doctrine.
3 Hearken: Beholde, there went out a sower to sowe:
4 And it fortuned as he sowed, that some fell by the way syde, and the fowles of
the ayre came, and deuoured it vp.
5 Some fell on stonie grounde, where it had not muche earth: and immediatly
sprange vp, because it had not deapth of earth.
6 But assoone as the sonne was vp, it caught heate: and because it hadde not
roote, it wythered away.
7 And some fell among thornes: and the thornes grewe vp, and choked it, and it
gaue no fruite.
8 And some fell vpon good grounde, and dyd yelde fruite, that sprang vp, and
grewe, and brought foorth, some thirtie folde, and some sixtie folde, and some
an hundred folde.
9 And he saide vnto them: He that hath eares to heare, let hym heare.
10 And when he was alone, they that were about hym, with the twelue, asked of
hym the parable.
11 And he sayde vnto them: To you it is geuen to knowe the misterie of the
kingdome of God: But vnto them that are without, all thynges are done by
parables,
12 That when they see, they may see and not discerne: and whe they heare, they
may heare and not vnderstande, lest at any tyme, they shoulde turne, and their
sinnes shoulde be forgeuen them.
13 And he sayde vnto them: Knowe ye not this parable? And howe then wyll ye
knowe all other parables?
14 The sower, soweth the worde.
15 And they that receaued seede by the way side, are those where the worde is
sowe: but when they haue hearde, Satan cometh immediatly, and taketh away the
word that was sowen in their heartes.
16 And lykewyse they that receaue seede into the stonie grounde, are they, which
when they haue hearde the worde, at once receaue it with gladnesse.
17 Yet haue no roote in them selues, and so endure but a tyme: and anone when
trouble and persecution aryseth for the wordes sake, immediatlye they are
offended.
18 And those be they that receaue seede among thornes: and those I saye are such
as heare the worde,
19 And the cares of this worlde, and the deceytfulnesse of ryches, and the
lustes of other thynges enter in, and choke the worde, and it is made
vnfruitefull.
20 And they whiche receaue seede into good grounde, are suche as heare the
worde, and receaue it, so that one corne doth bryng foorth thirtie, some sixtie,
some an hundred.
21 And he saide vnto them: Is the candle lyghted to be put vnder a busshell, or
vnder the table? And not to be put on a candelsticke?
22 For there is nothing so priuie that shal not be opened: neither hath it ben
so secrete, but that it shall come abrode.
23 If any man haue eares to heare, let hym heare.
24 And he sayde vnto them, take heede what ye heare: With what measure ye meate,
with the same shall it be measured to you agayne. And vnto you that heare, shall
more be geuen.
25 For vnto hym that hath, shall it be geuen: and from hym that hath not, shalbe
taken away, euen that which he hath.
26 And he sayde, so is the kyngdome of God: euen as yf a man shoulde sowe seede
in the grounde,
27 And shoulde slepe, and ryse vp nyght and day, and the seede shoulde spryng &
growe vp, he knoweth not howe.
28 For the earth bringeth foorth fruite of her selfe, first the blade, then the
eare, after that, the full corne in the eare.
29 But when the fruite is brought foorth, anone he thrusteth in the sickle,
because the haruest is come.
30 And he sayde: Wherevnto shall we lyken the kyngdome of God? Or with what
comparyson shall we compare it?
31 It is like a grayne of mustarde seede, whiche when it is sowen in the earth,
is lesse then all seedes that be in the earth.
32 When it is sowen, it groweth vp, and is greater then all hearbes, and beareth
great braunches, so that the fowles of the ayre may make their nestes vnder the
shadowe of it.
33 And with many such parables preached he the worde vnto them, as they were
able to heare it.
34 But without parable spake he nothing vnto them. But when they were alone, he
expounded all thynges to his disciples.
35 And the same day, when euen was come, he saide vnto them: Let vs passe ouer
vnto the other syde.
36 And they left the people, and toke him, euen as he was in the shippe. And
there were also with him, other litle shippes.
37 And there arose a great storme of wynde, and the waues dasshed into the
shippe, so that it was nowe full.
38 And he was in the sterne a slepe on a pelowe. And they awaked hym, and sayde
vnto hym: Maister, carest thou not that we peryshe?
39 And he arose, and rebuked the wynde, and saide vnto the sea, peace and be
styll. And the wynde ceassed, & there folowed a great calme.
40 And he sayde vnto them: why are ye so fearefull? Howe is it, that ye haue no
fayth?
41 And they feared exceadyngly, and sayde one to another: Who is this? For both
wynde and sea obey hym.

Chapter 5

1 And they came ouer to the other syde of the sea, into the countrey of the
Gadarenites.
2 And when he was come out of the shippe, immediatly there met hym from among
the tombes, a man possessed of an vncleane spirite:
3 Which had his abidyng among the tombes: And no man coulde bynde him, no not
with cheynes,
4 Because, that when he was often bounde with fetters and cheynes, he plucked
the cheynes a sunder, and brake the fetters in peeces: Neither coulde any man
tame hym.
5 And alwayes, nyght and day, he was in the mountaynes, and in the tombes,
crying, and beatyng hym selfe with stones.
6 But when he had spied Iesus a farre of, he ranne, and worshypped hym,
7 And cried with a loude voyce, & sayde: what haue I to do with thee Iesus thou
sonne of the most hyest God? I require thee in the name of God, that thou
torment me not.
8 (For he sayde vnto hym: come out of the man thou foule spirite.)
9 And he asked hym, what is thy name? And he aunswered and sayd vnto hym: my
name is legion, for we are many.
10 And he prayed hym instantly, that he woulde not sende them away, out of the
countrey.
11 But there was there, nye vnto the mountaynes, a great hearde of swyne
feedyng.
12 And all the deuyls besought hym, saying: sende vs into the swyne, that we may
enter into them.
13 And anone Iesus gaue them leaue. And the vncleane spirites went out, and
entred into the swyne: And the hearde ran headlong into the sea, (they were
about two thousande,) & were drowned in the sea.
14 And the swyneheardes fled, and tolde it in the citie, and in the countrey.
And they went out for to see what was done:
15 And came to Iesus, and sawe hym that was vexed with the fiende, and had the
legion, syt, both clothed, and in his right mynde: & they were afraide.
16 And they that sawe it, tolde them, howe it came to passe to hym that was
possessed with the deuyll: and also of the swyne.
17 And they beganne to pray hym, that he woulde depart out of their coastes.
18 And when he was come into the shippe, he that had ben possessed with the
deuyll, prayed hym, that he myght be with hym.
19 Howebeit, Iesus woulde not suffer hym, but sayde vnto hym: go home to thy
frendes, and shewe them howe great thynges the Lorde hath done for thee, and
howe he had compassion on thee.
20 And he departed, and beganne to publyshe in the ten cities, howe great
thynges Iesus had done for hym: and all men dyd maruayle.
21 And when Iesus was come ouer agayne by shippe, vnto the other syde, much
people gathered vnto hym, and he was nye vnto the sea.
22 And beholde, there came one of the rulers of the synagogue, whose name was
Iairus: and when he sawe hym, he fell downe at his feete,
23 And besought hym greatly, saying: my young daughter lieth at poynt of death,
I pray thee come and lay thy hande on her, that she may be safe, and lyue.
24 And he went with hym, and much people folowed him, and thronged him.
25 And there was a certayne woman, which had ben diseased of an issue of blood
twelue yeres,
26 And had suffred many thynges, of many phisitions, and had spent all that she
had, and felt none amendemet at all, but rather the worse.
27 When she had hearde of Iesus, she came in the prease behynde hym, and touched
his garment.
28 For she sayde: yf I may but touche his clothes, I shalbe whole.
29 And strayghtway the fountayne of her blood was dryed vp: & she felt in her
body, that she was healed of ye plague.
30 And Iesus immediatly, knowyng in hym selfe, that vertue proceaded from hym,
turned hym about in the prease, and sayde: who touched my clothes?
31 And his disciples sayde vnto hym: thou seest the people thrust thee, & askest
thou, who dyd touche me?
32 And he loked rounde about, for to see her that had done this thyng.
33 But the woman, fearyng & tremblyng, knowyng what was done within her, came,
and fell downe before hym, and tolde hym all the trueth.
34 And he sayde vnto her: Daughter thy fayth hath saued thee, go in peace, and
be whole of thy plague.
35 Whyle he yet spake, there came from the ruler of the synagogues house,
certayne, which sayde: thy daughter is dead, why diseasest thou the maister any
further?
36 Assoone as Iesus hearde the worde that was spoken, he sayde vnto the ruler of
the synagogue, be not afrayde, only beleue.
37 And he suffred no man to folowe him, saue Peter, and Iames, and Iohn the
brother of Iames.
38 And he came to the house of the ruler of the synagogue, and sawe the tumult,
and them that wept & wayled greatly.
39 And went in, and sayde vnto them: why make ye this a doe, and wepe? the
damsell is not dead, but slepeth.
40 And they laught hym to scorne: But he put them all out, and taketh the father
and the mother of the damsell, and them that were with hym, and entreth in where
the damsell laye,
41 And taketh the damsell by the hande, and sayth vnto her. Talitha cumi, which
is, yf one do interprete it, damsell (I say vnto thee) aryse.
42 And strayghtway the damsell arose, and walked: For she was of the age of
twelue yeres. And they were astonyed out of measure.
43 And he charged them straytly, that no man shoulde knowe of it: and commaunded
to geue her meate.

Chapter 6

1 And he departed thence, & came into his owne countrey, and his disciples
folowed him.
2 And when the sabboth day was come, he beganne to teache in the synagogue: And
many that hearde hym, were astonyed, and sayde: from whence hath he these
thynges? And what wisdome is this that is geuen vnto hym? and such myghtie
workes that are wrought by his handes?
3 Is not this the carpenter Maries sonne, the brother of Iames & Ioses, and of
Iuda and Simon? and are not his sisters here with vs? And they were offended at
hym.
4 Iesus sayde vnto them, that a prophete is not without honour, but in his owne
countrey, and among his owne kynne, and in his owne house.
5 And he coulde there shewe no mightie worke: but layde his handes vpon a fewe
sicke folke, and healed them.
6 And he marueyled, because of their vnbeliefe. And he went about by the townes
that lay on euery syde, teachyng.
7 And he called the twelue, and beganne to sende them foorth, two and two, and
gaue the power ouer vncleane spirites.
8 And commaunded them, that they shoulde take nothyng in their iourney, saue a
staffe only: no scrippe, no bread, no money in their purse.
9 But shoulde be shoed with sandales: And that they shoulde not put on two
coates.
10 And he sayde vnto them: Whersoeuer ye enter into an house, there abyde tyll
ye depart thence.
11 And whosoeuer shall not receaue you nor heare you, when ye depart thence,
shake of the dust that is vnder your feet, for a witnesse vnto them: I say
veryly vnto you, it shalbe easyer for the Sodomites and the Gomorrheans in the
day of iudgement, then for that citie.
12 And they went out, & preached, that men should repent.
13 And they cast out many deuyls, and annoynted many that were sicke, with oyle,
and healed them.
14 And king Herode hearde of hym for his name was spread abrode: And he sayde,
Iohn Baptist is rysen agayne from the dead, and therefore myghtie workes do
shewe foorth them selues in hym.
15 Other saide, it is Elias. Some saide, it is a prophete, or as one of the
prophetes.
16 But when Herode hearde of hym, he saide: It is Iohn, whom I beheaded, he is
rysen from death agayne.
17 For Herode himselfe had sent foorth, and layde handes vpon Iohn, & bounde hym
in pryson, for Herodias sake, his brother Philippes wyfe, because he had maryed
her.
18 For Iohn sayde vnto Herode: It is not lawful for thee to haue thy brothers
wyfe.
19 Therefore Herodias layde wayte for hym, and woulde haue kylled hym: but she
coulde not.
20 For Herode feared Iohn, knowyng that he was a iuste man and an holye, and
gaue hym reuerence: and when he hearde hym, he dyd many thynges, and hearde hym
gladly.
21 And whe a conuenient day was come, that Herode on his birth daye made a
supper to the lordes, hye captaynes, and chiefe estates of Galilee.
22 And when the daughter of the same Herodias came in, and daunced, and pleased
Herode, and them that sate at boorde also, the kyng said vnto the damsell: Aske
of me what thou wylt, and I wyll geue it thee.
23 And he sware vnto her: Whatsoeuer thou shalt aske of me, I wyll geue it thee,
euen vnto the one halfe of my kingdome.
24 And she went foorth, & sayde vnto her mother: What shall I aske? She saide,
Iohn Baptistes head.
25 And she came in strayghtwaye, with haste, vnto the kyng, and asked, saying: I
wyll, that thou geue me by and by in a charger, the head of Iohn Baptist.
26 And the kyng was sory, howebeit, for his othes sake, & for their sakes whiche
sate at supper also, he woulde not caste her of.
27 And immediatlye the kyng sent the hangman, and commaunded his head to be
brought in: And he went, and beheaded hym in the pryson,
28 And brought his head in a charger, & gaue it to the damsell, and the damsell
gaue it to her mother.
29 And when his disciples hearde of it, they came, and toke vp his body, and
layed it in a tombe.
30 And the Apostles gathered themselues together vnto Iesus, and tolde hym all
thynges, both what they had done, and what they had taught.
31 And he sayde vnto them: Come ye alone out of the way, into ye wyldernesse,
and rest awhyle: For there were many commers and goers, and they had no leysure,
so much as to eate.
32 And he wet by shippe out of the way, into a desert place.
33 And the people spyed them, when they departed, and many knewe hym, and ranne
a foote thyther, out of all cities, & came thyther before them, and came
together vnto hym.
34 And Iesus went out, and sawe much people, and had compassion on them, because
they were lyke sheepe, not hauyng a sheepheard: And he began to teache them many
thynges.
35 And when the day was nowe farre spent, his disciples came vnto hym, saying:
This is a desert place, & nowe the tyme is farre passed:
36 Let them departe, that they may go into the countrey rounde about, and into
the townes, and bye them bread: for they haue nothyng to eate.
37 He aunswered and sayde vnto them: geue ye them to eate. And they saide vnto
him: Shall we go and bye two hundred penyworth of bread, & geue them to eate?
38 He sayde vnto them: Howe many loaues haue ye, go loke? And when they had
searched, they sayde, fyue, and two fisshes.
39 And he commaunded them, to make them all sit downe by companies vpon the
greene grasse.
40 And they sate downe, here a rowe, and there a rowe, by hundredes, & by
fifties.
41 And when he had take the fiue loaues and the two fisshes, and loked vp to
heauen, he blessed, and brake the loaues, & gaue them to his disciples to set
before them: and the two fisshes deuided he among them all.
42 And they all did eate, & were satisfied.
43 And they toke vp twelue baskets full, of the fragmentes, & of the fisshes.
44 And they that dyd eate, were about fyue thousande men.
45 And straightway, he constrayned his disciples to go into the shippe, and to
go ouer the sea before, vnto Bethsaida, whyle he sent away the people.
46 And assoone as he had sent them away, he departed into a mountayne to pray.
47 And when euen was come, the ship was in the myddes of the sea, and he alone
on the lande.
48 And he sawe them troubled in rowyng (for the wynde was contrary vnto them:)
And about the fourth watche of the nyght, he came vnto them, walking vppon the
sea, and woulde haue passed by them.
49 But when they sawe hym walkyng vpon the sea, they supposed it had ben a
spirite, and cryed out.
50 For they all sawe him, & were afraide. And anone he talked with them, & saide
vnto them: Be of good cheare, it is I, be not afrayde.
51 And he went vp vnto them into the shippe, and the wynde ceassed, and they
were sore amased in themselues beyond measure, and marueyled.
52 For they vnderstoode not the miracle of the loaues, because their heart was
hardened.
53 And when they had passed ouer, they came into the lande of Genezareth, and
drewe vp into the hauen.
54 And assoone as they were come out of the shippe, straightway they knew him,
55 And ranne foorth throughout all the region rounde about, & began to carry
about in beddes those that were sicke, thither, where they heard that he was.
56 And whethersoeuer he entred, into townes, cities, or villages, they layde the
sicke folkes in the streates, & prayed him that they myght touche and it were
but the hemme of his garment: And as many as touched it, were made whole.

Chapter 7

1 And the pharisees came together vnto hym, & certayne of the scribes which came
from Hierusalem.
2 And whe they sawe some of his disciples eate bread with common that is to say,
with vnwasshen hands, they founde fault.
3 For the pharisees and all the Iewes, except they wasshe their handes oft, eate
not, obseruing the traditions of ye elders.
4 And when they come from the market, except they wasshe, they eate not. And
many other things there be, which they haue taken vpon them to obserue as the
wasshyng of cuppes and pottes, and brasen vessels, and of tables.
5 Then asked hym the pharisees and scribes: Why walke not thy disciples
accordyng to the traditio of the elders, but eate bread with vnwasshen handes?
6 He aunswered, and sayde vnto them, that Esaias hath prophesied well of you
hypocrites, as it is written: This people honoreth me with their lippes, but
their heart is farre from me.
7 Howebeit, in vayne do they worship me, teachyng doctrines, the commaundementes
of men.
8 For ye laye the commaundement of God apart, and obserue the tradition of me:
as the wasshing of pottes & cuppes. And many other such like thinges ye do.
9 And he sayde vnto them: Well, ye cast asyde the commaundement of God, to
mayntayne your owne tradition.
10 For Moyses sayde, Honor thy father and thy mother: and, who so curseth father
or mother, let him dye the death.
11 But ye say, yf a man shall say to father or mother Corban (that is, by the
gyft) that is offred of me, thou shalt be helped.
12 And so ye suffer hym no more to do ought for his father or his mother.
13 And make the worde of God of none effect, through your tradition, which ye
haue ordeyned. And many such thinges do ye.
14 And when he had called all the people vnto hym, he saide vnto them: Hearken
vnto me, euery one of you, and vnderstande.
15 There is nothyng without a man, that can defyle hym, when it entreth into
hym: But the thynges whiche proceade out of a man, those are they that defyle
the man.
16 If any man haue eares to heare, let hym heare.
17 And when he came into the house, away from the people, his disciples asked
hym of the similitude.
18 And he sayde vnto them: Are ye also so without vnderstandyng? Do ye not yet
perceaue, that whatsoeuer thing fro without, entreth into a man, it can not
defyle hym,
19 Because it entreth not into his heart, but into the belly, and goeth out into
the draught, purgyng all meates?
20 And he sayde: That which commeth out of a man, defyleth the man.
21 For from within, euen out of the heart of men, proceade euyll thoughtes,
adulterie, fornication, murther,
22 Theft, couetousnes, wickednes, deceit, wantonnes, a wicked eye, blasphemies,
pride, foolyshnes.
23 All these euyll thynges come fro within, and defyle a man.
24 And from thence he rose, and went into the borders of Tyre and Sidon, &
entred into an house, and woulde that no man shoulde haue knowen: but he coulde
not be hyd.
25 For a certayne woman, whose young daughter hadde an vncleane spirite, assoone
as she hearde of hym, came, & fell at his feete.
26 The woman was a Greke, out of the nation of Syrophenissa: & she besought hym,
that he woulde cast out the deuyll from her daughter.
27 But Iesus saide vnto her, let the children first be fedde: For it is not
meete to take the chyldrens bread, and to caste it vnto litle dogges.
28 She aunswered, and saide vnto hym, euen so Lorde: neuerthelesse, the litle
dogges also eate vnder the table, of the chyldrens crumbes.
29 And he sayde vnto her: For this saying, go thy way, the deuyll is gone out of
thy daughter.
30 And when she was come home to her house, she founde that the deuyll was
departed, and her daughter lying on the bedde.
31 And he departed agayne from the coastes of Tyre and Sidon, & came vnto the
sea of Galilee, through the middes of the coastes of the ten cities.
32 And they brought vnto hym one that was deafe, and had an impediment in his
speache: and they prayed him to put his hande vpon hym.
33 And when he had taken hym asyde from the people, he put his fyngers into his
cares, and dyd spyt, and touched his tongue,
34 And loked vp to heauen, and syghed, and sayde vnto him Ephphatha, that is to
say, be opened.
35 And straightway his eares were opened, and the stryng of his tongue was
loosed, and he spake playne.
36 And he commaunded them, that they shoulde tell no man: But the more he forbad
them, so much the more a great deale they published it.
37 And were beyonde measure astonyed, saying: He hath done all thynges well, he
hath made both the deafe to heare, and the dumbe to speake.

Chapter 8

1 In those dayes, when there was a very great company, and had nothyng to eate,
Iesus called his disciples to him, & saide vnto them:
2 I haue compassio on the people, because they haue nowe ben with me three
dayes, and haue nothyng to eate:
3 And yf I sende them away fastyng to their owne houses, they shall faynt by the
way: for diuers of them came fro farre.
4 And his disciples aunswered hym: From whence can a man satisfie these men with
bread here in the wildernesse?
5 And he asked the: Howe many loaues haue ye? They sayde, seuen.
6 And he commaunded the people to sit downe on the grounde: And he toke the
seuen loaues, and when he had geuen thankes, he brake, and gaue to his
disciples, to set before them: And they dyd set them before the people.
7 And they hadde a fewe small fysshes: And when he had blessed, he commaunded
them also to be set before them.
8 So they dyd eate, and were suffised: And they toke vp of the broken meate that
was left, seuen baskettes full.
9 And they that had eaten, were about foure thousand: And he sent the away.
10 And anone he entred into a shippe, with his disciples, and came into the
parties of Dalmanutha.
11 And the Pharisees came foorth, and began to dispute with hym, sekyng of him a
signe from heauen, tempting him.
12 And when he had sighed depely in his spirite, he sayth: Why doth this
generatio seke a signe? Ueryly I say vnto you, there shall no signe be geue vnto
this generation.
13 And he lefte them, and went into the ship agayne, & departed ouer the water.
14 And they had forgotten to take bread with them neither had they in the ship
with them more then one loafe.
15 And he charged the, saying: Take heede, beware of the leuen of the pharisees,
and of the leuen of Herode.
16 And they reasoned among them selues, saying: We haue no bread.
17 And Iesus knewe it, and sayth vnto them: Why reason ye, because ye haue no
bread? Perceaue ye not yet, neither vnderstande? Haue ye your heart yet
hardened?
18 Haue ye eyes, and see not? and haue ye eares & heare not? Do ye not remember?
19 When I brake fyue loaues among fyue thousande men, howe many baskettes full
of broken meate toke ye vp? They say vnto hym, twelue.
20 When I brake seuen among foure thousande, howe many baskettes of the
leauynges of the broken meate toke ye vp? They sayde, seuen.
21 And he sayde vnto them: Howe happeneth it, that ye do not vnderstande?
22 And he came to Bethsaida, & they brought a blynde man vnto hym, and desired
hym to touche hym.
23 And he caught the blinde by the hand, and led him out of the towne: and whe
he had spyt in his eyes, & put his handes vpon him, he asked him if he saw
ought.
24 And he loked vp, & saide, I see men: for I perceiue the walke as they were
trees.
25 After that, he put his handes agayne vpon his eyes, & made hym see: And he
was restored, & saw euery man clearely.
26 And he sent hym home to his house, saying: neither go into the towne, nor
tell it to any in the towne.
27 And Iesus went out, & his disciples, into the townes that long to Cesarea
Philippi: And by the way he asked his disciples, saying vnto them: Whom do men
say that I am?
28 And they aunswered: Some saye that thou art Iohn Baptist, and some saye,
Elias: Agayne, some saye that thou art one of the prophetes.
29 And he sayde vnto them: But whom say ye that I am? Peter aunswereth, & saith
vnto him: Thou art very Christe.
30 And he charged them, that they should tell no man of hym.
31 And he began to teache them, howe that the sonne of man must suffer many
thynges, & be reproued of the elders, and of the hie priestes, & scribes, and be
killed, and after three dayes, aryse agayne.
32 And he spake that saying openly: And Peter toke hym asyde, and began to
rebuke hym.
33 But he turned about, and loked on his disciples, and rebuked Peter, saying,
go after me Sata: for thou sauerest not the thinges that be of God, but the
thinges that be of men.
34 And when he had called the people vnto hym, with his disciples also, he said
vnto them: Whosoeuer wyll folow me, let hym forsake hym selfe, and take vp his
crosse, and folowe me.
35 For whosoeuer wyll saue his life, shall lose it: But whosoeuer shall lose his
life, for my sake & the Gospels, the same shall saue it.
36 For what shall it profite a man, yf he wynne all the worlde, and lose his
owne soule?
37 Or what shall a man geue, for a raunsome of his soule?
38 Whosoeuer therfore shalbe ashamed of me, and of my wordes, in this adulterous
and synnefull generation: of hym also shall the sonne of man be ashamed, when he
commeth in the glorie of his father, with the holy Angels.

Chapter 9

1 And he saide vnto them: Ueryly I say vnto you, ther be some of them that
stande here, whiche shall not taste of death, tyll they haue seene ye kyngdome
of God come, with power.
2 And after sixe dayes, Iesus taketh Peter, and Iames, and Iohn, and leadeth
them vp into an hye mountayne, out of the way, alone: and he was transfigured
before them.
3 And his rayment dyd shyne, & became very whyte, euen as snowe: so whyte, as no
fuller can make vpon the earth.
4 And there appeared vnto them Elias, with Moyses: And they talked with Iesu.
5 And Peter aunswered, and sayth to Iesu: Maister, here is good beyng for vs,
let vs make also three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moyses, and one
for Elias.
6 For he wist not what he saide, for they were afrayde.
7 And there was a cloude that shadowed them: and a voyce came out of the cloude,
saying, This is my beloued sonne, heare hym.
8 And sodenly, when they had loked rounde about, they sawe no man, more then
Iesus only, with them.
9 And as they came downe from the hyll, he charged them, that they should tell
no man those thynges that they had seene, tyll the sonne of man were rysen from
the dead agayne.
10 And they kept that saying with them, and demaunded one of another, what the
rysing from the dead againe, should meane?
11 And they asked hym, saying: Why then say the scribes that Elias must first
come?
12 He aunswered, and sayde vnto them: Elias veryly when he commeth firste,
restoreth all thynges: And the sonne of man, as it is written of hym, shall
suffer many thynges, & be set at naught.
13 But I saye vnto you, that Elias is come, & they haue done vnto him whatsoeuer
they would, as it is writte of him.
14 And when he came to his disciples, he sawe much people about them, and the
scribes disputyng with them.
15 And strayghtway all the people, whe they behelde hym, were amased, & ran to
hym, and saluted hym.
16 And he asked the scribes, what dispute ye with them?
17 And one of the companie aunswered, & sayde: Maister, I haue brought vnto thee
my sonne, whiche hath a dumbe spirite:
18 And whensoeuer he taketh hym, he teareth hym, & he fometh, and gnasheth with
his teeth, & pineth away: and I spake to thy disciples, that they should cast
hym out, and they coulde not.
19 He aunswereth hym, and sayth: O faythlesse nation, howe long shall I be with
you? how long shall I suffer you? Bryng hym vnto me.
20 And they brought him vnto him: And when he sawe hym, strayghtway the spirite
tare hym: And he fell downe on the grounde, wallowyng and fomyng.
21 And he asketh his father, howe longe it is a go sence this came vnto hym? And
he sayde, of a chylde.
22 And oft tymes it hath cast hym into the fire, and into the water, to destroye
hym: But yf thou canst do any thyng, haue mercy on vs, and helpe vs.
23 Iesus sayde vnto hym: this thyng yf thou cans beleue, all thynges are
possible to hym that beleueth.
24 And strayghtwaye the father of the childe cryed with teares, saying: Lorde I
beleue, helpe thou mine vnbeliefe.
25 When Iesus sawe that the people came runnyng together, he rebuked the foule
spirite, saying vnto hym: Thou dumbe and deafe spirite, I charge thee come out
of hym, and enter no more into hym.
26 And the spirite, when he had cryed and rent him sore, came out of hym: and he
was as one that had ben dead, insomuch that many sayde, he is dead.
27 But Iesus caught hym by the hande, and lyft hym vp: and he rose.
28 And whe he was come into the house, his disciples asked hym secretely: Why
coulde not we cast hym out?
29 And he saide vnto them: This kynde can come foorth by nothing, but by prayer
and fastyng.
30 And they departed thence, and toke their iorney thorowe Galilee: and he would
not yt any man should knowe it.
31 For he taught his disciples, and sayde vnto them: The sonne of man, shalbe
deliuered into the handes of men, & they shall kyll him: and, after that he is
kylled, he shall ryse agayne the thirde day.
32 But they vnderstoode not that saying, and were afrayde to aske hym.
33 And he came to Capernaum: And when he was come into the house, he asked them,
What was it that ye disputed among your selues by the way?
34 And they helde their peace: For by the way, they had reasoned among them
selues, who shoulde be the chiefest.
35 And when he was set downe, he called the twelue to hym, and sayde vnto them:
If any man desire to be first, the same shalbe last of al, & seruaut vnto al.
36 And he toke a young childe, & set him in the myddes of them: and when he had
taken hym in his armes, he sayde vnto them.
37 Whosoeuer receaueth any such a young chylde in my name, receaueth me: And
whosoeuer receaueth me, receaueth not me, but hym that sent me.
38 Iohn aunswered him, saying: Maister, we sawe one caste out deuylles in thy
name, & he foloweth not vs: and we forbad him, because he foloweth vs not.
39 But Iesus sayde, forbyd hym not: For there is no man, whiche, yf he do a
miracle in my name, can lyghtly speake euyll of me.
40 For he that is not against vs, is on our part.
41 Whosoeuer shall in my name geue you a cup of colde water to drynke, because
ye belong to Christe: veryly I say vnto you, he shall not lose his rewarde.
42 And whosoeuer shall offende one of these litle ones, that beleue in me, it
were better for him, if a mylstone were hanged about his necke, and he were cast
into the sea.
43 And yf thy hande offende thee, cut it of: It is better for thee to enter into
lyfe maymed, then hauyng two handes, to go into hell, into fire that neuer
shalbe quenched:
44 Where their worme dyeth not, & the fire goeth not out.
45 And yf thy foote offende thee, cut it of: It is better for thee to go halt
into lyfe, then hauyng two feete, to be cast into hell, into fire that neuer
shalbe queched:
46 Where their worme dyeth not, and the fire goeth not out.
47 And if thine eye offend thee, plucke it out: It is better for thee to go into
the kyngdome of God with one eye, then hauing two eyes, to be cast into hell
fire:
48 Where their worme dyeth not, and the fire goeth not out.
49 Euery man shalbe salted with fire: and euery sacrifice shalbe seasoned with
salt.
50 Salt is good: But if the salt be vnsauerie, with what thyng shall you season
it? Haue salt in your selues, and haue peace among your selues, one with an
other.

Chapter 10

1 And when he rose from thence, he went into the coastes of Iurie, through the
region that is beyonde Iordane: And the people resorted vnto hym a freshe, and
as he was wont, he taught them agayne.
2 And the pharisees came, and asked hym: Is it lawfull for a man to put away his
wyfe? temptyng hym.
3 And he aunswered, and sayde vnto them: What did Moyses commaunde you to do?
4 And they sayde: Moyses suffred to write a booke of diuorcement, and to put her
away.
5 And Iesus aunswered, and sayde vnto the: For the hardnesse of your heart, he
wrote this precept vnto you.
6 But from the begynnyng of the creation, God made them male & female.
7 And sayde for this cause shall a man leaue his father and mother, and byde by
his wyfe:
8 And they twayne shalbe one fleshe. So then are they no more twayne, but one
fleshe.
9 Therfore, what God hath coupled together, let not man seperate.
10 And in the house, his disciples asked hym agayne, of the same matter.
11 And he sayth vnto them: Whosoeuer putteth away his wyfe, & maryeth another,
committeth adulterie agaynst her.
12 And yf a woman put away her husbande, and be maryed to another, she
committeth adulterie.
13 And they brought young chyldren to hym, that he shoulde touche them: And his
disciples rebuked those that brought them.
14 But when Iesus sawe it, he was sore displeased, and sayde vnto them: Suffer
the young children to come vnto me, forbyd them not: For of such, is the
kyngdome of God.
15 Ueryly I say vnto you, whosoeuer doth not receaue ye kingdome of God as a
young childe, he shall not enter therin.
16 And when he had taken them vp in his armes, he put his handes vpon the, and
blessed them.
17 And when he was gone foorth into the way, there came one runnyng, and kneeled
to hym, and asked hym: good Maister, what shall I do, that I may inherite
eternall lyfe?
18 Iesus sayde vnto hym: Why callest thou me good? There is no man good but one,
which is God.
19 Thou knowest the commaundementes: Thou shalt not commit adulterie, Thou shalt
not kyll, Thou shalt not steale, Thou shalt not beare false witnesse, Thou shalt
defraude no man, Honour thy father and mother.
20 He aunswered, and sayde vnto hym: Maister, all these haue I obserued from my
youth.
21 Iesus behelde hym, and loued hym, and sayde vnto hym, one thyng thou lackest:
Go thy way, sell whatsoeuer thou hast, and geue to the poore, & thou shalt haue
treasure in heauen, and come folowe me, and take vp the crosse.
22 But he was discomforted because of that saying, and went away mournyng: for
he had great possessions.
23 And when Iesus had loked rounde about, he sayde vnto his disciples: Howe
hardly shall they that haue riches, enter into the kyngdome of God?
24 And the disciples were astonyed at his wordes. But Iesus aunswereth agayne,
and sayth vnto them: Children, howe harde is it for the that trust in ryches, to
enter into ye kyngdome of God.
25 It is easier for a camel to go thorowe the eye of a needle, then for the
riche to enter into the kyngdome of God.
26 And they were astonyed out of measure, saying betwene them selues: who then
can be saued?
27 Iesus loked vpon them, & sayde: with men it is vnpossible, but not with God:
for with God all thynges are possible.
28 And Peter began to say vnto him: Lo, we haue forsaken all, & haue folowed
thee.
29 Iesus aunswered, & sayde: Ueryly I say vnto you, there is no man that hath
forsaken house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wyfe, or
chyldren, or landes, for my sake and the Gospels,
30 But he shall receaue an hundreth folde nowe at this present, houses, and
brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and chyldren, and landes, with persecutions,
and in the worlde to come, eternall lyfe.
31 But many that are first, shalbe last: and the last, first.
32 And they were in the way, goyng vp to Hierusalem: And Iesus went before them,
and they were amazed, and folowed, and were afrayde. And Iesus toke the twelue
agayne, and beganne to tell them what thynges shoulde happen vnto hym.
33 Beholde, we go vp to Hierusalem, and the sonne of man shalbe delyuered vnto
the hye priestes, & vnto the scribes and they shall condenme hym to death, and
shall delyuer hym to the Gentiles.
34 And they shall mocke hym, & scourge hym, spit vpon hym, and kyll hym: And the
thirde day he shall ryse agayne.
35 And Iames and Iohn, the sonnes of Zebedee, came vnto hym, saying: Maister, we
would that thou shouldest do for vs, whatsoeuer we desyre.
36 He sayde vnto them: What woulde ye, that I shoulde do for you?
37 They sayde vnto hym: graunt vnto vs, that we may sit, one on thy ryght hande,
and the other on thy left hande, in thy glory.
38 But Iesus sayde vnto them, Ye wote not what ye aske: Can ye drynke of the
cuppe that I drynke of? and be baptized with the baptisme that I am baptized
with?
39 And they sayde vnto hym: that we can. Iesus sayde vnto them: ye shall in
deede drynke of the cup that I drynke of, and with the baptisme that I am
baptized withall, shall ye be baptized:
40 But to syt on my ryght hande, and on my left hande, is not myne to geue, but
vnto them, for whom it is prepared.
41 And when the ten hearde it, they began to disdaine at Iames and Iohn.
42 But Iesus, when he had called them to hym, sayde vnto them: ye knowe, that
they which seeme to beare rule among the Gentiles, raigne as Lordes ouer them:
And they that be great among them, exercise aucthoritie vpon them.
43 Neuerthelesse, so shall it not be among you: but whosoeuer of you, wyll be
great among you, shalbe your minister:
44 And whosoeuer of you wyll be the chiefest, shalbe seruaunt of all.
45 For the sonne of man also came not to be ministred vnto: but to minister, &
to geue his lyfe, a raunsome for many.
46 And they came to Hierico: And as he went out of ye citie of Hierico with his
disciples, and a great number of people, blynde Bartimeus the sonne of Timeus,
sate by the hye wayes syde beggyng.
47 And when he hearde that it was Iesus of Nazareth, he beganne to cry, and say:
Iesus, thou sonne of Dauid, haue mercy on me.
48 And many rebuked hym, that he shoulde holde his peace: But he cryed the more
a great deale, thou sonne of Dauid haue mercy on me.
49 And Iesus stoode styll, and commaunded hym to be called. And they called the
blynde, saying vnto hym: Be of good comfort, ryse, he calleth the.
50 And he threwe away his cloke, & rose, and came to Iesus.
51 And Iesus aunswered, and sayde vnto hym: what wylt thou that I do vnto thee?
The blynde sayde vnto hym: Maister, that I myght see.
52 Iesus sayde vnto hym: Go thy way, thy fayth hath saued thee. And immediatly
he receaued his sight, & folowed Iesus in the way.

Chapter 11

1 And when they came nye to Hierusalem, vnto Bethphage & Bethanie, at the mount
of Oliues, he sendeth foorth two of his disciples,
2 And sayth vnto them. Go your way into the towne, that is ouer against you: And
assoone as ye be entred into it, ye shall fynde a colte bounde, wheron neuer man
sate: loose hym, and bryng hym hyther.
3 And yf any man say vnto you, why do ye so? Say ye, that the Lorde hath neede
of hym: and strayghtway he wyll sende hym hyther.
4 And they went their way, and founde the colt tyed by the doore without, in a
place where two wayes met: and they loosed hym.
5 And diuers of them that stoode there, sayde vnto them: What do ye loosyng the
colte?
6 And they sayde vnto them, euen as Iesus had commaunded: And they let them go.
7 And they brought the colt to Iesus, and cast their garmentes on hym, and he
sate vpon hym.
8 And many spred their garmentes in the way: Other cut downe braunches of the
trees, & strawed the in the way.
9 And they that went before, and they that folowed, cryed, saying, Hosanna,
blessed is he that commeth in the name of the Lorde.
10 Blessed be the kyngdome, that commeth in the name of hym that is Lorde of our
father Dauid: Hosanna in the hiest.
11 And the Lorde entred into Hierusalem, and into the temple: And when he had
loked rounde about, vpon all thynges, and nowe the euen tyde was come, he went
out vnto Bethanie with the twelue.
12 And on the morowe, when they were come out from Bethanie, he hungred.
13 And when he had spyed a fygge tree a farre of, hauyng leaues, he came to see
if he myght fynde any thyng theron: And when he came to it, he founde nothyng
but leaues: for the tyme of figges was not yet.
14 And Iesus aunswered, and sayde vnto the fygge tree: neuer man eate fruite of
thee hereafter, whyle the worlde standeth. And his disciples hearde it.
15 And they came to Hierusalem: And Iesus went into the temple, and began to
cast out them that solde and bought in the temple, & ouerthrewe the tables of
the money chaungers, and the seates of them that solde doues:
16 And woulde not suffer, that any man shoulde cary a vessell through ye temple.
17 And he taught, saying vnto them: Is it not written, My house shalbe called
the house of prayer vnto all nations? But ye haue made it a denne of thieues.
18 And the scribes & hye priestes hearde it, and sought howe to destroy hym: For
they feared hym, because all the people was astonyed at his doctrine.
19 And when euen was come, Iesus went out of the citie.
20 And in the mornyng, as they passed by, they sawe the fygge tree dryed vp by
the rootes.
21 And Peter remembred, and sayde vnto hym: Maister, beholde, the fygge tree
which thou cursedst, is withered away.
22 And Iesus aunswered, and sayde vnto them: haue fayth in God.
23 For, veryly I say vnto you, that whosoeuer shall say vnto this mountayne: Be
thou remoued, and be thou cast into the sea, & shall not doubt in his heart, but
shall beleue yt those thynges which he sayth shall come to passe, whatsoeuer he
sayth, shalbe vnto hym.
24 Therfore I say vnto you, what thynges so euer ye desyre when ye pray, beleue
that ye receaue them, & ye shall haue them.
25 And when ye stande & pray, forgeue, yf ye haue ought agaynst any man: that
your father also which is in heauen, may forgeue you your trespasses.
26 But yf you do not forgeue: neither wyll your father, which is in heauen,
forgeue you your trespasses.
27 And they came agayne to Hierusalem: And as he walked in the temple, there
came to hym the hye priestes, and the scribes, and the elders.
28 And say vnto him: By what auctoritie doest thou these thynges? & who gaue
thee this auctoritie, to do these thynges?
29 Iesus aunswered, & sayde vnto them: I wyll also aske of you one question: and
aunswere me, and I wyll tell you by what auctoritie I do these thynges.
30 The baptisme of Iohn, whether was it from heauen, or of men? Aunswere me.
31 And they reasoned with them selues, saying, yf we shall say from heauen: he
wyll say, why then dyd ye not beleue hym?
32 But yf we shal say, of men, we feare the people. For all men counted Iohn,
that he was a very prophete.
33 And they aunswered, and sayde vnto Iesus: we can not tell. And Iesus
aunswered and sayde vnto them: neither wyll I tell you by what auctoritie I do
these thynges.

Chapter 12

1 And he beganne to speake vnto them by parables. A certayne man planted a
vineyarde, and compassed it about with an hedge, and ordeyned a wynepresse, and
built a towre, and let it out vnto husbande men: and went into a straunge
countrey.
2 And when the tyme was come, he sent to the husbande men a seruaunt, that he
myght receaue of the husbandmen, of the fruite of the vineyarde.
3 And they caught hym, and beat hym, and sent hym away emptie.
4 And moreouer, he sent vnto them another seruaunt: and at hym they cast stones,
and brake his head, and sent him away agayne, all to reuiled.
5 And agayne, he sent another, and hym they kylled: and many other, beatyng
some, and kyllyng some.
6 And so, when he had yet but one beloued sonne, he sent hym also at the last
vnto them, saying: they wyll stande in awe of my sonne.
7 But the husbandmen saide amongest them selues: this is the heyre, come, let vs
kyll him, and the inheritaunce shalbe ours.
8 And they toke hym, and kylled hym, and cast hym out of the vineyarde.
9 What shall therfore, the Lorde of the vineyarde do? He shal come, and destroy
the husbandmen, and wyll geue the vineyarde vnto other.
10 Haue ye not read this Scripture? The stone which the builders dyd refuse, is
become the chiefe stone of the corner:
11 This is the Lordes doyng, and it is marueylous in our eyes.
12 They went about also to take hym, and feared the people: For they knewe, that
he had spoken the parable agaynst them. And they left hym, and went their way.
13 And they sent vnto hym, certayne of the pharisees, and of the Herodians to
take hym in his wordes.
14 And assoone as they were come, they sayde vnto hym: Maister, we knowe that
thou art true, & carest for no man, for thou considerest not the persons of men,
but teachest the way of god truely: Is it lawfull to pay tribute to Caesar, or
not?
15 Ought we to geue, or ought we not to geue? But he seeyng their hypocrisie,
sayde vnto them: Why tempt ye me? Bryng me a penie, that I may see it.
16 And they brought it: And he sayth vnto them, Whose is this image and
superscription? And they sayde vnto hym: Caesars.
17 And Iesus aunswered, and sayde vnto them: Geue to Caesar the thynges that
belong to Caesar: and to God, the thynges which pertayne to God. And they
marueyled at hym.
18 There came also vnto hym, the Saducees, which say that there is no
resurrection, and they asked hym, saying:
19 Maister, Moyses wrote vnto vs, yf any mans brother dye, and leaue his wyfe
behynde hym, & leaue no chyldren: that his brother shoulde take his wyfe, and
rayse vp seede vnto his brother.
20 There were seuen brethren: and the first toke a wyfe, and when he dyed, left
no seede behynde hym.
21 And the seconde toke her, and dyed, neither left any seede: And the thirde
lykewyse.
22 And seuen had her, and left no seede behynde them: Last of all, the wyfe dyed
also.
23 In the resurrection therfore, when they shall rise agayne, whose wyfe shall
she be of them? for seuen had her to wife.
24 And Iesus aunswered, and sayde vnto the: Do ye not therfore erre, because ye
vnderstande not the Scriptures, neither the power of God?
25 For when they shall ryse agayne from the dead, they neither marry, nor are
geuen in maryage: but are as the Angels which are in heauen.
26 As touchyng the dead, that they ryse agayne: haue ye not read in the booke of
Moyses, howe in the bushe, God spake vnto him, saying: I am the God of Abraham,
and the God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob?
27 He is not the God of the dead, but God of the lyuyng. Ye therefore do greatly
erre.
28 And when there came one of the scribes, & had heard them disputyng together,
and perceaued that he had aunswered them well, he asked him: which is the first
of all the comaundementes.
29 Iesus aunswered hym, the first of all the commaundementes is: Heare O Israel,
The Lorde our God, is one Lorde:
30 And thou shalt loue the Lorde thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soule, and with all thy mynde, and with all thy strength. This is the first
commaundement.
31 And the seconde is lyke vnto this: Thou shalt loue thy neyghbour as thy
selfe. There is none other commaundement greater then these.
32 And the scribe sayde vnto hym: well maister, thou hast sayde the trueth, for
there is one God, & there is none but he.
33 And to loue hym with all the heart, and with all the vnderstandyng, & with
all the soule, and with all the strength, and to loue a mans neyghbour as hym
selfe, is greater then all the burnt offerynges and sacrifices.
34 And when Iesus sawe that he aunswered discretely, he sayde vnto hym: Thou art
not farre from the kingdome of God. And no man after that, durst aske hym any
question.
35 And Iesus aunswered and sayde, teachyng in the temple: howe say the scribes
that Christe is ye sonne of Dauid?
36 For Dauid hym selfe, inspired with the holy ghost, sayde: The Lorde saide to
my Lorde, sit on my right hande, tyll I make thyne enemies thy footestoole.
37 Dauid hym selfe calleth hym Lorde: and howe is he then his sonne? And much
people hearde hym gladly.
38 And he sayde vnto them in his doctrine, beware of the scribes, whiche desire
to go in long clothyng, and salutations in the market places,
39 And the chiefe seates in the congregations, and the vppermost rowmes at
feastes,
40 Which deuoure widdowes houses, & vnder a pretence, make long prayers: These
shal receaue greater dampnatio.
41 And when Iesus sate ouer agaynst the treasurie, he behelde howe the people
put money into the treasurie: And many that were rich, cast in much.
42 And there came a certayne poore widdowe, & she threwe in two mites, which
make a farthyng.
43 And he called vnto hym his disciples, and sayth vnto them: Ueryly I say vnto
you, that this poore widdowe hath cast more in, then all they which haue cast
into the treasurie.
44 For they all, dyd cast in of their superfluitie: but she, of her pouertie,
dyd cast in all that she had, euen all her lyuyng.

Chapter 13

1 And as he went out of the temple, one of his disciples sayde vnto hym:
Maister, see what stones, & what buildynges are here.
2 And Iesus aunswered, & sayde vnto hym: Seest thou these great buildynges?
There shall not be left one stone vpon another, that shall not be throwen downe.
3 And as he sate vpon the mount of Oliues, ouer agaynst the temple, Peter, and
Iames, and Iohn, and Andrewe, asked hym, secretely:
4 Tell vs, when shall these thynges be? And what shalbe the signe when all these
thynges shalbe fulfylled?
5 And Iesus aunswered them, and began to say: take heede, lest any man deceaue
you.
6 For many shall come in my name, saying I am Christe: and shall deceaue many.
7 When ye shall heare of warres, and tidynges of warres, be ye not troubled: For
such thynges must nedes be, but the ende is not yet.
8 For there shall nation aryse agaynst nation, and kyngdome agaynst kyngdome:
And there shalbe earthquakes in diuers places, and famine shall there be, and
troubles. These are the begynnyng of sorowes.
9 But take ye heede to your selues: For they shall deliuer you vp to councels,
and to synagogues, and ye shalbe beaten, yea, and shalbe brought before rulers &
kynges for my sake, for a testimoniall vnto them.
10 And the Gospel must first be published among all nations.
11 But when they leade you, and present you, be not carefull aforehande, neither
take thought what ye shall speake: but whatsoeuer is geuen you in the same
houre, that speake ye. For it is not ye that speake, but the holy ghost.
12 The brother shall betray the brother to death, and the father the sonne: and
the chyldren shall ryse agaynst their fathers and mothers, and shall put them to
death.
13 And ye shalbe hated of all men for my names sake: But who so endureth vnto
the ende, the same shalbe safe.
14 Moreouer, when ye see the abhomination of desolation, wherof is spoken by
Daniel the prophete, stande where it ought not (let hym that readeth
vnderstande) then let them that be in Iurie, flee to the mountaynes:
15 And let hym that is on ye house toppe, not go downe into the house, neither
enter therin, to fetch any thyng out of his house.
16 And let hym that is in the fielde, not turne backe agayne vnto the thynges
which he left behynde hym, for to take his garmente with hym.
17 Wo shalbe then to them that are with chylde, and to them that geue sucke in
those dayes.
18 But pray ye that your flyght be not in the Wynter:
19 For there shalbe in those dayes such tribulation, as was not from the
begynnyng of creatures, which God created, vnto this tyme, neither shalbe.
20 And except that the Lorde shoulde shorten those dayes, no fleshe shoulde be
saued: But for the electes sake, whom he hath chosen, he hath shortened those
dayes.
21 And then, yf any man say to you, lo here is Christe, lo he is there, beleue
not.
22 For false Christes, and false prophetes shall ryse, and shall shewe signes
and wonders, to deceaue, yf it were possible, euen the elect.
23 But take ye heede: Beholde, I haue shewed you all thynges before.
24 Moreouer, in those dayes, after that tribulation, the sunne shall waxe darke,
and the moone shall not geue her light.
25 And the starres of heauen, shall fall: and the powers which are in heauen,
shalbe shaken.
26 And then shall they see the sonne of man commyng in the cloudes, with great
power and glory.
27 And then shall he sende his Angels, and shall gather together his elect, from
the foure wyndes, from the ende of the earth, to the vtmost part of heauen.
28 Learne a parable of the fygge tree. When his braunche is yet tender, and hath
brought foorth leaues, ye knowe that sommer is neare:
29 So ye in lyke maner, when ye see these thynges come to passe, vnderstand,
that he is nye, euen at the doores.
30 Ueryly I say vnto you, that this generation shall not passe, tyll all these
thynges be done.
31 Heauen and earth shall passe away, but my wordes shall not passe away.
32 But of that day and tyme knoweth no man: no not the Angels which are in
heauen, neither the sonne him selfe, saue the father only.
33 Take heede, watche and pray: for ye knowe not when the tyme is.
34 As a man which is gone into a straunge countrey, and hath left his house, and
geuen auctoritie to his seruauntes, and to euery man his worke, and commaunded
the porter to watche:
35 Watche ye therfore, (for ye knowe not whe the maister of the house wyl come,
at euen, or at mydnyght, whether at the cocke crowyng, or in the dawnyng.)
36 Lest yf he come sodenly, he fynde you slepyng.
37 And that I say vnto you, I say vnto all, watche.

Chapter 14

1 After two dayes was the feaste of the Passouer, & of vnleuened bread. And the
hye priestes and the scribes, sought howe they myght take him by craft, and put
hym to death.
2 But they sayde: not in the feast day, lest any busines arise among the people.
3 And when he was at Bethanie, in the house of Simon the leper, euen as he sate
at meate, there came a woman hauyng an alabaster boxe of very precious oyntment,
called Narde pisrike, and she brake the boxe, and powred it on his head.
4 And there were some, that had indignation within them selues, and sayde: what
neded this waste of oyntment?
5 For it myght haue ben solde for more then three hundred pence, and haue ben
geuen to the poore. And they grudged agaynst her.
6 And Iesus sayde: let her alone, why trouble ye her? She hath done a good worke
on me.
7 For ye haue poore with you alwayes, and whensoeuer ye wyll, ye may do the
good: but me haue ye not alwayes.
8 She hath done that she coulde: she came aforehande, to annoynt my body to the
burying.
9 Ueryly I say vnto you, whersoeuer this Gospel shalbe preached, throughout the
whole worlde, this also that she hath done, shalbe rehearsed, in remembraunce of
her.
10 And Iudas Iscariot, one of the twelue, went away vnto ye hye priestes, to
betray hym vnto them.
11 When they hearde that, they were glad, and promised that they woulde geue hym
money. And he sought howe he myght conueniently betray hym.
12 And the first day of vnleuened bread, when they dyd sacrifice the Passouer,
his disciples sayde vnto hym: Where wylt thou that we go and prepare, that thou
mayest eate the Passouer?
13 And he sendeth foorth two of his disciples, and sayth vnto them: Go ye into
the citie, & there shall meete you a man bearing a pitcher of water, folowe him.
14 And whyther soeuer he goeth in, say ye to the good man of the house, the
maister sayth: Where is the ghest chaumber, where I shall eate the Pasouer with
my disciples?
15 And he wyll shewe you a large vpper chaumber, paued and prepared: there make
redy for vs.
16 And his disciples went foorth, & came into the citie, & founde as he had sayd
vnto them: & they made redy the Passouer.
17 And when it was nowe euen tyde, he came with the twelue.
18 And as they sate at boord & dyd eate, Iesus sayde: Ueryly I say vnto you, one
of you, that eateth with me, shall betray me.
19 And they began to be sory, and to say to hym one by one, is it I? And another
sayde, is it I?
20 He aunswered and sayde vnto them: It is one of the twelue, euen he that
dyppeth with me in the platter.
21 The sonne of man truely goeth as it is written of hym: but wo to that man by
whom the sonne of man is betrayed. Good were it for that man, yf he had neuer
ben borne.
22 And as they dyd eate, Iesus toke bread: and whe he had blessed, he brake it
and gaue to them, and sayde: Take, eate, this is my body.
23 And he toke the cup, and when he had geuen thankes, he toke it to them: and
they all dranke of it.
24 And he sayde vnto them: This is my blood, of the newe Testament, which is
shed for many.
25 Ueryly I say vnto you, I wyll drinke no more of the fruite of the vine,
vntyll that day, that I drinke it newe in the kyngdome of God.
26 And when they had praysed God, they went out into ye mount of Oliues.
27 And Iesus sayth vnto them: All ye shalbe offended because of me this nyght.
For it is written: I wyll smyte the sheepehearde, and the sheepe shalbe
scattered.
28 But after that I am risen agayne, I wyll go into Galilee before you.
29 Peter sayde vnto hym: And though all men be offended, yet wyll not I.
30 And Iesus sayth vnto hym: Ueryly I say vnto thee, that this day, euen, in
this night, before the cocke crowe twise, thou shalt deny me three tymes.
31 But he spake more vehemently: no, yf I shoulde dye with thee, I wyll not deny
thee. Likewise also sayde they all.
32 And they came into a place which was named Gethsemani, and he sayth to his
disciples: Sit ye heare, whyle I shall pray.
33 And he taketh with hym, Peter, and Iames, and Iohn, and began to waxe
abasshed, and to be in an agonie.
34 And sayth vnto them: My soule is heauie, euen vnto the death, tarry ye here
and watche.
35 And he went foorth a litle, and fell flat on the grounde, and prayed: that yf
it were possible, the houre myght passe from hym.
36 And he sayde: Abba father, all thynges are possible vnto thee, take away this
cup from me. Neuerthelesse, not that I wyll: but that thou wylt, be done.
37 And he came & founde them slepyng, and sayth vnto Peter: Simon, slepest thou?
Couldest not thou watche one houre?
38 Watche ye, and pray, lest ye enter into temptation: the spirite truely is
redy, but the fleshe is weake.
39 And agayne he went asyde, & prayed, and spake the same wordes.
40 And he returned, and founde them a slepe agayne. For their eyes were heauie:
neither wist they what to aunswere hym.
41 And he came the thirde tyme, & sayde vnto them: slepe hencefoorth, and take
your ease, it is inough: The houre is come, beholde, the sonne of man is
betrayed into the handes of sinners.
42 Ryse vp, let vs go: Lo, he that betrayeth me, is at hande.
43 And immediatly whyle he yet spake, commeth Iudas, which was one of the
twelue, and with hym a great number of people, with swordes & staues, from the
hye priestes, and scribes, and elders.
44 And he that betrayed hym, had geuen them a general token, saying: Who soeuer
I do kysse, that same is he, take hym, and leade hym away warely.
45 And assoone as he was come, he goeth strayghtway to hym, and sayth vnto hym:
Maister, Maister, and kissed hym.
46 And they layde their handes on hym, and toke hym.
47 And one of them that stoode by, drewe out a sworde, & smote a seruaunt of the
hye priest, and cut of his eare.
48 And Iesus aunswered, and saide vnto them: Ye be come out as vnto a thiefe
with swordes and with staues, for to take me.
49 I was dayly with you in the temple, teachyng, and ye toke me not, but these
thynges come to passe, that the Scriptures shoulde be fulfylled.
50 And they all forsooke hym, & ranne away.
51 And there folowed hym, a certayne young man, clothed in lynnen vpon the bare:
and the young men caught hym.
52 And he left his lynnen garment, and fled from them naked.
53 And they ledde Iesus away to the hyest priest, and with hym came all the hye
priestes, and the elders, and the scribes.
54 And Peter folowed hym a great way of, euen tyl he was come into the palace of
the hye priest, and he sate with the seruauntes, and warmed hym selfe at the
fyre.
55 And the hye priestes, and all the councell sought for witnesse agaynst Iesus,
to put hym to death, and founde none.
56 For many bare false witnesse agaynst hym, but their witnesse agreed not
together.
57 And there arose certayne, and brought false witnesse agaynst hym, saying.
58 We hearde hym say: I wyll destroy this temple that is made with handes, and
within three dayes I wyll buylde another, made without handes.
59 But yet their witnesse agreed not together.
60 And the hye priest stoode vp amongest them, and asked Iesus, saying:
Aunswerest thou nothyng? Howe is it that these beare witnesse agaynst thee?
61 But he helde his peace, & aunswered nothyng. Agayne, the hyest priest asked
hym, and sayde vnto hym: Art thou Christe, the sonne of the blessed?
62 And Iesus sayde, I am: And ye shall see the sonne of man sittyng on the ryght
hande of power, and commyng in the cloudes of heauen.
63 Then the hye priest rent his clothes, and sayde: What neede we any further
witnesses?
64 Ye haue hearde blasphemie: what thinke ye? And they all condemned him to be
worthy of death.
65 And some began to spyt at hym, and to couer his face, and to beate hym with
fistes, and to say vnto hym, prophecie. And the seruauntes dyd beate hym with
roddes.
66 And as Peter was beneath in the palace, there came one of the wenches of the
hyest priest:
67 And when she sawe Peter warmyng hym selfe, she loketh on hym, and sayth: And
thou also wast with Iesus of Nazareth.
68 And he denyed, saying: I knowe hym not, neither wote I what thou sayest. And
he went out into the porche, and the cocke crewe.
69 And a damsell, when she sawe hym agayne, began to say to the that stoode by,
this is one of them.
70 And he denyed it agayne. And anone after, they that stoode by, sayde agayne
to Peter: Surely, thou art one of the, for thou art of Galilee, and thy speache
agreeth therto.
71 But he began to curse, and to sweare, saying: I knowe not this man of whom ye
speake.
72 And the seconde tyme the cocke crewe, & Peter remembred the worde that Iesus
sayde vnto hym, before the cocke crowe twise, thou shalt deny me three tymes:
And he began to weepe.

Chapter 15

1 And anone in the dawnyng, the hye priestes held a councel, with the elders,
and the scribes, and the whole congregation, and bound Iesus, and ledde hym
away, and deliuered hym to Pilate.
2 And Pilate asked hym: Art thou the kyng of the Iewes? And he aunswered and
sayde vnto hym: thou sayest it?
3 And the hye priestes accused hym of many thynges.
4 So Pilate asked hym agayne, saying: Aunswerest thou nothyng? Beholde, howe
many thynges they witnesse agaynst thee.
5 Iesus yet aunswered nothyng, so that Pilate marueyled.
6 At that feast, Pilate dyd delyuer vnto them a prisoner, whomsoeuer they woulde
desire.
7 And there was one, that was named Barabbas, which lay bounde, with them that
made insurrection: Which men had committed murther also in the insurrection.
8 And the people crying aloude, began to desire hym that he woulde do, according
as he had euer done vnto them.
9 Pilate aunswered them, saying: Wyll ye that I let loose vnto you the kyng of
the Iewes?
10 For he knewe, that the hye priestes had delyuered hym of enuie.
11 But the hye priestes moued the people, that he shoulde rather delyuer
Barabbas vnto them.
12 Pilate aunswered agayne, and sayde vnto them: What wyll ye then that I do
vnto hym, whom ye call the kyng of the Iewes?
13 And they cryed agayne, crucifie hym.
14 Pilate sayde vnto them: What euyll hath he done? And they cryed the more
feruently, crucifie hym.
15 And so Pilate, wyllyng to content the people, let loose Barabbas vnto them,
and deliuered vp Iesus, when he had scourged hym, for to be crucified.
16 And the souldiers led hym away, into the hall, called Prætorium, and called
together the whole bande of souldiers:
17 And they clothed hym with purple, and they platted a crowne of thornes, and
crowned hym withall,
18 And began to salute hym: Hayle kyng of the Iewes.
19 And they smote hym on the head with a reede, & did spit vpon him, and bowed
their knees, and worshipped hym.
20 And when they had mocked hym, they toke the purple of hym, and put his owne
clothes on hym, and led hym out to crucifie hym.
21 And they compelled one that passed by, called Simon of Cyrene (commyng out of
the fielde, the father of Alexander and Rufus) to beare his crosse.
22 And they brought hym to a place named Golgotha, which is, if a man interprete
it, the place of dead mens sculles.
23 And they gaue hym to drynke, wyne myngled with myrre: but he receaued it not.
24 And when they had crucified hym, they parted his garmentes, castyng lottes
vpon them, what euery man shoulde take.
25 And it was the thyrde houre, and they crucified hym.
26 And the title of his cause was written: THE KYNG OF THE IEWES.
27 And they crucifed with hym two thieues: the one on the ryght hande, and the
other on his left.
28 And the Scripture was fulfylled which sayth: He was counted among the wycked.
29 And they that went by, rayled on him, wagging their heades, and saying: A
wretche, thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three dayes,
30 Saue thy selfe, and come downe from the crosse.
31 Lykewyse also mocked hym the hye priestes among them selues, with the
scribes, and sayde: He saued other men, hym selfe he can not saue.
32 Let Christe the kyng of Israel descende nowe from the crosse, that we may
see, and beleue. And they that were crucified with hym, checked hym also.
33 And when the sixth houre was come, darknesse arose ouer all the earth, vntill
the nynth houre.
34 And at the nynth houre, Iesus cryed with a loude voyce, saying: Eloi, Eloi,
lama sabachthani? which is, yf one interprete it, My God, my God, why hast thou
forsaken me?
35 And some of them that stoode by, whe they hearde that, sayde: Beholde, he
calleth for Elias.
36 And one ran, and fylled a spunge full of vineger, and put it on a reede, &
gaue hym to drynke, saying: let hym alone, let vs see whether Elias wyll come
and take hym downe.
37 But Iesus cryed with a loude voyce, and gaue vp the ghost.
38 And the vayle of the temple dyd rent in two peeces, from the toppe to the
bottome.
39 And when the Centurion, which stoode before hym, sawe, that he so cryed, and
gaue vp the ghost, he sayde: Truely this man was the sonne of God.
40 There were also women a good way of, beholdyng hym: among whom was Marie
Magdalene, and Marie the mother of Iames the litle, and of Ioses, and Salome.
41 Which also when he was in Galilee, had folowed hym, and ministred vnto hym:
and many other women, which came vp with hym vnto Hierusalem.
42 And nowe when the euen was come, (because it was the day of preparyng, that
goeth before the Sabboth)
43 Ioseph of the citie of Aramathia, a noble councellour, which also loked for
the kyngdome of God, came, and went in boldely vnto Pilate, and begged of hym
the body of Iesu.
44 And Pilate marueyled that he was alredy dead: and called vnto hym the
Centurion, and asked of hym, whether he had ben any whyle dead.
45 And when he knewe the trueth of the Centurion, he gaue the body to Ioseph.
46 And he bought a lynnen cloth, & toke hym downe, and wrapped hym in the lynnen
cloth, & layde him in a sepulchre, that was hewe out of the rocke, & roulled a
stone vnto the doore of ye sepulchre.
47 And Marie Magdalene, and Marie Ioses, behelde where he was layde.

Chapter 16

1 And whe the Sabboth day was past, Marie Magdalen and Marie the mother of
Iames, & Salome, bought sweete smellynge oyntmentes, that they myght come and
annoynt hym.
2 And early in the mornyng, the first day of the Sabbothes, they came vnto the
sepulchre, when the sunne was rysen:
3 And they sayde among them selues, who shall roule vs away the stone from the
doore of the sepulchre?
4 And when they loked, they sawe how that the stone was rouled awaye, for it was
a very great one.
5 And they went into the sepulchre, and sawe a young man syttyng on the ryght
syde, clothed in a long whyte garment, and they were amased.
6 And he sayth vnto them, be not amased: ye seke Iesus of Nazareth, which was
crucified: He is risen, he is not here, beholde the place where they had put
hym.
7 But go your way, & tell his disciples, and Peter, that he goeth before you
into Galilee, there shall ye see hym, as he saide vnto you.
8 And they went out quickly, and fled from the sepulchre, for they trembled &
were amased: neither sayde they any thing to any man, for they were afraide.
9 When Iesus was rysen early, the first day after the Sabboth, he appeared
firste to Marie Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seuen deuils.
10 And she went & tolde them that were with hym, as they mourned & wept.
11 And they, when they hearde that he was alyue, and had ben seene of her,
beleued it not.
12 After that, appeared he vnto two of them in another fourme, as they walked
and went into the countrey.
13 And they went and tolde it vnto the residue: and they beleued not these also.
14 Afterwarde, he appeared vnto the eleuen, as they sate at meate, and cast in
their teeth their vnbeliefe and hardnes of heart, because they beleued not them
whiche had seene that he was rysen agayne from the dead.
15 And he sayde vnto them: Go ye into all the worlde, and preache the Gospell to
all creatures.
16 He that beleueth, and is baptized, shalbe saued: But he that beleueth not,
shalbe dampned.
17 And these tokens shall folowe them that beleue. In my name they shal cast out
deuils, they shall speake with newe tongues,
18 They shall driue away serpentes: and yf they drinke any deadly thyng, it
shall not hurte them: They shall lay their handes on the sicke, & they shal
recouer.
19 So then, when the Lorde had spoken vnto them, he was receaued into heauen,
and sate hym downe on the ryght hande of God.
20 And they went foorth, and preached euerywhere, the Lorde workyng with them,
and confirmyng the worde with signes folowyng.


Luke

Chapter 1

1 Forasmuche as manye haue taken in hande, to set foorth in order, ye
declaration of those thynges whiche are moste surelye to be beleued among vs,
2 Euen as they deliuered them vnto vs, which from the begynnyng sawe them them
selues with their eyes, and were ministers of the worde:
3 I determined also, assoone as I had searched out diligently all thinges from
the begynnyng, that then I woulde write vnto thee, moste excellent Theophilus.
4 That thou myghtest knowe the certentie of those thinges wherof thou hast ben
infourmed.
5 There was in the dayes of Herode the kyng of Iurie, a certaine priest, named
Zacharias, of the course of Abia, & his wyfe was of the daughters of Aaron, &
her name was Elizabeth.
6 They were both ryghteous before God, and walked in all the lawes and
ordinaunces of the Lorde, that no man coulde fynde fault with them.
7 And they had no chylde, because that Elizabeth was barren: and they both were
nowe well stricken in age.
8 And it came to passe, that when Zacharie executed the priestes office before
God, as his course came,
9 Accordyng to ye custome of the priestes office, his lot was to burne incence,
whe he went into the temple of the Lorde.
10 And the whole multitude of the people were without in prayer, whyle the
incence was burnyng.
11 And there appeared vnto hym an Angel of the Lorde, standyng on the ryght syde
of the aulter of incence.
12 And when Zacharias sawe him, he was troubled, and feare came vpo him.
13 But the Angel sayde vnto him: Feare not Zacharie, for thy prayer is hearde:
and thy wyfe Elizabeth shall beare thee a sonne, & thou shalt cal his name Iohn.
14 And thou shalt haue ioy and gladnesse, and many shall reioyce at his birth.
15 For he shalbe great in the syght of the Lorde, and shall neither drynke wine
nor strong drynke: and he shalbe fylled with the holy ghost, euen from his
mothers wombe.
16 And many of the chyldren of Israel, shall he turne to their Lorde God.
17 And he shall go before hym, with the spirite and power of Elias, to turne the
heartes of the fathers to the chyldren, and the disobedient to the wisedome of
the iust men, to make redy a perfect people for the Lorde.
18 And Zacharias saide vnto the Angel: By what token shall I know this? For I am
olde, and my wyfe well stricken in yeres.
19 And the Angel aunswered, and sayde vnto hym: I am Gabriel that stande in the
presence of God, and am sent to speake vnto thee, and to shewe thee these glad
tydynges.
20 And beholde, thou shalt be dumbe, & not be able to speake, vntyll the day
that these thynges be perfourmed, because thou beleuedst not my wordes, whiche
shalbe fulfylled in their season.
21 And the people waited for Zacharias, and marueyled that he taried so long in
the temple.
22 And when he came out, he coulde not speake vnto them. And they perceaued that
he had seene a vision in the temple: For he beckened vnto them, and remayned
speachlesse.
23 And it came to passe, that assoone as the dayes of his office were out, he
departed into his owne house.
24 And after those dayes, his wyfe Elizabeth conceaued, and hyd her selfe fiue
monethes, saying:
25 Thus hath the Lorde dealt with me, in the dayes wherein he loked on me, to
take fro me my rebuke among men.
26 And in the sixth moneth, the Angel Gabriel was sent from God, vnto a citie of
Galilee, named Nazareth,
27 To a virgin, spoused to a man whose name was Ioseph, of the house of Dauid,
and the virgins name was Marie.
28 And the Angel went in vnto her, and sayde: Hayle thou that art freelie
beloued, the Lorde is with thee, blessed art thou among women.
29 And when she sawe hym, she was troubled at his saying, and caste in her mynde
what maner of salutation that shoulde be.
30 And the Angel saide vnto her: Feare not Marie, for thou hast founde grace
with God.
31 For beholde, thou shalt conceaue in thy wombe, and beare a sonne, & shalt
call his name Iesus.
32 He shalbe great, & shalbe called ye sonne of the hyest: & the Lord God shall
geue vnto him the seate of his father Dauid:
33 And he shall reigne ouer the house of Iacob for euer, and of his kyngdome
there shalbe none ende.
34 Then said Marie vnto ye Angel: How shall this be, seing I knowe not a man?
35 And the Angel aunswered, & saide vnto her: The holy ghost shall come vpon
thee, & the power of the hyest shall ouershadowe thee. Therefore also that holy
thyng whiche shalbe borne, shalbe called the sonne of God.
36 And beholde, thy cosin Elizabeth, she hath also conceaued a sonne in her olde
age: & this is her sixth moneth, whiche was called barren.
37 For with God, shall nothyng be vnpossible.
38 And Marie saide: Beholde the handmayden of the Lorde, be it vnto me accordyng
to thy worde. And the Angel departed from her.
39 And Marie arose in those dayes, & went into the hyll countrey with haste,
into a citie of Iuda,
40 And entred into the house of Zacharie, and saluted Elizabeth.
41 And it came to passe, that when Elizabeth hearde the salutation of Marie, the
babe sprang in her wombe, and Elizabeth was fylled with the holy ghost.
42 And she cryed with a loude voyce, and saide: Blessed art thou among women,
because ye fruite of thy wombe is blessed.
43 And whence commeth this to me, that ye mother of my lord should come to me?
44 For loe, assoone as the voyce of thy salutation sounded in mine eares, the
babe sprang in my wombe for ioy.
45 And blessed is she that beleued: For those thinges shalbe perfourmed, which
were tolde her from the Lorde.
46 And Marie saide: My soule magnifieth the Lorde.
47 And my spirite reioyceth in God my sauiour.
48 For he hath loked on the lowe degree of his handmayden: For loe, now from
hencefoorth shal all generations call me blessed.
49 Because, he that is mightie, hath done to me great thinges, & holy is his
name,
50 And his mercy is on them that feare him, from generation to generation.
51 He hath shewed stregth with his arme, he hath scattered them that are proude,
in the imagination of their heartes.
52 He hath put downe the myghtie fro their seates, and exalted them of lowe
degree.
53 He hath fylled the hungry with good thynges, & sent away the riche emptie.
54 He hath helped his seruaunt Israel, in remembraunce of his mercy,
55 ( Euen as he promised to our fathers, Abraham, and to his seede) for euer.
56 And Marie abode with her about three monethes, and returned agayne to her
owne house.
57 Elizabethes tyme came, that she shoulde be deliuered, and she brought foorth
a sonne.
58 And her neyghbours, and her cosins hearde howe the Lorde hadde shewed great
mercy vpo her, and they reioyced with her.
59 And it came to passe, that on the eyght day they came to circumcise the
chylde, and called his name Zacharias, after the name of his father.
60 And his mother aunswered, and said: not so, but he shalbe called Iohn.
61 And they sayde vnto her: There is none in thy kinrede that is named with this
name.
62 And they made signes to his father, howe he woulde haue hym called.
63 And he asked for wrytyng tables, and wrote, saying, his name is Iohn. And
they marueyled all.
64 And his mouth was opened immediatly, and his tounge loosed & he spake, and
praysed God.
65 And feare came on all them that dwelt nye vnto them: And all these sayinges
were noysed abrode throughout all the hyll countrey of Iurie.
66 And all they that hearde them, layde them vp in their heartes, saying: What
maner of chylde shall this be? And the hande of the Lorde was with hym.
67 And his father Zacharias was filled with ye holy ghost, & prophesied, saying.
68 Praysed be ye Lord God of Israel, for he hath visited & redeemed his people.
69 And hath raysed vp an horne of saluation vnto vs, in the house of his
seruaunt Dauid.
70 Euen as he promised by the mouth of his holy prophetes, whiche were sence the
worlde began.
71 That he would saue vs from our enemies, and from the hande of all that hate
vs.
72 That he would deale mercyfully with our fathers, and remember his holy
couenaunt.
73 And that he woulde perfourme the oth, which he sware to our father Abraham,
for to geue vs.
74 That we, beyng deliuered out of the handes of our enemies, might serue him
without feare,
75 All the dayes of our life, in such holynesse and righteousnes as are accepted
before hym.
76 And thou childe shalt be called the prophete of the hyghest: for thou shalt
go before the face of the Lorde, to prepare his wayes.
77 To geue knowledge of saluation vnto his people, by the remission of their
sinnes.
78 Through ye tender mercy of our God, wherby the day spryng from an hygh hath
visited vs.
79 To geue lyght to them that sitte in darknesse, and in the shadowe of death,
to guide our feete into the way of peace.
80 And the chylde grewe, and waxed strong in spirite, and was in wildernesse
till the day came when he should shewe hym selfe vnto the Israelites.

Chapter 2

1 And it came to passe in those dayes, yt there went out a commaundement fro
Augustus Cesar, that all the world should be taxed.
2 (And this first taxing was made, when Syrenius was liefetenaunt in Syria.)
3 And euery man went vnto his owne citie, to be taxed.
4 And Ioseph also went vp from Galilee, out of the citie Nazareth, into Iurie,
vnto the citie of Dauid, whiche is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house
and image of Dauid,
5 To be taxed with Marie his spoused wyfe, which was with chylde.
6 And so it was, that whyle they were there, the dayes were accomplysshed, that
she shoulde be deliuered.
7 And she brought foorth her first begotten sonne, and wrapped him in swadlyng
clothes, & layde hym in a manger, because there was no rowme for them in the
Inne.
8 There were in ye same countrey sheepheardes, abydyng in the fielde, & watchyng
their flocke by nyght.
9 And loe, the Angel of the Lorde stoode harde by them, and the glorie of the
Lorde shone rounde about them, & they were sore afrayde.
10 And the Angel sayde vnto them, be not afrayde: For beholde, I bryng you
tydynges of great ioy, that shall come to all people.
11 For vnto you is borne this daye, in the citie of Dauid, a sauiour, which is
Christ the Lorde.
12 And take this for a signe: Ye shal finde the childe wrapped in swadling
clothes, and layde in a manger.
13 And straightway, there was with the Angel, a multitude of heauenly souldiers,
praysyng God, and saying.
14 Glorie to God on hye, and peace on the earth, and vnto men a good wyll.
15 And it came to passe, assoone as the Angels were gone away from them into
heauen, the sheepheardes said one to another: Let vs go nowe euen vnto
Bethlehem, and see this thyng that is come to passe, whiche the Lorde hath
shewed vnto vs.
16 And they came with haste, and founde Marie and Ioseph, and the babe layde in
a manger.
17 And when they had seene it, they publisshed abrode the saying whiche was
tolde them, of that childe.
18 And all they that hearde it, wondred at those thinges which were tolde them
of the sheepheardes.
19 But Marie kept al those sayinges, and pondered them in her heart.
20 And the sheepheardes returned, praysyng & laudyng God, for all the thinges
that they had hearde and seene, euen as it was tolde vnto them.
21 And when the eygth day was come, that the chylde shoulde be circumcised, his
name was called Iesus, whiche was so named of the Angel, before he was conceaued
in the wombe.
22 And when the dayes of her purification, after the lawe of Moyses, were
accomplished, they brought hym to Hierusalem, to present him to the Lord.
23 (As it is written in the lawe of ye Lord: Euery man chylde that firste
openeth the wombe, shalbe called holy to ye lord)
24 And to offer, as it is sayde in the lawe of the Lorde, a payre of turtle
doues, or two young pigions.
25 And beholde, there was a man in Hierusalem, whose name was Simeon: and the
same man was iust and godlye, and loked for the consolation of Israel, and the
holy ghost was vpon hym.
26 And a reuelation was geuen hym of the holy ghost, not to see death, before he
had seene the Lordes Christe.
27 And he came by inspiration into the temple: And when the father & mother
brought in the chylde Iesus, to do for hym after the custome of the lawe,
28 Then toke he hym vp in his armes, & praysed God, and sayde:
29 Lord nowe lettest thou thy seruaut depart in peace, accordyng to thy promise.
30 For mine eyes haue seene thy saluatio,
31 Whiche thou hast prepared before the face of all people:
32 A light to be reuealed to the gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel.
33 And Ioseph and his mother marueyled at those thinges which were spoken of
hym.
34 And Simeon blessed them, & saide vnto Marie his mother: beholde, this chylde
is set to be the fall & vprysyng agayne of many in Israel, & for a signe which
is spoken agaynst.
35 And moreouer, the sworde shall pearce thy soule, that the thoughtes of many
heartes may be opened.
36 And ther was a prophetisse, one Anna, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe
of Aser, which was of a great age, and had lyued with an husbande seuen yeres
from her virginitie.
37 And she had ben a wydowe about fourescore and foure yeres, whiche departed
not from the temple, but serued God with fastynges and prayers nyght and day.
38 And she, commyng at the same instant vpon them, confessed lykewise the Lorde,
and spake of hym, to all them that loked for redemptio in Hierusalem.
39 And when they had perfourmed all thynges, accordyng to the lawe of the Lorde,
they returned into Galilee, to their owne citie Nazareth.
40 And the chylde grewe, and waxed strong in spirite, and was fylled with
wisdome: & the grace of God was vpon hym.
41 Nowe, his parentes went to Hierusale euery yere, at the feast of ye Passouer.
42 And when he was twelue yere old, they ascended vp to Hierusalem, after the
custome of the feast day:
43 And whe they had fulfilled the dayes, as they returned home, the chylde Iesus
abode styll in Hierusalem: & Ioseph and his mother knewe not of it.
44 But they, supposyng hym to haue ben in the company, came a dayes iourney, and
sought hym among their kinsfolke and acquayntaunce.
45 And when they founde hym not, they turned backe againe to Hierusalem, and
sought hym.
46 And it came to passe, that after three dayes, they founde hym in the temple,
sittyng in the myddes of the doctours, hearyng them, and posyng them.
47 And all that hearde hym, were astonied at his vnderstanding & aunsweres.
48 And when they sawe hym, they were amased. And his mother said vnto him:
Sonne, why hast thou thus dealt with vs? Beholde, thy father and I haue sought
thee, sorowyng.
49 And he sayde vnto them: Howe is it that ye sought me? Wyste ye not, that I
must go about my fathers businesse?
50 And they vnderstoode not that saying which he spake vnto them.
51 And he went downe with them, and came to Nazareth, & was obedient vnto them:
But his mother kepte all these sayinges in her heart.
52 And Iesus increased in wisedome and stature, and in fauour with God & men.

Chapter 3

1 Nowe, in the fifteenth yere of ye raigne of Tiberius Cesar, Pontius Pilate
being lieftenaut of Iurie, and Herode being tetrarch of Galilee, & his brother
Philip tetrarch of Iturea, and of the region of ye Trachonites, and Lysanias the
tetrarch of Abiline,
2 When Annas and Caiaphas were the hye priestes, the worde of the Lorde came
vnto Iohn, the sonne of Zacharias, in the wyldernesse.
3 And he came into all the coastes about Iordane, preachyng the baptisme of
repentaunce, for the remission of sinnes:
4 As it is writte in ye booke of the wordes of Esaias the prophete, saying: The
voyce of a cryer in wyldernesse, prepare ye the way of ye Lorde, make his pathes
strayght.
5 Euery valley shalbe fylled, and euery mountayne & hyll shalbe brought lowe:
And thynges that be croked, shalbe made strayght, and the rough wayes shalbe
made playne.
6 And all flesshe, shall see the saluation of God.
7 Then saide he to the people that were come foorth to be baptized of hym: O
generations of vipers, who hath forewarned you to flee from the wrath to come?
8 Bryng foorth therefore due fruites of repentaunce, and begyn not to say within
your selues, we haue Abraham to our father: For I saye vnto you, that God is
able of these stones, to rayse vp childre vnto Abraham.
9 Nowe also is the axe layed vnto the roote of the trees: Euery tree therfore
which bryngeth not foorth good fruite, is hewen downe, and cast into the fire.
10 And the people asked hym, saying: What shall we do then?
11 He aunswereth, and sayth vnto them: He that hath two coates, let him part
with hym that hath none: and he that hath meate, let hym do lykewyse.
12 Then came publicanes also to be baptized, and saide vnto him: Maister, what
shall we do?
13 And he sayde vnto them: Require no more then that which is appoynted vnto
you.
14 The souldiours lykewyse demaunded of hym, saying: And what shall we do? And
he saide vnto them: Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be
content with your wages.
15 As the people wayted, & all men mused in their heartes of Iohn, whether he
were very Christe:
16 Iohn aunswered, and said vnto them all, In deede I baptize you with water:
but one stronger then I commeth, whose shoes latched I am not worthy to vnlose,
he shall baptize you with the holy ghost, and with fire.
17 Which hath his fanne in his hande, & wyll purge his floore, & wyll gather the
wheate into his barne: but ye chaffe wyl burne vp, with fire that neuer shalbe
quenched.
18 And many other thinges, in his exhortation, preached he vnto the people.
19 Then Herode the tetrarch, when he was rebuked of hym for Herodias, his
brother Philippes wyfe, and for all the euyls which Herode dyd,
20 Added this aboue all, & shut vp Iohn in pryson.
21 Nowe it came to passe, as all the people were baptized, and when Iesus was
baptized, and dyd praye, that the heauen was opened,
22 And the holy ghost came downe, in a bodyly shape lyke a Doue, vpon hym: and a
voyce came from heauen, which sayde, Thou art my beloued sonne, in thee I am
well pleased.
23 And Iesus him selfe began to be about thirtie yeres of age, beyng (as he was
supposed) the sonne of Ioseph: whiche was the sonne of Heli,
24 Whiche was the sonne of Matthat, whiche was the sonne of Leui, whiche was the
sonne of Melchi, whiche was the sonne of Ianna, whiche was the sonne of Ioseph:
25 Whiche was ye sonne of Matthathias, whiche was the sonne of Amos, whiche was
the sonne of Naum, whiche was the sonne of Hesly, which was the sonne of Nagge:
26 Whiche was the sonne of Maath, which was the sonne of Matthathias, which was
the sonne of Semei, whiche was the sonne of Ioseph, whiche was the sonne of
Iuda:
27 Whiche was the sonne of Ioanna, which was the sonne of Rhesa, whiche was the
sonne of Zorobabel, whiche was the sonne of Salathiel, which was the sonne of
Neri:
28 Whiche was the sonne of Melchi, whiche was the sonne of Addi, whiche was the
sonne of Cosam, whiche was the sonne of Elmodam, whiche was the sonne of Er:
29 Whiche was the sonne of Iose, which was the sonne of Eliezer, whiche was
sonne of Iorim, whiche was ye sonne of Matthat, which was ye sonne of Leui:
30 Whiche was the sonne of Simeon, whiche was the sonne of Iuda, whiche was the
sonne of Ioseph, whiche was the sonne of Ionan, whiche was the sonne of Eliacim:
31 Whiche was the sonne of Melea, whiche was ye sonne of Menam, whiche was ye
sonne of Matthatha, which was the sonne of Nathan, whiche was the sonne of
Dauid:
32 Whiche was ye sonne of Iesse, whiche was the sonne of Obed, which was the
sonne of Booz, whiche was the sonne of Salmo, which was ye sonne of Naasso:
33 Whiche was the sonne of Aminadab, whiche was the sonne of Aram, whiche was
the sonne of Esron, whiche was the sonne of Phares, whiche was the sonne of
Iuda:
34 Whiche was ye sonne of Iacob, whiche was the sonne of Asaac, which was the
sonne of Abraham, whiche was ye sonne of Thara, which was the sonne of Nachor:
35 Which was ye sonne of Saruch, which was the sonne of Ragau, whiche was the
sonne of Phaleg, which was ye sonne of Heber, which was the sonne of Sala:
36 whiche was the sonne of Arphaxad, whiche was the sonne of Sem, whiche was the
sonne of Noe, whiche was the sonne of Lamech:
37 Whiche was the sonne of Mathusala, whiche was the sonne of Enoch, which was
the sonne of Iared, whiche was the sonne of Maleleel, whiche was the sonne of
Cainan:
38 Which was the sonne of Henos, which was ye sonne of Seth, which was ye sonne
of Adam, which was the sonne of God.

Chapter 4

1 Iesus, being full of the holy ghost, returned from Iordane, & was ledde by the
spirite into wyldernesse,
2 And was fourtie dayes tempted of the deuyll, and in those dayes dyd he eate
nothyng: And when they were ended, he afterwarde hungred.
3 And the deuyll sayde vnto hym: If thou be the sonne of God, commaunde this
stone that it be made bread.
4 And Iesus aunswered hym, saying: It is written, that man shall not lyue by
bread only, but by euery word of god.
5 And the deuyll toke hym into an hye mountayne, & shewed hym all the kingdomes
of ye worlde in a moment of time.
6 And the deuyl saide vnto hym: all this power wyll I geue thee euerywhyt, & the
glory of them, for that is deliuered vnto me, and to whomsoeuer I wyll, I geue
it.
7 If thou therfore wilt fall downe before me, & worship me, they shalbe all
thine.
8 Iesus aunswered, & sayde vnto hym, Hence from me Satan: For it is writte, Thou
shalt worship the Lorde thy God, and hym only shalt thou serue.
9 And he caryed hym to Hierusalem, & set hym on a pinacle of the temple, and
sayde vnto him: If thou be the sonne of God, cast thy selfe downe from hence.
10 For it is written, that he shall geue his Angels charge ouer thee, to kepe
thee.
11 And in their handes they shall beare thee vp, that thou dasshe not thy foote
at any tyme agaynst a stone.
12 And Iesus aunswered, and sayde vnto hym: It is sayde, Thou shalt not tempt
the Lorde thy God.
13 And assoone as all the temptatio was ended, the deuyll departed from hym for
a season.
14 And Iesus returned, by the power of the spirite, into Galilee: & there went a
fame of hym, throughout all the region rounde about.
15 And he taught in their synagogues, & was commended of all men.
16 And he came to Nazareth, where he was nursed: and, as his custome was, he wet
into the synagogue on the Sabboth day, and stoode vp for to reade.
17 And there was deliuered vnto hym the booke of the prophete Esaias: And whe he
had opened the booke, he founde the place where it was written,
18 The spirite of the Lord vpon me, because he hath annoynted me, to preache the
Gospel to the poore he hath sent me, to heale the broken hearted, to preache
deliueraunce to the captiue, & recouering of syght to the blynde, freely to set
at libertie them that are bruised:
19 And to preache the acceptable yere of the Lorde.
20 And he closed the booke, and gaue it agayne to the minister, and sate downe:
And the eyes of all them that were in ye synagogue, were fastened on hym.
21 And he began to say vnto the: this day is this scripture fulfilled in your
eares.
22 And all bare him witnesse, & wondred at ye gratious wordes whiche proceaded
out of his mouth. And they sayde, is not this Iosephes sonne?
23 And he saide vnto them: Ye wyll vtterly say vnto me this prouerbe, phisition
heale thy selfe: Whatsoeuer we haue heard done in Capernau, do ye same here
lykewyse in thine owne countrey.
24 And he saide: Ueryly I say vnto you, no prophete is accepted in his owne
countrey.
25 But I tell you of a trueth, many wydowes were in Israel, in the dayes of
Elias, when heauen was shutte three yeres & sixe monethes, when great famishment
was throughout all ye lande:
26 And vnto none of the was Elias sent, saue vnto Sarepta, a citie of Sidon,
vnto a woman that was a wydowe.
27 And many lepers were in Israel, in the tyme of Elizeus the prophete: and none
of them was clensed, sauyng Naaman the Syrian.
28 And all they in the synagogue, when they hearde these thynges, were fylled
with wrath:
29 And rose vp, and thrust hym out of the citie, and led hym euen vnto the edge
of the hyll (wheron their citie was built,) yt they might cast him downe
headlong.
30 But he, passyng through the myddes of them, went his way:
31 And came downe to Capernaum, a citie of Galilee, and there taught them on the
Sabboth dayes.
32 And they were astonyed at his doctrine: For his preachyng was with power.
33 And in the synagogue, there was a man, which had an vncleane spirite of a
deuyll, and cryed with a loude voyce,
34 Saying: Oh what haue we to do with thee, thou Iesus of Nazareth? Art thou
come to destroy vs? I knowe who thou art, euen the holy one of God.
35 And Iesus rebuked hym, saying: Holde thy peace, and come out of hym. And when
the deuyll had throwen him in the middes, he came out of hym, and hurt hym not.
36 And feare came on them all, and they spake among them selues, saying: What
maner a thyng is this? For with auctoritie and power he commaundeth the foule
spirites, and they come out.
37 And the fame of hym spread abrode, throughout euery place of the countrey
rounde about.
38 And when he was risen vp, and come out of the synagogue, he entred into
Simons house: And Simons wiues mother was taken with a great feuer, & they made
intercession to hym for her.
39 And he stoode ouer her, and rebuked the feuer, and the feuer left her: And
immediatly she arose, and ministred vnto them.
40 When the Sunne was downe, all they that had sicke, taken with diuers
diseases, brought them vnto hym: And he layde his handes on euery one of them,
and healed them.
41 And deuyls also came out of many, crying & saying: Thou art that Christe, the
sonne of God. And he rebuked the, and suffred them not to speake: For they knewe
that he was Christe.
42 As soone as it was day, he departed, and went into a desert place: And the
people sought hym, and came to hym, and kept hym, that he shoulde not depart
from them.
43 And he sayde vnto them, I must preache the kyngdome of God to other cities
also: For therfore am I sent.
44 And he preached in the synagogues of Galilee.

Chapter 5

1 It came to passe, that when ye people preassed vpon hym, to heare the worde of
God, he stoode by the lake of Genezareth,
2 And sawe two shippes stande by the lakes syde: But the fisshermen were gone
out of them, and were wasshyng their nettes.
3 And he entred into one of the shippes, which pertayned to Simon, and prayed
hym that he woulde thrust out, a litle from the lande: And he sate downe, and
taught the people out of the shippe.
4 When he had left speakyng, he sayde vnto Simon: Launche out into the deepe,
and let slip your nettes, to make a draught.
5 And Simon aunswered, and sayde vnto hym: Maister, we haue laboured all nyght,
and haue taken nothyng: Neuerthelesse, at thy commaundement I wyll loose foorth
the nette.
6 And when they had this done, they inclosed a great multitude of fisshes: But
their nette brake.
7 And they beckened vnto their felowes, which were in the other shippe, that
they shoulde come, and helpe them. And they came, and fylled both the shippes,
that they suncke agayne.
8 When Simon Peter sawe this, he fell downe at Iesus knees, saying: Lorde, go
from me, for I am a sinfull man.
9 For he was vtterly astonyed, and all that were with hym, at the draught of
fisshes, which they had taken.
10 And so was also Iames and Iohn the sonnes of Zebedee, whiche were parteners
with Simon. And Iesus sayde vnto Simon: Feare not, from hencefoorth thou shalt
catch men.
11 And when they had brought vp their boates to the shore, they forsoke all, and
folowed hym.
12 And it came to passe, that whe he was in a certayne citie: Beholde, there was
a man full of leprosie, and when he had spyed Iesus, he fell flat on his face,
and besought hym, saying: Lorde, yf thou wylt, thou canst make me cleane.
13 And he stretched foorth his hande, and touched hym, saying: I wyll, be thou
cleane. And immediatly the leprosie departed from hym. And he charged hym, that
he shoulde tell no man:
14 But go sayth he and shewe thy selfe to the priest, and offer for thy
clensyng, accordyng as Moyses commaunded, for a witnesse vnto them.
15 But so much the more went there a fame abrode of hym, and much people came
together to heare, and to be healed of hym, from their infirmities.
16 And he kept hym selfe a part in the wildernesse, and prayed.
17 And it came to passe, on a certayne day, as he was teachyng, that there were
pharisees & doctours of the lawe, sittyng by, which were come out of all the
townes of Galilee and Iurie, and Hierusalem: And the power of the Lorde was
present, to heale them.
18 And beholde, men brought in a bed, a man which was taken with a paulsie, and
they sought meanes to bryng hym in, and to lay hym before hym.
19 And when they coulde not fynde on what syde they myght bryng hym in, because
of the prease, they went vpon the toppe of the house, and let hym downe through
the tylyng, bed and all, euen in the myddes before Iesus.
20 Whe he sawe their faith, he saide vnto him: Man, thy sinnes are forgeuen
thee.
21 And the scribes and the pharisees, began to thynke, saying: What felowe is
this, which speaketh blasphemies? Who can forgeue sinnes but God only?
22 But when Iesus perceaued their thoughtes, he aunswered, & sayde vnto them:
What thynke ye in your heartes?
23 Whether is easier to say, thy sinnes be forgeuen thee: or to say, ryse vp &
walke?
24 But that ye may knowe that the sonne of man hath power to forgeue sinnes on
earth (he sayde vnto the sicke of the paulsie) I say vnto thee, aryse, take vp
thy bed, and go vnto thy house.
25 And immediatly he rose vp before them, and toke vp his bed, wheron he lay,
and departed to his owne house, praysyng God.
26 And they were all amazed, and they gaue the glory vnto God, and were fylled
with feare, saying: Doutlesse we haue seene straunge thynges to day.
27 After these thynges, he went foorth, & sawe a publicane named Leui, sittyng
at the receipt of custome: and he sayde vnto hym, folowe me.
28 And he left all, rose vp, & folowed him.
29 And Leui made hym a great feast in his owne house. And there was a great
companie of publicanes, and of other that sate at meate with them.
30 But they that were scribes and pharisees among them, murmured agaynst his
disciples saying: Why do ye eate and drynke with publicanes and sinners?
31 And Iesus aunswered, and saide vnto them, They that are whole, neede not the
phisition: But they that are sicke.
32 I came not to call the ryghteous: but sinners to repentaunce.
33 And they sayde vnto hym: Why do the disciples of Iohn fast often, & pray, and
the disciples of the pharisees also: but thyne eate and drynke?
34 He sayde vnto them. Can ye make the chyldren of the weddyng chaumber fast,
whyle the brydegrome in with the?
35 But the dayes wyll come, when the brydegrome also shalbe taken away fro them:
then shall they fast in those dayes.
36 He spake also vnto them a similitude. No man putteth a peece of a newe
garment, into an olde vesture: For then the newe renteth the olde, and the peece
that was taken out of the newe, agreeth not with the olde.
37 And no man powreth newe wyne into olde vessels: For yf he do, the newe wyne
wyll burst the vessels, and runne out it selfe, and the vessels shall perishe.
38 But newe wine must be put into newe vessels, and both are preserued.
39 No man also that drinketh olde wyne, strayghtway can awaye with newe: For he
sayth, the olde is better.

Chapter 6

1 And it came to passe, on the seconde Sabboth, after the first, that he went
through the corne fieldes: and his disciples plucked the eares of corne, and dyd
eate, and rubbed them in their handes.
2 And certayne of the pharisees sayde vnto them: Why do ye that, which is not
lawfull to do on ye Sabboth dayes?
3 And Iesus aunswered them, & sayde: Haue ye not read what Dauid dyd, when he
hym selfe was an hungred, and they which were with hym:
4 Howe he went into the house of God, and dyd take and eate the shewe bread, and
gaue also to them that were with hym, which was not lawfull to eate, but for the
priestes only?
5 And he sayde vnto them: The sonne of man is Lord also of ye Sabboth day.
6 And it came to passe also in another Sabboth, that he entred into the
synagogue, and taught: And there was a man, whose right hand was dried vp.
7 And the scribes & pharisees watched hym, whether he woulde heale on the
Sabboth day: that they myght fynde howe to accuse hym.
8 But he knewe their thoughtes, and said to the man which had the withered
hande: Ryse vp, and stande foorth in the myddes. And he arose, and stoode
foorth.
9 Then sayde Iesus vnto them, I wyll aske you a question: Whether is it lawfull
on the Sabboth dayes to do good, or to do euyll? to saue ones lyfe, or to
destroy it?
10 And he behelde them all in compasse, & sayde vnto the man: Stretche foorth
thy hande. And he dyd so: & his hande was restored agayne as whole as the other.
11 And they were fylled with madnesse, and communed together among them selues,
what they myght do to Iesus.
12 And it came to passe in those dayes, yt he wet out into a mountayne to pray,
& continued all nyght in prayer to God.
13 And assoone as it was day, he called his disciples: And of them he chose
twelue, whom he called Apostles:
14 (Simon, whom he also named Peter, and Andrewe his brother: Iames and Iohn,
Philip and Barthelmewe,
15 Matthewe and Thomas, Iames the sonne of Alpheus, & Simon, which is called
Zelotes:
16 And Iudas, Iames brother and Iudas Iscariot, which also was the traytour.)
17 And he came downe with them, and stoode in the playne fielde, and the company
of his disciples, and a great multitude of people, out of all Iurie &
Hierusalem, and fro the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, which came to heare hym,
and to be healed of their diseases,
18 And they that were vexed with foule spirites: and they were healed.
19 And all the people preassed to touche hym: for there went vertue out of hym,
and healed them all.
20 And he lyft vp his eyes vpon his disciples, and sayde: Blessed be ye poore,
for yours is the kyngdome of God.
21 Blessed are ye that hunger nowe, for ye shalbe satisfied. Blessed are ye that
weepe nowe, for ye shall laugh.
22 Blessed shall ye be when men hate you, & seperate you from their companie and
raile on you, & put out your names as an euyll thyng, for the sonne of mans
sake.
23 Reioyce ye in that day, and be glad: For beholde, your rewarde is great in
heauen: For thus dyd their fathers vnto the prophetes.
24 But wo vnto you that are riche: for ye haue your consolation.
25 Wo vnto you that are full: for ye shall hunger. Wo vnto you that nowe laugh:
for ye shall wayle and weepe.
26 Wo vnto you when all men prayse you: for so dyd their fathers to the false
prophetes.
27 But I say vnto you which heare: Loue your enemies, Do good to them which hate
you.
28 Blesse them that curse you: And pray for the which wrongfully trouble you.
29 And vnto hym that smyteth thee on the one cheeke, offer also the other. And
hym that taketh away thy cloke, forbyd not to take thy coate also.
30 Geue to euery man that asketh of thee: And of hym that taketh away thy
goodes, aske them not agayne.
31 And as ye woulde that men shoulde do to you, do ye also to them lykewyse.
32 For yf ye loue them which loue you, what thanke haue ye? For sinners also
loue their louers.
33 And yf ye do good for them which do good for you, what thanke haue ye? For
sinners also do euen the same.
34 And yf ye lende to them, of whom ye hope to receaue, what thanke haue ye? For
synners also lende to sinners, to receaue such lyke agayne.
35 But loue ye your enemies, & do good, and lende, lokyng for nothyng agayne:
and your rewarde shalbe great, and ye shalbe the chyldren of the hyest: for he
is kynde vnto the vnkynde, & to the euyll.
36 Be ye therfore mercifull, as your father also is mercifull.
37 Iudge not, & ye shall not be iudged: Condemne not, and ye shall not be
condemned: Forgeue, & ye shalbe forgeuen.
38 Geue, and it shalbe geuen vnto you: good measure, pressed downe, & shaken
together, and runnyng ouer, shall men geue into your bosomes. For with the same
measure that ye meate withall, shall other men meate to you agayne.
39 And he put foorth a similitude vnto them: Can the blynde leade the blynde? Do
they not both fall into the ditche?
40 The disciple is not aboue his maister: But whosoeuer wylbe a perfect
disciple, shalbe as his maister is.
41 And why seest thou a moate in thy brothers eye: but considerest not the beame
that is in thyne owne eye?
42 Either, howe canst thou say to thy brother: Brother, let me pull out the
moate that is in thyne eye, when thou seest not the beame that is in thyne owne
eye? Thou hypocrite, caste out the beame out of thyne owne eye first, & then
shalt thou see perfectly, to pul out the moate that is in thy brothers eye.
43 For it is not a good tree, that bryngeth foorth euyll fruite: Neither is that
an euyll tree, that bryngeth foorth good fruite.
44 For euery tree is knowen by his fruite: for of thornes do not me gather
fygges, nor of busshes, gather they grapes.
45 A good man, out of the good treasure of his heart, bringeth foorth that which
is good: And an euyll man, out of the euyll treasure of his heart, bryngeth
foorth that which is euyll. For of the aboundaunce of the heart, his mouth
speaketh.
46 Why call ye me Lorde, Lorde, and do not as I byd you?
47 Whosoeuer commeth to me, & heareth my sayinges, and doth the same, I wyll
shewe you to whom he is lyke.
48 He is lyke a man which built an house, and digged deepe, and layde the
foundation on a rocke. And when the waters arose, the fludde beat vpon that
house, and coulde not moue it: For it was grounded vpon a rocke.
49 But he that heareth and doeth not, is lyke a man, that without foundation,
built an house vpon the earth, agaynst which the fludde dyd beate, and it fell
immediatly: And the fall of that house was great.

Chapter 7

1 When he had ended all his sayinges, in the audience of the people, he entred
into Capernaum.
2 And a certayne Centurions seruaunt, which was deare vnto hym, lay sicke, and
was in peryll of death.
3 And when he hearde of Iesus, he sent vnto hym the elders of the Iewes,
besechyng hym that he woulde come, and heale his seruaunt.
4 And when they came to Iesus, they besought hym instantly, saying he is worthy
that thou shouldest do this for hym.
5 For he loueth our nation, and hath built vs a synagogue.
6 Then Iesus went with them. And when he was nowe not farre from the house, the
Centurion sent friendes to hym, saying vnto hym: Lorde, trouble not thy selfe,
for I am not worthy that thou shouldest enter vnder my roofe.
7 Wherefore I thought not my selfe worthy to come vnto thee: but say thou the
worde, & my seruaunt shalbe whole.
8 For I also am a man, set vnder power, and haue vnder me souldiers: and I say
vnto one go, and he goeth: and to another, come, and he commeth: and to my
seruaunt, do this, and he doth it.
9 When Iesus hearde these thynges, he marueyled at hym, and turned hym about,
and sayde to the people that folowed hym: I say vnto you, I haue not founde so
great fayth, no, not in Israel.
10 And they that were sent, turned backe home agayne, and founde the seruaunt
whole, that had ben sicke.
11 And it came to passe the day after, that he went into a citie, which is
called Naim: and many of his disciples went with hym, and much people.
12 When he came nye to the gate of the citie, beholde, there was a dead man
caryed out, which was the only sonne of his mother, and she was a widdowe: And
much people of the citie was with her.
13 And when the Lorde sawe her, he had compassion on her, and sayde vnto her:
Weepe not.
14 And he came nye, & touched the beere, (and they that bare hym stoode styll)
And he sayde: Young man, I say vnto thee, aryse.
15 And he that was dead, sate vp, and began to speake: And he delyuered hym to
his mother.
16 And there came a feare on them all, & they gaue the glory vnto God, saying: A
great prophete is risen vp among vs, and veryly God hath visited his people.
17 And this rumour of hym went foorth throughout all Iurie, & throughout all the
regions which lye rounde about.
18 And the disciples of Iohn, shewed hym of all these thynges.
19 And Iohn called vnto hym two of his disciples, and sent them to Iesus,
saying: Art thou he that shoulde come, or shall we loke for another?
20 When the men were come vnto hym, they sayde, Iohn Baptiste sent vs vnto thee,
saying: Art thou he that shoulde come, or shall we loke for another?
21 And in that same houre, he cured manye of their infirmities & plagues, and of
euyll spirites, and vnto many that were blynde, he gaue sight.
22 Then Iesus aunswered, and sayde vnto them: Go your way, and bryng worde
agayne to Iohn, what thynges ye haue seene and hearde, howe that the blynde see,
the halt go, the lepers are clensed, the deafe heare, the dead ryse agayne, to
the poore is the Gospell preached,
23 And happy is he, that is not offended at me.
24 And when the messengers of Iohn were departed, he began to speake vnto the
people concernyng Iohn: What went ye out into the wildernesse for to see? a
reede shaken with the wynde?
25 But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft rayment? Beholde, they
which are gorgeously appareled, & lyue delicately, are in kynges courtes.
26 But what went ye foorth to see? A prophete? Yea, I say to you, and more then
a prophete.
27 This is he, of whom it is written: Beholde, I sende my messenger before thy
face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.
28 For I say vnto you, among womens chyldren, is there not a greater prophete
then Iohn Baptist. Neuerthesse, he that is lesse in the kyngdome of God, is
greater then he.
29 And all the people, and the publicanes that hearde hym, iustified God, and
were baptized with the baptisme of Iohn.
30 But the pharisees and lawyers despised the councel of God, agaynst them
selues, and were not baptized of hym.
31 And the Lorde sayde: Whervnto shall I lyken the men of this generation? and
what thyng are they lyke?
32 They are lyke vnto chyldren, sittyng in the market place, and crying one to
another, and saying: We haue pyped vnto you, and ye haue not daunsed: We haue
mourned to you, and ye haue not wept.
33 For Iohn Baptist came, neither eatyng bread nor drynkyng wyne, and ye say he
hath the deuyll.
34 The sonne of man is come, and eateth and drynketh, and ye saye, beholde a
gluttonous man, and an vnmeasurable drynker of wyne, a frende of publicanes and
sinners.
35 And wisdome is iustified of all her chyldren.
36 And one of the pharisees desired hym, that he woulde eate with hym. And he
went into the pharisees house, and sate downe to meate.
37 And beholde, a woman in that citie, which was a sinner, assoone as she knewe
that Iesus sate at meate in the pharisees house, she brought an alabaster boxe
of oyntment:
38 And stoode at his feete behynde hym, weepyng, and began to washe his feete
with teares, & dyd wype them with the heeres of her head, and kyssed his feete,
and anoynted them with the oyntment.
39 When the pharisee which had bydden hym, sawe, he spake within hym selfe,
saying: If this man were a prophete, he woulde surely knowe who, & what maner of
woman this is, that touched hym, for she is a sinner.
40 And Iesus aunswered, and sayde vnto hym: Simon, I haue somewhat to say vnto
thee. And he sayde: Maister, say on.
41 There was a certayne lender, which had two detters: The one ought fyue
hundred pence, and the other fyftie.
42 When they had nothyng to pay, he forgaue them both. Tell me therefore, which
of them wyll loue hym most?
43 Simon aunswered and sayde: I suppose, that he to whom he forgaue most. And he
sayde vnto hym: Thou haste truely iudged.
44 And he turned to the woman, & sayde vnto Simon: Seest thou this woman? I
entred into thyne house, thou gauest me no water for my feete, but she hath
wasshed my feete with teares, & wyped them with the heeres of her head.
45 Thou gauest me no kysse: but she, sence the tyme I came in, hath not ceassed
to kysse my feete.
46 Myne head with oyle thou dyddest not anoynt: but she hath anoynted my feete
with oyntment.
47 Wherfore I say vnto thee, many sinnes are forgeuen her: for she loued much.
To whom lesse is forgeuen, the same doth lesse loue.
48 And he sayde vnto her: thy sinnes are forgeuen thee.
49 And they that sate at meate with hym, began to say within them selues, Who is
this that forgeueth sinnes also?
50 And he sayde to the woman: Thy fayth hath saued thee, go in peace.

Chapter 8

1 And it came to passe afterwarde, that he him selfe wet throughout euery citie
& towne preachyng, & shewyng the kingdome of god, & the twelue with hym.
2 And also certayne women, which were healed of euyll spirites, and infirmities,
Marie which is called Magdalene, out of whom went seuen deuyls.
3 And Ioanna the wyfe of Chusa Herodes stewarde, and Susanna, & many other which
ministred vnto hym of their substaunce.
4 When much people were gathered together, & were come to hym out of all cities,
he spake by a similitude.
5 The sower wet out to sowe his seede: and as he sowed, some fell by the way
syde, and it was troden downe, and the foules of the ayre deuoured it vp.
6 And some fell on stones, and assoone as it was sprong vp, it withered away,
because it lacked moystnes.
7 And some fell among thornes, and the thornes sprang vp with it, and choked it.
8 And some fell on good grounde, and sprang vp, and bare fruite, an hundred
folde. And as he sayde these thynges, he cryed: He that hath eares to heare, let
hym heare.
9 And his disciples asked hym, saying what maner of similitude is this?
10 And he sayde, Unto you it is geuen to knowe the secretes of the kyngdome of
God: but to other by parables, that when they see, they shoulde not see, and
when they heare, they shoulde not vnderstande.
11 The parable is this. The seede, is the worde of God.
12 Those that are besyde the way, are they that heare: then commeth the deuyll,
and taketh away the worde out of their heartes, lest they shoulde beleue, and be
saued.
13 They on the stones, are they which when they heare, receaue the worde with
ioy: & these haue no rootes, which for a whyle beleue, and in tyme of temptation
go away.
14 And that which fell among thornes, are they, which whe they haue hearde, go
foorth, and are choked with cares & ryches, and voluptuous lyuyng, & bring
foorth no fruite.
15 But that which fell on ye good groude, are they, which with a pure and good
hearte heare the worde, and kepe it, and bryng foorth fruite through pacience.
16 No man when he lyghteth a candel, couereth it with a vessell, or putteth it
vnder a table, but setteth it on a candlesticke, that they which enter in, may
see the lyght.
17 For nothyng is secrete, that shall not come abrode: Neither any thyng hyd,
that shall not be knowen, and come to lyght.
18 Take heede therfore, howe ye heare. For whosoeuer hath, to hym shalbe geuen:
And whosoeuer hath not, from hym shalbe take, euen that same which he supposeth
that he hath.
19 Then came to hym his mother and his brethren, and coulde not come at hym for
prease.
20 And it was tolde hym by certayne which sayde: Thy mother and thy brethren
stande without, & woulde see thee.
21 He aunswered, and sayde vnto them: My mother & my brethren are these, which
heare the worde of God, & do it.
22 And it came to passe on a certayne day, that he went into a shippe, and his
disciples also: and he sayde vnto them, Let vs go ouer vnto the other syde of
the lake.
23 And they lauched foorth: But as they sayled he fell a slepe, and there came
downe a storme on the lake, and they were fylled with water, and were in
ieoperdie.
24 And they came to hym, and awoke hym, saying: Maister, Maister, we are lost.
Then he arose, and rebuked the wynde, & the tempest of water, and they ceassed,
and it waxed calme.
25 And he sayde vnto them: Where is your fayth? And they feared, and wondred
among them selues, saying: Who is this? For he commaundeth both the wyndes &
water, and they obey hym.
26 And they sayled vnto the region of the Gadarenites, which is ouer agaynst
Galilee.
27 And when he went out to lande, there met hym out of the citie a certayne man,
which had deuyls long tyme, and ware no clothes, neither abode in any house: but
in graues.
28 When he sawe Iesus, and had cryed, he fell downe before hym, and with a loude
voyce sayde: What haue I to do with thee Iesus, thou sonne of God most hyest? I
beseche thee torment me not.
29 (For he commaunded the foule spirite to come out of the man: For oftentymes
he had caught him, and he was bounde with chaynes, and kept with fetters: & he
brake the bandes, and was caryed of the fiende into wildernesse.)
30 And Iesus asked hym, saying: What is thy name? And he sayde, Legion: because
many deuyls were entred into hym.
31 And they besought hym, that he woulde not commaunde them, to go out into the
deepe.
32 And there was there, an hearde of many swyne, feedyng on an hyll: and they
besought hym, that he woulde suffer them to enter into them: and he suffered
them.
33 Then went the deuyls out of the man, and entred into the swyne: And the heard
ran headlong with violence into the lake, and were choked.
34 When the heardmen sawe what was done, they fled: and when they were departed,
they tolde it in the citie, & in the villages.
35 Therfore they came out to see what was done, and came to Iesus, & founde the
man out of whom the deuyls were departed, sittyng at the feete of Iesus,
clothed, & in his ryght mynde, and they were afrayde.
36 They also which sawe it, tolde them by what meanes he that was possessed of
the deuyls, was healed.
37 Then the whole multitude of the countrey about the Gadarenites, besought hym
that he woulde departe from them, for they were taken with great feare. And he
gat hym vp into the shippe, and returned backe agayne.
38 Then the man out of whom the deuyls were departed, besought hym that he myght
be with hym. But Iesus sent hym away, saying:
39 Go home agayne to thine owne house, and shewe what thynges so euer God hath
done for thee. And he went his way, and preached throughout all the citie, what
thynges so euer Iesus had done vnto hym.
40 And it came to passe, yt when Iesus was come agayne, the people receaued hym:
For they all wayted for hym.
41 And behold, ther came a man named Iairus, & he was a ruler of ye synagoge, &
he fell downe at Iesus feete, praying him that he would come into his house:
42 For he had but one daughter only, vpon a twelue yeres of age, and she lay a
dying. (But as he went, the people thronged hym.
43 And a woman, hauyng an issue of blood twelue yeres, which had spent all her
substaunce vpon phisitions, neither coulde be holpen of any,
44 Came behynde hym, and touched the hemme of his rayment: and immediatly her
issue of blood staunched.
45 And Iesus sayde: Who is it that touched me? Whe euery man denyed, Peter and
they that were with hym, sayde: Maister, the people thrust thee, and vexe thee,
and sayest thou, who touched me?
46 And Iesus sayde, Some body hath touched me: For I perceaue that vertue is
gone out of me.
47 When the woman sawe that she was not hyd, she came trembling, and fell at his
feete and tolde him before al the people, for what cause she had touched him,
and howe she was healed immediatly.
48 And he sayde vnto her: Daughter, be of good comfort, thy fayth hath saued
thee, go in peace.)
49 Whyle he yet spake, there came one from the ruler of the synagogues house,
which sayde to hym: Thy daughter is dead, disease not the Maister.
50 But when Iesus hearde that worde, he aunswered him, saying: Feare not, beleue
only, & she shalbe made whole.
51 And when he came to the house, he suffered no man to go in with hym, saue
Peter, and Iames, and Iohn, and the father and the mother of the mayden.
52 Euery body wept, & sorowed for her. And he sayde: Weepe not, the damsell is
not dead, but slepeth.
53 And they laughed hym to scorne, knowyng that she was dead.
54 And he thrust them all out, and toke her by the hande, and cryed, saying:
Mayde, aryse.
55 And her spirite came agayne, and she rose straightway: And he commaunded to
geue her meate.
56 And the father and the mother of her, were astonyed: But he warned the that
they should tel no man what was done.

Chapter 9

1 Iesus called the twelue together, and gaue the power and aucthoritie ouer al
deuils, and that they might heale diseases.
2 And he sent them to preache the kyngdome of God, and to heale the sicke.
3 And he saide vnto the: Take nothing to your iourney, neither staues, nor
scrippe, neither bread, neither money, neither haue two coates.
4 And whatsoeuer house ye enter into, there abyde, and thence depart.
5 And whosoeuer wyll not receaue you, when ye go out of that citie, shake of the
very dust from your feete, for a testimonie agaynst them.
6 And they departed, and went through the townes, preachyng the Gospell, and
healyng euerywhere.
7 And Herode the tetrarche heard of all that was done by hym, and doubted,
because that it was sayde of some, that Iohn was rysen agayne from death:
8 And of some, that Elias had appeared, and of some, that one of the olde
prophetes was rysen agayne.
9 And Herode sayde, Iohn haue I beheaded, but who is this of who I heare such
thinges? And he desired to see him.
10 And the apostles returned, & tolde him all that they had done. And he toke
the and went aside into a solitarie place, nye vnto the citie that is called
Bethsaida.
11 Which whe the people knew, they folowed him: And he receaued them, and spake
vnto the of the kingdome of God, & healed the that had nede to be healed.
12 And when the day began to weare away, then came the twelue and sayde vnto
hym: Sende the people awaye, that they may go into the townes and vyllages
rounde about, and lodge, and get meate: for we are here in a place of
wyldernesse.
13 But he said vnto them: Geue ye the to eate. And they said: We haue no mo but
fyue loaues and two fisshes, excepte we should go & bye meate for al this
people.
14 And they were about fyue thousande men. And he said to his disciples: Cause
the to sit downe by fifties in a companie.
15 And they dyd so, and made them all to sit downe.
16 And he toke the fyue loaues and the two fisshes, and loked vp to heauen, and
blessed them, and brake, and gaue to the disciples to set before the people.
17 And they dyd all eate, and were satisfied. And there was taken vp of that
remayned to them, twelue baskettes full of broken meate.
18 And it came to passe, as he was alone praying, his disciples were with hym,
and he asked them, saying: Who say the people that I am?
19 They aunswered and sayde, Iohn Baptist: some say, Elias: and some say that
one of the olde prophetes is rysen.
20 He sayde vnto them: But whom say ye that I am? Simon Peter aunswered, &
saide: Thou art Christe, of God.
21 And he warned & commaunded them, that they should tell no man that thing,
22 Saying: The sonne of man must suffer many thynges, and be reproued of the
elders, and of the hye priestes and scribes, and be slayne, and ryse agayne the
thirde day.
23 And he said to the all: If any man wyl come after me, let him denie him
selfe, & take vp his crosse dayly, & folowe me.
24 For whosoeuer wyl saue his lyfe, shal lose it: But whosoeuer shal lose his
lyfe for my sake, the same shall saue it.
25 For what auauntageth it a man yf he wynne the whole worlde, and lose hym
selfe, or runne in daunger of hym selfe?
26 For whosoeuer shalbe ashamed of me, and of my wordes, of hym shall the sonne
of man be ashamed, whe he commeth in his maiestie, and in the maiestie of his
father, and of the holy angels.
27 I tell you of a trueth, there be some standyng here, whiche shall not taste
of death, tyl they see the kingdome of God.
28 And it came to passe, about an eyght dayes after these sayinges, he toke
Peter, and Iohn, and Iames, and went vp into a mountayne to pray.
29 And as he prayed, the fashion of his countenaunce was chaunged, & his garment
was whyte, and shone.
30 And beholde, there talked with hym two men, which were Moyses & Elias:
31 That appeared in the maiestie, & spake of his departyng, which he shoulde end
at Hierusalem.
32 But Peter, and they that were with him, were heauie with sleepe: and whe they
awoke, they sawe his maiestie, and two men standyng with hym.
33 And it came to passe, as they departed fro him, Peter said vnto Iesus:
Maister it is good beyng here for vs, let vs make three tabernacles, one for
thee, & one for Moyses, and one for Elias: and wyst not what he sayde.
34 Whyle he thus spake, there came a cloude, and ouershadowed them, & they
feared whe they wer come into ye cloude
35 And there came a voyce out of the cloude, saying: this is my deare sonne,
heare him.
36 And assoone as the voyce was paste, Iesus was founde alone: and they kept it
close, and tolde no man in those dayes any of those thynges which they hadde
seene.
37 And it came to passe, that on the next day, as they came downe from the hyll,
much people met hym.
38 And beholde, a man of the companie cried out, saying: Maister, I besech thee
behold my sonne, for he is all yt I haue:
39 And see, a spirite taketh hym, and sodenly he cryeth, and teareth hym, that
he fometh agayne, & with much payne departeth from him, when he hath rent hym.
40 And I besought thy disciples to cast hym out, and they coulde not.
41 Iesus aunswered, and saide: O faithlesse and croked nation, howe long shall I
be with you, and shall suffer you? Bryng thy sonne hyther.
42 As he was yet a commyng, the fiende rent hym, and tare hym: And Iesus rebuked
the vncleane spirite, and healed the chylde, and deliuered hym to his father.
43 And they were all amased at the mightie power of God: But whyle they wondred
euery one at all thinges which he dyd, he sayde vnto his disciples,
44 Let these sayinges sincke downe into your eares: For it wyll come to passe,
that the sonne of man shalbe deliuered into the handes of men.
45 But they wyst not what that worde meant, and it was hydde from them that they
vnderstoode it not: And they feared to aske hym of that saying.
46 Then there arose a disputatio among them, which of them should be the
greatest.
47 When Iesus perceaued the thought of their heartes, he toke a chylde, and set
hym harde by hym,
48 And sayde vnto them: Whosoeuer receaueth this chylde in my name, receaueth
me: And whosoeuer receaueth me, receaueth him that sent me. For he that is least
among you all, the same shalbe great.
49 And Iohn aunswered, and sayde: Maister, we sawe one castyng out deuyls in thy
name, and we forbad hym, because he foloweth not with vs.
50 And Iesus sayde vnto hym, Forbyd ye hym not: For he that is not against vs,
is with vs.
51 And it came to passe, when the tyme was come that he shoulde be receaued vp,
he set his face to go to Hierusalem.
52 And sent messengers before him: And they went, & entred into a towne of the
Samaritanes, to make redy for hym.
53 And they woulde not receaue him, because his face was as though he woulde go
to Hierusalem.
54 When his disciples, Iames & Iohn, sawe this, they sayde: Lord, wylt thou that
we comaunde fire to come downe from heauen and consume them, euen as Elias dyd?
55 Iesus turned about, & rebuked them, saying: Ye wote not what maner spirite ye
are of.
56 For the sonne of man is not come to destroye mens lyues, but to saue them.
And they went to another towne.
57 And it came to passe, that as they went walkyng in the way, a certayne man
sayde vnto hym: I wyll folowe thee Lorde whyther so euer thou go.
58 And Iesus sayde vnto hym: Foxes haue holes, and byrdes of the ayre haue
nestes: but the sonne of man, hath not where to lay his head.
59 And he sayde vnto another, folowe me. And the same sayde: Lorde, suffer me
first to go and burie my father.
60 Iesus sayde vnto hym, Let the dead burie their dead: but go thou & preache
the kyngdome of God.
61 And another sayde: Lorde I wyll folowe thee, but let me first go byd them
farewell, which are at home at my house.
62 Iesus sayde vnto hym: No man that putteth his hande to the plowe, and loketh
backe, is apt to the kyngdome of God.

Chapter 10

1 After these thynges, the Lorde appoynted other seuentie also, and sent them
two and two before hym, into euery citie and place, whyther he hym selfe woulde
come.
2 Therefore sayde he vnto them: The haruest is great, but the labourers are
fewe. Pray ye therfore the Lorde of the haruest, to sende foorth labourers into
his haruest.
3 Go your wayes: beholde, I sende you foorth as lambes among wolfes.
4 Beare no wallet, neither scrippe, nor shoes, & salute no man by the way.
5 Into whatsoeuer house ye enter, first say, peace be to this house.
6 And yf the sonne of peace be there, your peace shall rest vpon hym: yf not, it
shall turne to you agayne.
7 And in the same house tary styll, eatyng and drinking such thynges as they
shall set before you. For the labourer is worthy of his rewarde. Go not from
house to house.
8 And into whatsoeuer citie ye enter, and they receaue you, eate such thynges as
are set before you:
9 And heale the sicke that are therin, and say vnto them, the kyngdome of God is
come nye vpon you.
10 But into whatsoeuer citie ye enter, & they receaue you not, go your ways out
into the streates of the same, and saye:
11 Euen the very dust of our citie, which cleaueth on vs, we do wype of agaynst
you: Notwithstandyng, be ye sure of this, that the kyngdome of God was come nye
vpon you.
12 I say vnto you, that it shalbe easyer in that day for Sodome, then for that
citie.
13 Wo vnto thee Chorazin, wo vnto thee Bethsaida: For if the miracles had ben
done in Tyre and Sidon, whiche haue ben done in you, they had a great whyle ago
repented of their sinnes syttyng in sackecloth and asshes.
14 Therfore it shalbe easyer for Tyre and Sidon at the iudgement, then for you.
15 And thou Capernaum, which art exalted to heauen, shalt be thrust downe to
hell.
16 He that heareth you, heareth me, and he that despiseth you, despiseth me: and
he that despiseth me, despiseth hym that sent me.
17 And the seuentie turned agayne with ioy, saying: Lord, euen the very deuils
are subdued to vs through thy name.
18 And he said vnto them: I sawe Satan as it had ben lyghtnyng, fallyng downe
from heauen.
19 Beholde, I geue vnto you power to treade on serpentes, and scorpions, and
ouer all maner power of the enemie, & nothyng shall hurt you.
20 Neuerthelesse, in this reioyce not, that the spirites are subdued vnto you:
but rather reioyce, because your names are written in heauen.
21 That same houre reioyced Iesus in the spirite, and sayde: I confesse vnto
thee father, Lorde of heauen & earth, that thou hast hyd these thynges from the
wise and prudent, and hast opened them vnto babes: Euen so father, for so it
pleased thee.
22 All thynges are geuen me of my father. No man knoweth who the sonne is, but
the father, and who the father is, but the sonne, and he to whom the sonne wyll
shewe hym.
23 And he turned to his disciples, & sayde secretely: Happy are the eyes which
see the thynges that ye see.
24 For I tell you, that many prophetes and kynges haue desired to see those
thynges whiche ye see, & haue not seene them, and to heare those thinges which
ye heare, and haue not hearde them.
25 And beholde, a certaine lawyer stoode vp, and tempted him, saying: Maister,
what shall I do to inherite eternal lyfe? He sayde vnto hym:
26 What is written in the lawe, howe readest thou?
27 And he aunswered, and saide: Thou shalt loue the Lorde thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soule, & with all thy strength, and with al thy mynde,
and thy neyghbour as thy selfe.
28 And he sayde vnto hym, Thou hast aunswered ryght: this do, and thou shalt
lyue.
29 But he, wyllyng to iustifie hym selfe, said vnto Iesus: and who is my
neighbour?
30 And Iesus aunswered, and sayde. A certaine man descended from Hierusalem to
Hierico, and fell among thieues, which robbed hym of his rayment, and wounded
hym, and departed, leauyng hym halfe dead.
31 And it befell, that there came downe a certayne priest that same way, and whe
he sawe hym, he passed by on the other syde.
32 And likewise a Leuite, when he went nye to the place, came and loked on him,
and passed by the other syde.
33 But a certayne Samaritane, as he iourneyed, came vnto hym, and when he saw
him, he had compassion on him.
34 And went to hym, and bounde vp his woundes, and powred in oyle and wine, and
set hym on his owne beast, and brought hym to a common Inne, and made prouision
for hym.
35 And on the morowe when he departed, he toke out two pence, and gaue them to
the hoste, and sayde vnto hym, take cure of hym, and whatsoeuer thou spendest
more, when I come agayne, I wyll recompence thee.
36 Which nowe of these three, thinkest thou, was neyghbour vnto hym that fell
among the thieues?
37 And he sayde: He that shewed mercy on hym. Then sayde Iesus vnto hym: Go, and
do thou lykewyse.
38 Nowe it came to passe, that as they went, he entred into a certayne towne:
And a certayne woma, named Martha, receaued hym into her house.
39 And this woman had a sister called Marie, whiche also sate at Iesus feete,
and hearde his worde.
40 But Martha was cumbred about much seruing, and came to hym, & saide: Lorde,
doest thou not care that my sister hath lefte me to serue alone? Byd her
therfore that she helpe me.
41 And Iesus aunswered, and sayde vnto her: Martha, Martha, thou art carefull,
and troubled about many thynges:
42 Ueryly one is needefull. Mary hath chosen the good part, which shall not be
taken away from her.

Chapter 11

1 And so it was, that as he was praying in a certaine place, when he ceassed,
one of his disciples sayde vnto hym: Lord teache vs to pray, as Iohn also taught
his disciples.
2 And he said vnto them, When ye pray, say: O our father which art in heauen,
halowed be thy name, thy kyngdome come, thy wyll be fulfylled, euen in earth
also, as it is in heauen.
3 Our dayly breade geue vs this day.
4 And forgeue vs our synnes: For euen we forgeue euery man that trespasseth vs.
And leade vs not into temptation, but delyuer vs from euyll.
5 And he sayde vnto them: Whiche of you shall haue a friende, and shall go vnto
hym at mydnyght, and saye vnto hym, friende lende me three loaues,
6 For a friende of mine is come out of the way to me, and I haue nothyng to set
before hym:
7 And he within aunswere, & say, trouble me not, the doore is nowe shut, and my
children are with me in bedde, I can not ryse and geue thee.
8 I saye vnto you, though he wyll not ryse and geue hym, because he is his
friende: yet because of his importunitie he wyll ryse, and geue hym as many as
he needeth.
9 And I say vnto you, aske, and it shalbe geuen you, seke, and ye shall fynde,
knocke, and it shalbe opened vnto you.
10 For euery one that asketh, receaueth, and he that seketh, fyndeth, and vnto
hym that knocketh, shall it be opened.
11 If the sonne shall aske breade, of any of you that is a father, wyll he geue
him a stone? Or yf he aske fisshe, wyll he for fisshe geue hym a serpent?
12 Or yf he aske an egge, wyll he offer hym a scorpion?
13 If ye then, being euyll, can geue good gyftes vnto your chyldren, howe muche
more shall your father of heauen geue the holy spirite, to them that desire it
of hym.
14 And he was castyng out a deuyll, and the same was dumbe. And it came to
passe, when the deuyll was gone out, the dumbe spake, & the people wondred.
15 But some of the sayde, he casteth out deuils through Beelzebub, the chiefe of
the deuils.
16 And other tempted him, and required of hym a signe from heauen.
17 But he knowyng their thoughtes, sayde vnto them: Euery kyngdome deuided
agaynst it selfe, is desolate: and a housed deuided agaynst a house, falleth.
18 If Satan also be deuided against him selfe, howe shall his kyngdome endure?
Because ye saye that I cast out deuils through Beelzebub.
19 If I by the helpe of Beelzebub cast out deuils, by whose helpe do your
chyldren cast them out? Therfore shall they be your iudges.
20 But yf I with the fynger of God cast out deuyls, no doubt the kyngdome of God
is come vpon you.
21 When a strong man armed, kepeth his palace, ye thynges that he possesseth are
in peace.
22 But whe a stronger then he commeth vpon hym, and ouercommeth hym, he taketh
from him all his harnesse, wherin he trusted, and deuideth his goodes.
23 He that is not with me, is against me: and he that gathereth not with me,
scattereth abrode.
24 When the vncleane spirite is gone out of a man, he walketh through drye
places, sekyng rest: and when he fyndeth none, he sayth, I wyll returne vnto my
house, whence I came out.
25 And when he commeth, he fyndeth it swept and garnisshed.
26 Then goeth he, and taketh to hym seuen other spirites, worse then him selfe,
and they enter in, and dwell there: and the ende of that man, is worse then the
begynnyng.
27 And it came to passe, that as he spake these thynges, a certayne woman of the
company lyft vp her voyce, & saide vnto hym: Happy is the wombe that bare thee,
and the pappes whiche gaue thee sucke.
28 But he sayde: Yea rather happy are they that heare the worde of God, and kepe
it.
29 When the people were gathered thicke together, he began to saye: This is an
euyll natio, they seke a signe, and there shall no signe be geuen them, but the
signe of Ionas the prophete.
30 For as Ionas was a signe to the Niniuites, so shall also the sonne of man be
to this nation.
31 The Queene of the south shall ryse in iudgement with the men of this nation,
and condempne them: for she came from the vtmost partes of the earth, to heare
the wisedome of Solomon: And beholde, a greater then Solomon is here.
32 The men of Niuiue shall rise in iudgement with this nation, and shall
condempne them, for they repented at the preachyng of Ionas: and beholde, a
greater then Ionas is here.
33 No man lyghteth a candle, & putteth it in a priuie place, neither vnder a
busshell: but on a candlesticke, that they which come in may see the lyght,
34 The lyght of the body, is the eye: Therefore when thyne eye is single, all
thy body also shalbe full of lyght. But if thyne eye be euyll, thy body also
shalbe full of darknesse.
35 Take heede therefore, that the lyght which is in thee, be not darknes.
36 If all thy body therfore be cleare, hauyng no part darke, then shall it all
be full of lyght, euen as when a candle doth lyght thee with bryghtnes.
37 And as he spake, a certaine pharisee besought hym to dyne with hym: and Iesus
went in, & sate downe to meate.
38 When the pharisee sawe it, he marueyled that he had not first wasshed before
dynner.
39 And the Lorde said vnto him: Now do ye pharisees make cleane the outsyde of
the cuppe, and the platter, but the inward part is full of your rauenyng and
wickednesse.
40 Ye fooles, dyd not he that made that whiche is without, make that which is
within also?
41 But rather geue almes of those thynges which are within, and beholde all
thynges are cleane vnto you.
42 But wo vnto you pharisees: for ye tithe mint & rue, and al maner hearbes, and
passe ouer iudgement, and the loue of God: These ought ye to haue done, and yet
not to leaue the other vndone.
43 Wo vnto you pharisees: for ye loue the vppermost seates in ye synagogues, and
greetynges in the markettes.
44 Wo vnto you scribes and pharisees, ye hypocrites: for ye are as graues which
appeare not, and the men that walke ouer them, are not ware of them.
45 Then aunswered one of the lawyers, and sayde vnto him: Maister, thus saying,
thou puttest vs to rebuke also.
46 And he sayde, Wo vnto you also ye lawyers: for ye lade me with burthens
greeuous to be borne, and ye your selues touche not ye burthens with one of your
fyngers.
47 Wo vnto you, ye buylde the sepulchres of the prophetes, and your fathers
kylled them.
48 Truely, ye beare witnesse that ye alowe the deedes of your fathers: for they
kylled them, and ye buylde their sepulchres.
49 Therfore saide the wisedome of God, I wyl sende them prophetes and apostles,
and some of them they shall slaye and persecute:
50 That the blood of all the prophetes, which is shedde, from the foundation of
the worlde, may be required of this generation,
51 From the blood of Abel, vnto ye blood of Zacharie, whiche perished betwene
the aulter & the temple: Ueryly I saye vnto you, it shalbe required of this
nation.
52 Wo vnto you lawyers: for ye haue taken away the keye of knowledge, ye entred
not in your selues, and them that came in, ye forbad.
53 When he thus spake vnto them, the lawyers & the pharisees began to vrge hym
vehemently, and to prouoke hym to speake many thynges.
54 Laying wayte for hym, and sekyng to catche somethyng out of his mouth, wherby
they myght accuse hym.

Chapter 12

1 In ye meane tyme, whe ther were gathered together an innumerable multitude of
people insomuch that they trode one another, he began to saye vnto his
disciples. First of all, beware of the leuen of the pharisees, which is
hypocrisie.
2 For there is nothyng couered, that shall not be vncouered, neither hyd, that
shall not be knowen.
3 Therfore, whatsoeuer you haue spoken in darkenesse, shalbe hearde in the
light: and that which ye haue spoken in the eare, euen in secrete places, shalbe
preached on the toppe of the houses.
4 And I say vnto you my friendes, be not afrayde of them that kyll the body, and
after that, haue no more that they can do.
5 But I wyll forewarne you who you shall feare: Feare hym, which after he hath
killed, hath power to cast into hell, yea I say vnto you, feare hym.
6 Are not fyue sparrowes bought for two farthynges? and not one of them is
forgotten before God.
7 Also, eue the very heeres of your head are all numbred. Feare not therfore, ye
are more of value the many sparrowes.
8 Also I say vnto you, whosoeuer confesseth me before men, hym shall the sonne
of man knowledge also, before the angels of God.
9 But he that denyeth me before men, shalbe denyed before the angels of God.
10 And whosoeuer speaketh a worde agaynst the sonne of man, it shalbe forgeuen
hym: But vnto hym that blasphemeth the holy ghost, it shall not be forgeuen.
11 And when they bryng you vnto the synagogues, and vnto the rulers and
officers, take ye no thought, how or what thyng ye shall aunswere, or what ye
shall speake.
12 For the holy ghost shall teache you in the same houre what ye ought to say.
13 One of the companie sayde vnto hym: Maister, speake to my brother, that he
deuide the inheritauce with me.
14 And he sayde vnto hym: Man, who made me a iudge or a deuider ouer you?
15 And he sayde vnto them, Take heede & beware of couetousnes: For no mans lyfe
standeth in the aboundaunce of the thynges which he possesseth.
16 And he put foorth a similitude vnto the, saying: The grounde of a certaine
ryche man brought foorth plentifull fruites.
17 And he thought within him selfe, saying, What shall I do, because I haue no
rowme where to bestow my fruites?
18 And he sayde, this wyll I do, I wyll destroy my barnes, and buylde greater,
and therin wyll I gather all my fruites and my goodes.
19 And I wyll saye to my soule: Soule, thou hast much goods layed vp in store
for many yeres, take thyne ease, eate, drynke, and be mery.
20 But God sayde vnto hym: Thou foole, this nyght wyll they fetch awaye thy
soule againe fro thee: Then whose shall those thynges be, which thou hast
prouided?
21 So is he that gathereth riches to him selfe, and is not ryche towardes God.
22 And he spake vnto his disciples: Therfore I say vnto you, take no thought for
your lyfe, what ye shall eate, neither for the body what ye shall put on.
23 The lyfe is more then meate, and the body is more then rayment.
24 Consider the Rauens, for they neither sowe nor reape, whiche neither haue
storehouse nor barne, and God feedeth them: Howe much more are ye better then
fethered fowles?
25 Which of you, with takyng thought, can adde to his stature one cubite?
26 If ye then be not able to do that thing which is least: why take ye thought
for the remnaunt?
27 Consider the Lylies how they growe, they labour not, they spinne not: and yet
I say vnto you, that Solomon in al his royaltie was not clothed lyke one of
these.
28 If God so clothe the grasse, whiche is to daye in the fielde, and to morowe
is cast into the furnasse, howe much more wyll he clothe you, O ye of litle
fayth?
29 And aske not ye what ye shall eate, or what ye shall drynke, neither be ye of
doubtfull mynde:
30 For all suche thynges do the Heathen people of the worlde seke for: and your
father knoweth that ye haue neede of these thynges.
31 But rather seke ye after ye kyngdome of God, and all these thinges shalbe
ministred vnto you.
32 Feare not litle flocke, for it is your fathers pleasure to geue you a
kyngdome.
33 Sell that ye haue, and geue almes: and prepare you bagges whiche waxe not
olde, euen a treasure that fayleth not in heauen, where no thiefe cometh,
neither moth corrupteth.
34 For where your treasure is, there wyl your hearte be also.
35 Let your loynes be girde about, and your lyghtes brennyng,
36 And ye your selues like vnto men, that wayte for their Lorde, when he wyll
returne from the weddyng, that when he commeth, and knocketh, they maye open
vnto hym immediatly.
37 Happy are those seruauntes, who the Lorde, when he commeth, shall fynde
wakyng. Ueryly I say vnto you, that he shall girde him selfe, and make them to
syt downe to meate, and wyll come foorth, and minister vnto them.
38 And yf he come in the seconde watche, yea if he come in the thirde watche,
and fynde them so, happye are those seruauntes.
39 This vnderstande, that yf the good man of the house knew what houre the
thiefe woulde come, he woulde surely watche, and not suffer his house to be
dygged through.
40 Be ye therfore redy also, for ye sonne of man wyll come at an houre when ye
thynke not.
41 Then Peter saide vnto him: Maister, tellest thou this similitude vnto vs, or
to all men?
42 And the Lorde saide: Who is a faythfull and wyse stewarde, whom his lorde
shall make ruler ouer his housholde, to geue them their portion of meate in due
season?
43 Happye is that seruaunt, whom his lorde when he commeth, shall fynde so
doyng.
44 Of a trueth I saye vnto you, that he wyll make hym ruler ouer all that he
hath.
45 But & yf that seruaut say in his heart, my lorde wyll deferre his commyng,
and shall begyn to smyte the seruauntes and maydens, and to eate and drynke, and
to be dronken,
46 The Lord of that seruaunt wyll come in a day when he thynketh not, and at an
houre when he is not ware, and wyll hewe hym in peeces, and geue hym his portion
with the vnbeleuers.
47 And the seruaunt that knewe his maisters wyll, and prepared not hym selfe,
neither dyd accordyng to his wyll, shalbe beaten with many strypes.
48 But he that knewe not, and did comit thynges worthy of strypes, shalbe beaten
with fewe strypes. For vnto whosoeuer much is geuen, of him shalbe much
required: and to whom men haue committed much, of hym wyl they aske the more.
49 I am come to sende fire on ye earth, and what is my desire, but that it be
alredye kindled?
50 Notwithstandyng, I must be baptized with a baptisme, and howe am I payned
tyll it be ended?
51 Suppose ye that I am come to sende peace on earth? I tell you naye, but
rather deuision.
52 For fro hencefoorth there shalbe fyue in one house deuided, three against
two, and two against three.
53 The father shalbe deuided against the sonne, and the sonne against the
father: The mother agaynst the daughter, and the daughter agaynst the mother:
The mother in lawe against her daughter in lawe, and the daughter in lawe
against her mother in lawe.
54 He sayde also to the people: When ye see a cloude rise out of the west,
straightway ye say there cometh a showre, and so it is.
55 And whe ye see the south wynd blow, ye say it wyll be hotte, and it commeth
to passe.
56 Ye hypocrites, ye can discerne the outwarde appearaunce of the skye, and of
the earth: but howe is it that ye cannot discerne this tyme?
57 Yea, and why iudge ye not of your selues what is ryght?
58 When thou goest with thine aduersarie to the ruler, as thou art in the waye,
geue diligence that thou mayest be deliuered from hym, lest he bryng thee to the
iudge, and the iudge deliuer thee to the iayler, and the iayler caste thee into
prison.
59 I tel thee, thou shalt not depart thence, tyll thou haue made good the vtmost
mite.

Chapter 13

1 There were present at the same seaso, certaine men, that shewed him of ye
Galileans, whose blood Pilate hadde myngled with their owne sacrifice.
2 And Iesus aunswered, and sayde vnto them: Suppose ye that these Galileans,
were greater sinners then all the others Galileans, because they suffred such
punishment?
3 I tell you naye: but except ye repent, ye shall all lykewyse peryshe.
4 Or those eyghteene vpon whiche the towre in Siloe fell, and slewe them, thynke
ye that they were sinners aboue all men that dwelt in Hierusalem?
5 I tell you naye: but except ye repent, ye shall all lykewyse peryshe.
6 He tolde also this similitude. A certaine man had a figge tree planted in his
vineyarde, and he came, and sought fruite theron, and founde none.
7 Then sayde he to the dresser of his vineyarde: Beholde, this three yere I haue
come & sought fruite in this figge tree, and finde none: cut it downe, why
cumbreth it the grounde?
8 And he aunswered, & sayde vnto him: Lorde, let it alone this yere also, tyll I
dygge rounde about it, & dongue it.
9 And yf it beare fruite thou mayest let it alone: and yf it beare not then,
after that shalt thou cut it downe.
10 And he taught in one of their synagogues on the Sabboth dayes.
11 And beholde, there was a woman, which had a spirite of infirmitie eyghteene
yeres, and was bowed together, and coulde in no wyse lyft vp her head.
12 When Iesus sawe her, he called her to hym, and sayde vnto her: Woman, thou
art loosed from thy disease.
13 And he layde his handes on her, and immediatly, she was made strayght, and
glorified God.
14 And the ruler of the synagogue aunswered with indignation, because that Iesus
had healed on the Sabboth day, & sayde vnto the people: There are sixe dayes, in
which men ought to worke, in them therfore come, that ye may be healed, and not
on the Sabboth day.
15 But the Lorde aunswered hym, and sayde: Thou hypocrite, doth not eche one of
you on the Sabboth day, loose his oxe or his asse from the staule, and leade hym
to the water?
16 And ought not this daughter of Abraham, whom Satan hath bounde, lo eyghteene
yeres, be loosed from this bonde on the Sabboth day?
17 And when he sayde these thynges, all his aduersaries were ashamed, and all
the people reioyced on all the excellent deedes that were done by hym.
18 Then sayde he: What is the kyngdome of God lyke? or whereto shall I compare
it?
19 It is like a grayne of mustarde seede, whiche a man toke & sowed in his
garden: and it grewe, and waxed a great tree, and the foules of the ayre made
nestes in the braunches of it.
20 And agayne he sayde: Whervnto shall I lyken the kyngdome of God?
21 It is lyke leuen, which a woman toke, and hyd in three peckes of meale, tyll
all was leuened.
22 And he went through all cities and townes, teachyng, and iourneying towardes
Hierusalem.
23 Then sayde one vnto hym: Lorde, are there fewe that be saued? And he sayde
vnto them:
24 Stryue to enter in at the strayte gate: for many I say vnto you, wyll seke to
enter in, and shall not be able.
25 When the good man of the house is risen vp, and hath shut to the doore, and
ye begyn to stande without, & to knocke at the doore, saying, Lorde, Lorde, open
vnto vs: and he shall aunswere, and say vnto you, I knowe you not whence ye are.
26 Then shall ye begyn to say: We haue eaten and dronken in thy presence, and
thou hast taught in our streates.
27 And he shall say, I tell you, I knowe you not, whence ye are: depart from me
all ye that worke iniquitie.
28 There shalbe weepyng & gnasshyng of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and
Isaac, and Iacob, and all the prophetes, in the kyngdome of God, and ye your
selues thrust out.
29 And they shall come from the east and from the west, and from the north, and
from the south, and shall syt downe in the kyngdome of God.
30 And beholde, there are last, which shalbe first: And there are first, which
shalbe last.
31 The same day, came there certaine of the pharisees, and sayde vnto hym: Get
thee out, and depart hence, for Herode wyll kyll thee.
32 And he sayde vnto them: Go ye, and tell that foxe, beholde, I cast out
deuyls, & heale the people to day & to morowe, and the thirde day I shalbe
perfected.
33 Neuerthelesse, I must walke to day and to morowe, and the day folowyng: For
it can not be, that a prophete perishe any other where, saue at Hierusalem.
34 O Hierusalem, Hierusalem, which kyllest prophetes, and stonest them that are
sent vnto thee, howe often woulde I haue gathered thy children together, as a
henne doth gather her young vnder her wynges, and ye woulde not?
35 Beholde, your house is left vnto you desolate. Ueryly I say to you, ye shall
not see me, vntyll the tyme come that ye shall say, Blessed is he that commeth
in the name of the Lorde.

Chapter 14

1 And it came to passe, that he went into the house of one of ye chiefe
pharisees, to eate bread on the Sabboth day, & they watched hym.
2 And beholde, there was a certayne man before hym, which had the dropsie.
3 And Iesus aunswered, and spake vnto the lawyers & pharisees, saying: Is it
lawful to heale on the Sabboth day?
4 And they helde their peace. And he toke hym, & healed him, and let him go,
5 And aunswered them, saying: Which of you shal haue an asse or an oxe fallen
into a pyt, and wyll not strayghtway pull hym out, on the Sabboth day?
6 And they coulde not aunswere hym agayne to these thynges.
7 He put foorth also a similitude to the ghestes, when he marked howe they chose
out the chiefe rowmes, and sayde vnto them:
8 When thou art bydden of any man to a weddyng, syt not downe in the hyest
rowme: lest a more honourable man then thou, be bydden of hym,
9 And he, that bad hym and thee, come, and say to thee, geue this man rowme: &
thou then begyn with shame, to take the lowest rowme.
10 But when thou art bydden, go and syt in the lowest rowme, that when he that
bad thee cometh, he may say vnto thee, friende syt vp hyer: Then shalt thou haue
worshyppe in the presence of them that syt at meate with thee.
11 For whosoeuer exalteth hym selfe, shalbe brought lowe: And he that humbleth
hym selfe, shalbe exalted.
12 Then sayde he also to hym that bad hym to meate: When thou makest a dinner or
a supper, call not thy friendes, nor thy brethren, neither thy kynsemen, nor thy
ryche neyghbours, lest they also byd thee agayne, and a recompence be made thee.
13 But when thou makest a feast, call the poore, the feeble, the lame, & the
blynde,
14 And thou shalt be happy, for they can not recompence thee: For thou shalt be
recompenced at the resurrection of the iust men.
15 When one of them, that sate at meate also, hearde these thynges, he sayde
vnto hym: Happy is he that eateth bread in the kyngdome of God.
16 Then sayde he vnto hym. A certayne man ordayned a great supper, and bad many,
17 And sent his seruaunt at supper tyme, to say to them that were bydden, come,
for all thynges are nowe redy.
18 And they all at once began to make excuse. The first sayde vnto hym: I haue
bought a farme, & I must needes go & see it, I pray thee haue me excused.
19 And another sayde: I haue bought fiue yoke of oxen, and I go to proue them, I
pray thee haue me excused.
20 And another sayde: I haue maryed a wyfe, and therfore I can not come.
21 And the seruaunt returned, & shewed his maister these thynges. Then was the
good man of the house displeased, & sayde to his seruaunt: Go out quickly into
the brode streates and lanes of the citie, and bryng in hyther the poore, and
the feeble, and the halt, and the blynde.
22 And the seruaunt sayde: Lorde, it is done as thou hast commaunded, and yet
there is rowme.
23 And the Lorde sayde to the seruaunt: Go out into the hye wayes & hedges, and
compell them to come in, that my house may be fylled.
24 For I say vnto you, that none of those men which were bydden, shall taste of
my supper.
25 There went a great companie with hym: and he returned, and sayde vnto them,
26 If any man come to me, and hate not his father and mother, and wyfe, and
chyldren, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his owne lyfe also, he can not be
my disciple.
27 And whosoeuer doth not beare his crosse, and come after me, can not be my
disciple.
28 For which of you, disposed to buylde a towre, sitteth not downe before, and
counteth the cost, whether he haue sufficient to perfourme it?
29 Lest after he hath layde the foundation, and is not able to perfourme it, all
that beholde it, begyn to mocke hym,
30 Saying: this man began to buylde, and was not able to make an ende?
31 Or what kyng, goyng to make battell against another kyng, sitteth not downe
first, and casteth in his mynde, whether he be able with ten thousande, to meete
hym, that commeth agaynst hym with twentie thousande?
32 Or els, whyle the other is yet a great way of, he sendeth an imbassage, and
desireth conditions of peace.
33 So lykewyse, whosoeuer he be of you, that forsaketh not all that he hath, he
can not be my disciple.
34 Salt is good, but if ye salt haue lost the saltnes, what shalbe seasoned
therwith?
35 It is neither good for the lande, nor yet for the doung hyll: but men cast it
out at the doores. He that hath eares to heare, let hym heare.

Chapter 15

1 Then resorted vnto hym all the publicanes and sinners, for to heare hym.
2 And the pharisees & scribes murmured, saying: he receaueth sinners, and eateth
with them.
3 But he put foorth this parable vnto them, saying:
4 What man of you, hauyng an hundred sheepe, if he loose one of them, doth not
leaue ninetie and nine in the wildernesse, and go after that which is lost,
vntyll he fynde it?
5 And when he hath founde it, he layeth it on his shoulders with ioy:
6 And assoone as he commeth home, he calleth together his louers and neyghbours,
saying vnto them: Reioyce with me, for I haue founde my sheepe which was lost.
7 I say vnto you, that lykewyse ioy shalbe in heauen ouer one sinner that
repenteth, more then ouer ninetie and nine iust persons, which neede no
repentaunce.
8 Either what woman, hauyng tenne peeces of siluer, yf she loose one, doth not
lyght a candle, and swepe the house, and seke diligently tyll she fynde it?
9 And when she hath founde it, she calleth her louers & her neyghbours together,
saying: Reioyce with me, for I haue founde the peece which I had lost.
10 Lykewyse I say vnto you, shall there be ioy in the presence of the Angels of
God, ouer one sinner that repenteth.
11 And he sayde. A certayne man had two sonnes:
12 And the younger of them sayde to his father: father, geue me the portion of
the goodes, that to me belongeth. And he deuided vnto them his substaunce.
13 And not long after, when the younger sonne had gathered all that he had
together, he toke his iourney into a farre countrey, and there wasted his goodes
with riotous lyuyng.
14 And when he had spent all, there arose a great dearth in all that lande, and
he began to lacke.
15 And he ioyned hym selfe to a citizen of that countrey: and he sent hym to his
farme, to feede swyne.
16 And he woulde fayne haue fylled his belly with the coddes that the swyne dyd
eate: and no man gaue vnto hym.
17 Then he came to hym selfe, and sayde: Howe many hyred seruauntes at my
fathers house haue bread inough, and I perishe with hunger?
18 I wyll aryse, and go to my father, and wyll say vnto hym: Father, I haue
sinned agaynst heauen, and before thee,
19 And am no more worthy to be called thy sonne, make me as one of thy hyred
seruauntes.
20 And he arose, and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way of, his
father sawe him, & had compassion, and ranne, and fell on his necke, and kissed
hym.
21 And the sonne sayde vnto him: Father, I haue sinned agaynst heauen, and in
thy syght, and am no more worthy to be called thy sonne.
22 But the father saide to his seruauntes: bryng foorth the best garment, and
put it on hym, and put a ryng on his hande, and shoes on his feete:
23 And bryng hyther that fat calfe, and kyll it, and let vs eate and be mery:
24 For this my sonne was dead, and is aliue agayne, he was lost, and is founde.
And they began to be mery.
25 The elder brother was in the fielde: and when he came and drewe nye to the
house, he hearde minstrelsie & daunsing,
26 And called one of his seruauntes, and asked, what those thynges meant.
27 And he sayde vnto hym: thy brother is come, and thy father hath kylled the
fat calfe, because he hath receaued hym safe and sounde.
28 And he was angry, and woulde not go in: Therfore came his father out, and
entreated hym.
29 He aunswered and sayde to his father: Lo, these many yeres haue I done thee
seruice, neither brake I at any tyme thy commaundement, and yet thou neuer
gauest me a kidde to make mery with my friendes:
30 But assoone as this thy sonne was come, which hath deuoured thy goodes with
harlottes, thou hast for his pleasure kylled that fat calfe.
31 And he sayde vnto hym: Sonne, thou art euer with me, and all that I haue, is
thyne,
32 It was meete that we shoulde make mery and be glad: for this thy brother was
dead, and is alyue agayne: and was lost, and is founde.

Chapter 16

1 And he sayde also vnto his disciples. There was a certayne riche man, which
had a stewarde, and the same was accused vnto hym that he had wasted his goodes.
2 And he called hym, and sayde vnto hym: Howe is it, that I heare this of thee?
Geue accomptes of thy stewardeshyppe, for thou mayest be no longer stewarde.
3 The stewarde sayde within hymselfe: What shall I do, for my maister taketh
away from me the stewardshyppe? I can not digge, & to begge I am ashamed.
4 I wote what to do, that when I am put out of the stewardshippe, they may
receaue me into their houses.
5 So, whe he had called all his maisters detters together, he sayde vnto the
first: Howe muche owest thou vnto my maister?
6 And he sayde, an hundreth measures of oyle. And he sayde vnto hym: Take thy
byll, and syt downe quickely, and write fiftie.
7 Then sayde he to another: Howe much owest thou? And he sayde, an hundreth
measures of wheate. He sayde vnto hym: Take thy byll, and write fourescore.
8 And the Lord commended the vniuste stewarde, because he had done wisely. For
the chyldren of this worlde are in their nation, wiser then the chyldren of
lyght.
9 And I saye vnto you, make you friends of the vnrighteous Mammo, that when ye
shall haue neede, they may receaue you into euerlastyng habitations.
10 He that is faythfull in that which is least, is faythfull also in much. And
he that is vnrighteous in the least, is vnrighteous also in much.
11 So then, yf ye haue not ben faythfull in the vnryghteous Mammon, who shall
trust you in the true treasure?
12 And yf ye haue not ben faythfull in another mans businesse, who shall geue
you that which is your owne?
13 No man can serue two maisters: For either he shall hate the one, and loue the
other: or els, he shall leane to the one, and despise the other. Ye can not
serue God, and Mammon.
14 All these thynges heard the pharisees also, which were couetous, and they
mocked hym.
15 And he sayde vnto them, Ye are they which iustifie your selues before men:
but God knoweth your heartes. For that which is hyghly esteemed among men, is
abhominable in the syght of God.
16 The lawe & the prophetes raigned vntyll Iohn, and sence that tyme, the
kyngdome of God is preached, & euery man stryueth to go in.
17 Easyer is it for heauen and earth to perishe, the one title of the lawe to
faile.
18 Whosoeuer forsaketh his wyfe, and marieth another, committeth adulterie. And
he that maryeth her that is deuorced from her husbande, committeth adulterie
also.
19 Ther was a certaine riche man, whiche was clothed in purple & fine whyte, and
fared very deliciously euery day.
20 And there was a certayne begger, named Lazarus, which was layde at his gate
full of sores:
21 And desiring to be refresshed with the crumbes which fell from ye riche mans
boorde And no man gaue vnto hym: but the dogges came and licked his sores.
22 And it came to passe, that the begger dyed, and was caryed by the Angels into
Abrahams bosome. The riche man also dyed, and was buryed.
23 And beyng in hell in tormentes, he lyft vp his eyes, and sawe Abraham a farre
of, and Lazarus in his bosome,
24 And he cryed and sayde: father Abraham, haue mercie on me, and sende Lazarus
that he may dippe the tippe of his fynger in water, and coole my tongue: for I
am tormented in this flambe.
25 But Abraham sayde: Sonne, remember that thou in thy lyfe tyme, receauedst thy
pleasure, and lykewyse Lazarus paynes: But nowe is he comforted, and thou art
tormented.
26 Beyonde all this, betweene vs & you there is a great gulfe set, so that they
which woulde go from hence to you, can not, neither may come from thence to vs.
27 Then he sayde: I pray thee therfore father, sende hym to my fathers house.
28 For I haue fyue brethren, that he may witnesse vnto them, lest they also come
into this place of torment.
29 Abraham sayde vnto hym: they haue Moyses and the prophetes, let them heare
them.
30 And he sayde, nay father Abraham: but yf one come vnto them from the dead,
they wyll repent.
31 He sayde vnto hym: If they heare not Moyses & the prophetes, neither wyll
they beleue, though one rose from death agayne.

Chapter 17

1 He sayde vnto the disciples, it can not be but offences wyll come,
neuerthelesse, wo vnto hym, through whom they come.
2 It were better for hym, that a mylstone were hanged about his necke, & he cast
into the sea, then that he shoulde offende one of these litle ones.
3 Take heede to your selues: If thy brother trespasse agaynst thee, rebuke hym:
and yf he repent, forgeue hym.
4 And though he sinne agaynst thee seuen tymes in a day, and seuen tymes in a
day turne agayne to thee, saying, it repenteth me: thou shalt forgeue hym.
5 And the Apostles sayde vnto the Lorde: increase our fayth.
6 And the Lorde sayde: If ye had fayth as much as a grayne of mustarde seede, &
should say vnto this Sycamine tree, plucke vp thy selfe by the rootes, and plant
thy selfe in the sea, it shoulde obey you.
7 But which of you, hauyng a seruaunt plowyng, or feedyng cattell, woulde say
vnto hym by & by when he were come from the fielde, go and syt downe at the
table:
8 And woulde not rather say vnto hym, dresse, wherwith I may suppe, & gyrde vp
thy selfe, and serue me, tyll I haue eaten and dronken, and afterward eate thou,
and drynke thou?
9 Doth he thanke that seruaunt, because he dyd the thynges that were commaunded
vnto hym? I trowe not.
10 So lykewyse ye, when ye haue done all those thynges which are commaunded you,
say, We are vnprofitable seruauntes, We haue done that which was our duetie to
do.
11 And so it was, as he went to Hierusalem, that he passed through the myddest
of Samaria and Galilee.
12 And as he entred into a certayne towne, there met hym ten men that were
lepers, which stoode a farre of,
13 And put foorth their voyces, & sayde: Iesu maister, haue mercie on vs.
14 When he sawe them, he sayde vnto them: Go shewe your selues vnto the
priestes. And it came to passe, that as they went, they were clensed.
15 And one of them, when he sawe that he was healed, turned backe agayne and
with a loude voyce praysed God:
16 And fell downe on his face at his feete, and gaue hym thankes: And the same
was a Samaritane.
17 And Iesus aunswered, and sayde: Are there not ten clensed? But where are
those nine?
18 There are not founde that returned agayne, to geue God prayse, saue only this
straunger.
19 And he sayde vnto hym: aryse, go thy way, thy fayth hath made thee whole.
20 When he was demaunded of the pharisees, when the kyngdome of God shoulde
come: he aunswered them, and sayde, The kyngdome of God shall not come with
obseruation.
21 Neither shall they say, lo here, or lo there: For beholde, the kyngdome of
God is within you.
22 And he sayde vnto the disciples: the dayes wyll come, when ye shall desyre to
see one day of the sonne of man, and ye shall not see it.
23 And they shall say to you, See here, see there: Go not after them, nor folowe
them.
24 For as the lyghtnyng, that lyghtneth out of the one part that is vnder
heauen, and shyneth vnto the other part which is vnder heauen: so shall the
sonne of man be in his daye.
25 But first must he suffer many thynges, and be refused of this nation.
26 And as it was in the dayes of Noe: so shall it be also in the dayes of the
sonne of man.
27 They dyd eate, and drynke, they maryed wiues, and were maryed, euen vnto the
same day that Noe went into the Arke: and the fludde came, & destroyed them all.
28 Lykewyse also as it was in the dayes of Lot: they dyd eate, they dranke, they
bought, they solde, they planted, they buylded:
29 But euen the same day that Lot went out of Sodome, it rayned fire and
brimstone from heauen, and destroyed them all.
30 Euen thus shall it be, in the day when the sonne of man shalbe reuealed.
31 At that day, he which is on the house top, and his stuffe in the house, let
him not come downe to take it out: And let not him that is in the fielde, turne
backe agayne lykewyse, to the thynges that he left behynde.
32 Remember lottes wyfe.
33 Whosoeuer wyll go about to saue his lyfe, shall loose it: and whosoeuer shall
loose his lyfe, shall quicken it.
34 I tell you, in that nyght there shalbe two in one bed, the one shalbe
receaued, the other shalbe forsaken.
35 Two women shalbe gryndyng together: the one shalbe receaued, and the other
forsaken.
36 Two men shalbe in the fielde: the one shalbe receaued, & the other forsake.
37 And they aunswered, and sayde vnto hym: Where Lorde? He sayde vnto the:
Whersoeuer the body shalbe, thyther wyll also the Egles be gathered together.

Chapter 18

1 And he put foorth a parable vnto them, to this ende that me ought alwayes to
pray, & not to be weery,
2 Saying: There was in a certayne citie, a iudge, whiche feared not God, neither
regarded man.
3 And there was a certayne widdowe in the same citie, and she came vnto him,
saying: Auenge me of mine aduersarie.
4 And he woulde not for a whyle. But afterwarde he sayde within hym selfe:
Though I feare not God, nor care for man,
5 Yet because this widdowe much troubleth me, I wyll auenge her: leste she come
at the last, & make me weery.
6 And the Lorde sayde: heare what the vuryghteous iudge sayeth.
7 And shall not God auenge his elect, which crye day and nyght vnto hym? yea,
though he deferre them,
8 I tell you he wyll auenge them, and that quickly. Neuerthelesse, when the
sonne of man commeth, shall he fynde fayth on the earth?
9 And he tolde this parable vnto certayne which trusted in them selues, that
they were perfect, and despised other.
10 Two men went vp into the temple to pray: the one a pharisee, and the other a
publicane.
11 The pharisee stoode and prayed thus with hym selfe: God, I thanke thee, that
I am not as other men are, extortioners, vniust, adulterers, or as this
publicane.
12 I fast twise in the weeke, I geue tithe of all that I possesse.
13 And the publicane standyng a farre of, woulde not lyft vp his eyes to heauen,
but smote vpon his brest, saying: God be mercifull to me a sinner.
14 I tell you, this man departed home to his house iustified, rather then the
other. For euery one that exalteth hym selfe, shalbe brought lowe: And he that
humbleth hym selfe, shalbe exalted.
15 They brought vnto him also infantes that he should touch them: Which, whe his
disciples sawe it, they rebuked the.
16 But Iesus, when he had called them vnto hym, saide, Suffer chyldre to come
vnto me, and forbyd them not: For of such is the kyngdome of God.
17 Ueryly I say vnto you: Whosoeuer receaueth not the kyngdome of God, as a
chylde, shall not enter therin.
18 And a certayne ruler asked hym, saying: Good maister, what ought I to do, to
possesse eternall lyfe?
19 Iesus sayde vnto hym: Why callest thou me good? None is good, saue God onely.
20 Thou knowest the commaundementes: Thou shalt not commit adultrie, thou shalt
not kyll, thou shalt not steale, thou shalt not beare false witnesse, honour thy
father and thy mother.
21 And he sayde: all these haue I kept from my youth vp.
22 When Iesus hearde that, he sayde vnto hym: Yet lackest thou one thyng. Sell
all that thou hast, and distribute vnto the poore, & thou shalt haue treasure in
heauen, and come, folowe me.
23 When he hearde this, he was very sory, for he was very riche.
24 When Iesus sawe that he was sory, he sayde: With what difficultie shall they
that haue money, enter into the kyngdome of God?
25 For it is easier for a camel to go through a nedles eye, then for a riche man
to enter into the kyngdome of God.
26 And they that hearde it, sayde: And who can then be saued?
27 And he sayde: The thynges which are vnpossible wih men, are possible with
God.
28 Then Peter sayde: Lo, we haue forsaken all, and folowed thee.
29 He sayde vnto them. Ueryly I say vnto you: there is no man that hath forsaken
house, either father, or mother, either brethren, or wyfe, or chyldren, for the
kyngdome of Gods sake.
30 Which shall not receaue much more in this worlde, and in the worlde to come,
lyfe euerlastyng.
31 Iesus toke vnto hym the twelue, and sayde vnto them: Beholde, we go vp to
Hierusalem, and all thynges shalbe fulfylled to the sonne of man, that are
written by the prophetes.
32 For he shalbe deliuered vnto the gentiles, and shalbe mocked, and spitefully
entreated, and spitted on:
33 And when they haue scourged hym, they wyll put hym to death. And the thyrde
day he shall aryse agayne.
34 And they vnderstoode none of all these thynges. And this saying was hyd from
them, so that they perceaued not the thynges which were spoken.
35 And it came to passe, that as he was come nie vnto Hierico, a certayne blynde
man sate by the wayes syde, beggyng.
36 And when he hearde the people passe by, he asked what it meant.
37 And they sayde vnto hym, that Iesus of Nazareth passed by.
38 And he cryed, saying: Iesu thou sonne of Dauid, haue mercie on me.
39 And they which went before, rebuked hym, that he shoulde holde his peace: But
he cryed so much the more, thou sonne of Dauid, haue mercie on me.
40 And Iesus stoode styll, & commaunded hym to be brought vnto hym. And whe he
was come neare, he asked him,
41 Saying: What wylt thou that I do vnto thee? And he saide: Lorde, that I may
receaue my syght.
42 And Iesus sayde vnto hym: receaue thy syght, thy fayth hath saued thee?
43 And immediatly he receaued his sight, and folowed hym, praysyng God: And all
the people, when they sawe it, gaue prayse vnto God.

Chapter 19

1 And he entred in, and went through Hierico.
2 And beholde, there was a man named Zacheus, which was the chiefe among the
publicanes, and was riche also:
3 And he sought meanes to see Iesus, what he shoulde be, & coulde not for the
preasse, because he was litle of stature.
4 And he ran before, and clymed vp into a wylde fygge tree, to see hym: for he
was to come that way.
5 And when Iesus came to the place, he loked vp and sawe hym, and sayde vnto
hym: Zache, come downe at once, for to day I must abyde at thy house.
6 And he came downe hastyly, and receaued hym ioyfully.
7 And when they al saw it, they murmured, saying that he was gone in to tary
with a man that is a synner.
8 And Zache stoode foorth, and sayde vnto the Lorde: Beholde Lorde, the halfe of
my goodes I geue to the poore, and yf I haue taken from any man by forged
cauillation, I restore him foure folde.
9 Iesus sayde vnto hym: This daye is saluation come to this house, because that
he also is become the childe of Abraham.
10 For the sonne of man is come to seke, and to saue that which was lost.
11 And as they hearde these thynges, he added & spake a parable, because he was
nye to Hierusale, & because they thought that the kingdome of God should shortly
appeare.
12 He sayde therfore: A certayne noble man went into a farre countrey, to
receaue for hym selfe a kyngdome, and to come agayne.
13 And he called his ten seruauntes, & deliuered the ten peeces of money, saying
vnto them, Occupie tyl I come.
14 But his citezins hated hym, and sent a message after hym, saying: We wyll not
haue this man to raigne ouer vs.
15 And it came to passe, that whe he had receaued his kyngdome and returned, he
commaunded these seruauntes to be called vnto him, to whom he had geuen the
money, to wyt howe muche euery man had done in occupying.
16 Then came the first, saying: Lorde thy peece hath gayned ten peeces.
17 And he sayde vnto hym: Well thou good seruaunt, because thou hast ben
faythfull in a very litle thing, haue thou aucthoritie ouer ten cities.
18 And the seconde came, saying: Thy peece hath encreased fiue peeces.
19 And to the same he sayde, be thou also ruler ouer fyue cities.
20 And another came, saying: Lorde beholde here is thy peece, whiche I haue
layed vp in a napkin.
21 For I feared thee, because thou art a strayte man: Thou takest vp that thou
laydest not downe, & reapest that thou dyddest not sowe.
22 He sayth vnto hym: Of thyne owne mouth wyll I iudge thee, thou euyll
seruaunt. Knewest thou that I am a straite man, taking vp that I layed not
downe, & reapyng that I dyd not sowe:
23 And wherfore gauest not thou my money into the banke, and at my commyng I
myght haue required myne owne with vauntage?
24 And he sayde vnto them that stoode by: Take from hym that peece, and geue it
to hym that hath ten peeces.
25 And they sayde vnto hym: Lorde he hath ten peeces.
26 For I say vnto you, that vnto euery one which hath, shalbe geuen: and fro hym
that hath not, shalbe taken away euen that he hath.
27 Moreouer, those mine enemies, which woulde not that I shoulde raigne ouer
the, bring hyther, & slea them before me.
28 And when he hadde thus spoken, he went foorth before, ascending vp to
Hierusalem.
29 And it came to passe, when he was come nye to Bethphage & Bethanie, besides
the mount which is called Oliuet, he sent two of his disciples,
30 Saying: Go ye into the towne which is ouer agaynst you, into the whiche,
assoone as ye are come, ye shall fynde a coult tyed, wheron yet neuer man sate:
loose hym, and bryng hym hyther.
31 And yf any man aske you, why do ye loose hym, thus shall ye say vnto hym:
because the Lorde hath neede of hym.
32 They that were sent, went their way, & founde euen as he had said vnto them.
33 And as they were a loosyng the coult, the owners therof said vnto them, why
loose ye the coult?
34 And they sayde: For the Lorde hath neede of hym.
35 And they brought hym to Iesus, and cast their rayment on the coult, and set
Iesus theron.
36 And as he went, they spread their clothes in the way.
37 And when he was nowe come nye to the going downe of the mount Oliuete, the
whole multitude of the disciples began to reioyce, and to prayse God with a
loude voyce, for all the miracles that they had seene.
38 Saying: Blessed be the kyng that cometh in the name of the Lorde, peace in
heauen, and glory in the hyest.
39 And some of the Pharisees of the companie sayde vnto hym: Maister, rebuke thy
disciples.
40 He saide vnto them: I tell you, that if these holde their peace, then shall
the stones crye.
41 And when he was come neare, he behelde the citie, and wept on it.
42 Saying: If thou haddest knowen those thynges whiche belong vnto thy peace,
euen in this thy day: But nowe are they hyd from thyne eyes.
43 For the dayes shall come vpon thee, that thyne enemies also shall caste a
banke about thee, and compasse thee rounde, and kepe thee in on euery syde:
44 And make thee euen with ye grounde, and thy chyldren which are in thee: and
they shall not leaue in thee one stone vpo another, because thou knowest not the
tyme of thy visitation.
45 And he went into the temple, and began to cast out them that solde therin, &
them that bought,
46 Saying vnto them, it is written: My house is the house of prayer, but ye haue
made it a denne of thieues.
47 And he taught dayly in the temple. But the hye priestes and the scribes, &
the chiefe of the people, went about to destroy hym,
48 And coulde not fynde what to do: For all the people stacke by hym, when they
hearde hym.

Chapter 20

1 And it came to passe, that on one of those dayes, as he taught ye people in
the temple, & preached the Gospell, the hie priestes and the scribes came vpo
hym, with the elders.
2 And spake vnto him, saying: Tell vs by what aucthoritie doest thou these
thynges? Eyther who is he that gaue thee this aucthoritie?
3 Iesus aunswered, & sayde vnto them: I also wyll aske you one thyng, & aunswere
me.
4 The baptisme of Iohn, was it from heauen, or of men?
5 And they reasoned within the selues, saying, Yf we say from heauen, he wyll
say, why then beleued ye hym not?
6 But and yf we say of men, all the people wyll stone vs: For they be perswaded
that Iohn is a prophete.
7 And they aunswered, that they coulde not tell whence it was.
8 And Iesus saide vnto them: Neither tell I you by what aucthoritie I do these
thynges.
9 Then began he to put foorth to the people this parable. A certayne man planted
a vineyarde, and let it foorth to husbande men, and went hym selfe into a
straunge countrey for a great season.
10 And when the time was come, he sent a seruaunt to the husbande men, that they
shoulde geue hym of the fruite of the vineyarde. And they beat hym, and sent hym
away emptie.
11 And agayne, he sent yet another seruaunt: and hym they did beate, and
entreated hym shamefully, and sent hym away emptie.
12 Agayne, he sent the thirde also: and hym they wounded, and cast hym out.
13 Then said the Lord of the vineyarde: What shal I do? I wyl send my deare
sonne, it may be they wyll reuerence hym, when they see hym.
14 But when the husbande men sawe him, they reasoned within them selues, saying:
This is the heyre, come, let vs kyll hym, that the inheritaunce may be ours.
15 And they cast him out of the vineyard, and kylled hym. What shall the Lorde
of the vineyarde therfore do vnto them?
16 He shall come and destroye these husbande men, & shall let out his vineyarde
to other. When they hearde this, they sayde, God forbyd.
17 And he behelde them, & sayde: What is this then that is written, The stone
that the buylders refused, the same is become the head of the corner.
18 Whosoeuer doth stumble vppon that stone, shalbe broken: but on whosoeuer it
falleth, it wyll grinde hym to powder.
19 And the hye priestes & the scribes, the same houre went about to laye handes
on hym: and they feared the people. For they perceaued that he had spoken this
similitude agaynst them.
20 And they watched hym, & sent foorth spyes, which shoulde fayne them selues
ryghteous men, to take hym in his wordes, and to delyuer hym vnto the power and
aucthoritie of the deputie.
21 And they asked him, saying: Maister, we knowe that thou sayest and teachest
ryght, neither considerest thou the outwarde appearaunce of any man, but
teachest the way of God truely:
22 Is is lawfull for vs to geue tribute vnto Caesar, or no?
23 He perceaued their craftynesse, & saide vnto them: why tempt ye me?
24 Shewe me a penie, whose image and superscription hath it? They aunswered and
sayde, Caesars.
25 And he sayde vnto them: Geue then vnto Caesar, the thynges which belong vnto
Caesar, and to God the thynges that perteyne vnto God.
26 And they coulde not reproue his saying before the people: and they marueyled
at his aunswere, & helde their peace.
27 Then came to hym certayne of the saducees, which denie that there is any
resurrection, and they asked hym,
28 Saying: Maister, Moyses wrote vnto vs, yf any mans brother dye, hauyng a
wyfe, and he dye without chyldren: that then his brother shoulde take his wyfe,
& rayse vp seede vnto his brother.
29 There were therfore seuen brethren, and the first toke a wyfe, & dyed without
chyldren.
30 And the seconde toke her, and he dyed chyldlesse.
31 And the thirde toke her, & in lykewise the residue of the seuen, and left no
chyldren behynde them, and dyed.
32 Last of all, the woman dyed also.
33 Nowe in the resurrection, whose wife of them shall she be? For seuen had her
to wyfe.
34 Iesus aunswered and saide vnto the: The chyldren of this worlde marrye wyues,
and are marryed:
35 But they which shalbe counted worthy to enioy that worlde, and the
resurrection from the dead, do not marrye wyues, neither are marryed,
36 Nor yet can dye any more: For they are equall vnto the angels, and are the
sonnes of God, inasmuche as they are chyldren of the resurrection.
37 And that the dead shall ryse agayne, Moyses also sheweth besides the bushe,
when he calleth the Lorde the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, & the God of
Iacob.
38 For he is not a God of dead, but of lyuyng: For all lyue vnto hym.
39 Then certayne of the pharisees aunswered, and sayde? Maister, thou hast well
sayde.
40 And after that, durst they not aske him any question at all.
41 And he sayde vnto them: Howe saye they that Christe is Dauids sonne:
42 And Dauid hym selfe sayeth in the booke of the psalmes: The Lord saide to my
Lord, syt thou on my right hand,
43 Tyll I make thine enemies thy footestoole?
44 Dauid therfore calleth hym Lorde, & howe is he then his sonne?
45 Then in the audience of all the people, he saide vnto his disciples.
46 Beware of the scribes, whiche wyll go in long robes, and loue greetinges in
the markets, and the hyest seates in the synagogues, and the chiefe rowmes at
feastes:
47 Which deuour widowes howses vnder colour of longe prayers: The same shall
receaue greater dampnation.

Chapter 21

1 As he beheld, he sawe the ryche men whiche caste their gyftes into the
treasurie.
2 He saw also a certaine poore wydowe, which caste in thyther two unites.
3 And he sayde, Of a trueth I say vnto you, that this poore wydowe hath put in
more then they all.
4 For they all haue of their superfluitie added vnto the offerynges of God: but
she of her penurie hath cast in al the substaunce that she had.
5 And vnto some, that spake of the temple, howe it was garnisshed with goodlie
stones and gyftes, he sayde.
6 Are these the thynges whiche ye loke vpo? The dayes wyll come, in ye which
there shall not be left one stone vpo another, that shall not be throwen downe.
7 And they asked him, saying: Maister when shall these thynges be? and what
signe wyll there be, when these thynges shall come to passe?
8 And he sayde: Take heede, that ye be not deceaued. For many shall come in my
name, saying I am Christe, and the tyme draweth neare. Folowe ye them not
therfore.
9 But when ye heare of warres, and seditios, be not afraide: For these thinges
must first come to passe, but the ende foloweth not by and by.
10 Then sayde he vnto them: Nation shall ryse agaynst nation, & kyngdome agaynst
kyngdome.
11 And great earthquakes shalbe in diuers places, and hunger, and pestilence,
and fearefull thynges, and great signes shall there be from heauen.
12 But before all these, they shall laye their handes on you, and persecute you,
deliueryng you vp to the synagogues, & into prisons, and shall bryng you vnto
kynges and rulers for my names sake.
13 And it shall turne to you for a testimoniall.
14 Be at a sure poynt therefore in your heartes, not to studie before what ye
shall aunswere:
15 For I wyll geue you a mouth, and wysedome, where agaynst, all your
aduersaries shall not be able to speake nor resist.
16 Yea ye shalbe betrayed also of your parentes, and brethren, and kynsfolke,
and friendes, and some of you shal they put to death.
17 And hated shal ye be of all men for my names sake.
18 And there shall not one heere of your head peryshe.
19 Possesse ye your soule by patience.
20 And whe ye see Hierusalem besieged with an hoast, then be sure that the
desolation of the same is nye.
21 Then let them which are in Iurie, flee to the mountaynes, and let them which
are in the myddes of it, depart out: and let not them that are in other
countreys enter therin.
22 For these be the dayes of vengeaunce, that all thinges which are written, may
be fulfylled.
23 But wo vnto the that are with childe, & to them that geue sucke in those
days: For there shalbe great distresse in the lande, and wrath ouer this people.
24 And they shall fall through the edge of the sworde, and shalbe led away
captiue into all nations: And Hierusalem shalbe troden downe of the gentiles,
vntyll the tyme of the gentiles be fulfylled.
25 And there shalbe signes in the sunne and in the moone, & in the starres: and
vpon the earth trouble among the nations, with perplexitie. The sea and the
water shall rore.
26 And mens heartes shal fayle them for feare, and for loking after those
thinges which shall come on the world: For the powers of heauen shalbe shaken.
27 And then shall they see the sonne of man come in a cloude, with power and
great glorie.
28 And when these thynges begyn to come to passe, then loke vp, and lyft vp your
heades, for your redemptio draweth nye.
29 And he shewed them a similitude: Behold the figge tree, & all the trees.
30 When they shoote foorth their buddes ye see and knowe of your owne selues
that sommer is then nye at hande.
31 So likewise ye, when ye see these thinges come to passe, be ye sure that the
kyngdome of God is nye.
32 Ueryly I say vnto you, this generation shall not passe, tyll all be
fulfylled.
33 Heauen and earth shall passe, but my wordes shall not passe.
34 Take heede to your selues, lest at any tyme your heartes be ouercome with
surfettyng and dronkennesse, and cares of this lyfe, and so the daye come vpon
you vnwares.
35 For as a snare shall it come on al them that dwell on the face of ye whole
earth.
36 Watche ye therfore, and pray continually, that ye may be accompted worthy to
escape all these thinges yt shall come, & that ye may stand before ye sonne of
man.
37 In the day time he taught in the temple: and at nyght he went out, & abode in
the mount that is called Oliuete.
38 And all the people came in ye mornyng to hym in the temple, for to heare hym.

Chapter 22

1 The feast of sweete breade drewe nye, which is called the Passouer.
2 And ye hie priestes and scribes sought howe they myght kyll hym, for they
feared the people.
3 Then entred Satan into Iudas, whose sirname was Iscariot, whiche was of the
number of the twelue.
4 And he went his waye, and communed with the hye priestes and officers, howe he
myght betray him vnto them.
5 And they were glad, and promised to geue him money.
6 And he consented, and sought oportunitie to betray him vnto them, when the
people were away.
7 Then came the day of sweete breade, when of necessitie the Passouer must be
offered.
8 And he sent Peter and Iohn, saying: Go and prepare vs the Passouer, that we
may eate.
9 They sayde vnto hym: Where wylt thou that we prepare?
10 And he sayde vnto them: Beholde, when ye enter into the citie, there shall a
man meete you, bearyng a pitcher of water, hym folowe into the same house that
he entreth in.
11 And ye shall say vnto the good man of the house, the maister saith vnto thee,
where is the ghest chamber, where I shall eate ye Passouer with my disciples?
12 And he shal shew you an vpper chamber prepared, there make redye.
13 And they went, and founde as he had sayde vnto them: and they made redye the
Passouer.
14 And when the houre was come, he sate downe, & the twelue apostles with hym.
15 And he sayde vnto them: I haue earnestly desired to eate this Passouer with
you, before that I suffer.
16 For I saye vnto you, hencefoorth I wyll not eate of it any more, vntyll it be
fulfylled in the kyngdome of God.
17 And he toke the cuppe, & gaue thankes, and sayde, Take this, and deuide it
aamong you:
18 For I say vnto you, I wyll not drinke of the fruite of the vine, vntyll the
kyngdome of God come.
19 And he toke bread, and when he had geue thankes, he brake it and gaue vnto
the, saying, This is my body, which is geuen for you: This do in the
remembraunce of me.
20 Lykewise also, when he had supped, he toke the cuppe, saying: This cuppe is
the new testamet in my blood, which is shed for you.
21 Yet beholde, the hande of hym that betrayeth me, is with me on the table.
22 And truely the sonne of man goeth as it is appoynted: but wo vnto that man by
whom he is betrayed.
23 And they began to enquire among them selues, which of them it was that
shoulde do it.
24 And there was a stryfe among the, which of them shoulde seeme to be the
greatest.
25 And he saide vnto them: The kinges of nations raigne ouer them, and they that
haue aucthoritie vpo them, are called gracious Lordes.
26 But ye shall not be so. But he that is greatest among you, shalbe as the
younger, and he that is chiefe, shalbe as he that doth minister.
27 For whether is greater, he that sitteth at meate, or he that serueth? Is not
he that sitteth at meate? But I am among you, as he that ministreth.
28 Ye are they, which haue bydden with me in my temptations.
29 And I appoynt vnto you a kingdome, as my father hath appoynted vnto me.
30 That ye may eate and drynke at my table in my kyngdome, & sit on seates
iudgyng the twelue tribes of Israel.
31 And the Lord saide: Simon, Simon, beholde Satan hath desired to sift you, as
it were wheate:
32 But I haue prayed for thee, that thy fayth fayle not: And when thou art
couerted, strength thy brethren.
33 And he sayde vnto him: Lord I am redy to go with thee into pryson, and to
death.
34 And he sayde: I tell thee Peter, the Cocke shal not crowe this day, tyll thou
hast thryse denyed that thou knewest me.
35 And he said vnto them: When I sent you without wallet, and scrippe, and
shoes, lacked ye any thyng? And they sayde, no.
36 Then saide he vnto them: But nowe he that hath a wallet, let him take it vp,
and lykewyse his scrippe: and he that hath none, let him sell his coate, and bye
a sworde.
37 For I say vnto you, that yet the same whiche is written, must be perfourmed
in me: Euen among the wicked was he reputed. For those thynges whiche are
written of me, haue an ende.
38 And they sayde: Lorde, beholde here are two swordes. And he sayde vnto them,
it is enough.
39 And he came out, and went as he was wont, to mount Oliuete: and the disciples
folowed hym.
40 And when he came to the place, he sayde vnto them: pray, lest ye fall into
temptation.
41 And he gate hym selfe from them about a stones caste, and kneeled downe, and
prayed,
42 Saying: Father, yf thou wylt, remoue this cuppe from me. Neuerthelesse, not
my wyl, but thine be fulfilled.
43 And there appeared an angell vnto hym from heauen, comfortyng hym.
44 And he was in an agonie, and he prayed more earnestly: and his sweat was lyke
droppes of blood, tricklyng downe to the grounde.
45 And when he rose vp from prayer, and was come to his disciples, he founde the
slepyng for heauynesse,
46 And sayde vnto them, why slepe ye? Rise, & pray lest ye fall into temptation.
47 Whyle he yet spake, behold there came a company, and he that was called
Iudas, one of the twelue, went before the, & preassed nye vnto Iesus to kisse
hym.
48 But Iesus sayde vnto hym: Iudas, betrayest thou the sonne of man with a
kisse?
49 When they whiche were about hym sawe what woulde folowe, they sayde vnto hym:
Lorde, shall we smyte with sworde?
50 And one of them smote a seruaunt of the hye priest, & stroke of his right
eare.
51 Iesus aunswered and saide, Suffer ye thus farre foorth. And whe he touched
his eare, he healed hym.
52 Then Iesus said vnto the hye priestes and rulers of the temple, and the
elders which were come to hym: Be ye come out as vnto a thiefe, with swordes and
staues?
53 When I was dayly with you in the temple, ye stretched foorth no handes
agaynst me: But this is euen your very houre, and the power of darknesse.
54 Then toke they hym, and ledde hym, & brought him to the hye priestes house:
and Peter folowed a farre of.
55 And when they had kyndeled a fire in the myddes of the hall, and were set
downe together, Peter also sate downe among them.
56 But when a certayne wenche behelde hym, as he sate by the fire and earnestlye
loked vpon hym she sayde: This same felowe was also with hym.
57 And he denyed hym, saying, woman I knowe hym not.
58 And after a litle whyle, another sawe hym, and saide: Thou art also of them.
And Peter sayd, man I am not.
59 And about the space of an houre after, an other affirmed saying: Ueryly this
felowe was with hym also, for he is of Galilee.
60 And Peter sayde: Man I wote not what thou sayest. And immediatlye whyle he
yet spake, the Cocke crewe.
61 And the Lorde turned backe, & loked vpon Peter: And Peter remembred the worde
of the Lorde, howe he hadde sayde vnto hym, before the Cocke crowe thou shalt
denie me thrise.
62 And Peter went out, & wept bitterlye.
63 And the men that helde Iesus, mocked hym, and smote hym.
64 And when they had blindfolded him, they stroke hym on the face, and asked
him, saying: Arede, who is it that smote thee?
65 And many other things blasphemouslye spake they against hym.
66 And assoone as it was day, the elders of the people, and the hye priestes,
and scribes, came together, and led hym into their counsell, saying:
67 Art thou very Christe, tell vs? And he sayde vnto them: If I tell you, you
wyll not beleue:
68 And if I aske you, you wyll not aunswere me, nor let me go.
69 Hereafter shall the sonne of man sit on the right hand of the power of God.
70 Then said they all: Art thou then the sonne of God? He sayde: Ye say yt I am.
71 And they sayd? What neede we any further witnesse? For we our selues haue
hearde of his owne mouth.

Chapter 23

1 And the whole multitude of them arose, & led hym vnto Pilate.
2 And they began to accuse hym, saying: We founde this felow peruerting the
people, and forbyddyng to paye tribute to Ceasar, saying that he is Christe, a
kyng.
3 And Pilate apposed hym, saying: Art thou the kyng of the Iewes? He aunswered
hym, and sayde: Thou sayest it.
4 Then saide Pilate to the hye priestes, and to the people: I finde no fault in
this man.
5 And they were the more fierce, saying: He moueth the people, teaching
thorowout al Iurie, and began at Galilee, euen to this place.
6 When Pilate hearde mention of Galilee, he asked whether the man were of
Galilee.
7 And assoone as he knewe that he belonged vnto Herodes iurisdiction, he sent
hym to Herode, whiche was also at Hierusalem at that tyme.
8 And when Herode sawe Iesus, he was exceeding glad: For he was desirous to see
hym of a long season, because he had hearde many thinges of hym, and he trusted
to haue seene some miracle done by hym.
9 Then he questioned with hym many wordes: But he aunswered hym nothing.
10 The hye priestes and scribes stoode foorth, and accused hym straytely.
11 And Herode with his men of warre despised him: and when he had mocked hym, he
arayed hym in whyte clothing, and sent hym agayne to Pilate.
12 And the same day Pilate and Herode were made friendes together: For before
they were at variaunce.
13 And Pilate called together the hye priestes, and the rulers, and the people,
14 And said vnto them: Ye haue brought this man vnto me, as one yt peruerteth
the people: and behold, I examine him before you, & finde no fault in this man
of those thinges wherof ye accuse hym:
15 No, nor yet Herode: For I sent you to hym, and loe nothing worthy of death is
done to hym.
16 I wyll therefore chasten hym, and let hym loose.
17 For of necessitie he must haue let one loose vnto them at the feast.
18 And all the people cryed at once, saying: Away with him, and deliuer to vs
Barabbas.
19 Which for a certaine insurrection made in the citie, and for murther, was
cast in pryson.
20 Pilate spake agayne to them, wyllyng to let Iesus loose.
21 But they cryed, saying: Crucifie hym, crucifie hym.
22 He sayde vnto them the thirde tyme: What euyll hath he done? I finde no cause
of death in hym, I wyll therefore chasten hym, and let hym go.
23 And they were instant with loude voyces, requiring that he might be
crucified. And the voyces of them, and of the hye priestes preuayled.
24 And Pilate gaue sentence, that it should be as they required.
25 And he let loose vnto them, him that for insurrection and murther was caste
into prison, whom they had desired, & he deliuered vnto them Iesus, to do with
hym what they woulde.
26 And as they ledde hym away, they caught one Simon of Cyrene comming out of
the fielde, and on hym layde they the crosse, that he myght beare it after
Iesus.
27 And there folowed hym a great companie of people, and of women, which
bewayled and lamented hym.
28 But Iesus turned backe vnto them, and sayde: Ye daughters of Hierusalem, wepe
not for me, but wepe for your selues, and for your chyldren:
29 For beholde, the dayes wyll come, in the which they shal say: Happy are the
barren, & the wombes that neuer bare, & the pappes which neuer gaue sucke.
30 Then shall they begin to say to the mountaynes, fall on vs, & to the hylles,
couer vs.
31 For if they do these thinges in a greene tree, what shalbe done in the drye?
32 And there were two euyll doers, led with hym to be slayne.
33 And after that they were come to the place whiche is called Caluarie, there
they crucified hym, and the euyll doers, one on the right hand, and the other on
the left.
34 Then said Iesus, Father forgeue the, for they wote not what they do. And they
parted his rayment, & cast lottes.
35 And the people stoode, and behelde: and the rulers mocked him with them,
saying: He saued other men let hym saue him selfe, if he be very Christe the
chosen of God.
36 The souldiours also mocked him, and came and offred him vineger,
37 And sayd: If thou be the kyng of the Iewes, saue thy selfe.
38 And a superscription was written ouer him, with letters of greke, and latin,
and hebrue, This is the king of the Iewes.
39 And one of the euyll doers whiche were hanged, rayled on hym, saying: If thou
be Christe, saue thy self and vs.
40 But the other aunswered, and rebuked hym, saying: Fearest thou not God, seing
thou art in the same dampnation?
41 We are righteously punished for we receaue according to our deedes: But this
man hath done nothing amisse.
42 And he sayde vnto Iesus: Lorde, remember me, when thou commest into thy
kyngdome.
43 And Iesus sayde vnto hym: Ueryly I say vnto thee, to day shalt thou be with
me in paradise.
44 And it was about the sixt houre: and there was a darknesse ouer al the earth
vntyll the ninth houre.
45 And the sunne was darkned, and the vayle of the temple dyd rent, euen thorowe
the middes.
46 And when Iesus had cryed with a loude voyce, he sayde: Father into thy handes
I commende my spirite. And when he thus had sayde, he gaue vp the ghost.
47 When the Centurion saw what was done, he glorified God, saying: Ueryly this
was a righteous man.
48 And all the people that came together to that sight, & sawe the thinges
whiche were done, smote their brestes, and returned.
49 And all his acquaintaunce, and the women that folowed him from Galilee stode
a farre of, beholding these thinges.
50 And beholde, there was a man named Ioseph, a councellour, and he was a good
man and a iust:
51 The same had not consented to the counsell and deede of them, which was of
Aramathia a citie of the Iewes, whiche same also wayted for the kyngdome of God.
52 He went vnto Pilate, and begged the body of Iesus,
53 And toke it downe, and wrapped it in a linnen cloth, and layde it in a
sepulchre that was hewen in stone, wherin neuer man before was layde.
54 And that day was the preparing of the Sabbath, & the Sabbath drew on.
55 The women that folowed after, whiche had come with hym from Galilee, behelde
the sepulchre, and how his body was layde.
56 And they returned, and prepared sweete odours and oyntmentes: but rested the
Sabbath day, according to the commaundement.

Chapter 24

1 But vpon the first day of the Sabbathes, very early in the mornyng, they came
vnto the sepulchre, & brought ye sweete odours which they had prepared, and
other women with them.
2 And they founde the stone rolled away from the sepulchre,
3 And they went in: but founde not the body of the Lorde Iesu.
4 And it came to passe, as they were amased therat: Beholde, two men stoode by
them in shinyng garmentes.
5 And as they were afrayde, and bowed downe their faces to the earth, they said
vnto them: Why seeke ye the lyuyng among the dead?
6 He is not here, but is risen: Remember howe he spake vnto you, when he was yet
in Galilee,
7 Saying: that the sonne of man must be deliuered into the handes of sinfull
men, and be crucified, and the thirde day rise agayne.
8 And they remembred his wordes,
9 And returned from the sepulchre, and tolde all these thinges vnto those
eleuen, and to all the remnaunt.
10 It was Marie Magdalene, and Ioanna, and Marie Iacobi, and other that were
with them, which tolde these thinges vnto the Apostles.
11 And their wordes seemed vnto them fayned thynges, neither beleued they them.
12 Then arose Peter, and ran vnto the sepulchre, and loked in, and sawe the
linnen clothes layde by them selues, and departed, wondryng in him selfe at that
which was come to passe.
13 And beholde, two of them went that same day to a towne called Emaus, which
was from Hierusalem about threescore furlonges.
14 And they talked together of all these thynges that were done.
15 And it came to passe, that whyle they communed together & reasoned, Iesus him
selfe drewe neare, and went with them.
16 But their eyes were holden, that they shoulde not knowe him.
17 And he sayde vnto them: What maner of communications are these that ye haue
one to another as ye walke, and are sad?
18 And the one of them, whose name was Cleophas, aunswered, and sayde to him:
Art thou only a straunger in Hierusalem, & hast not knowen the thinges which are
come to passe there, in these dayes?
19 He sayde vnto them: what thynges? And they sayde vnto him: Of Iesus of
Nazareth, whiche was a prophete, mightie in deede and worde before God and all
the people:
20 And howe the hye priestes, and our rulers deliuered him to be condempned to
death, and haue crucified him.
21 But we trusted that it had ben he which shoulde haue redeemed Israel: And as
touchyng all these thynges, to day is euen the thirde day, that they were done.
22 Yea, and certayne women also of our companie made vs astonied, which came
early vnto the sepulchre,
23 And founde not his body, and came, saying that they had seene a vision of
angels, which sayde that he was alyue.
24 And certayne of them which were with vs, went to the sepulchre, & founde it
euen so as the women had sayde: but hym they sawe not.
25 And he sayde vnto them: O fooles and slowe of heart, to beleue all that the
prophetes haue spoken.
26 Ought not Christe to haue suffered these thinges, & to enter into his glory?
27 And he began at Moyses, and all the prophetes, and interpreted vnto them in
all Scriptures which were writen of hym.
28 And they drewe nye vnto the towne which they went vnto, and he made as though
he would haue gone further.
29 And they constrayned hym, saying: abyde with vs, for it draweth towarde
nyght, and the day is farre passed. And he went in to tary with them.
30 And it came to passe, as he sate at meate with them, he toke bread, and
blessed it, and brake, and gaue to them.
31 And their eyes were opened, and they knewe him: and he vanished out of their
syght.
32 And they sayde betweene them selues: Dyd not our heartes burne within vs,
whyle he talked with vs by the way, and opened vnto vs the scriptures?
33 And they rose vp the same houre, and returned agayne to Hierusalem, and
founde the eleuen gathered together, and them that were with them,
34 Saying: The Lorde is rysen in deede, and hath appeared to Simon.
35 And they tolde what thynges were done in the way, and howe they knewe him in
breakyng of bread.
36 And as they thus spake, Iesus him selfe stoode in the middes of them, and
saith vnto them: Peace be vnto you.
37 But they were abasshed and afrayde, & supposed that they had seene a spirite.
38 And he sayde vnto them: Why are ye troubled, and why do thoughtes arise in
your heartes?
39 Beholde my handes and my feete, that it is euen I my selfe: Handle me and
see, for a spirite hath not fleshe and bones, as ye see me haue.
40 And when he had thus spoken, he shewed them his handes and his feete.
41 And whyle they yet beleued not for ioy, and wondred, he sayde vnto them: Haue
ye heare any meate?
42 And they offered him a peece of a broyled fishe, and of an hony combe.
43 And he toke it, and dyd eate before them.
44 And he sayde vnto them: These are the wordes which I spake vnto you, whyle I
was yet with you, that all must needes be fulfylled, which were written of me in
the law of Moyses, and in the prophetes, and in the psalmes.
45 Then opened he their wittes, that they myght vnderstande the scriptures.
46 And sayde vnto them: Thus is it written, and thus it behoued Christe to
suffer, and to rise agayne from death the thirde day:
47 And that repentaunce and remission of sinnes shoulde be preached in his name
among all nations, and must begyn at Hierusalem.
48 And ye are witnesses of these thynges.
49 And beholde I wyll sende the promise of my father vpon you: But tary ye in
the citie of Hierusalem, vntyll ye be endued with power from an hye.
50 And he led them out into Bethanie, and lift vp his handes, & blessed them.
51 And it came to passe, as he blessed them, he departed from them, and was
caryed vp into heauen.
52 And they worshipped him, and returned to Hierusalem with great ioy,
53 And were continually in the temple, praysyng and laudyng God. Amen.


John

Chapter 1

1 In the begynnyng was the worde, & the worde was with God: and that worde was
God.
2 The same was in the begynnyng with God.
3 All thynges were made by it: and without it, was made nothyng that was made.
4 In it was lyfe, and the lyfe was the lyght of men,
5 And the lyght shyneth in darkenesse: and the darknesse comprehended it not.
6 There was a man sent from God, whose name was Iohn:
7 The same came for a witnesse, to beare witnesse of the lyght, that all men
through hym myght beleue.
8 He was not that lyght: but was sent to beare witnesse of the lyght.
9 That lyght was the true lyght, which lyghteth euery man that commeth into the
worlde.
10 He was in the worlde, and the worlde was made by hym, and the worlde knewe
hym not.
11 He came among his owne, and his owne receaued hym not.
12 But as many as receaued hym, to them gaue he power to be the sonnes of God,
euen them that beleued on his name.
13 Which were borne, not of blood, nor of the wyll of the fleshe, nor yet of the
wyll of man, but of God.
14 And the same word became fleshe, and dwelt among vs ( and we sawe the glory
of it, as the glory of the only begotten sonne of the father) full of grace and
trueth.
15 Iohn beareth witnesse of hym, and cryeth, saying: This was he of whom I
spake, he that commeth after me, is preferred before me, for he was before me.
16 And of his fulnesse haue all we receaued, and grace for grace.
17 For the lawe was geuen by Moyses: but grace and trueth came by Iesus Christe.
18 No man hath seene God at any tyme: The onely begotten sonne which is in the
bosome of the father, he hath declared hym.
19 And this is the recorde of Iohn: When the Iewes sent priestes and leuites
from Hierusalem, to aske hym: What art thou?
20 And he confessed and denyed not, and sayde playnely, I am not that Christe.
21 And they asked hym: What then? art thou Elias? And he sayth, I am not. Art
thou that prophete? And he aunswered, no.
22 Then sayde they vnto hym: What art thou? that we may geue an aunswere to them
that sent vs: What sayest thou of thy selfe?
23 He sayde: I am the voyce of a cryer in the wildernesse, make strayght the way
of the Lorde, as sayde the prophete Esaias.
24 And they which were sent, were of the pharisees.
25 And they asked hym, and sayde vnto hym: Why baptizest thou then, yf thou be
not Christe, nor Elias, neither that prophete?
26 Iohn aunswered them, saying: I baptize with water, but there standeth one
among you, whom ye knowe not,
27 He it is, which though he came after me, was before me, whose shoes latchet I
am not worthy to vnloose.
28 These thynges were done in Bethabara beyonde Iordane, where Iohn dyd baptize.
29 The next day, Iohn seeth Iesus comming vnto hym, and saith, beholde the lambe
of God, which taketh away the sinne of the worlde.
30 This is he of whom I sayde, After me commeth a man, which is preferred before
me, for he was before me.
31 And I knewe hym not: but that he shoulde be declared to Israel, therfore am I
come, baptizing with water.
32 And Iohn bare recorde, saying: I sawe the spirite descende from heauen, lyke
vnto a doue, and abode vpon hym,
33 And knewe hym not. But he that sent me to baptize with water, the same saide
vnto me: vpon whom thou shalt see the spirite descende, and tary styll on hym,
the same is he which baptizeth with the holy ghost.
34 And I sawe, and bare recorde, that he is the sonne of God.
35 The next day after, Iohn stoode agayne, and two of his disciples.
36 And he behelde Iesus as he walked by, & sayth: beholde the lambe of God.
37 And the two disciples hearde hym speake, and they folowed Iesus.
38 And Iesus turned about, and sawe them folowe hym, & sayth vnto them: What
seeke ye? They sayde vnto hym: Rabbi (which is to say yf one interprete it,
Maister) where dwellest thou?
39 He sayeth vnto them: come and see. They came, and sawe where he dwelt, and
abode with hym that day: For it was about the tenth houre.
40 One of the two which hearde Iohn speake, & folowed hym, was Andrewe, Simon
Peters brother.
41 The same founde his brother Simon first, and sayth vnto hym: We haue founde
Messias, which is by interpretation, the annoynted.
42 And brought hym to Iesus. And Iesus behelde hym, and sayde: Thou art Simon
the sonne of Iona, thou shalt be called Cephas, which is by interpretation, a
stone.
43 The day folowyng, Iesus woulde go into Galilee, & founde Philip, and sayth
vnto hym, folowe me.
44 Philip was of Bethsaida, the citie of Andrewe and Peter.
45 Philip founde Nathanael, and sayth vnto hym: We haue founde hym, of whom
Moyses in the lawe, and the prophetes, dyd write: Iesus of Nazareth, the sonne
of Ioseph.
46 And Nathanael sayde vnto hym: Can there any good thyng come out of Nazareth?
Philip sayth vnto him: come and see.
47 Iesus sawe Nathanael commyng to hym, & sayeth of hym: Beholde a ryght
Israelite, in whom is no guile.
48 Nathanael sayth vnto hym: Whence knewest thou me? Iesus aunswered, and sayde
vnto hym: Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast vnder the fygge tree, I
sawe thee.
49 Nathanael aunswered, and sayde vnto hym: Rabbi, thou art euen the very sonne
of God, thou art ye kyng of Israel.
50 Iesus aunswered, & sayde vnto hym: Because I sayde vnto thee, I saw thee
vnder the fygge tree, thou beleuest: Thou shalt see greater thynges then these.
51 And he sayth vnto hym: Ueryly, veryly I say vnto you, hereafter shall ye see
heauen open, and the Angels of God ascendyng & descendyng vpon the sonne of man.

Chapter 2

1 And the thirde day, was there a mariage in Cana a citie of Galilee, and the
mother of Iesus was there.
2 And Iesus was called, and his disciples vnto the mariage.
3 And whe the wyne fayled, the mother of Iesus sayth vnto hym: they haue no
wyne.
4 Iesus saith vnto her: Woman, what haue I to do with thee, myne houre is not
yet come.
5 His mother sayth vnto the ministers: Whatsoeuer he sayth vnto you, do it.
6 And there were set there, sixe water pottes of stone, after the maner of the
purifiyng of the Iewes, conteynyng two or three firkins a peece.
7 Iesus sayth vnto them: fyll the water pottes with water. And they fylled them
vp to the brym.
8 And he sayth vnto them: drawe out nowe, and beare vnto the gouernour of feast.
And they bare it.
9 When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wyne, and knewe
not whence it was (but the ministers which drewe the water knewe) the gouernour
of the feast calleth the brydegrome:
10 And sayth vnto hym, Euery man at the begynnyng doth set foorth good wine, and
when men haue well dronke, then that which is worse: But thou hast kept the good
wyne vntyll nowe.
11 This begynnyng of miracles dyd Iesus in Cana of Galilee, and shewed his
glory, & his disciples beleued on hym.
12 After this, he went downe to Capernaum, he, and his mother, and his brethren,
and his disciples, and there continued not many dayes.
13 And the Iewes Passouer was at hande, & Iesus went vp to Hierusalem,
14 And founde sittyng in the temple, those that solde oxen, and sheepe, and
doues, and chaungers of money.
15 And when he had made as it were a scourge of small cordes, he droue them all
out of the temple, with the sheepe, & oxen, and powred out the chaungers money,
and ouerthrewe the tables,
16 And saide vnto them that solde doues: Haue these thinges hence, and make not
my fathers house an house of marchaundize.
17 And his disciples remembred that it was written: The zeale of thine house
hath euen eaten me.
18 Then aunswered the Iewes, & sayde vnto hym: What token shewest thou vnto vs,
seeyng that thou doest these thynges?
19 Iesus aunswered, & sayde vnto them: Destroy this temple, & in three dayes I
wyll reare it vp.
20 Then sayde the Iewes, fourtie and sixe yeres was this temple a buildyng, and
wilt thou reare it vp in three dayes?
21 But he spake of the temple of his body.
22 Assoone therfore, as he was rysen from death agayne, his disciples remembred
that he thus had sayde: And they beleued the scripture, & the wordes which Iesus
had sayde.
23 When he was in Hierusalem at the Passouer, in the feast day, many beleued on
his name, when they sawe his miracles which he dyd.
24 But Iesus dyd not commit hym selfe vnto them, because he knewe all men,
25 And neded not, that any shoulde testifie of man: For he knewe what was in
man.

Chapter 3

1 There was a man of the pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Iewes.
2 The same came to Iesus by night, & said vnto him: Rabbi, we knowe that thou
art a teacher come from God: for no man coulde do these miracles that thou
doest, except God were with him.
3 Iesus aunswered, & sayde vnto hym: Ueryly, veryly, I say vnto thee, except a
man be borne agayne, he can not see the kyngdome of God.
4 Nicodemus sayth vnto hym: Howe can a man be borne when he is olde? can he
enter into his mothers wombe, and be borne agayne?
5 Iesus aunswered: Ueryly, veryly, I say vnto thee, except a man be borne of
water and of the spirite, he can not enter into the kyngdome of God.
6 That which is borne of the fleshe, is fleshe: and that which is borne of the
spirite, is spirite.
7 Maruayle not thou that I sayde to thee, ye must be borne agayne.
8 The wynde bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sounde therof: but
canst not tell whence it commeth, and whither it goeth. So is euery one that is
borne of the spirite.
9 Nicodemus aunswered, and sayde vnto hym: howe can these thynges be?
10 Iesus aunswered, & sayde vnto hym: Art thou a maister in Israel, and knowest
not thesethynges?
11 Ueryly, veryly, I say vnto thee, we speake that we do knowe, & testifie that
we haue seene: and ye receaue not our witnesse.
12 If I haue tolde you earthly thynges, and ye beleue not: howe shall ye beleue,
yf I tell you of heauenly thynges?
13 And no man ascendeth vp to heauen, but he that came downe from heauen, euen
the sonne of man which is in heauen.
14 And as Moyses lyft vp the serpent in the wyldernesse: euen so must the sonne
of man be lyft vp:
15 That whosoeuer beleueth in hym, perishe not, but haue eternall lyfe.
16 For God so loued the worlde, that he gaue his only begotten sonne, that
whosoeuer beleueth in hym, shoulde not perishe, but haue euerlastyng lyfe.
17 For God sent not his sonne into the worlde, to condempne the worlde: but that
the worlde through hym myght be saued. He that beleueth on hym, is not
condempned:
18 But he that beleueth not, is condempned alredy, because he hath not beleued
in the name of the only begotte sonne of God.
19 And this is the condempnation: that lyght is come into the worlde, and men
loued darknesse rather then lyght, because their deedes were euyll.
20 For euery one that euyll doeth, hateth the lyght: neither commeth to the
light, lest his deedes shoulde be reproued.
21 But he that doeth trueth, cometh to the lyght, yt his deedes may be knowen,
howe that they are wrought in God.
22 After these thynges, came Iesus and his disciples into the lande of Iurie,
and there he taryed with the, & baptized.
23 And Iohn also baptized in Enon, besides Salim, because there was much water
there: and they came, and were baptized.
24 For Iohn was not yet cast into prison.
25 And there arose a question betwene Iohns disciples and the Iewes, about
purifiyng.
26 And they came vnto Iohn, and sayde vnto hym: Rabbi, he that was with thee
beyonde Iordane, to whom thou barest witnesse, beholde the same baptizeth, and
all men come to hym.
27 Iohn aunswered, and sayde: A man can receaue nothyng, except it be geuen hym
from heauen.
28 Ye your selues are witnesses, howe that I sayde I am not Christe, but am sent
before hym.
29 He that hath ye bride, is the bridegrome. But the friende of the brydegrome,
which standeth & heareth him, reioyceth greatly because of ye brydegromes voyce.
This my ioy therfore is fulfylled.
30 He must increace, but I must decreace.
31 He that commeth from an hye, is aboue all: He that is of the earth, is
earthlye, and speaketh of the earth. He that commeth from heauen, is aboue all:
32 And what he hath seene and hearde, that he testifieth: and no man receaueth
his testimonie.
33 He that hath receaued his testimonie, hath set to his seale, that God is
true.
34 For he whom God hath sent, speaketh the wordes of God: For God geueth not the
spirite by measure vnto hym.
35 The father loueth the sonne, and hath geuen all thynges into his hande.
36 He that beleueth on the sonne, hath euerlastyng lyfe: He that beleueth not
the sonne, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abydeth on hym.

Chapter 4

1 Assoone as the Lord knew, how the pharisees had heard that Iesus made and
baptized mo disciples then Iohn,
2 (Though that Iesus hym selfe baptized not, but his disciples:)
3 He left Iurie, and departed agayne into Galilee.
4 For it was so that he must needes go through Samaria.
5 Then came he to a citie of Samaria, which is called Sichar, besydes the
possession that Iacob gaue to his sonne Ioseph.
6 And there was Iacobs well. Iesus then beyng wery of his iourney, sate thus on
the well. And it was about the sixt houre:
7 And there came a woman of Samaria to drawe water: Iesus sayth vnto her, geue
me drynke.
8 For his disciples were gone away, vnto the towne to bye meate.
9 Then sayth the woman of Samaria vnto hym: Howe is it, that thou beyng a Iewe,
askest drynke of me, which am a Samaritane? For the Iewes meddle not with the
Samaritanes.
10 Iesus aunswered, and sayde vnto her: yf thou knewest the gyft of God, & who
it is that sayeth to thee geue me drynke, thou wouldest haue asked of hym, and
he woulde haue geuen thee water of lyfe.
11 The woman sayth vnto hym: Syr, thou hast nothyng to drawe with, and the well
is deepe: from whence then hast thou that water of lyfe?
12 Art thou greater then our father Iacob, which gaue vs the well, and he hym
selfe dranke therof, and his chyldren, and his cattell?
13 Iesus aunswered, and sayde vnto her: Whosoeuer drynketh of this water, shal
thyrst agayne:
14 But whosoeuer drynketh of the water that I shall geue hym, shall neuer be
more a thyrst: but the water that I shall geue him, shalbe in him a well of
water, spryngyng vp into euerlastyng lyfe.
15 The woman sayth vnto hym: Syr, geue me of that water, that I thyrst not,
neither come hyther to drawe.
16 Iesus sayth vnto her: Go, call thy husbande, and come hyther.
17 The woman aunswered, and sayde vnto hym: I haue no husbande. Iesus sayde vnto
her: Thou hast well sayde, I haue no husbande.
18 For thou hast had fyue husbandes, and he whom thou now hast, is not thy
husbande. In that saydest thou truely.
19 The woman sayth vnto hym: Syr, I perceaue that thou art a prophete.
20 Our fathers worshipped in this mountayne, and ye say that in Hierusalem is
the place, where men ought to worshippe.
21 Iesus sayth vnto her: woman beleue me, the houre commeth, when ye shall
neither in this mountayne, nor yet at Hierusalem, worshippe the father.
22 Ye worshippe ye wote not what. We knowe what we worshippe: For saluation
commeth of the Iewes.
23 But the houre commeth, and nowe is, when the true worshippers, shall
worshippe the father in spirite, and in the trueth: For such the father also
requireth to worshippe hym.
24 God is a spirite, and they that worshippe hym, must worshippe hym in spirite,
and in the trueth.
25 The woman sayth vnto hym, I wote that Messias shal come, which is called
Christe: when he is come, he wyll tell vs all thynges.
26 Iesus sayth vnto her: I that speake vnto thee, am he.
27 And immediatly came his disciples, and marueyled that he talked with the
woman: Yet no man saide, what seekest thou, or why talkest thou with her?
28 The woman then left her water pot, and went her way into the citie, & sayth
to the men:
29 Come, see a man which tolde me all thynges that euer I dyd: Is not he
Christe?
30 Then they went out of the citie, and came vnto hym.
31 In the meane whyle his disciples prayed hym, saying: Maister, eate.
32 He sayde vnto them: I haue meate to eate that ye wote not of.
33 Therfore sayde the disciples among them selues: Hath any man brought hym
ought to eate?
34 Iesus sayth vnto them: my meate is to do the wyll of hym that sent me, and to
finishe his worke.
35 Say not ye, there are yet foure monethes, and then commeth haruest? Beholde,
I say vnto you, lyft vp your eyes, and loke on the regions: for they are whyte
alredy vnto haruest.
36 And he that reapeth, receaueth wages, and gathereth fruite vnto lyfe
eternall: that both he that soweth, & he that reapeth, myght reioyce together.
37 And herein is the saying true, that one soweth, and another reapeth.
38 I sent you to reape that, wheron ye bestowed no labour. Other men laboured,
and ye are entred into their labours.
39 Many of the Samaritanes of that citie beleued on hym, for the saying of the
woman, which testified that he tolde her all that euer she dyd.
40 So, when the Samaritanes were come vnto hym, they besought hym that he would
tary with them: And he abode there two dayes.
41 And many mo beleued, because of his owne worde,
42 And sayde vnto the woman: Nowe we beleue, not because of thy saying: for we
haue heard him our selues, & know that this is euen Christe, the sauiour of the
worlde.
43 After two dayes he departed thence, and went away into Galilee.
44 For Iesus hym selfe testified, that a prophete hath none honour in his owne
countrey.
45 Then, assoone as he was come into Galilee, the Galileans receaued hym, when
they had seene all the thynges that he dyd at Hierusalem, at the day of the
feast. For they went also vnto the feast day.
46 So Iesus came agayne into Cana of Galilee, where he turned the water into
wyne. And there was a certayne ruler, whose sonne was sicke at Capernaum.
47 Assoone as the same hearde that Iesus was come out of Iurie into Galilee, he
went vnto hym, and besought hym that he woulde come downe, and heale his sonne:
For he was euen at the poynt of death.
48 Then sayde Iesus vnto hym: except ye see signes and wonders, ye wyll not
beleue.
49 The ruler sayth vnto hym: Syr, come downe or euer that my sonne dye.
50 Iesus sayth vnto hym: Go thy way, thy sonne lyueth. The man beleued the worde
that Iesus had spoken vnto hym, and he went his way.
51 And as he was nowe goyng downe, the seruauntes met hym, and tolde him,
saying, thy sonne lyueth.
52 Then enquired he of them the houre, when he began to amende. And they sayde
vnto hym: Yesterday at the seuenth houre, the feuer left hym.
53 So the father knewe, that it was the same houre, in the which Iesus sayde
vnto hym thy sonne lyueth: And he beleued, and all his householde.
54 This is agayne the seconde miracle, that Iesus dyd, when he was come out of
Iurie into Galilee.

Chapter 5

1 After this, was there a feast day of the Iewes, and Iesus went vp to
Hierusalem.
2 And there is at Hierusalem by the sheepe market, a poole, which is called in
the Hebrue tonge Bethesda, hauyng fyue porches.
3 In which lay a great multitude of sicke folke, of blynde, halt, & wythered,
waytyng for the mouyng of the water.
4 For an Angel went downe at a certayne season into the poole, and stirred the
water: Whosoeuer then firste after the stirring of the water stepped in, was
made whole of whatsoeuer disease he hadde.
5 And a certaine man was there, which had ben diseased thirtie & eyght yeres.
6 When Iesus sawe hym lye, & knewe that he nowe long tyme had ben diseased, he
sayth vnto hym: Wylt thou be made whole?
7 The sicke man aunswered him: Sir, I haue no man whe the water is troubled to
put me into the poole: But in the meane time, while I am about to come, another
steppeth downe before me.
8 Iesus saith vnto him: Ryse, take vp thy bedde, and walke.
9 And immediatly the man was made whole, and toke vp his bedde, & walked. And
the same day was the Sabboth.
10 The Iewes therfore sayde vnto hym that was made whole: It is the Sabboth day,
it is not lawfull for thee to carie thy bedde.
11 He aunswered them: He that made me whole, saide vnto me, take vp thy bedde
and walke.
12 Then asked they hym: What man is that which sayde vnto thee, take vp thy
bedde, and walke?
13 And he that was healed, wyste not who it was. For Iesus had gotten him selfe
awaye, because that there was prease of people in that place.
14 Afterwarde, Iesus founde hym in the temple, and saide vnto him: behold, thou
art made whole, sinne no more, lest a worse thyng come vnto you.
15 The man departed, & tolde the Iewes that it was Iesus which had made him
whole.
16 And therefore the Iewes dyd persecute Iesus, and sought the meanes to slea
hym, because he hadde done these thynges on the Sabboth day.
17 And Iesus aunswered them: My father worketh hitherto, and I worke.
18 Therfore the Iewes sought the more to kyll him, not only because he had
broken the Sabboth, but sayde also, that God was his father, and made himselfe
equall with God.
19 Then aunswered Iesus, & sayde vnto them: Ueryly veryly I say vnto you, the
sonne can do nothyng of hym selfe, but that he seeth ye father do: For
whatsoeuer he doeth, that doeth the sonne also.
20 For the father loueth the sonne, and sheweth hym all thynges that he hym
selfe doeth: And he wyll shewe hym greater workes then these, because ye shoulde
marueyle.
21 For lykewyse as the father rayseth vp the dead, and quickeneth them: euen so,
the sonne quickeneth whom he wyll.
22 Neither iudgeth the father any man: but hath committed all iudgement vnto the
sonne,
23 Because that all men shoulde honour the sonne, euen as they honour the
father. He that honoureth not the sonne, the same honoureth not ye father which
hath sent hym.
24 Ueryly veryly I say vnto you, he that heareth my worde, and beleueth on him
that sent me, hath euerlastyng lyfe, and shall not come into dampnation, but is
escaped from death vnto lyfe.
25 Ueryly veryly I saye vnto you, the houre shall come, and nowe is, when the
dead shall heare the voyce of the sonne of God: And they that heare, shall lyue.
26 For as the father hath lyfe in hym selfe: so lykewyse hath he geuen to the
sonne, to haue lyfe in hym selfe:
27 And hath geuen hym power also to iudge, because he is the sonne of man.
28 Marueyle not at this: For the houre shall come, in the whiche all that are in
the graues shall heare his voyce.
29 And shall come foorth, they that haue done good, vnto the resurrection of
lyfe, and they that haue done euyll, vnto the resurrection of dampnation.
30 I can of mine owne selfe do nothing: As I heare I iudge, and my iudgemet is
iuste, because I seke not myne owne wyll, but the wyll of the father whiche hath
sent me.
31 Yf I shoulde beare witnesse of my selfe, my witnesse were not true.
32 There is another that beareth witnesse of me, and I am sure that the witnesse
which he beareth of me is true.
33 Ye sent vnto Iohn, and he bare witnesse vnto the trueth.
34 But I receaue not the recorde of man: Neuerthelesse, these thinges I say,
that ye myght be safe.
35 He was a burnyng & a shynyng lyght, and ye would for a season haue reioyced
in his lyght.
36 But I haue greater witnesse, then the witnesse of Iohn: For the workes whiche
the father hath geuen me to finishe, the same workes that I do, beare witnesse
of me, that the father hath sent me.
37 And the father hymselfe which hath sent me, hath borne witnesse of me. Ye
haue not hearde his voyce at any tyme, nor seene his shape,
38 His worde haue ye not abydyng in you: For who he hath set, him ye beleue not.
39 Searche the scriptures, for in them ye thynke ye haue eternall lyfe: and they
are they which testifie of me.
40 And yet wyll ye not come to me, that ye myght haue lyfe.
41 I receaue not prayse of men.
42 But I knowe you, that ye haue not the loue of God in you.
43 I am come in my fathers name, and ye receaue me not. Yf another come in his
owne name, hym wyll ye receaue.
44 Howe can ye beleue, whiche receaue honour one of another, and seke not the
honour that commeth of God only?
45 Do not thinke that I wyll accuse you to my father: There is one that accuseth
you, euen Moyses, in who ye trust.
46 For had ye beleued Moyses, ye would haue beleued me: for he wrote of me.
47 But yf ye beleue not his wrytynges, howe shall ye beleue my wordes?

Chapter 6

1 After these thynges, Iesus went his waye ouer the sea of Galilee, which is the
sea of Tiberias.
2 And a great multitude folowed hym, because they sawe his miracles whiche he
dyd on them that were diseased.
3 And Iesus went vp into a mountayne, & there he sate with his disciples.
4 And the Passouer, a feast of ye Iewes, was nye.
5 When Iesus then lyft vp his eyes, and sawe a great company come vnto him, he
saith vnto Philip: Whence shal we bye bread, that these may eate?
6 (This he sayde to proue hym: for he hym selfe knewe what he woulde do.)
7 Philip aunswered hym: Two hundred penie worth of bread are not sufficient for
them, that euery man may take a litle.
8 One of his disciples, Andrewe, Simo Peters brother, sayth vnto hym:
9 There is a litle ladde here, whiche hath fyue barly loaues and two fisshes,
but what are they among so many?
10 And Iesus sayde: Make the people syt downe. There was much grasse in the
place. So the men sate downe, in number about fyue thousande.
11 And Iesus toke the bread, and when he had geue thankes, he gaue to the
disciples, and the disciples to them yt were set downe, and lykewyse of the
fisshes, as much as they woulde.
12 When they had eaten enough, he saide vnto his disciples: Gather vp the broke
meate that remayneth, that nothyng be lost.
13 And they gathered it together, & fylled twelue baskettes with the broken
meate of the fyue barly loaues, whiche broken meate remayned vnto them that had
eaten.
14 Then those men, when they had seene the miracle that Iesus did, saide: This
is of a trueth the same prophete that shoulde come into the worlde.
15 When Iesus therfore perceaued, that they would come and take him, to make hym
kyng, he departed agayne into amountayne hym selfe alone.
16 And when euen was nowe come, his disciples went downe vnto the sea.
17 And gat vp into a shippe, and went ouer the sea, towardes Capernau: And it
was nowe darke, and Iesus was not come to them.
18 And the sea arose, with a great wynde that blewe.
19 So, when they had rowed about 25 or 30 furlonges, they sawe Iesus walkyng on
the sea, and drawyng nye vnto the shippe, and they were afrayde.
20 But he sayth vnto them: It is I, be not afrayde.
21 And they wyllyngly receaued hym into the shippe, and immediatly the shippe
was at the lande whyther they went.
22 The day folowyng, when the people, whiche stoode on the other syde of the
sea, sawe that there was none other shippe there, saue that one whereinto his
disciples were entred, and that Iesus went not in with his disciples into the
shippe, but that his disciples were gone awaye alone:
23 Howebeit there came other shippes fro Tiberias, nye vnto the place, where
they dyd eate bread, after that the Lord had geuen thankes.
24 When the people therefore sawe that Iesus was not there, neither his
disciples, they also toke shippyng, and came to Capernaum, sekyng for Iesus.
25 And whe they had founde hym on the other side of the sea, they said vnto him,
Rabbi, when camest thou hyther? Iesus aunswered them, and sayde:
26 Ueryly veryly I say vnto you, ye seke me, not because ye sawe the miracles,
but because ye dyd eate of the loaues, & were fylled.
27 Labour not for the meate whiche perisheth, but for that whiche endureth vnto
euerlastyng lyfe, which meate the sonne of man shall geue vnto you: For hym hath
God the father sealed.
28 Then saide they vnto him: What shall we do, that we myght worke ye workes of
God?
29 Iesus aunswered, & sayde vnto them: This is the worke of God, that ye beleue
on hym whom he hath sent.
30 They said therfore vnto hym: What signe shewest thou then, yt we may see, &
beleue thee? What doest thou worke?
31 Our fathers dyd eate Manna in the desert, as it is written: He gaue them
bread from heauen to eate.
32 Then Iesus sayde vnto them: Ueryly veryly I say vnto you, Moyses gaue you not
yt bread fro heauen, but my father geueth you ye true bread fro heaue.
33 For the bread of God, is he which cometh downe from heauen, and geueth lyfe
vnto the worlde.
34 Then sayde they vnto hym: Lorde, euermore geue vs this bread.
35 And Iesus sayde vnto them, I am the bread of lyfe: He that cometh to me,
shall not hunger: and he that beleueth on me, shall neuer thirst.
36 But I say vnto you, that ye also haue seene me, and yet ye beleue not.
37 All that the father geueth me, shall come to me: and hym that commeth to me,
I cast not away.
38 For I came downe from heauen, not to do that I wyll: but that he wyll, which
hath sent me.
39 And this is the fathers wyll whiche hath sent me: that of all which he hath
geuen me, I shal lose nothing, but rayse it vp agayne at the last day.
40 And this is the wyll of him yt sent me: that euery one which seeth the sonne,
& beleueth on him, hath euerlastyng lyfe: And I wyll rayse him vp at ye last
day.
41 The Iewes then murmured at him, because he sayde, I am the bread of life
which came downe from heauen.
42 And they saide: Is not this Iesus, ye sonne of Ioseph, whose father and
mother we knowe? Howe is it then that he sayth, I came downe from heauen?
43 Iesus aunswered, & sayde vnto them: Murmure not among your selues.
44 No man can come to me, except the father, whiche hath sent me, drawe hym: And
I wyll rayse hym vp at the last day.
45 It is written in the prophetes: And they shalbe all taught of God. Euery man
therfore that hath heard, and hath learned of the father, cometh vnto me.
46 Not that any man hath seene the father, saue he which is of God, the same
hath seene the father.
47 Ueryly veryly I say vnto you, he that putteth his trust in me, hath
euerlasting lyfe.
48 I am that bread of lyfe.
49 Your fathers dyd eate Manna in the wyldernesse, and are dead.
50 This is that bread, which commeth downe from heauen, that yf any man eate
therof, he shoulde not dye.
51 I am that lyuyng bread, which came downe from heauen. Yf any man eate of this
bread, he shall lyue for euer. And the bread that I wyl geue, is my fleshe,
whiche I wyll geue for the lyfe of the worlde.
52 The Iewes therefore stroue among them selues, saying: Howe can this felowe
geue vs that fleshe of his to eate?
53 Then Iesus saide vnto them: Ueryly veryly I saye vnto you, excepte ye eate
the fleshe of the sonne of man, and drynke his blood, ye haue no lyfe in you.
54 Who so eateth my fleshe, and drinketh my blood, hath eternall lyfe, and I wyl
rayse hym vp at the last day.
55 For my fleshe is meate in deede, and my blood is drynke in deede.
56 He that eateth my fleshe, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, & I in hym.
57 As the lyuing father hath sent me, and I lyue by the father: Euen so, he that
eateth me, shal liue by the meanes of me.
58 This is that bread, which came downe from heauen: Not as your fathers dyd
eate Manna, and are dead. He that eateth of this bread, shall lyue euer.
59 These thynges sayde he in the synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum.
60 Many therfore of his disciples, when they had hearde this, saide: This is an
harde saying, who can abyde the hearyng of it?
61 Iesus knewe in hym selfe, that his disciples murmured at it, and he sayde
vnto them, doth this offende you?
62 What and yf ye shall see the sonne of man ascende vp thyther where he was
before?
63 It is the spirite that quickeneth, the fleshe profiteth nothyng. The wordes
that I speake vnto you, are spirite and lyfe.
64 But there are some of you that beleue not. For Iesus knewe from the
begynning, which they were that beleued not, and who shoulde betray hym.
65 And he sayde: Therfore saide I vnto you, that no man can come vnto me, except
it were geue vnto him of my father.
66 From that time, many of his disciples wet backe, & walked no more with him.
67 Then sayde Iesus vnto the twelue: Wyll ye also go away?
68 Then Simon Peter aunswered him: Lorde, to who shall we go? Thou hast the
wordes of eternall lyfe:
69 And we beleue and are sure that thou art Christe, the sonne of ye lyuyng God.
70 Iesus aunswereth them: Haue not I chosen you twelue, and one of you is a
deuyll?
71 He spake of Iudas Iscariot the sonne of Simon: For he it was, that shoulde
betray hym, beyng one of the twelue.

Chapter 7

1 After these thynges, Iesus went about in Galilee: For he would not go about in
Iurie, because that the Iewes sought to kyll hym.
2 The Iewes feaste of tabernacles was at hande.
3 His brethren therfore sayde vnto him: Get thee hence, and go into Iurie, that
thy disciples also may see thy workes that thou doest.
4 For there is no man that doeth any thyng in secrete, and he hym selfe seketh
to be knowen openly. Yf thou do suche thynges, shewe thy selfe to the worlde.
5 For his brethren beleued not in hym.
6 Then Iesus sayde vnto them, My tyme is not yet come: but your tyme is alway
redy.
7 The worlde can not hate you, but me it hateth, because I testifie of it, that
the workes therof are euyll.
8 Go ye vp vnto this feast: I wyll not go vp yet vnto this feast, for my tyme is
not yet full come.
9 When he had saide these wordes vnto them, he abode styll in Galilee.
10 But assoone as his brethre were gone vp, then went he also vp vnto the
feaste, not openly, but as it were priuilie.
11 Then sought hym the Iewes at the feaste, and sayde, where is he?
12 And much murmuryng of hym was there among the people: For some said, he is
good: other sayde, nay, but he deceaueth the people.
13 Howebeit, no man spake openlye of hym, for feare of the Iewes.
14 Nowe when halfe of the feast was done, Iesus went vp into the temple, and
taught.
15 And the Iewes marueyled, saying: howe knoweth he the scriptures, seyng that
he neuer learned?
16 Iesus aunswered them, & sayde: My doctrine is not myne, but his yt sent me.
17 Yf any man wyll do his wyll, he shall knowe of the doctrine, whether it be of
God, or whether I speake of my selfe.
18 He that speaketh of hym selfe, seketh his owne praise: But he that seketh his
praise that sent hym, the same is true, & no vnryghteousnes is in hym.
19 Dyd not Moyses geue you a lawe, & yet none of you kepeth the lawe? Why go ye
about to kyll me?
20 The people aunswered and sayde: Thou hast the deuyll, who goeth about to kyll
thee?
21 Iesus aunswered, & said vnto the: I haue done one worke, & ye al marueyle.
22 Moyses therefore gaue vnto you the circumcisio (not because it is of Moyses,
but of the fathers) And yet ye on the Sabboth day, circumcise a man.
23 Yf a man on the Sabboth day receaue circumcision, without breakyng of the
lawe of Moyses: disdayne ye at me, because I haue made a man euerywhyt whole on
the Sabboth day?
24 Iudge not after the vtter appearaunce, but iudge with a ryghteous iudgement.
25 The sayde some of them of Hierusale: Is not this he, whom they go about to
kyll?
26 But loe, he speaketh boldly, & they saye nothyng to hym. Do the rulers knowe
in deede that this is very Christ?
27 Howbeit, we know this man whence he is: but when Christe cometh, no man
knoweth whence he is.
28 Then cryed Iesus in the temple, as he taught, saying: Ye both knowe me, and
whence I am, ye knowe. And I am not come of my selfe: but he that set me is
true, whom ye knowe not.
29 But I knowe him, for I am of him, and he hath sent me.
30 Then they sought to take hym: but no man layde handes on hym, because his
houre was not yet come.
31 Many of the people beleued on hym, and saide: When Christe commeth, wyl he do
mo miracles then these that this man hath done?
32 The pharisees hearde, that the people murmured such thinges concerning hym:
And the pharisees and the hye priestes sent seruauntes to take hym.
33 Then sayde Iesus vnto them: yet am I a litle whyle with you, and then go I
vnto hym that sent me.
34 Ye shall seke me, & shall not fynde me: & where I am thither can ye not come.
35 Then sayde the Iewes among them selues: Whyther wyll he go, that we shall not
fynde hym? Wyll he go vnto the dispearsed among the Gretians, & teache the
gentiles?
36 What maner of saying is this that he sayde, ye shall seke me, and shall not
fynde me: and where I am, thyther can ye not come?
37 In the last day, that great day of the feast, Iesus stoode and cryed, saying:
Yf any man thirste, let him come vnto me and drynke:
38 He that beleueth on me, as saith the scripture, out of his belly shall flowe
ryuers of water of lyfe.
39 (But this spake he of the spirite, which they yt beleue on hym, should
receaue. For the holy ghost was not yet there because Iesus was not yet
glorified.)
40 Many of the people therfore, when they hearde this saying, sayde: Of a trueth
this is the prophete.
41 But other sayde, this is Christe: But some saide, shall Christe come out of
Galilee?
42 Sayth not the scripture, that Christe shall come of the seede of Dauid, and
out of the towne of Bethlehem, where Dauid was?
43 So was there discention among the people, because of hym.
44 And some of them woulde haue taken hym, but no man layde handes on him.
45 Then came the seruauntes to the hye priestes & pharisees: and they sayde vnto
them, why haue ye not brought him?
46 The seruauntes aunswered: Neuer man spake as this man doeth.
47 Then aunswered them the pharisees: Are ye also deceaued?
48 Doth any of the rulers or of the pharisees beleue on hym?
49 But this common people which know not the lawe, are cursed.
50 Nicodemus sayth vnto the, he that came to Iesus by nyght, and was one of
them:
51 Doth our lawe iudge any man, before it heare hym, and knowe what he hath
done?
52 They aunswered, and saide vnto him: Art thou also of Galilee? Search & loke:
For out of Galilee aryseth no prophete.
53 And euery man went vnto his owne house.

Chapter 8

1 Iesus went vnto mout Oliuete.
2 And early in the mornyng he came agayne into the temple, and all the people
came vnto hym, & he sate downe and taught them.
3 And the scribes and pharisees brought vnto hym a woman taken in adulterie, &
when they had set her in the middes,
4 They sayde vnto hym: Maister, this woman was taken in adulterie, euen as the
deede was a doyng.
5 Moyses in the lawe commaunded vs that suche shoulde be stoned: But what sayest
thou?
6 This they sayde to tempte hym, that they myght accuse hym. But Iesus stowped
downe, and with his fynger wrote on the grounde.
7 So, when they continued asking him, he lyft vp hym selfe, & sayde vnto them:
Let hym that is among you without sinne, caste the first stone at her.
8 And agayne he stowped downe, and wrote on the grounde.
9 And when they hearde this, beyng accused of their owne consciences, they went
out one by one, begynnyng at the eldest, euen vnto the last: and Iesus was left
alone, & the woman standyng in the myddes.
10 When Iesus had lyft vp hym selfe, & sawe no man but the woman, he sayde vnto
her: Woma where are those thine accusers? Hath no man condempned thee?
11 She sayde, No man Lorde. And Iesus sayde, Neither do I condempne thee: Go,
and sinne no more.
12 Then spake Iesus agayne vnto them, saying, I am the light of ye world: He
that foloweth me, doth not walke in darknesse, but shal haue the light of life.
13 The pharisees therfore said vnto him: Thou bearest recorde of thy selfe, thy
recorde is not true.
14 Iesus aunswered, & saide vnto them: Though I beare recorde of my selfe, yet
my recorde is true. For I knowe whence I came, & whyther I go: But ye can not
tel whence I come, and whyther I go.
15 Ye iudge after the fleshe, I iudge no man.
16 And if I iudge, my iudgement is true: For I am not alone, but I and the
father that sent me.
17 It is also written in your lawe, that the testimonie of two men is true.
18 I am one that beareth witnesse of my selfe, & the father that sent me beareth
witnesse of me.
19 Then sayde they vnto hym: Where is thy father? Iesus aunswered, Ye neither
knowe me, nor yet my father: Yf ye had knowen me, ye should haue knowen my
father also.
20 These wordes spake Iesus in ye treasurie, as he taught in the temple, and no
man layde handes on hym, for his houre was not yet come.
21 Then sayde Iesus againe vnto them: I go my way, and ye shall seeke me, and
shall dye in your synnes: Whyther I go, thyther can ye not come.
22 Then sayde the Iewes: Wyll he kyll hym selfe, because he saith, whyther I go,
thyther can ye not come?
23 And he sayde vnto them: ye are from beneathe, I am from aboue: ye are of this
worlde, I am not of this worlde.
24 I sayde therefore vnto you, that you shall dye in your sinnes. For yf ye
beleue not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sinnes.
25 Then sayde they vnto hym: Who art thou? And Iesus saith vnto them: Euen the
very same thyng that I sayde vnto you from the begynnyng.
26 I haue many thynges to saye, and to iudge of you. Yea, & he that sent me, is
true: And I speake to the world, those thynges which I haue hearde of hym.
27 Howebeit, they vnderstoode not that he spake to them of his father.
28 Then saide Iesus vnto them: When ye haue lift vp an hye the sonne of man,
then shall ye knowe that I am he, and that I do nothyng of my selfe: but as my
father hath taught me, euen so I speake these thynges.
29 And he that sent me, is with me. The father hath not left me alone: For I do
alwayes those thynges that please him.
30 As he spake those wordes, many beleued on hym.
31 Then sayde Iesus to those Iewes which beleued on him: Yf ye continue in my
word, then are ye my very disciples.
32 And ye shall knowe the trueth, and the trueth shall make you free.
33 They aunswered hym: We be Abrahams seede, and were neuer bonde to any man:
howe sayest thou then, ye shalbe made free?
34 Iesus aunswered them: Ueryly, veryly I say vnto you, that whosoeuer comitteth
sinne, is the seruaunt of sinne.
35 And the seruaut abideth not in ye house for euer: but the sonne abydeth euer.
36 Yf the sonne therefore shall make you free, then are ye free in deede.
37 I know that ye are Abrahams seede, but ye seke meanes to kyll me, because my
worde hath no place in you.
38 I speake that whiche I haue seene with my father: and ye do that whiche ye
haue seene with your father.
39 They aunswered, and saide vnto him: Abraham is our father. Iesus saith vnto
them: Yf ye were Abrahams childre, ye woulde do the workes of Abraham.
40 But now ye go about to kyll me, a ma that hath tolde you the trueth, which I
haue heard of god: this did not Abraha.
41 Ye do the deedes of your father. Then said they to him: We be not borne of
fornication, we haue one father, euen God.
42 Iesus saide vnto them: Yf God were your father, truely ye woulde loue me: For
I proceaded foorth, and came from God: neither came I of my selfe, but he sent
me.
43 Why do ye not knowe my speache? euen because ye cannot heare my word.
44 Ye are of your father the deuyll, and the lustes of your father wyll ye do.
He was a murtherer from the begynnyng, and abode not in the trueth: because
there is no trueth in hym. When he speaketh a lye, he speaketh of his owne: For
he is a lyer, and the father of the same thyng.
45 And because I tel you the trueth, therfore ye beleue me not.
46 Which of you rebuketh me of sinne? Yf I say the trueth, why do not ye beleue
me?
47 He that is of god, heareth gods wordes. Ye therfore heare the not, because ye
are not of God.
48 Then aunswered the Iewes, & saide vnto hym: Say we not well that thou art a
Samaritane, and hast the deuyl?
49 Iesus aunswered, I haue not the deuyll: but I honour my father, and ye haue
dishonoured me.
50 I seke not myne owne praise, there is one that seketh, and iudgeth.
51 Ueryly veryly I saye vnto you, yf a man kepe my saying, he shall neuer see
death.
52 Then sayde the Iewes vnto hym: Now know we that thou hast ye deuyll. Abraham
is dead, & the prophetes: and thou sayest, yf a man kepe my saying, he shall
neuer taste of death.
53 Art thou greater the our father Abraham, which is dead? and the prophetes are
dead: whom makest thou thy selfe?
54 Iesus aunswered: Yf I honour my selfe, mine honour is nothing. It is my
father that honoureth me, which ye say is your God:
55 And yet ye haue not knowen him, but I knowe hym: And if I say I knowe hym
not, I shalbe a lyer lyke vnto you. But I knowe hym, & kepe his saying.
56 Your father Abraham was glad to see my day: and he saw it, and reioyced.
57 Then sayde the Iewes vnto hym: Thou art not yet fiftie yeres olde, & hast
thou seene Abraham.
58 Iesus sayde vnto them: Ueryly, veryly I saye vnto you, before Abraham was, I
am.
59 Then toke they vp stones to caste at hym: but Iesus hyd hym selfe, and went
out of the temple.

Chapter 9

1 And as Iesus passed by, he saw a man whiche was blynde fro his birth:
2 And his disciples asked hym, saying: Maister, who did sinne, this man, or his
father and mother, that he was borne blynde?
3 Iesus aunswered, Neither hath this man sinned, nor yet his father & mother:
but that the workes of God shoulde be shewed in hym.
4 I must worke the workes of him that sent me, whyle it is daye. The nyght
commeth when no man can worke.
5 As long as I am in the world, I am the lyght of the worlde.
6 Assoone as he had thus spoke, he spat on the grounde, and made claye of the
spittle, and he annoynted with the claye the eyes of the blynde,
7 And sayde vnto hym: Go, washe thee in the poole of Siloe, whiche by
interpretation, is as much to say, as sent. He went his way therefore, & washed,
and came agayne, seyng.
8 So, the neyghbours, and they that hadde seene hym before when he was blynde,
sayde: Is not this he that sate and begged?
9 Some sayde, this is he: Other sayde, he is lyke hym. He hym selfe sayde, I am
euen he.
10 Therfore sayde they vnto him: Howe are thyne eyes opened?
11 He aunswered and sayde: The man that is called Iesus made claye, and
annoynted myne eyes, and sayde vnto me, go to the poole Siloe and washe: And
when I went and washed, I receaued my syght.
12 Then sayde they vnto hym, where is he? He sayde, I can not tell.
13 They brought to the pharisees, hym that a litle before was blynde.
14 And it was the Sabboth day when Iesus made ye claye, & opened his eyes.
15 Then againe the pharisees also asked hym, howe he had receaued his syght. He
sayde vnto them: He put claye vpon myne eyes, and I washed, and do see.
16 Therfore sayde some of the pharisees, this man is not of God, because he
kepeth not the Sabboth day. Other said: How can a man that is a sinner do such
miracles? And there was a stryfe among them.
17 They spake vnto the blynde man againe: What sayest thou of him, because he
hath opened thyne eyes? He sayde, he is a prophete.
18 But the Iewes dyd not beleue the man, howe that he had ben blynde, and
receaued his syght, vntyll they called the father and mother of hym that had
receaued his syght:
19 And they asked them, saying: Is this your sonne, whom ye saye was borne
blynde? Howe doeth he nowe see then?
20 His father & mother aunswered them, and sayde: We knowe that this is our
sonne, and that he was borne blynde:
21 But by what meanes he now seeth, we can not tell: Or who hath opened his
eyes, can not we tell. He is olde inough, aske him, let him aunswere for
himselfe.
22 Such wordes spake his father & mother, because they feared the Iewes: For the
Iewes had decreed alredy, that yf any man dyd confesse that he was Christe, he
shoulde be excommunicate out of the synagogue.
23 Therfore sayde his father & mother: he is olde inough, aske hym.
24 Then agayne called they the man that was blynde, and sayde vnto hym: Geue God
the prayse, we knowe that this man is a sinner.
25 He aunswered, and sayde: Whether he be a sinner or no, I can not tell: One
thyng I am sure of, that wheras I was blynde, nowe I see.
26 Then sayde they to hym agayne: What dyd he to thee? Howe opened he thyne
eyes?
27 He aunswered them: I tolde you yer whyle, and ye dyd not heare. Wherfore
woulde ye heare it agayne? Wyll ye also be his disciples?
28 Then rayted they hym, and sayde, Be thou his disciple: We are Moyses
disciples.
29 We are sure, that God spake vnto Moyses: As for this felowe, we knowe not
from whence he is.
30 The man aunswered, and sayde vnto them: this is a marueylous thyng, that ye
wote not from whence he is, and yet he hath opened myne eyes.
31 For we be sure, that God heareth not sinners: But yf any man be a worshipper
of God, and obedient vnto his wyll, hym heareth he.
32 Sence the worlde began, was it not hearde, that any man opened the eyes of
one that was borne blynde.
33 If this man were not of God, he coulde haue done nothyng.
34 They aunswered, & sayde vnto hym: Thou art altogether borne in sinne, and
doest thou teache vs? And they cast hym out.
35 Iesus hearde that they had excommunicate hym, & when he had founde hym, he
sayde vnto hym: Doest thou beleue on the sonne of God?
36 He aunswered and sayde: Who is he Lorde, that I myght beleue on hym?
37 And Iesus sayde vnto hym: Thou hast both seene hym, and it is he that talketh
with thee.
38 And he sayde, Lorde, I beleue: And he worshipped hym.
39 And Iesus sayde vnto hym: I am come vnto iudgement into this worlde, that
they which see not, myght see: and that they which see, myght be made blynde.
40 And some of the pharisees which were with hym, hearde these wordes, & sayde
vnto hym: Are we blynde also?
41 Iesus sayde vnto them, Yf ye were blynde, ye shoulde haue no sinne: But nowe
ye say, we see, therfore your sinne remayneth.

Chapter 10

1 Veryly, veryly, I say vnto you: He that entreth not in by ye doore into the
sheepfolde, but clymeth vp some other way, the same is a thiefe, and a robber.
2 But he that entreth in by the doore, is the sheephearde of the sheepe.
3 To hym the porter openeth, and the sheepe heare his voyce, and he calleth his
owne sheepe by name, and leadeth them out.
4 And when he hath sent foorth his owne sheepe, he goeth before them, and the
sheepe folowe hym: for they knowe his voyce.
5 A straunger wyll they not folowe, but wyll flee from hym: for they knowe not
the voyce of straungers.
6 This prouerbe spake Iesus vnto them: But they vnderstoode not what thynges
they were, which he spake vnto them.
7 Then sayde Iesus vnto them againe. Ueryly, veryly, I say vnto you: I am the
doore of the sheepe.
8 All, euen as many as came before me, are thieues and robbers: but the sheepe
dyd not heare them.
9 I am the doore: by me yf any man enter in, he shalbe safe, and shall go in and
out, and fynde pasture.
10 A thiefe commeth not, but for to steale, kyll, & to destroy: I am come, that
they myght haue lyfe, and that they myght haue it more aboundauntly.
11 I am the good sheephearde. A good sheephearde, geueth his lyfe for the
sheepe.
12 An hyrelyng, and he which is not the sheephearde, neither the sheepe are his
owne, seeth the wolfe commyng, and leaueth the sheepe, and fleeth, and the wolfe
catcheth, & scattereth the sheepe.
13 The hyrelyng fleeth, because he is an hyrelyng, and careth not for the
sheepe.
14 I am the good sheepheard, & knowe my sheepe, and am knowen of myne.
15 As the father knoweth me, euen so, knowe I also the father: And I geue my
lyfe for the sheepe.
16 And other sheepe I haue, which are not of this folde: them also must I bryng,
& they shall heare my voyce, and there shalbe one folde, and one sheepehearde.
17 Therfore doth my father loue me, because I put my lyfe from me, that I myght
take it agayne.
18 No man taketh it from me: but I put it away of my selfe. I haue power to put
it from me, and I haue power to take it agayne. This commaundement haue I
receaued of my father.
19 There was a discention therefore agayne among the Iewes, for these sayinges.
20 And many of them sayde: He hath the deuyll, & is mad, why heare ye him?
21 Other sayd: These are not ye wordes of hym that hath the deuyll. Can the
deuyll open the eyes of the blynde?
22 And it was at Hierusalem, the feast of the dedication, and it was wynter.
23 And Iesus walked in the temple, euen in Solomons porche.
24 Then came the Iewes rounde about hym, and sayde vnto hym: Howe long doest
thou make vs doubt? Yf thou be Christe, tell vs playnely.
25 Iesus aunswered them: I tolde you, and ye beleue not. The workes that I do in
my fathers name, they beare witnesse of me.
26 But ye beleue not, because ye are not of my sheepe, as I sayde vnto you.
27 My sheepe heare my voyce, and I knowe them, and they folowe me:
28 And I geue vnto them eternall lyfe, and they shal neuer perishe, neither shal
any man plucke them out of my hande.
29 My father which gaue them me, is greater then all: and no man is able to take
them out of my fathers hande.
30 I and my father are one.
31 Then the Iewes agayne toke vp stones, to stone hym withall.
32 Iesus aunswered them, Many good workes haue I shewed you from my father: for
which of the do ye stone me?
33 The Iewes aunswered hym, saying: For thy good workes sake we stone thee not,
but for thy blasphemie, and because that thou beyng a man, makest thy selfe God.
34 Iesus aunswered them: Is it not written in your lawe, I sayde, ye are Gods?
35 If he called them Gods, vnto whom the worde of God was spoken, and the
scripture can not be broken:
36 Say ye of hym whom the father hath sanctified and sent into the worlde, thou
blasphemest, because I saide I am the sonne of God?
37 Yf I do not the workes of my father, beleue me not:
38 But yf I do, and yf ye beleue not me, beleue the workes: that ye may knowe
and beleue, that the father is in me, and I in hym.
39 Agayne they went about to take hym: and he escaped out of their hande,
40 And went away againe beyonde Iordane, into the place where Iohn before had
baptized, and there he abode.
41 And many resorted vnto hym, and sayde: Iohn dyd no miracle, but all thynges
that Iohn spake of this man were true.
42 And many beleued on hym there.

Chapter 11

1 A certayne man was sicke, named Lazarus of Bethanie, the towne of Marie and
her sister Martha.
2 (It was that Marie which anoynted ye Lorde with oyntment, and wyped his feete
with her heere, whose brother Lazarus was sicke.)
3 Therfore, his sisters sent vnto hym, saying: Lorde, beholde, he whom thou
louest is sicke.
4 When Iesus hearde that, he sayde, this infirmitie is not vnto death: but for
the glory of God, that the sonne of God, myght be glorified therby.
5 Iesus loued Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus.
6 When he had hearde therfore that he was sicke, he abode two dayes styll in the
same place where he was.
7 Then after that, sayde he to his disciples: Let vs go into Iurie agayne.
8 His disciples sayde vnto hym: Maister, the Iewes lately sought to stone thee,
and wylt thou go thither agayne?
9 Iesus aunswered: Are there not twelue houres of the day? If any man walke in
the day, he stumbleth not, because he seeth the lyght of this worlde.
10 But yf a man walke in the nyght, he stumbleth, because there is no lyght in
hym.
11 These thynges sayde he, and after that, he sayde vnto them: Our friende
Lazarus slepeth, but I go to wake hym out of slepe.
12 Then sayde his disciples: Lorde, yf he slepe, he shall do well inough.
13 Howbeit, Iesus spake of his death, but they thought that he had spoken of the
naturall slepe.
14 Then sayde Iesus vnto the playnely, Lazarus is dead:
15 And I am glad for your sakes, that I was not there, because ye may beleue.
Neuerthelesse, let vs go vnto hym.
16 Then sayde Thomas, which is called Didimus, vnto his felowe disciples: let vs
also go, that we may dye with hym.
17 Then went Iesus, and founde that he had lyen in his graue, foure dayes
alredy.
18 (Bethanie was nye vnto Hierusalem, about fifteene furlonges of.)
19 And many of the Iewes came to Martha and Marie to comfort them ouer their
brother.
20 Martha assoone as she hearde that Iesus was commyng, went and met hym: but
Marie sate styll in the house.
21 Then sayde Martha vnto Iesus: Lorde, yf thou haddest ben here, my brother had
not dyed:
22 Neuerthelesse, nowe I knowe that whatsoeuer thou askest of God, God wyll geue
it thee.
23 Iesus sayth vnto her: Thy brother shall ryse agayne.
24 Martha sayth vnto hym: I knowe that he shall ryse agayne in the resurrection
at the last day.
25 Iesus sayth vnto her, I am the resurrection, and the lyfe: He that beleueth
on me, yea, though he were dead, yet shall he lyue.
26 And whosoeuer lyueth, and beleueth on me, shall neuer dye. Beleuest thou
this?
27 She sayde vnto hym: Yea Lorde, I beleue that thou art Christe the sonne of
God, which shoulde come into the worlde.
28 And assoone as she had so sayde, she went her way, and called Marie her
sister secretely, saying: The Maister is come, and calleth for thee.
29 Assoone as she hearde that, she arose quickly, and came vnto hym.
30 Iesus was not yet come into the towne: but was in that place where Martha met
hym.
31 The Iewes then which were with her in the house & comforted her, when they
sawe Marie that she rose vp hastelye, and went out, folowed her, saying: She
goeth vnto the graue, to weepe there.
32 Then when Marie was come where Iesus was, and sawe hym, she fell downe at his
feete, and sayth vnto him: Lorde, yf thou haddest ben here, my brother had not
ben dead.
33 Whe Iesus therfore sawe her weepe, and the Iewes also weepyng which came with
her, he groned in the spirite, and was troubled in hym selfe.
34 And sayde: Where haue ye layde him? They sayde vnto hym: Lorde, come, and
see.
35 And Iesus wept.
36 Then sayde the Iewes: Beholde howe he loued hym.
37 And some of them sayde: Coulde not he which opened the eyes of the blinde,
haue made also, that this man shoulde not haue dyed?
38 Iesus therfore agayne groned in him selfe, and came to the graue. It was a
caue, and a stone layde on it.
39 Iesus sayde: Take ye away the stone. Martha, the sister of hym that was dead,
sayde vnto hym, Lorde, by this tyme he stinketh: For he hath ben dead foure
dayes.
40 Iesus sayde vnto her: Sayde I not vnto thee, that yf thou dyddest beleue,
thou shouldest see the glory of God?
41 Then they toke away the stone from the place where the dead was layde. And
Iesus lyft vp his eyes, and sayde: Father, I thanke thee that thou hast hearde
me.
42 Howbeit, I knowe, that thou hearest me alwayes: but because of the people
which stande by, I sayde it, that they maye beleue that thou hast sent me.
43 And when he thus had spoken, he cryed with a loude voyce: Lazarus, come
foorth.
44 And he that was dead, came foorth, bounde hande and foote, with graue
clothes, and his face was bounde with a napkyn. Iesus sayde vnto them: loose
hym, and let hym go.
45 Then many of the Iewes which came to Marie, and had seene ye thynges which
Iesus dyd, beleued on hym.
46 But some of them went their wayes to the pharisees, and tolde them what Iesus
had done.
47 Then gathered the hye priestes and the pharisees a councell, and sayde: What
do we? For this man doth many miracles.
48 If we let hym scape thus, all men wyll beleue on him, and the Romaynes shall
come, and take away both our rowme and the people.
49 And one of them named Caiaphas, beyng the hye priest that same yere, sayde
vnto them: Ye perceaue nothyng at all,
50 Nor consider, that it is expedient for vs, that one man dye for the people,
and not that all the people perishe.
51 This spake he, not of hym selfe, but beyng hye priest that same yere, he
prophesied that Iesus shoulde dye for the people,
52 And not for the people only: but that he shoulde gather together in one, the
chyldren of God, that were scattered abrode.
53 Then from that day foorth, they toke councell together, for to put hym to
death.
54 Iesus therfore walked no more openlye among the Iewes: but went his way
thence, vnto a countrey nye to a wildernesse, into a citie which is called
Ephraim, and there continued with his disciples.
55 And the Iewes Easter was nye at hande, and many went out of the countrey vp
to Hierusale before the Easter, to purifie them selues.
56 Then sought they for Iesus, & spake among them selues, as they stoode in the
temple: What thynke ye, seeyng he commeth not to the feast day?
57 The hye priestes and pharisees had geuen a commaundement, that yf any man
knewe where he were, he shoulde shewe it, that they myght take hym.

Chapter 12

1 Then Iesus, sixe dayes before the Passouer, came to Bethanie, where Lazarus
had ben dead, whom he raysed from death.
2 There they made hym a supper, and Martha serued: but Lazarus was one of them
that sate at the table with hym.
3 Then toke Marie a pounde of oyntment of Spike narde, very costly, and
annoynted Iesus feete, and wyped his feete with her heere: and the house was
fylled with the odoure of the oyntment.
4 Then sayde one of his disciples, euen Iudas Iscariot Simons sonne, which
shoulde betraye hym.
5 Why was not this oyntment solde for three hundred pence, and geuen to the
poore?
6 This he sayde, not that he cared for the poore: but because he was a thiefe,
and had the bagge, and bare that which was geuen.
7 Then sayde Iesus: Let her alone, agaynst the day of my burying hath she kept
this.
8 For the poore alwayes shall ye haue with you: but me haue ye not alwayes.
9 Much people of the Iewes therfore had knowledge that he was there. And they
came not for Iesus sake only: but that they might se Lazarus also, who he raysed
from death.
10 But the hye priestes helde a councell, that they myght put Lazarus to death
also,
11 Because that for his sake, many of the Iewes went away, and beleued on Iesus.
12 On the next day, much people that were come to ye feast, when they hearde
that Iesus should come to Hierusalem,
13 Toke braunches of paulme trees, and went foorth to meete hym, and cryed:
Hosanna, blessed is he that in the name of the Lorde commeth, kyng of Israel.
14 And Iesus got a young Asse, and sate theron, as it is written:
15 Feare not daughter of Sion, beholde, thy kyng commeth, sittyng on an Asses
colte.
16 These thynges vnderstoode not his disciples at the first: but when Iesus was
glorified, the remembred they that such thinges were written of him, & that such
thynges they had done vnto hym.
17 The people that was with him, when he called Lazarus out of his graue, and
raysed hym from death, bare recorde.
18 Therfore met hym the people also, because they hearde that he had done such a
miracle.
19 The pharisees therfore sayde among them selues: perceaue ye, howe ye preuayle
nothyng? Beholde, all the whole worlde goeth after hym.
20 There were certaine Grekes among them, that came to worship at the feast:
21 The same came therefore to Philip, which was of Bethsaida, a citie of
Galilee, and desired hym, saying: Syr, we woulde fayne see Iesus.
22 Philip came and tolde Andrewe: And agayne, Andrewe & Philip tolde Iesus.
23 And Iesus aunswered them, saying: The houre is come, that the sonne of man
must be glorified.
24 Ueryly, veryly, I say vnto you, except the wheate corne fall into the
grounde, and dye, it abideth alone: If it dye, it bryngeth foorth much fruite.
25 He that loueth his lyfe, shall destroy it: and he that hateth his lyfe in
this worlde, shall kepe it vnto lyfe eternall.
26 If any man minister vnto me, let hym folowe me: And where I am, there shall
also my minister be. If any man minister vnto me, hym wyll my father honour.
27 Nowe is my soule troubled, and what shall I say? Father, saue me from this
houre: but therfore came I into this houre.
28 Father, glorifie thy name. Then came there a voyce from heauen saying I haue
both glorified it, and wyll glorifie it agayne.
29 The people therfore that stoode by and hearde it, sayde that it thundred:
Other sayde, an Angel spake to hym.
30 Iesus aunswered and sayde: This voyce came, not because of me, but for your
sakes.
31 Nowe is the iudgement of this worlde: Nowe shall the prince of this worlde be
cast out.
32 And I, yf I were lyft vp from the earth, wyll drawe all men vnto me.
33 (This he sayde, signifiyng what death he shoulde dye.)
34 The people aunswered him: We haue hearde out of the lawe, that Christe bydeth
euer: and howe sayest thou, the sonne of man must be lyft vp? Who is that sonne
of man?
35 Then Iesus sayde vnto them: Yet a litle while is the light with you. Walke
while ye haue light, lest the darknesse come on you: For he that walketh in the
darke, wotteth not whither he goeth.
36 Whyle ye haue lyght, beleue on the lyght, that ye may be the chyldren of the
lyght. These thynges spake Iesus, and departed, & hyd hym selfe from the.
37 But though he had done so many miracles before them, yet beleued not they on
hym,
38 That the saying of Esaias the prophete myght be fulfylled, which he spake:
Lorde, who shall beleue our saying? And to whom is the arme of the Lorde
declared?
39 Therfore coulde they not beleue, because that Esaias sayth agayne:
40 He hath blynded their eyes, and hardened their heart, that they shoulde not
see with their eyes, & lest they should vnderstande with their hearte, & should
be conuerted, and I should heale them.
41 Such thynges sayde Esaias, when he sawe his glory, and spake of hym.
42 Neuerthelesse, among ye chiefe rulers also, many beleued on hym: But because
of the pharisees, they dyd not confesse hym, lest they should be excomunicate.
43 For they loued the prayse of men, more then the prayse of God.
44 Iesus cryed, and sayde: He that beleueth on me, beleueth not on me, but on
hym that sent me.
45 And he that seeth me, seeth hym that sent me.
46 I am come a lyght into ye worlde, that whosoeuer beleueth on me, should not
byde in darknesse.
47 And yf any man heare my wordes, and beleue not, I iudge hym not: For I came
not to iudge the worlde, but to saue the worlde.
48 He that refuseth me, & receaueth not my wordes, hath one that iudgeth him:
The worde that I haue spoken, the same shall iudge hym in the last day.
49 For I haue not spoken of my selfe: but the father which sent me, he gaue me a
commaundement what I should say, and what I shoulde speake.
50 And I knowe that his commaundement is lyfe euerlastyng. Whatsoeuer I speake
therfore, euen as the father bad me, so I speake.

Chapter 13

1 Before the feast of the Passouer, when Iesus knewe that his houre was come, yt
he shoulde departe out of this world vnto the father: When he loued his which
were in the world, vnto the ende he loued them.
2 And when supper was ended (after that the deuyll had put in the heart of Iudas
Iscariot Simons sonne, to betray hym)
3 Iesus knowyng that the father had geuen all thynges into his handes, and that
he was come from God, and went to God:
4 He rose from supper, and layde asyde his vpper garmentes: And when he had
taken a towel, he gyrded hym selfe.
5 After that, he powred water into a bason, and began to washe the disciples
feete, and to wype them with the towel wherwith he was gyrded.
6 Then came he to Simon Peter. And Peter sayde vnto hym: Lorde, doest thou
wasshe my feete?
7 Iesus aunswered, & sayde vnto hym: What I do, thou wotest not nowe, but thou
shalt knowe hereafter.
8 Peter sayth vnto hym: Thou shalt neuer wasshe my feete. Iesus aunswered hym:
If I wasshe thee not, thou hast no part with me.
9 Simon Peter sayth vnto him: Lorde, not my feete only, but also the handes, and
the head.
10 Iesus sayth to hym: He that is wasshed, nedeth not saue to washe his feete,
but is cleane euery whit. And ye are cleane, but not all.
11 For he knewe who it was that should betray hym. Therfore sayde he: ye are not
all cleane.
12 So, after he had wasshed their feete, and receaued his clothes, and was set
downe agayne, he sayde vnto them: Wote ye what I haue done to you?
13 Ye call me Maister, and Lorde, and ye say well, for so am I.
14 If I then your Lorde and Maister, haue wasshed your feete, ye also ought to
wasshe one anothers feete.
15 For I haue geuen you an ensample, that ye shoulde do as I haue done to you.
16 Ueryly, veryly, I say vnto you: The seruaunt is not greater the his maister,
neither the messenger greater then he that sent hym.
17 Yf ye knowe these thynges, happy are ye, yf ye do them.
18 I speake not of you all. I knowe whom I haue chosen. But that the scripture
may be fulfylled: He that eateth bread with me, hath lyft vp his heele agaynst
me.
19 Nowe tell I you before it come: that when it is come to passe, ye myght
beleue that I am he.
20 Ueryly, veryly, I say vnto you, he that receaueth whomsoeuer I sende,
receaueth me: And he that receaueth me, receaueth hym that sent me.
21 When Iesus had thus sayde, he was troubled in spirite, and testified, &
saide: Ueryly, veryly, I say vnto you, that one of you shall betray me.
22 Then the disciples loked one on another, doubtyng of whom he spake.
23 There was one of Iesus disciples, leanyng on Iesus bosome, euen he whom Iesus
loued.
24 To hym beckened Simon Peter therfore, that he shoulde aske who it was of whom
he spake.
25 He then, when he leaned on Iesus brest, sayde vnto hym: Lorde, who is it?
26 Iesus aunswered: He it is to whom I geue a sop when I haue dipped it. And he
wet the sop, and gaue it to Iudas Iscariot, Simons sonne.
27 And after the sop, Satan entred into hym. Then sayde Iesus vnto hym: That
thou doest, do quickly.
28 That wiste no man at the table, for what intent he spake vnto hym.
29 Some of the thought, because Iudas had the bagge, that Iesus had sayde vnto
hym, bye those thynges that we haue neede of agaynst the feast: or, that he
shoulde geue somethyng to ye poore.
30 Assoone then, as he had receaued the sop, he went immediatly out: and it was
nyght.
31 Therfore, when he was gone out, Iesus sayd, Nowe is the sonne of man
glorified: And God is glorified in hym.
32 Yf God be glorified in hym, God shall also glorifie hym in hym selfe, and
shall strayghtway glorifie hym.
33 Litle children, yet a litle whyle am I with you. Ye shall seeke me: and as I
sayde vnto the Iewes, whither I go, thither can ye not come. Also to you say I
nowe:
34 A newe commaundement geue I vnto you, that ye loue together, as I haue loued
you, that euen so ye loue one another.
35 By this shall all men knowe that ye are my disciples, yf ye haue loue one to
another.
36 Simon Peter saide vnto him: Lorde, whither goest thou? Iesus aunswered hym:
Whither I go, thou canst not folowe me nowe, but thou shalt folowe me
afterwardes.
37 Peter sayde vnto hym: Lorde, why can not I folowe thee nowe? I wyll ieoparde
my lyfe for thy sake.
38 Iesus aunswered hym: Wylt thou ieoparde thy lyfe for my sake? Uerly, veryly,
I saye vnto thee, the Cocke shall not crowe, tyll thou haue denyed me thryse.

Chapter 14

1 And he sayde vnto his disciples, Let not your hearte be troubled: Ye beleue in
god, beleue also in me.
2 In my fathers house, are many dwellyng places: If it were not so, I woulde
haue tolde you. I go to prepare a place for you.
3 And yf I go to prepare a place for you, I wyll come agayne, and receaue you,
euen vnto my selfe: that where I am, there may ye be also.
4 And whither I go, ye knowe, and the way ye knowe.
5 Thomas sayth vnto hym: Lorde, we knowe not whither thou goest: And howe is it
possible for vs to knowe the waye?
6 Iesus sayth vnto hym: I am the way, and the trueth, and the lyfe. No man
cometh vnto the father, but by me.
7 If ye had knowen me, ye had knowen my father also. And nowe ye knowe hym, and
haue seene hym.
8 Philip sayth vnto hym: Lorde, shewe vs the father, and it suffiseth vs.
9 Iesus sayth vnto hym: Haue I ben so long tyme with you, & yet hast thou not
knowen me? Philip, he that hath seene me, hath seene the father. And howe sayest
thou then, shewe vs the father?
10 Beleuest thou not, that I am in the father, & the father in me? The wordes
that I speake vnto you, I speake not of my selfe: but the father that dwelleth
in me, is he that doth the workes.
11 Beleue me, that I am in the father, and the father in me: Or els beleue me
for the workes sake.
12 Ueryly, veryly I say vnto you, he that beleueth on me, the workes that I do,
the same shal he do also, and greater workes then these shall he do, because I
go vnto the father.
13 And whatsoeuer ye aske in my name, that wyll I do, that the father may be
glorified in the sonne.
14 If ye shall aske any thing in my name, I wyll do it.
15 If ye loue me, kepe my commaundementes,
16 And I wyll pray the father, and he shall geue you another comforter, that he
may byde with you for euer:
17 Euen the spirite of trueth, whom the worlde can not receaue, because the
worlde seeth hym not, neither knoweth hym. But ye knowe hym: For he dwelleth
with you, and shalbe in you.
18 I wyll not leaue you comfortlesse, but wyll come to you.
19 Yet a litle whyle, and the worlde shall see me no more: but ye shall see me,
because I lyue, and ye shall lyue also.
20 That day shall ye knowe, that I am in my father, and you in me, & I in you.
21 He that hath my commaundementes, and kepeth them, the same is he that loueth
me: And he that loueth me, shalbe loued of my father, and I wyll loue him, and
wyll shew myne owne selfe to hym.
22 Iudas sayth vnto hym, not Iudas Iscariot: Lorde, what is done, that thou wylt
shewe thy selfe vnto vs, and not vnto the worlde?
23 Iesus aunswered, & sayde vnto hym: If a man loue me, he wyll kepe my
sayinges: and my father wyll loue hym, and we wyll come vnto hym, and dwell with
hym.
24 He that loueth me not, kepeth not my sayinges: And the word which ye heare,
is not myne, but the fathers which sent me.
25 These thynges haue I spoken vnto you, beyng yet present with you.
26 But the comforter, which is the holy ghost, whom the father wyll sende in my
name, he shal teach you all thinges, & bryng all thynges to your remebraunce
whatsoeuer I haue sayde vnto you.
27 Peace I leaue with you, my peace I geue vnto you: Not as the worlde geueth,
geue I vnto you. Let not your heartes be greeued, neither feare.
28 Ye haue hearde howe I sayde vnto you, I go away, and come agayne vnto you. Yf
ye loued me, ye woulde veryly reioyce, because I sayde, I go vnto the father:
for the father is greater then I.
29 And nowe haue I shewed you before it come, that when it is come to passe, ye
myght beleue.
30 Hereafter wyll I not talke many wordes vnto you: For the prince of this
worlde cometh, and hath nought in me.
31 But that the worlde may knowe that I loue the father: And as the father gaue
me commaundement, euen so do I. Ryse, let vs go hence.

Chapter 15

1 I am the true vine, and my father is the husbandman.
2 Euery braunche that beareth not fruite in me, he will take away: And euery
braunche that beareth fruite wyll he pourge, that it may bryng foorth more
fruite.
3 Nowe are ye cleane through the worde which I haue spoken vnto you.
4 Byde in me, and I in you. As the braunche can not beare fruite of it selfe,
except it byde in the vine: no more can ye, except ye abyde in me.
5 I am the vine, ye are the braunches. He that abydeth in me, and I in hym, the
same bryngeth foorth much fruite: For without me can ye do nothyng.
6 Yf a man byde not in me, he is cast foorth as a braunch, and withereth, and
men gather them, and cast them into the fyre, and they burne.
7 Yf ye byde in me, and my wordes abyde in you, aske what ye wyll, and it shalbe
done for you.
8 Herein is my father glorified: that ye beare much fruite, and become my
disciples.
9 As the father hath loued me, euen so haue I loued you: Continue ye in my loue.
10 Yf ye kepe my commaundementes, ye shall abyde in my loue, euen as I haue kept
my fathers commaundementes, and abyde in his loue.
11 These thynges haue I spoken vnto you, that my ioy might remayne in you, and
that your ioy myght be full.
12 This is my commaundement, that ye loue together, as I haue loued you.
13 Greater loue hath no man, then this: yt a man bestowe his life for his
frendes.
14 Ye are my frendes, yf ye do whatsoeuer I commaunde you.
15 Hencefoorth call I you not seruautes: for the seruaunt knoweth not what his
Lorde doeth. But you haue I called frendes, for all thynges that I haue hearde
of my father, haue I made knowen to you.
16 Ye haue not chosen me, but I haue chosen you, and ordayned you, to go, and
bryng foorth fruite, and that your fruite shoulde remayne, that whatsoeuer ye
aske of the father in my name, he may geue it you.
17 This commaunde I you, that ye loue together.
18 Yf the worlde hate you, ye knowe that it hated me before it hated you.
19 If ye were of the worlde, the worlde would loue his owne: Howbeit, because ye
are not of the worlde, but I haue chosen you out of the worlde: therfore the
worlde hateth you.
20 Remember the worde that I sayde vnto you: the seruaunt is not greater then
the Lorde. If they haue persecuted me, they wyll also persecute you. If they
haue kept my saying, they wyll kepe yours also.
21 But all these thynges wyll they do vnto you for my names sake, because they
haue not knowe hym that sent me.
22 Yf I had not come and spoken vnto them, they shoulde haue had no sinne: but
nowe haue they nothyng to cloke their sinne withall.
23 He that hateth me, hateth my father also.
24 Yf I had not done among them, the workes which none other man dyd, they
shoulde haue had no sinne. But nowe haue they both seene, and hated not only me,
but also my father,
25 But this commeth to passe, that the worde myght be fulfylled, that is written
in their lawe: They hated me without a cause.
26 But when the comforter is come, whom I wyl sende vnto you from the father,
euen the spirite of trueth, which proceadeth of the father, he shall testifie of
me.
27 And ye shall beare witnesse also, because ye haue ben with me from the
begynnyng.

Chapter 16

1 These thynges haue I sayde vnto you, because ye shoulde not be offended.
2 They shall excomunitate you: yea the time shall come, that who so euer kylleth
you, wyll thynke that he doth God seruice.
3 And such thynges wyll they do vnto you, because they haue not knowen the
father, neither yet me.
4 But these thynges haue I tolde you, that when the tyme is come, ye may remeber
then that I tolde you. These thynges sayde I not vnto you at the begynnyng,
because I was present with you.
5 But nowe I go my waye, to hym that sent me, & none of you asketh me, whyther
goest thou.
6 But because I haue saide such thinges vnto you, your heartes are ful of sorow.
7 Neuerthelesse, I tell you the trueth, it is expedient for you that I go away.
For yf I go not away, that comforter wyll not come vnto you: But yf I depart, I
wyll sende hym vnto you.
8 And whe he is come, he wyll rebuke the world of sinne, and of righteousnes,
and of iudgement.
9 Of sinne, because they beleue not on me.
10 Of righteousnes, because I go to my father, and ye shall see me no more.
11 Of iudgement, because the prince of this worlde is iudged alredy.
12 I haue yet many thynges to say vnto you, but ye can not beare them away nowe.
13 Howebeit, when he is come, whiche is the spirite of trueth, he wyl leade you
into all trueth. He shall not speake of himselfe: but whatsoeuer he shal heare,
that shall he speake, and he wyll shewe you thynges to come.
14 He shall glorifie me: For he shall receaue of mine, and shal shewe vnto you.
15 All thynges that the father hath, are mine: Therfore sayde I vnto you that he
shall take of mine, & shew vnto you.
16 After a whyle, and ye shall not see me, and agayne after a whyle ye shall see
me: for I go to the father.
17 Then sayde some of his disciples betwene them selues: What is this that he
saith vnto vs, after a whyle, & ye shal not see me, and againe, after a whyle ye
shal see me: and, that I go to the father?
18 They sayde therefore: What is this that he saith, after a whyle? we can not
tell what he saith.
19 Iesus perceaued that they would aske hym, and sayde vnto them: Do ye enquire
among your selues of that I said after a whyle, and, ye shall not see me, &
againe, after a while & ye shall see me?
20 Ueryly veryly I say vnto you, ye shall wepe and lament, the worlde shall
reioyce: ye shall sorowe, but your sorowe shalbe turned to ioy.
21 A woman, when she trauayleth, hath sorowe, because her houre is come: but
assoone as she is deliuered of the childe, she remembreth no more the anguishe,
for ioy that a man is borne into ye world.
22 And ye nowe therefore haue sorowe: but I wyll see you agayne, and your
heartes shall reioyce, and your ioy shall no man take from you.
23 And in that day shall ye aske me no question. Ueryly veryly I say vnto you,
whatsoeuer ye shal aske the father in my name, he wyll geue it you.
24 Hytherto haue ye asked nothyng in my name: Aske, & ye shall receaue, that
your ioy may be full.
25 These thynges haue I spoken vnto you by prouerbes. The tyme wyl come, when I
shall no more speake vnto you by prouerbes: but I shall shewe you playnely of my
father.
26 At that day shall ye aske in my name: And I say not vnto you, that I wyll
pray vnto my father for you.
27 For the father hym selfe loueth you, because ye haue loued me, and haue
beleued that I came out from God.
28 I went out from the father, and came into the worlde: Agayne, I leaue the
worlde, and go to the father.
29 His disciples sayde vnto hym: Lo, nowe talkest thou plainely, and speakest no
prouerbe.
30 Nowe are we sure that thou knowest all thynges, & nedest not, that any man
shoulde aske thee any question: Therfore beleue we, that thou camest from God.
31 Iesus aunswered them: Do ye nowe beleue?
32 Beholde, the houre draweth nye, and is alredy come, that ye shalbe scattered
euery man to his owne, and shall leaue me alone. And yet am I not alone: For the
father is with me.
33 These wordes haue I spoken vnto you, that in me ye myght haue peace. For in
the worlde shall ye haue tribulation: but be of good cheare, I haue ouercome the
worlde.

Chapter 17

1 These wordes spake Iesus, and lift vp his eyes to heauen, and sayde: Father,
the houre is come, glorifie thy sonne that thy sonne also may glorifie thee:
2 As thou hast geuen hym power ouer all fleshe, that he shoulde geue eternall
life, to as many as thou hast geuen him.
3 This is lyfe eternall, that they myght knowe thee, the only true God, & Iesus
Christe whom thou hast sent.
4 I haue glorified thee on the earth: I haue finished ye worke, which thou
gauest me to do.
5 And nowe glorifie thou me, O father, with thine owne selfe, with the glory
which I had with thee yer the worlde was.
6 I haue declared thy name vnto ye men, which thou gauest me out of ye world.
Thyne they were, and thou gauest the me, and they haue kepte thy worde.
7 Nowe they haue knowen yt al thinges whatsoeuer yu hast geuen me are of thee.
8 For I haue geuen vnto them ye wordes which thou gauest me, and they haue
receaued them, and haue knowe surely that I came out from thee, & they haue
beleued, that thou dyddest sende me.
9 I pray for them: I pray not for the worlde, but for them which thou hast geuen
me, for they are thyne.
10 And all myne are thyne, and thyne are myne, and I am glorified in them.
11 And nowe am I not in the worlde, and they are in the worlde, and I come to
thee. Holy father, kepe through thine owne name, the which thou hast geuen me,
that they may also be one, as we are.
12 Whyle I was with them in ye worlde, I kept them in thy name. Those that thou
gauest me, haue I kept, and none of them is lost, but that lost chylde, that the
scripture myght be fulfylled.
13 Nowe come I to thee, and these wordes speake I in the worlde, that they myght
haue my ioy fulfylled in them seues.
14 I haue geuen them thy worde, and the worlde hath hated them, because they are
not of the worlde, euen as I also am not of the worlde.
15 I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the worlde: but that thou
kepe them from euyll.
16 They are not of the worlde, as I also am not of the worlde.
17 Sanctifie them through thy trueth. Thy worde is the trueth.
18 As thou diddest sende me into ye world, eue so haue I also sent the into ye
world.
19 And for their sakes sanctifie I my selfe, that they also myght be sanctified
through the trueth.
20 Neuerthelesse, I pray not for them alone: but for the also, which shall
beleue on me through their preachyng:
21 That they all may be one, as thou father art in me, and I in thee, and that
they also may be one in vs: that ye world may beleue, that thou hast sent me.
22 And the glorie which thou gauest me, I haue geuen them, that they may be one,
as we also are one.
23 I in them, and thou in me: that they may be made perfecte in one, and that
the worlde may knowe that thou hast sent me, and hast loued them, as thou hast
loued me.
24 Father, I wyll that they which thou hast geuen me, be with me where I am,
that they may see my glorie which thou hast geuen me. For thou louedst me,
before the foundation of the world.
25 O ryghteous father, the worlde also hath not knowen thee: But I haue knowen
thee, and these haue knowen that thou hast sent me.
26 And I haue declared vnto them thy name, and wyll declare it, that the loue
wherewith thou hast loued me, may be in them, and I in them.

Chapter 18

1 When Iesus had spoken these wordes, he went forth with his disciples ouer the
brooke Cedron, where was a garden, into the whiche he entred, & his disciples.
2 Iudas also whiche betrayed hym, knewe the place? For Iesus oft tymes resorted
thyther, with his disciples.
3 Iudas then, after he had receaued a bande of men, and officers of the hye
priestes & pharisees, came thyther with lanternes, and torches, and weapons.
4 And Iesus, knowing all thinges that shoulde come on hym, went foorth, and
sayde vnto them, whom seke ye?
5 They aunswered him: Iesus of Nazareth. Iesus sayth vnto them, I am he. Iudas
also whiche betrayed hym, stoode with them.
6 Assoone then as he sayde vnto them I am he, they went backewarde, & fell to
the grounde.
7 Then asked he them agayne, whom seke ye? They said: Iesus of Nazareth.
8 Iesus aunswered, I haue tolde you that I am he: Yf ye seke me therefore, let
these go their way.
9 That the saying myght be fulfylled which he spake: Of them which thou gauest
me, haue I not lost one.
10 Then Simon Peter, hauing a sword, drewe it, and smote the hye priestes
seruaunt, and cut of his ryght eare. The seruauntes name was Malchus.
11 Therefore sayth Iesus vnto Peter, Put vp thy sworde into the sheathe: shall I
not drynke of the cuppe whiche my father hath geuen me?
12 Then the companie, and the capitaine, and officers of the Iewes, toke Iesus,
and bounde hym,
13 And led hym away to Annas first, (for he was father in lawe vnto Caiaphas,)
which was ye hye priest that same yere: And Annas sent Christe bounde vnto
Caiaphas the hye priest.
14 Caiaphas was he which gaue councell to the Iewes, that it was expediet that
one man should dye for the people.
15 And Simon Peter folowed Iesus, and so did another disciple. That disciple was
knowen vnto the hye priest, & went in with Iesus into the palace of the hye
priest.
16 But Peter stoode at the doore without. Then went out that other disciple
which was knowen vnto the hye priest, and spake vnto the damosell that kept the
doore, and brought in Peter.
17 Then saide the damosell, that kept the doore, vnto Peter: Art not thou also
one of this mans disciples? He sayde, I am not.
18 The seruauntes and officers stoode there, which had made a fire of coales,
(for it was colde) and they warmed the selues. Peter also stoode among them, and
warmed hym.
19 The hye priest then asked Iesus of his disciples, and of his doctrine.
20 Iesus aunswered him: I spake openly to the worlde, I euer taught in the
synagogue, and in the temple, whyther all the Iewes resort, & in secrete haue I
sayde nothyng.
21 Why askest thou me? Aske the which hearde me, what I haue sayd vnto the:
Beholde, they can tell what I sayde.
22 When he had thus spoken, one of the officers whiche stoode by, smote Iesus
with a rod saying: Aunswerest thou the hye priest so?
23 Iesus aunswered hym, Yf I haue euyl spoken, beare witnesse of the euyl: But
yf I haue well spoken, why smytest thou me?
24 Nowe Annas had sent hym bounde vnto Caiaphas the hye priest.
25 Simon Peter stoode & warmed hym selfe. Then sayde they vnto hym: Art not thou
also one of his disciples? He denyed it, and sayde, I am not.
26 One of the seruautes of ye hye priestes, (his cosin whose eare Peter smote
of) sayde vnto hym: Dyd not I see thee in the garden with hym?
27 Peter therefore denyed againe: And immediatly the Cocke crewe.
28 Then led they Iesus fro Caiaphas into the hall of iudgement. It was in the
mornyng: And they them selues went not into the iudgement hall, leste they
shoulde be defyled: but that they myght eate the Passouer.
29 Pilate then went out vnto them, and said: What accusatio bryng you against
this man?
30 They aunswered, and said vnto him: Yf he were not an euyll doer, we would not
haue deliuered hym vnto thee.
31 Then sayde Pilate vnto them: Take ye him, and iudge him after your owne lawe.
The Iewes therfore sayde vnto hym: It is not lawfull for vs to put any man to
death.
32 That the wordes of Iesus myght be fulfylled, whiche he spake, signifiyng what
death he shoulde dye.
33 Then Pilate entred into the iudgement hall againe, and called Iesus, and
sayde vnto hym: Art thou the kyng of the Iewes?
34 Iesus aunswered: Sayest thou that of thy selfe, or did other tell it thee of
me?
35 Pilate aunswered: am I a Iewe? Thyne owne nation & hye priestes haue
deliuered thee vnto me, what hast thou done?
36 Iesus aunswered: My kyngdome is not of this worlde. Yf my kyngdome were of
this worlde, then woulde my seruauntes surely fyght, that I shoulde not be
deliuered to the Iewes: but now is my kyngdome not from hence.
37 Pilate therfore sayde vnto hym: Art thou a kyng then? Iesus aunswered: Thou
sayest that I am a king. For this cause am I borne, & for this cause came I into
the worlde, that I should beare witnesse vnto the trueth: And all that are of
the trueth, heare my voyce.
38 Pilate sayde vnto him: What thyng is trueth? And when he had sayde this, he
went out agayne vnto the Iewes, & sayth vnto them, I fynde in hym no cause at
all.
39 Ye haue a custome, that I shoulde deliuer you one loose at ye Passouer: Wyll
ye that I loose vnto you the kyng of the Iewes?
40 Then cryed they all agayne, saying: Not hym, but Barabbas. This Barabbas was
a robber.

Chapter 19

1 Then Pilate toke Iesus therfore, and scourged hym.
2 And the souldiers wounde a crowne of thornes, and put it on his head: And they
did on hym a purple garment,
3 And sayde, Hayle king of the Iewes: And they stroke hym with roddes.
4 Pilate went foorth agayne, and sayde vnto them: Beholde, I bryng hym foorth to
you, that ye may knowe that I fynde no fault in hym.
5 Then came Iesus foorth, wearyng a crowne of thorne, and a robe of purple: And
he sayth vnto them, beholde the man.
6 When the hye priestes therefore and officers sawe hym, they cryed, saying:
crucifie hym, crucifie hym. Pilate sayth vnto them, Take ye hym, and crucifie
hym: for I fynde no cause in hym.
7 The Iewes aunswered hym: We haue a lawe, and by our lawe he ought to dye,
because he made hym selfe the sonne of God.
8 When Pilate hearde that saying, he was the more afrayde.
9 And went agayne into the iudgement hall, and sayth vnto Iesus, whence art
thou? But Iesus gaue hym none aunswere.
10 Then sayde Pilate vnto hym: Speakest thou not vnto me? Knowest thou not that
I haue power to crucifie thee, and haue power to loose thee?
11 Iesus aunswered: Thou couldest haue no power at all agaynst me, except it
were geuen thee from aboue: Therfore he that deliuered me vnto thee, hath the
more sinne.
12 And from thencefoorth sought Pilate meanes to loose hym. But the Iewes cryed,
saying: Yf thou let hym go, thou art not Caesers friend. For whosoeuer maketh
hym selfe a kyng, speaketh agaynst Caesar.
13 When Pilate hearde that saying, he brought Iesus foorth, & he sate downe in
the iudgement seate, in a place that is called the pauement, but in the Hebrue
tounge, Gabbatha.
14 It was the preparyng of ye Passouer, and about the sixt houre: And he sayth
vnto the Iewes, beholde your kyng.
15 They cryed, away with hym, away with hym, crucifie hym. Pilate sayth vnto
them: Shall I crucifie your king? The hye priestes aunswered: We haue no king
but Caesar.
16 Then deliuered he hym vnto them, to be crucified. And they toke Iesus, &
ledde hym away.
17 And he bare his crosse, & wet forth into a place, which is called ye place of
dead mens skulles, but in Hebrue Golgotha:
18 Where they crucified hym, and two other with him, on eyther syde one, and
Iesus in the myddes.
19 And Pilate wrote a title, and put it on the crosse. The wrytyng was: Iesus of
Nazareth, kyng of the Iewes.
20 This title read many of the Iewes: For the place where Iesus was crucified,
was nye to ye citie. And it was written in Hebrue, and Greke, and Latine.
21 Then sayde the hye priestes of the Iewes to Pilate, Write not kyng of the
Iewes: but, that he sayde, I am kyng of the Iewes.
22 Pilate aunswered: What I haue written, that haue I written.
23 Then the souldiers, when they had crucified Iesus, toke his garmentes, (&
made foure partes, to euery souldier a part) and also his coate. The coate was
without seame, wouen from the toppe throughout.
24 They sayde therefore among them selues: Let vs not deuide it, but caste
lottes for it, who shal haue it. That the scripture myght be fulfylled, saying:
They parted my rayment among the, & for my coate dyd they cast lottes. And the
souldiers dyd such thynges in deede.
25 There stoode by the crosse of Iesus his mother, and his mothers sister, Marie
the wyfe of Cleophas, and Marie Magdalene.
26 Whe Iesus therfore sawe his mother and the disciple standyng by, whom he
loued, he saith vnto his mother: Woman, beholde thy sonne.
27 Then sayde he to the disciple, beholde thy mother. And from that houre, the
disciple toke her vnto his owne.
28 After these thynges, Iesus knowyng that all thynges were nowe perfourmed,
that the scripture might be fulfylled, he sayth, I thirste.
29 So there stoode a vessell by, full of vineger: Therefore they fylled a sponge
with vineger, and put it vpon Isope, & put it to his mouth.
30 Assoone as Iesus then receaued of the vineger, he saide, it is finished: and
bowed his head, and gaue vp the ghost.
31 The Iewes therefore, because it was the preparyng of the Sabboth that the
bodyes should not remaine vpo ye crosse on the Sabboth day (for that Sabboth
day, was an hye day) besought Pilate that their legges myght be broken, and that
they myght be taken downe.
32 Then came the souldiers, and brake the legges of the first, and of the other
which was crucified with hym:
33 But when they came to Iesus, & sawe that he was dead alredye, they brake not
his legges.
34 But one of the souldyers with a speare thruste hym into the syde, &
foorthwith came there out blood and water.
35 And he that sawe it, bare recorde, and his recorde is true: & he knoweth that
he saith true, that ye might beleue also.
36 For these thynges were done, that the scripture shoulde be fulfylled: Ye
shall not breake a bone of hym.
37 And agayne another scripture saith: They shall loke on hym whom they pearsed.
38 After this, Ioseph of Aramathia, (which was a disciple of Iesus, but
secretely, for feare of ye Iewes) besought Pilate that he myght take downe the
body of Iesus. And Pilate gaue hym licence. He came therefore, and toke the dye
of Iesus.
39 And there came also Nicodemus (whiche at the begynnyng came to Iesus by
nyght) and brought of mirre and aloes myngled together, about an hundred pounde
wayght.
40 Then toke they the body of Iesus, & wounde it in linnen clothes, with the
odours, as the maner of the Iewes is to burie.
41 And in the place where he was crucified there was a garden, and in the garden
a newe sepulchre, wherein was neuer man yet layde.
42 There layde they Iesus therfore, because of the preparyng of the Sabboth of
the Iewes: for the sepulchre was nie at hande.

Chapter 20

1 The first day of ye Sabbothes, came Marie Magdalene early, whe it was yet
darke, vnto the sepulchre, and sawe the stone taken awaye from the graue.
2 Then she ranne, & came to Simo Peter, & to the other disciple who Iesus loued,
& saith vnto the: They haue take away the Lorde out of the graue, & we can not
tell where they haue layde him.
3 Peter therfore went foorth, and that other disciple, & came to the sepulchre.
4 They ran both together, & the other disciple did outrun Peter, and came first
to the sepulchre:
5 And when he had stowped downe, he sawe the linnen clothes lying, yet went he
not in.
6 Then came Simon Peter folowyng hym, and went into the sepulchre, and sawe the
lynnen clothes lye,
7 And the napkin yt was about his head not lying with the linnen clothes, but
wrapped together in a place by it selfe.
8 Then went in also that other disciple, whiche came first to the sepulchre, and
he sawe, and beleued.
9 For as yet they knew not ye scripture, that he should rise agayne from death.
10 Then the disciples wet away agayne vnto their owne house.
11 Marie stoode without at the sepulchre weepyng: So, as she wepte, she bowed
her selfe into the sepulchre,
12 And seeth two angels clothed in white, sittyng, the one at the head, & the
other at the feete, where the body of Iesus was layde.
13 They saye vnto her: Woman, why weepest thou? She saith vnto the: For they
haue taken away my Lorde, & I wote not where they haue layde him.
14 When she had thus sayde, she turned her selfe backe, and sawe Iesus standyng,
and knewe not that it was Iesus.
15 Iesus saith vnto her: Woman, why weepest thou? Whom sekest thou? She
supposing that he had ben the gardener, saith vnto him: Sir, if thou haue borne
him hence, tel me where thou hast layde hym, and I wyll fet hym.
16 Iesus sayth vnto her, Marie. She turned her selfe, and sayde vnto hym:
Rabboni, which is to say, Maister.
17 Iesus saith vnto her: Touche me not, for I am not yet ascended to my father:
But go to my brethren, and saye vnto them, I ascende vnto my father and your
father, and to my God & your God.
18 Marie Magdalene came and tolde the disciples that she had seene ye Lorde, and
that he had spoken suche thynges vnto her.
19 The same day at nyght, whiche was the first day of the Sabbothes, when the
doores were shut, where the disciples were assembled together for feare of the
Iewes, came Iesus and stoode in the myddes, and sayth vnto them, peace be vnto
you.
20 And when he had so sayde, he shewed vnto them his handes & his syde. Then
were the disciples glad, when they sawe the Lorde.
21 Then sayde Iesus to them agayne, peace be vnto you: As my father sent me,
euen so sende I you also.
22 And when he had saide those wordes, he breathed on them, & saith vnto them:
Receaue ye the holy ghost.
23 Whosoeuers sinnes ye remit, they are remitted vnto them: And whosoeuers
sinnes ye retayne, they are retayned.
24 But Thomas, one of the twelue, which is called Didymus, was not with them
when Iesus came.
25 The other disciples therfore sayde vnto hym, we haue seene the Lorde. But he
sayde vnto them: Except I see in his handes the print of the nayles, and put my
fynger into the prynt of the nayles, and thruste my hande into his syde, I wyll
not beleue.
26 And after eyght dayes, againe his disciples were within, and Thomas with
them: Then came Iesus, when the doores were shutte, and stoode in the myddes,
and sayde, peace be vnto you.
27 After that said he to Thomas: Bring thy fynger hyther, and see my handes, &
reache hyther thy hande, and thrust it into my syde, and be not faythlesse, but
beleuyng.
28 Thomas aunswered, and sayde vnto hym: My Lorde, and my God.
29 Iesus sayth vnto hym: Thomas, because thou hast seene me, thou hast beleued:
Blessed are they that haue not seene, and yet haue beleued.
30 And many other signes truely dyd Iesus in the presence of his disciples,
which are not written in this booke.
31 These are written, that ye myght beleue that Iesus is Christe the sonne of
God, and that in beleuyng, ye myght haue lyfe through his name.

Chapter 21

1 Afterward dyd Iesus shew him selfe againe to his disciples, at the sea of
Tiberias. And on this wyse shewed he hym selfe.
2 There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas which is called Didymus, and
Nathanael, of Cana in Galilee, and the sonnes of Zebedee, & two other of his
disciples.
3 Simon Peter saith vnto them, I wyl go a fisshyng. They say vnto hym: We also
wyll go with thee. They wet their way, and entred into a shippe immediatly, &
that nyght caught they nothyng.
4 But when the mornyng was nowe come, Iesus stoode on the shore: Neuerthelesse,
the disciples knewe not that it was Iesus.
5 Iesus sayth vnto them: Children, haue ye any meate? They aunswered hym, no.
6 And he saith vnto them: Cast out the net on the ryght syde of the shippe, and
ye shall fynde. They cast out therefore, and anone they were not able to drawe
it for the multitude of fisshes.
7 Then sayde the disciple, whom Iesus loued, vnto Peter: It is the Lord. Whe
Simon Peter hearde that it was the Lorde, he gyrde his coate vnto him (for he
was naked) and sprang into the sea.
8 The other disciples came by shippe, (for they were not farre from lande, but
as it were two hundred cubites) And they drewe the net with fisshes.
9 Assoone then as they were come to lande, they sawe whot coales, and fisshe
layde theron, and bread.
10 Iesus saith vnto them: Bryng of the fisshe which ye haue nowe caught.
11 Simon Peter went vp, and drewe the net to the lande, full of great fisshes,
an hundred and fiftie and three: And for all there were so many, yet was not the
net broken.
12 Iesus sayth vnto them, come and dyne. And none of the disciples durst aske
hym, who art thou? For they knewe that it was the Lorde.
13 Iesus then came, and toke bread, and gaue them, and fisshe lykewyse.
14 This is nowe the thirde tyme that Iesus appeared to his disciples, after that
he was risen agayne from death.
15 So when they had dyned, Iesus saith to Simon Peter: Simon Ioanna, louest thou
me more then these? He sayd vnto hym: Yea Lorde, thou knowest that I loue thee.
He sayth vnto hym: feede my lambes.
16 He sayth to hym agayne the seconde tyme: Simon Ioanna, louest thou me? He
sayth vnto hym: Yea Lorde, thou knowest that I loue thee. He sayde vnto hym:
feede my sheepe.
17 He sayde vnto hym the thirde tyme: Simon Ioanna, louest thou me? Peter was
sory, because he sayde vnto hym the thirde tyme, louest thou me: And he sayde
vnto hym, Lorde thou knowest all thynges, thou knowest that I loue thee. Iesus
sayth vnto hym: feede my sheepe.
18 Ueryly veryly I say vnto thee, when thou wast young, thou gyrdedst thy selfe,
and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be olde, thou shalt
stretch foorth thy handes, and another shall gyrde thee, and leade thee whither
thou wouldest not.
19 That spake he, signifiyng by what death he should glorifie God. And whe he
had spoken this, he sayth vnto hym, folowe me.
20 Peter turned about, and sawe the disciple, whom Iesus loued, folowyng, which
also leaned on his brest at supper, and sayde, Lorde which is he that betrayeth
thee?
21 When Peter therfore sawe hym, he sayth to Iesus: Lorde, what shal he do?
22 Iesus sayth vnto hym: If I wyll haue hym to tary tyll I come, what is that to
thee? folowe thou me.
23 Then went this saying abrode among the brethren, that that disciple shoulde
not dye: Yet Iesus sayde not to hym, he shall not dye: but, yf I wyll that he
tary tyll I come, what is that to thee?
24 The same disciple is he, which testifieth of these thynges, and wrote these
thynges: And we knowe that his testimonie is true.
25 There are also many other thynges, whiche Iesus dyd, the which, yf they
shoulde be written euery one, I suppose the world could not conteine the bookes
that shoulde be written.


Acts

Chapter 1

1 In ye former treatise O Theophilus, we haue spoke of all that Iesus began to
do and teache,
2 Untyll the day in which he was take vp, after that he through the holy ghost,
had geuen commaundementes vnto the Apostles, whom he had chosen,
3 To whom also he shewed hym selfe alyue after his passion, and that by manye
tokens, appearyng vnto them fourtie dayes, and speaking of the kingdome of God,
4 And gatheryng them together, commaunded them that they shoulde not depart from
Hierusalem, but wayte for the promise of the father, wherof saith he ye haue
hearde of me.
5 For Iohn truely baptized with water, but ye shalbe baptized with the holy
ghost, after these fewe dayes.
6 When they therfore were come together, they asked of hym, saying: Lorde, wylt
thou at this tyme restore agayne the kyngdome to Israel?
7 And he sayde vnto them: It is not for you to knowe the tymes, or the seasons,
which the father hath put in his owne power.
8 But ye shall receaue power, after that the holy ghost is come vpon you: And ye
shalbe witnesses vnto me, both in Hierusalem, and in al Iurie, & in Samarie, and
euen vnto the worldes ende.
9 And when he had spoken these thynges, whyle they behelde, he was taken vp an
hye, and a cloude receaued hym vp out of their syght.
10 And while they loked stedfastly vp towarde heaue, as he went, beholde, two
men stoode by them in whyte apparell,
11 Which also sayde: Ye men of Galilee, why stande ye gasyng vp into heauen?
This same Iesus, which is taken vp from you into heauen, shall so come, euen as
ye haue seene hym go into heauen.
12 Then returned they vnto Hierusalem, from the mount that is called Oliuete,
which is from Hierusalem a Sabboth dayes iourney.
13 And when they were come in, they went vp into a parlour, where abode both
Peter, and Iames, and Iohn, and Andrewe, Philip and Thomas, Barthelmewe and
Matthewe, Iames the sonne of Alpheus, & Simo Zelotes, and Iudas the brother of
Iames.
14 These all continued with one accorde in prayer and supplication with the
women, and Marie the mother of Iesus, and with his brethren.
15 And in those dayes, Peter stoode vp in the middes of the disciples, and said
(The number of names together, were about an hundred and twentie)
16 Ye men and brethren, this scripture must needes haue ben fulfylled, which the
holy ghost by the mouth of Dauid spake before of Iudas, which was guide to them
that toke Iesus:
17 For he was numbred with vs, & had obteyned felowship in this ministerie.
18 And the same hath nowe purchased a fielde, with the rewarde of iniquitie? And
when he was hanged, he burst a sunder in the middes, & all his bowels gusshed
out.
19 And it is knowen vnto all the dwellers at Hierusalem, in so much that the
same fielde is called in their mother tongue, Aceldema, that is to saye, the
blood fielde.
20 For it is written in ye booke of psalmes: Let his habitation be desert, and
no man be dwellyng therein: And his bishopricke let another take.
21 Wherfore, of these men which haue companyed with vs, all the tyme that the
Lorde Iesus went in and out among vs,
22 Begynnyng from the baptisme of Iohn, vnto that same day that he was take vp
from vs, must one be ordeyned, to be a witnesse with vs of his resurrection.
23 And they appoynted two, Ioseph which is called Barsabas, whose sirname was
Iustus, and Matthias.
24 And they prayed, saying: Thou Lord which knowest the heartes of all men,
shewe whether of these two thou haste chosen,
25 That he may take the rowme of this ministerie and Apostleship, from which
Iudas by transgression fell, that he myght go to his owne place.
26 And they gaue foorth their lottes, & the lot fell vpon Matthias, and he was
counted with the eleuen Apostles.

Chapter 2

1 And when the day of Pentecost was, they were all with one accorde in one
place:
2 And sodenly there came a sounde fro heauen, as it had ben the commyng of a
mightie wynde, and it fylled all the house where they sate.
3 And there appeared vnto them clouen tongues, lyke as they had ben of fyre, and
it sate vpon eche one of them.
4 And they were all fylled with the holy ghost, and began to speake with other
tongues, as the spirite gaue them vtteraunce.
5 There were dwellyng at Hierusalem, Iewes, deuout men, out of euery nation of
them that are vnder heauen.
6 When this was noysed about, the multitude came together and were astonnyed,
because that euery man hearde them speake with his owne language.
7 They wondred all, and marueyled, saying among themselues: Beholde, are not all
these which speake, of Galilee?
8 And howe heare we euery man his owne tongue, wherin we were borne?
9 Parthians, and Medes, & Elamites, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and in
Iurie, and in Capadocia, in Pontus and Asia,
10 Phrygia, & Pamphylia, in Egypt, and in the parties of Lybia, which is besyde
Cyrene, & straungers of Rome, Iewes and Proselytes.
11 Cretes and Arabians: we haue hearde them speake in our tongues, the
wonderfull workes of God.
12 They were all amased, and wondred, saying one to another: What meaneth this?
13 Other mocked, saying: These men are full of newe wyne.
14 But Peter standyng foorth with the eleuen, lyft vp his voyce, and sayde vnto
them: Ye men of Iurie, and all ye that dwell at Hierusalem, be this knowen vnto
you, and with your eares heare my wordes.
15 For these are not drunken, as ye suppose, seeyng it is but the thirde houre
of the day.
16 But this is that which was spoken by the prophete Ioel:
17 And it shalbe in the last dayes (sayth God) of my spirite I wyll powre out
vpon all fleshe: And your sonnes and your daughters shall prophesie, and your
young men shall see visions, and your olde men shall dreame dreames.
18 And on my seruauntes, and on my handemaydens, I wyll powre out of my spirite
in those dayes, and they shall prophesie.
19 And I wyll shewe wonders in heauen aboue, and tokens in the earth beneath,
blood, and fyre, and the vapour of smoke.
20 The Sunne shalbe turned into darknesse, and the Moone into blood, before that
great and notable day of the Lord come.
21 And it shall come to passe, that whosoeuer shall call on the name of the
Lorde, shalbe saued.
22 Ye men of Israel, heare these wordes: Iesus of Nazareth, a man approued of
God among you, with miracles, wonders, and signes, which God dyd by hym in the
middes of you, as ye your selues also knowe.
23 Hym haue ye taken, by the handes of vnryghteous persons, after he was
deliuered by the determinate councell and foreknowledge of God, and haue
crucified and slayne hym.
24 Whom God hath raised vp, and loosed the sorowes of death, because it was
vnpossible, that he shoulde be holden of it.
25 For Dauid speaketh of hym, I sawe the Lorde alwayes set foorth before my
face: for he is on my ryght hande, that I shoulde not be moued.
26 Therfore dyd my heart reioyce, and my tongue was glad. Moreouer also my
fleshe shall reste in hope,
27 Because thou wylt not leaue my soule in hell, neither wylt thou suffer thyne
holy one to see corruption.
28 Thou hast shewed me the wayes of lyfe, thou shalt make me full of ioy with
thy countenaunce.
29 Ye men and brethren, let me freely speake vnto you of the patriarke Dauid:
For he is both dead and buryed, and his sepulchre remayneth with vs vnto this
day.
30 Therfore, seeyng he was a prophete, and knewe that God had sworne with an oth
to hym, that Christe, as concernyng the fleshe, should come of the fruite of his
loynes, & should syt on his seate:
31 He knowyng this before, spake of the resurrection of Christe, that his soule
shoulde not be left in hell, neither his fleshe shoulde see corruption.
32 This Iesus hath God raysed vp, wherof we all are witnesses.
33 Then sence that he by the ryght hande of God was exalted, and hath receaued
of the father the promise of the holy ghost, he hath shed foorth this, which ye
nowe see, and heare.
34 For Dauid is not ascended into heaue, but he sayeth: The Lorde sayde to my
Lorde, syt thou on my ryght,
35 Untill I make thy foes thy footstoole.
36 Therfore, let all the house of Israel know for a suretie, that God hath made
that same Iesus, whom ye haue crucified, Lorde and Christe.
37 Nowe when they hearde this, they were pricked in their heartes, and sayde
vnto Peter, & vnto the other Apostles: Ye men & brethren, what shall we do?
38 Then Peter sayde vnto them: Repent, and be baptized euery one of you in the
name of Iesus Christe, for the remission of sinnes, and ye shall receaue the
gyft of the holy ghost.
39 For the promise was made vnto you, and to your chyldren, and to all that are
a farre of, euen as many as the Lorde our God shall call.
40 And with many other wordes bare he witnesse, and exhorted them, saying: Saue
your selues from this vntowarde generation.
41 Then they that gladly receaued his worde, were baptized: And the same day
there were added vnto them, about three thousande soules.
42 And they continued stedfastly in the Apostles doctrine and felowship, and in
breakyng of bread, and in prayers.
43 And feare came vpon euery soule. And many wonders and signes were done by the
Apostles.
44 And all that beleued, kept them selues together, and had all thynges common,
45 And solde their possessions & goodes, and parted them to all men, as euery
man had neede.
46 And they continued dayly with one accorde in the temple, and brake bread from
house to house, and dyd eate their meate together, with gladnesse and
singlenesse of heart,
47 Praysyng God, & had fauour with all the people. And the Lorde added to the
Churche dayly, such as should be saued.

Chapter 3

1 Nowe Peter and Iohn went vp together into the temple at the nynth houre of
prayer.
2 And a certayne man, that was lame from his mothers wombe, was brought, whom
they layde dayly at the gate of the temple which is called beawtifull, to aske
almes of them that entred into the temple.
3 When he sawe Peter and Iohn that they woulde go into the temple, he desired to
receaue an almes.
4 And Peter fastenyng his eyes vpon hym with Iohn, sayde: Loke on vs.
5 And he gaue heede vnto the, trustyng to receaue somethyng of them.
6 Then sayde Peter: Syluer and golde haue I none, but such as I haue, geue I
thee: In the name of Iesus Christe of Nazareth, ryse vp, and walke.
7 And he toke hym by the ryght hande, and lyft hym vp. And immediatly his feete
and ancle bones receaued strength.
8 And he sprang, stoode, and walked, and entred with them into the temple,
walkyng, and leaping, & praysyng God.
9 And all the people sawe hym walke, and prayse God.
10 And they knewe hym, that it was he, which sate and begged at the beawtifull
gate of the temple. And they wondred, and were sore astonyed at that which had
happened vnto hym.
11 And as the lame which was healed, helde Peter and Iohn, all the people ran
amased vnto them, in the porche that is called Solomons.
12 And when Peter sawe that, he aunswered vnto the people: Ye men of Israel, why
maruayle ye at this, or why loke ye so on vs, as though by our owne power or
godlynesse, we had made this man to go?
13 The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Iacob, the God of our fathers hath
glorified his sonne Iesus, whom ye betrayed and denyed in the presence of
Pilate, when he had iudged hym to be loosed.
14 But ye denyed the holy and iust, and desired a murtherer to be geuen you,
15 And kylled the Lorde of lyfe, whom God hath raysed from the dead: of the
which we are witnesses.
16 And his name, through the fayth in his name, hath made this man sounde, whom
ye see and knowe: And the fayth which is by hym, hath geuen to this man health,
in the presence of you all.
17 And nowe brethren, I wote that through ignoraunce ye dyd it, as dyd also your
rulers.
18 But those thynges which God before had shewed by the mouth of all his
prophetes, that Christe shoulde suffer, he hath so fulfylled.
19 Repent ye therfore and conuert, that your sinnes may be done away, when the
tyme of refreshyng shall come, in the presence of the Lorde.
20 And he shall sende Iesus Christ, which before was preached vnto you.
21 Whom the heauen must receaue, vntill the tyme that all thynges be restored,
which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophetes since the world
began.
22 Moyses truely sayde vnto the fathers: A prophete shall the Lorde your God
rayse vp vnto you, of your brethren, lyke vnto me: hym shall ye heare in all
thynges, whatsoeuer he shall say vnto you.
23 For the tyme wyll come, that euery soule which wyll not heare that same
prophete, shalbe destroyed from among the people.
24 All the prophetes also fro Samuel & thencefoorth, as many as haue spoken,
haue lykewise tolde you of these dayes.
25 Ye are the chyldren of the prophetes, and of the couenaunt which God made
vnto our fathers, saying to Abraham: Euen in thy seede shall all the kinredes of
the earth be blessed.
26 Unto you first, God hath raysed vp his sonne Iesus, and hath sent hym to
blesse you, in turnyng euery one of you from his iniquities.

Chapter 4

1 And as they spake vnto ye people, the priestes & the ruler of the temple, and
the saducees, came vpon them,
2 Takyng it greuously that they taught the people, and preached in Iesus the
resurrection from the dead.
3 And they layde handes on them, and put them in holde, vntyll the next day: for
it was nowe euentyde.
4 Howbeit, many of them which hearde the worde, beleued: and the number of the
men was about fyue thousande.
5 And it came to passe on the morowe, that their rulers, and elders, & scribes,
6 And Annas the chiefe priest, and Caiaphas, and Iohn, and Alexander, and as
many as were of the kynrede of the hye priestes, were gathered together at
Hierusalem.
7 And when they had set them before them, they asked: by what power, or in what
name haue ye done this?
8 Then Peter, full of the holy ghost, sayde vnto them: Ye rulers of the people,
and elders of Israel,
9 If we this day be examined of the good deede done to the sicke man, by what
meanes he is made whole:
10 Be it knowen vnto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name
of Iesus Christe of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raysed agayne from the
dead: euen by hym doth this man stande here before you whole.
11 This is the stone which was cast asyde of you buylders, which is the head of
the corner:
12 Neither is there saluation in any other. For among men vnder heauen, there is
geuen none other name, wherin we must be saued.
13 Nowe when they sawe the boldnesse of Peter and Iohn, and vnderstoode that
they were vnlearned and lay men, they marueyled, and they knewe them that they
had ben with Iesu:
14 And beholdyng also the man which was healed, standyng with them, they coulde
not say agaynst it,
15 But commaundyng them to go asyde out of the counsel, and counseled among them
selues,
16 Saying: What shall we do to these men? For a manifest signe is done by them,
and is openly knowen to all them that dwell in Hierusalem, and we can not denie
it.
17 But that it be noysed no farther among the people, let vs threaten and charge
them that they speake hencefoorth to no man in this name.
18 And they called them, and commaunded them, that in no wyse they shoulde
speake, nor teache in the name of Iesu.
19 But Peter and Iohn aunswered, and sayde vnto them: Whether it be ryght in the
syght of God, to hearken vnto you more then to God, iudge ye.
20 For we cannot but speake that, which we haue seene and hearde.
21 So threatned they them, and let them go, and founde nothyng how to punishe
them, because of the people: For all men praysed God, because of that which was
done.
22 For the man was about fourtie yere olde, on whom this miracle of healyng was
shewed.
23 Then assoone as they were let go, they came to their felowes, and shewed all
that the hye priestes and elders had sayde vnto them.
24 And when they hearde that, they lyft vp their voyces to God with one accorde,
and sayde: Lorde, thou art God, which hast made heauen and earth, the sea, and
all that in them is,
25 Which by the mouth of thy seruaunt Dauid, hast sayde: Why dyd the Heathen
rage, & the people imagine vayne thynges?
26 The kynges of the earth stoode vp, and the rulers came together, agaynst the
Lorde, and agaynst his Christe.
27 And of a trueth, agaynst thy holye chylde Iesus, who thou hast anoynted, both
Herode and also Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel,
gathered them selues together,
28 For to do whatsoeuer thy hande & thy counsel determined before to be done.
29 And nowe Lorde, beholde their threatnynges, & graunt vnto thy seruauntes,
that with all boldensse they may speake thy worde.
30 So that thou stretch foorth thyne hande, that healyng, and signes, and
wonders, be done by the name of thy holy chylde Iesus.
31 And assoone as they had prayed, the place moued where they were assembled
together, and they were all fylled with the holy ghost, and they spake the worde
of God boldely.
32 And the multitude of them that beleued, were of one heart, and of one soule:
Neither sayde any of them, that ought of ye thynges which he possessed, was his
owne: but they had all thinges common.
33 And with great power gaue the Apostles witnesse of the resurrection of the
Lorde Iesu: And great grace was with them all.
34 Neither was there any among them, that lacked: For as many as were possessers
of landes, or houses, solde them, & brought the price of the thynges that were
solde,
35 And layed it downe at the Apostles feete: And distribution was made vnto
euery man, accordyng as he had neede.
36 And Ioses, which was also called of the Apostles Barnabas (that is to say)
the sonne of consolation, being a Leuite, and of the countrey of Cypers,
37 When he had lande, solde it, and layde the money downe at the Apostles feete.

Chapter 5

1 But a certayne man, named Ananias, with Saphyra his wyfe, solde a possession,
2 And kept away part of the price, his wyfe also beyng of counsell, and brought
a certayne part, and layde it downe at the Apostles feete.
3 But Peter sayde: Ananias, howe is it, that Satan hath fylled thyne heart, that
thou shouldest lye vnto the holy ghost, and kepe away part of the price of the
lande?
4 Whyles it remayned, was it not thyne owne? And after it was solde, was it not
in thyne owne power? Why haste thou conceaued this thyng in thyne heart? Thou
hast not lyed vnto men, but vnto God.
5 When Ananias hearde these wordes, he fell downe, and gaue vp the ghost. And
great feare came on all them that hearde these thynges.
6 And the young rose vp, and put hym a part, and caryed hym out, and buryed hym.
7 And it came to passe, that as it were about the space of three houres after,
his wyfe came in, ignoraunt of that which was done.
8 And Peter sayde vnto her: Tell me, Solde ye not the lande for so much? And she
sayde: Yea, for so much.
9 Then Peter sayde vnto her: Why haue ye agreed together, to tempt the spirite
of the Lorde? Beholde, the feete of the which haue buried thy husbande, are at
the doore, and shall cary thee out.
10 Then fell she downe strayghtway at his feete, and yelded vp the ghost. And
the young men came in, and founde her dead, and caryed her out, and buryed her
by her husbande.
11 And great feare came vpon all the Churche, and vpon as many as hearde these
thynges.
12 And by the handes of the Apostles, were many signes & wonders shewed among
the people. (And they were all together with one accord in Solomons porche.
13 And of other durst no man ioyne hym selfe to them, neuerthelesse, the people
magnified them.
14 The number of them that beleued in the Lorde, both of men and women, grewe
more and more.)
15 In so much that they brought the sicke into the streates, & layde the on
beddes and couches, that at the least way, the shadowe of Peter when he came by,
myght shadowe some of them.
16 There came also a multitude of the cities rounde about, vnto Hierusalem,
bryngyng sicke folkes, and them which were vexed with vncleane spirites: And
they were healed euery one.
17 Then the chiefe priest rose vp, and all they that were with hym, which is the
sect of the Saducees, and were full of indignation:
18 And layed handes on the Apostles, and put them in the common prison.
19 But the Angel of the Lorde by nyght opened the prison doores, and brought
them foorth, and sayde:
20 Go, and stande & speake in the temple to the people, all the wordes of this
lyfe.
21 And when they hearde that, they entred into the temple early in ye mornyng,
and taught: But the chiefe priest came, and they that were with hym, & called a
counsayle together, and all the elders of the chyldren of Israel, and sent to
the pryson to fet them.
22 But when the officers came, & founde them not in the pryson, they returned,
and tolde,
23 Saying: The pryson truely founde we shut with all diligence, & the kepers
standyng without, before the doores: But when we had opened, we founde no man
within.
24 Then when the chiefe priest and the ruler of the temple, and the hye priestes
hearde these thynges, they doubted of them, whervnto this woulde growe.
25 Then came one and shewed them, saying: Beholde, the men that ye put in
pryson, stande in the temple, and teache the people.
26 Then went the ruler of the temple, with the officers, and brought them
without violence: (For they feared the people, lest they should haue ben stoned)
27 And when they had brought them, they set them before the counsell. And the
chiefe priest asked them,
28 Saying: dyd not we strayghtly commaunde you, that ye shoulde not teache in
this name? And beholde, ye haue fylled Hierusalem with your doctrine, and
intende to bryng this mans blood vpon vs.
29 Then Peter and the other Apostles aunswered, and sayde: We ought more to obey
God then men.
30 The God of our fathers raysed vp Iesus, whom ye slewe, & hanged on tree.
31 Hym hath God lyft vp with his ryght hande, to be a prince and a sauiour, for
to geue repentaunce to Israel, and forgeuenesse of sinnes.
32 And we are recordes of these thynges which we say, & so is also the holy
ghost, whom God hath geuen to them that obey hym.
33 When they hearde that, they claue asunder, and sought meanes to slea the.
34 Then stoode there vp one in the counsell, a pharisee, named Gamaliel, a
doctour of lawe, had in reputation among all the people, and commaunded the
Apostles to go asyde a litle space,
35 And sayde vnto them: Ye men of Israel, take heede to your selues, what ye
entende to do, as touchyng these men.
36 For before these dayes rose vp one Theudas, boastyng him selfe, to whom
resorted a number of men, about a foure hundred, which was slayne: and they all
which beleued hym, were scattered abrode, and brought to naught.
37 After this man, arose vp one Iudas of Galilee, in the dayes of tribute, and
drewe away much people after hym: He also perished, and all, euen as many as
hearkened to hym, were scattered abrode.
38 And nowe I saye vnto you, refrayne your selues fro these men, and let them
alone: For yf this counsell or this worke be of men, it wyll come to naught.
39 But and yf it be of God, ye can not destroy it, lest haply ye be founde to
stryue agaynst God.
40 And to hym agreed the other: And when they had called the Apostles, they beat
them, and commaunded that they shoulde not speake in the name of Iesu, and let
them go.
41 And they departed from the counsell, reioycing that they were counted worthy
to suffer rebuke for his name.
42 And dayly in the temple, and in euery house, they ceassed not to teach &
preach Iesus Christe.

Chapter 6

1 And in those dayes, when the number of ye disciples grewe, there arose a
grudge among the Grekes agaynst ye Hebrues, because their wydowes were despysed
in the dayly ministerie.
2 Then the twelue called the multitude of the disciples together, and sayde: It
is not good that we shoulde leaue the worde of God, and serue tables.
3 Wherfore brethren, loke ye out among you seuen men of honest report, & full of
the holy ghost, and wysedome, to who we may commit this busynesse.
4 But we wyll geue our selues continually to prayer, and to the ministerie of
the worde.
5 And the saying pleased the whole multitude. And they chose Steuen, a man full
of fayth, and of the holy ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, &
Timon, and Permenas, and Nicolas a conuert of Antioche.
6 These they set before the apostles: and whe they had prayed, they layde their
handes on them.
7 And the worde of God encreased, & the number of ye disciples multiplied in
Hierusalem greatly, and a great companie of the priestes were obedient to ye
fayth.
8 And Steuen full of fayth & power, dyd great wonders & miracles among the
people.
9 Then there arose certaine of the synagogue, which is called the synagogue of
the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and of Alexandria, and of Cilicia, & of Asia,
disputyng with Steuen.
10 And they coulde not resiste the wisedome and the spirite by the whiche he
spake.
11 Then they priuilie prepared men, whiche sayde, we haue heard him speake
blasphemous wordes agaynst Moyses, and agaynst God.
12 And they moued the people, and the elders, and the scribes, and came vppon
hym, and caught him, and brought him to the counsell.
13 And brought foorth false witnesses, which sayde: This man ceasseth not to
speake blasphemous wordes agaynste this holy place and the lawe.
14 For we hearde hym say, that this Iesus of Nazareth shal destroy this place, &
shall chaunge the ordinaunces which Moyses gaue vs:
15 And all that sate in the counsell, loking stedfastly on him, saw his face as
it had ben the face of an angell.

Chapter 7

1 Then said ye chiefe priest: Are these thynges so?
2 And he said: Ye men, brethren, and fathers, hearken. The God of glorie
appeared vnto our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in
Charran,
3 And sayde vnto him: Get thee out of thy countrey, & fro thy kinrede, & come
into the lande which I shall shew thee.
4 Then came he out of the lande of the Chaldeans, and dwelt in Charran: and from
thence, whe his father was dead, he brought hym into this lande wherin ye nowe
dwell.
5 And he gaue hym none inheritaunce in it, no not the breadth of a foote: and
promised that he woulde geue it to hym to possesse, and to his seede after hym,
when as yet he had no chylde.
6 God veryly spake on this wyse, that his seede shoulde soiourne in a straunge
lande, and that they shoulde kepe it in bondage, and entreate them euyl foure
hundreth yeres.
7 And the nation to whom they shalbe in bondage, wyll I iudge, sayde God: And
after that, shall they come foorth, & serue me in this place.
8 And he gaue hym the couenaunt of circumcision: And he begate Isaac, and
circumcised hym the eyght day, and Isaac begate Iacob, and Iacob begate the
twelue patriarkes.
9 And the patriarkes moued with enuie, solde Ioseph into Egypt: and God was with
hym,
10 And deliuered hym out of all his aduersities, and gaue hym fauour & wisedome
in the syght of Pharao kyng of Egypt: and he made hym gouernour ouer Egypt, &
ouer all his housholde.
11 But there came a dearth ouer all the land of Egypt and Chanaan: and great
affliction, that our fathers founde no sustenaunce.
12 But when Iacob hearde that there was corne in Egypt, he sent our fathers
first.
13 And at the second time, Ioseph was knowen of his brethren, and Iosephes
kinrede was made knowen vnto Pharao.
14 Then sent Ioseph, and caused his father to be brought, and all his kynne,
three score and fyfteene soules.
15 And Iacob descended into Egypt, and dyed, both he and our fathers,
16 And were caryed ouer into Sichem, and layde in the sepulchre, that Abraha
bought for money of the sonnes of Emor, the sonne of Sichem.
17 But when the tyme of the promyse drewe nye, whiche God had sworne to Abraham,
the people grewe and multiplied in Egypt:
18 Tyll another king arose, which knew not of Ioseph.
19 The same dealt subtilly with our kinrede, and euyll intreated our fathers, &
made them caste out their young chyldren, that they shoulde not remayne alyue.
20 The same tyme was Moyses borne, and was acceptable vnto God, and norished vp
in his fathers house three monethes.
21 And when he was cast out, Pharaos daughter toke hym vp, & norished hym for
her owne sonne.
22 And Moyses was learned in all maner of wisedome of the Egyptians, and was
myghtie in deedes and in wordes.
23 And when he was full fourtie yeres olde, it came into his heart to visite his
brethren the chyldren of Israel.
24 And when he sawe one of them suffer wrong, he defended hym, and auenged his
quarrell that had the harme done to hym, and smote the Egyptian.
25 For he supposed his brethren woulde haue vnderstande, howe that God by his
hande shoulde delyuer them: But they vnderstoode not.
26 And the next day he shewed hym selfe vnto them as they stroue, and woulde
haue set them at one agayne, saying: Sirs, ye are brethren, why do ye wrong one
to another?
27 But he that did his neighbour wrong, thrust hym awaye, saying: Who made thee
a ruler and a iudge ouer vs?
28 Wylt thou kyll me, as thou diddest the Egyptian yesterday?
29 Then fledde Moyses at that saying, and was a straunger in the lande of
Madian, where he begate two sonnes.
30 And whe fourtie yeres were expired, there appeared to hym in the wyldernesse
of mount Sina, an Angel of the Lorde in a flambe of fire in a busshe.
31 When Moyses sawe it, he wondred at ye sight: And as he drue neare to behold,
the voyce of the Lord came vnto hym.
32 I am the God of thy fathers, ye God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and ye
God of Iacob. Then Moyses trembled, & durst not beholde.
33 Then sayde the Lorde to hym: Put of thy shoes from thy feete, for the place
where thou standest, is holy grounde.
34 I haue seene, I haue seene the afflictio of my people which is in Egypt, and
I haue hearde their gronyng, and am come downe to deliuer them: And now come, &
I wyll sende thee into Egypt.
35 This Moyses, whom they forsoke saying, who made thee a ruler and a iudge? the
same dyd God sende, to be a ruler, and a deliuerer, by the handes of the angell,
whiche appeared to hym in the busshe.
36 He brought them out, shewyng wonders and signes in Egypt, & in the read sea,
& in the wyldernesse fourtie yeres.
37 This is that Moyses which saide vnto the chyldren of Israel: A prophete shall
the Lorde your God raise vp vnto you of your brethren, lyke vnto me, him shall
ye heare.
38 This is he that was in the Churche in ye wyldernesse with the angel, which
spake to hym in the mount Sinai, and with our fathers: This man receaued the
worde of lyfe to geue vnto vs.
39 To whom our fathers woulde not obey, but thrust it from them, and in their
hearts turned backe againe into Egypt,
40 Saying vnto Aaron, Make vs gods to go before vs. For as for this Moyses that
brought vs out of the lande of Egypt, we wote not what is become of hym.
41 And they made a Calfe in those dayes, and offred sacrifice vnto the idoll,
and reioyced ouer the workes of their owne handes.
42 Then God turned hym selfe away, & gaue them vp to worship the hoast of
heauen, as it is written in ye booke of the prophetes: O ye house of Israel,
haue ye offered to me slayne beastes, and sacrifices, by the space of fourtie
yeres in the wyldernesse?
43 And ye toke vnto you the tabernacle of Moloch, and the starre of your god
Remphan, figures whiche ye made to worship them: And I wyll carry you away
beyonde Babylon.
44 Our fathers had ye tabernacle of witnesse in the wyldernesse, as he had
appoynted, speakyng vnto Moyses, that he shoulde make it accordyng to the
fasshion that he had seene.
45 Whiche also our fathers that came after, brought in with Iesus into the
possession of the gentiles, who God draue out before the face of our fathers,
vnto the dayes of Dauid.
46 Which founde fauour before God, and woulde fayne haue founde a tabernacle for
the God of Iacob.
47 But Solomon buylt hym an house.
48 Howebeit, he that is hyest of al, dwelleth not in teples made with handes, as
sayth the prophete:
49 Heauen is my seate, and earth is my footstoole. What house wyll ye buylde for
me, saith the Lord? Or which is the place of my rest?
50 Hath not my hande made all these thynges?
51 Ye styfnecked and of vncircumcised heartes and eares, ye haue alwayes
resisted the holy ghost: as your fathers dyd, so do ye.
52 Which of the prophetes haue not your fathers persecuted? And they haue slayne
them which shewed before of the commyng of that iuste, of whom ye are nowe the
betrayers and murtherers:
53 Whiche also haue receaued the lawe, by the disposition of angels, and haue
not kept it.
54 When they hearde these thynges, their heartes claue a sunder, and they
gnasshed on hym with their teeth.
55 But he being full of the holy ghost, loked vp stedfastly into heauen, and
sawe the glory of God, and Iesus standyng on the ryght hande of God,
56 And sayde: Beholde, I see the heauens open, & the sonne of man standyng on
the ryght hande of God.
57 Then they gaue a shoute with a loude voyce, and stopped their eares, and ran
vpon hym all at once,
58 And cast hym out of the citie, and stoned him. And ye witnesses layde downe
their clothes at a young mans feete, whose name was Saul.
59 And they stoned Steuen, callyng on, and saying: Lorde Iesu receaue my
spirite.
60 And he kneeled downe, and cryed with a loude voyce: Lorde lay not this sinne
to their charge. And when he had thus spoken, he fell a sleepe.

Chapter 8

1 And Saul consented vnto his death. And at that time there was a great
persecution against ye Churche which was at Hierusalem, and they were all
scattered abrode thorowout the regions of Iurie, and Samaria, except the
apostles.
2 And deuout men were carefull together touchyng Steuen, and made great
lamentation ouer hym.
3 As for Saul, he made hauocke of the Churche, and entred into euery house, &
drewe out both men and women, and put them into pryson.
4 Therfore, they that were scattered abrode, went euery where preachyng the
worde of God.
5 Then came Philip into the citie of Samaria, & preached Christe vnto the.
6 And the people gaue heede vnto those thynges whiche Philip spake with one
accorde, hearyng and seing the miracles which he dyd.
7 For vncleane spirites, crying with loude voyce, came out of manye that were
possessed with them. And many taken with paulsies, & many that haulted, were
healed.
8 And there was great ioy in that citie.
9 But there was a certayne man called Simon, which beforetyme in the same citie
vsed witchcraft, and bewitched the people of Samaria, saying that he was a man
that coulde do great thynges:
10 Whom they regarded from the least to the greatest, saying: This man is the
great power of God.
11 And hym they sette much by, because that of long tyme he had bewitched the
with sorseries.
12 But assoone as they gaue credence to Philips preachyng of the kyngdome of
God, and of the name of Iesus Christe, they were baptized, both men & wome.
13 Then Simon him selfe beleued also: And whe he was baptized, he continued with
Philip, & wondred, beholding the miracles & signes which were shewed.
14 When the apostles whiche were at Hierusalem, hearde say that Samaria hadde
receaued the worde of God, they sent vnto them Peter and Iohn.
15 Which when they were come downe, prayed for the that they myght receaue the
holy ghost.
16 (For as yet he was come downe vpon none of them, but they were baptized only
in the name of Christ Iesu.)
17 Then layde they their handes on the, and they receaued the holy ghost.
18 And when Simon sawe, that thorow laying on of the apostles handes, ye holy
ghost was geuen, he offred the money,
19 Saying: Geue me also this power, that on whomsoeuer I put the hands, he may
receaue the holy ghost.
20 But Peter sayde vnto him: Thy money perishe with thee, because thou hast
thought that the gyfte of God may be obteyned with money.
21 Thou hast neither part nor felowship in this busynesse: For thy hearte is not
ryght in the syght of God.
22 Repent therefore of this thy wickednesse, & praye God, if perhaps ye thought
of thyne heart may be forgeuen thee.
23 For I perceaue yt thou art in the gall of bitternesse, & wrapped in
iniquitie.
24 The aunswered Simon & said: Pray ye to the Lord for me, that none of these
thinges which ye haue spoke fall on me.
25 And they, when they had testified and preached the worde of the Lorde,
returned towarde Hierusalem, and preached the Gospell in many townes of the
Samaritanes.
26 And the Angell of the Lorde spake vnto Philip, saying: Aryse, and go towarde
the South, vnto the waye that goeth downe from Hierusalem vnto Gaza, which is
desert.
27 And he arose, & went on: and behold a man of Ethiopia, an Eunuch, & of great
auctoritie with Candace, Queene of the Ethiopias, & had the rule of all her
treasure, came to Hierusale for to worship.
28 And as he returned home agayne, sittyng in his charet, he read Esaias the
prophete.
29 Then the spirite said vnto Philip: Go neare, & ioyne thy selfe to yonder
charet.
30 And Philip ran thither to him, & heard hym reade the prophete Esaias, &
saide: vnderstandest thou what thou readest?
31 And he said: how can I, except I had a guyde? And he desired Philip that he
woulde come vp, and sit with hym.
32 The tenour of the scripture which he read, was this: He was ledde as a sheepe
to the slaughter, & lyke a lambe dumbe before his shearer, so opened he not his
mouth.
33 In his humilitie, his iudgement is exalted: But who shall declare his
generation? For his lyfe is taken from the earth.
34 And the Eunuche aunswered Philip, and sayde: I pray thee of whom speaketh the
prophete this? Of hym selfe, or of some other man?
35 Then Philip opened his mouth, and began at the same scripture, and preached
vnto hym Iesus.
36 And as they went on their way, they came vnto a certayne water, and the
Eunuche sayde: See, here is water, what doth let me to be baptized?
37 Philip sayde vnto hym If thou beleuest with all thine heart, thou mayest. And
he aunswered, and saide: I beleue that Iesus Christe is the sonne of God.
38 And he commaunded the charet to stande styll: and they went downe both into
the water, both Philip and also the Eunuche: and he baptized hym.
39 And assoone as they were come out of the water, the spirite of ye Lorde
caught away Philip, that the Eunuche sawe hym no more. And he went on his way
reioycyng.
40 But Philip was founde at Azotus. And he walked throughout the countrey,
preachyng in all the cities, tyll he came to Cesarea.

Chapter 9

1 And Saul yet breathyng out threatnings and slaughter agaynst the disciples of
ye Lord, went vnto ye hie priest,
2 And desired of him letters to carrye to Damascus, to the synagogues: that yf
he founde any of this waye, whether they were men or women, he myght bryng them
bounde vnto Hierusalem.
3 And when he iourneyed, it came to passe, that as he was come nye to Damascus,
sodenly there shyned rounde about hym a lyght from heauen:
4 And he fell to the earth, and hearde a voyce saying to him: Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me?
5 And he sayde: Who art thou Lorde? And the Lorde said: I am Iesus who thou
persecutest, It is harde for thee to kicke agaynst the prickes.
6 And he both tremblyng and astonyed, sayde: Lord, what wylt thou haue me to do?
And the Lorde sayde vnto hym: Aryse, and go into the citie, and it shalbe tolde
thee what thou must do.
7 The men also which iourneyed with him, stoode amased, hearing a voyce, but
seyng no man.
8 And Saul arose from the earth, and when he opened his eyes, he sawe no man:
But they ledde him by the hande, and brought hym into Damascus.
9 And he was three dayes without syght, and neither dyd eate nor drynke.
10 And there was a certayne disciple at Damascus, named Ananias: & to him sayde
the Lorde in a vision, Ananias. And he said, Behold I am here Lorde.
11 And the Lorde sayde vnto hym: aryse, and go into the streate, whiche is
called strayght, and seeke in the house of Iudas, after one called Saul, of
Tarsus: for beholde he prayeth,
12 And hath seene in a vision a man named Ananias commyng in to hym, and puttyng
his handes on hym, that he myght receaue his syght.
13 Then Ananias aunswered: Lorde, I haue heard by many, of this man, how much
euyll he hath done to thy saintes, at Hierusalem.
14 And here he hath aucthoritie of ye hye priestes, to bynde all yt call on thy
name.
15 The Lord sayde vnto hym: Go thy way, for he is a chosen vessell vnto me, to
beare my name before the gentiles, & kynges, and the chyldren of Israel.
16 For I wyl shew hym how great thinges he must suffer for my names sake.
17 And Ananias went his way, and entred into the house, and put his handes on
hym, and sayde: Brother Saul, the Lorde (euen Iesus that appeared vnto thee in
the waye as thou camest) hath sent me, that thou myghtest receaue thy syght, &
be fylled with the holy ghost.
18 And immediatly there fell from his eyes as it had ben scales, & he receaued
syght foorthwith, and arose, and was baptized,
19 And receaued meate, and was comforted. Then was Saul certaine dayes with the
disciples whiche were at Damasco.
20 And strayghtway he preached Christe in the synagogues, that he was ye sonne
of God.
21 But all that hearde hym, were amased, and sayde: Is not this he that
destroyed them which called on this name in Hierusalem, and came hyther for that
intent, that he myght bryng the bounde vnto the hye priestes?
22 But Saule increased the more in strength, and confounded the Iewes whiche
dwelt at Damasco, affirmyng that this was very Christe.
23 And after that many dayes were fulfilled, the Iewes toke counsell together to
kyll hym.
24 But their laying awayte was knowen of Saule. And they watched ye gates day
and nyght to kyll hym.
25 Then the disciples toke him by night, and put hym through the wall, and let
hym downe in a basket.
26 And when Saule was come to Hierusalem, he assayde to couple hym selfe to the
disciples: but they were all afrayde of hym, & beleued not that he was a
disciple.
27 But Barnabas toke hym, & brought hym to the Apostles, and declared to them
howe he had seene the Lorde in the way, & that he had spoken to hym, and howe he
had done boldely at Damasco in the name of Iesu.
28 And he had his conuersation with the at Hierusalem,
29 Speakyng boldly in the name of the Lorde Iesu. And he spake and disputed
agaynst the Grekes: but they went about to slea hym.
30 Which whe the brethren knewe, they brought hym to Cesarea, and sent hym
foorth to Tarsus.
31 Then had the Churches rest throughout all Iurie, and Galilee, and Samaria,
and were edified, and walked in the feare of the Lorde, & multiplied by the
comfort of the holy ghost.
32 And it came to passe, as Peter walked throughout all quarters, he came also
to the Saintes which dwelt at Lydda.
33 And there he founde a certayne man, named Eneas, which had kept his bed eyght
yeres, & was sicke of the paulsie.
34 And Peter sayde vnto hym, Eneas, Iesus Christe make thee whole: aryse, and
make thy bedde. And he arose immediatly.
35 And all that dwelt at Lydda, and Saron sawe hym, and turned to the Lorde.
36 There was also at Ioppa a certayne woman, a disciple, named Tabitha, which by
interpretatio is called Dorcas: the same was full of good workes and almes
deedes, which she dyd.
37 And it came to passe in those dayes that she was sicke, and dyed: Whom when
they had wasshed, they layde her in an vpper chamber:
38 And forasmuch as Lydda was nye to Ioppa, and the disciples hadde hearde that
Peter was there, they sent vnto hym two men, desyryng hym that he woulde not be
greeued to come vnto them.
39 Then Peter arose, & came with them, and when he was come, they brought hym
into the vpper chamber: And all the wydowes stoode rounde about him weepyng, and
shewyng the coates and garmentes which Dorcas made whyle she was with them.
40 And Peter put them all foorth, and kneled downe, and prayed, and turned hym
to the body, and sayde: Tabitha aryse. And she opened her eyes, and when she
sawe Peter, she sate vp.
41 And he gaue her the hande, and lyfte her vp: and when he hadde called the
saintes and wydowes, he deliuered her alyue.
42 And it was knowen throughout all Ioppa, & many beleued in the Lorde.
43 And it came to passe, that he taryed many dayes in Ioppa, with one Simo a
tanner.

Chapter 10

1 There was a certayne man in Cesarea, called Cornelius, a captayne of the bande
called the Italian bande,
2 A deuoute man, & one yt feared God, with all his housholde, which gaue much
almes to the people, and prayed God alway.
3 The same sawe by a vision euidently, about the ninth houre of the daye, an
Angel of God commyng in to hym, and saying vnto hym, Cornelius.
4 And when he loked on hym, he was afrayde, and sayde: What is it Lorde? And he
sayde vnto hym: Thy prayers and thyne almes, are come vp into remembraunce
before God.
5 And nowe sende men to Ioppa, & call for one Simo, whose sirname is Peter.
6 He lodgeth with one Simon a tanner, whose house is by the sea syde: He shall
tell thee what thou oughtest to do.
7 And when the Angell whiche spake vnto Cornelius was departed, he called two of
his household seruauntes, and a deuout souldier of them that wayted on hym,
8 And tolde them all the matter, & sent them to Ioppa.
9 On the morowe as they went on their iourney, and drewe nye vnto the citie,
Peter went vp vnto the highest part of the house to pray, about the sixth houre.
10 And whe he waxed hungry, he would haue eaten: But whyle they made redie, he
fell into a traunce.
11 And saw heauen opened, and a certaine vessell come downe vnto him, as it had
ben a great sheete, knyt at the foure corners, & was let downe to the earth.
12 Wherin were all maner of fourefooted beastes of the earth, & wilde beastes,
and wormes, and foules of the ayre.
13 And there came a voyce to hym: ryse Peter, kyll and eate.
14 But Peter sayde, Not so Lorde: For I haue neuer eaten any thyng that is
common or vncleane.
15 And the voyce spake vnto hym againe the seconde tyme: What God hath cleansed,
that call not thou common.
16 This was done thryse, and the vessell was receaued vp agayne into heauen.
17 Nowe whyle Peter doubted in hym selfe, what this vision whiche he hadde seene
meant: beholde, the men whiche were sent from Cornelius, had made inquiraunce
for Simons house, & stoode before the doore,
18 And called, and asked whether Simo which was sirnamed Peter, were lodged
there.
19 Whyle Peter thought on the vision, the spirite said vnto hym: beholde, three
men seke thee.
20 Arise therfore, and get the downe, and go with them, & doubt not, for I haue
sent them.
21 Then Peter went downe to the men which were set vnto him fro Cornelius, &
said: Behold, I am he who ye seeke, what is the cause wherfore ye are come?
22 And they sayde: Cornelius the capitayne, a iust man, and one that feareth
God, and of good report among all the people of the Iewes, was warned by an holy
Angel to sende for thee into his house, and to heare wordes of thee.
23 Then called he them in, and lodged them. And on the morowe, Peter went away
with them, and certaine brethren from Ioppa accompanied hym.
24 And the thirde day after, entred they into Cesarea: And Cornelius wayted for
them, and hadde called together his kinsemen and speciall friendes.
25 And it came to passe, as Peter came in, Cornelius met hym, & fell downe at
his feete, and worshipped hym.
26 But Peter toke him vp, saying: stande vp, I my selfe also am a man.
27 And as he talked with him, he came in, & found many that were come together.
28 And he said vnto the: Ye knowe how that it is an vnlawful thyng for a man
that is a Iew, to companie or come vnto one of another natio: But God hath
shewed me, that I shoulde not call any man common or vncleane.
29 Therefore came I vnto you without delay, assoone as I was sent for: I aske
therfore, for what intent ye haue sent for me?
30 And Cornelius sayde: This day nowe foure dayes, about this houre, I sate
fasting, and at the ninth houre, I prayed in my house: And beholde, a man stoode
before me in bryght clothyng,
31 And sayde: Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and thyne almes deedes are had in
remembraunce in the syght of God.
32 Sende therfore to Ioppa, and call for Simon, whose sirname is Peter: He is
lodged in the house of one Simo, a tanner, by the sea syde, who when he commeth,
shall speake vnto thee.
33 Then sent I for thee immediatly, and thou hast well done that thou art come.
Nowe therfore are we all here present before God, to heare all thynges that are
commaunded vnto thee of God.
34 Then Peter opened his mouth, and said: Of a trueth I perceaue that God hath
no regarde of persons:
35 But in euery nation, he that feareth hym, and worketh ryghteousnes, is
accepted with hym.
36 Touchyng the worde which God set vnto the chyldren of Israel, preachyng peace
by Iesus Christe (he is Lord ouer all.)
37 Ye knowe howe the worde was publisshed through all Iurie, begynnyng in
Galilee, after the baptisme whiche Iohn preached:
38 Howe God annoynted Iesus of Nazareth, with the holy ghoste, and with power:
Who went about doyng good, and healyng all that were oppressed of the deuyll,
for God was with hym.
39 And we are witnesses of all thynges which he dyd in the land of the Iewes,
and at Hierusalem, whom they slewe, and hanged on tree.
40 Hym God raysed vp the thirde daye, and shewed hym openly,
41 Not to al the people, but vnto vs witnesses, chosen before of God, euen to vs
whiche dyd eate and drynke with hym after he arose from the dead.
42 And he commaunded vs to preache vnto the people, and to testifie that it is
he whiche was ordeyned of God to be the iudge of quicke and dead.
43 To hym geue all the prophetes witnesse, that through his name whosoeuer
beleueth in hym, shall receaue remission of sinnes.
44 Whyle Peter yet spake these wordes, the holy ghost fell on all them whiche
hearde the worde.
45 And they of the circumcision which beleued, were astonied, as many as came
with Peter, because that on the gentiles also was shedde out the gyft of the
holy ghost.
46 For they hearde them speake with tounges, & magnifie God. Then aunswered
Peter:
47 Can any man forbid water, that these shoulde not be baptized, which haue
receaued the holy ghost aswell as we?
48 And he commaunded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord. Then prayed
they him to tary certaine dayes.

Chapter 11

1 And the apostles & brethre that were in Iurie, hearde that ye heathe had also
receaued the worde of God.
2 And when Peter was come vp to Hierusalem, they that were of the circumcision
contended agaynst hym,
3 Saying: Thou wentest in to men vncircucised, & diddest eate with them.
4 But Peter rehearsed the matter from the begynnyng, and expounded it by order
vnto them, saying:
5 I was in the citie of Ioppa praying, and in a traunce I sawe a vision, a
certayne vessell descende, as it had ben a great sheete, let downe from heauen
by the foure corners, and it came to me.
6 Upon the which whe I had fastened mine eyes, I considered, & sawe fourefooted
beastes of the earth, and wylde beastes, and wormes, and foules of the ayre.
7 And I hearde a voyce, saying vnto me: aryse Peter, slay, and eate.
8 But I sayde, Not so Lorde: For nothyng common or vncleane hath at any tyme
entred into my mouth.
9 But the voyce aunswered me agayne from heaue: Make them not comon which God
hath cleansed.
10 And this was done three tymes: And all were taken vp agayne into heauen.
11 And beholde, immediatly there were three men, alredy come vnto the house
where I was, sent from Cesarea vnto me.
12 And the spirite sayde vnto me, that I shoulde go with the, without doubting.
Moreouer, these sixe brethren accompanyed me, & we entred into the mans house:
13 And he shewed vs, howe he had seene an Angel in his house, which stoode and
sayde vnto hym: Sende men to Ioppa, and call for Simon, whose sirname is Peter:
14 He shal tell thee wordes, wherby both thou and all thyne house shalbe saued.
15 And as I began to speake, the holy ghost fell on them, as he dyd on vs at the
begynnyng.
16 Then came it to my remembraunce, howe that the Lorde sayde: Iohn baptized
with water, but ye shalbe baptized with the holy ghost.
17 For as much then, as God gaue them the lyke gyft as he dyd vnto vs, when we
beleued on the Lorde Iesus Christ: what was I, that I shoulde haue withstande
God?
18 When they hearde these thynges, they helde their peace, and glorified God,
saying: Then hath God also to ye Gentiles, graunted repentaunce vnto lyfe.
19 They also which were scattered abrode through the affliction that arose about
Steuen, walked throughout vnto Phenices, and Cypers, and Antioche, preachyng the
worde to no man, but vnto the Iewes only.
20 And some of the were men of Cypers, and Cyrenes, which when they were come to
Antioche, spake vnto ye Grekes, and preached the Lorde Iesus.
21 And the hande of the Lorde was with them, and a great number beleued and
turned vnto the Lorde.
22 Then tydynges of these thinges came vnto the cares of the Churche, which was
in Hierusale: And they sent foorth Barnabas, that he shoulde go vnto Antioche.
23 Which when he came, and had seene the grace of God, was glad, and exhorted
them all, that with purpose of heart they woulde cleaue vnto the Lorde.
24 For he was a good man, and full of the holy ghost, and of fayth: And much
people was added vnto the Lorde.
25 Then departed Barnabas to Tarsus, for to seeke Saul.
26 And when he had founde hym, he brought hym vnto Antioche. And it came to
passe, that a whole yere they had their couersation with the Church there, &
taught much people: in so much, that the disciples of Antioche, were the first
that were called Christians.
27 And in those dayes, came prophetes from Hierusalem vnto Antioche.
28 And there stoode vp one of them named Agabus, and signified by the spirite,
that there shoulde be great dearth throughout all the worlde: which came to
passe in the dayes of Claudius Cesar.
29 Then the disciples, euery man accordyng to his abilitie, purposed to sende
succour vnto the brethren which dwelt in Iurie.
30 Which thyng they also dyd, and sent it to the elders by the handes of
Barnabas and Saul.

Chapter 12

1 At the same tyme Herode the king stretched foorth his handes to vexe certayne
of the Churche.
2 And he killed Iames the brother of Iohn with the sworde.
3 And because he sawe it pleased the Iewes, he proceaded further, and toke Peter
also. (Then were the dayes of sweete bread.)
4 And when he had caught hym, he put hym in pryson also, and delyuered hym to
foure quaternions of souldiers to be kept, intendyng after Easter to bryng hym
foorth to the people.
5 And Peter was kept in pryson: But prayer was made without ceassyng of the
Churche, vnto God for hym.
6 And when Herode woulde haue brought hym foorth vnto the people, the same nyght
slept Peter betweene two souldiers, bounde with two chaynes, and the kepers
before the doore kept the pryson.
7 And beholde, the Angel of ye Lorde was there present, and a lyght shyned in
the habitation: And he smote Peter on the syde, and stirred hym vp, saying:
Aryse vp quickly. And his chaynes fell of from his handes.
8 And the Angel sayde vnto hym: gyrde thy selfe, & bynde on thy sandales. And so
he dyd. And he sayeth vnto hym: cast thy garment about thee, and folow me.
9 And he came out and folowed hym, and wyse not that it was trueth which was
done by the Angel, but thought he had seene a vision.
10 When they were past the first and the seconde watch, they came vnto the yron
gate, that leadeth vnto the citie, which opened to them by the owne accorde: And
they went out, and passed through one streate, and foorthwith the Angel departed
from hym.
11 And when Peter was come to hym selfe, he sayde: Nowe I knowe of a suertie,
that the Lorde hath sent his Angel, and hath deliuered me out of the hande of
Herode, and from all the waytyng for, of the people of the Iewes.
12 And as he considered the thyng, he came to the house of Marie the mother of
Iohn, whose sirname was Marke, where many were gathered together in prayer.
13 As Peter knocked at the entrie doore, a damsell came foorth to hearken, named
Rhoda.
14 And when she knewe Peters voyce, she opened not the doore for gladnesse, but
ran in, and tolde howe Peter stoode before the doore.
15 And they sayde vnto her: thou art mad. But she affirmed that it was euen so.
Then sayde they: it is his Angel.
16 But Peter continued knockyng: And when they had opened the doore, and sawe
hym, they were astonyed.
17 And when he had beckened vnto the with the hande, that they myght holde their
peace, he tolde them by what meanes the Lorde had brought hym out of the pryson.
And he sayde: Go shewe these thynges vnto Iames and to the brethren. And he
departed, and went into another place.
18 Nowe assoone as it was day, there was no litle adoe among the souldiers, what
was become of Peter.
19 And when Herode had sought for hym, and founde hym not, he examined the
kepers, and commaunded them to be caryed away. And he descended from Iurie to
Cesarea, and there abode.
20 And Herode was displeased with them of Tyre and Sidon: But they came all with
one accorde to hym, and made intercession vnto Blastus the kynges chaumberlayne,
and desired peace, because their countrey was norisshed by the kyng.
21 And vpon a day appoynted, Herode arayed hym in royall apparell, and set hym
in his seate, and made an oration vnto them.
22 And the people gaue a shout saying It is the voyce of God, & not of a man.
23 And immediatly the Angel of ye Lorde smote hym, because he gaue not God ye
honour, & he was eaten of wormes, and gaue vp the ghost.
24 And the worde of God grewe and multiplied.
25 And Barnabas and Saul returned to Hierusalem, when they had fulfylled their
office, and toke with them Iohn, whose sirname was Marke.

Chapter 13

1 There was also in the Churche that was at Antioche, certayne prophetes, and
teachers: as Barnabas and Simeon that was called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene,
and Manahen, which had ben norisshed vp with Herode the tetrarch, and Saul.
2 As they ministred to the Lorde and fasted, the holy ghost sayde: Separate me
Barnabas and Saul, for the worke wherunto I haue called them.
3 And when they had fasted & prayed, & layde their hades on the, they let the
go.
4 And they, after they were sent foorth of the holy ghost, departed vnto
Seleucia, & from thence they sealed to Cyprus.
5 And when they were at Salamine, they preached the worde of God in the
synagogues of the Iewes: And they had also Iohn to their minister.
6 And when they had gone through the Ile vnto Paphos, they founde a certayne
sorcerer, a false prophete, a Iewe, whose name was Bariesu:
7 Which was with the deputie of the countrey, one Sergius Paulus, a prudent man:
The same called vnto hym Barnabas and Saul, and desired to heare the worde of
God.
8 But Elymas the sorcerer (for so is his name by interpretation) withstoode
them, and sought to turne the deputie away from the fayth.
9 Then Saul (which also is called Paul) beyng full of the holy ghost, set his
eyes on hym,
10 And sayde: O full of all subtiltie and all mischiefe, thou chylde of the
deuyll, thou enemie of all righteousnesse, wylt thou not cease to peruert the
wayes of the Lorde?
11 And nowe beholde, the hande of the Lorde is vpon thee, and thou shalt be
blynde, and not see the sunne for a season. And immediatly, there fell on hym a
myste, and a darcknesse, and he went about, seekyng them that shoulde leade hym
by the hande.
12 Then the deputie, when he sawe what was done, beleued, and wondred at the
doctrine of the Lorde.
13 Nowe when they that were with Paul, were departed fro Paphos, they came to
Perga in Pamphylia: And Iohn departed from them, and returned to Hierusalem.
14 But when they departed from Perga, they came to Antioche in Pisidia, and went
into the synagogue on ye Sabboth day, and sate downe.
15 And after the lecture of the lawe and the prophetes, the rulers of the
synagogue sent vnto them, saying: Ye men and brethren, yf ye haue any worde to
exhort the people, say on.
16 Then Paul stoode vp, and beckened with the hande, and sayde: Men of Israel, &
ye that feare God, geue audience.
17 The God of this people of Israel, chose our fathers, & exalted the people,
when they dwelt as straungers in the lande of Egypt, and with an hye arme
brought he them out of it.
18 And about the tyme of fourtie yeres, suffred he their maners in the
wyldernesse.
19 And he destroyed seuen nations in the lande of Chanaan, and deuyded their
lande to them by lot.
20 And afterwarde, he gaue vnto them iudges, about the space of foure hundred
and fyftie yeres, vnto the tyme of Samuel the prophete.
21 And afterwarde, they desired a kyng, and God gaue vnto them Saul, the sonne
of Cis, a man of the tribe of Beniamin, by the space of fourtie yeres.
22 And when he was put downe, he set vp Dauid to be their kyng, of whom he
reported, saying: I haue founde Dauid the sonne of Iesse, a man after mine owne
heart, which shall fulfyll all my wyll.
23 Of this mans seede, hath God accordyng to his promise brought foorth to
Israel, the sauiour Iesus.
24 When Iohn had first preached before his commyng, the baptisme of repentaunce
to all the people of Israel.
25 And when Iohn had fulfylled his course, he sayde: Whom ye thynke that I am,
the same am I not. But behold, there commeth one after me, whose shoes of his
feete I am not worthy to loose.
26 Ye men and brethren, chyldren of the generation of Abraham, and whosoeuer
among you feareth God, to you is the worde of this saluation sent.
27 For they that dwell at Hierusalem, and their rulers, because they knewe hym
not, nor yet the voyces of the prophetes which are read euery Sabboth day, they
haue fulfylled them in condempnyng hym:
28 And though they founde no cause of death in hym, yet desired they Pilate to
kyll hym.
29 And when they had fulfylled all that were written of hym, they toke hym downe
from the tree, and put hym in a sepulchre.
30 But God raysed hym agayne from the dead:
31 And he was seene many dayes of them which came vp with hym from Galilee to
Hierusalem, which are his witnesses vnto the people.
32 And we declare vnto you, howe that the promise which was made vnto the
fathers,
33 God hath fulfylled the same vnto vs their chyldren, in that he raysed vp
Iesus agayne. As it is written in the seconde psalme: Thou art my sonne, this
day haue I begotten thee.
34 And as concernyng that he raysed him vp from the dead, nowe no more to
returne to corruption, he sayde on this wyse: I wyll geue you ye holy thynges of
Dauid, which are faythfull.
35 Wherfore, he sayeth also in another place. Thou shalt not suffer thyne holy
one to see corruption.
36 For Dauid, after he had serued his tyme, by the wyll of God fell on slepe,
and was layde vnto his fathers, and sawe corruption:
37 But he whom God raysed agayne, sawe no corruption.
38 Be it knowen vnto you therfore, ye men & brethren, that through this man is
preached vnto you the forgeuenesse of sinnes,
39 And that by hym, all that beleue, are iustified from all thynges, from which
ye coulde not be iustified by the lawe of Moyses.
40 Beware therfore, lest that fall on you, which is spoken of in the prophetes:
41 Beholde ye despisers, and wonder, and perishe ye: for I do a worke in your
dayes, a worke which ye shal not beleue though a man declare it you.
42 And when they were gone out of the synagogue of the Iewes, the Gentiles
besought that they woulde preache these wordes to them ye next Sabboth.
43 Nowe when the congregation was broken vp, many of the Iewes and vertuous
proselytes folowed Paul & Barnabas, which spake to them, and exhorted them to
continue in the grace of God.
44 And the next Sabboth day came almost the whole citie together, to heare the
worde of God.
45 But when the Iewes sawe the people, they were full of indignation, and spake
agaynst those thynges which were spoken of Paul, speakyng against, and raylyng.
46 Then Paul and Barnabas wared bolde, and sayde: It was meete that the worde of
God shoulde first haue ben spoken to you: but seeyng ye put it from you, and
thynke your selues vnworthy of euerlastyng lyfe, loe, we turne to the Gentiles,
47 For so hath the Lorde commaunded vs. I haue made thee a lyght of the
Gentiles, that thou be the saluation vnto the ende of the worlde.
48 And when the Gentiles hearde this, they were glad, and glorified the worde of
the Lorde, and as many as were ordayned to eternall lyfe, beleued.
49 And the worde of the Lorde was publisshed throughout all the region.
50 But the Iewes moued the deuout and honest women, and the chiefe men of the
citie, and raysed persecution agaynst Paule and Barnabas, and expelled them out
of their coastes:
51 But they shoke of the dust of their feete against them, and came vnto
Iconium.
52 And the disciples were fylled with ioy, and with the holy ghost.

Chapter 14

1 And it came to passe in Iconium, that they went both together into the
synagogue of the Iewes, & so spake, that a great multitude both of the Iewes, &
also of the Grekes beleued.
2 But the vnbeleuyng Iewes, stirred vp, and corrupted the myndes of the Gentiles
agaynst the brethren.
3 Long tyme therfore abode they there, and quyt them selues boldely, with the
helpe of the Lorde, which gaue testimonie vnto the worde of his grace, and
graunted signes & wonders to be done by their handes.
4 But the multitude of the citie was deuided: and part helde with the Iewes, and
part with the Apostles.
5 And when there was an assault made both of the gentiles, and also of the
Iewes, with their rulers, to do them violence, and to stone them,
6 They were ware of it, and fled vnto Lystra & Derbe, cities of Lycaonia, and
vnto the regio that lieth rounde about:
7 And there preached the Gospell.
8 And there sate a certayne man at Lystra, weake in his feete, beyng a creple
from his mothers wombe, and neuer had walked.
9 The same hearde Paul speake: which beholdyng hym, and perceauyng that he had
sayth to be whole,
10 Sayde with a loude voyce: stande vpryght on thy feete. And he start vp, and
walked.
11 And when the people saw what Paul had done, they lyft vp their voyces, saying
in the speache of Lycaonia: Gods are come downe to vs in the lykenesse of men.
12 And they called Barnabas Iupiter, and Paul Mercurius, because he was the
chiefe speaker.
13 Then Iupiters priest, which was before their citie, brought oxen and
garlandes vnto the doore, and woulde haue done sacrifice with the people.
14 Which when the Apostles, Barnabas & Paul heard of, they rent their clothes,
and ran in among the people, crying,
15 And saying: Sirs, why do ye these thynges? We are mortall men lyke vnto you,
and preach vnto you, that ye shoulde turne from these vanities, vnto the lyuyng
God, which made heauen and earth, and the sea, and all thynges that are therin.
16 The which in tymes past suffred all nations to walke in their owne wayes.
17 Neuerthelesse, he left not hym selfe without witnesse, in that he shewed his
benefites from heauen, in geuyng vs rayne and fruitefull seasons, fillyng our
heartes with foode and gladnesse.
18 And with these sayinges, scarce refrayned they the people, that they had not
done sacrifice vnto them.
19 Then thyther came certayne Iewes from Antioche and Iconium: which, whe they
had perswaded the people, and had stoned Paule, drewe hym out of the citie,
supposyng he had ben dead.
20 Howbeit, as the disciples stoode round about hym, he arose vp, and came into
the citie: And the next day, he departed with Barnabas to Derbe.
21 And when they had preached to that citie, and had taught many, they returned
agayne to Lystra, and to Iconium, and Antioche,
22 And strengthed the disciples soules agayne, and exhorted them to continue in
the fayth, and that we must through much tribulation enter into the kyngdome of
God.
23 And when they had ordeyned them elders by election in euery Churche, and had
prayed, with fastyng, they commended them to the Lorde, on whom they beleued.
24 And when they had gone throughout Pisidia, they came to Pamphylia,
25 And when they had spoken the worde in Perga, they descended into Attalia,
26 And thence departed by shippe to Antioche, from whence they were committed
vnto the grace of God, to the worke which they fulfylled.
27 And when they were come, and had gathered the Churche together, they
rehearsed all that God had done with them, & howe he had opened the doore of
fayth vnto the gentiles.
28 And there they abode long tyme with the disciples.

Chapter 15

1 And certayne men whiche came downe fro Iurie, taught the brethren, except ye
be circumcised after the maner of Moyses, ye can not be saued.
2 So, when there was rysen discention and disputyng, not a litle vnto Paul and
Barnabas, agaynst them: they determyned that Paul and Barnabas, and certayne
other of them, shoulde go vp to Hierusalem, vnto the Apostles and elders, about
this question.
3 And after they were brought on their way by ye Churche, they passed through
Phenices and Samaria, declaryng the conuersation of the gentiles, and they
brought great ioy vnto all the brethen.
4 And when they were come to Hierusalem, they were receaued of ye Church, and of
the Apostles and elders: And they declared all thynges that God had done with
them.
5 Then rose vp certayne of the sect of the pharisees, which dyd beleue, saying
that it was needefull to circumcise the, and to commaunde to kepe the lawe of
Moyses.
6 And the Apostles and elders came together, for to consider of this matter.
7 And when there had ben much disputyng, Peter rose vp, and sayde vnto the: Ye
men & brethren, ye knowe how that a good while ago, God did chose among vs, that
the gentiles by my mouth, shoulde heare the worde of the Gospel, and beleue.
8 And God whiche knoweth the heartes, bare them witnesse, and gaue vnto them the
holy ghost, euen as he dyd vnto vs:
9 And put no difference betwene vs and them, purifiyng their heartes by fayth.
10 Nowe therfore, why tempt ye God, to put on the disciples neckes, the yoke
which neither our fathers nor we were able to beare?
11 But we beleue, that through the grace of the Lorde Iesu Christe, we shalbe
saued, euen as they.
12 Then all the multitude was scilent, and gaue audience to Barnabas and Paul,
which tolde what signes and wonders, God had shewed among the gentiles by them.
13 And when they helde their peace, Iames aunswered, saying: Men and brethren,
hearken vnto me.
14 Simeon tolde, howe God at the begynnyng dyd visite, to receaue of the
gentiles, a people in his name.
15 And to this agree the wordes of the prophetes, as it is written:
16 After this I wyll returne, and wyll buylde agayne the tabernacle of Dauid,
which is fallen downe: and that which is fallen in decay of it, wyll I buylde
agayne, and I wyll set it vp:
17 That the residue of men myght seke after the Lorde, and all the gentiles vpon
whom my name is called, sayth the Lorde, which doth all these thynges.
18 Knowen vnto God are all his workes from the begynnyng of the worlde.
19 Wherfore my sentence is, that we trouble not them, which from among the
gentiles, are turned to God:
20 But that we write vnto them, that they absteyne themselues from fylthynesse
of idols, and fro fornication, and from strangled, and from blood.
21 For Moyses of olde tyme, hath in euery citie, them that preache hym in the
synagogues, when he is read euery Sabboth day.
22 Then pleased it the Apostles & elders, with the whole Church, to sende chosen
me of their owne companie to Antioch, with Paul and Barnabas: That is Iudas,
whose sirname was Barsabas, and Silas, which were chiefe men among the brethren,
23 And wrote letters by them, after this maner.
24 The Apostles, and elders, & brethren, sende greetinges vnto ye brethren,
which are of the gentiles in Antiochia, Syria, & Cilicia. Forasmuch as we haue
heard, that certayne which departed from vs, haue troubled you with wordes, &
cumbred your myndes, saying ye must be circumcised and kepe the lawe, to who we
gaue no such commaundent:
25 It seemed therfore to vs a good thing, when we were come together with one
accorde, to sende chosen men vnto you, with our beloued Barnabas and Paul,
26 Men that haue ieoparded their lyues, for ye name of our Lorde Iesus Christe.
27 We haue sent therefore Iudas and Silas, which shall also tell you ye same
thynges by mouth.
28 For it seemed good to the holy ghost, and to vs, to charge you with no more
then these necessarie thynges That is to say
29 That ye abstayne from thynges offered to idols, and from blood, and from
strangled, and from fornication: From which yf ye kepe your selues, ye shall do
well. So fare ye well.
30 Nowe therfore, when they were departed, they came to Antioche, and gathered
the multitude together, and delyuered the epistle.
31 Which when they had read, they reioyced of the consolation.
32 And Iudas, and Silas, beyng prophetes, exhorted ye brethren with many wordes,
and strengthed them.
33 And after they had taryed there a space, they were let go in peace of the
brethren, vnto the Apostles.
34 Notwithstandyng, it pleased Silas to abyde there styll.
35 Paul also and Barnabas continued in Antioche, teachyng and preachyng the
worde of the Lorde, with other many.
36 But after a certayne space, Paul sayde vnto Barnabas: Let vs go agayne, and
visite our brethren, in euery citie where we haue shewed ye worde of the Lorde,
and see howe they do.
37 And Barnabas gaue counsell to take with them Iohn, whose sirname was Marke.
38 But Paul woulde not take hym vnto their companie, which departed from them
from Pamphylia, and went not with them to the worke.
39 And the contention was so sharpe betwene the, that they departed a sunder,
one from the other, and so Barnabas toke Marke, & sayled vnto Cypers.
40 And Paul chose Silas, and departed, beyng committed of the brethren vnto the
grace of God.
41 And he went through Cyria & Cilicia, stablisshyng the Churches.

Chapter 16

1 Then came he to Derbe and to Lystra: And beholde, a certayne disciple was
there, named Timotheus, a womans sonne which was a Iewesse, and beleued: but his
father was a Greke.
2 Of whom the brethren that were at Lystra and Iconium, reported well.
3 Paul woulde that he should go foorth with hym, and toke & circumcised hym,
because of the Iewes, which were in those quarters: for they knewe all, that his
father was a Greke.
4 And as they went through the cities, they delyuered them the decrees for to
kepe, that were ordayned of ye Apostles and elders, which were at Hierusalem.
5 And so were the Churches stablisshed in the fayth, and encreased in number
dayly.
6 Nowe when they had gone throughout Phrygia, and the region of Galatia, and
were forbidden of the holy ghost to preache the worde in Asia,
7 They commyng to Mysia, sought to go into Bithynia: but the spirite suffred
them not.
8 And they passyng through Mysia, came downe to Troada.
9 And a vision appeared to Paul in the nyght: There stoode a man of Macedonia,
and prayed hym, saying: Come into Macedonia, and helpe vs.
10 And after he had seene ye visio, immediatly we prepared to go into Macedonia,
beyng certified that ye Lorde had called vs, for to preache the Gospel vnto
them.
11 When we loosed foorth then from Troada, we came with a strayght course to
Samothracia, and the next day to Neapolis:
12 And from thence, to Philippos, which is the chiefe citie in the partes of
Macedonia, and a free citie: And we were in that citie abydyng certayne dayes.
13 And on the day of the Sabbothes, we went out of the citie, besydes a ryuer,
where prayer was wont to be made: And we sate downe, and spake vnto the women
which resorted thyther.
14 And a certayne woman, named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the citie of the
Thyatirians, which worshipped God, gaue vs audience: Whose hearte the Lorde
opened, that she attended vnto the thynges which Paul spake.
15 And when she was baptized, and her householde, she besought vs, saying: Yf ye
haue iudged me to be faythfull to the Lorde, come into my house, and abyde
there. And she constrayned vs.
16 And it came to passe, as we went to prayer, a certayne damsell, possessed
with a spirite of southsaying met vs: which brought her maisters much vantage
with southsaying.
17 The same folowed Paul and vs, and cryed, saying: These men are the seruauntes
of the most hye God, which shewe vnto vs the way of saluation.
18 And this dyd she many dayes. But Paul not content, turned about, & sayde to
the spirite, I commaunde thee in the name of Iesu Christe, that thou come out of
her. And he came out the same houre.
19 And when her maisters sawe that the hope of their gaynes was gone, they
caught Paul & Silas, and drewe them into the market place, vnto the rulers,
20 And brought them to the officers, saying: These men trouble our citie, being
Iewes:
21 And preache ordinaunces, which are not lawfull for vs to receaue, neither to
obserue, seeyng we are Romanes.
22 And the people ran agaynst them, and the officers rent their clothes, and
commaunded them to be beaten with roddes.
23 And when they had beaten them sore, they cast them into pryson, commaundyng
the iayler of the pryson to kepe them diligently.
24 Which when he had receaued such commaundement, thrust them into the inner
pryson, and made their feete fast in the stockes.
25 And at mydnyght Paul and Silas prayed, and lauded God. And the prysoners
hearde them.
26 And sodenly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundation of the
pryson was shaken, and immediatly all the doores opened, and euery mans bandes
were loosed.
27 When the keper of the pryson waked out of his sleepe, and sawe the pryson
doores open, he drewe out his sworde and woulde haue kylled hym selfe, supposyng
that the prysoners had ben fled.
28 But Paul cryed with a loude voyce, saying: Do thy selfe no harme, for we are
all here.
29 Then he called for a lyght, and sprang in, and came tremblyng, and fell downe
before Paul and Silas,
30 And brought them out, & sayde: Syrs, what must I do to be saued?
31 And they sayde: beleue on the Lorde Iesus Christe, and thou shalt be saued,
and thy householde.
32 And they spake vnto hym the worde of the Lorde, and to all that were in his
house.
33 And he toke them the same houre of the nyght, and wasshed their woundes, and
was baptized hym selfe, & all they of his householde strayghtway.
34 And when he had brought them into his house, he set meat before them, and
ioyed that he with all his householde beleued on God.
35 And when it was day, the officers sent the sergeauntes, saying: Let those men
go.
36 And the keper of the pryson tolde this saying to Paul, the officers haue sent
worde to loose you. Nowe therfore, get you hence, and go in peace.
37 Then sayde Paul vnto them: They haue beaten vs openly vncondempned, beyng
Romanes, and haue cast vs into pryson: and nowe woulde they thrust vs out
priuily? Nay veryly, but let them come them selues, and fet vs out.
38 And the sergeaunts tolde these wordes vnto the officers, and they feared when
they hearde that they were Romanes.
39 And they came and besought them, and brought them out, and desired the to
depart out of the citie.
40 And they went out of the pryson, and entred into the house of Lydia, & when
they had seene the brethren, they comforted them, and departed.

Chapter 17

1 As they made their iourney thorowe Amphipolis, and Apollonia, they came to
Thessalonica, where was a synagogue of the Iewes.
2 And Paul, as his maner was, went in vnto them, and three Sabboth dayes
disputed with the out of the scriptures,
3 Openyng and alleagyng, that Christ must needes haue suffred, and rysen agayne
from the dead, and that this is Christe Iesus, which I preache to you.
4 And some of them beleued, and ioyned with Paul and Silas, and of the deuout
Grekes a great multitude, and of the chiefe women not a fewe.
5 But the Iewes whiche beleued not, moued with enuie, toke vnto them certaine
vagaboundes and euyll men, and gathered a companie, and set all the citie on a
rore, and made assault vnto the house of Iason, & sought to bryng them out to
the people.
6 And when they founde them not, they drewe Iason and certaine brethren vnto the
heades of the citie, crying: these that trouble the world, are come hyther also,
7 Whom Iason hath receaued priuily. And these al do contrary to the decrees of
Caesar, saying that there is another kyng one Iesus.
8 And they troubled the people, and the officers of the citie, when they hearde
these thynges.
9 And when they were sufficiently aunswered of Iason, and of the other, they let
them go.
10 And the brethren immediatlye sent away Paul & Silas by nyght, vnto Berea:
Which when they were come thyther, they entred into the synagogue of the Iewes.
11 These were the noblest of birth among them of Thessalonica, which receaued
the worde with all redynesse of mynde, and searched the scriptures dayly,
whether those thynges were so.
12 Therfore many of them beleued. Also of honest women which were Grekes, and of
men not a fewe.
13 But when the Iewes of Thessalonica had knowledge that ye worde of God was
preached of Paul at Berea, they came thyther and moued the people.
14 And then immediatly the brethren sent away Paul, to go as it were to the sea:
but Silas & Timotheus abode there styll.
15 And they that guyded Paul, brought hym vnto Athens, and receaued a
commaundement vnto Silas & Timotheus for to come to hym with speede, & went
their way.
16 Whyle Paul wayted for them at Athens, his spirite was moued in hym, when he
sawe the citie geue to worshippyng of idoles.
17 Therfore disputed he in the synagogue with the Iewes, and with the deuout
persons, and in the market dayly with them that came vnto hym by chaunce.
18 Then certaine philosophers of the Epicures, and of the Stoickes disputed with
hym. And some saide: What wyll this babler say? Other some, he seemeth to be a
setter foorth of newe gods: because he preached vnto them Iesus, and the
resurrection.
19 And they toke hym, and brought him into Marce streate, saying: Maye we not
knowe what this newe doctrine wherof thou speakest is?
20 For thou bryngest certaine straunge thinges to our eares: We would knowe
therfore what these thynges meane.
21 For all the Athenians and straungers which were there, gaue them selues to
nothing els, but either to tell or to heare some newe thyng.
22 Then Paul stoode in the myddes of Marce streate, and sayde: ye men of Athens,
I perceaue that in all thynges ye are to superstitious.
23 For as I passed by, and behelde the maner howe ye worship your gods, I founde
an aulter, wherin was written, vnto the vnknowe god. Whom ye then ignorauntly
worship, him shewe I vnto you.
24 God that made the worlde, & all that are in it, seing that he is Lorde of
heaue and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with handes:
25 Neither is worshipped with mens handes, as though he needed of any thing,
seing he him selfe geueth life and breath to all, euery where.
26 And hath made of one blood all nations of men, for to dwell on all ye face of
the earth, & hath determined the tymes before appoynted, and also the boundes of
their habitation:
27 That they shoulde seke the Lorde, yf perhappes they myght haue felt and
founde hym, though he be not farre fro euery one of vs.
28 For in hym we liue, and moue, & haue our beyng, as certaine of your owne
poetes sayde: for we are also his offpryng.
29 Forasmuch then as we are the offpring of God, we ought not to thynke that the
Godhead is lyke vnto golde, siluer, or stone, grauen by art, and mans deuice.
30 And the tyme of this ignoraunce God wyncked at: but nowe byddeth all men
euery where to repent:
31 Because he hath appoynted a day in the which he wyll iudge the worlde in
ryghteousnesse, by that man by whom he hath appoynted, and hath offered fayth to
all men, in that he hath raysed hym from the dead.
32 And when they hearde of the resurrection from the dead, some mocked, and
other sayde, we wyll heare thee agayne of this matter.
33 So Paul departed from among them.
34 Howe be it, certaine men claue vnto hym, and beleued: among the whiche was
Denys Areopagita, and a woman named Damaris, & other with them.

Chapter 18

1 After these thynges, Paul departed fro Athens, & came to Corinth,
2 And found a certaine Iewe, named Aquila, borne in Ponthus, lately come fro
Italie with his wyfe Priscilla (because that Claudius had commaunded all Iewes
to depart from Rome) and he came vnto them.
3 And because he was of the same craft, he abode with them, and wrought (for
their craft was to make tentes)
4 And he disputed in the synagogue euery Sabboth, and exhorted the Iewes and the
Grekes.
5 And when Silas and Timotheus were come fro Macedonia, Paul was constrayned by
the spirite to testifie to the Iewes that Iesus was Christe.
6 And when they sayde contrary, and blasphemed, he shoke his rayment, & said
vnto them: Your blood be vpon your owne heades. From hencefoorth wyll I go
blamelesse vnto the gentiles.
7 And he departed thence, and entred into a certaine mans house, named Iustus, a
worshipper of God, whose house ioyned harde to the synagogue.
8 And one Crispus the chiefe ruler of the synagogue beleued on the Lorde, with
all his housholde: and many of the Corinthians hearyng, beleued, and were
baptized.
9 Then spake the Lorde to Paul in the nyght by a vision: Be not afrayde, but
speake, and holde not thy peace:
10 For I am with thee, and no man shal inuade thee to hurt thee. For I haue much
people in this citie.
11 And he continued there a yere and sixe monethes, and taught the word of God
among them.
12 And when Gallio was the deputie of Achaia, the Iewes made insurrection with
one accord against Paul, & brought hym to the iudgement seate,
13 Saying: This felow counselleth men to worship God contrary to the lawe.
14 And when Paul nowe was about to open his mouth, Gallio sayde vnto the Iewes:
Yf it were a matter of wrong, or an euyll deede, O ye Iewes, reason woulde that
I shoulde beare with you:
15 But yf it be a question of wordes and names, or of your lawe, loke ye to it
your selues: for I wyll be no iudge of such matters.
16 And he draue them fro the iudgement seate.
17 Then all the Grekes toke Softenes the chiefe ruler of ye synagogue, & smote
hym before the iudgement seate: And Gallio cared for none of those thinges.
18 And Paul after this, taried there yet a good whyle, and then toke his leaue
of the brethren, & sayled thence into Syria, (Aquila & Priscilla accompanying
him) And he shore his head in Cenchrea, for he had a vowe.
19 And he came to Ephesus, and left the there, but he hym selfe entred into the
synagogue, & reasoned with ye Iewes.
20 When they desired him to tary longer tyme with them, he consented not:
21 But bade them farewell, saying, I must needes at this feast that commeth be
in Hierusalem: but I wyll returne agayne vnto you yf God wyll. And he sayled
from Ephesus.
22 And whe he was come vnto Cesarea, and ascended vp & saluted the Churche, he
went to Antioche.
23 And whe he had taried there a while, he departed, and went ouer al the
countrey of Galatia and Phrygia by order, strengthyng all the disciples.
24 And a certaine Iewe, named Apollos, borne at Alexandria, came to Ephesus, an
eloquent man, and myghtie in the scriptures.
25 The same was infourmed in the way of the Lorde, and spake feruently in the
spirite, & taught diligently the thynges of the Lorde, and knewe but the
baptisme of Iohn only.
26 And the same began to speake boldly in the synagogue. Whom when Aquila and
Priscilla had hearde, they toke him vnto them, and expounded vnto him the way of
God more perfectly.
27 And when he was disposed to go into Achaia, the brethre wrote, exhorting the
disciples to receaue hym: Which when he was come, helped them much which had
beleued through grace.
28 For he ouercame the Iewes myghtilye, and that openly, shewyng by the
scriptures, that Iesus was Christe.

Chapter 19

1 And it came to passe, yt whyle Apollo was at Corinth, Paul passed through the
vpper coastes, and came to Ephesus, and founde certaine disciples,
2 And sayde vnto them: Haue ye receaued the holy ghost sence ye beleued? And
they saide vnto hym: We haue not hearde whether there be any holy ghost or no.
3 And he sayde vnto them: Unto what then were ye baptized? And they sayde: vnto
Iohns baptisme.
4 Then sayde Paul: Iohn veryly baptized with the baptisme of repentaunce, saying
vnto the people, that they should beleue on hym which shoulde come after hym,
that is, on Christe Iesus.
5 When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lorde Iesu.
6 And whe Paul had layde his handes vpon them, the holy ghost came on the, and
they spake with tongues, and prophesied.
7 And all the men were about twelue.
8 And he went into the synagogue, and spake boldlye for the space of three
monethes, disputyng & perswadyng those thynges that appertayne to the kyngdome
of God.
9 But when diuers waxed harde hearted, and beleued not, but spake euyll of the
way
10 And this continued by the space of two yeres, so that all they whiche dwelt
in Asia, hearde the worde of the Lord Iesu, both Iewes and Grekes.
11 And God wrought speciall miracles by the handes of Paul.
12 So that from his body, were brought vnto the sicke, napkins, and partlettes,
and the diseases departed from them, & the euyll spirites went out of them.
13 Then certaine of the vagabounde Iewes, exorcistes, toke vpon them to call
ouer them which had euyll spirites, the name of the Lorde Iesus, saying: We
adiure you by Iesus, whom Paul preacheth.
14 And there were seuen sonnes of one Sceua a Iewe, and chiefe of ye priestes,
which dyd so.
15 And the euyll spirite aunswered, and sayde, Iesus I knowe, and Paul I knowe:
but who are ye?
16 And the man in whom the euyll spirite was, ran on them, & ouercame the, &
preuayled agaynst them, so that they fled out of that house naked & wouded.
17 And this was knowen to all ye Iewes & Grekes also which dwelt at Ephesus, and
feare came on them all, & the name of the Lorde Iesus was magnified.
18 And many that beleued, came & confessed, and shewed their workes.
19 Many also of the whiche vsed curious craftes, brought their bookes, & burned
them before all men, and they counted the price of them, & founde it fiftie
thousande peeces of syluer.
20 So myghtyly grew the word of God, and preuayled.
21 After these thinges were ended, Paul purposed in the spirite, when he had
passed ouer Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Hierusalem, saying: After I haue ben
there, I must also see Rome.
22 So sent he into Macedonia two of them that ministred vnto hym, Timotheus and
Erastus, but he hym selfe remayned in Asia for a season.
23 And the same time there arose no litle a do about that way.
24 For a certaine man, named Demetrius, a syluer smyth, which made shrines for
Diana, was not a litle beneficiall vnto the craftes men.
25 Whom he called together, with the workemen of like occupation, and sayde:
Sirs, ye knowe that by this craft we haue aduauntage.
26 Moreouer, ye see and heare, that not alone at Ephesus, but almost throughout
all Asia, this Paul hath perswaded and turned away much people, saying that they
be not gods which are made with handes.
27 So that not only this our craft commeth into peryll to be set at naught, but
also that the temple of ye great goddesse Diana should be despised, and her
magnificence should be destroyed, whom all Asia and the worlde worshippeth.
28 And when they hearde these sayinges, they were full of wrath, and cryed out,
saying: great is Diana of ye Ephesians.
29 And all the citie was on a rore, & they russhed into the common hall with one
assent, and caught Gaius & Aristarcus, men of Macedonia, Paules companions.
30 When Paule woulde haue entred in vnto ye people, the disciples suffred hym
not.
31 But certaine of ye chiefe of Asia, which were his friendes, sent vnto hym,
desiryng hym that he would not preasse into the common hall.
32 Some therfore cryed one thyng, and some another, and the assemblie was all
out of quiet, and the more part knew not wherfore they were come together.
33 And they drewe Alexander out of the multitude, the Iewes thrustyng hym
forwardes. And Alexander beckened with the hande, and would haue geuen the
people an aunswere.
34 But when they knewe that he was a Iewe, there arose a shoute almost for the
space of two houres, of all men, crying: great is Diana of the Ephesians.
35 And when the towne clarke had pacified the people, he sayde: Ye men of
Ephesus, what man is it that knoweth not how that the citie of the Ephesians is
a worshipper of the great goddesse Diana, and of the image whiche came downe
from Iupiter?
36 Seing then that these thinges can not be spoken against, ye ought to be
contet, and to do nothyng rasshely.
37 For ye haue brought hyther these men, which are neither robbers of Churches
nor yet despisers of your goddesse.
38 Wherfore, yf Demetrius & the craftes men which are with hym, haue a matter
agaynst any man, the lawe is open, and there are deputies, let them accuse one
another.
39 But yf ye inquire any thyng concernyng other matters, it shalbe determined in
a lawfull assemblie.
40 For we are in ieopardie to be accused of this dayes vprore, forasmuch as
there is no cause, wherby we may geue a reckenyng of this concourse of people.
41 And when he had thus spoken, he let the assemblie depart.

Chapter 20

1 And after the vprore was ceassed, Paul called the disciples, & toke his leaue
of them, and departed, for to go into Macedonia.
2 And whe he had gone ouer those parties, and had geuen them a long exhortation,
he came into Grece.
3 And there abode three monethes. And when the Iewes layde wayte for hym as he
was about to sayle into Syria, he purposed to returne through Macedonia.
4 And there accompanied him into Asia Sopater of Berrea, and of the
Thessalonians Aristarcus and Secundus, and Gaius of Derbe and Timotheus, and out
of Asia Tychicus and Trophimus.
5 These going before, taried vs at Troas.
6 And we sayled away fro Philippos, after the dayes of sweete bread, & came vnto
the to Troas in fiue dayes, where we abode seuen dayes.
7 And vpon one of the Sabboth dayes, when the disciples came together for to
breake bread, Paul reasoned with the, redy to depart on the morowe, and
continued the worde vnto mydnyght.
8 And there were many lyghtes in an vpper chamber, where they were gathered
together.
9 And there sate in a window a certaine young man, named Eutychus, being fallen
into a deepe sleepe: And as Paul was long reasonyng, he was the more ouercome
with sleepe, and fell downe from the thirde loft, and was taken vp dead.
10 But whe Paul went downe, he fell on hym, and imbraced hym, & saide: make
nothyng a do, for his lyfe is in hym.
11 And so when he was come vp againe, and had broken bread and eaten, & talked a
long while, euen tyll the morning, and so he departed.
12 And they brought the young man alyue, and were not a litle comforted.
13 And we went afore to shippe, & loosed vnto Asson, there to receaue Paul: For
so had he appoynted, and woulde hym selfe go a foote.
14 And when he was come to vs to Asso, we toke hym in, and came to Mytilene.
15 And we sayled thence, and came the next day ouer agaynst Chios: and the next
daye we arryued at Samos, and taryed at Trogylliu. The next day we came to
Miletum:
16 For Paul had determined to sayle ouer by Ephesus, because he would not spend
the tyme in Asia. For he hasted, yf it were possible for hym, to kepe at
Hierusalem the day of Pentecost.
17 And from Miletum, he sent to Ephesus, and called the elders of the Church.
18 Which when they were come to hym, he saide vnto them: Ye knowe from the first
daye that I came into Asia, after what maner I haue ben with you at all seasons.
19 Seruyng the Lorde with all humblenesse of mynde, and with many teares, and
temptations whiche came vnto me by the layinges awayte of the Iewes:
20 And howe I kept backe nothing that was profitable vnto you, but haue shewed
you, and haue taught you openly, and throughout euery house.
21 Witnessyng both to the Iewes & also to the Grekes, the repentaunce that is
towarde God, and the fayth whiche is towarde our Lorde Iesus.
22 And nowe beholde I go bounde in the spirite vnto Hierusale, not knowyng the
thynges that shall come vnto me:
23 But that the holy ghost witnesseth in euery citie, saying that bondes &
trouble abyde me.
24 But none of these thynges moue me, neither is my lyfe deare vnto my selfe, so
that I myght fulfyll my course with ioy, and the ministerie whiche I haue
receaued of the Lorde Iesu, to testifie the Gospell of the grace of God.
25 And nowe beholde, I am sure that hencefoorth ye al, through who I haue gone
preachyng the kyngdome of God, shall see my face no more.
26 Wherefore, I take you to recorde this day, that I am pure from the blood of
all men.
27 For I haue kept nothyng backe, but haue shewed you all ye counsell of God.
28 Take heede therfore vnto your selues, and to all the flocke, ouer the which
the holy ghost hath made you ouerseers, to rule the Church of God, which he hath
purchased with his owne blood.
29 For I knowe this, that after my departyng, shall greeuous wolfes enter in
among you, not sparyng the flocke.
30 Also of your owne selues shall men aryse, speakyng peruerse thynges, to drawe
disciples after them.
31 Therfore watch, and remember that by the space of three yeres I ceassed not
to warne euery one night and day with teares.
32 And nowe brethren I commende you to God, and to the worde of his grace, which
is able to buylde further, and to geue you an inheritaunce among all the which
are sanctified.
33 I haue desired no mans syluer, golde, or vesture.
34 Yea, ye your selues knowe, that these handes haue ministred vnto my
necessities, and to them that were with me.
35 I haue shewed you all thinges, howe that so labouryng ye ought to receaue the
weake, and to remember ye wordes of the Lorde Iesu, howe that he said, it is
more blessed to geue, then to receaue.
36 And when he hadde thus spoken, he kneled downe, & prayed with them all.
37 And they all wepte sore, and fell on Paules necke, and kyssed hym,
38 Sorowyng most of all for the wordes whiche he spake, that they shoulde see
his face no more. And they accompanied hym vnto the shippe.

Chapter 21

1 And when it came to passe that we had lauched forth, and were departed from
them, we came with a straight course vnto Choos, and the day folowyng vnto the
Rhodes, and from thence vnto Patara.
2 And when we had gotten a shippe that woulde sayle vnto Phenice, we went
aboorde, and set foorth.
3 Nowe when Cyprus began to appeare vnto vs, we left it on the left hande, and
sayled into Syria, and came vnto Tyre: For there the shippe vnladed the burthen.
4 And when we had founde disciples, we taryed there seuen dayes: who said to
Paule through the spirite, that he shoulde not go vp to Hierusalem.
5 And when the dayes were ended, we departed, and went our way, and they all
brought vs on our way, with wyues and chyldren, tyll we were come out of the
citie. And we kneeled downe in the shore, and prayed.
6 And whe we had taken our leaue one of another, we toke shippe, and they
returned home agayne.
7 When we had full ended the course from Tyre, we went downe to Ptolomaida, and
saluted the brethren, and abode with them one day.
8 And the next daye, they that were of Paules companie departed, and came vnto
Cesarea: And we entred into the house of Philip the Euangelist (which was one of
the seuen) and abode with hym.
9 And the same man had foure daughters, virgins, which dyd prophesie.
10 And as we taryed there a good many of dayes, there came a certaine prophete
from Iurie, named Agabus.
11 And when he was come vnto vs, he toke Paules girdle, & bounde his owne handes
and feete, & sayde: Thus sayth the holy ghost, so shall the Iewes at Hierusalem
bynde the man that oweth this girdle, and shall delyuer hym into the handes of
the gentiles.
12 And when we hearde these thynges, both we and other whiche were of the same
place, besought him that he would not go vp to Hierusalem.
13 Then Paule aunswered: What do ye weepyng and vexyng myne heart? For I am
redy, not to be bounde only, but also to dye at Hierusalem for the name of the
Lorde Iesu.
14 And when we coulde not turne his mynde, we ceassed, saying: the wyll of the
Lorde be fulfylled.
15 And after those dayes, we toke vp our burthens, and went vp to Hierusalem.
16 There went with vs also certayne of the disciples of Cesarea, & brought with
them one Mnason of Cyprus, an olde disciple, with whom we shoulde lodge.
17 And when we were come to Hierusalem, the brethren receaued vs gladly.
18 And on the morowe, Paule went in with vs vnto Iames, and all the elders came
together.
19 And when he had saluted them, he tolde by order all thinges that God had
wrought among the gentiles by his ministerie.
20 And when they hearde it, they glorified the Lorde, & sayde vnto hym: Thou
seest brother, howe many thousande Iewes there are which beleue, & they are all
earnest folowers of the lawe.
21 And they are infourmed of thee, that thou teachest all the Iewes whiche are
among the Gentiles to forsake Moyses, and sayest that they ought not to
circucise their chyldren, neither to walke after the customes.
22 What is it therefore? The multitude must needes come together: For they shall
heare that thou art come.
23 Do therfore this that we saye to thee. We haue foure men, which haue a vow on
them:
24 Them take, & purifie thy selfe with them, and do coste on them, that they may
shaue their heades: And all shall knowe, that those thynges whiche they haue
hearde concernyng thee, are nothyng, but that thou thy selfe also walkest and
kepest the lawe.
25 As touchyng the Gentiles which beleue, we haue written and concluded, that
they obserue no suche thyng, saue only that they kepe them selues from thynges
offered to idoles, & from blood, and from strangled, & from fornication.
26 Then Paul toke the men, and the next day purifiyng hym selfe with them,
entred into the temple, declaryng the accomplishement of the dayes of the
purification, vntyll that an offeryng should be offered for euery one of them.
27 And when the seuen dayes were almost ended, the Iewes which were of Asia,
when they sawe hym in the temple, moued al the people, & layde handes on hym,
28 Crying: Men of Israel helpe. This is the man that teacheth all men euery
where against the people, and the lawe, and this place: He hath also brought
Grekes into the temple, and hath polluted this holy place.
29 For they had seene before with hym in the citie Trophimus an Ephesian, whom
they supposed that Paul had brought into the temple.
30 And all the citie was moued, and the people swarmed together: And they toke
Paul & drewe hym out of the temple, & foorthwith the doores were shut.
31 And as they went about to kyll hym, tydynges came vnto the hye captaine of
the souldiers, that all Hierusalem was in an vprore.
32 Which immediatly toke souldiers, and vnder captaines, and ran downe vnto
them: And when they sawe the vpper captaine and the souldiers, they left smytyng
of Paul.
33 Then the chiefe captaine came neare, & toke hym, and comaunded hym to be
bounde with two chaynes, & demaunded who he was, & what he had done.
34 And some cryed one thyng, some another, among the people. And when he coulde
not knowe the certaintie for the rage, he commaunded him to be caryed into the
castle.
35 And when he came vpon the stayres, it was so that he was borne of the
souldyers for the violence of the people.
36 For the multitude of the people folowed after, crying, away with hym.
37 And when Paul began to be caryed into the castle, he saide vnto the hye
captaine: May I speake vnto thee? Who sayde: Canst thou speake Greke?
38 Art not thou that Egyptian which before these dayes madest an vprore, and
leddest out into the wyldernesse foure thousande men that were murtherers?
39 But Paul saide: I am a man which am a Iewe, of Tarsus, a citie in Cilicia, a
citezin of no vyle citie, and I beseche the suffer me to speake vnto the people.
40 And when he had geuen hym licence, Paul stoode on the stayres, & beckened
with ye hande vnto the people: And whe there was made a great scilece, he spake
vnto them in the Hebrue tongue, saying:

Chapter 22

1 Men, brethren, & fathers, heare ye mine aunswer whiche I make vnto you.
2 (And when they heard that he spake in the Hebrue tongue to the, they kept ye
more scilence. And he saith:)
3 I am verily a man which am a Iewe, borne in Tarsus in Cilicia, and yet brought
vp in this citie at ye feete of Gamaliel, and infourmed accordyng to the perfect
maner of the lawe of ye fathers, and was zelous towarde God, as ye all are this
same day.
4 And I persecuted this way vnto the death, byndyng & delyueryng into prison
both men and women,
5 As also the chiefe priest doth beare me witnesse, and all the estate of the
elders: of whom also I receaued letters vnto the brethren, and went to Damascus,
to bryng them whiche were there, bounde vnto Hierusalem for to be punisshed.
6 And it came to passe, that as I made my iourney, & was come nye vnto Damascus,
about noone, sodeinly there shone from heauen a great light rounde about me.
7 And I fell vnto the earth, and hearde a voyce saying vnto me: Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me:
8 And I aunswered: Who art thou Lorde? And he sayde vnto me: I am Iesus of
Nazareth whom thou persecutest.
9 And they that were with me, sawe veryly a lyght, and were afrayde: but they
hearde not the voyce of hym that spake with me.
10 And I saide: What shall I do Lord? And the Lorde sayde vnto me: Aryse, and go
into Damascus, & there it shalbe tolde thee of all thynges whiche are appoynted
for thee to do.
11 And when I sawe nothyng for the bryghtnesse of the lyght, I was ledde by the
hande of the that were with me, and came into Damascus.
12 And one Ananias, a deuout man as perteynyng to the lawe, hauyng a good report
of all the Iewes whiche there dwelt,
13 Came vnto me, and stoode, and sayde vnto me: Brother Saul, receaue thy syght.
And the same houre I receaued my syght, and sawe hym.
14 And he said: The God of our fathers hath ordeyned thee before, that thou
shouldest knowe his wyll, and see that iuste one, and shouldest heare the voyce
of his mouth.
15 For thou shalt be his witnesse vnto all men, of those thynges which thou hast
seene and hearde:
16 And nowe why taryest thou? aryse, & be baptized, & wasshe away thy sinnes, in
callyng on the name of the Lorde.
17 And it came to passe, that whe I was come agayne to Hierusalem, and prayed in
the temple, I was in a traunce,
18 And sawe him, saying vnto me: Make haste and get thee quickly out of
Hierusalem: for they wyl not receaue thy witnesse concernyng me.
19 And I sayde: Lord, they knowe that I prisoned and beat in euery synagogue
them that beleued on thee.
20 And when the blood of thy wytnesse Steuen was shedde, I also stoode by, and
consented vnto his death, and kept the rayment of them that slue hym.
21 And he sayde vnto me: depart, for I wyll sende thee farre hence vnto the
gentiles.
22 And they gaue him audience vnto this worde, and then lift vp their voyces and
sayde: away with suche a felowe from the earth, for it is no reason yt he
shoulde lyue.
23 And as they cryed, and caste of their clothes, and threwe dust into the ayre,
24 The chiefe captaine comaunded hym to be brought into the castle, & bade that
he shoulde be scourged, and examined, that he myght knowe wherefore they cryed
so on hym.
25 And as they boude him with thonges, Paul saide vnto ye Centurion that stoode
by: Is it lawfull for you to scourge a man that is a Romane, and vncondempned?
26 When the Centurion hearde that, he went and tolde the vpper captaine, saying:
Take heede what thou doest, for this man is a Romane.
27 Then the vpper captaine came, & saide vnto him: Tel me, art thou a Romane? He
sayde, yea.
28 And the chiefe captaine aunswered: With a great summe obteyned I this
freedome. And Paul saide: I was free borne.
29 Then strayghtway departed fro him they which should haue examined him. And
the hie captaine also was afrayde, after he knew that he was a Romane, and
because he had bounde hym.
30 On the morowe, because he woulde haue knowen the certaintie wherefore he was
accused of the Iewes, he loosed hym from his bandes, and commaunded the hye
priestes & all the counsell to come together, & brought Paul foorth, and set hym
before them.

Chapter 23

1 And Paul earnestlie beholdyng the counsell, saide: Men & brethren, I haue
lyued in al good conscience before God vntyll this day.
2 And ye hye priest Ananias, commaunded the that stoode by, to smyte hym on the
mouth.
3 Then sayde Paul vnto him: God shall smite thee thou paynted wall: For, sittest
thou & iudgest me after the lawe, & comaundest me to be smitten contrary to the
lawe?
4 And they that stoode by, sayde: Reuilest thou Gods hye priest?
5 Then sayde Paul: I wyst not brethren, that he was the hye priest. For it is
written: Thou shalt not curse the ruler of thy people.
6 But when Paul perceaued that the one part were saducees, and the other
pharisees, he cryed out in the counsell: Men and brethren, I am a pharisee, the
sonne of a pharisee: Of the hope & resurrection of the dead, I am iudged.
7 And when he had so sayde, there arose a debate betwene the pharisees and the
saducees, & the multitude was deuided.
8 For the saducees say, that there is no resurrection, neither Angel, nor
spirite: But the pharisees confesse both.
9 And there arose a great crye: and whe the scribes which were of the pharisees
part arose, they stroue, saying, We fynde none euyll in this man: But yf a
spirite or an Angel hath spoken to hym, let vs not striue agaynst God.
10 And when there arose a great debate, the chiefe captayne, fearyng lest Paul
shoulde haue ben pluckt asunder of the, comaunded the souldiers to go downe, and
to take him from among them, and to bryng hym into the castle.
11 And the nyght folowyng, the Lorde stoode by hym, and sayde: Be of good cheare
Paul, for as thou hast testified of me in Hierusalem, so must thou beare
witnesse also at Rome.
12 And when it was day, certayne of the Iewes gathered them selues together, and
made a vowe, saying that they woulde neither eate nor drynke, tyl they had
kylled Paul.
13 And they were mo then fourtie men, which had made this conspiracie.
14 And they came to the chiefe priestes and elders, and sayde: We haue bounde
our selues with a vowe, that we wyll eate nothyng vntyll we haue slayne Paul.
15 Nowe therfore geue ye knowledge to the vpper captayne, and to the counsell,
that he bryng hym foorth vnto you to morrowe, as though ye woulde knowe
somethyng more perfectly of hym: And we, or euer he come neare, are redy to kyll
hym.
16 And when Paules sisters sonne heard of their laying awaite, he went & entred
into the castle, and tolde Paul.
17 And Paul called one of the vnder captaynes vnto hym, and sayde: Bryng this
young man vnto the hye captayne, for he hath a certayne thyng to shewe hym.
18 And he toke hym, and brought hym to the hye captayne, and sayde: Paul the
prisoner called me vnto him, and prayed me to bryng this young man vnto thee,
which hath a certayne matter to shewe thee.
19 Then the hye captayne toke hym by the hande, and went with hym out of the
way, and asked hym: What is it that thou hast to tell me?
20 And he sayde: The Iewes are determined to desire thee, that thou wouldest
bryng foorth Paul to morowe into the counsell, as though they would enquire
somewhat of hym more perfectly.
21 But folowe not thou their myndes: For there lye in wayte for him, of them, mo
the fourtie men, which haue bounde themselues with a vowe, that they will
neither eate nor drynke, tyll they haue kylled hym. And nowe are they redy, and
loke that thou shouldest promise.
22 The vpper captayne then let ye young man depart, and charged hym, see thou
tell it out to no man, that thou hast shewed these thynges to me.
23 And he called vnto hym two vnder captaynes, saying: Make redy two hundred
souldyers, to go to Cesarea, and horsmen threescore and ten, and spearemen two
hundred, at the thirde houre of the nyght:
24 And delyuer them beastes, that they may set Paul on, and bryng hym safe vnto
Felix the hye deputie.
25 And he wrote a letter, after this maner.
26 Claudius Lysias, vnto the most mightie ruler Felix, sendeth greetinges.
27 This man was taken of the Iewes, and shoulde haue ben kylled of them: Then
came I with souldeirs, & rescued hym, and perceaued that he was a Romane.
28 And whe I would haue knowen the cause, wherfore they accused hym, I brought
hym foorth into their counsell.
29 Whom I perceaued to be accused of questions of their lawe, but was not gyltie
of any thyng worthy of death, or of bondes.
30 And when it was shewed me howe that the Iewes layde wayte for the man, I sent
hym strayghtway to thee, and gaue commaundement to his accusers, that the
thynges which they haue agaynst hym, they shoulde tell before thee. Fare well.
31 Then the souldyers, as it was commaunded them, toke Paul, and brought hym by
nyght to Antipatris.
32 On the morowe, they left the horsmen to go with hym, and returned vnto the
castle.
33 Which when they came to Cesarea, and delyuered the epistle to the deputie,
presented Paul also before hym.
34 And when the deputie had read the letter he asked of what coutrey he was. And
when he vnderstoode that he was of Celicia,
35 I wyll heare thee, sayde he, when thyne accusars are come also. And he
comaunded hym to be kept in Herodes iudgement hall.

Chapter 24

1 And after fyue dayes, Ananias the hie priest descended, with the elders, and
with a certayne oratour, named Tartullus, which appeared before the deputie
agaynst Paul.
2 And when Paul was called foorth, Tartullus began to accuse hym, saying: Seyng
that we obtayned great quietnesse by the meanes of thee, and that many good
thynges are done vnto this nation through thy prouidence,
3 That alowe we euer, & in all places, most noble Felix, with all thankes.
4 Notwithstandyng, that I be not tedious vnto thee, I pray thee, that thou
wouldest heare vs of thy curtesie a fewe wordes.
5 For we haue founde this man a pestilent felowe, and a mouer of debate vnto all
the Iewes in the whole worlde, and a maynteyner of the sect of the Nazarites.
6 And hath gone about to pollute the temple: Whom we toke, and woulde haue
iudged accordyng to our lawe.
7 But the hye captayne Lysias, came vpon vs, and with great violence toke hym
away out of our handes,
8 Commaundyng his accusers to come vnto thee: Of whom thou mayest, yf thou wilt
enquire, knowe the certayntie of all these thynges, wherof we accuse hym.
9 And the Iewes lykewyse affirmed, saying that these thynges were so.
10 The Paul, after that the deputie hym selfe had beckened vnto hym that he
shoulde speake, aunswered: With a more quiet mynde do I aunswere for my selfe,
forasmuch as I vnderstande, that thou haste ben of many yeres a iudge vnto this
nation:
11 Because that thou mayest knowe, that there are yet but twelue dayes, sence I
went vp to Hierusalem for to worshyp.
12 And they neither founde me in the temple disputyng with any man, either
raysyng vp the people, neither in the synagogues, nor in the citie.
13 Neither can they proue the thynges wherof they accuse me.
14 But this I confesse vnto thee, that after the way which they call heresie, so
worship I the God of my fathers, beleuyng all thynges which are written in the
lawe and the prophetes,
15 And haue hope towardes God, that the resurrection of the dead which they them
selues loke for also, shalbe both of the iust and vniust.
16 And herein studie I, to haue alway a cleare conscience toward God, and toward
men.
17 Nowe after many yeres, I came and brought almes to my nation, and offerynges:
18 In the which they founde me purified in the temple, neither with multitude,
nor yet with vnquietnesse: Howbeit, there were certayne Iewes out of Asia,
19 Which ought to be here present before thee, & accuse me, yf they had ought
agaynst me:
20 Or els let these same here say, yf they haue founde any euyll doyng in me,
whyle I stande here in the counsell:
21 Except it be for this one voyce, that I cryed standyng among them, of the
resurrection from the dead, am I iudged of you this day.
22 And when Felix hearde these thynges, he deferred them, for he knewe very well
of that way, and sayde: When Lysias the captayne is come downe, I will knowe the
utmost of your matter.
23 And he commaunded an vnder captayne to kepe Paul, and to let hym haue rest,
and that he shoulde forbyd none of his acquayntaunce to minister vnto hym, or to
come vnto hym.
24 And after certayne dayes, when Felix came, with his wyfe Drusilla, which was
a Iewesse, he called foorth Paul, and hearde hym of the fayth which is towarde
Christe.
25 And as he reasoned of ryghteousnesse, temperaunce, and iudgement to come,
Felix trembled, and aunswered: Go thy way for this tyme, when I haue a
conuenient season, I will sende for thee.
26 He hoped also, that money shoulde haue ben geuen hym of Paul, that he myght
loose hym: wherfore, he sent for hym the oftener, and communed with hym.
27 But after two yere, Porcius Festus came into Felix rowme: And Felix wyllyng
to shewe the Iewes a pleasure, left Paul bounde.

Chapter 25

1 Then when Festus was come into the prouince, after three dayes, he ascended
from Cesarea vnto Hierusalem.
2 Then enfourmed him the hye priest, and the chiefe of the Iewes, of Paul: And
they besought hym,
3 And desired fauour agaynst hym, that he woulde sende for hym to Hierusalem: &
they layde awayte in the way, to kyll hym.
4 But Festus aunswered, that Paul shoulde be kept at Cesarea, and that he
himselfe woulde shortly depart thither.
5 Let them therfore, sayde he, which among you are able, come downe with vs, and
accuse hym, yf there be any fault in this man.
6 And when he had taryed among them more then ten dayes, he went downe vnto
Cesarea, & the next day sate downe in the iudgement seate, and commaunded Paul
to be brought.
7 Who beyng come, the Iewes which were come from Hierusalem, stoode about hym
and layde many & greeuous complayntes agaynst Paul, which they coulde not proue,
8 Whyles he aunswered for hym selfe that he had agaynst the lawe of the Iewes,
neither agaynst the temple, nor yet agaynst Caesar offended any thyng at all.
9 But Festus wyllyng to do ye Iewes a pleasure; aunswered Paul, and sayde: Wylt
thou go vp to Hierusalem, & there be iudged of these thynges before me?
10 Then said Paul: I stande at Caesars iudgement seate, where I ought to be
iudged: To the Iewes haue I no harme done, as thou very wel knowest.
11 For yf I had done any hurt, or committed any thyng worthy of death, I refuse
not to dye: But yf there be none of these thinges, wherof they accuse me, no man
may delyuer me to them. I appeale vnto Caesar.
12 Then spake Festus, with the counsell, and aunswered: Hast thou appealed vnto
Caesar? vnto Caesar shalt thou go.
13 And after certayne dayes, King Agrippa and Bernice came vnto Cesarea, to
salute Festus.
14 And when they had ben there a good season, Festus rehearsed Paules cause vnto
the kyng, saying: There is a certayne man left in bondes of Felix,
15 About whom, when I came to Hierusalem, the hye priestes and elders of the
Iewes enfourmed me, and desired to haue iudgement agaynst hym.
16 To whom I aunswered: It is not the maner of the Romanes, for fauour to
delyuer any man that he shoulde perishe, before that he which is accused, haue
the accusers before hym, and haue licence to aunswere for hymselfe, concernyng
the cryme layde agaynst hym.
17 Therfore, when they were come hyther, without any delay, on the morowe I sate
to geue iudgement, and commaunded the man to be brought foorth.
18 Agaynst whom, when the accusers stoode vp, they brought none accusation of
such thynges as I supposed:
19 But had certayne questions agaynst hym of their owne superstition, and of one
Iesus which was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alyue.
20 And because I doubted of such maner of questions, I asked hym whether he
woulde go to Hierusalem, and there be iudged of these matters.
21 But when Paul had appealed to be kept vnto the knowledge of Augustus, I
commaunded hym to be kept, tyll I myght sende hym to Caesar.
22 Then Agrippa sayde vnto Festus: I woulde also heare the man my selfe. To
morowe sayd he, thou shalt heare hym.
23 And on the morowe, when Agrippa was come, and Bernice, with great pompe, and
were entred into the counsell house, with the chiefe captaynes, and chiefe men
of the citie, at Festus commaundement was Paul brought foorth.
24 And Festus sayde: Kyng Agrippa, and al men which are here present with vs, ye
see this man, about whom all the multitude of the Iewes haue intreated me, both
at Hierusalem, and also here, crying, that he ought not to lyue any longer.
25 Yet founde I nothyng worthy of death, that he had committed: Neuerthelesse,
seeyng that he hath appealed to Augustus, I haue determined to sende hym:
26 Of whom I haue no certayne thyng to write vnto my Lorde. Wherfore, I haue
brought hym foorth vnto you, and specially vnto thee, O kyng Agrippa, that after
examination had, I myght haue somewhat to write.
27 For me thynketh it vnreasonable, for to sende a prysoner, and not to shewe
the causes which are laide agaynst him.

Chapter 26

1 Then Agrippa sayde vnto Paul, thou art permitted to speake for thy selfe. Then
Paul stretched foorth the hande, and aunswered for hym selfe
2 I thynke my selfe happy, king Agrippa, because I shall aunswere this day
before thee, of all the thynges whereof I am accused of the Iewes:
3 Namely, because thou art expert in all customes and questions, whiche are
among the Iewes: Wherefore I beseche thee to heare me patiently.
4 My lyfe, that I haue led of a chylde, which was at the first among myne owne
nation at Hierusalem, knowe all the Iewes,
5 Which knewe me from the beginning, (yf they woulde testifie) that after the
most straytest sect of our religion, I lyued a pharisee.
6 And nowe I stande and am iudged, for the hope of the promise made of God vnto
our fathers:
7 Unto which promise, our twelue tribes instantly seruyng God day & nyght, hope
to come. For which hopes sake, kyng Agrippa, I am accused of the Iewes.
8 Why shoulde it be thought a thyng incredible vnto you, that God shoulde rayse
agayne the dead?
9 I also veryly thought in my selfe that I ought to do many contrary thynges,
cleane agaynst the name of Iesus of Nazareth:
10 Which thyng I also dyd in Hierusalem. And many of the Saintes dyd I shut vp
in pryson, hauyng receaued aucthoritie of the hye priestes: And when they were
put to death, I gaue the sentence.
11 And I punished them oft in euery synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme:
and was yet more mad vpon them, and persecuted them, euen vnto straunge cities.
12 About which thynges, as I went to Damascus, with auctoritie and commission of
the hye priestes:
13 Euen at mydday, O kyng, I sawe in the way, a lyght from heauen, aboue the
bryghtnesse of the Sunne, shyne rounde about me and them which iourneyed with
me.
14 And when we were all fallen to the earth, I hearde a voyce speakyng vnto me,
and saying in the Hebrewe tongue: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? It is
harde for thee to kicke agaynste the prickes.
15 And I sayde: Who art thou Lorde? And he sayde: I am Iesus whom thou
persecutest.
16 But ryse and stande vpon thy feete. For I haue appeared vnto thee for this
purpose, to make thee a minister and a witnesse, both of those thynges which
thou hast seene, and of those thynges in the which I wyll appeare vnto thee,
17 Delyueryng thee from the people, and from the gentiles, vnto whom nowe I
sende thee,
18 To open their eyes, that they may be turned from darknesse to lyght, & from
the power of Satan vnto God, that they may receaue forgeuenes of sinnes, &
inheritaunce among them which are sanctified by fayth that is towarde me.
19 Wherfore, O kyng Agrippa, I was not disobedient vnto the heauenly visio:
20 But shewed first vnto them of Damascus, & at Hierusalem, and throughout all
the coastes of Iurie, and then to the gentiles, that they shoulde repent, and
turne to God, and do such workes as become them that repent.
21 For this cause the Iewes caught me in the temple, & went about to kyll me.
22 Seyng therefore, that I haue obtayned helpe of God, I continue vnto this day,
witnessyng both to small and to great, saying none other thynges, then those
which the prophetes and Moyses dyd say shoulde come:
23 That Christe shoulde suffer, and that he shoulde be the first that shoulde
ryse from the dead, and shoulde shewe lyght vnto the people, and to the
gentiles.
24 And as he thus spake for hym selfe, Festus sayde with a loude voyce: Paul,
thou art besyde thy selfe, much learnyng doth make thee mad.
25 But he sayde: I am not mad, most noble Festus, but speake foorth the wordes
of trueth and sobernesse.
26 For the kyng knoweth of these thynges, before whom also I speake freely,
neither thynke I, that any of these thynges are hydden from him: For this thyng
was not done in a corner.
27 Kyng Agrippa, beleuest thou the prophetes? I wote wel that thou beleuest.
28 Then Agrippa sayde vnto Paul: Somewhat thou perswadest me to be a christian.
29 And Paul sayde: I woulde to God, that not only thou, but also all that heare
me to day, were both somewhat, and also in a great deale, such as I am, except
these bondes.
30 And when he had thus spoken, the king rose vp, and the deputie, & Bernice,
and they that sate with them.
31 And when they were gone apart, they talked betwene the selues, saying: This
man doth nothyng worthy of death, or of bondes.
32 Then sayde Agrippa vnto Festus: This man myght haue ben let loose, yf he had
not appealed vnto Caesar.

Chapter 27

1 And when it was cocluded, that we shoulde sayle into Italie, they delyuered
both Paul, & certayne other prysoners, vnto one named Iulius, an vnder captayne
of Augustus bande.
2 And we entred into a shippe of Adramyttium, & loosed from lande, appoynted to
sayle by the coastes of Asia, one Aristarchus out of Macedonia, of the countrey
of Thessalonia, tarying styll with vs.
3 And the next day we came to Sidon: And Iulius curteouslye entreated Paul, and
gaue hym libertie to go vnto his friendes, and to refreshe hym selfe.
4 And when we had launched from thence, we sayled harde by Cypers, because the
wyndes were contrarye.
5 And when we had sayled ouer the sea of Cilicia, and Pamphylia, we came to
Myra, which is in Lycia.
6 And there the vnder captayne founde a shippe of Alexandria redy, that sayled
into Italie, and he put vs therin.
7 And whe we had sayled slowly many dayes, & scarce were come ouer agaynst
Guydum, because ye wynde withstoode vs, we sayled harde by Candie, ouer agaynst
Salmo,
8 And with much worke sayled beyonde it, and came vnto a place wich is called
the Fayre hauens, nye whervnto was the citie of Lasea.
9 When much tyme was spent, & when saylyng was nowe ieopardus, because also that
they had ouerlong fasted, Paul put them in remembraunce,
10 And sayde vnto them: Syrs, I perceaue that this vyage will be with hurt and
much damage, not of the ladyng and shippe only, but also of our lyues.
11 Neuerthelesse, the vnder captayne beleued the gouernour and the maister of
the shippe, more then those thynges which were spoken of Paul.
12 And because the hauen was not commodious to wynter in, many toke counsell to
depart thence, yf by any meanes they myght attayne to Phenice, & there to
winter, which is an hauen of Candie, and lyeth towarde the southwest and
northwest wynde.
13 And when the south wynde blewe softly, they supposyng to obtayne their
purpose, loosed vnto Asson, and sayled past Candie.
14 But not long after, there arose against their purpose, a flawe of wynde out
of the northeast.
15 And when the shippe was caught, and coulde not resist the wynde, we let her
go, and were dryuen with the weather.
16 But we were caryed into an Ile which is named Clauda, and had much worke to
come by a boate,
17 Which they toke vp, and vsed helpe, and made fast the shippe, fearyng least
they shoulde fall into the Syrtes: And so they let downe a vessel, & were
caried.
18 The next day, when we were tossed with an exceading tempest, they lighted the
shippe,
19 And the thirde day, we cast out with our owne handes, the tacklyng of the
shippe.
20 And when neither ye sunne nor starres in many dayes appeared, and no small
tempest lay vpon vs, all hope that we should be saued, was then taken away.
21 But after long abstinence, Paul stoode foorth in the middes of them, and
sayde: Syrs, ye shoulde haue harkened to me, & not to haue loosed fro Candie,
neither to haue brought vnto vs this harme and losse.
22 And nowe I exhort you to be of good chere: For there shalbe no losse of any
mans lyfe among you, but of the shippe.
23 For there stoode by me this nyght, the Angel of God, whose I am, and whom I
serue,
24 Saying: Feare not Paul, thou must be brought before Caesar. And lo, God hath
geuen thee all them that sayle with thee.
25 Wherfore syrs be of good cheare: for I beleue God, that it shalbe euen as it
was tolde me.
26 Howbeit, we must be cast into a certayne Ilande.
27 But when the fourtenth nyght was come, as we were saylyng in Adria, about
mydnyght the shypmen deemed that there appeared some countrey vnto them:
28 And sounded, and founde it twentie faddomes. And when they had gone a litle
further, they sounded agayne, and founde it fyfteene faddomes.
29 Then fearyng lest they shoulde haue fallen on some rocke, they caste foure
anckers out of the sterne, and wisshed for the day.
30 And as the shypmen were about to flee out of the shippe, when they had let
downe the boate into the sea, vnder a colour, as though they woulde haue cast
anckers out of the foreshippe,
31 Paul sayde vnto the vnder captayne, and to the souldiers: Except these abide
in the shippe, ye can not be safe.
32 Then the souldyers cut of the rope of the boate, and let it fall away.
33 And when the day began to appeare, Paul besought them all to take meate,
saying: This is the foureteenth day, that ye haue taryed & continued fasting,
receauyng nothyng at all.
34 Wherfore, I pray you to take meate, for this no doubt is for your health: for
there shall not an heere fall from the head of any of you.
35 And when he had thus spoken, he toke bread, and gaue thankes to God in
presence of them all: And when he had broken it, he began to eate.
36 Then were they all of good cheare, and they also toke meate.
37 And we were altogether in the shippe, two hudred threescore & sixteene
soules.
38 And when they had eaten enough, they lyghted the shippe, and cast out the
wheate into the sea.
39 And when it was day, they knewe not the lande: but they spyed a certayne
hauen with a banke, into the which they were mynded, yf it were possible, to
thrust in the shippe.
40 And when they had taken vp the anckers, they committed themselues vnto the
sea, and loosed the rudder bondes, and hoyssed vp the mayne sayle to the wynde,
and drewe to lande.
41 And when they fell into a place which had the sea on both sydes, they thrust
in the shippe: And the forepart stucke fast & moued not, but the hynder part
brake with the violence of the waues.
42 And the souldiers counsel was to kyll the prysoners, lest any of them, when
he had swomme out, should runne away.
43 But the vnder captayne wyllyng to saue Paul, kept the from their purpose, &
commaunded that they which coulde swymme, shoulde cast them selues first into
the sea, and scape to lande:
44 And the other, some on boordes, and some on broke peeces of the shippe. And
so it came to passe, that they escaped all safe to lande.

Chapter 28

1 And when they were scaped, then they knewe that the Ile was called Melite.
2 And ye straungers shewed vs no litle kyndnesse: for they kyndled a fyre, and
receaued vs euery one, because of the present rayne, and because of the colde.
3 And when Paul had gathered a bondell of stickes, and layde them on the fyre,
there came a Uiper out of the heat, and caught hym by the hande.
4 And when the straungers sawe the beast hang on his hande, they sayde among
them selues, No doubt this man is a murtherer: Whom though he haue escaped the
sea, yet vengeance suffreth not to lyue.
5 And he shoke of the Uiper into the fyre, and felt no harme.
6 Howbeit, they wayted whe he shoulde haue swolne, or fallen downe dead
sodenlie: But after they had loked a great while, and sawe no harme come to him,
they chaunged their myndes, and sayde that he was a God.
7 In the same quarters were possessios of ye chiefe man of the Ile, whose name
was Publius, which receaued vs, and lodged vs three dayes curteouslye.
8 And it came to passe, that the father of Publius lay sicke of a feuer, and of
a bloody flixe: to whom Paul entred in, & prayed, and layde his handes on hym,
and healed hym.
9 So when this was done, other also which had diseases in the Ile, came and were
healed:
10 Which also dyd vs great honour, and when we departed, they laded vs with such
thynges as were necessary.
11 And after three monethes we departed in a shippe of Alexandria, which had
wyntred in the Ile, whose badge was Castor and Pollux.
12 And when we came to Syracusa, we taryed there three dayes.
13 And from thence we fet a compasse, and came to Rhegium, & after one day the
south wynde blewe, and we came the next day to Puteolus:
14 Where we founde brethren, and were desired to tary with them seuen dayes, and
so we came towarde Rome.
15 And from thence, when the brethren hearde of vs, they came to meete vs at
Appii forum, and at the three tauernes. When Paul sawe the, he thanked God, and
waxed bolde.
16 And when we came to Rome, ye vnder captayne delyuered the prysoners to the
chiefe captayne of the hoast: But Paul was suffred to dwell by him selfe, with a
souldyer that kept hym.
17 And it came to passe, that after three dayes Paul called ye chiefe of the
Iewes together. And whe they were come, he sayde vnto them: Men and brethren,
though I haue committed nothyng agaynst the people, or lawes of the fathers, yet
was I delyuered prysoner from Hierusalem, into the handes of the Romanes.
18 Which when they had examined me, woulde haue let me go, because there was no
cause of death in me.
19 But when the Iewes spake contrary, I was constrayned to appeale vnto Caesar:
not that I had ought to accuse my people of.
20 For this cause then haue I called for you, euen to see you and to speake with
you: because that for the hope of Israel, I am bounde with this chayne.
21 And they said vnto him: We neither receaued letters out of Iurie concernyng
thee, neither any of the brethren that came, shewed or spake any harme of thee.
22 But we wyll heare of thee, what thou thynkest: For as concernyng this sect,
we knowe that euery where it is spoke agaynst.
23 And when they had appoynted hym a day, there came many to hym into his
lodgyng, to whom he expounded and testified the kyngdome of God, perswadyng them
concernyng Iesus, both out of the lawe of Moyses, and out of the prophetes, euen
from morning to night.
24 And some were perswaded in the thynges which were spoken, and some beleued
not.
25 And when they agreed not among them selues, they departed after that Paul had
spoken one worde, that is to say well spake the holy ghost by Esaias the
prophete, vnto our fathers,
26 Saying: Go vnto this people, and say, with your eares shall ye heare, and
shall not vnderstande: and with your eyes shall ye see, and not perceaue.
27 For the heart of this people is waxed grosse, & their eares are dull of
hearing, and their eyes haue they closed: lest they shoulde see with their eyes,
and heare with their eares, and vnderstande with their heartes, and shoulde be
conuerted, and I shoulde heale them.
28 Be it knowen therfore vnto you, that this saluation of God is sent to the
gentiles, and they shall heare it.
29 And when he had sayde these wordes, the Iewes departed, and had great
reasonyng among them selues.
30 And Paul dwelt two yeres full in his owne hired house, and receaued all that
came in vnto hym,
31 Preachyng the kyngdome of God, and teachyng those thynges which concerne the
Lorde Iesus Christe, with all confidence, no man forbyddyng hym.


Romans

Chapter 1

1 Paul the seruaunt of Iesus Christe, called to be an Apostle, seuered into the
Gospel of God.
2 Which he had promised afore by his prophetes in ye holy scriptures
3 Of his sonne, which was made of the seede of Dauid after the fleshe:
4 And hath ben declared to be the sonne of God, with power after the spirite
that sanctifieth, by the resurrectio from the dead, of Iesus Christe our Lorde.
5 By whom we haue receaued grace and apostleship, that obedience myght be geuen
vnto the fayth in his name, among all heathen.
6 Among whom, ye are also the called of Iesus Christe:
7 To all that be in Rome, beloued of God, saintes by callyng, grace to you, and
peace, from God our father, and the Lorde Iesus Christe.
8 First verily I thanke my God through Iesus Christe for you all, that your
fayth is publisshed throughout all the worlde.
9 For God is my witnesse, whom I serue with my spirite in the Gospell of his
sonne, that without ceassyng I make mention of you,
10 Praying alwayes in my prayers, that by some meane at the last, one tyme or
other, I myght take a prosperous iourney by the wyll of God, to come vnto you.
11 For I long to see you, that I myght bestowe among you some spirituall gift,
that ye myght be stablisshed.
12 That is, that I might haue consolation together with you, eche with others
fayth, yours and mine.
13 I woulde that ye should knowe brethren, howe that I haue oftentymes purposed
to come vnto you ( and haue ben let hytherto,) that I myght haue some fruite
also among you, as among other of the gentiles.
14 I am debter both to the grekes, and to the barbarous, both to the wyse, and
to the vnwise.
15 So that as much as in me is, I am redy to preache the Gospell to you that are
at Rome also.
16 For I am not ashamed of the Gospell of Christ, because it is the power of God
vnto saluation to all that beleue, to the Iewe first, and also to the Greke.
17 For by it is the ryghteousnes of God opened fro fayth to fayth. As it is
written: the iuste shall lyue by fayth.
18 For the wrath of God appeareth from heauen, against all vngodlynesse &
vnrighteousnes of men, which withholde the trueth in vnrighteousnes.
19 For that that may be knowen of God, is manifest among them, because God hath
shewed it vnto them.
20 For his inuisible thinges, being vnderstanded by his workes, through the
creation of the worlde, are seene, that is, both his eternall power and godhead:
So that they are without excuse.
21 Because that when they knewe God, they glorified hym not as God, neither were
thankefull, but waxed full of vanities in their imaginations, and their foolishe
heart was blynded.
22 When they counted them selues wyse, they became fooles:
23 And turned the glorie of the immortall God, vnto an image, made not only
after the similitude of a mortal man, but also of birdes, and foure footed
beastes, and of crepyng beastes.
24 Wherefore God gaue them vp to vncleanenesse, through the lustes of their owne
heartes, to defyle their owne bodies among them selues.
25 Whiche chaunged his trueth for a lye, and worshipped and serued the creature,
more then the creator, which is to be praysed for euer. Amen.
26 Wherefore God gaue them vp vnto shamefull lustes: For euen their women dyd
chaunge the naturall vse, into that which is agaynst nature.
27 And likewise also, the men left the naturall vse of the woman, and brent in
their lustes one with another, and men with men wrought fylthynesse, and
receaued to them selues the rewarde of their errour (as it was accordyng)
28 And as they regarded not to knowe God: euen so God deliuered them vp vnto a
leude mynde, that they should do those thinges which were not comely:
29 Beyng full of all vnrighteousnes, fornication, craftynesse, couetousnes,
maliciousnes, full of enuie, murther, debate, deceite, euyll conditioned,
whysperers,
30 Backbyters, haters of God, dispiteful, proude, boasters, bryngers vp of euyll
thinges, disobedient to father & mother:
31 Without vnderstandyng, couenaunt breakers, without naturall affection, truice
breakers, vnmercyfull.
32 The whiche knowyng the righteousnes of God, howe that they which commit such
thynges are worthy of death, not only do the same, but also haue pleasure in
them that do them.

Chapter 2

1 Therefore art thou inexcusable, O ma, whosoeuer thou be that iudgest. For in
that same wherin thou iudgest another, thou condempnest thy self. For thou that
iudgest, doest euen ye selfe same thynges.
2 But we are sure that the iudgement of god is according to the trueth, against
them which commit such thynges.
3 Thinkest thou this, O thou man that iudgest them whiche do such thynges, and
doest the same thy selfe that thou shalt escape the iudgement of God?
4 Eyther despisest thou the rychesse of his goodnes, & pacience, and long
sufferaunce, not knowyng that the kyndnesse of god leadeth thee to repentauce?
5 But thou after thy stubbernnesse and heart that can not repent, heapest vnto
thy selfe wrath, agaynst the daye of wrath and declaration of the righteous
iudgement of God:
6 Which wyl rewarde euery man accordyng to his deedes:
7 To them, whiche by continuyng in well doyng seke for glorie, and honour, and
immortalitie, eternall lyfe.
8 But vnto them that are contentious, & that do not obey the trueth, but obey
vnrighteousnes shall come indignation, and wrath.
9 Tribulation, and anguishe, vpon euery soule of man that doeth euyll, of the
Iewe first, and also of the Greke:
10 But glorie, and honour, and peace to euery man that doeth good, to ye Iewe
first, and also to the Greke.
11 For there is no respect of persos with God.
12 For whosoeuer hath sinned without lawe, shall also perishe without lawe: And
as many as haue sinned in ye lawe, shalbe iudged by the lawe.
13 (For in the sight of God, they are not righteous whiche heare the lawe: but
the doers of the lawe shalbe iustified.
14 For when the Gentiles, which haue not the lawe, do of nature the thynges
conteyned in the lawe: they hauing not the lawe, are a lawe vnto them selues.
15 Which shewe the workes of the lawe written in their heartes, their conscience
bearing them witnesse, & their thoughtes, accusyng one another, or excusyng,)
16 At the day when God shall iudge the secretes of men by Iesus Christe,
accordyng to my Gospell.
17 Behold, thou art called a Iewe, and restest in the lawe, and makest thy boast
of God,
18 And knowest his wyll, and alowest the thinges that be excellent, infourmed by
the lawe:
19 And beleuest that thou thy selfe art a guyde of the blynde, a lyght of them
which are in darknesse,
20 An infourmer of them whiche lacke discretion, a teacher of the vnlearned:
which hast the fourme of knowledge, & of the trueth in the lawe.
21 Thou therefore which teachest another, teachest not thy selfe? Thou preachest
a man shoulde not steale, yet thou stealest.
22 Thou that sayest a man shoulde not commit adulterie, breakest wedlocke. Thou
abhorrest idoles, and yet robbest God of his honour.
23 Thou that makest thy boast of ye lawe, through breakyng the lawe dishonorest
God.
24 For the name of God is euyll spoken of among the Gentiles, through you: As it
is written.
25 For circumcision veryly auayleth, yf thou kepe the lawe: But yf thou be a
breaker of the lawe, thy circumcision is made vncircumcision.
26 Therefore if the vncircumcisio kepe the ordinaunces of the law, shall not his
vncircumcisio be counted for circumcisio?
27 And shall not vncircumcision which is by nature, if it kepe the law, iudge
thee, which beyng vnder the letter & circumcision, doest transgresse the lawe?
28 For he is not a Iewe, whiche is a Iewe outwarde. Neither is that circucision
which is outwarde in the fleshe:
29 But he is a Iewe whiche is one inwardly, and the circumcisio of ye heart,
which consisteth in the spirite, and not in the letter is circumcision whose
prayse is not of men, but of God.

Chapter 3

1 What preferment then hath ye Iew? or what auauntageth circumcision?
2 Much euery way. First, for because yt vnto them were committed ye wordes of
God.
3 What then though some of them dyd not beleue? Shal their vnbeliefe make the
fayth of God without effect?
4 God forbyd. Yea let God be true, and euery man a lyer, as it is writte: That
thou myghtest be iustified in thy sayinges, and ouercome when thou art iudged.
5 But yf our vnrighteousnes setteth foorth the righteousnes of God, what shall
we saye? Is God vnryghteous which taketh vengeaunce? I speake after the maner of
men,
6 God forbyd. For howe then shall God iudge the worlde?
7 For yf the trueth of God hath more abounded through my lye, vnto his glory,
why am I as yet iudged as a sinner?
8 And not rather (as men speake euyll of vs, and as some affirme that we say)
let vs do euyll, that good may come therof? Whose dampnation is iuste.
9 What then? Are we better then they? No, in no wise. For we haue alredy proued,
howe that both Iewes and Gentiles are all vnder sinne.
10 As it is written: There is none righteous, no not one.
11 There is none that vnderstandeth, there is none that seketh after God.
12 They are all gone out of the waye, they are all vnprofitable, there is none
that doth good, no not one.
13 Their throte is an open sepulchre, with their tongues they haue deceaued, the
poyso of aspes is vnder their lippes.
14 Whose mouth is full of cursyng and bytternesse.
15 Their feete are swyft to shed blood.
16 Heartes griefe & miserie are in their wayes.
17 And they way of peace haue they not knowen.
18 There is no feare of God before their eyes.
19 Nowe we knowe that what thynges so euer the lawe saith, it saith it to them
which are vnder the lawe: That all mouthes maye be stopped, and that al ye world
may be indaungered to God.
20 Because that by the deedes of the lawe, there shall no flesshe be iustified
in his syght. For by the lawe, commeth the knowledge of sinne.
21 But nowe is the righteousnes of God declared without the lawe, beyng
witnessed by the testimonie of the lawe and of the prophetes.
22 The ryghteousnes of God commeth by the fayth of Iesus Christe, vnto all and
vpon all them that beleue. There is no difference:
23 For all haue synned, and are destitute of the glorie of God,
24 Iustified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christe
Iesu:
25 Whom God hath set foorth to be a propitiatio, through fayth in his blood, to
declare his ryghteousnes, in that he forgeueth the sinnes that are past,
26 Which God dyd suffer, to shew at this tyme his righteousnes, that he might be
iuste, & the iustifier of hym which beleueth on Iesus.
27 Where is then thy boastyng? It is excluded. By what lawe? Of workes? Nay, but
by the lawe of fayth.
28 Therfore, we holde that a man is iustified by fayth, without the deedes of
the lawe.
29 Is he the God of the Iewes only? Is he not also of the Gentiles? Yes, euen of
the Gentiles also.
30 For it is one God whiche shall iustifie the circumcision by fayth, and
vncircumcision through fayth.
31 Do we then destroy the lawe through fayth? God forbyd: But we rather
mayntayne the lawe.

Chapter 4

1 What shall we saye then that Abraham our father, as parteynyng to the flesshe,
dyd fynde?
2 For if Abraham were iustified by workes, the hath he wherein to boaste, but
not before God.
3 For what sayth the scripture? Abraham beleued God, and it was counted vnto hym
for ryghteousnes.
4 To hym that worketh, is the reward not reckened of grace, but of duetie.
5 To hym that worketh not, but beleueth on hym that iustifieth the vngodly, his
fayth is counted for ryghteousnes.
6 Euen as Dauid describeth the blessednesse of the man vnto whom God imputeth
righteousnesse without workes:
7 Blessed are they whose vnrighteousnesse are forgeuen, & whose sinnes are
couered.
8 Blessed is that man to who the Lorde wyll not impute sinne.
9 Came this blessednes then vpon the circumcision, or vpon the vncircumcision
also? For we say, that fayth was reckened to Abraham for ryghteousnes.
10 Howe was it then reckened? When he was in the circumcision? or whe he was in
the vncircumcision? Not in the circumcision: but in vncircumcision.
11 And he receaued the signe of circumcision, as the seale of the ryghteousnesse
of fayth, whiche he had yet beyng vncircumcised, that he shoulde be the father
of al them that beleue, though they be not circumcised, that ryghteousnes myght
be imputed vnto them also.
12 And that he myght be father of circumcision, not vnto them only whiche came
of the circumcised: but vnto them also that walke in the steppes of the fayth
that was in our father Abraham, before the time of circumcision.
13 For the promise that he shoulde be the heyre of the worlde, was not to
Abraham or to his seede through the lawe, but through the ryghteousnes of fayth.
14 For yf they which are of the lawe be heyres, then is fayth but vayne, and the
promise of none effect:
15 Because the lawe causeth wrath. For where no lawe is, there is no
transgression.
16 Therefore by fayth is the inheritaunce geuen that it might come by grace,
that the promise myght be sure to all ye seede, not to that only which is of the
lawe, but to that also which is of the fayth of Abraham, which is the father of
vs al.
17 (As it is written, that I haue made thee a father of many nations) before
God, whom he beleued, which restoreth the dead vnto life, and calleth those
thynges whiche be not, as though they were.
18 Who contrary to hope, beleued in hope, that he shoulde be the father of many
nations, accordyng to that which was spoken: so shall thy seede be.
19 And he faynted not in the fayth, nor considered his owne body nowe dead, when
he was almost an hundred yeres old, neither yet the deadnesse o Saraes wombe.
20 He stackered not at the promise of God through vnbeliefe: but was strong in
fayth, geuyng glorie to God:
21 And beyng full certified, that what he had promised, he was able also to
perfourme.
22 And therfore was it reckened to hym for righteousnes.
23 Neuerthelesse, it is not written for hym only, that it was reckened to him:
24 But also for vs, to whom it shalbe reckened, so that we beleue on hym that
raysed vp Iesus our Lorde from the dead.
25 Which was deliuered for our sinnes, and was raysed agayne for our
iustification.

Chapter 5

1 Therefore being iustified by fayth, we are at peace with god, thorowe our
Lorde Iesus Christe:
2 By whom also we haue had an entrauce by fayth, vnto this grace wherin we
stande, and reioyce in hope of the glorie of God.
3 Not that only: but also we reioyce in tribulations, knowyng that tribulation
worketh pacience:
4 Pacience profe, profe hope:
5 And hope maketh not ashamed, because the loue of God is shedde abrode in our
heartes by the holy ghost, which is geuen vnto vs.
6 For when we were yet weake, accordyng to the tyme, Christe dyed for the
vngodly.
7 Nowe scace wyll any man dye for the righteous: Yet peraduenture for the good
some men durst dye.
8 But God setteth out his loue towarde vs, seyng that whyle we were yet sinners,
Christe dyed for vs.
9 Muche more then nowe, we that are iustified by his blood, shalbe saued from
wrath through hym.
10 For, yf when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his
sonne: much more, seyng we are reconciled, we shalbe saued by his lyfe.
11 Not only so, but we also ioye in God, through our Lorde Iesus Christe, by who
we haue nowe receaued the atonement.
12 Wherfore, as by one man sinne entred into the worlde, & death by sinne: euen
so, death entred into all men, insomuch as all haue sinned.
13 For vnto the lawe, was sinne in the worlde: but sinne is not imputed when
there is no lawe.
14 Neuerthelesse, death raigned from Adam to Moyses, ouer them also that had not
sinned with lyke transgression as dyd Adam, whiche is the figure of hym that was
to come.
15 But not as the sinne, so is the gyft. For yf through the sinne of one many be
dead: much more the grace of God, and the gyft by grace, which is by one man
Iesus Christe, hath abounded vnto many.
16 And not as by one that sinned euen so the gyft. For the iudgement was of one
into condemnation: but the gyfte, of many sinnes into iustification.
17 For yf by the sinne of one, death raigned by the meanes of one: much more
they, whiche receaue aboundaunce of grace, and of the gyfte of ryghteousnes,
shall raigne in life by the meanes of one, Iesus Christe.
18 Lykewyse then, as by the sinne of one sinne came on all men to condempnation:
euen so, by the ryghteousnes of one good came vpon all men to the ryghteousnes
of lyfe.
19 For as by one mans disobedience many became sinners: so by the obedience of
one, shall many be made ryghteous.
20 But the lawe in the meane tyme entred in, that sinne shoulde encrease. But
where sinne was plenteous, grace was more plenteous.
21 That as sinne hath raigned vnto death: euen so myght grace raigne thorowe
ryghteousnes vnto eternall lyfe, by Iesus Christe our Lorde.

Chapter 6

1 What shall we saye then? Shall we continue in sinne, that grace maye abound?
God forbyd.
2 Howe shall we that are dead to sinne, lyue any longer therin?
3 Knowe ye not, that all we whiche haue ben baptized into Iesus Christe, haue
ben baptized into his death?
4 We are buryed then with him by baptisme into his death, that lykewyse as
Christe was raysed vp from the dead by the glorie of the father: euen so, we
also shoulde walke in newnesse of lyfe.
5 For if we be graft together by the likenesse of his death: euen so shall we be
partakers of the resurrection:
6 Knowyng this, that our olde man is crucified with hym also, that the body of
sinne might vtterly be destroyed, that hencefoorth we shoulde not serue sinne.
7 For he that is dead, is iustified from sinne.
8 And yf we be dead with Christe, we beleue that we shall also lyue with him:
9 Knowyng that Christe beyng raysed from the dead, dyeth no more, death hath no
more power ouer hym.
10 For as touchyng that he dyed, he dyed concerning sinne once: And as touching
that he lyueth, he lyueth vnto God.
11 Lykewyse, recken your selues to be dead to sinne, but alyue vnto God, thorowe
Iesus Christe our Lorde.
12 Let not sinne raigne therefore in your mortall bodie, that ye shoulde
thervnto obey by the lustes of it.
13 Neither geue ye your members as instrumentes of vnryghteousnesse vnto sinne:
but geue your selues vnto God, as they that are alyue from the dead, and your
members as instrumentes of ryghteousnesse vnto God.
14 For sinne shall not haue power ouer you, because ye are not vnder ye lawe,
but vnder grace.
15 What then? Shall we sinne, because we are not vnder the lawe, but vnder
grace? God forbyd.
16 Knowe ye not, how that to whom soeuer ye commit your selues as seruauntes to
obey, his seruauntes ye are to whom ye obey: whether it be of sinne vnto death,
or of obedience vnto ryghteousnesse?
17 But God be thanked, that ye were the seruautes of sinne: but ye haue obeyed
with heart the fourme of doctrine, into the which ye were brought vnto.
18 Being then made free fro sinne, ye are become ye seruauntes of
ryghteousnesse.
19 I speake after the maner of men, because of the infirmitie of your fleshe. As
ye haue geuen your members seruauntes to vncleannesse and iniquitie, vnto
iniquitie: euen so nowe geue your members seruauntes to righteousnesse, vnto
holynesse.
20 For when ye were the seruauntes of sinne, ye were free from ryghteousnesse.
21 What fruite had ye then in those thynges, wherof ye are nowe ashamed? For the
ende of those thynges, is death.
22 But nowe ye beyng made free from sinne, and made the seruauntes of God, haue
your fruite vnto holynesse, and the ende euerlastyng lyfe.
23 For the rewarde of sinne is death: but the gyft of God is eternall lyfe,
thorowe Iesus Christe our Lorde.

Chapter 7

1 Knowe, ye not brethre (for I speake to the that knowe the lawe) how that the
law hath power ouer a ma, as long as he lyueth?
2 For the woman which is in subiectio to a man, is bounde by the lawe to the
man, as long as he lyueth: But yf the man be dead, she is loosed from the lawe
of the man.
3 So then yf whyle the man lyueth, she couple her selfe with another man, she
shalbe counted a wedlocke breaker: But yf the man be dead, she is free from the
law, so that she is no wedlocke breaker, though she couple her selfe with
another man.
4 Euen so, ye also my brethren, are dead concernyng the lawe by the body of
Christe, that ye shoulde be coupled to another, who is raysed from the dead,
that we shoulde bryng foorth fruite vnto God.
5 For when we were in the fleshe, the lustes of sinne whiche were by the lawe
wrought in our members, to bring forth fruite vnto death.
6 But nowe are we delyuered from the lawe, and dead vnto it whervnto we were in
bondage, that we shoulde serue in newenesse of spirite, and not in the oldnesse
of the letter.
7 What shall we say then? Is the lawe sinne? God forbyd. Neuerthelesse, I knewe
not sinne, but by the lawe: For I had not knowen lust, except the lawe had
sayde, thou shalt not lust.
8 But sinne, takyng occasion by the commaundement, wrought in me all maner of
concupiscence. For without the lawe, sinne was dead.
9 I once lyued without lawe: But when the commaundement came, sinne reuyued,
10 And I was dead. And the very same commaundemet, which was ordeyned vnto lyfe,
was founde to be vnto me an occasion of death.
11 For sinne, takyng occasion by the commaundement, hath deceaued me, and by the
same slewe me.
12 Wherfore the lawe is holy, and the commaundement holy, & iust and good.
13 Was that then which was good, made death vnto me? God forbyd. But sinne, that
sinne myght appeare, by that which was good to worke death in me: that sinne by
ye commaundement, myght be out of measure sinfull.
14 For we knowe, that the lawe is spirituall: but I am carnall, solde vnder
sinne.
15 For that which I do, I alowe not. For what I woulde, that do I not: but what
I hate, that do I.
16 If I do nowe that which I woulde not, I consent vnto the lawe, that it is
good.
17 Nowe then, it is not I that do it: but sinne that dwelleth in me.
18 For I knowe, that in me, that is to say in my fleshe, dwelleth no good thyng.
For to wyll, is present with me: but I fynde no meanes to perfourme that which
is good.
19 For the good that I woulde, do I not: But the euyll which I woulde not, that
do I.
20 And yf I do that I woulde not, then is it not I that doth it, but sinne that
dwelleth in me.
21 I fynde then by the lawe, that when I woulde do good, euyll is present with
me.
22 For I delite in the lawe of God, after the inwarde man:
23 But I see another lawe in my members, rebellyng agaynst the lawe of my mynde,
and subduyng me vnto the lawe of sinne, which is in my members.
24 O wretched man that I am: Who shall deliuer me from the body of this death?
25 I thanke God through Iesus Christe our Lorde. So then, with the mynde I my
selfe serue the lawe of God: but with the fleshe, the lawe of sinne.

Chapter 8

1 There is then no dampnation to them which are in Christe Iesu, which walke not
after the fleshe, but after the spirite.
2 For the lawe of the spirite of lyfe, through Iesus Christe, hath made me free
from the lawe of sinne and death.
3 For what the lawe coulde not do, in as much as it was weake through the
fleshe, God sendyng his owne sonne, in the similitude of sinfull fleshe, euen by
sinne, condempned sinne in the fleshe:
4 That the ryghteousnesse of the lawe, myght be fulfylled in vs, which walke not
after the fleshe, but after the spirite.
5 For they that are carnall, are carnally mynded: But they that are spirituall,
are spiritually mynded.
6 To be carnally mynded, is death: But to be spiritually mynded, is lyfe &
peace:
7 Because that the fleshly mynde is enmitie agaynst God: For it is not obedient
to the lawe of God, neither can be.
8 So then, they that are in the fleshe, can not please God.
9 But ye are not in the fleshe, but in the spirite, yf so be that the spirite of
God dwell in you. If any man haue not the spirite of Christe, the same is none
of his.
10 And yf Christe be in you, the body is dead because of sinne: but the spirite
is lyfe for ryghteousnesse sake.
11 But, yf ye spirite of hym that raysed vp Iesus from the dead, dwell in you:
euen he that raised vp Christe from the dead, shall also quicken your mortall
bodyes, because that his spirite dwelleth in you.
12 Therfore brethren, we are detters, not to the fleshe, to lyue after the
fleshe.
13 For if ye liue after ye fleshe, ye shall dye: But if ye through the spirite,
do mortifie the deedes of the body, ye shall lyue.
14 For as many as are led by the spirite of God, they are the sonnes of God.
15 For ye haue not receaued the spirite of bondage agayne to feare: but ye haue
receaued the spirite of adoption, wherby we cry, Abba, father.
16 The same spirite, beareth witnesse to our spirite, that we are ye sonnes of
God.
17 If we be sonnes, then are we also heyres, the heyres of God, and ioyntheyres
with Christe: So that we suffer together, that we may be also glorified
together.
18 For I am certaynely perswaded that the afflictions of this tyme, are not
worthy of the glory which shalbe shewed vpon vs.
19 For the feruent desire of the creature, abydeth lokyng whe the sonnes of God
shall appeare:
20 Because the creature is subiect to vanitie, not wyllyng, but for hym which
hath subdued the same in hope.
21 For the same creature shalbe made free from the bondage of corruptio, into
the glorious libertie of ye sonnes of God.
22 For we knowe, that euery creature groneth with vs also, and trauayleth in
payne, euen vnto this tyme.
23 Not only they, but we also which haue the first fruites of the spirite, and
we our selues mourne in our selues, and wayte for the adoption, euen the
deliueraunce of our body.
24 For we are saued by hope: But hope that is seene, is no hope. For howe can a
man hope for that which he seeth?
25 But and yf we hope for that we see not, the do we with pacience abide for it.
26 Lykewyse, the spirite also helpeth our infirmities. For we knowe not what to
desire as we ought: but ye spirite maketh great intercession for vs, with
gronynges, which can not be expressed.
27 And he that searcheth the heartes, knoweth what is the meanyng of the
spirite: for he maketh intercession for the saintes accordyng to the pleasure of
God.
28 For we knowe yt all thinges worke for the best, vnto them that loue God, to
them which also are called of purpose.
29 For those which he knewe before, he also dyd predestinate, that they shoulde
be lyke fashioned vnto the shape of his sonne, that he myght be ye first
begotten among many brethren.
30 Moreouer, whom he dyd predestinate, the also he called. And whom he called,
them also he iustified: And whom he iustified, them he also glorified.
31 What shall we then say to these thynges? If God be on our syde, who can be
agaynst vs?
32 Which spared not his owne sonne, but gaue hym for vs all: Howe shall he not
with hym also geue vs all thynges?
33 Who shall lay any thyng to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that
iustifieth:
34 Who is he that can condempne? It is Christe which dyed, yea rather which is
raysed agayne, which is also on the ryght hande of God, and maketh intercession
for vs.
35 Who shall seperate vs from the loue of God? Shall tribulation or anguishe, or
persecution, either hunger, either nakednesse, either peryll, either sworde?
36 As it is written: For thy sake are we kylled all daye long, and are counted
as sheepe for the slaughter.
37 Neuerthelesse, in all these thinges we ouercome, through hym that loued vs.
38 For I am sure, that neither death, neither lyfe, neither angels, nor rule,
neither power, neither thynges present, neither thynges to come,
39 Neither heygth nor deapth, neither any other creature, shalbe able to
seperate vs from the loue of God, which is in Christe Iesu our Lorde.

Chapter 9

1 I say ye trueth in Christ, I lye not, my conscience also bearyng me witnesse
by the holy ghost,
2 That I haue great heauinesse, & continuall sorowe in my heart.
3 For I haue wisshed my selfe to be cursed from Christe, for my brethren, my
kynsmen as pertaynyng to ye fleshe,
4 Which are the Israelites: To whom pertayneth the adoption, and the glory, &
the couenauntes, and the lawe that was geuen, and the seruice of God, and the
promises.
5 Of whom are the fathers, of whom as concernyng the fleshe, Christe came, which
is God, in all thynges to be praysed for euer. Amen.
6 And it can not be, that the worde of God shoulde take none effect. For they
are not all Israelites, which are of Israel:
7 Neither are they all chyldren that are the seede of Abraham: But in Isaac
shall thy seede be called.
8 That is to say: They which are the chyldren of the fleshe, are not the
chyldren of God: But they which be the childre of promise, are counted the
seede.
9 For this is a worde of promise: About this tyme wyll I come, and Sara shall
haue a sonne.
10 Not only this, but also Rebecca was with chylde by one euen by our father
Isaac.
11 For yer the chyldren were borne, when they had neither done good neither bad,
(that the purpose of God by election might stande: not by the reason of workes,
but by the caller)
12 It was sayde vnto her: The elder shall serue the younger.
13 As it is written: Iacob haue I loued, but Esau haue I hated.
14 What shall we say then? Is there any vnrighteousnes with God? God forbid.
15 For he sayth to Moyses: I wyll shewe mercy to whom I shewe mercy: And wyll
haue compassion, on whom I haue compassion.
16 So then it is not of the wyller, nor of the runner: but of the mercy of God.
17 For the scripture sayth vnto Pharao: Euen for this same purpose haue I
stirred thee vp, to shewe my power in thee, & that my name myght be declared
throughout all the worlde.
18 So hath he mercy on whom he wyll, and whom he wyll, he hardeneth.
19 Thou wylt say then vnto me: Why then blameth he vs yet? For who hath ben able
to resist his wyll?
20 But O man, what art thou which disputest with God? Shall the worke say to the
workeman, why hast thou made me on this fashion?
21 Hath not the potter power ouer the clay, euen of the same lumpe to make one
vessel vnto honour, and another vnto dishonour?
22 If then, God wyllyng to shewe his wrath, and to make his power knowe, suffred
with long patience, the vessels of wrath, ordayned to destruction,
23 To declare the riches of his glory, on the vessels of mercy, which he had
prepared vnto glory:
24 Whom also he called, not of ye Iewes only, but also of the Gentiles.
25 As he sayth also in Osee: I wyll call them my people, which were not my
people: and her beloued, which was not beloued.
26 And it shall come to passe, that in the place where it was sayde vnto them:
Ye are not my people, there shall they be called ye chyldren of the lyuyng God.
27 And Esaias cryeth concerning Israel: Though the number of the children of
Israel, be as the sande of the sea, yet but a remnaunt shalbe saued.
28 For he finisheth the worde, and maketh it short in ryghteousnesse: For a
short worde wyll the Lorde make on earth.
29 And as Esaias sayde before: Except the Lorde of Sabboth had lefte vs seede,
we had ben made as Sodoma, and had ben lykened to Gomorrha.
30 What shall we say then? that the gentiles which folowed not ryghteousnes,
haue obtayned righteousnesse: euen the ryghteousnesse which cometh of fayth.
31 But Israel, which folowed the lawe of ryghteousnesse, hath not attayned to
the lawe of ryghteousnesse.
32 Wherfore? Because they sought it not by fayth: but as it were by the workes
of the lawe. For they haue stumbled at the stumblyng stone,
33 As it is written: Beholde, I put in Sion a stumblyng stone, and a rocke of
offence: And whosoeuer beleueth on hym, shall not be confounded.

Chapter 10

1 Brethren, my heartes desire & prayer to God for Israel, is, that they myght be
saued.
2 For I beare them recorde, that they haue a zeale of God: but not accordyng to
knowledge.
3 For they beyng ignoraunt of Gods ryghteousnesse, and goyng about to stablyshe
their owne righteousnesse, haue not ben obedient vnto the ryghteousness of God.
4 For Christe is the ende of the lawe, for ryghteousnesse to all that beleue.
5 For Moyses writeth, of the ryghteousnesse which is of the lawe, howe that the
man which doth those thinges, shall lyue by them.
6 But the ryghteousnesse which is of fayth, speaketh on this wise: Say not thou
in thyne heart, who shall ascende into heauen? That is, to fetch Christe downe
from aboue.
7 Either who shall descende into the deepe? That is, to fetch vp Christe agayne
from the dead.
8 But what sayth he? The worde is nye thee, euen in thy mouth, and in thy heart.
This same is the worde of faith, which we preache
9 For if thou shalt knowledge with thy mouth, the Lorde Iesus, and shalt beleue
in thyne heart that God raysed hym from the dead, thou shalt be saued.
10 For with the heart man beleueth vnto ryghteousnesse, and with ye mouth man
confesseth to saluation.
11 For the scripture sayth: Whosoeuer beleueth on him, shall not be cofounded.
12 There is no difference betwene the Iewe & the Greke: for the same Lorde ouer
al, is riche vnto al yt call vpon him.
13 For whosoeuer shall call on the name of the Lorde, shalbe saued.
14 Howe then shall they call on hym, on whom they haue not beleued? Howe shall
they beleue on hym of whom they haue not hearde? Howe shal they heare, without a
preacher?
15 And howe shall they preache, except they be sent? As it is written: Howe
beautifull are the feete of them whiche bryng good tydynges of peace, & bryng
good tydynges of good thynges.
16 But they haue not all obeyed ye Gospel. For Esaias sayth: Lorde, who hath
beleued our sayinges?
17 So then fayth commeth by hearyng, and hearyng commeth by the worde of God.
18 But I aske: Haue they not hearde? No doubt, their sounde went out into all
landes, and their wordes into the endes of the worlde.
19 But I demaunde whether Israel did knowe or not? First Moyses sayth: I wyll
prouoke you to enuie, by them that are no people: and by a foolyshe nation I
wyll anger you.
20 And Esaias is bolde, and sayeth: I am founde of them that sought me not: I am
manifest vnto them that asked not after me.
21 But agaynst Israel he sayeth: All day long haue I stretched foorth my handes
vnto a people that beleueth not, but speaketh agaynst me.

Chapter 11

1 I say then, hath God cast away his people? God forbid. For I also am an
Israelite, of the seede of Abraham, of the tribe of Beniamin,
2 God hath not cast away his people which he knewe before. Wote ye not what the
scripture sayth of Elias? howe he maketh intercession to God, agaynst Israel,
3 Saying: Lord, they haue kylled thy prophetes, and dygged downe thyne aulters:
and I am left alone, and they seke my lyfe.
4 But what sayth the aunswere of God vnto hym? I haue reserued vnto my selfe
seuen thousande men, which haue not bowed the knee to ye image of Baal.
5 Euen so at this tyme, there is a remnaunt, according to the election of grace.
6 If it be of grace, then is it not nowe of workes: For the grace is no more
grace. But yf it be of workes, then is it nowe no grace: For then worke is no
more worke.
7 What then? Israel hath not obtayned that which he sought: but the election
hath obtayned it, the remnaunt hath ben blynded,
8 Accordyng as it is written: God hath geuen them the spirite of remorse, eyes
that they shoulde not see, and eares that they shoulde not heare, euen vnto this
day.
9 And Dauid sayth: Let their table be made a snare, and a trappe, and a
stumbling stocke, and a recompence vnto the.
10 Let their eyes be blinded yt they see not, & bowe thou downe their backe
alway.
11 I say then, haue they therfore stumbled, that they shoulde fall? God forbyd:
but through their fall, saluation is come vnto the gentiles, for to prouoke them
withall.
12 Nowe, yf the fall of them be ye ryches of the worlde, and the minishyng of
the, the ryches of the gentiles: Howe much more their fulnesse?
13 For I speake to you gentiles, in as much as I am the Apostle of the gentiles,
I magnifie myne office.
14 If by any meane I may prouoke the which are my fleshe, and myght saue some of
them.
15 For yf the castyng away of them, be the reconcilyng of the worlde: what shall
the receauyng of them be, but lyfe from the dead?
16 For yf the first fruites be holy, ye whole lumpe also is holy. And yf the
roote be holy, the braunches also.
17 And yf some of the brauches be broken of, and thou beyng a wylde Oliue tree,
wast graft in among them, & made partaker of the roote and fatnesse of the Oliue
tree:
18 Boast not thy selfe agaynst the braunches. For yf thou boast thy selfe, thou
bearest not the roote, but the roote thee.
19 Thou wylt say then, the braunches are broken of, that I might be graft in.
20 Well: because of vnbeliefe, they were broken of, and thou stodest stedfast in
fayth. Be not hye mynded, but feare.
21 For seyng that God spared not the naturall braunches take heede lest it come
to passe, that he spare not thee.
22 Beholde therfore, the kyndnesse and rigorousnesse of God: on them which fell,
rigorousnesse: but towardes thee, kyndnesse, if thou continue in kindnesse, or
els thou shalt be hewen of:
23 And they, yf they byde not styll in vnbeliefe, shalbe graffed in: For God is
of power to graffe them in agayne.
24 For yf thou were cut out of a naturall wylde Oliue tree, and were graffed
contrary to nature, in a true Oliue tree: Howe much more shall the naturall
braunches, be graffed in their owne Oliue tree?
25 For I woulde not brethren, that ye shoulde be ignoraunt of this misterie,
(lest ye shoulde be wyse in your owne conceiptes,) that partly blyndnesse is
happened in Israel, vntyll the fulnesse of the gentiles be come in:
26 And so all Israel shalbe saued, as it is written: There shall come out of
Sion he that doth delyuer, and shall turne away vngodlynesse from Iacob.
27 And this is my couenaunt vnto them, when I shall take away their sinnes.
28 As concernyng the Gospel, they are enemies for your sakes: but as touching
the election, they are loued for the fathers sakes.
29 For the gyftes and callyng of God, are without repentaunce.
30 For, as ye in tyme past haue not beleued God, yet haue nowe obtayned mercie,
through their vnbeliefe:
31 Euen so nowe haue they not beleued the mercie shewed vnto you, that they also
may obtayne mercie.
32 For God hath wrapped all nations in vnbeliefe, yt he myght haue mercie on al.
33 O the deepenesse of the ryches both of the wisdome and knowledge of God, howe
vnsearcheable are his iudgementes, and his wayes past fyndyng out?
34 For who hath knowen the mynde of the Lorde? Or who hath ben his councellour?
35 Either who hath geuen vnto hym first, & he shalbe recompensed agayne.
36 For of hym, and through hym, and for hym, are all thynges: To whom be glory
for euer. Amen.

Chapter 12

1 I beseche you therfore brethren, by the mercifulnesse of God, that ye geue vp
your bodyes a quicke sacrifice, holy, acceptable vnto God, whiche is your
reasonable seruice:
2 And fasshion not your selues lyke vnto this worlde, but be ye chaunged in your
shape, by ye renuing of your minde, that ye may proue what is the wyll of God,
good, and acceptable, and perfect.
3 For I say, through the grace geuen vnto me, to euery man among you, that no
man esteeme of hym selfe more then he ought to esteeme: but so esteeme hym selfe
that he behaue hymselfe discretelye, accordyng as God hath dealt to euerye man
the measure of fayth.
4 For as we haue many members in one body, and all members haue not one office:
5 So, we beyng many, are one body in Christe, and euery one members one of
another.
6 Seyng that we haue dyuers giftes, accordyng to the grace that is geuen vnto
vs, yf any man haue the gyft, either prophesie after the measure of fayth,
7 Either office in administration, or he that teacheth in teachyng:
8 Or he that exhorteth, in exhortyng, he that geueth in singlenesse, he that
ruleth in diligence, he that is mercifull in chearefulnesse.
9 Loue without dissimulation, hatyng euyll, cleauyng to good.
10 Affectioned one to another with brotherly loue, in geuyng honour, go one
before another.
11 Not lither in businesse, feruent in spirite, seruyng the Lorde,
12 Reioycyng in hope, pacient in trouble, instant in prayer,
13 Distributyng to ye necessitie of saintes, geuen to hospitalitie.
14 Blesse them which persecute you, blesse, and curse not.
15 Reioyce with them that do reioyce, and wepe with them that wepe.
16 Beyng of lyke affection one towardes another, beyng not hye mynded: but
makyng your selues equall to them of the lower sort. Be not wise in your owne
opinions,
17 Recompensyng to no man euyll for euyll. Prouydyng afore hande thynges honest,
not only before God, but also in the syght of all men.
18 If it be possible, as much as lyeth in you, lyue peaceably with all men.
19 Dearely beloued, auenge not your selues, but rather geue place vnto wrath.
For it is written: Uengeaunce is myne, I wyll repay sayth the Lorde.
20 Therfore, yf thyne enemie hunger, feede hym: yf he thyrst, geue him drinke.
For in so doyng, thou shalt heape coales of fyre on his head.
21 Be not ouercome of euyll, but ouercome euyll with good.

Chapter 13

1 Let euery soule be subiect vnto the hyer powers: For there is no power but of
god. The powers that be, are ordeyned of God.
2 Whosoeuer therfore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinaunce of God: And
they that resist, shall receaue to the selues dampnation.
3 For rulers are not fearefull to good workes, but to the euyll. Wylt thou not
feare the power? Do well, and thou shalt haue prayse of the same.
4 For he is the minister of God for thy wealth. But yf thou do euyll, feare: For
he beareth not the sworde in vayne, for he is the minister of God, reuenger of
wrath on hym that doth euyll.
5 Wherfore, ye must needes be subiect, not only for feare of punishment: but
also because of conscience.
6 And for this cause pay ye tribute. For they are Gods ministers, seruyng for
the same purpose.
7 Geue to euery man therfore his dutie, tribute to whom tribute, custome to whom
custome, feare to whom feare, honour to whom honour belongeth.
8 Owe nothyng to no man, but to loue one another: (For he that loueth another,
hath fulfylled the lawe.
9 For this: Thou shalt not commit adultrie, thou shalt not kyll, thou shalt not
steale, thou shalt not beare false witnesse, thou shalt not lust: and yf there
be any other commaundement, it is comprehended in this saying: Namelye, Thou
shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe.
10 Charitie worketh no yll to his neyghbour, therfore the fulfyllyng of the lawe
is charitie.)
11 And chiefely consideryng the season, howe that it is tyme that we shoulde
nowe awake out of slepe: For nowe is our saluation nearer, then when we beleued.
12 The nyght is passed, the day is come nye. Let vs therfore caste away the
deedes of darknesse, & let vs put on the armour of lyght.
13 Let vs walke honestly as in the day, not in riotyng & dronkennesse, neither
in chaumberyng & wantonnesse, neither in strife and enuying.
14 But put ye on ye Lorde Iesus Christe. And make not prouision for the fleshe,
to the lustes therof.

Chapter 14

1 Hym that is weake in the fayth, receaue: not to iudgementes of disputyng.
2 One beleueth yt he may eate euery thyng: Another which is weake, eateth
hearbes.
3 Let not hym that eateth, dispise hym that eateth not: And let not hym which
eateth not, iudge hym that eateth. For God hath receaued hym.
4 What art thou that iudgest another mans seruaunt? To his owne maister he
standeth or falleth: Yea, he shalbe holden vp. For god is able to make him
stande.
5 This man putteth difference betwene day and day. Another man counteth all
dayes alyke. Let euery man be fully perswaded in his owne mynde.
6 He that esteemeth the day, esteemeth it vnto ye Lorde: And he that esteemeth
not the day to the Lorde, he doeth not esteeme it. He that eateth, eateth to the
Lorde, for he geueth God thankes: And he that eateth not, eateth not to the
Lorde, and geueth God thankes.
7 For none of vs lyueth to hym selfe, and no man dyeth to hym selfe.
8 For yf we lyue, we lyue vnto ye Lorde: And if we dye, we dye vnto the Lorde.
Whether we lyue therfore, or dye, we are the Lordes.
9 For to this ende Christe both dyed and rose agayne and reuyued, that he myght
be Lorde both of dead & quicke.
10 But why doest thou then iudge thy brother? Either, why doest thou despise thy
brother? We shalbe all brought before the iudgement seate of Christe.
11 For it is written, I lyue, sayth the Lorde: and all knees shall bowe to me, &
all tongues shall geue prayse to God.
12 So shal euery one of vs geue accompt of hym selfe to God.
13 Let vs not therfore iudge one another any more: But iudge this rather, that
no man put a stumblyng blocke, or an occasion to fall, in his brothers way.
14 For I knowe, and am perswaded by the Lorde Iesus, that there is nothyng
common of it selfe: but vnto hym that iudgeth it to be common, to hym is it
common.
15 But yf thy brother be greeued with thy meat, nowe walkest thou not
charitably. Destroy not hym with thy meat, for whom Christe dyed.
16 Let not your good be euyll spoken of.
17 For the kyngdome of God, is not meat and drinke: but righteousnesse, & peace,
and ioy in the holy ghost.
18 For he that in these thynges serueth Christe, pleaseth God, and is comended
of men.
19 Let vs therfore folowe those thynges which make for peace, & thynges wherwith
one may edifie another.
20 Destroy not the worke of God for meates sake. All thinges are pure: but it is
euyll for that man, which eateth with offence.
21 It is good neither to eate fleshe, neither to drinke wine, neither any thyng
wherby thy brother stumbleth, either falleth, or is made weake.
22 Hast thou fayth? Haue it with thy selfe before God. Happy is he that
condempneth not hym selfe in the thyng which he aloweth.
23 For he that maketh conscience, is damned yf he eate, because he eateth not of
fayth: For whatsoeuer is not of fayth, is sinne.

Chapter 15

1 We whiche are stronge, ought to beare ye fraylnes of the weake, & not to
stande in our owne conceiptes.
2 Let euery man please his neygbour, in that that is good to edifiyng.
3 For Christe pleased not him selfe. But as it is written: The rebukes of them
which rebuked thee, fell on me.
4 For whatsoeuer thynges haue ben written afore time, were written for our
learnyng, that we through pacience and comfort of ye scriptures might haue hope.
5 The God of pacience and consolation, graunt you to be lyke mynded one towardes
another, after the ensample of Christe Iesu:
6 That ye all agreeyng together, may with one mouth prayse God, and the father
of our Lorde Iesus Christe.
7 Wherfore, receaue ye one another, as Christe receaued vs, to ye prayse of God.
8 And I say, that Iesus Christe was a minister of the circumcisio for the trueth
of God, to confirme the promise made vnto the fathers:
9 And that the gentiles myght prayse God for his mercie, as it is written: For
this cause I wyll praise thee among the gentiles, and syng vnto thy name.
10 And againe he saith: Reioyce ye gentiles with his people.
11 And againe: praise the Lord al ye gentiles, & laude him al ye people
together.
12 And againe Esaias saith: There shalbe the roote of Iesse, and he that shall
rise to raigne ouer the gentiles, in hym shall the gentiles trust.
13 The God of hope, fyll you with al ioy and peace in beleuyng, that ye may be
riche in hope, through the power of the holy ghost.
14 I my selfe am perswaded of you my brethre, that ye also are full of goodnes,
and fylled with all knowledge, able also to exhort one another.
15 Neuerthelesse brethren, I haue somewhat more boldly written vnto you, to put
you in remembraunce, through the grace that is geuen me of God,
16 That I should be the minister of Iesus Christe, to the gentiles, and shoulde
minister the Gospell of God, that the offeryng of the gentiles might be
acceptable, and sanctified by the holy ghost.
17 I haue therefore whereof I may reioyce through Christ Iesus, in those thynges
which parteyne to God.
18 For I dare not speake of any of those thinges which Christ hath not wrought
by me, to make the gentiles obedient with worde and deede,
19 In myghtie signes and wonders, by the power of the spirite of God: so that
from Hierusalem, & the coastes rounde about, vnto Illyricum, I haue fullye
preached the Gospell of Christe.
20 So haue I enforced my selfe to preach the Gospell, not where Christe was
named, lest I shoulde haue buylt vpon an other mans foundation.
21 But as it is written: To whom he was not spoken of, they shall see: and they
that hearde not, shall vnderstande.
22 For this cause I haue ben oft let, that I coulde not come vnto you.
23 But nowe, seyng I haue no more to do in these countreys, and also haue ben
desirous many yeres to come vnto you:
24 Whensoeuer I take my iourney into Spayne, I wyll come to you: For I trust to
see you in my iourney, and to be brought on my waye thytherwarde by you, after
that I be somewhat fylled with you.
25 But nowe go I vnto Hierusalem, to minister vnto the saintes.
26 For it hath pleased them of Macedonia & Achaia to make a certaine comon
gatheryng for the poore saintes whiche are at Hierusalem.
27 It hath pleased them veryly, & their detters are they. For yf the gentiles be
made partakers of their spirituall thynges, their duetie is to minister vnto the
in carnall thynges.
28 When I haue perfourmed this, and haue sealed to the this fruite, I wyll come
by you into Spayne.
29 And I am sure, that when I come vnto you, I shall come with aboundaunce of
the blessyng of the Gospell of Christe.
30 I beseche you brethren for ye Lorde Iesus Christes sake, and for the loue of
the spirite, that ye helpe me in my busynesse with your prayers to God for me:
31 That I may be delyuered from them which beleue not in Iurie, & that this my
seruice which I haue at Hierusalem may be accepted of the saintes:
32 That I may come vnto you with ioy, by the wyll of God, and may with you be
refresshed.
33 The God of peace be with you al. Ame.

Chapter 16

1 I commende vnto you Phebe our sister, whiche is a minister of the Church of
Cenchrea,
2 That ye receaue her in the Lorde, as it becommeth saintes, and that ye assist
her in whatsoeuer busynesse she hath nede of you: For she hath suckoured many,
and my selfe also.
3 Greete Priscilla and Aquila my helpers in Christe Iesu:
4 (Which haue for my lyfe layde downe their owne neckes: Unto whom, not onlye I
geue thankes, but also all the Churches of the gentiles)
5 Lykewyse greete the Churche that is in their house. Salute my welbeloued
Epenetus, which is the first fruite of Achaia in Christe.
6 Greete Marie, which bestowed much labour on vs.
7 Salute Andronicus and Iunia my cosins, and prisoners with me also, which are
wel taken among the Apostles, and were in Christe before me.
8 Greete Amplias my beloued in the Lorde.
9 Salute Urban our helper in Christe, and Stachys my beloued.
10 Salute Appelles approued in Christe, salute them whiche are of Aristobulus
housholde.
11 Salute Herodion my kinsman, greete them that be of the housholde of
Narcissus, which are in the Lorde.
12 Salute Tryphena, & Tryphosa, which labour in the Lorde. Salute the beloued
Persis, which laboured much in the Lorde.
13 Salute Rufus chosen in the Lorde, and his mother and myne.
14 Greete Asyncritus, Phlegon, Herman, Patrobas, Mercurius, and the brethren
which are with them.
15 Salute Philologus and Iulia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas, and all the
saintes which are with them.
16 Salute one an other with an holy kysse. The Churches of Christ salute you.
17 Nowe I beseche you brethren, marke them whiche cause deuision, & geue
occasions of euyll, contrarie to the doctrine whiche ye haue learned, and auoyde
them.
18 For they that are suche, serue not the Lorde Iesus Christe, but their owne
belly, and with sweete and flatteryng wordes deceaue the heartes of the
innocentes.
19 For your obedience is gone abrode vnto al men. I am glad therfore no doubt,
of you: But yet I would haue you wise vnto that whiche is good, & simple
concernyng euyll.
20 The God of peace shall treade Satan vnder your feete shortly. The grace of
our Lorde Iesus Christe be with you.
21 Timotheus my workfelowe, and Lucius, and Iason, & Sosipater my kinsemen,
salute you.
22 I Tertius, whiche wrote this epistle, salute you in the Lorde.
23 Gaius myne hoast, and of the whole Churche, saluteth you. Erastus the
chamberlaine of the citie saluteth you, and Quartus a brother.
24 The grace of our Lorde Iesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
25 To hym that is of power to stablisshe you, according to my Gospell, and
preachyng of Iesus Christe, by reuealyng of the misterie whiche was kept secrete
sence the worlde began,
26 But nowe is opened, and by the scriptures of the prophetes, at the
comaundement of the euerlastyng God, to the obedience of fayth, among all
nations publisshed:
27 To the same God, wyse only, be glorie, through Iesus Christe, for euer. Amen.
This epistle was written to the Romanes from Corinthus


1 Corinthians

Chapter 1

1 Paule called to be an Apostle of Iesu Christ, through the wyll of God, and
brother Sostenes:
2 Unto the Church of God whiche is at Corinthus: To the that are sanctified in
Christe Iesus, saintes by callyng, with all that call on the name of our Lorde
Iesus Christe in euery place, both of theirs and ours:
3 Grace be vnto you, and peace from God our father, and from the Lorde Iesus
Christe.
4 I thanke my God alwayes on your behalfe, for the grace of God whiche is geuen
you in Iesus Christe:
5 That in all thynges ye are made riche in hym, in all vtteraunce, & in all
knowledge:
6 As the testimonie of Iesus Christ was confirmed in you.
7 So that ye are destitute of no gyft, wayting for the appearing of our Lord
Iesus Christe,
8 Whiche shall also strength you vnto the ende, that ye may be blamelesse in the
day of our Lord Iesus Christ.
9 God is faythfull, by whom ye are called vnto the felowship of his sonne Iesus
Christe our Lorde.
10 Nowe I beseche you brethren by the name of our Lorde Iesus Christe, that ye
all speake one thyng, and that there be no discentions among you, but be ye knit
together, in one mynde, and in one meanyng.
11 For it is shewed vnto me my brethren, of you, by them whiche are of the house
of Cloe, that there are contentions among you.
12 Nowe this I saye, that euery one of you saith, I am of Paul, and I am of
Apollo, and I am of Cephas, and I am of Christe.
13 Is Christe deuided? was Paul crucified for you? eyther were ye baptized in
the name of Paul?
14 I thanke God that I baptized none of you but Crispus and Gaius:
15 Lest any shoulde say, that I had baptized in myne owne name.
16 I baptized also the housholde of Stephana: Furthermore knowe I not whether I
baptized any other.
17 For Christe sent me not to baptize, but to preache the Gospell: not with
wisedome of wordes, lest ye crosse of Christ shoulde be made of none effect.
18 For the preachyng of the crosse, is to them that perishe foolishnesse: but
vnto vs which are saued, it is the power of God.
19 For it is written, I wyll destroye the wisedome of the wyse, and wyll cast
away the vnderstandyng of the prudent.
20 Where is the wise? where is ye scribe? where is the disputer of this worlde?
Hath not God made the wisedome of this worlde foolyshenesse?
21 For after that the world through wisedome knewe not God, in the wisedome of
God: it pleased God through foolishnesse of preachyng to saue them that beleue.
22 For the Iewes require a signe, & the Grekes seke after wisedome:
23 But we preache Christe crucified, vnto the Iewes a stumblyng blocke, and vnto
the Grekes foolyshnesse:
24 But vnto them which are called both of the Iewes and Grekes we preache
Christe the power of God, and the wisedome of God.
25 For the foolishnesse of God, is wiser then men, and the weakenesse of God, is
stronger then men.
26 Brethren, ye see your callyng, howe that not many wise men after the fleshe,
not many myghtie, not many noble are called.
27 But God hath chosen the foolyshe thynges of the worlde, to confounde the
wise: And God hath chosen the weake thynges of the worlde, to confounde thynges
which are myghtie:
28 And vnnoble thynges of the worlde, & thinges which are despysed, hath God
chosen, yea and thinges which are not, to bryng to naught thynges that are:
29 That no fleshe shoulde reioyce in his presence.
30 And of hym are ye in Christe Iesu, whiche of God is made vnto vs wisedome,
and righteousnesse, and sanctification, and redemption:
31 That accordyng as it is written: he that reioyceth, let hym reioyce in the
Lorde.

Chapter 2

1 And I brethren, when I came to you, came not in gloriousnesse of wordes, or of
wisedome, shewing vnto you the testimonie of God.
2 For I esteemed not to knowe any thyng among you saue Iesus Christe, and hym
crucified.
3 And I was among you in weaknesse, and in feare, and in much tremblyng.
4 And my wordes and my preachyng was not with entysing wordes of mans wisedome,
but in shewyng of the spirite, and of power:
5 That your fayth should not stande in the wisedome of men, but in the power of
God.
6 And we speake wisedome among the that are perfite: not the wisedome of this
world, neither of the princes of this world, which come to naught.
7 But we speake the wisedome of God in a misterie euen the hyd wisedome which
God ordeyned before the worlde, vnto our glorie.
8 Which none of ye princes of this world knewe: For had they knowen it, they
woulde not haue crucified the Lorde of glorie.
9 But as it is written: The eye hath not seen, & the eare hath not heard,
neither haue entred into the heart of man, the thynges which God hath prepared
for them that loue hym.
10 But God hath reuealed the vnto vs by his spirite: For the spirite searcheth
all thinges, yea the deepe thinges of God.
11 For what man knoweth the thynges of a man, saue ye spirite of man which is in
hym? Euen so, the thinges of God, knoweth no man, but ye spirite of God.
12 And we haue receaued, not the spirite of the worlde, but the spirite which is
of God, that we myght know the thinges that are geuen to vs of God.
13 Which thynges also we speake, not in the wordes which mans wisedome teacheth,
but which ye holy ghost teacheth, comparyng spirituall thynges with spirituall
thynges.
14 But the naturall man perceaueth not the thynges of ye spirite of God, for
they are foolyshenesse vnto hym: Neither can he knowe them because they are
spiritually discerned.
15 But he that is spirituall, discerneth all thynges, yet he hym selfe is iudged
of no man.
16 For who hath knowen the mynde of the Lorde, that he myght instruct hym? But
we haue the mynde of Christe.

Chapter 3

1 And I coulde not speake vnto you brethren, as vnto spirituall, but as vnto
carnall eue as vnto babes in Christe.
2 I gaue you mylke to drynke, and not meate: For ye then were not stronge,
neither are ye as yet.
3 For ye are carnal. Seing then, there is among you enuying, & stryfe, and
sectes, are ye not carnall, and walke as men?
4 For whyle one sayth, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollo, are ye not
carnall?
5 What is Paul? what is Apollo? Only ministers are they by whom ye beleued, euen
as the Lorde gaue to euery man.
6 I haue planted, Apollo watered: but God gaue the encrease.
7 So then, neither is he that planteth any thyng, neither he that watreth: but
God that geueth the encrease.
8 He that planteth, & he that watreth, are one, and euery man shal receaue his
rewarde accordyng to his labour.
9 For we together are Gods labourers, ye are Gods husbandrie ye are Gods
buyldyng.
10 Accordyng to the grace of God geuen vnto me, as a wise maister builder haue I
layde the foundation, and another buyldeth theron. But let euery man take heede
howe he buyldeth vpon.
11 For other foundation can no man lay, then that that is layde, which is Iesus
Christe.
12 If any man buylde on this foundation, golde, syluer, precious stones, tymber,
haye or stubble:
13 Euery mans worke shal appeare. The day shall declare it, because it shalbe
reuealed by the fire: And the fire shall trie euery mans worke what it is.
14 If any mans worke that he hath built vpon abyde, he shall receaue a reward.
15 If any mans worke burne, he shall suffer losse, but he shalbe safe hym selfe:
neuertheles, yet as it were through fire.
16 Knowe ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the spirite of God
dwelleth in you?
17 If any man defyle the temple of God, hym shall God destroy. For the temple of
God is holy, which temple ye are.
18 Let no man deceaue him selfe. Yf any man among you seeme to be wise in this
worlde, let hym be a foole, that he may be wyse.
19 For the wisedome of this worlde, is foolishnesse with God. For it is writte:
He compasseth the wise in their own craftynesse.
20 And agayne The Lorde knoweth the thoughtes of the wyse, that they be vayne.
21 Therfore, let no man reioyce in men: For all thynges are yours:
22 Whether it be Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, either the worlde, either lyfe, or
death, whether they be present thinges, or thynges to come, all are yours:
23 And ye are Christes, and Christe (is) Gods.

Chapter 4

1 Let a man so esteeme of vs, as the ministers of Christe, and disposers of the
secretes of God.
2 Furthermore, it is required of the disposers that a man be founde faythfull.
3 With me it is but a very small thyng that I shoulde be iudged of you, either
of mans iudgement: No, I iudge not mine owne selfe.
4 For I knowe nothing by my selfe, yet am I not thereby iustified: but he that
iudgeth me is the Lorde.
5 Therefore iudge nothyng before the tyme, vntyll the Lorde come, who wyl
lyghten thynges that are hyd in darkenesse, & open the counsels of the heartes,
and then shall euery man haue prayse of God.
6 And these thynges brethren, I haue figuratiuely applied vnto my selfe, and to
Apollos, for your sakes, that ye might learne by vs, that no man conceaue in
mynde aboue that whiche is written, that one swell not agaynst another for any
mans cause.
7 For who seperateth thee? And what hast thou, that thou hast not receaued? If
thou haue receaued it, why reioycest thou, as though thou haddest not receaued
it?
8 Nowe ye are full, nowe ye are made ryche, ye raigne as kynges without vs, and
I woulde to God ye dyd raigne, that we also myght raigne with you.
9 For me thynketh, that God hath set foorth vs, whiche are the last apostles, as
it were men appoynted to death. For we are made a gasyng stocke vnto the worlde,
and to the angels, and to men.
10 We are fooles for Christes sake, but ye are wyse in Christe. We are weake,
but ye are stronge. Ye are honorable, but we are despised.
11 Euen vnto this time we both hunger and thirste, and are naked, and are
buffeted, and haue no certaine dwellyng place.
12 And labour, working with our owne handes. We are reuyled, and we blesse. We
are persecuted, and suffer it.
13 We are euyll spoken of, and we praye: we are made as the fylthynesse of the
worlde, the ofscowryng of all thynges vnto this day.
14 I write not these thynges to shame you, but as my beloued sonnes I warne you.
15 For though ye haue ten thousande instructours in Christ, yet haue ye not many
fathers: For in Christe Iesu I haue begotten you through the Gospell.
16 Wherfore, I desire you, be ye folowers of me.
17 For this cause haue I sent vnto you Timotheus, whiche is my beloued sonne, &
faythfull in the Lorde, which shall put you in remembraunce of my wayes which be
in Christe, as I teache euery where in all Churches.
18 Some swel as though I would come no more at you:
19 But I wyll come to you shortly, if the Lorde wyll, & wyll knowe, not the
wordes of the which swell, but the power.
20 For the kyngdome of God is not in worde, but in power.
21 What wyl ye? Shal I come vnto you with a rodde, or in loue and in the spirite
of mekenesse?

Chapter 5

1 There goeth a common saying that there is fornication among you, & suche
fornication as is not named among the gentiles: that one shoulde haue his
fathers wyfe.
2 And ye swell, and haue not rather sorowed, that he that hath so done this
deede myght be put from among you.
3 For I veryly, as absent in body, but present in spirite, haue determined
alredie, as though I were present, concernyng hym that hath done this deede.
4 In the name of our Lorde Iesus Christe, when ye are gathered together and my
spirite, with the power of the Lorde Iesus Christe,
5 To delyuer suche a one vnto Satan for the destruction of the flesshe, that the
spirite may be saued in the daye of the Lorde Iesus.
6 Your reioycing is not good. Knowe ye not, that a litle leauen leaueneth the
whole lumpe?
7 Purge out therfore the olde leauen, that ye maye be newe dowe, as ye are
vnleauened bread: For Christe our Pasouer is offred vp for vs.
8 Therefore let vs kepe holy day, not with old leauen, neither with the leauen
of maliciousnes and wickednesse, but with the vnleauened bread of purenesse and
trueth.
9 I wrote vnto you in an epistle, that ye should not companie with fornicatours:
10 And I meant not at all with the fornicatours of this worlde, or with the
couetous, or extortioners, or with idolaters: for then must ye needes haue gone
out of the world.
11 But nowe I haue written vnto you, that ye companie not together, if any that
is called a brother be a fornicatour, or couetous, or a worshipper of idols, or
a rayler, or a drunkarde, or an extortioner: with him that is such see that ye
eate not.
12 For what haue I to do to iudge them that are without? Do ye not iudge them
that are within?
13 For what haue I to do to iudge them that are without? Do ye not iudge them
that are within? Them that are without God iudgeth. Put away from among you that
wicked person.

Chapter 6

1 Dare any of you, hauing businesse with another, be iudged vnder the vniust,
and not rather vnder ye saintes?
2 Do ye not knowe that the saintes shall iudge the worlde? If the worlde shalbe
iudged by you, are ye vnworthy to iudge the smallest matters?
3 Know ye not howe that we shal iudge the angels? Howe much more thinges that
parteyne to this lyfe?
4 If then ye haue iudgement of thinges parteynyng to this lyfe, set vp them to
iudge whiche are least esteemed in the Churche.
5 I speake it to your shame: Is it so that there is not a wyse man among you? no
not one that can iudge betwene brother and brother?
6 But one brother goeth to law with another, and that vnder the vnbeleuers?
7 Nowe therefore there is vtterly a fault among you, because ye go to lawe one
with another: Why rather suffer ye not wrong? why rather suffer ye not harme?
8 Nay, ye your selues do wrong, and do harme, and that to your brethren.
9 Knowe ye not that the vnrighteous shall not inherite the kingdome of God? Be
not deceaued: neither fornicatours, nor idolatours, nor adulterers, nor
weaklinges, nor abusers of them selues with mankinde,
10 Nor theeues, nor couetous, nor drunckardes, nor cursed speakers, nor pyllers,
shall inherite the kingdome of God.
11 And such were some of you: but ye are wasshed, but ye are sanctified, but ye
are iustified in the name of the Lord Iesus, and by the spirite of our God.
12 All thinges are lawfull vnto me, but al thinges are not profitable: Al things
are lawfull vnto me, but I will not be brought vnder the power of any.
13 Meates are ordeyned for the belly, and the belly for meates: but God shall
destroy both it, and them. Nowe the body is not for fornication: but for the
Lorde, and the Lorde for the body.
14 And God both hath raysed vp the Lorde, and also shall rayse vs vp by his
power.
15 Knowe ye not that your bodies are the members of Christe? Shall I then take
the members of Christe, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbyd.
16 Know ye not, that he whiche coupleth him selfe with an harlot, is one body?
For two (sayth he) shalbe one fleshe.
17 But he that is ioyned vnto the Lord is one spirite.
18 Flee fornication. Euery synne that a man doeth, is without the body: but he
that committeth fornication, sinneth against his owne body.
19 Knowe ye not that your body is the temple of the holy ghost whiche is in you,
whom ye haue of God, and ye are not your owne?
20 For ye are dearely bought: therefore glorifie God in your body and in your
spirite, which are Gods.

Chapter 7

1 Nowe as concernyng the thinges wherof ye wrote vnto me, it is good for a man
not to touche a woman.
2 Neuerthelesse, to auoyde fornication, let euery man haue his owne wyfe, and
let euery woman haue her owne husband.
3 Let the husbande geue vnto the wyfe due beneuolence: Lykewyse also the wyfe
vnto the husbande.
4 The wyfe hath not the power of her owne body, but the husbande: And likewyse
also the husbande hath not the power of his owne body, but the wife.
5 Defraude you not the one the other, except it be with both your consentes for
a time, that ye may geue your selues to fasting and prayer: and afterward come
together againe, that Satan tempt you not for your incontinencie.
6 This I say of fauour, & not of commaundement.
7 For I woulde that all men were as I my selfe am: but euery man hath his proper
gift of God, one after this maner, another after that.
8 I say therefore vnto them that be vnmaryed and wyddowes, it is good for them
if they abyde euen as I.
9 But if they can not abstayne, let them marrie: For it is better to marrie then
to burne.
10 Unto the maryed commaunde, not I, but the Lord, Let not the wyfe depart from
the husbande:
11 But and if she depart, let her remayne vnmarried, or be reconciled vnto her
husbande againe: And let not the husbande put away his wyfe.
12 But to the renmaunt speake I, not the Lorde: If any brother haue a wife that
beleueth not, if she be content to dwell with him, let him not put her away.
13 And the woman which hath to her husbande an infidell, and he consent to dwel
with her, let her not put him away.
14 For the vnbeleuing husbande is sanctified by the wyfe, and the vnbeleuyng
wyfe is sanctified by the husbande: els were your children vncleane, but nowe
are they holy.
15 But if the vnbeleuing depart, let hym depart: A brother or a sister is not in
subiection in such thinges: But God hath called vs in peace.
16 For howe knowest thou O woman, whether thou shalt saue thy husbande? or how
knowest thou O man, whether thou shalt saue thy wyfe?
17 But as God hath distributed to euery man, as the Lorde hath called euery one,
so let hym walke, and so ordeyne I in all Churches.
18 Is any man called beyng circumcised? let him not adde vncircumcision: Is any
called vncircumcised? let him not be circumcised.
19 Circumcision is nothing, and vncircumcision is nothing, but the keping of the
commaundementes of God.
20 Let euery man abyde in the same calling, wherein he was called.
21 Art thou called a seruaunt? care not for it: Neuerthelesse, if thou mayest be
free, vse it rather.
22 For he that is called in the Lord being a seruaunt, is the Lordes free man:
Lykewyse also he that is called beyng free, is Christes seruaunt.
23 Ye are dearely bought, be not ye the seruauntes of men.
24 Brethren, let euery man wherin he is called, therin abyde with God.
25 Nowe concerning virgins I haue no commaundement of the Lord: yet geue I
counsell, as one that hath obtayned mercy in the Lorde to be faythfull.
26 I suppose therfore that it is good for the present necessitie: for I say it
is good for a man so to be.
27 Art thou bounde vnto a wife? seke not to be loosed: Art thou loosed from a
wyfe? seke not a wyfe.
28 But and if thou marrie a wyfe, thou sinnest not, and if a virgin marrie, she
hath not sinned: Neuerthelesse, such shall haue trouble in their fleshe, but I
beare with you.
29 But this say I brethren, the tyme is short: It remayneth, that they which
haue wyues, be as though they had none:
30 And they that wepe, as though they wept not: & they that reioyce, as though
they reioyced not: and they that bye, as though they possessed not:
31 And they that vse this worlde, as though they vsed it not: For the fashion of
this worlde goeth away.
32 I woulde haue you without care: He that is vnmaryed, careth for the thinges
that belong to the Lorde, how he may please the Lorde:
33 But he that hath maryed awyfe, careth for the thinges that are of the worlde,
how he may please his wyfe.
34 There is difference betweene a virgin and a wyfe: The vnmaryed woman careth
for the thinges that are of the Lorde, that she may be holy both in body and in
spirite: Againe she that is maryed careth for the thinges that pertayne to the
world, how she may please her husbande.
35 This speake I for your profite, not to tangle you in a snare: but that ye may
folowe that which is honest and comely, and that ye may cleaue fast vnto the
Lorde without separation.
36 But if any man thinke that it is vncomely for his virgin if she passe the
time of mariage, and neede so require, let him do what he wyll, he sinneth not:
let them be maryed.
37 Neuerthelesse, he that purposeth surely in his heart hauing no neede, but
hath power ouer his owne wyll, and hath so decreed in his heart that he wyl kepe
his virgin, doth well.
38 So then he that ioyneth his virgin in maryage, doth well: but he that ioyneth
not his virgin in mariage, doth better.
39 The wyfe is bounde to the lawe as long as her husbande lyueth: but if her
husband be dead, she is at libertie to marry with whom she wil, onely in the
Lorde.
40 But she is happier if she so abide, after my iudgement: And I thinke veryly
that I haue the spirite of God.

Chapter 8

1 As touching thinges offred vnto idols, we are sure yt we all haue knowledge.
Knowledge maketh a man swell: but loue edifieth.
2 If any man thynke that he knoweth any thing, he knoweth nothing yet as he
ought to know.
3 But if any man loue God, the same is knowen of him.
4 As concerning the eating of those thinges that are offered vnto idols, we are
sure that an idoll is nothing in the worlde, and that there is none other God
but one.
5 And though there be that are called gods, whether in heauen or in earth, (as
there be gods many, and lordes many:)
6 Yet vnto vs is there but one God, which is the father, of whom are all
thinges, and we in him, and one Lorde Iesus Christe, by whom are al thinges, and
we by him.
7 But euery man hath not knowledge: For some hauing conscience of the idol
vntill this houre, eate as a thing offred vnto idols, and so their conscience
being weake, is defiled.
8 But meate maketh vs not acceptable to God: For neither if we eate, haue we the
more, neither if we eate not, haue we the lesse.
9 But take heede lest by any meanes this libertie of yours be an occasion of
falling, to them that are weake.
10 For if any man see thee which hast knowledge, sit at meate in the idols
temple: shal not the conscience of him which is weake, be boldened to eate those
thinges which are offred to idols,
11 And through thy knowledge shal the weake brother perishe, for whom Christe
dyed?
12 When ye sinne so against the brethren, and wounde their weake conscience, ye
sinne against Christe.
13 Wherefore, if meate offend my brother, I wyll eate no fleshe whyle the worlde
standeth, lest I shoulde offende my brother.

Chapter 9

1 Am I not an Apostle? am I not free? haue I not seene Iesus Christe our Lord:
Are ye not my worke in the Lorde?
2 If I be not an Apostle vnto other, yet doubtlesse am I vnto you: For the seale
of myne Apostleship are ye in the Lorde.
3 Myne aunswere to them that aske me, is this,
4 Haue we not power to eate and to drinke?
5 Haue we not power to leade about a sister a woman as well as other Apostles,
and as the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas?
6 Either only I and Barnabas haue not power this to do?
7 Who goeth a warfare any time at his owne cost? Who planteth a vineyarde, and
eateth not of the fruite therof? Or who feedeth a flocke, and eateth not of the
milke of the flocke?
8 Say I these thinges after the maner of men? or saith not the law the same
also?
9 For it is written in the law of Moyses: Thou shalt not moosell the mouth of
the Oxe that treadeth out the corne. Doth God take care for Oxen?
10 Either sayth he it not altogether for our sakes? For our sakes no doubt this
is written, that he which eareth, should eare in hope: & that he which tressheth
in hope, should be partaker of his hope.
11 If we haue sowen vnto you spirituall thinges, is it a great thing if we reape
your carnall thinges?
12 If others be partakers of this power wherfore are not we rather?
Neuerthelesse, we haue not vsed this power: but suffer all thinges, lest we
shoulde hinder the Gospel of Christ.
13 Do ye not knowe that they which minister about holy thynges, eate of the
thinges of the temple? And they whiche wayte at the aulter, are partakers with
the aulter?
14 Euen so hath the Lord ordayned, that they which preache the Gospell, shoulde
lyue of the Gospell.
15 But I haue vsed none of these thinges. Neuerthelesse, I wrote not these
thinges, that it shoulde be so done vnto me: For it were better for me to die,
then that any man should make my reioycing vayne.
16 For if I preache the Gospell, I haue nothyng to reioyce of: for necessitie is
layde vpon me. But wo is vnto me if I preache not the Gospell.
17 For if I do it with a good wil, I haue a reward: but if I do it against my
wil, the dispensatio is committed vnto me.
18 What is my reward then? Uerily that when I preache the Gospell, I make the
Gospell of Christ free, that I misuse not myne aucthoritie in the Gospell.
19 For though I be free from all men, yet haue I made my selfe seruaunt vnto all
men, that I might win the mo.
20 Unto the Iewes, I become as a Iewe, that I might win the Iewes: To them that
are vnder the lawe, I become as though I were vnder the lawe, that I might win
them that are vnder the lawe:
21 To them that are without lawe, become as though I were without lawe, (when I
was not without law as parteyning to the lawe of God, but in the lawe of
Christe) to winne them that are without lawe.
22 To the weake became I as weake, that I might winne the weake. I am made all
thinges to all men, that I might at the least way saue some.
23 And this I do for the Gospels sake, that I might haue my part therof.
24 Perceaue ye not howe that they which run in a race, run all, but one
receaueth the rewarde? So run that ye may obtayne.
25 Euery man that proueth maisteries, abstayneth from all thynges, and they do
it to obtayne a crowne that shall perishe: but we to obtayne an euerlasting
crowne.
26 I therfore so run, not as at an vncertayne thing: So fight I, not as one that
beateth the ayre.
27 But I tame my body, and bryng it into subiection, lest by any meanes, that
when I haue preached to other, I my selfe shoulde be a castaway.

Chapter 10

1 Brethre, I woulde not that ye shoulde be ignoraunt, howe that all our fathers
were vnder the cloude, and all passed through the sea,
2 And were all baptized vnto Moyses in the cloude, & in the sea:
3 And dyd all eate of one spirituall meate.
4 And dyd all drynke of one maner of spirituall drynke. (And they dranke of that
spirituall rocke that folowed them, which rocke was Christe.)
5 But in many of them had God no delite: For they were ouerthrowen in the
wildernesse.
6 These veryly are ensamples to vs, to thintent that we shoulde not lust after
euyll thynges, as they also lusted.
7 Neither be ye idolatours, as were some of them, as it is written: The people
sate downe to eate and drynke, and rose vp to play.
8 Neither let vs commit fornication, as some of them committed fornication, and
fell in one daye three and thirtie thousande.
9 Neither let vs tempt Christe, as some of them tempted, and were destroyed of
serpentes.
10 Neither murmure ye, as some of the also murmured, and were destroyed of the
destroyer.
11 All these thinges happened vnto them for ensamples: but they are written to
put vs in remembraunce, whom the endes of the worlde are come vpon.
12 Wherfore, let hym that thynketh he standeth, take heede lest he fall.
13 There hath no temptation taken you, but such as foloweth the nature of man:
But God is faythfull, which shall not suffer you to be tempted aboue your
strength: but shall with the temptation make away that ye maye be able to beare
it.
14 Wherfore my deare beloued, flee from idolatrie.
15 I speake as vnto them which haue discretion, iudge ye what I say.
16 The cuppe of blessyng which we blesse, is it not ye partakyng of the blood of
Christe? The bread which we breake, is it not the partakyng of the body of
Christe?
17 For we that are many, are one bread and one body, in as much as we all are
partakers of one bread.
18 Beholde Israel after the fleshe. Are not they which eate of the sacrifices,
partakers of the aulter?
19 What say I then? that the idol is any thyng? Or that it which is offered to
idols is any thyng?
20 Nay but this I saye that the thinges which the gentiles offer, they offer to
deuyls, & not to God. And I woulde not that ye shoulde haue felowshippe with the
deuils.
21 Ye can not drynke ye cup of the Lorde, and the cup of deuils. Ye can not be
partakers of the Lordes table, and of the table of deuyls.
22 Either do we prouoke the Lorde to anger? Are we stronger then he?
23 All thynges are lawfull for me, but all thynges are not expedient: All
thynges are lawfull for me, but all thynges edifie not.
24 Let no man seeke his owne: but euery man anothers wealth.
25 Whatsoeuer is solde in the market, that eate, and aske no question for
conscience sake.
26 For the earth is the Lordes, and all that therin is.
27 If any of them which beleue not, byd you to a feast and ye be disposed to go,
whatsoeuer is set before you, eat, asking no question for conscience sake.
28 But yf any man say vnto you, this is offred vnto idols, eate not of it for
his sake that shewed it, and for conscience sake. The earth is the Lordes and
all that therin is.
29 Conscience I say, not thyne, but of the other. For why is my libertie, iudged
of another mans conscience?
30 For, if I take my part with thankes, why am I euyll spoken of, for that
wherfore I geue thankes?
31 Whether therfore ye eate or drynke, or whatsoeuer ye do, do all to the prayse
of God.
32 See that ye geue none offence, neither to the Iewes, nor yet to the Grecians,
neither to the Churche of God.
33 Euen as I please all men in all thynges, not seking myne owne profite, but
the profite of many, that they might be saued.

Chapter 11

1 Be ye the folowers of me, euen as I am of Christe.
2 I commende you brethren, that ye remember me in all thinges, and kepe the
ordinaunces, as I deliuered them to you.
3 But I wyl that ye knowe, that Christ is the head of euery man. And the man is
the womans head: And God is Christes head.
4 Euery man praying or prophesiyng, hauyng any thing on his head, shameth his
head.
5 But euery woman that prayeth or prophesieth bare headed, dishonesteth her
head: For that is euen all one as yf she were shauen.
6 Yf the woman be not couered, let her also be shorne. Yf it be a shame for a
woman to be shorne or shauen, let her couer her head.
7 A man ought not to couer his head, forasmuch as he is the image and glorie of
God: But the woman is the glorie of the man:
8 For the man is not of the woman: but the woman of the man:
9 Neither was the man created for the womans sake: but the woman for the mans
sake.
10 For this cause ought the woman to haue power on her head, for the Angels
sakes.
11 Neuerthelesse, neither is the man without the woman, neither ye woman without
the man, in the Lorde.
12 For as the woman is of the man, euen so is the man by the woman, but all of
God.
13 Iudge in your selues, whether it be comely that a woman pray vnto God bare
headed?
14 Doth not nature it selfe teache you, that it is a shame for a man, yf he haue
long heere?
15 But yf a woman haue long heere, it is a prayse for her: For her heere is
geuen her to couer her withall.
16 If any man lust to striue, we haue no such custome, neither the Churches of
God.
17 This I warne you of, and commende not, that ye come together, not after a
better maner, but after a worse.
18 For first of all, when ye come together in the Churche, I heare that there is
dissention among you, and I partly beleue it.
19 For there must be sectes among you, that they which are approued among you,
myght be knowen.
20 When ye come together therfore into one place, you can not eate the Lordes
supper:
21 For euery one preuenteth other, in eatyng his owne supper. And one is hungry,
and another is drunken.
22 Haue ye not houses to eate & to drynke in? Despise ye the Churche of God, and
shame them that haue not? What shall I say vnto you, shall I prayse you in this,
I prayse you not.
23 That which I deliuered vnto you, I receaued of the Lorde. For the Lord Iesus,
the same nyght in the which he was betrayed, toke bread:
24 And when he had geuen thankes, he brake it, and sayde: Take ye and eate, this
is my body which is broke for you: This do ye in the remembraunce of me.
25 After the same maner also he toke the cup, when he had supped, saying: This
cup is the newe testament in my blood: This do as oft as ye drynke it, in
remembraunce of me.
26 For as often as ye shal eate this bread, and drynke this cup, ye shall shewe
the Lordes death tyll he come.
27 Wherfore, whosoeuer shall eate this bread, and drynke this cup of the Lorde
vnworthyly, shalbe gyltie of the body and blood of the Lorde.
28 But let a man examine hym selfe, and so let hym eate of this bread, and
drinke of this cuppe:
29 For he that eateth and drynketh vnworthyly, eateth and drynketh his owne
dampnation, because he maketh no difference of the Lordes body.
30 For this cause many are weake and sicke among you, and many slepe.
31 For yf we woulde iudge our selues, we shoulde not be iudged.
32 But when we are iudged, we are chastened of the Lorde, that we shoulde not be
dampned with the worlde.
33 Wherfore my brethren, when ye come together to eate, tary one for another.
34 If any man hunger, let hym eate at home, that ye come not together vnto
condempnation. Other thynges wyll I set in order when I come.

Chapter 12

1 Concernyng spirituall gyftes, brethren, I woulde not haue you ignoraunt.
2 Ye knowe yt ye were gentiles, and caryed away vnto dumbe idols, as ye were
led.
3 Wherfore I declare vnto you, that no man speakyng by the spirite of God,
defieth Iesus. Also no man can say that Iesus is ye Lord, but by the holy ghost.
4 There are diuersities of gyftes, but the spirite is one.
5 And there are differences of administrations, but the Lorde is one.
6 And there are diuers maners of operations, but God is one, which worketh all
in all.
7 The manifestation of the spirite, is geuen to euery man, to profite withall.
8 For to one is geuen by the spirite, the worde of wisdome, to another the word
of knowledge, by the same spirite:
9 To another is geuen fayth, by the same spirite: to another the giftes of
healyng by the same spirite:
10 To another, power to do miracles, to another, prophesie, to another iudgement
to discerne spirites, to another, diuers kyndes of tongues, to another, the
interpretation of tongues.
11 But these all worketh euen one and the selfe same spirite, deuidyng to euery
man a seuerall gyft, as he wyll.
12 For as the body is one, & hath many members, and all the members of one body,
though they be many, yet are but one body: euen so is Christe.
13 For by one spirite, are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Iewes or
gentiles, whether we be bonde or free: and haue all drunke of one spirite.
14 For the body is not one member, but many.
15 If the foote woulde say, because I am not the hande, I am not of the body: is
it therfore not of the body?
16 And yf the eare woulde say, because I am not the eye, I am not of the body:
is it therfore not of the body?
17 If all the body were an eye, where were then the hearyng? If all were
hearyng, where were the smellyng?
18 But nowe hath God set ye members, euery one seuerally in the body, as it hath
pleased hym.
19 For yf they were all one member, where were the body?
20 Nowe are there many members, yet but one body.
21 And the eye can not say vnto ye hande, I haue no neede of thee: Nor, the head
agayne to the feete, I haue no neede of you.
22 Yea, rather a great deale, those members of the body which seeme to be more
feeble, are necessary:
23 And vpon those members of the body which we thynke least honest, put we more
honestie on. And our vncomely partes, haue more comelynesse on.
24 For our comely members neede it not: But God hath tempered the body together,
and hath geuen the more honour to that part which lacked:
25 Lest there shoulde be any stryfe in the body: but that the members shoulde
haue the same care one for another.
26 And yf one member suffer, all suffer with it. If one member be had in honour,
all the members reioyce with it.
27 Ye are the body of Christe, and members one of another.
28 And God hath ordayned some in the Churche, first Apostles, secondarely,
prophetes, thirdely teachers, then them that do miracles: after that, the giftes
of healyng, helpers, gouernours, diuersitie of tongues.
29 Are all, Apostles? are all, prophetes? are all, teachers?
30 Are all, doers of miracles? Haue all the giftes of healyng? Do all speake
with tongues? Do all interprete?
31 Couet after the best giftes: And yet shew I vnto you a more excellent way.

Chapter 13

1 Though I speake with the tongues of men and of Angels, and haue not loue, I am
as soundyng brasse, or as a tincklyng Cimball:
2 And though I coulde prophesie, and vnderstoode all secretes, and all
knowledge: Yea, if I had all fayth, so that I coulde moue mountaynes out of
their places, and haue not loue, I were nothyng.
3 And though I bestowe all my goodes to feede the poore, and though I geue my
body that I burned, and haue not loue, it profiteth me nothyng.
4 Loue suffreth long, and is curteous: Loue enuieth not, loue doth not
frowardely, swelleth not,
5 Dealeth not dishonestlie, seeketh not her owne, is not prouoked to anger,
thynketh none euyll,
6 Reioyceth not in iniquitie: bur reioyceth in the trueth:
7 Suffreth all thynges, beleueth all thynges, hopeth all thynges, endureth all
thynges.
8 Though ye prophesiynges fayle, other tongues ceasse, or knowledge vanishe
away, yet loue falleth neuer away.
9 For our knowledge is vnperfect, and our prophesiyng is vnperfect:
10 But when that which is perfect, is come, then that which is vnperfect shalbe
done away.
11 When I was a chylde, I spake as a childe, I vnderstode as a childe, I
imagined as a chylde: But assoone as I was a man, I put away chyldishnesse.
12 Nowe we see in a glasse, euen in a darke speakyng: but then shall we see face
to face. Nowe I knowe vnperfectly: but then shall I knowe euen as I am knowen.
13 Nowe abydeth fayth, hope, and loue, these three, but the chiefe of these is
loue.

Chapter 14

1 Folowe after loue, and couet spirituall giftes but most chiefelie that ye may
prophesie.
2 For he that speaketh with the tongue, speaketh not vnto men, but vnto God: For
no man heareth hym. Howbeit, in the spirite he speaketh misteries.
3 But he that prophesieth, speaketh vnto men to their edifiyng, to their
exhortation, and to their comfort.
4 He that speaketh with the tongue, edifieth hym selfe: he that prophesieth,
edifieth the Churche.
5 I woulde yt ye al spake with tongues, but rather that ye prophesied: For
greater is he that prophesieth, then he that speaketh with tongues, except he
expounde it, that the Churche may haue edifiyng.
6 Nowe brethren, yf I come vnto you speakyng with tongues, what shall I profite
you, except I speake to you eyther by reuelation, or by knowledge, or by
prophesiyng, or by doctrine?
7 Moreouer, thynges without lyfe geuing sound, whether it be a pipe or an harpe,
except they make a distinction in the soundes, howe shall it be knowen what is
piped or harped?
8 And also yf the trumpe geue an vncertayne sounde, who shall prepare him selfe
to the warre?
9 Euen so lykewyse, when ye speake with tongues, except ye speake wordes that
haue signification, howe shall it be vnderstande what is spoken? For ye shall
speake into the ayer.
10 There are so many kyndes of voyces, as it commeth to passe in the worlde, and
none of them are without signification.
11 If I knowe not what the voyce meaneth, I shalbe lyke vnto hym that speaketh,
an aliaunt: and he that speaketh, shalbe an aliaunt vnto me.
12 Euen so, forasmuch as ye couet spirituall giftes seke that ye may excell,
vnto the edifiyng of the Churche.
13 Wherfore, let him that speaketh with tongue, pray that he may interprete.
14 For yf I pray with tongue, my spirite prayeth, but my vnderstanding is
without fruite.
15 What is it then? I wyll pray with the spirite, and wyll pray with the
vnderstandyng also. I wyll syng with the spirite, and wyll syng with the
vnderstandyng also.
16 Els, when thou blessest with the spirite, howe shall he that occupieth the
rowme of the vnlearned, say Amen at thy geuyng of thankes, seyng he
vnderstandeth not what thou sayest?
17 Thou veryly geuest thankes well: but the other is not edified.
18 I thanke my God, I speake with tongues more the ye all.
19 Yet had I rather, in the Churche to speake fiue wordes with my vnderstandyng,
to the information of other, then ten thousande wordes with the tongue.
20 Brethren, be not chyldren in wytte: Howbeit, as concerning maliciousnesse, be
chyldren: but in wytte, be perfect.
21 In the lawe it is written: With sundry tongues, and with sundry lyppes, wyll
I speake vnto this people, and yet for all that will they not heare me, sayth
the Lorde.
22 Wherfore, tongues are for a signe, not to them that beleue, but to them that
beleue not: But prophesiyng serueth not for them that beleue not, but for them
which beleue.
23 If therfore, when all the Churche is come together in one, & all speake with
tongues, there come in they that are vnlearned, or they which beleue not: wyll
they not say yt ye are out of your wittes?
24 But yf all prophesie, and there come in one ye beleueth not, or one
vnlearned: he is rebuked of all men, and is iudged of euery man:
25 And so are the secretes of his heart made manifest, and so falleth he downe
on his face, and worshippeth God, and sayth that God is in you of a trueth.
26 Howe is it then brethren? When ye come together, euery one of you hath a
psalme, hath a doctrine, hath a tongue, hath a reuelation, hath interpretation.
Let all thynges be done vnto edifiyng.
27 Yf any man speake with tongue, let it be by two, or at the most by three, and
that by course, and let one interprete.
28 But yf there be no interpreter, let him kepe scilence in the Churche, and let
him speake to hym selfe, and to God.
29 Let the prophetes speake two or three, and let the other iudge.
30 If any reuelation be made to another that sitteth by, let ye first holde his
peace.
31 For ye may all prophesie one by one, that all may learne, and all may haue
comfort.
32 And the spirites of the prophetes, are subiect to the prophetes.
33 For God is not the aucthour of confusion, but of peace, as in all Churches of
the saintes.
34 Let your women kepe scilence in the Churches: For it is not permitted vnto
them to speake, but to be vnder obedience, as sayth the lawe.
35 If they wyll learne any thyng, let the aske their husbandes at home: For it
is a shame for women to speake in the Churche.
36 Sproung the worde of God from you? Either came it vnto you only?
37 If any man thynke hym selfe to be a prophete, either spiritual, let him knowe
that the thinges that I write vnto you, are ye commaundementes of the Lorde.
38 But yf any man be ignoraunt, let hym be ignoraunt.
39 Wherfore brethren, couet to prophesie, and forbyd not to speake with tongues.
40 Let all thynges be done honestlie and in order.

Chapter 15

1 Moreouer brethren I declare vnto you, the Gospell which I preached vnto you,
which also ye haue receaued, and wherin ye cotinue,
2 By the which also ye are saued, yf ye kepe in memorie after what maner I
preached vnto you, except ye haue beleued in vayne.
3 For first of all I deliuered vnto you, that which I receaued: howe that
Christe dyed for our sinnes, agreeyng to the scriptures:
4 And that he was buryed, and that he arose agayne the thirde day, accordyng to
the scriptures:
5 And that he was seene of Cephas, then of the twelue:
6 After that, he was seene of mo then fiue hundred brethren at once: of which,
many remayne vnto this day, & some are fallen a slepe.
7 After that, he was seene of Iames, then of all the Apostles.
8 And last of all he was seene of me, as of one borne out of due tyme.
9 For I am the least of the Apostles, which am not worthy to be called an
Apostle, because I persecuted the Churche of God.
10 But by the grace of God, I am that I am: And his grace which is in me, was
not in vayne: But I laboured more aboundauntly then they all, yet not I, but the
grace of God which is with me.
11 Therfore, whether it were I or they, so we preache, and so haue ye beleued.
12 If Christe be preached howe that he rose from the dead: howe say some among
you, that there is no resurrection of the dead?
13 If there be no rysyng agayne of the dead, then is Christe not rysen agayne.
14 If Christe be not rysen agayne, then is our preachyng vayne, and your fayth
is also vayne.
15 Yea, and we are founde false witnesses of God: For we haue testified of God,
howe that he raysed vp Christe, whom he raysed not vp, yf it be so that the dead
ryse not agayne.
16 For yf the dead ryse not agayne, then is not Christe rysen agayne.
17 If it be so, that Christ rose not againe, then is your fayth vayne, and ye
are yet in your sinnes.
18 Therfore, they which are fallen in a slepe in Christe, are perisshed.
19 If in this lyfe only we haue hope on Christe, then are we of all men moste
miserable.
20 But nowe is Christe rysen from the dead, the first fruites of them that
slept.
21 For since by man came death, euen so by man came the resurrection of ye dead.
22 For, as by Adam all dye: euen so by Christe shall all be made alyue,
23 But euery man in his owne order. The first fruites is Christe, afterward,
they that are Christes at his commyng.
24 Then commeth the ende, when he hath deliuered vp the kingdome to God the
father, when he hath put downe all rule, and all auctoritie, and power.
25 For he must raigne tyll he haue put all his enemies vnder his feete.
26 The last enemie that shalbe destroyed, is death.
27 For he hath put downe all thynges vnder his feete: But when he saith, all
thynges are vnder hym, it is manifest that he is excepted which dyd put all
thynges vnder hym.
28 When all thynges are subdued vnto hym, then shall the sonne also hym selfe be
subiect vnto him that put all thinges vnder hym, that God may be all in all.
29 Els what shall they do, which are baptized for the dead, yf the dead ryse not
at all?
30 Why are they then baptized for them? And why stande we in ieopardie euery
houre?
31 By our reioycyng which I haue in Christe Iesu our Lorde, I dye dayly.
32 If I haue fought with beastes at Ephesus after the maner of men, what
auauntageth it me, yf the dead ryse not agayne? Let vs eate & drynke, for to
morowe we shall dye.
33 Be not deceaued. Euyll wordes, corrupt good maners.
34 Awake truely out of slepe, and sinne not: For some haue not the knowledge of
God. I speake this to your shame.
35 But some man wyll say, howe are the dead raysed vp? With what bodie shall
they come?
36 Thou foole, that which thou sowest, is not quickened except it dye.
37 And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shalbe, but bare
corne, as of wheate, or of some other:
38 But God geueth it a body at his pleasure, to euery seede his owne body.
39 All flesshe, is not the same flesshe: But there is one maner of flesshe of
me, another flesshe of beastes, another of fisshes, and another of byrdes.
40 There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial: But the glorie of
the celestial is one, and the glorie of the terrestrial another.
41 There is another glorie of the sunne, and another glorie of the moone, and
another glorie of the starres: For one starre differeth from another starre in
glorie.
42 So is the resurrection of the dead. It is sowen in corruption, it ryseth in
incorruption.
43 It is sowen in dishonour, it riseth in honour. It is sowen in weakenesse, it
ryseth in power.
44 It is sowen a naturall bodie, it ryseth a spirituall bodie. There is a
naturall bodie, and there is a spirituall bodie.
45 As it is also written: The first man Adam was made a lyuyng soule, and the
last Adam was made a quickenyng spirite.
46 Howebeit, that is not first whiche is spirituall, but that whiche is
naturall, and then that whiche is spirituall.
47 The first man is of the earth, earthy: the seconde man is the Lorde from
heauen.
48 As is the earthy, suche are they that are earthy: And as is the heauenly,
such are they also that are heauenly.
49 And as we haue borne the image of the earthy, so shall we beare the image of
the heauenly.
50 This saye I brethren, that fleshe and blood can not inherite the kyngdome of
God: Neither doth corruption, inherite incorruption.
51 Beholde, I shewe you a misterie. We shall not all slepe: but we shall all be
chaunged.
52 In a moment, in the twynklyng of an eye, at the last trumpe. For the trumpe
shall blowe, and the dead shall ryse incorruptible, and we shalbe chaunged.
53 For this corruptible, must put on incorruption, and this mortall must put on
immortalitie.
54 When this corruptible, hath put on incorruption, and this mortal, hath put on
immortalitie, then shalbe brought to passe the saying that is written, Death is
swalowed vp into victorie.
55 O death where is thy stynge? O hell where is thy victorie?
56 The stynge of death is sinne, and the strength of sinne is the lawe.
57 But thankes be vnto God, whiche hath geue vs victorie through our Lord Iesus
Christe.
58 Therfore my beloued brethren, be ye stedfast, vnmouable, alwayes riche in the
worke of the Lorde, forasmuch as ye knowe that your labour is not in vayne in
the Lorde.

Chapter 16

1 Concerning the gatheryng for the saintes, as I haue ordeined in the Churches
of Galacia, euen so do ye.
2 Upon some Sabboth daye, let euery one of you put asyde by hym selfe, and laye
vp as God hath prospered hym, that then there be no gatherynges when I come.
3 When I am come, whomsoeuer ye shall alowe by your letters, them wyll I sende,
to bryng your liberalitie vnto Hierusalem.
4 And yf it be meete that I go also, they shall go with me.
5 I wyll come vnto you, after I haue gone ouer Macedonia (For I wyl passe
through Macedonia)
6 And it may be, that I wyll abyde, yea or wynter with you, that ye may bryng me
on my way whyther soeuer I go.
7 For I wyll not see you nowe in my passage, but I trust to abyde a whyle with
you, yf the Lorde shall suffer me.
8 I wyll tarie at Ephesus vntyll whytsontyde:
9 For a great doore and effectuall is opened vnto me, and there are many
aduersaries.
10 Yf Timotheus come, see that he be without feare with you: For he worketh the
worke of the Lorde, as I do.
11 Let no man therfore despise hym, but conuay him foorth in peace, that he may
come vnto me: for I loke for hym with the brethren.
12 As touchyng our brother Apollo, I greatly desired hym to come vnto you with
the brethren, but his mynde was not at all to come at this tyme: Howebeit, he
wyll come when he shall haue conuenient tyme.
13 Watche ye, stande fast in the fayth, quyte you lyke men, be strong.
14 Let al your thinges be done with loue.
15 I beseche you brethren (ye knowe the house of Stephanas, that it is ye first
fruites of Achaia, and that they haue appoynted them selues to minister vnto the
saintes)
16 That ye be obedient euen vnto suche, and to all that helpe with vs, & labour.
17 I am glad of the commyng of Stephanas, and Fortunatus, & Achaicus: for that
whiche was lackyng vnto me on your part, they haue supplied.
18 For they haue comforted my spirite, and yours: Loke therfore that ye know
them that are such.
19 The Churches of Asia salute you. Aquila and Priscilla salute you muche in the
Lord, and so doth the Churche that is in their house.
20 All the brethren greete you: Greete ye one another with an holy kysse.
21 The salutatio of me Paul, with mine owne hande.
22 Yf any man loue not the Lorde Iesus Christe, the same be Anathema maranatha.
23 The grace of our Lorde Iesus Christ be with you.
24 My loue be with you all in Christe Iesus. Amen. The first (epistle) to the
Corinthians, was sent from Philippos by Stephanas, and Fortunatus, and Achaicus,
and Timotheus.


2 Corinthians

Chapter 1

1 Paul an Apostle of Iesu Christe, by the wyll of God, & brother Timotheus. Unto
ye Church of God which is at Corinthus, with all the saintes which are in all
Achaia:
2 Grace be with you, and peace from God our father and from the Lorde Iesus
Christe.
3 Blessed be God, the father of our Lorde Iesus Christe, whiche is the father of
mercies, & the God of al comfort:
4 Which comforted vs in all our tribulation, insomuch that we are able to
comfort them which are in any maner trouble, with the comfort wherwith we our
selues are comforted of God.
5 For as the afflictions of Christ are plenteous in vs: euen so is our
consolation plenteous by Christe.
6 Whether we be troubled it is for your consolation and saluation, which
saluation sheweth her power, in that ye suffer the same afflictions whiche we
also suffer: or whether we be comforted it is for your consolation & saluation:
7 And our hope is stedfast, insomuch as we knowe howe that as ye are partakers
of ye afflictions, so ye be partakers also of the consolation.
8 For we woulde not brethren haue you ignoraunt of our trouble, whiche came vnto
vs in Asia: For we were greeued out of measure, passyng strength, so greatly,
that we dispayred euen of lyfe.
9 Yea, we receaued the sentence of death in our selues, that we should not put
our trust in our selues, but in God, whiche rayseth the dead:
10 Who delyuered vs from so great a death, and doth deliuer: On whom we trust
that yet hereafter he wyll deliuer,
11 By the helpe of your prayer for vs, that by ye meanes of many persons,
thankes may geuen of many on our behalfe, for the grace geuen vnto vs.
12 For our reioycyng is this, the testimonie of our conscience, that in
simplicitie & godly purenesse, and not in fleshely wisdome, but by the grace of
God, we haue had our conuersatio in the worlde, and most of all to you wardes.
13 We write none other thinges vnto you then that ye read, or also yt ye
acknowledge, and I trust ye shall acknowledge vs vnto the ende.
14 Euen as ye haue acknowledged vs partly: For we are your reioycing, euen as ye
are ours in the daye of our Lorde Iesus.
15 And in this confidence was I minded first to haue come vnto you, yt ye myght
haue had one pleasure more:
16 And to passe by you into Macedonia, and to haue come agayne out of Macedonia
vnto you, and to be led foorth of you to Iurie.
17 When I therfore was thus mynded, did I vse lightnesse? or mynde I carnally
those thynges whiche I mynde, that with me shoulde be yea yea, & nay nay?
18 God is faythfull: For our preaching to you, was not yea and nay.
19 For Gods sonne Iesus Christe which was preached among you by vs, euen by me,
and Siluanus, and Timotheus, was not yea and nay, but in hym it was yea.
20 For all the promises of God in him are yea, and are in him Amen, vnto the
glorie of God, through vs.
21 And God it is whiche stablysheth vs with you in Christe, and hath annoynted
vs.
22 Which hath also sealed vs, and hath geuen the earnest of the spirite in our
heartes.
23 I call God for a recorde vnto my soule, that to spare you I came not as yet
vnto Corinthus.
24 Not that we be Lordes ouer your fayth, but are helpers of your ioy. For by
fayth ye stande.

Chapter 2

1 But I determined this in my selfe, yt I would not come againe to you in
heauynesse.
2 For if I make you sorie, who is he yt shoulde make me glad, but the same which
is made sorie by me?
3 And I wrote this same vnto you, lest when I came, I shoulde take heauynesse of
them of whom I ought to reioyce. This confidence haue I toward you all, that my
ioy is the ioy of you all.
4 For in great affliction and anguishe of heart, I wrote vnto you with many
teares, not that ye shoulde be made sorie, but that ye myght perceaue the loue
which I haue, most specially vnto you.
5 But yf any man hath caused sorowe, the same hath not made me sorie, but
partly, lest I shoulde greeue you all.
6 It is sufficient vnto the same man that he was rebuked of many.
7 So that nowe contrarywise, ye ought rather to forgeue hym, and comforte hym,
lest that same person shoulde be swallowed vp with ouermuche heauynesse.
8 Wherfore I pray you, that you would confirme your loue towardes hym.
9 For this cause veryly did I write, that I myght knowe the profe of you,
whether ye be obedient in all thynges.
10 To whom ye forgeue any thyng, I forgeue also. For if I forgaue any thing, to
whom I forgaue it, for your sakes forgaue I it, in the sight of Christe.
11 Lest Satan shoulde circumuent vs: For his thoughtes are not vnknowen vnto vs.
12 Furthermore, when I came to Troada, to preache Christes Gospell, and a doore
was opened vnto me of the lorde,
13 I had no rest in my spirite, because I founde not Titus my brother, but toke
my leaue of them, and went away into Macedonia.
14 Nowe thankes be vnto God, whiche alwayes geueth vs the victorie in Christe,
and openeth the sauour of his knowledge by vs in euery place.
15 For we are vnto God the sweete sauour of Christe in them that are saued, and
in them which perisshe.
16 To the one part are we the sauour of death, vnto death: and vnto the other
part are we the sauour of lyfe vnto lyfe. And who is meete vnto these thynges?
17 For we are not as many are, whiche chop & chaunge with the word of God: but
as of purenesse of God, in the syght of God, so speake we in Christe.

Chapter 3

1 Do we begyn to prayse our selues agayne? Or neede we as some other of epistles
of recomendation vnto you? or letters of recommendation from you?
2 Ye are our epistle written in our heartes, whiche is vnderstande and read of
all men:
3 Forasmuche as ye declare that ye are the epistle of Christ ministred by vs,
and written, not with ynke, but with the spirite of the lyuyng God, not in
tables of stone, but in fleshly tables of the heart.
4 Such trust haue we through Christe to Godwarde.
5 Not that we are sufficiet of our selues to thynke any thyng as of our selues:
but our ablenesse is of God,
6 Which hath made vs able ministers of the newe testament, not of the letter,
but of the spirite: For the letter kylleth, but the spirite geueth lyfe.
7 Yf the ministration of death, through the letters figured in stones, was in
glorie, so that the chyldren of Israel coulde not beholde the face of Moyses,
for the glorie of his countenaunce, whiche glorie is done away:
8 Howe shall not the ministration of the spirite be much more in glorie?
9 For yf the ministration of condempnation be glorie: much more doth the
ministration of ryghteousnes exceede in glorie.
10 For euen that which was glorified, is not glorified in respect of this
exceedyng glorie.
11 For yf that whiche is destroyed was glorious, much more that which remayneth
is glorious.
12 Seyng then that we haue such truste, we vse great boldnesse:
13 And not as Moyses, which put a vayle ouer his face, that the chyldren of
Israel shoulde not see for what purpose that serued which is put away.
14 But their myndes were blynded: For vntyll this day remayneth the same
coueryng vntaken away in the reading of the olde testament, which vayle is put
away in Christe.
15 But euen vnto this day when Moyses is read, the vayle is layde vppon their
heart.
16 Neuerthelesse, when it shall turne to the Lorde, the vayle shalbe taken away.
17 The Lorde is a spirite: And where the spirite of the Lorde is there is
libertie.
18 But we all behold as in a mirrour, the glorie of the Lorde, with his face
open, and are chaunged vnto the same similitude, from glorie to glorie, euen as
of the spirite of the Lorde.

Chapter 4

1 Therfore, seyng that we haue such a ministerie, as we haue receaued mercie, we
faynt not:
2 But haue cast from vs the clokes of vnhonestie, and walke not in craftynesse,
neither handle we the word of God disceitefully, but in openyng of the trueth,
and report our selues to euery mans conscience in the syght of God.
3 Yf our Gospell be yet hyd, it is hyd in them that are lost:
4 In whom the god of this worlde hath blinded the myndes of them whiche beleue
not, lest the lyght of the Gospell of the glorie of Christe (which is the image
of God) should shine vnto them.
5 For we preache not our selues, but Christe Iesus the Lord, and our selues your
seruauntes for Iesus sake.
6 For it is God that commaundeth the lyght to shine out of darknesse, whiche
hath shined in our heartes, for to geue the lyght of the knowledge of the glorie
of God, in the face of Iesus Christe.
7 But we haue this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellencie of the
power be Gods, and not ours.
8 We are troubled on euery syde, yet are we not without shyft. We are in
pouertie, but not vtterly without somewhat.
9 We suffer persecution, but are not forsaken therin. We are cast downe, but we
perisshe not.
10 We alwayes beare about in the body the dying of the Lorde Iesus, that the
lyfe of Iesus myght also appeare in our bodie.
11 For we which lyue, are alwayes deliuered vnto death for Iesus sake, that the
lyfe also of Iesu myght appeare in our mortall flesshe.
12 So then, death worketh in vs, but life in you.
13 Seing then that we haue the same spirite of fayth (accordyng as it is
written, I beleued, and therefore haue I spoken) We also beleue, and therefore
speake.
14 For we knowe, that he which raysed vp the Lorde Iesus, shall rayse vp vs also
by the meanes of Iesus, and shall set vs with you.
15 For all thynges do for your sakes, that the plenteous grace, by thankes
geuyng of many, may redounde to the prayse of God.
16 Wherefore we are not weryed: But though our outwarde man perishe, yet the
inwarde man is renued day by day.
17 For our exceedyng tribulation which is momentanie & lyght, prepareth an
exceedyng and an eternall wayght of glorie vnto vs.
18 Whyle we loke not on the thynges whiche are seene, but on the thynges which
are not seene. For the thynges which are seene, are temporall: but the things
which are not seene, are eternal.

Chapter 5

1 For we knowe, that yf our earthly house of this tabernacle were destroyed, we
haue a building of God, an habitation not made with handes, but eternall in
heauen.
2 For therfore sygh we, desiryng to be clothed with our house whiche is from
heauen:
3 So yet, yf that we be founde clothed, and not naked.
4 For we that are in this tabernacle sigh, & being burdened because we would not
be vnclothed, but would be clothed vpo, that mortalitie might be swalowed vp of
lyfe.
5 He that hath ordeyned vs for this thyng is God, which hath also geuen vnto vs
the earnest of the spirite.
6 Therfore we are alway of good cheare, and knowe, that as long as we are at
home in the body, we are absent from the Lorde.
7 (For we walke by fayth, not after outwarde appearaunce.)
8 Neuerthelesse, we are of good comfort, and had rather to be absent from the
body, and to be present with the Lorde.
9 Wherfore, whether we be at home, or from home, we endeuour our selues to be
accepted vnto hym.
10 For we must all appeare before the iudgement seate of Christe, that euery man
may receaue the workes of his bodie according to that he hath done, whether it
be good or bad.
11 Seing then that we knowe the feare of the Lorde, we fare fayre with men: For
we are knowen well enough vnto God. I trust also that we are knowen in your
consciences.
12 For we prayse not our selues agayne vnto you, but geue you an occasion to
reioyce of vs, that ye may haue somwhat agaynst them which reioyce in the face,
and not in the heart.
13 For yf we be to feruent, to God are we to feruent: Or yf we kepe measure, for
your cause kepe we measure.
14 For the loue of Christe constrayneth vs, because we thus iudge, that yf one
dyed for all, then were all dead.
15 And he dyed for all, that they which lyue, shoulde not hencefoorth lyue vnto
them selues, but vnto hym which dyed for them, and rose agayne.
16 Wherefore hencefoorth knowe we no man after the flesshe: Insomuche, though we
haue knowen Christe after the flesshe, nowe yet hencefoorth knowe we hym so no
more.
17 Therfore yf any man be in Christe, he is a newe creature. Olde thynges are
passed awaye, beholde all thynges are become newe.
18 And all thynges are of God, whiche hath reconciled vs vnto hym selfe by Iesus
Christe, and hath geuen to vs the ministerie of reconciliation.
19 For God was in Christe, reconciling the worlde to hym selfe, not imputyng
their sinnes vnto them, and hath committed to vs the preachyng of the atonement.
20 Nowe then are we messengers in the rowme of Christe, euen as though God dyd
beseche you through vs. So praye we you in Christes steade, that ye be
reconciled vnto God.
21 For he hath made him to be sinne for vs, whiche knewe no sinne, that we
shoulde be made the ryghteousnesse of God in hym.

Chapter 6

1 We also as helpers exhorte you, that ye receaue not the grace of God in vayne.
2 For he saith: I haue heard thee in a tyme accepted, and in the day of
saluation haue I suckoured thee. Beholde, nowe is that accepted tyme, beholde
nowe is that day of saluation:
3 Let vs geue none occasion of euyll in any thyng, that the ministerie be not
blamed:
4 But in all thynges let vs behaue our selues as ye ministers of God, in much
pacience, in afflictions, in necessities, in anguisshes,
5 In stripes, in prisonmentes, in strifes, in labours,
6 In watchynges, in fastinges, in purenesse, in knowledge, in long suffryng, in
kyndnesse, in the holy ghost, in loue vnfaigned:
7 In the worde of trueth, in the power of God, by the armour of righteousnes, of
the ryght hande and on the lefte,
8 By honour and dishonour, by euyll report and good report, as deceauers and yet
true,
9 As vnknowen, and yet knowen, as dying, and beholde we lyue, as chastened, and
not kylled,
10 As sorowyng, and yet alway merie: as poore, and yet make many riche: as
hauyng nothyng, and yet possessyng all thynges.
11 O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open vnto you, our heart is made large:
12 Ye are in no strayte in vs, but are in a straite in your owne bowels.
13 I promise you lyke rewarde as vnto children: Set your selues at large,
14 And beare not ye a straunge yoke with the vnbeleuers. For what felowship hath
righteousnesse with vnrighteousnesse? Or what communion hath lyght with
darkenesse?
15 Or what concorde hath Christe with belyall? Eyther what part hath he that
beleueth, with an infidell?
16 Or howe agreeth the temple of God with images? For ye are the temple of the
lyuing God, as saide God, I wyll dwell in them, & walke in them & wyll be their
God, & they shalbe my people.
17 Wherfore come out fro among them, and separate your selues from them (saith
the Lorde) and touche none vncleane thyng, and I wyll receaue you,
18 And wyll be a father vnto you, and ye shalbe my sonnes and daughters, saith
the Lorde almightie.

Chapter 7

1 Seyng that we haue these promises (dearely beloued) let vs clense our selues
from all fylthynesse of the flesshe & spirite, and growe vp to full holynesse in
the feare of God.
2 Understande vs, we haue wronged no man, we haue corrupt no man, we haue
defrauded no man.
3 I speake not this to condempne you: for I haue shewed you before, that ye are
in our heartes to dye and lyue with you.
4 I am very bolde ouer you, I reioyce greatly in you. I am fylled with comfort,
and am exceedyng ioyous in all our tribulation.
5 For when we were come into Macedonia, our flesshe had no rest, but we were
troubled on euery syde: Outward was fyghtyng, inward was feare.
6 Neuerthelesse, God that comforteth the humble, comforted vs by the commyng of
Titus.
7 And not by his comming only, but also by the consolatio whiche we receaued of
you, when he tolde vs your desire, your wepyng, your feruent mynde towarde me,
so that I reioyced the more.
8 For though I made you sorie with a letter, I repent not, though I dyd repent.
For I perceaue, that the same epistle made you sorie, though it were but for a
season.
9 I nowe reioyce, not that ye were sorie, but that ye so sorowed to repent: for
ye sorowed godly, so that in nothyng ye were hurt by vs.
10 For godly sorowe, causeth repentaunce vnto saluatio, not to be repented of:
but the sorowe of the world causeth death.
11 For beholde this thing, what carefulnesse this godly sorow that ye toke, hath
wrought in you: yea what clearing of your selues, yea what indignation, yea what
feare, yea what vehemet desire, yea what zeale, yea what punishment. For in all
thynges ye haue shewed your selues that ye were cleare in ye matter.
12 Wherefore, though I wrote vnto you, I dyd it not for his cause that had done
the hurt, neither for his cause that was hurt: but that your good minde to
vswarde myght appeare among you in the syght of God.
13 Therfore we are comforted, because ye are comforted: yea and exceedyngly the
more ioyed we, for the ioy that Titus had, because his spirite was refreshed by
you all.
14 I am therefore not nowe ashamed, though I boasted my selfe to hym of you. For
as all thinges which we spake vnto you are true: euen so our boastyng that I
made vnto Titus is made true.
15 And his inwarde affection is more aboundaunt towarde you, when he remembred
the obedience of you all, howe with feare and tremblyng ye receaued hym.
16 I reioyce that I may be bolde in you in all thynges.

Chapter 8

1 Moreouer, we do you to wite brethren, of the grace of God, which was geuen in
the Churches of Macedonia.
2 Howe that ye aboundance of their reioycing is, that they are tryed with muche
tribulation. And though they were exceedyng poore, yet haue they geuen exceedyng
rychlye, and that in singlenesse.
3 For to their powers (I beare them recorde) yea & beyonde their powers, they
were wyllyng.
4 And prayed vs with great instaunce that we woulde receaue this grace and
societie of the ministerie to ye saintes.
5 And this they dyd not as we loked for: but gaue their owne selues first to the
Lorde, and after vnto vs by the wyll of God.
6 So that we coulde not but desire Titus to accomplyshe ye same grace among you
also, euen as he had begun.
7 Nowe therefore as ye are riche in all thinges, in fayth, in worde, in
knowledge, in all feruentnesse, and in loue, which ye haue to vs: euen so, see
that ye be plenteous in this grace also.
8 This say I not by commaundement, but because of ye feruentnesse of other, &
alowing the vnfaynednes of your loue.
9 For ye knowe the grace of our Lorde Iesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet
for your sakes he became poore, that ye through his pouertie might be made rich.
10 And I geue councell hereto: For this is expedient for you, which haue begun
not to do only, but also to wil a yere ago.
11 Nowe therfore perfourme the thyng which ye began to do: that as ther was in
you a redines to wyll, euen so ye may performe ye dede of that which ye haue.
12 For if there be first a wyllyng mynde, it is accepted accordyng to that a man
hath, and not accordyng to that he hath not.
13 Truly, not that other be set at ease, & ye brought into combraunce:
14 But that there be equalnesse nowe at this tyme, and that your aboundaunce may
succour their lacke, and that their aboundaunce maye supplie your lacke, that
there may be equalitie.
15 As it written: He that had much, had not the more aboundaunce, and he that
had litle, had not the lesse.
16 Thankes be vnto God, which put the same good mynde for you in the heart of
Titus,
17 Because he accepted the exhortation, yea rather he was so well wylling, that
of his owne accorde he came vnto you.
18 We haue sent with hym that brother whose praise is in the Gospel through out
all the Churches.
19 (And not that only, but is also chosen of the Churches to be a felowe with vs
in our iourney, concernyng this grace that is ministred by vs vnto the glorie of
the same Lorde, and to stirre vp your redie mynde)
20 For this we eschewe, that any man shoulde rebuke vs in this plenteous
distribution that is ministred by vs:
21 And make prouisio for honest thinges, not only in the syght of the Lorde, but
also in the syght of men.
22 We haue sent with them a brother of ours, whom we haue oftentymes proued
diligent in many thinges, but nowe much more diligent, for the great confidence
whiche I haue in you:
23 Partly for Titus sake, which is my felowe & helper concernyng you: partly
because of other which are our brethren and the messengers of the Churches, and
the glorie of Christe.
24 Wherfore shewe ye vnto them ye profe of your loue, & of our reioycyng of you
in the syght of the Churches.

Chapter 9

1 Of the ministryng to the saintes, it is but superfluous for me to write vnto
you:
2 For I knowe the redinesse of your mynde, whereof I boast my selfe of you, vnto
them of Macedonia, that Achaia was prepared a yere a go: and your zeale hath
prouoked many.
3 Yet haue I sent the brethren, lest our boastyng which I make of you, should be
in vayne in this behalfe, that ye (as I haue sayde) may prepare your selues.
4 Lest yf they of Macedonia come with me, and fynde you vnprepared, we (I wyll
not say you) shoulde be ashamed in this matter of boastyng.
5 Therfore, I thought it necessarie to exhort the brethren, to come beforehand
vnto you, and to prepare your good blessyng promised afore, that it myght be
redy, so that it be as a blessyng, and not a defraudyng.
6 This yet I say he which soweth litle, shall reape litle: and he that soweth in
geuyng largely and freely, shall reape plenteouslie.
7 Let euery man do, accordyng as he hath purposed in his heart, not grudgyngly,
or of necessitie: For God loueth a chearefull geuer.
8 God is able to make you riche in all grace, that ye in all thynges hauyng
sufficient vnto the vtmost, may be riche vnto all maner of good workes,
9 As it is written: He hath sparsed abrode, and hath geuen to the poore, his
ryghteousnesse remayneth for euer.
10 He that ministreth seede vnto ye sower, ministreth bread also for foode, and
multiplieth your seede, and encreaseth the fruites of your ryghteousnesse:
11 That in all thynges ye may be made riche into all singlenesse, which causeth
through vs, that thankes are geuen vnto God.
12 For the administration of this seruice, not only supplieth ye neede of the
saintes: but also is aboundaunt by the thankes geuyng of many vnto God,
13 Which by the experiment of this ministration, prayse God for the obedience of
your consentyng to the Gospell of Christe, and for your singlenesse in
distributyng to them, and to all men:
14 And by their prayers for you, which long after you, for the aboundaunt grace
of God in you.
15 Thankes be vnto God, for his vnspeakeable gyft.

Chapter 10

1 I Paul my selfe beseche you by the mekenesse & gentlenesse of Christ, whiche
when I am present among you, am lowlye: but am bolde towarde you beyng absent.
2 I beseche you, that I neede not to be bolde when I am present, with that same
boldnesse, wherwith I am supposed to haue ben bolde, agaynst some, which repute
vs as though we walked accordyng to the fleshe.
3 For though we walke in the fleshe, yet we do not warre according to ye flesh.
4 For the weapons of our warfare are not carnall, but myghtie through God, to
cast downe strong holdes,
5 Wherwith we ouerthrowe counsels, and euery hye thyng, that is exalted agaynst
the knowledge of God, & bryng into captiuitie all imagination, to the obedience
of Christe,
6 And are readie to take vengeaunce on all disobedience, when your obedience is
fulfylled.
7 Loke ye on thynges after the vtter appearaunce? If any man trust in hym selfe
that he is Christes, let hym consider this agayne of hym selfe, that as he is of
Christe, euen so are we of Christe.
8 For though I shoulde boast my selfe somwhat more of our auctoritie, which the
Lorde hath geuen to vs for edification, and not for your destruction, it shal
not be to my shame:
9 Lest I should seeme as though I wet about to make you afrayde by letters.
10 For the letters sayth he, are sore and strong: but his bodyly presence is
weake, and his speache rude.
11 Let hym that is such, thynke on this wise: that as we are in worde by
letters, when we are absent, such are we in deede when we are present.
12 For we dare not make our selues of the number of them, or to compare our
selues to them which praise themselues. Neuerthelesse, whyle they measure them
selues, with them selues, and compare them selues with them selues, they
vnderstande not.
13 But we wyll not reioyce aboue measure: but accordyng to the measure of the
rule, which God hath distributed vnto vs, a measure to reache euen vnto you.
14 For we stretch not out our selues beyonde measure, as though we reached not
vnto you: For euen to you also haue we come with the Gospell of Christe:
15 And we boast not our selues out of measure in other mens labours: Yea, and we
hope, when your fayth is increased among you, to be magnified accordyng to our
measure aboundauntly,
16 And that I shall preache the Gospell, in those regions which are beyonde you:
and not to glorie of those thynges, which by another mans measure are prepared
alredy.
17 But let hym that glorieth, glorie in the Lorde.
18 For he that prayseth hymselfe, is not alowed, but whom the Lorde prayseth.

Chapter 11

1 Would to God ye coulde haue suffred me a litle in my foolishnesse: and in dede
ye do forbeare me.
2 For I am gelous ouer you, with Godly gelousie: For I haue coupled you to one
man, to present you a chaste virgin vnto Christe.
3 But I feare lest by any meanes, that as the serpent begyled Eue through his
subtiltie, euen so your myndes shoulde be corrupted fro the singlenesse that is
towarde Christe.
4 For yf he that commeth, preacheth another Iesus, whom we haue not preached: or
yf ye receaue another spirite whom ye haue not receaued: either another Gospell
which ye haue not receaued, you woulde well haue suffered hym.
5 Ueryly I suppose that I was not behynde the chiefe Apostles.
6 But though I be rude in speakyng, yet not in knowledge, but in all thynges
among you, we haue ben well knowen to the vtmost.
7 Dyd I sinne because I submitted my selfe, that ye myght be exalted, & because
I preached to you the Gospell of God freely?
8 I robbed other Churches, takyng wages of them, to do you seruice.
9 And when I was present with you, and had nede, I was chargeable to no man: for
that which was lackyng vnto me, the brethren which came from Macedonia supplied,
and in all thynges I haue kept my selfe so that I shoulde not be chargeable to
any man, and so wyll I kepe my selfe.
10 The trueth of Christe is in me, that this reioycyng shall not be shut vp
agaynst me in the regions of Achaia.
11 Wherfore? Because I loue you not? God knoweth.
12 But what I do, that wyll I do, to cut away occasion from them which desire
occasion, that they myght be founde lyke vnto vs, in yt wherin they gloried.
13 For such false Apostles are disceiptfull workers, transfourmed into ye
Apostles of Christe.
14 And no maruayle, for Satan himselfe is transfourmed into an angel of lyght.
15 Therfore it is no great thyng though his ministers be transfourmed as the
ministers of righteousnesse, whose ende shalbe accordyng to their workes.
16 I say agayne, let no man thynke that I am foolyshe: or els euen nowe take ye
me as a foole, that I also may boast my selfe a litle.
17 That I speake, I speake it not after the Lorde: but as it were foolishly, in
this maner of boastyng.
18 Seyng that many glorie after ye fleshe, I wyll glorie also.
19 For ye suffer fooles gladly, seyng ye your selues are wyse.
20 For ye suffer, yf a man bryng you into bondage, yf a man deuoure, yf a man
take, yf a man exalt hym selfe, yf a man smite you on the face.
21 I speake concernyng reproche, as though we had ben weake: Howbeit, wherin
soeuer any man is bolde, (I speake foolishly) I am bolde also.
22 They are Ebrues, euen so am I. They are Israelites, euen so am I. They are
the seede of Abraham, euen so am I.
23 They are the ministers of Christe, (I speake as a foole) I am more: in
labours more aboundant, in stripes aboue measure, in pryson more plenteouslie,
in death oft.
24 Of the Iewes fyue tymes receaued I fourtie stripes saue one.
25 Thryse was I beaten with roddes, once stoned, thrise I suffred shipwracke,
nyght and day haue I ben in ye depth:
26 In iourneying often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils of
myne owne nation, in perils among the heathen, in perils in the citie, in perils
in the wildernesse, in perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren,
27 In labour & trauayle, in watchinges often, in hunger and thirst, in fastinges
often, in colde and nakednesse,
28 Besides the thynges which outwardlye come vnto me: my dayly encombraunce is
the care of all the Churches.
29 Who is weake, and I am not weake? who is offended, and I burne not?
30 If I must needes glory, I wyll glory of the thynges that concerne myne
infirmities.
31 The God and father of our Lorde Iesus Christe, which is blessed for euermore,
knoweth that I lye not.
32 In the citie of Damascus, Aretas the kynges gouernour of the people, layde
watche in the citie of the Damascens, and woulde haue caught me:
33 And at a wyndowe was I let downe in a basket through the wall, and scaped his
handes.

Chapter 12

1 It is not expedient doubtles, for me to glorie, I wyl come to visions &
reuelations of the Lorde.
2 For I knew a ma in Christe, aboue xiiij. yeres ago, (whether he were in the
body I can not tell, or whether he were out of the body, I can not tell, God
knoweth) that he was taken vp into the thirde heauen:
3 And I knewe the same man (whether in the body or out of the body, I can not
tell, God knoweth)
4 Howe that he was take vp into paradise, & hearde vnspeakeable wordes, which is
not lawfull for man to vtter.
5 Of such a man wyll I glorie, yet of my selfe wyll I not glorie, but in myne
infirmities.
6 For though I woulde desire to glorie, I shall not be a foole, for I wyll say
the trueth: but I nowe refrayne, lest any man shoulde thynke of me, aboue that
which he seeth me to be, or yt he heareth of me.
7 And lest I shoulde be exalted out of measure through the aboundaunce of the
reuelations, there was geuen vnto me a pricke to the fleshe, the messenger of
Satan to buffet me, because I should not be exalted out of measure.
8 For this thyng besought I the Lorde thryse, that it myght depart from me.
9 And he sayde vnto me: My grace is sufficient for thee. For my strength is made
perfect in weakenesse. Most gladly therfore, I wyll rather glorie in my
infirmities, that the power of Christ myght dwell in me.
10 Therfore haue I delectation in infirmities, in rebukes, in necessities, in
persecutions, in anguishes for Christes sake: For when I am weake, then am I
strong.
11 I am become a foole in gloriyng. Ye haue compelled me: for I ought to haue
ben commended of you. For nothyng was I inferiour vnto the chiefe Apostles,
though I be nothyng,
12 Truely the signes of an Apostle were wrought among you, in all patience, and
signes, and wonders, and myghtie deedes.
13 For what is it, wherin ye were inferiour vnto other Churches, except it be
that I was not chargeable vnto you? Forgeue me this wrong.
14 Beholde, nowe the thirde tyme I am redy to come vnto you, and yet wyll I not
be chargeable vnto you: For I seke not yours, but you. For the children ought
not to lay vp for the fathers and mothers: but the fathers and mothers for the
chyldren.
15 I wyll very gladly bestowe, & wylbe bestowed for your sakes, though the more
aboundauntly I loue you, the lesse I am loued agayne.
16 But be it, that I was not chargeable vnto you: Neuerthelesse, when I was
craftie, I caught you with guile.
17 Dyd I pyll you by any of them who I sent vnto you?
18 I desired Titus, and with hym I sent a brother: Dyd Titus defraude you of any
thyng? Haue we not walked in the same spirite? not in the same steppes?
19 Agayne, thynke you that we excuse our selues vnto you? We speake in Christ in
the syght of God: but we do all thinges dearely beloued, for your edifiyng.
20 For I feare lest when I come, I shall not fynde you such as I woulde: and
that I shalbe founde vnto you, such as ye woulde not: lest there be debates,
enuyinges, wrathes, strifes, backbitinges, whisperinges, swellinges, &
seditions:
21 And that when I come agayne, my God bryng me lowe among you, and I shall
bewayle many of the which haue sinned alredy, and haue not repented of the
vncleannesse, and fornication, and wantonnes, which they haue comitted.

Chapter 13

1 Nowe come I the third time vnto you. In the mouth of two or three witnesses
shall euery worde be stablisshed.
2 I tolde you before, and tell you before, as though I had ben present with you
the seconde tyme, so write I nowe beyng absent, to them which in time past haue
sinned, and to all other, that yf I come agayne, I wyll not spare,
3 Seyng yt ye seeke experience of Christe which speaketh in me, which to you
ward is not weake, but is mighty in you.
4 For though he was crucified of weakenesse, yet liueth he of the power of God.
And we no doubt, are weake in hym: but we shall lyue with hym, by ye might of
God towarde you.
5 Examine your selues, whether ye are in the fayth: Proue your owne selues.
Knowe ye not your owne selues, howe that Iesus Christe is in you? except ye be
reprobates.
6 I trust ye shal knowe that we are not reprobates.
7 Truely I pray to God that ye do none euyll, not that we shoulde seeme
approued: but yt ye shoulde do that which is honest, though we be as reprobates.
8 For we can do nothyng agaynst the trueth: but for the trueth.
9 For we are glad when we are weake, and ye are strong. Truely this also we
wishe, euen your perfection.
10 Therfore write I these thynges beyng absent, lest when I am present, I should
vse sharpenesse, accordyng to the power which the Lorde hath geuen me to
edification, and not to destruction.
11 Finally brethren, fare well, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mynde,
lyue in peace, and the God of loue and peace shalbe with you.
12 Greete one another in an holy kisse.
13 All the saintes salute you.
14 The grace of our Lorde Iesus Christ, and the loue of God, and the comunion of
the holy ghost, be with you all. Amen. The ende of the seconde Epistle to the
Corinthians. Sent from Philippos, a citie in Macedonia, by Titus and Lucas.


Galatians

Chapter 1

1 Paul an Apostle, not of men, neither by man: but by Iesus Christe, and by God
the father, which raysed hym vp from death:
2 And all the brethren which are with me. Unto ye Churches of Galacia:
3 Grace be with you, and peace from God the father, and from our Lorde Iesus
Christe:
4 Which gaue hym selfe for our sinnes, to deliuer vs from this present euyll
worlde, accordyng to the wyll of God, and our father:
5 To whom be glory for euer and euer. Amen.
6 I maruayle, that ye are so soone turned from him that had called you in the
grace of Christe, vnto another Gospell:
7 Which is not another Gospel but that there be some which trouble you, and
intende to peruert the Gospel of Christ.
8 Neuerthelesse, though we, or an Angel from heauen, preache any other Gospel
vnto you, then that which we haue preached vnto you, let hym be accursed.
9 As we sayde before, so say I nowe agayne, yf any man preache any other Gospell
vnto you, then that ye haue receaued, let hym be accursed.
10 Do I nowe perswade men, or God? Other do I seke to please men? For yf I
shoulde yet please men, I were not the seruaunt of Christe.
11 I certifie you brethren, that the Gospell which was preached of me, was not
after man.
12 For I neither receaued it of man, neither was I taught it but by the
reuelation of Iesus Christe.
13 For ye haue hearde of my conuersation in tyme past in the Iewes religion,
howe that beyonde measure I persecuted the Churche of God, & spoyled it:
14 And profited in the Iewes religion, aboue many of my companions in mine owne
nation, beyng a very feruent maynteyner of the traditions of my fathers.
15 But when it pleased God, which seperated me from my mothers wombe, & called
me by his grace,
16 To reueale his sonne by me, that I shoulde by the Gospell preache hym among
the Heathen: immediatly I communed not with fleshe and blood:
17 Neither returned to Hierusalem, to them which were Apostles before me: but
went my wayes into Arabia, and came agayne vnto Damascus.
18 Then after three yeres, I returned to Hierusale to see Peter, and abode with
hym fyfteene dayes.
19 But other of the Apostles sawe I none, saue Iames the Lordes brother.
20 The thynges therfore which I write vnto you, beholde, before God I lie not.
21 Afterwarde, I came into the coastes of Syria & Cilicia,
22 and was vnknowen in face vnto the Churches of Iurie, which were in Christe.
23 But they had hearde only, that he which persecuted vs in tyme past, nowe
preacheth the fayth, which before he destroyed.
24 And they glorified God in me.

Chapter 2

1 Then fourteene yeres after, I went vp agayne to Hierusalem with Barnabas, and
toke Titus with me.
2 I went vp also by reuelation, & I declared vnto them the Gospel which I
preache among the gentiles: but priuately, with them which were the chiefe, lest
by any meanes, I shoulde runne or had runne in vayne.
3 But neither Titus which was with me, beyng a Greke, was compelled to be
circumcised,
4 And that because of incommers, being false brethren, which came in priuily, to
spye out our libertie which we haue in Christe Iesu, that they myght bryng vs
into bondage.
5 To whom, no not for an houre, we gaue place by subiection, that the trueth of
the Gospel might continue with you.
6 Of them which seemed to be somewhat (what they were in time passed, it maketh
no matter to me, God accepteth no mans person) for they which seemed chiefe,
added nothyng to me.
7 But contrary wyse, when they sawe that the Gospell of the vncircumcision was
committed vnto me, as the Gospel of the circumcision was committed vnto Peter.
8 (For he that was myghtie in Peter, to the Apostleshyp of the circumcision, the
same was myghtie in me towarde the gentiles)
9 When they perceaued the grace that was geuen vnto me, then Iames, Cephas, and
Iohn, which seemed to be pyllers, gaue to me and Barnabas the ryght handes of
felowshyppe, that we shoulde be Apostles vnto the Heathen, and they vnto the
circumcision.
10 Onely that we shoulde remember the poore: Wherin also I was diligent to do
the same.
11 But whe Peter was come to Antioche, I withstoode him to the face, because he
was to be blamed.
12 For yer yt certaine came from Iames, he dyd eate with the gentiles: But whe
they were come, he withdrue, and seperated himselfe, fearing them which were of
the circumcision.
13 And the other Iewes dissembled lykewyse with hym: insomuch that Barnabas also
was brought into their simulation.
14 But when I sawe that they went not the ryght way to the trueth of the Gospel,
I saide vnto Peter before them all: If thou beyng a Iewe, lyuest after the maner
of the gentiles, and not as do the Iewes: Why causest thou the gentiles to lyue
as do the Iewes?
15 We which are Iewes by nature, and not sinners of the gentiles,
16 Knowe that a man is not iustified by the deedes of the lawe, but by the fayth
of Iesus Christe: And we haue beleued on Iesus Christ, that we might be
iustified by the fayth of Christe, and not by the deedes of the lawe, because by
the deedes of the lawe no fleshe shalbe iustified.
17 If then, whyle we seke to be made ryghteous by Christe, we our selues are
founde sinners: is therfore Christe the minister of sinne? God forbyd.
18 For yf I builde agayne the thynges which I destroyed, then make I my selfe a
trespasser.
19 For I, through the lawe, am dead to the lawe, that I myght lyue vnto God: I
am crucified with Christe.
20 Neuerthelesse, I lyue: yet nowe not I, but Christe lyueth in me. And ye lyfe
which I nowe liue in the fleshe, I lyue by the faith of the sonne of God, which
loued me, and gaue hym selfe for me.
21 I reiect not the grace of God: For yf ryghteousnesse come of the lawe, then
Christe is dead in vayne.

Chapter 3

1 O foolishe Galathians, who hath bewitched you, that ye shoulde not obey ye
trueth? To whom Iesus Christe was described before the eyes, & among you
crucified.
2 This only woulde I learne of you, whether ye receaued the spirite by the
deedes of the lawe, or by the hearyng of the fayth?
3 Are ye such fooles, that after ye haue begun in the spirite, ye woulde nowe
ende in the fleshe?
4 Haue ye suffered so great thynges in vayne? Yf it be yet in vayne.
5 He therfore that ministreth to you the spirite, and worketh miracles among
you, doth he it through the deedes of the lawe, or by hearyng of the fayth?
6 Euen as Abraham beleued God, & it was ascribed to hym for righteousnesse.
7 Knowe ye therfore, that they which are of fayth, the same are the chyldren of
Abraham.
8 For the scripture seyng aforehande that God woulde iustifie the Heathen
through fayth, shewed beforehand glad tydynges vnto Abraham, saying: In thee
shall all nations be blessed.
9 So then, they which be of fayth, are blessed with the faythfull Abraham.
10 For as many as are of the deedes of the lawe, are vnder the curse. For it is
writte: Cursed is euery one that continueth not in all thinges which are written
in the booke of the lawe, to do them.
11 But that no man is iustified by ye lawe in the sight of God, it is euident.
For the iust shall lyue by fayth.
12 And the lawe is not of fayth: but the man that doth them, shall lyue in them.
13 Christe hath redeemed vs from the curse of the lawe, beyng made a curse for
vs. For it is written: Cursed is euery one that hangeth on tree:
14 That the blessyng of Abraham might come on the gentiles through Iesus
Christe, that we myght receaue the promise of the spirite through fayth.
15 Brethren, I speake after ye maner of men: Though it be but a mans testamet,
yet if it be alowed, no man reiecteth it, or addeth therto.
16 To Abraham and his seede were the promises made. He sayth not to the seedes,
as of many: but to thy seede, as of one, which is Christe.
17 This I say, that the lawe which began afterwarde, beyonde foure hundred and
thirtie yeres, doth not disanull the testament that was confirmed afore of God,
vnto Christe warde, to make the promise of none effect.
18 For yf the inheritauce be of the lawe, then not nowe of promise: But God gaue
it vnto Abraham by promise.
19 Wherfore then serueth the lawe? It was added because of transgressions, tyl
the seede came to whom the promise was made: and it was ordayned by Angels in
the hande of a mediatour.
20 A mediatour is not a mediatour of one, but God is one.
21 Is the lawe then against the promise of God? God forbyd. For yf there had ben
a lawe geuen which coulde haue geuen life: then no doubt righteousnesse shoulde
haue ben by the lawe.
22 But the scripture hath concluded all vnder sinne, that the promise by ye
fayth of Iesus Christe shoulde be geuen vnto them that beleue.
23 But before fayth came, we were kept vnder the lawe, and were shut vp vnto the
fayth which shoulde afterwarde be reuealed.
24 Wherfore, the lawe was our scholemaister vnto Christe, that we shoulde be
iustified by fayth.
25 But after that fayth is come, we are no longer vnder a scholemaister.
26 For ye are all the chyldren of God by fayth in Christe Iesu.
27 For all ye that are baptized, haue put on Christe.
28 There is no Iewe, neither Greke, there is neither bonde nor free, there is
neither male, nor female: For ye are all one in Christe Iesu.
29 If ye be Christes, then are ye Abrahams seede, and heyres accordyng to the
promise.

Chapter 4

1 And I say, that the heyre, as long as he is a chylde, differeth nothyng from a
seruaut, though he be Lorde of all,
2 But is vnder tuters and gouernours, vntyll the tyme appoynted of the father.
3 Euen so we, when we were chyldren, were in bondage vnder ye rudimentes of the
worlde:
4 But when the fulnesse of the tyme was come, God sent his sonne, made of a
woman, and made vnder the lawe,
5 To redeeme them that were vnder the lawe, that we myght receaue the adoption
of chyldren.
6 Because ye are sonnes, God hath sent the spirite of his sonne into your
heartes, crying, Abba, father.
7 Wherfore thou art no more a seruaunt, but a sonne: If thou be a sonne, thou
art also an heire of God, through Christ.
8 Notwithstandyng, when ye knewe not God, ye dyd seruice vnto the which by
nature are no Gods.
9 But nowe after that ye haue knowen God, yea, rather are knowen of God, howe
turne ye agayne vnto the weake and beggarly rudimentes, whervnto againe ye
desire a freshe to be in bondage?
10 Ye obserue dayes, and monethes, and tymes, and yeres.
11 I am in feare of you, lest I haue bestowed on you labour in vayne.
12 Brethren, I besech you be as I am for I am as ye are. Ye haue not iniured me
at all.
13 Ye knowe howe through infirmitie of the fleshe, I preached the Gospell vnto
you at the first:
14 And my temptation which was in my fleshe, ye dispised not, neither abhorred:
but receaued me as an Angel of God, euen as Christe Iesus.
15 What is then your felicitie? For I beare you recorde, that yf it had ben
possible, ye woulde haue plucked out your owne eyes, and haue geuen them to me.
16 Am I therfore become your enemie, because I tell you the trueth?
17 They are gelouse ouer you amisse: Yea, they intende to exclude you, that ye
shoulde be feruent to them warde.
18 It is good alwayes to be zelous in a good thyng, and not only when I am
present with you
19 My litle chyldren, of whom I trauayle in birth agayne, vntyll Christe be
fashioned in you.
20 But I desire to be present with you nowe, and to chaunge my voyce: for I
stande in doubt of you.
21 Tell me, ye that desire to be vnder the lawe, do ye not heare the lawe?
22 For it is written, that Abraham had two sonnes, the one by a bonde mayde, the
other by a free woman:
23 But he which was of the bonde woman, was borne after the fleshe: but he which
was of the free woman, was borne by promise.
24 Which thynges are spoken by an allegorie. For these are two testamentes: the
one from the mount Sina, which gendreth vnto bondage, which is Agar.
25 For Agar is the mount Sina in Arabia, and bordreth vpon the citie, which is
nowe called Hierusalem, and is in bondage with her chyldren.
26 But Hierusalem which is aboue, is free: which is the mother of vs all.
27 For it is written: Reioyce thou baren, that bearest no chyldren, breake
foorth and crye, thou that trauaylest not: For the desolate hath many mo
chyldren, then she which hath an husbande.
28 But brethren, we are after Isaac the chyldren of promise.
29 But as then he that was borne after the fleshe, persecuted hym that was borne
after the spirite: euen so is it now.
30 Neuerthelesse, what saith the scripture? put away the bondwoman and her
sonne: For the sonne of the bondwoman, shall not be heire with the sonne of the
free woman.
31 So then brethren, we are not chyldren of the bonde woman, but of the free.

Chapter 5

1 Stande fast therfore in the libertie wherwith Christe hath made vs free, and
be not intangled agayne with ye yoke of bondage.
2 Beholde I Paul saye vnto you, that yf ye be, circumcised Christe shall profite
you nothyng.
3 For I testifie agayne to euery man which is circumcised, that he is a detter
to do the whole lawe.
4 Christe is become but vayne to you, as many of you as are iustified by the
lawe, are fallen from grace.
5 For we through the spirite, wayte for the hope of ryghteousnes by fayth.
6 For in Iesus Christe, neither is circumcision any thing woorth, neither yet
vncircumcision: but fayth, which worketh by loue.
7 Ye dyd runne well, who was a let vnto you, that ye should not obey ye trueth?
8 Not the perfection of hym that called you.
9 A litle leauen, doth leauen the whole lumpe of dowe.
10 I haue truste towarde you in the Lorde, that ye wyll be none otherwyse
mynded: But he that troubleth you, shall beare iudgement, whatsoeuer he be.
11 And brethren, if I yet preache circumcision, why do I yet suffer persecution?
Then is the slaunder of the crosse ceassed.
12 I woulde to God they were cut of which trouble you.
13 For brethren, ye haue ben called into libertie: Only let not libertie be an
occasio to the flesshe, but by loue serue one another.
14 For all the lawe is fulfylled in one worde, which is this: Thou shalt loue
thy neyghbour as thy selfe.
15 Yf ye byte and deuoure one another, take heede lest ye be consumed one of
another.
16 Then I say, walke in the spirite, and ye shall not fulfyll the lust of the
flesshe.
17 For the flesshe lusteth contrary to the spirite, and the spirite contrary to
the flesshe. These are contrary one to the other, so that ye can not do what ye
woulde.
18 But and yf ye be ledde of the spirite, then are ye not vnder the lawe.
19 The deedes of the flesshe are manifest, which are these, adulterie,
fornication, vncleannesse, wantonnesse,
20 Worshippyng of images, witchcrafte, hatred, variaunce, zeale, wrath, strife,
seditions, sectes,
21 Enuyinges, murthers, drunkennesse, gluttonies, and such lyke: of the whiche I
tell you before, as I haue tolde you in tyme past, that they which do suche
thinges, shall not inherite the kingdome of God.
22 But the fruite of the spirite is, loue, ioye, peace, long sufferyng,
gentlenesse, goodnesse, fayth,
23 Mekenesse, temperauncie: agaynst such there is no lawe.
24 They truely that are Christes, haue crucified the flesshe, with the
affections and lustes.
25 Yf we lyue in ye spirite, let vs walke in the spirite.
26 Let vs not be desirous of vayne glorie, prouoking one another, enuying one
another.

Chapter 6

1 Brethren, yf a man be taken in any fault, ye which are spiritual restore such
a one in the spirite of mekenes, consideryng thy selfe, lest thou also be
tempted.
2 Beare ye one anothers burthen, and so fulfyll the lawe of Christe.
3 For if any man seeme to him selfe that he is somewhat, when he is nothyng, the
same deceaueth hymselfe in his owne fansie.
4 But let euery man proue his owne worke, & then shall he haue reioyceyng only
in his owne selfe, and not in another.
5 For euery man shall beare his owne burthen.
6 Let hym that is taught in the word, minister vnto hym that teacheth hym, in
all good thynges.
7 Be not deceaued, God is not mocked: For whatsoeuer a man soweth, that shall he
also reape.
8 For he that soweth into his flesshe, shal of the flesshe reape corruption: But
he that soweth into the spirite, shall of the spirite reape lyfe euerlastyng.
9 Let vs not be weery in well doyng: for in due season we shall reape, yf we
faynt not.
10 Whyle we haue therefore tyme, let vs do good vnto all men, specially vnto the
which are of the housholde of fayth.
11 Ye see how large a letter I haue written vnto you with myne owne hande.
12 As many as desire with outwarde appearaunce to please carnally, the same
constrayne you to be circumcised, onlye lest they shoulde suffer persecution for
the crosse of Christe.
13 For they the selues which are circumcised, kepe not the lawe: but desire to
haue you circumcised, that they myght reioyce in your flesshe.
14 God forbyd that I shoulde reioyce, but in the crosse of our Lorde Iesus
Christe, wherby the world is crucified vnto me, and I vnto the worlde.
15 For in Christe Iesu, neither circumcision auayleth any thing, nor
vncircumcision, but a newe creature.
16 And as many as walke accordyng to this rule, peace be on them, and mercie,
and vpon the Israel that is of God.
17 From hencefoorth, let no man put me to busynesse: For I beare in my body the
markes of the Lorde Iesus.
18 Brethren, the grace of our Lorde Iesus Christe be with your spirite. Amen.
The Epistle vnto the Galathians, was sent from Rome.


Ephesians

Chapter 1

1 Paul an apostle of Iesus Christe by the wyll of God: To the saintes which are
at Ephesus, and to the faythfull in Christe Iesus:
2 Grace be with you, and peace, from God our father, & from the Lorde Iesus
Christe.
3 Blessed be God, the father of our Lorde Iesus Christe, whiche hath blessed vs
in all spirituall blessyng, in heauenly thynges by Christe:
4 According as he had chosen vs in hym before the foundation of the world, that
we shoulde be holy, and without blame before hym, through loue.
5 Who hath predestinate vs into the adoption of childre, by Iesus Christ vnto
hym selfe, according to the good pleasure of his wyll:
6 To the prayse of the glorie of his grace, wherein he hath made vs accepted in
the beloued.
7 In whom we haue redemption through his blood, the forgeuenesse of sinnes,
accordyng to the rychesse of his grace,
8 Wherein he hath abounded towarde vs in all wysedome and prudence.
9 And hath opened vnto vs the misterie of his wyll, accordyng to his good
pleasure which he had purposed in himselfe.
10 That in the dispensation of the fulnesse of the tymes, he myght gather
together in one all thinges in Christe, both which are in heauen, and which are
in earth, in hym.
11 In whom also we are chosen, beyng predestinate accordyng to the purpose of
hym who worketh all thynges after the councell of his owne wyll:
12 That we shoulde be vnto the prayse of his glorie, whiche before beleued in
Christe.
13 In whom also ye, after that ye heard the worde of trueth, the Gospell of your
saluation, wherin also after that ye beleued, were sealed with the holy spirite
of promyse,
14 Whiche is the earnest of our inheritaunce, vnto ye redemption of the
purchased possession, vnto the prayse of his glorie.
15 Wherfore I also after that I hearde of the fayth which ye haue in the Lorde
Iesus, and loue vnto all the saintes,
16 Ceasse not to geue thankes for you, makyng mention of you in my prayers:
17 That the God of our Lorde Iesus Christe, the father of glorie, may geue vnto
you the spirite of wisdome and reuelation, in the knowledge of hym:
18 The eyes of your myndes beyng lightened, that ye maye knowe what the hope is
of his callyng, and what the richesse of the glorie of his inheritaunce is in
the saintes:
19 And what is the exceedyng greatnesse of his power to vswarde, which beleue,
accordyng to the workyng of his myghtie power,
20 Which he wrought in Christe when he raysed hym from the dead, and set him on
his ryght hande in heauenly places
21 Farre aboue all rule, and power, and myght, and dominion, and euery name that
is named, not in this worlde only, but also in the worlde to come.
22 And hath put all thynges vnder his feete, and gaue him to be the head ouer
all thynges to the Churche,
23 Which is his body, the fulnesse of him that fylleth all in all.

Chapter 2

1 And you that were dead in trespasses and sinnes,
2 In the which in time passed ye walked, according to the course of this worlde,
after the gouernour that ruleth in the ayre, the spirite that nowe worketh in
the chyldren of disobedience.
3 Among whom we all had our conuersation also in tyme past in the lustes of our
flesshe, fulfyllyng the wyll of the flesshe, and of the mynde, & were by nature
the chyldren of wrath, euen as other:
4 But God which is ryche in mercie, for his great loue wherwith he loued vs,
5 Euen when we were dead by sinnes, hath quickned vs together with Christ, by
grace are ye saued:
6 And hath raysed vs vp together, and made vs syt together in the heauenly in
Christe Iesus.
7 That in ages to come, he might shew the exceedyng ryches of his grace, in
kyndnesse to vswarde through Christe Iesus.
8 For by grace are ye made safe through fayth, and that not of your selues, it
is the gyft of God:
9 Not of workes, lest any man shoulde boast hym selfe.
10 For we are his workmanship, created in Christe Iesus vnto good workes, whiche
God hath ordeyned that we shoulde walke in them.
11 Wherfore, remember that ye being in tyme passed gentiles in the flesshe,
called vncircumcision of that which is called circumcision in the flesshe, made
by handes:
12 That at that tyme ye were without Christe, beyng aliauntes from the common
wealth of Israel, and straungers fro the testamentes of promise, hauyng no hope,
& without God in this worlde.
13 But nowe in Christe Iesus, ye which sometyme were farre of, are made nye by
the blood of Christe.
14 For he is our peace, which hath made both one: and hath broken downe the wall
that was a stoppe betwene vs,
15 Taking away in his flesshe the hatred, euen the lawe of commaundementes,
conteyned in ordinaunces, for to make of twayne one newe man in hym selfe, so
makyng peace,
16 And that he myght reconcile both vnto God in one body through his crosse, and
slewe hatred thereby.
17 And came and preached peace to you which were a farre of, and to them that
were nye.
18 For through hym, we both haue an entraunce in one spirite vnto the father.
19 Nowe therefore, ye are no more straungers and foreyners: but citezins with
the saintes, and of the housholde of God,
20 And are built vpon the foundation of the apostles and prophetes, Iesus
Christe hym selfe beyng the head corner stone,
21 In whom all the buyldyng coupled together, groweth vnto an holy temple in the
Lorde.
22 In whom ye also are buylded together for an habitation of God through the
spirite.

Chapter 3

1 For this cause I Paul am a prisoner of Iesus Christe, for you heathen:
2 Yf ye haue hearde of the dispensatio of the grace of God, which is geuen me to
youwarde:
3 For by reuelation shewed he the misterie vnto me (as I wrote afore in fewe
wordes:
4 Whereby, when ye reade, ye may vnderstande my knowledge in the misterie of
Christe)
5 Which misterie in other ages was not opened vnto the sonnes of men, as it is
nowe reuealed vnto his holy apostles and prophetes by the spirite,
6 That the gentiles shoulde be inheritours also, and of the same body, and
partakers of his promise in Christe, by the Gospell:
7 Wherof I am made a minister, accordyng to the gyfte of the grace of God, which
is geuen vnto me after the workyng of his power.
8 Unto me the least of all saintes is this grace geuen, that I shoulde preache
among the gentiles the vnsearchable ryches of Christe,
9 And to bring to lyght to all men what the felowship of the misterie is whiche
from the begynnyng of the world hath ben hid in god, which made all thinges
through Iesus Christe:
10 To thintent that nowe vnto the rulers and power in heauenly thynges myght be
knowen by ye Church, the very manyfolde wysedome of God:
11 According to ye eternall purpose which he wrought in Christe Iesus our Lord:
12 By who we haue boldnesse & entraunce in ye confidence which is by faith of
him.
13 Wherfore I desire that ye faynt not in my tribulations for you, whiche is
your glorie.
14 For this cause I bowe my knees vnto the father of our Lorde Iesus Christe,
15 Of who all the famyly in heauen and earth is named:
16 That he would graunt you, according to the rychesse of his glorie, to be
strengthed with myght by his spirite in the inner man.
17 That Christe may dwell in your heartes by fayth: that ye beyng rooted and
grounded in loue,
18 Myght be able to comprehende with al saintes, what is the breadth, & length,
and deapth, and heygth:
19 And to knowe the loue of Christe, whiche excelleth knowledge, that ye might
be fylled with all fulnesse of God.
20 Unto him that is able to do exceeding aboundauntly aboue all that we aske or
thynke, accordyng to the power that worketh in vs,
21 Be prayse in the Churche by Christe Iesus, throughout all ages, worlde
without ende. Amen.

Chapter 4

1 I therfore, a prisoner in the Lorde, exhorte you, that ye walke worthy of the
vocatio wherewith ye are called,
2 With all lowlynesse & mekenesse, with long sufferyng, forbearyng one another
in loue.
3 Endeuoryng to kepe the vnitie of the spirite in the bonde of peace:
4 One body and one spirite, euen as ye are called in one hope of your calling.
5 One Lorde, one fayth, one baptisme.
6 One God, and father of all, whiche is aboue all, and through all, and in you
all.
7 But vnto euery one of vs, is geuen grace, accordyng to the measure of the gyft
of Christe.
8 Wherfore he saith: When he went vp an hye, he ledde captiuitie captiue, and
gaue gyftes vnto men.
9 (But that he ascended, what is it? but that he also descended first into the
lower partes of the earth?
10 He that descended, is euen the same also that ascended vp farre aboue all
heauens, to fulfyll all thynges.)
11 And he gaue some apostles, and some prophetes, and some euangelistes, and
some shepheardes and teachers,
12 To the gatheryng together of the saintes, into the worke of ministration,
into the edifiyng of the body of Christe:
13 Tyll we all meete together into the vnitie of fayth, and knowledge of the
sonne of God, vnto a perfect man, vnto the measure of the age of the fulnesse of
Christe:
14 That we hencefoorth be no more children, wauering and caryed about with euery
wynde of doctrine, in the wylynesse of men, in craftynesse, to the laying wayte
of deceyte.
15 But folowyng trueth in loue, let vs growe vp into him in all thynges whiche
is the head, Christ:
16 In whom all the body beyng coupled and knit together by euery ioynt of
subministration, accordyng to the effectuall power in ye measure of euery part,
maketh increase of the body, vnto the edifiyng of it selfe in loue.
17 This I say therfore, and testifie in the Lorde, that ye hencefoorth walke not
as other gentiles walke, in vanitie of their mynde:
18 Darkened in cogitation, being alienated from the lyfe of God by the
ignoraunce that is in them, by the blindnesse of their heartes.
19 Whiche beyng past feelyng, haue geuen the selues ouer vnto wantonnesse, to
worke al vncleanenesse with greedynesse.
20 But ye haue not so learned Christe.
21 Yf so be that ye haue hearde hym, and haue ben taught in hym, as the trueth
is in Iesus,
22 To lay downe, accordyng to the former conuersation, ye olde man, which is
corrupt, accordyng to the lustes of error:
23 To be renued in the spirite of your mynde,
24 And to put on that newe man, which after God is shapen, in righteousnesse &
holynesse of trueth.
25 Wherfore, puttyng away lying, speake euery man trueth vnto his neyghbour,
forasmuch as we are members one of another.
26 Be ye angry, and sinne not, let not the sunne go downe vpon your wrath,
27 Neither geue place to the deuyll.
28 Let hym that stole, steale no more: but let hym rather labour, workyng with
his handes the thyng whiche is good, that he may geue vnto hym that needeth.
29 Let no fylthy communication procede out of your mouth, but that whiche is
good to edifie withal, as oft as neede is, that it may minister grace vnto the
hearers.
30 And greeue not the holy spirite of God, by whom ye are sealed vnto the day of
redemption.
31 Let all bytternesse, and fiercenesse, & wrath, and crying, and euyll
speakyng, be put away from you, with all maliciousnesse.
32 Be ye curteous one to another, merciful, forgeuing one another, euen as God
for Christes sake hath forgeuen you.

Chapter 5

1 Be ye therefore folowers of God, as deare chyldren:
2 And walke ye in loue, euen as Christe hath loued vs, and hath geuen hym selfe
for vs an offering and a sacrifice of a sweete smellyng sauour to God.
3 But fornication, and all vncleannesse, or couetousnesse, let it not be once
named among you, as it becommeth saintes:
4 Neither fylthynesse, neither foolyshe talkyng, neither iestyng, which are not
comely: but rather, geuyng of thankes.
5 For this ye knowe, that no whoremonger, neither vncleane person, nor couetous
person, which is a worshipper of images, hath any inheritaunce in the kyngdome
of Christe, and of God.
6 Let no man deceaue you with vayne wordes: For, because of such thynges commeth
the wrath of God vppon the chyldren of disobedience.
7 Be not ye therefore companions of them.
8 For ye were sometimes darknesse: but nowe are ye lyght in the Lorde. Walke as
chyldren of lyght.
9 For the fruite of the spirite (is) in all goodnesse, and righteousnesse, &
trueth,
10 Approuyng what is acceptable vnto the Lorde.
11 And haue no felowship with the vnfruitefull workes of darknesse, but rather
euen rebuke them.
12 For it is shame euen to name those thynges whiche are done of them in
secrete.
13 But all thynges, when they are rebuked of the lyght, are manifest: For all
that which do make manifest, is lyght.
14 Wherefore he sayth: Awake thou that sleepest, and stande vp from the dead,
and Christe shall geue thee lyght.
15 Take heede therfore howe ye walke circumspectlye: not as vnwyse, but as wyse,
16 Redeemyng the time, because ye dayes are euyll.
17 Wherfore be ye not vnwise, but vnderstandyng what the wyll of the Lord is.
18 And be not drunke with wine, wherin is excesse: but be fylled with the
spirite,
19 Speaking vnto your selues in psalmes and hymnes, and spirituall songues,
syngyng and makyng melodie to the Lorde in your heartes:
20 Geuing thankes alwayes for all thinges vnto God and the father, in ye name of
our Lorde Iesus Christe,
21 Submittyng your selues one to another in the feare of God.
22 Wyues, submit your selues vnto your owne husbandes, as vnto the Lorde:
23 For the husbande is the head of the wyfe, euen as Christe is the head of the
Church: & he is the sauiour of the bodie.
24 But as the Church is subiect to Christ, lykewyse the wyues to their owne
husbandes in all thynges.
25 Ye husbandes loue your wyues, euen as Christe also loued the Churche, and
gaue hym selfe for it,
26 To sanctifie it, clensyng it in the fountayne of water in the worde,
27 To make it vnto hym selfe a glorious Churche, not hauyng spot or wrinckle, or
any such thyng: but that it should be holy, and without blame.
28 So ought men to loue their wyues, as their owne bodies. He that loueth his
wyfe, loueth hym selfe.
29 For no man euer yet hated his owne flesshe: but norissheth & cherissheth it,
euen as the Lorde the Churche.
30 For we are members of his body, of his flesshe, and of his bones.
31 For this cause shall a man leaue father and mother, and shalbe ioyned vnto
his wyfe, and two shalbe made one flesshe.
32 This is a great secrete: but I speake of Christe and of the Churche.
33 Therfore euery one of you do ye so Let euery one of you loue his wyfe euen as
hym selfe, and let the wyfe reuerence her husbande.

Chapter 6

1 Chyldren, obey your fathers and mothers in the Lorde: for this is ryght.
2 Honour thy father and mother (whiche is the first commaundement in promise)
3 That thou mayest prosper, and lyue long on earth.
4 Fathers prouoke not your children to wrath: but bring them vp in instruction
and information of the Lorde.
5 Seruauntes obey them that are your bodyly maisters, with feare and tremblyng,
in singlenesse of your heart, as vnto Christe.
6 Not with seruice vnto the eye, as men pleasers: but as the seruautes of
Christ.
7 Doyng the wyll of God fro the heart, with good wyll seruyng the Lorde, and not
men:
8 Knowyng, that whatsoeuer good thyng any man doeth, that shall he receaue
agayne of the Lorde, whether he be bonde or free.
9 And ye maisters do the same thynges vnto them, puttyng away threatnyng:
knowyng that your maister also is in heauen, neither is respecte of person with
hym.
10 Finally my brethren, be strong in the Lorde, & in the power of his might.
11 Put on all the armour of God, that ye may stande agaynst the assaultes of the
deuyll.
12 For we wrastle not agaynst blood & flesshe: but agaynst rule, agaynst power,
agaynst worldly gouernours of the darknesse of this worlde, agaynst spirituall
craftynesse in heauenly places.
13 Wherfore take vnto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to resist
in the euyll day, and hauing finished all thynges, to stande fast.
14 Stande therfore, hauyng loynes girt about with the trueth, and puttyng on the
brest plate of righteousnesse,
15 And hauyng your feete shodde, in the preparation of the Gospell of peace.
16 Aboue all, takyng the shielde of fayth, wherwith ye may quenche all the
fierie dartes of the wicked:
17 And take the helmet of saluation, and the sworde of the spirite, whiche is
the worde of God.
18 Praying alwayes in all prayer and supplication in the spirite, and watche
thervnto with all instaunce and supplication, for all saintes,
19 And for me, that vtteraunce may be geue vnto me, yt I may open my mouth
freely, to vtter ye secretes of the Gospell.
20 Whereof I am messenger in bondes, that therein I may speake freely, as I
ought to speake.
21 But yt ye may also knowe my affaires, and what I do, Tichicus a deare brother
and faythfull minister in the Lord, shall shewe you all thynges:
22 Whom I haue sent vnto you for the same purpose, that ye myght knowe of our
affaires, and that he myght comfort your heartes.
23 Peace be vnto the brethren, and loue, with fayth, from God the father, and
from the Lorde Iesus Christe.
24 Grace be with all them whiche loue our Lorde Iesus Christe in sinceritie.
Amen. Sent from Rome vnto the Ephesians, by Tichicus.


Philippians

Chapter 1

1 Paul & Timotheus the seruauntes of Iesus Christ: To all the saintes in Christ
Iesus, whiche are at Philippos, with the bisshops & deacons:
2 Grace be vnto you, and peace fro God our father, and from the Lorde Iesus
Christ.
3 I thanke my God, with all remembraunce of you,
4 ( Alwayes in all my prayer for all you, makyng prayer with gladnesse,)
5 For your felowship in the Gospell, fro the first day vntyll nowe.
6 And beyng perswaded of this same thyng, that he which hath begun good worke in
you, wyll perfourme it vntyll the day of Iesus Christe,
7 As it becommeth me to iudge this of you al, because I haue you in my heart,
and in my bondes, in the defence and confirmation of the Gospell, you all beyng
partakers of my grace.
8 For God is my recorde howe greatly I long after you all, in the bowels of
Iesus Christe.
9 And this I pray, that your loue may abounde yet more and more in knowledge,
and in all vnderstandyng:
10 That ye maye discerne thynges that differ, that ye maye be pure, and without
offence, tyll the day of Christe.
11 Beyng fylled with the fruites of righteousnesse, which are by Iesus Christ,
vnto the glorie and prayse of God.
12 But I woulde ye should vnderstande brethren, that the thinges which came vnto
me, hath come rather vnto the furtheraunce of the Gospell:
13 So that my bondes in Christe, are manifest, throughout all the iudgement
hall, and in all other places.
14 And many of the brethren of the Lord, beyng incouraged through my bondes,
dare more plentifully speake the word, without feare.
15 Some preache Christe of enuie & strife, and some of good wyll.
16 The one preache Christe of strife, not sincerely, supposyng to adde more
affliction to my bondes:
17 But the others of loue, knowing that I am set to the defence of the Gospell.
18 What then? So that Christe be preached any maner of way, whether it be by
pretence, or by trueth, I ioy therein, and wyll ioy.
19 For I knowe that this shall turne to my saluation, through your prayer, and
ministryng of the spirite of Iesus Christe,
20 Accordyng to my expectation, and my hope, yt in nothyng I shalbe ashamed: but
yt with all boldnesse, as alwayes, so now also, Christ shalbe magnified in my
body, whether it be by life, or by death.
21 For Christe is to me lyfe, and death is to me aduantage.
22 But if I lyue in the fleshe, this (is) the fruite of my labour, and what I
shall chose, I wote not.
23 For I am in a strayte betwixt two, hauyng a desire to be loosed, and to be
with Christ, which is much farre better.
24 Neuerthelesse, to abyde in ye fleshe, is more needefull for you.
25 And this am I sure of, that I shall abyde & continue with you all, for your
furtheraunce and ioy of fayth,
26 That your reioysyng may be ye more aboundaunt in Iesus Christe for me, by my
commyng to you agayne.
27 Only let your conuersation be, as it becommeth the Gospell of Christe: that
whether I come and set you, or els be absent, I may yet heare of your matters,
that ye continue in one spirite, in one soule, fyghtyng together for ye fayth of
the Gospell.
28 And in nothyng fearyng your aduersaries, which is to them a token of
perdition: but to you of saluatio, and that of God.
29 For vnto you it is geuen for Christe, not only this to beleue on hym: but
also this, to suffer for his sake,
30 Hauing the same fight, which ye sawe in me, and nowe heare in me.

Chapter 2

1 If there be therefore any consolation in Christe, yf any comfort of loue, if
any felowship of ye spirite, yf any compassion and mercie,
2 Fulfyl ye my ioy, that ye be lyke mynded, hauyng the same loue, being of one
accorde, of one mynde,
3 Let nothyng be done through stryfe or vayne glorie, but in mekenesse of mynde
euery man esteeme one ye other better then hym selfe.
4 Loke not euery man on his owne thynges, but euery man also on the thynges of
others.
5 Let ye same mynde be in you, which was in Christe Iesus:
6 Who beyng in the fourme of God, thought it not robbery to be equall with God.
7 But made hym selfe of no reputation, takyng on him the fourme of a seruaut,
and made in the lykenesse of men, and founde in figure as a man:
8 He humbled hym selfe, made obedient vnto death, euen the death of the crosse.
9 Wherfore God also hath highly exalted hym, and geuen hym a name which is aboue
euery name.
10 That in the name of Iesus euery knee should bowe, of thynges in heauen, and
thynges in earth, and thinges vnder the earth:
11 And that euery tongue should confesse that the Lorde, Iesus Christe is to the
glorie of God the father.
12 Wherfore, my dearely beloued, as ye haue alwayes obeyed, not as in my
presence only, but nowe much more in my absence, worke out your owne saluation
with feare and tremblyng.
13 For it is God which worketh in you, both to will and to do of good wyll.
14 Do all thyng without murmuryng and disputyng:
15 That ye may be blamelesse and pure, the sonnes of God, without rebuke in the
myddes of a croked and peruerse nation, among who shyne ye as lightes in the
worlde,
16 Holdyng fast the worde of lyfe, to my reioycyng in the day of Christe that I
haue not runne in vayne, neither haue laboured in vayne.
17 Yea, and though I be offered vp vpo the offeryng and seruice of your fayth, I
reioyce, and reioyce with you all.
18 For the same cause also do ye reioyce, and reioyce with me.
19 But I trust in the Lorde Iesus, to sende Timotheus shortly vnto you, that I
also may be of good comfort, when I knowe your state.
20 For I haue no man lyke mynded, who wyll naturally care for your state.
21 For all seeke their owne, not the thynges which are Iesus Christes.
22 Ye knowe the profe of hym, that as a sonne with the father, he hath serued
with me in the Gospell.
23 Hym therfore I hope to sende, assoone as I knowe my state.
24 But I trust in the Lorde, that I also my selfe shall come shortly.
25 But I supposed it necessarie to sende to you Epaphroditus, my brother and
companion in labour, & felowe souldier, but your Apostle, and the minister of my
neede.
26 For he longed after you all, and was full of heauinesse, because that ye had
hearde that he had ben sicke.
27 And no doubt he was sicke nye vnto death, but God had mercie on hym, and not
on hym only, but on me also, lest I shoulde haue sorowe vpon sorowe.
28 I sent him therfore the more diligentlie, that when ye see him againe, ye may
reioyce, and that I may be the lesse sorowfull.
29 Receaue hym therfore in the Lorde with all gladnes, & make much of such:
30 Because, for the worke of Christe, he was nye vnto death, not regardyng his
lyfe, to fulfyll your lacke of seruice towarde me.

Chapter 3

1 Moreouer my brethren, reioyce ye in the Lord. It greeueth me not to write the
same thyng often to you, for to you it is a sure thyng.
2 Beware of dogges, beware of euyll workers, beware of concision.
3 For we are the circumcision, which worship God in the spirite, and reioyce in
Christ Iesus, and haue no confidence in the fleshe:
4 Though I might also haue confidence in the fleshe. If any other man thinketh
that he hath wherof he myght trust in the fleshe, more I:
5 Circumcised the eyght day, of the kinred of Israel, of the tribe of Beniamin,
an Ebrue of the Ebrues, after the lawe a pharisee,
6 Concernyng feruentnesse, persecutyng the Churche: touchyng ye righteousnesse
which is in ye lawe, I was blamelesse.
7 But the thynges that were vauntage vnto me, those I counted losse for Christes
sake.
8 Yea, I thynke all thynges but losse, for the excellencie of the knowledge of
Christe Iesus my Lorde: For whom I haue counted all thyng losse, & do iudge the
but vile, that I may winne Christe,
9 And be founde in hym, not hauyng myne owne ryghteousnesse which is of the
lawe: but that which is through the fayth of Christ, the ryghteousnes which
commeth of God through fayth:
10 That I may knowe hym, and the power of his resurrection, and the felowshippe
of his passions, confirmable vnto his death,
11 If by any meanes, I myght attayne vnto the resurrection of the dead.
12 Not as though I had alredy attayned, either were alredy perfect: but I
folowe, yf that I may comprehende, wherein also I am comprehended of Christe
Iesus.
13 Brethren I count not my selfe as yet that I haue attained: but this one thing
I say I forget those thinges which are behynde, and endeuour my selfe vnto those
thynges which are before,
14 And I prease towarde the marke, for the price of the hye callyng of God in
Christe Iesus.
15 Let vs therfore as many as be perfect, be thus mynded, and if ye be otherwyse
mynded, God shall reueale the same also vnto you.
16 Neuerthelesse, vnto that which we haue attayned vnto, let vs proceade by one
rule, that we may be of one accorde.
17 Brethren, be folowers together of me, and loke on them which walke so as ye
haue vs for an ensample.
18 For many walke, of whom I haue tolde you often, & nowe tel you wepyng, that
they are the enemies of the crosse of Christe:
19 Whose ende is dampnation, whose God is their belly, and glorie to their
shame, which mynde earthly thynges.
20 But our conuersation is in heauen, from whence also we loke for the sauiour,
the Lorde Iesus Christe:
21 Who shall chaunge our vyle body, that it may be fashioned lyke vnto his
glorious body, according to the working wherby he is able to subdue all thynges
vnto hym selfe.

Chapter 4

1 Therfore my brethren beloued & longed for, my ioy and crowne, so continue in
the Lorde ye beloued.
2 I pray Euodias, and beseche Syntyches, yt they be of one accorde in the Lorde.
3 Yea, and I beseche thee also faythfull yockefelowe, helpe those women which
laboured with me in the Gospell, and with Clement also, and with other my labour
felowes, whose names are in the booke of lyfe.
4 Reioyce in the Lorde alway, and agayne I say reioyce.
5 Let your pacient mynde be knowen vnto all men: The Lorde is at hande.
6 Be carefull for nothyng: but in all thynges, let your petition be manifest
vnto God, in prayer and supplication with geuyng of thankes.
7 And the peace of God, which passeth all vnderstandyng, shall kepe your heartes
and myndes through Christe Iesus.
8 Furthermore brethren, whatsoeuer, thynges are true, whatsoeuer thynges (are)
honest, whatsoeuer thynges (are) iuste, whatsoeuer thynges (are) pure,
whatsoeuer thynges pertayne to loue, whatsoeuer thynges (are) of honest report:
If there be any vertue, & yf there be any prayse, thynke on these thynges:
9 Which ye haue both learned, and receaued, and hearde, and seene in me: Those
thinges do, and the God of peace shalbe with you.
10 But I reioyce in the Lorde greatly, that nowe at the last you are reuiued
againe to care for me, in ye wherin ye were also carefull, but ye lacked
oportunitie.
11 I speake not because of necessitie. For I haue learned, in whatsoeuer estate
I am, therwith to be content.
12 I knowe howe to be lowe, and I knowe howe to exceade. Euery where & in all
thynges I am instructed, both to be ful, and to be hungry, both to haue plentie,
and to suffer neede.
13 I can do all thynges through Christe, which strengtheneth me.
14 Notwithstandyng, ye haue well done yt ye dyd communicate to my afflictions.
15 Ye Philippians knowe also, that in the begynnyng of the Gospell, when I
departed fro Macedonia, no Church communicated to me, as concernyng geuyng and
receauyng, but ye only.
16 For euen in Thessalonica, ye sent once, & afterward agayne vnto my
necessitie.
17 Not that I desire a gyft, but I desire fruite aboundyng to your accompt.
18 But I haue receaued al, & haue plentie. I was euen fylled after that I had
receaued of Epaphroditus the thynges which were sent from you, an odoure of a
sweete smel, a sacrifice acceptable, plesaunt to God.
19 My God shall supplie all your neede, through his riches in glorie, in Christe
Iesus.
20 Unto God and our father, be prayse for euermore. Amen.
21 Salute all the saintes in Christe Iesus. The brethren which are with me,
greete you.
22 All the saintes salute you, most of all, they that are of Caesars housholde.
23 The grace of our Lorde Iesu Christe be with you all. Amen. This Epistle was
written from Rome, by Epaphroditus.


Colossians

Chapter 1

1 Paul an Apostle of Iesus Christe, by the wyll of God, and Timotheus the
brother.
2 To them which are in Colossa, saintes and faythfull brethren in Christe: Grace
vnto you, & peace from God our father, and the Lorde Iesus Christe.
3 We geue thankes to God and father of our Lorde Iesus Christe, alwayes for you,
praying:
4 Sence we hearde of your fayth in Christe Iesus, and of the loue which is to
all saintes,
5 For the hopes sake which is layde vp for you in heauen, of which hope ye
hearde before, in the worde of trueth of the Gospell,
6 Which is come vnto you, euen as it is into all the worlde, & is fruitfull, as
it is also in you, from the day ye hearde of it and knewe the grace of God in
trueth,
7 As ye also learned of Epaphras, our deare felowe seruaunt, which is for you a
faythfull minister of Christe:
8 Who also declared vnto vs your loue in the spirite.
9 For this cause we also, sence ye day we hearde, haue not ceassed to pray for
you, and to desire that ye myght be fulfylled with knowledge of his wyll, in all
wisdome & spiritual vnderstandyng,
10 That ye myght walke worthie of the Lorde in all pleasyng, beyng fruitefull in
all good workes, and encreasyng in the knowledge of God,
11 Strenthened with all might, through his glorious power, vnto all patience and
long sufferyng with ioyfulnesse:
12 Geuyng thankes vnto ye father, which hath made vs meete to be partakers of
the inheritaunce of the saintes in lyght.
13 Who hath delyuered vs from the power of darcknesse, and hath translated vs
into the kingdome of his deare sonne.
14 In who we haue redemptio through his blood, the forgeuenesse of sinnes:
15 Who is the image of the inuisible God, the first borne of all creatures.
16 For by him were all thinges created, that are in heaue and that are in earth,
visible and inuisible, whether they be maiestie or lordeshippe, either rule or
power: All thynges were created by hym and for hym.
17 And he is before all thynges, and in hym all thynges consist.
18 And he is the head of the body of the Churche: he is the begynnyng, the first
borne of the dead, that in all thynges he myght haue the preeminence.
19 For it pleased the father that in hym shoulde all fulnesse dwell,
20 And by hym to reconcile all thynges vnto hym selfe, & to set at peace through
the blood of his crosse by hym, both the thynges in earth, and thynges in
heauen,
21 And you which were sometyme straungers, and enemies, by cogitation in euyll
workes, hath he nowe yet reconciled,
22 In the body of his fleshe, through death, to present you holye, and
vnblameable, & without fault in his syght:
23 If ye continue grounded & stablisshed in the fayth, and be not moued away
from the hope of the Gospell, which ye haue hearde howe it is preached to euery
creature which is vnder heauen, wherof I Paul am made a minister.
24 Nowe iowe I in my sufferynges for you, and fulfyll that which is behynde of
the passions of Christe, in my fleshe, for his bodyes sake, which is ye Church:
25 Wherof I am made a minister, accordyng to the dispensation of God, which is
geuen to me to youwarde, to fulfyll the worde of God:
26 The misterie hyd sence the worlde began, and sence the begynnyng of
generations: but nowe is opened to his saintes:
27 To whom God woulde make knowe what is the riches of the glorie of this
misterie among the gentiles, which is Christe in you, the hope of glorie:
28 Whom we preache, warnyng euery man, and teachyng euery man in all wisdome, to
present all men perfect in Christe Iesus:
29 Wherunto I also labour striuyng, according to his workyng which worketh in me
mightylie.

Chapter 2

1 For I woulde that ye knew what great fight I haue for you, and for them that
are at Laodicea, and for as many as haue not seene my face in the fleshe,
2 That their heartes myght be comforted, beyng knyt together in loue, and in al
riches of certaintie of vnderstanding, to knowe the misterie of God, and of the
father, and of Christe,
3 In whom are hyd all the treasures of wisdome and knowledge.
4 This I say, lest any man shoulde begyle you with perswasion of wordes.
5 For though I be absent in the fleshe, yet am I with you in the spirite, ioying
and beholdyng your order, and your stedfast fayth in Christe.
6 As ye haue therfore receaued Christe Iesus the Lorde, so walke ye in hym:
7 Rooted and built in hym, & stablished in the fayth, as ye haue ben taught,
aboundyng therin with thankes geuing.
8 Beware lest any man spoyle you through philosophie & vayne deceipt, after the
tradition of men, and after the rudimentes of the worlde, and not after Christe.
9 For in hym dwelleth all the fulnesse of the Godhead bodyly:
10 And ye are complete in him, which is the head of all principalitie and power,
11 In whom also ye are circumcised with circumcisio made without handes, by
puttyng of the body of sinnes of the fleshe, in the circumcision of Christe:
12 Buried with him in baptisme, in who ye are also risen agayne through ye fayth
of the operation of God, who hath raysed hym from the dead.
13 And ye beyng dead to sinne and to the vncircumcision of your fleshe, hath he
quickened with him, forgeuyng all your trepasses,
14 And puttyng out the hande writing of ordinaunces, that was agaynst vs, and
that hath he taken out of the way, fastenyng it to his crosse:
15 Spoylyng all principalities & powers, hath made a shewe of them openly,
triumphyng ouer them in it.
16 Let no man therfore iudge you in meate, or in drinke, or in part of an
holyday, or of the newe moone, or of the Sabboth dayes:
17 Which are shadowes of thynges to come: but the body (is) of Christe.
18 Let no man begile you of victorie, in the humblenesse and worshippyng of
Angels, intrudyng (hym selfe into those thinges) which he hath not seene,
causelesse puft vp with his fleshly mynde,
19 And holdeth not the head, wherof all the body by ioyntes & bandes supported
and knit together, encreaseth with the encrease of God.
20 Wherfore, yf ye be dead with Christe from ye rudimentes of the world: why, as
though lyuyng in the worlde, are ye led with traditions,
21 Touche not, taste not, handle not?
22 Which all be in corruption, in abusyng after the commaundementes and
doctrines of men.
23 Which thynges haue a shewe of wisdome, in superstition & humblenesse of
mynde, and in hurtyng of the body, not in any honour to the satisfiyng of ye
flesh.

Chapter 3

1 If ye then be rysen agayne with Christ, seke those things which are aboue,
where Christe sitteth on the ryght hande of God.
2 Set your affection on thynges aboue, not on thinges on the earth.
3 For ye are dead, and your lyfe is hyd with Christe in God.
4 When soeuer Christe which is our life, shall appeare, then shall ye also
appeare with hym in glorie.
5 Mortifie therefore your members which are vpon the earth: fornication,
vncleannesse, inordinate affection, euyll concupiscence, and couetousnesse,
which is worshippyng of images:
6 For which thynges sake, the wrath of God commeth on the children of
disobedience,
7 In the which ye walked sometyme, when ye lyued in them.
8 But nowe put ye of also all, wrath, fiercenesse, maliciousnesse, blasphemie,
filthie comunication out of your mouth.
9 Lye not one to another, seyng that ye haue put of ye olde man with his workes:
10 Hauyng put on the newe man, which is renued into the knowledge after the
image of hym that made hym,
11 Where is neither Greke nor Iewe, circumcision nor vncircumcision, Barbarian,
Sythian, bonde, free: but Christe is all, and in all.
12 Put on therfore (as the elect of God, holy and beloued) bowels of mercie,
kyndenesse, humblenesse of mynde, mekenesse, long sufferyng,
13 Forbearyng one another, and forgeuyng one another, yf any man haue a quarel
agaynst any: euen as Christe forgaue you, so also do ye.
14 And aboue all thynges put on loue, which is the bonde of perfectnesse.
15 And let the peace of God haue the victorie in your heartes, to the which also
we are called in one body: And see that ye be thankefull.
16 Let the worde of God dwell in you richly in all wisdome, teachyng and
admonisshyng your owne selues, in psalmes, and hymmes, and spirituall songes,
singyng with grace in your heartes to the Lorde.
17 And whatsoeuer ye do in worde or deede, do all in the name of the Lorde
Iesus, geuyng thankes to God and the father by hym.
18 Wiues, submit your selues vnto your owne husbandes, as it is comely in the
Lorde.
19 Husbandes, loue your wyues, and be not bitter agaynst them:
20 Chyldren, obey your fathers and mothers in all thynges, for that is well
pleasyng vnto the Lorde.
21 Fathers, prouoke not your chyldren to anger, lest they be discouraged.
22 Seruauntes, obey in all thynges to your bodyly maisters: not with eye
seruice, as men pleasers, but in singlenesse of heart, fearyng God.
23 And whatsoeuer ye do, do it heartilie, as to the Lorde, and not vnto men:
24 Knowyng, that of the Lorde ye shall receaue the rewarde of inheritaunce, for
ye serue the Lorde Christe:
25 But he that doth wrong, shall receaue for the wrong he hath done: And there
is no respect of persons.

Chapter 4

1 Maisters, do vnto your seruauntes that which is iust & equall, knowyng that ye
also haue a maister in heauen.
2 Continue in prayer, and watche in the same with thankes geuyng:
3 Praying also for vs, that God may open vnto vs the doore of vtteraunce, that
we may speake ye misterie of Christ, wherfore I am also in bondes:
4 That I may vtter it, as I ought to speake.
5 Walke in wisdome towarde the that are without, redeemyng the tyme.
6 Let your speache be alway in grace, powdered with salt, to knowe howe ye ought
to aunswere euery man.
7 All my state shall Tychicus declare vnto you, who is a beloued brother and
faythfull minister, and felowe seruaunt in the Lorde:
8 Whom I haue sent vnto you for the same thyng, that he myght knowe your state,
and comfort your heartes,
9 With Onesimus a faythfull and beloued brother, which is of you. They shall
shewe you of all thynges which are here.
10 Aristarchus my prison felowe saluteth you, & Marcus Barnabas sisters sonne,
(touchyng whom ye receaued commaundementes:) If he come vnto you, receaue hym:
11 And Iesus, which is called Iustus, which are of the circumcision. These only
are my workefelowes vnto the kyngdome of God, which hath ben vnto my
consolation.
12 Epaphras which is of you, a seruaunt of Christe, saluteth you, alwayes
labouryng feruently for you in prayers, that ye may stande perfect and fylled in
all the wyll of God.
13 For I beare him recorde, that he hath a great zeale for you, and them that
are in Laodicea, and them that are in Hierapolis.
14 Deare Lucas the phisition greeteth you, and Demas.
15 Salute the brethren which are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the Churche which
is in his house.
16 And when the epistle is read of you, make that it be read also in the Church
of the Laodiceans: and that ye likewise reade the epistle from Laodicea.
17 And say to Archippus: take heede to the ministerie that thou hast receaued in
the Lorde, that thou fulfyll it.
18 The salutation, by the hande of me, Paul. Remember my bondes. Grace be with
you. Amen. Written from Rome to the Colossians, by Tychicus and Onesimus.


1 Thessalonians

Chapter 1

1 Paul & Siluanus and Timotheus, vnto the Churche of the Thessalonians, in God
the father, and in the Lorde Iesus Christ: Grace be vnto you, & peace from God
our father, and the Lorde Iesus Christe.
2 We geue thankes to God alwayes for all you, makyng mention of you in our
prayers,
3 Without ceassyng, callyng to remembraunce the worke of your fayth, and labour
of loue, and patient abidyng in the hope of our Lorde Iesus Christe, in the
syght of God and our father.
4 Knowyng, brethren beloued, your election of God.
5 For our Gospell came not vnto you in worde only, but also in power, and in the
holy ghost, and in much certayntie, as ye knowe after what maner we were among
you for your sake.
6 And ye became folowers of vs, and of the Lorde, receauyng the worde in much
affliction, with ioy of the holy ghost:
7 So that ye were an ensample to all that beleue in Macedonia and Achaia.
8 For from you, sounded out the worde of the Lorde, not only in Macedonia &
Achaia: but also in euery place your faith to Godwarde is spread abroade, so
that we neede not to speake any thyng.
9 For they them selues shewe of you, what maner of entryng in we had vnto you,
and howe ye turned to God from images, to serue the lyuyng and true God.
10 And to tary for his sonne from heauen, whom he raysed from the dead: euen
Iesus which delyuereth vs from the wrath to come.

Chapter 2

1 For ye your selues, brethren, knowe our entraunce in vnto you, yt it was not
in vayne:
2 But euen after that we had suffred before, and were shamefully entreated as ye
knowe, at Philippos, we were bolde in our God, to speake vnto you the Gospell of
God, in much stryuyng.
3 For our exhortation was not of deceit, neither of vncleannes, neither in
guile:
4 But as it were alowed of God, to be put in credite with the Gospell: euen so
we speake, not as pleasyng men, but God, which tryeth our heartes.
5 For neither at any tyme vsed we flatteryng wordes, as ye knowe, neither cloke
of couetousnes, God is recorde,
6 Neither sought we prayse of men, neither of you, nor yet of others:
7 When we myght haue ben in auctoritie, as the Apostles of Christe, but we were
tender among you, euen as a nource cherissheth her chyldren,
8 So, beyng tenderly affected towarde you, our good wyll was to haue dealt vnto
you, not the Gospell of God only: but also our owne soules, because ye were
deare vnto vs.
9 For ye remember brethren, our labour and trauayle. For we labouryng nyght &
day, because we woulde not be chargeable vnto any of you, preached vnto you the
Gospell of God.
10 Ye are witnesses, & God also howe holyly, and iustly, and vnblameably, we
behaued our selues among you that beleue.
11 As ye knowe, howe that as a father his chyldren, so we haue exhorted,
comforted, and besought euery one of you,
12 That ye woulde walke worthie of God, who hath called you vnto his kyngdome
and glorie.
13 For this cause thanke we God also without ceassyng, because ye receauyng the
worde which ye hearde of vs concernyng God, ye receaued it not as the worde of
man, (but as it is in deede) the worde of God, which effectuously worketh also
in you that beleue.
14 For ye brethren became folowers of the Churches of God, which in Iurie are in
Christe Iesus: for ye haue suffred lyke thynges of your countreymen, as they
haue of the Iewes:
15 Who both kylled the Lorde Iesus, and their owne prophetes, & haue persecuted
vs: and God they please not, and are contrarie to all men:
16 And hynder vs to speake to the gentiles that they myght be saued, to fulfyll
their sinnes alway. For the wrath of God is come on them to the vtmost.
17 Forasmuch brethren, as we are kept from you for a short season, in person,
not in heart, we enforced ye more to see you personally with great desire.
18 And therfore we woulde haue come vnto you, (I Paul) once agayne: but Satan
hyndered vs.
19 For what is our hope, or ioy, or crowne of reioycyng? Are not ye it in the
presence of our Lorde Iesus Christe, at his commyng?
20 Yes, ye are our glorie and ioy.

Chapter 3

1 Wherfore, sence we coulde no longer forbeare, we thought it good to remaine at
Athens alone.
2 And sent Timotheus, our brother and minister of God, and felowe labourer in
the Gospell of Christe, to stablishe you & to comfort you concernyng your faith.
3 That no man shoulde be moued in these afflictions: For ye your selues knowe,
that we are appoynted therevnto.
4 For veryly when we were with you, we tolde you before that we shoulde suffer
tribulation, euen as it came to passe, and as ye knowe.
5 For this cause, when I coulde no longer forbeare, I sent to knowe your fayth,
lest by some meanes the tempter had tempted you, and our labour had ben vayne.
6 But nowe lately, when Timotheus came from you vnto vs, and brought vs good
tydynges of your fayth and loue, and howe that ye haue good remembraunce of vs
alwayes, desiryng to see vs, as we also to see you:
7 Therefore brethren we were comforted ouer you, in all our aduersitie and
necessitie, because of your fayth.
8 For nowe we lyue, yf ye stande fast in the Lorde.
9 For what thankes can we recompence to God agayne for you, for all the ioye
wherwith we ioy for your sakes before our God?
10 Praying nyght and daye exceedyngly to see you personally, and repayre the
wantynges of your fayth?
11 Nowe God him selfe, and our father, and our Lord Iesus Christe, guyde our
waye vnto you.
12 And the Lorde encrease you, & make you abounde in loue one towarde another,
and towarde all men, euen as we also towarde you,
13 To stablyshe your heartes vnblameable, in holynesse before God and our
father, in the commyng of our Lorde Iesus Christe, with all his saintes.

Chapter 4

1 Furthermore we besech you brethren, & exhorte you by the Lorde Iesus, that ye
encrease more and more, as ye haue receaued of vs, how ye ought to walke and to
please God.
2 For ye knowe what commaundementes we gaue you by the Lorde Iesus.
3 For this is the wyll of God, your holynesse, that ye should abstayne from
fornication:
4 That euery one of you should knowe how to possesse his vessell in holynesse
and honour:
5 Not in the lust of concupiscence, euen as the gentiles, which knowe not God.
6 That no man oppresse and defraude his brother in any matter, because that the
Lorde is the auenger of all suche: as we also haue forewarned you, and
testified.
7 For God hath not called vs vnto vncleanenesse, but into holynesse.
8 He therefore that despiseth, despiseth not man, but God, who hath geuen to you
his holy spirite.
9 But as touchyng brotherly loue, ye nede not that I write vnto you: For ye are
taught of God to loue one another.
10 Yea and that thyng veryly ye do vnto all ye brethren which are in al
Macedonia: But we beseche you brethren, that ye encrease more and more:
11 And that ye studie to be quiet, and to do your owne busynesse and to worke
with your owne handes as we commaunded you:
12 That ye may walke honestly toward them that are without, & that nothyng be
lackyng in you.
13 But I woulde not haue you to be ignoraunt brethren, concernyng them which
sleepe, that ye sorowe not euen as other, which haue no hope.
14 For yf we beleue that Iesus dyed and rose agayne: euen so them also whiche
sleepe by Iesus, wyll God bryng with hym.
15 For this say we vnto you in the worde of the Lorde, that we whiche lyue,
remayning vnto the comyng of the Lord, shall not preuent them which sleepe.
16 For the Lorde hym selfe shal descende from heauen in a shoute, and in the
voyce of the Archangell, and in the trumpe of God: And the dead in Christ shall
aryse first.
17 Than we which lyue, which remaine, shalbe caught vp together with them in the
cloudes, to meete the Lorde in the ayre: And so shall we euer be with the Lorde.
18 Wherfore comfort your selues one another in these wordes.

Chapter 5

1 But of the tymes & seasons brethre, ye haue no neede that I write vnto you.
2 For ye your selues knowe perfectlye that the day of the Lord shall so come
euen as a theefe in the nyght.
3 For when they shal say peace & safetie, then shall sodeyne destruction come
vppon them, as sorowe vpon a woman with chylde, and they shall not escape.
4 But ye brethren are not in darknesse, that that day shoulde ouertake you as a
theefe.
5 Ye are all the chyldren of lyght, and the chyldren of the daye: We are not of
the nyght, neither of darkenesse.
6 Therefore let vs not sleepe, as do other: but let vs watche and be sober.
7 For they that sleepe, sleepe in the night: and they that be druncken, are
druncken in the nyght.
8 But let vs which are of the day, be sober, puttyng on the brest plate of fayth
and loue, and a helmet, the hope of saluation.
9 For God hath not appoynted vs to wrath: but to obtayne saluation, by our Lorde
Iesus Christe,
10 Whiche dyed for vs, that whether we wake or sleepe, we shoulde lyue together
with hym.
11 Wherefore comfort your selues together, and edifie euery one another, euen as
ye do.
12 And we beseche you brethren to know them whiche labour among you, and haue
the ouersight of you in the Lorde, and admonishe you:
13 That ye haue them in hye reputation, in loue for their worke, and be at peace
among your selues.
14 We exhort you brethren, warne them that are vnruly, comfort the feeble
mynded, lyft vp the weake, be pacient towarde all men.
15 See that none recompence euyll for euyll vnto any man: but euer folowe that
whiche is good, both among your selues, and to all men.
16 Reioyce euer.
17 Pray continually.
18 In all thinges geue thankes. For this is the wyl of God in Christe Iesus
towarde you.
19 Quenche not the spirite.
20 Despise not prophesiynges.
21 Examine all thynges, holde fast that which is good.
22 Abstayne from all appearaunce of euyll.
23 And the very God of peace santifie you throughout And I pray God that your
whole spirite, and soule, and body, may be preserued blamelesse in the comming
of our Lorde Iesus Christe.
24 Faythfull is he whiche called you, whiche wyll also do it.
25 Brethren, pray for vs.
26 Greete all the brethren in an holy kysse.
27 I charge you in the Lorde, that this epistle be read vnto al the holy
brethren.
28 The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ be with you. Amen. The first (epistle)
vnto the Thessalonians, written from Athens.


2 Thessalonians

Chapter 1

1 Paul and Siluanus and Timotheus, vnto the Church of the Thessalonians in God
our father, and the Lord Iesus Christe:
2 Grace vnto you and peace from God our father, & the Lorde Iesus Christe.
3 We are bound to thanke God alwayes for you brethren, as it is meete, because
that your fayth groweth exceedyngly, and the loue of euery one of you toward
another aboundeth:
4 So that we our selues reioyce in you in the Churches of God, ouer your
pacience and faith in all your persecutions and tribulations that ye suffer,
5 Which is a token of the ryghteous iudgment of God, that ye may be counted
woorthy of the kyngdome of God, for which ye also suffer.
6 For it is a ryghteous thing with God, to recompence tribulation to them that
trouble you:
7 And to you whiche are troubled, reste with vs, in the reuelation of the Lorde
Iesus from heauen, with the Angels of his power,
8 In flamyng fire, rendryng vengeance vnto them that knowe not God, and that
obey not the Gospell of our Lorde Iesus Christe.
9 Which shalbe punisshed with euerlastyng dampnation, from the presence of the
Lorde, & fro the glorie of his power:
10 When he shall come to be glorified in his saintes, and to be made marueylous
in all them that beleue (because our testimonie toward you was beleued) in that
day.
11 Wherfore also we praye alwayes for you, that our God woulde make you worthy
of the callyng, & fulfyll all good pleasure of goodnesse in the worke of fayth
in power:
12 That the name of our Lorde Iesus Christe may be glorified in you, and ye in
hym, accordyng to the grace of our God, and the Lorde Iesus Christe.

Chapter 2

1 We besech you brethren, by the comming of our Lorde Iesus Christe, and by our
assembling vnto hym,
2 That ye be not sodenlye moued from your minde, nor be troubled, neither by
spirite, nor by worde, nor yet by letter, as from vs, as though the daye of
Christe were at hande.
3 Let no man deceaue you by any meanes, for the Lorde shall not come excepte
there come a fallyng away first, & that that man of sinne be reuealed, the sonne
of perdition,
4 Whiche is an aduersarie, and is exalted aboue all that is called God, or that
is worshipped: so that he as God, sitteth in the temple of God, shewing hym
selfe that he is God.
5 Remember ye not, that when I was yet with you, I tolde you these thynges?
6 And nowe ye knowe what withholdeth, that he myght be reuealed in his tyme.
7 For the misterie of iniquitie doth alredie worke, tyll he whiche nowe onlye
letteth, be taken out of the way.
8 And then shall that wicked be reuealed, whom the Lorde shall consume with the
spirite of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightnesse of his commyng:
9 Euen hym whose commyng is after the workyng of Satan, in all power & signes,
and wonders, of lying,
10 And in all deceauablenesse of vnryghteousnesse, in them that peryshe: because
they receaued not the loue of the trueth, that they myght be saued.
11 And therefore God shall sende them strong delusion, that they should beleue
lyes:
12 That all they myght be dampned whiche beleued not the trueth, but had
pleasure in vnryghteousnes.
13 But we are bounde to geue thankes alway to God for you, brethren beloued of
the Lorde, because that God hath fro the begynnyng chosen you to saluation in
sanctifiyng of the spirite, & in fayth of the trueth:
14 Wherevnto he called you by our Gospell, to the obteyning of the glorie of our
Lorde Iesus Christe.
15 Therfore brethren stande fast, and holde the ordinaunces whiche ye haue ben
taught, whether it were by our preachyng, or by our epistle.
16 Our Lorde Iesus Christe, and God and our father, whiche hath loued vs, and
hath geuen vs euerlastyng consolation, and good hope in grace,
17 Comfort your heartes, and stablysshe you in all good saying and doyng.

Chapter 3

1 Furthermore brethren, praye ye for vs, that the worde of the Lord may haue
free passage and be glorified, euen as with you:
2 And that we may be delyuered from disordered and euyll men: For all men haue
not fayth.
3 But the Lorde is faythfull, whiche shall stablyshe you, and kepe you from
euyll.
4 And we haue confidence in the Lorde to youwarde, that ye both do, and wyll do
the thynges whiche we commaunde you.
5 And the Lorde guyde your heartes to the loue of God, and to the pacient
waytyng for Christe.
6 We commaunde you brethren in the name of our Lorde Iesus Christe, that ye
withdrawe your selues from euery brother that walketh inordinately, and not
after the institution whiche he receaued of vs.
7 For ye your selues knowe howe ye ought to folowe vs: For we behaued not our
selues inordinately among you,
8 Neither toke we breade of any man for nought: but wrought with labour and
sweat nyght and daye, because we woulde not be chargeable to any of you.
9 Not but that we had auctoritie, but to make our selues an ensample vnto you to
folowe vs.
10 For when we were with you, this we warned you of: that yf any woulde not
worke, the same shoulde not eate.
11 For we haue heard that there are some which walke among you inordinately,
workyng not at all, but be busy bodies.
12 Them that are such, we commaunde and exhort by our Lorde Iesus Christ, that
they workyng in quietnesse, eate their owne breade.
13 And ye brethren, be not weery in well doyng.
14 Yf any man obey not our doctrine, signifie hym by an epistle, and haue no
companie with hym, that he maye be ashamed.
15 Yet count him not as an enemie, but warne hym as a brother.
16 Nowe the very Lorde of peace geue you peace alwayes, by all meanes. The Lorde
be with you all.
17 The salutation of me Paul with mine owne hande. This is the token in euery
epistle. So I write.
18 The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ be with you all. Amen. Sent from Athens.


1 Timothy

Chapter 1

1 Paul an Apostle of Iesus Christ, by the commission of God our sauiour, and
Lorde Iesus Christe whiche is our hope,
2 Unto Timothie a natural sonne in the faith: Grace, mercie and peace from God
our father and Iesus Christe our Lorde.
3 As I besought thee to abyde styll in Ephesus, when I departed into Macedonia
so do that thou comaunde some that they teache no other doctrine:
4 Neither geue heede to fables and endlesse genealogies, whiche breede
questions, more then godly edifying which is in fayth.
5 But the ende of the commaundement, is loue out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, & of fayth vnfaigned.
6 From the whiche thynges, some hauyng erred, haue tourned vnto vayne ianglyng:
7 Couetyng to be doctours of the lawe, not vnderstandyng what they speake,
neither wherof they affirme.
8 But we knowe that the lawe is good, yf a man vse it lawfully:
9 Knowyng this, that the lawe is not geuen vnto a ryghteous man, but vnto the
lawlesse and disobedient, to the vngodly and to sinners, to vnholy and vncleane,
to murtherers of fathers & murtherers of mothers, to manslears,
10 To whoremongers, to them that defyle them selues with mankynde, to
manstealers, to lyers, to periured, and yf there be any other thyng that is
contrarie to wholsome doctrine:
11 Accordyng to the Gospell of glorie of the blessed God, whiche is committed
vnto me.
12 And I thanke Christ Iesus our Lord whiche hath made me strong: For he counted
me faythfull, puttyng me into the ministerie,
13 Beyng a blasphemer, and a persecuter, and an oppressour: But yet I obtayned
mercie, because I dyd it ignorauntly in vnbeliefe.
14 Neuerthelesse, the grace of our Lorde was exceedyng aboundaunt, with faith
and loue, which is in Christe Iesus.
15 This is a faythfull saying, and by all meanes worthy to be receaued, that
Christe Iesus came into the worlde to saue synners, of whom I am chiefe.
16 Notwithstandyng, for this cause was mercie shewed vnto me, that in me the
first, Iesus Christe myght shewe all long sufferyng, to the example of them
which shoulde beleue on hym to lyfe euerlastyng.
17 Nowe, vnto the kyng euerlastyng, immortall, inuisible, vnto God onlye wise be
honour and glorie for euer and euer, Amen.
18 This commaundement commit I vnto thee sonne Timotheus, accordyng to the
prophesies which went before vpon thee, that thou in them shouldest fyght a good
fyght:
19 Hauyng fayth and good conscience, which some hauyng put awaye as concernyng
fayth, haue made shipwracke.
20 Of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I haue delyuered vnto Satan, that
they maye learne not to blaspheme.

Chapter 2

1 I exhort therefore, that firste of all, prayers, supplications, intercessios
and geuynge of thankes be made for all men:
2 For kynges, and for all that are in auctoritie, that we maye leade a quiete
and peaceable lyfe, in all godlynesse and honestie.
3 For that is good and accepted in the syght of God our sauiour,
4 Who wyll haue all men to be saued, and to come vnto the knowledge of the
trueth.
5 For there is one God, and one mediatour of God and men, the man Christe Iesus:
6 Who gaue him selfe a raunsome for all, a testimonie in due tymes.
7 Wherevnto I am ordeined a preacher and an apostle (I tell the trueth in
Christe, and lye not) a teacher of the gentiles in fayth and veritie.
8 I wyll therefore, that the men praye euerywhere, lyftyng vp holy handes,
without wrath and reasonyng.
9 Lykewyse also the women, that they araye them selues in comely apparell, with
shamefastnesse, and discrete behauiour, not in brayded heere, either golde or
pearles, or costly aray:
10 But (that becommeth women professyng godlynesse) through good workes.
11 Let the woman learne in scilence in all subiection.
12 But I suffer not a woman to teache, neither to vsurpe auctoritie ouer ye man,
but to be in scilence.
13 For Adam was first fourmed, then Eue.
14 And Adam was not deceaued: but the woman beyng deceaued, was in the
transgression.
15 Notwithstandyng through bearyng of chyldren she shalbe saued, yf they
continue in fayth and loue, and holynesse, with modestie.

Chapter 3

1 This is a faithful saying: Yf a man desire ye office of a bishop, he desireth
a good worke.
2 A bishop therfore must be blamelesse, the husband of one wyfe, watchyng,
sober, comely apparelled, a louer of hospitalitie, apt to teache,
3 Not geuen to ouermuch wine, no striker, not greedy of fylthy lucre: but
gentle, abhorryng fyghtyng, abhorryng couetousnesse:
4 One that ruleth well his owne house, hauyng chyldren in subiection, with all
grauitie.
5 For yf a man knowe not to rule his owne house, howe shall he care for the
Churche of God?
6 Not a young scoler, lest he, beyng puffed vp, fall into the condempnation of
the deuyll.
7 He must also haue a good report of the which are without, lest he fall into
the rebuke and snare of the deuyll.
8 Likewise must ye ministers be graue, not double tongued, not geuen to much
wine, neither greedy of fylthy lucre:
9 Holdyng the misterie of the fayth in a pure conscience.
10 And let them first be proued, then let them minister, beyng blamelesse.
11 Euen so must their wyues be graue, not euyll speakers, sober, faythfull in
all thynges.
12 Let the deacons be the husbandes of one wife, and such as can rule their
children well, and their owne housholdes.
13 For they that haue ministred well, get them selues a good degree, and great
libertie in the fayth whiche is in Christe Iesus.
14 These thynges write I vnto thee, hopyng to come shortly vnto thee:
15 But yf I tary long, that thou mayest knowe howe thou oughtest to behaue thy
selfe in the house of God, whiche is the Church of the lyuyng God, the pyller
and grounde of trueth.
16 And without doubt, great is that misterie of godlynesse: God was shewed in
the flesshe, was iustified in the spirite, was seene among the angels, was
preached vnto the gentiles, was beleued on in the worlde, and was receaued vp in
glorie.

Chapter 4

1 Nowe the spirite speaketh euidently, that in the latter tymes some shall
depart from the fayth, geuing heede vnto spirites of errour, & doctrines of
deuyls,
2 Which speake false in hypocrisie, hauyng their conscience seared with an hotte
iron:
3 Forbidding to marrie & commaunding to abstayne from meates whiche God hath
created to be receaued with geuing thankes, of them whiche beleue, and knowe the
trueth.
4 For euery creature of God is good, and nothyng to be refused, yf it be
receaued with thankes geuyng.
5 For it is sanctified by the worde of God and prayer.
6 Yf thou put the brethren in remembraunce of these thynges, thou shalt be a
good minister of Iesus Christ, which hast ben norysshed vp in the wordes of
fayth and of good doctrine, which thou hast continually folowed.
7 But cast away prophane & old wiues fables: Exercise thy selfe rather vnto
godlynesse.
8 For bodyly exercise profiteth litle: but godlinesse is profitable vnto all
thinges, hauing promise of the lyfe that is nowe, and of that which is to come.
9 This is a sure saying, & by all meanes worthy to be receaued.
10 For therfore we both labour, and suffer rebuke, because we haue hoped in the
lyuyng God, whiche is the sauiour of all men, specially of those that beleue.
11 These thynges commaunde & teache.
12 Let no man despise thy youth: but be thou a paterne of the beleuers, in
worde, in conuersation, in loue, in spirite, in fayth, in chastitie.
13 Tyll I come geue attendaunce to readyng, to exhortation, to doctrine.
14 Despise not the gyfte that is in thee, which was geuen thee through
prophesie, with the laying on of handes by the auctoritie of the eldership.
15 Haue a care of these thinges, and geue thy selfe vnto them, that it may be
seene howe thou profitest in all thynges.
16 Take heede vnto thy selfe, and vnto doctrine, and continue therein: For in
doying this, thou shalt both saue thy selfe, and them that heare thee.

Chapter 5

1 Rebuke not an elder, but exhort him as a father, the younger men as brethren,
2 The elder women as mothers, the younger as sisters, in all chastitie.
3 Honour wydowes, whiche are wydowes in deede.
4 But yf any wydowe haue chyldren or nephewes, let them learne first to rule
their owne houses godly, and to recompence also their elder kynsefolkes: for
that is good and acceptable before God.
5 And she that is a wydowe in deede, and left alone, hopeth in God, and
continueth in supplications and prayers nyght and day.
6 But she that liueth in pleasure, is dead beyng alyue.
7 And these thynges commaunde, that they may be blamelesse.
8 But if any prouide not for his owne, and specially for them of his housholde,
he hath denyed the fayth, and is worse then an infidell.
9 Let not a wydowe be chosen vnder three score yeres olde, hauyng ben the wyfe
of one man.
10 And well reported of in good workes, yf she haue brought vp chyldren, yf she
haue lodged straungers, yf she haue wasshed the saintes feete, yf she haue
ministred vnto them that were in aduersitie, yf she haue ben continually geuen
to euery good worke.
11 But the yonger wydowes refuse: For whe they haue begun to waxe wanton agaynst
Christe, they wyll marrie:
12 Hauyng dampnation, because they haue cast away their first fayth.
13 They learne to wander about from house to house idle: yea not idle only, but
also tatlers and busybodies, speakyng thynges which are not comely.
14 I wyll therefore that the yonger women do marrie, to beare chyldren, to guyde
the house, to geue none occasion to ye aduersarie to speake slaunderously.
15 For certaine of them are alredy turned backe after Satan.
16 Yf any man or woman that beleueth haue wydowes, let them susteine them, & let
not the Churches be charged, that there maye be sufficient for them that are
wydowes in deede.
17 The elders that rule well are worthy of double honour, most speciallye they
which labour in the worde & teachyng.
18 For the scripture sayth: Thou shalt not moosel the oxe that treadeth out the
corne: And, the labourer is worthy of his rewarde.
19 Agaynst an elder receaue none accusation, but vnder two or three witnesses.
20 Them that sinne, rebuke before all, that other also may feare.
21 I testifie before God, and the Lorde Iesus Christe, and the elect angels,
that thou obserue these thinges without hastynesse of iudgement, and do nothyng
after parcialitie.
22 Lay handes sodenly on no man, neither be partaker of other mens sinnes. Kepe
thy selfe chaste.
23 Drinke no longer water, but vse a litle wine for thy stomackes sake & thine
often diseases.
24 Some mens sinnes are open beforehande, hastyng before vnto iudgement, and in
some they folowe after.
25 Lykewise also, good workes are manifest before hande, and they that are
otherwyse can not be hyd.

Chapter 6

1 Let as many seruauntes as are vnder the yoke, count their maisters worthy of
all honour, that the name of god and his doctrine be not blasphemed.
2 And they whiche haue beleuyng maisters, despise them not because they are
brethren: but rather do seruice, forasmuch as they are beleuyng and beloued and
partakers of the benefite. These thynges teache and exhort.
3 Yf any man teache otherwyse, and consenteth not vnto the wholsome wordes of
our Lorde Iesus Christe, and to the doctrine whiche is accordyng to godlynesse:
4 He is puft vp, knowyng nothing, but dotyng about questions and strifes of
wordes, wherof commeth enuie, stryfe, raylynges, euyll surmysynges,
5 Uayne disputations of men of corrupte myndes, destitute of the trueth,
thynkyng lucre to be godlynesse. From suche be thou separate.
6 Godlynesse is great lucre, if a man be content with that he hath.
7 For we brought nothyng into the worlde, and it is certayne that we may carry
nought away.
8 But hauyng foode and rayment, we must therwith be content.
9 For they that wyll be riche, fall into temptations and snares, and into many
folishe & noysome lustes, which drowne men in perdition and destruction.
10 For loue of money, is the roote of all euyll, whiche whyle some lusted after,
they erred from the fayth, & pearced the selues through with many sorowes.
11 But thou O man of God, flee these thynges, and folow after righteousnes,
godlynes, faith, loue, pacience, mekenes.
12 Fight the good fight of faith, lay hand on eternall lyfe, wherevnto thou art
also called, and hast professed a good profession before many witnesses.
13 I geue thee charge in the sight of God, who quickeneth all thynges, and
before Iesus Christe, which vnder Pontius Pilate witnessed a good profession,
14 That thou kepe the commaundement without spot, vnrebukeable, vntyll the
appearyng of our Lorde Iesus Christ:
15 Which in his tymes he shall shewe that is blessed and prince only, the kyng
of kynges, and Lorde of Lordes,
16 Who only hath immortalitie, dwelling in the light that no man can attayne
vnto, Whom no man hath seene, neither can see, vnto whom be honour & power
euerlastyng. Amen.
17 Charge them which are riche in this world, that they be not hie minded, nor
trust in vncertayne riches: but in ye lyuyng God, which geueth vs aboundauntly
all thinges to enioy:
18 That they do good, that they be riche in good workes, that they be redye to
geue, glad to distribute:
19 Laying vp in store for them selues a good foundation agaynst the tyme to
come, that they may lay holde on eternall lyfe.
20 O Timotheus, saue that which is geuen thee to kepe, auoydyng prophane and
vayne bablynges, and oppositions of science, falslie so called:
21 Which some professyng, haue erred concernyng the fayth. Grace be with thee.
Amen. Sent from Laodicea, which is the chiefest citie of Phrygia Pacaciana.


2 Timothy

Chapter 1

1 Paul an Apostle of Iesus Christe by the wyll of God, according to the promise
of lyfe, which is in Christ Iesus,
2 To Timothie a beloued sonne: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the father, and
Christe Iesus our Lorde.
3 I thanke God whom I worshippe from my forefathers in pure conscience, that
without ceassyng I haue remembrauce of thee in my prayers night & day
4 Desiryng to see thee, myndefull of thy teares: that I may be fylled with ioy.
5 When I call to remembraunce the vnfaigned fayth that is in thee, whiche dwelt
first in thy graundmother Lois, and in thy mother Eunica: and I am assured that
it dwelleth in thee also.
6 Wherfore I put thee in remebraunce that thou stirre vp the gyft of God, which
is in thee by the puttyng on of my handes.
7 For God hath not geuen to vs the spirite of feare: but of power, and of loue,
and of a sounde mynde.
8 Be not thou therfore ashamed of the testimonie of our Lorde, neither of me his
prisoner: but suffer thou aduersitie with the Gospell, accordyng to the power of
God,
9 Who hath saued vs, & called vs with an holy callyng, not accordyng to our
workes: but accordyng to his owne purpose and grace, which was geuen vs in
Christe Iesus, before the world began:
10 But is nowe made manifest by the appearyng of our sauiour Iesus Christ, who
hath put away death, and hath brought life and immortalitie vnto light through
the Gospell:
11 Wherunto I am appoynted, a preacher and Apostle, and a teacher of the
gentiles:
12 For the which cause I also suffer these thynges. Neuerthelesse, I am not
ashamed: For I knowe whom I haue beleued, and I am perswaded that he is able to
kepe that which I haue committed to hym, agaynst that day.
13 See thou haue the paterne of wholesome wordes, which thou hast hearde of me
in fayth & loue, that is in Christe Iesus.
14 That good thyng which was committed to thy keping, holde fast through the
holy ghost which dwelleth in vs.
15 This thou knowest, that all they which are in Asia, be turned from me: of who
are Phygellus & Hermogenes.
16 The Lorde geue mercie vnto ye house of Onesiphorus, for he oft refreshed me,
and was not ashamed of my chayne.
17 But whe he was in Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and founde me.
18 The Lorde graunt vnto hym, that he may fynde mercie with the Lorde in that
day: And in howe many thynges he ministred vnto me at Ephesus, thou knowest very
well.

Chapter 2

1 Thou therfore my sonne, be strong in the grace that is in Christe Iesus.
2 And the thynges that thou haste hearde of me by many witnesses, the same
commit thou to faythfull men, which shalbe apt to teache other also.
3 Thou therfore suffer afflictions as a good souldier of Iesus Christe.
4 No man that warreth, entangleth hym selfe with thaffayres of this lyfe, that
he may please hym which hath chosen hym to be a souldier.
5 And if a man also wrestle, yet is he not crowned except he wrestle lawfullie.
6 The labouryng husbandman, must first be partaker of the fruites.
7 Consider What I say: and the Lorde geue thee vnderstandyng in all thinges.
8 Remember that Iesus Christe, of the seede of Dauid, was raysed from the dead,
accordyng to my Gospell,
9 Wherin I suffer trouble as an euyll doer, euen vnto bondes: But the worde of
God is not bounde.
10 Therfore I suffer all thynges for the electes sakes, that they myght also
obtaine the saluation, which is in Christ Iesus, with eternall glorie.
11 It is a faythfull saying: for yf we be dead with hym, we shall also lyue with
hym:
12 If we be patient, we shall also raigne with hym: If we denie hym, he also
shall denie vs.
13 If we be vnfaythful, he abideth faithfull, he can not denie hym selfe.
14 Of these thynges put them in remembraunce, testifie before the Lorde, that
they striue not about wordes to no profite, but to the peruertyng of ye hearers.
15 Studie to shewe thy selfe approued vnto God, a workman not to be ashamed,
rightlie deuidyng the worde of trueth.
16 But prophane voyces of vanitie passe ouer: For they wyll encrease vnto
greater vngodlynesse.
17 And their worde shall fret as doth a cancker: of whom is Hymeneus and
Philetus,
18 Which about the trueth haue erred, saying that the resurrection is past
alredie, & do ouerthrowe the fayth of some.
19 But the strong foundation of God standeth styl, hauyng this seale: The Lorde
knoweth the that are his: And, let euery one that nameth the name of Christe,
depart from iniquitie.
20 But in a great house are not onely vessels of golde, and of siluer, but also
of wood and of earth: some to honour, and some vnto dishonour.
21 If a man therfore pourge hym selfe from these, he shalbe a vessell vnto
honour, and meete for ye vses of the Lorde, and prepared vnto euery good worke.
22 Lustes of youth auoyde, but folowe ryghteousnesse, fayth, loue, peace, with
them that call on the Lorde out of a pure heart.
23 But foolishe & vnlearned questions put from thee, knowyng that they do but
gender strife.
24 And the seruaunt of the Lorde must not striue: but be gentle vnto all men,
apt to teache, sufferyng euyll in mekenesse,
25 Instructing the which are contrarie mynded, yf God at any tyme wyll geue them
repentaunce, to the knowledge of the trueth:
26 And that they may come to the selues agayne, out of the snare of the deuyll,
which are holden captyue of hym at his wyll.

Chapter 3

1 This knowe also, that in the last dayes, perylous tymes shalbe at hande.
2 For men shalbe louers of their owne selues, couetous, boasters, proude,
blasphemers, disobedient to fathers and mothers, vnthankefull, vngodlye:
3 Without naturall affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, riotous, fierce,
despisers of them which are good,
4 Traytours, headdy, hye mynded, louers of pleasures more then louers of God:
5 Hauyng a fourme of godlynesse, but denying the power therof: turne away from
these.
6 These are they, which enter into houses, & leade captiue simple women laden
with sinne, caryed with diuers lustes:
7 Euer learnyng, and neuer able to come vnto the knowledge of the trueth.
8 For as Iannes and Iambres withstoode Moyses, so do these also resist the
trueth: Men of corrupt myndes, reprobate concernyng the fayth:
9 But they shall preuayle no longer. For their madnesse shalbe manifest vnto all
men as also theirs was.
10 But thou hast folowed my doctrine, fashion of lyuyng, purpose, fayth, long
sufferyng, loue, patience,
11 Persecutions, afflictions, which came vnto me at Antioche, at Iconium, at
Lystra, which persecutions I suffred patiently: And from them all, the Lord
deliuered me.
12 Yea, and all that wyll lyue godly in Christe Iesus, shall suffer persecution.
13 But the euyll men and deceauers, shall waxe worse and worse, deceauyng and
deceaued.
14 But continue thou in the thynges which thou haste learned, which also were
committed vnto thee, knowyng of whom thou hast learned them:
15 And that from an infant thou hast knowen the scriptures, which are able to
make thee wyse vnto saluation, thorowe fayth which is in Christe Iesus.
16 All scripture is geuen by inspiration of God, and is profitable to doctrine,
to reproue, to correction, to instruction which is in ryghteousnesse,
17 That the man of God may be perfect, instructed vnto all good workes.

Chapter 4

1 I testifie therefore before God, & the Lorde Iesus Christe, which shall iudge
the quicke and the dead at his appearyng, and his kingdome.
2 Preache the worde, be instant in season, out of season: Improue, rebuke,
exhort in all long sufferyng and doctrine.
3 For the tyme wyll come, when they shall not suffer wholsome doctrine: but
after their owne lustes, shal they whose eares itche, get the an heape of
teachers:
4 And shall turne away their hearyng from the trueth, and shalbe turned vnto
fables.
5 But watche thou in all thynges, suffer afflictions, do the worke of an
Euangelist, fulfyll thy ministerie:
6 For I am nowe redie to be offered, & the tyme of my dissolution is at hande.
7 I haue fought a good fyght, I haue fulfylled my course, I haue kept ye faith.
8 Hencefoorth there is layde vp for me a crowne of ryghteousnesse, which the
Lorde, the ryghteous iudge, shall geue me at that day: not to me only, but vnto
the also yt haue loued his appearyng.
9 Do thy diligence to come shortly vnto me.
10 For Demas hath forsaken me, hauing loued this present worlde, and is departed
vnto Thessalonica, Crescens to Galatia, Titus vnto Dalmatia.
11 Only Luke is with me. Takyng Marke and bryng him with thee, for he is
profitable vnto me for ye ministration.
12 And Tychicus haue I sent to Ephesus.
13 The cloke that I left at Troas with Carpus, whe thou commest bring with thee,
and the bookes, but specially the parchementes.
14 Alexander the coppersmith shewed me much euyll: The Lorde rewarde hym
accordyng to his deedes.
15 Of whom be thou ware also: For he hath greatly withstande our preaching.
16 At my first aunsweryng, no man assisted me, but all forsoke me, I pray God yt
it may not be layde to their charges:
17 Notwithstandyng, the Lorde assisted me, and strengthed me, that by me the
preachyng should be fulfylled to the vtmost, and that all the gentiles should
heare, and I was deliuered out of the mouth of the Lion.
18 And the Lorde shall delyuer me from euery euyll worke, & will preserue me
vnto his heauenly kingdome: To who be prayse for euer and euer. Amen.
19 Salute Prisca and Aquila, and the housholde of Onesiphorus.
20 Erastus abode at Corinthum: But Trophimus haue I left at Miletum sicke.
21 Do thy diligece to come before winter. Eubolus greeteth thee, and Pudens, &
Linus, and Claudia, & all the brethre.
22 The Lorde Iesus Christe be with thy spirite: Grace be with you. Amen. The
seconde epistle vnto Timothe, was written from Rome, when Paul was presented the
seconde tyme vnto the Emperour Nero.


Titus

Chapter 1

1 Paul a seruaunt of God, & an Apostle of Iesus Christe, according to the fayth
of Gods elect, & the knowledge of ye trueth, whiche is after godlynesse,
2 In the hope of eternall lyfe, which God that can not lye, promised before the
worlde began:
3 But hath made manifest his worde, at ye time appoynted through preaching,
which is committed vnto me, according to the ordinaunce of God our sauiour:
4 To Titus a natural sonne after the common fayth: Grace, mercie, peace, from
God the father, and the Lorde Iesus Christe our sauiour.
5 For this cause left I thee in Creta, that thou shouldest refourme ye thynges
that are left, and ordayne elders in euerye citie, as I had appoynted thee:
6 If any be blamelesse, the husbande of one wyfe, hauyng faythfull chyldren, not
accusable of riote, or vntractable.
7 For a bishop must be blamelesse, as the stewarde of God: not stubborne, not
angry, not geuen to wyne, no striker, not geuen to filthie lucre:
8 But a louer of hospitalitie, a louer of goodnes, sober, ryghteous, godly,
temperate,
9 Holdyng fast the faythfull worde, which is accordyng to doctrine, that he may
be able both to exhort in wholsome doctrine, and to improue them that say
agaynst it.
10 For there are many vnruly, and vayne talkers, and deceauers of myndes,
specially they that are of ye circumcision,
11 Whose mouthes must be stopped, which subuert whole houses, teachyng thynges
which they ought not, for fylthie lucre sake.
12 One of them selues euen a prophete of their owne, sayde: The Crettans are
alwayes lyers, euyll beastes, slowe bellyes.
13 This witnesse is true: wherfore rebuke them sharpely that they may be founde
in the fayth,
14 Not takyng heede to Iewes fables and comaundementes of men, turnyng from the
trueth.
15 Unto the pure, are all thynges pure: but vnto them that are defyled and
vnbeleuyng, is nothyng pure, but euen the mynde and conscience of them is
defyled.
16 They confesse that they knowe God: but with workes they denie hym, seyng they
are abhominable and disobedient, and vnto euery good worke reprobate.

Chapter 2

1 But speake thou the thynges which become wholsome doctrine.
2 That the elder men be watchyng, graue, sober, sounde in fayth, in loue, in
pacience:
3 The elder women lykewyse, that they be in such behauiour as becometh
holynesse, not false accusers, not geuen to much wine, teachers of good thinges,
4 To make the young women sober mynded, to loue their husbandes, to loue their
chyldren,
5 (To be) discrete, chaste, house kepers, good, obedient vnto their owne
husbandes, that the worde of God be not blasphemed.
6 Young men lykewyse exhort, to be sober mynded.
7 In all thynges shewyng thy selfe a paterne of good workes, in the doctrine,
vncorruptnesse, grauitie, integritie,
8 Wholsome worde, vnrebukeable, that he which withstandeth, may be ashamed,
hauyng no euyll thyng to say of you.
9 Exhort seruauntes, to be obedient vnto their owne maisters, and to please them
in all thynges, not aunsweryng agayne:
10 Neither pickers, but shewing all good faythfulnesse, that they may adourne
the doctrine of God our sauiour in all thynges.
11 For there hath appeared the grace of God which is healthful to all men,
12 Teachyng vs, that denying vngodlynesse and worldly lustes, we shoulde lyue
soberlie and ryghteouslie, and godlie in this present worlde:
13 Lokyng for that blessed hope and appearyng of the glorie of the great God,
and our sauiour Iesus Christe,
14 Which gaue hym selfe for vs, that he myght redeeme vs from all
vnryghteousnesse, and pourge vs a peculier people vnto hym selfe, zelous of good
workes.
15 These thynges speake and exhort, and rebuke with all aucthoritie. Let no man
dispise thee.

Chapter 3

1 Warne them to be subiect to rule & power, to obey magistrates, to be redie to
euery good worke:
2 To blaspheme no man, to be no fyghters, but gentle, shewyng all mekenesse vnto
all men.
3 For we our selues also were some tyme foolyshe, disobedient, deceaued, seruyng
diuers lustes & voluptuousnes, lyuyng in maliciousnesse and enuie, full of hate,
hatyng one another.
4 But after that the kyndenesse and loue of our sauiour God to manwarde
appeared,
5 Not of workes which be in ryghteousnesse wrought, but accordyng to his mercie,
he saued vs by the fountayne of regeneration and renuyng of the holy ghost,
6 Which he shed on vs richlie through Iesus Christe our sauiour:
7 That we iustified by his grace, should be made heyres accordyng to the hope of
eternall lyfe.
8 This is a faythfull saying: And of these thynges I wyll that thou confirme,
that they which haue beleued in God, myght be carefull to shewe foorth good
workes. These thynges are good and profitable vnto men.
9 But foolishe questions, and genealogies, and contentions, and striuinges about
the lawe, auoyde: for they are vnprofitable and vayne.
10 A man that is an aucthour of sectes, after the first and the seconde
admonition, auoyde:
11 Knowyng, that he that is such, is subuerted and sinneth, beyng dampned of hym
selfe.
12 When I shall sende Artemas vnto thee, or Tychicus, be diligent to come vnto
me vnto Nicopolis: For I haue determined there to wynter.
13 Bryng Zenas the lawyer, & Apollos, on their iourney diligently, that nothing
be lackyng vnto them.
14 And let ours also learne to excell in good workes to necessarie vses, that
they be not vnfruitefull.
15 All that are with me, salute thee. Greete them that loue vs in the fayth.
Grace be with you all. Amen. Written from Nicopolis, (a citie) of Macedonia.


Philemon

Chapter 1

1 Paul a prisoner of Iesus Christ, and brother Timotheus: Unto Philemo the
beloued, and our felowe labourer,
2 And to the beloued Apphia, and to Archippus our felowe souldier, and to the
Churche in thy house:
3 Grace to you, and peace from God our father, and the Lorde Iesus Christ.
4 I thanke my God, makyng mention alwayes of thee in my prayers,
5 Hearyng of thy loue and fayth, which thou hast towarde the Lorde Iesus, and
towarde all saintes:
6 That the felowshippe of thy fayth may be effectuall in the knowledge of euery
good worke which is in you, towarde Christe Iesus.
7 For we haue great ioy & consolation in thy loue, because the bowels of the
saintes are refresshed by thee, brother.
8 Wherfore, though I myght be much bolde in Christe, to inioyne thee that which
is conuenient:
9 Yet for loues sake, I rather beseche thee, beyng such a one as Paul the aged,
& nowe also a prisoner of Iesus Christe.
10 I beseche thee for my sonne Onesimus, whom I haue begotten in my bondes:
11 Which in tyme passed, was to thee vnprofitable, but nowe profitable to thee
and to me.
12 Whom I haue sent agayne: Thou therefore receaue hym, that is, myne owne
bowels,
13 Whom I woulde haue retayned with me, that in thy steade he myght haue
ministred vnto me in the bondes of the Gospell:
14 But without thy mynde woulde I do nothyng, that thy benefite shoulde not be
as it were of necessitie, but willingly.
15 For happyly he therfore departed for a season, that thou shouldest receaue
hym for euer:
16 Not nowe as a seruaunt, but aboue a seruaunt, a brother beloued, specially to
me: but howe much more vnto thee, both in the fleshe, and in the Lorde?
17 If thou count me therfore a felowe, receaue hym as my selfe.
18 If he haue iniuried, or oweth thee ought that lay to my charge.
19 I Paul haue written it with myne owne hande, I wyll recompence it: Albeit, I
do not say to thee, howe that thou owest vnto me euen thyne owne selfe.
20 Yea brother, let me enioy this pleasure of thee in the Lorde: Comfort my
bowels in the Lorde.
21 Trustyng in thine obedience, I wrote vnto thee, knowyng, that thou wilt also
do more then I say.
22 Moreouer, prepare me also a lodgyng: for I trust that through your prayers, I
shalbe geuen vnto you.
23 There salute thee Epaphras, my felowe prisoner in Christe Iesus.
24 Marcus, Aristarcus, Demas, Lucas, my felowe labourers.
25 The grace of our Lorde Iesus Christ be with your spirite. Amen. Written from
Rome, by Onesimus a seruaunt.


Hebrews

Chapter 1

1 God which in time past, at sundrie tymes, and in diuers maners, spake vnto the
fathers in the prophetes:
2 Hath in these last dayes, spoken vnto vs in the sonne, whom he hath appoynted
heyre of all thynges, by whom also he made the worldes.
3 Who beyng the bryghtnesse of the glorie, and the very image of his substaunce,
vpholdyng all thynges with the worde of his power, hauing by him selfe pourged
our sinnes, hath syt on the ryght hande of the maiestie on hye:
4 Beyng so much more excellent then the Angels, as he hath by inheritaunce
obtayned a more excellent name then they.
5 For vnto which of the Angels sayde he at any tyme: Thou art my sonne, this day
haue I begotten thee?
6 And agayne, I wyll be to hym a father, and he shalbe to me a sonne? And
agayne, when he bryngeth in the first begotten sonne into the worlde, he saith:
And let all the Angels of God worship hym.
7 And vnto the Angels he sayth: He maketh his Angels spirites, and his ministers
a flambe of fyre.
8 But vnto the sonne he sayth Thy seate O God, shalbe for euer and euer: The
scepter of thy kyngdome is a scepter of ryghteousnesse.
9 Thou hast loued ryghteousnesse, and hated iniquitie: Therfore God, euen thy
God, hath annoynted thee with the oyle of gladnesse, aboue thy felowes.
10 And thou Lorde, in the begynnyng hast layde the foundation of the earth: And
the heauens are the workes of thy handes:
11 They shall perishe, but thou endurest, and they shall waxe olde as doth a
garment:
12 And as a vesture shalt thou folde the vp, and they shalbe chaunged: but thou
art the same, & thy yeres shall not fayle.
13 But vnto which of ye Angels sayde he at any tyme: Sitte on my right hande,
tyll I make thyne enemies thy foote stoole?
14 Are they not all ministring spirites, sent foorth into ministerie for their
sakes which shalbe heyres of saluation?

Chapter 2

1 Wherfore we ought to geue the more earnest heede to the thynges which we haue
heard, lest at any tyme we should let them slippe.
2 For yf the worde spoken by Angels, was stedfast: And euery transgression and
disobedience receaued a iust recompense of rewarde:
3 Howe shall we escape, yf we neglect so great saluation? which at the first
began to be preached of the Lorde, and was confirmed vnto vswarde, by them that
hearde it:
4 God bearyng witnesse therto both with signes & wonders also, and with diuers
powers and gyftes of the holy ghost, accordyng to his owne wyll.
5 For vnto the Anges hath he not put in subiection the worlde to come, wherof we
speake.
6 But one in a certayne place witnessed, saying: What is man, that thou arte
myndeful of hym? Or the sonne of man, that thou wouldest loke vpon hym?
7 Thou madest hym for a litle whyle lower then the Angels, thou hast crowned him
with glorie and honour, and hast set hym aboue the workes of thy handes.
8 Thou hast put all thynges in subiectio vnder his feete. In yt he put all
thinges vnder hym, he left nothyng that is not put vnder hym. But nowe, we see
not yet all thynges put vnder hym.
9 But hym that for a whyle was made lesse then the Angels, we see that it was
Iesus, who through the sufferyng of death, was crowned with glorie and honour,
that he by the grace of God, shoulde taste of death for all.
10 For it became hym, for whom are all thynges, and by whom are all thynges,
after he had brought many sonnes vnto glorie, that he shoulde make the capitayne
of their saluation perfect through afflictions.
11 For both he that sanctifieth, and they which are sanctified, are all of one.
For which cause, he is not ashamed to call them brethren,
12 Saying: I wyll declare thy name vnto my brethren, in the myddes of the
Churche wyll I prayse thee.
13 And agayne: I wyll put my trust in hym. And agayne: Beholde here am I, and
the chyldren whiche God hath geuen me.
14 Forasmuch then as the chyldren are partakers of flesshe and blood, he also
hym selfe lykewyse toke part with the, that through death he myght expell hym
that had lordship ouer death, that is the deuyll:
15 And that he myght delyuer them, which through feare of death, were all their
lyfe tyme in daunger of bondage.
16 For he in no place taketh on hym the Angels: but the seede of Abraham taketh
he on hym.
17 Wherfore, in all thinges it became him to be made lyke vnto his brethren,
that he myght be mercyfull, and a faythfull hye priest in thynges concernyng
God, for to purge the peoples sinnes.
18 For in that he hym selfe suffered and was tempted, he is able to succour them
that are tempted.

Chapter 3

1 Therfore holy brethren, partakers of the celestiall callyng, consider the
apostle and hye priest of our profession Christe Iesus,
2 Beyng faythfull to hym that appoynted hym, as also was Moyses in all his
house.
3 For this man is counted worthy of more glorie then Moyses, inasmuch as he
which hath buylded the house, hath more honour then the house.
4 For euery house is buylded of some man: But he that buylded all thynges, is
God.
5 And Moyses veryly was faythfull in al his house, as a minister, for a witnesse
of those thynges whiche were to be spoken after:
6 But Christe as a sonne hath rule ouer his owne house, whose house are we, yf
we holde fast the confidence and the reioycyng of that hope vnto the ende.
7 Wherfore, as the holy ghost saith: Today yf ye wyll heare his voyce,
8 Harden not your heartes, as in the prouokyng, in the day of the temptation in
the wyldernesse,
9 Where your fathers tempted me, proued me, and sawe my workes 40 yeres.
10 Wherfore I was greeued with that generation, and sayde: they do alway erre in
heart, they veryly haue not knowen my wayes.
11 So that I sware in my wrath, yf they shall enter into my rest.
12 Take heede brethren, lest at any tyme there be in you an euyll heart of
vnbeliefe, to depart from the lyuyng God:
13 But exhort ye one another dayly, whyle it is called to day, lest any of you
be hardened, through the deceytfulnesse of sinne.
14 For we are made partakers of Christe, yf we kepe sure vnto the ende the
begynnyng of the substaunce,
15 So long as it is said: to day yf ye wyll heare his voyce, harden not your
heartes, as in the prouokyng.
16 For some when they had hearde, dyd prouoke: howe be it, not all that came out
of Egypt by Moyses.
17 But with whom was he displeased fourtie yeres? Not with them that had sinned,
whose carkases fell in the desert?
18 And to who sware he that they should not enter into his rest, but vnto them
that were not obedient?
19 And we see that they coulde not enter in, because of vnbeliefe.

Chapter 4

1 Let vs feare therfore, lest at any tyme, by forsakyng the promise of entryng
into his reste, any of you shoulde be defrauded.
2 For vnto vs was the Gospell preached, aswell as vnto them: But the worde
whiche they hearde dyd not profite them, not beyng coupled with fayth to them
that hearde.
3 For we which haue beleued, do enter into his rest, as he sayde: Euen as I haue
sworne in my wrath, if they shal enter into my rest. Although the workes were
made perfecte from the foundation of the worlde.
4 For he spake in a certayne place of the seuenth daye on this wyse: And God dyd
rest the seuenth daye from all his workes.
5 And in this place againe: yf they shall enter into my rest.
6 Seing therfore it foloweth, that some must enter there into, and they to who
the Gospell was first preached entred not therin for vnbeliefe.
7 Againe, he appoynteth a certaine day, by to day, saying in Dauid after so long
a tyme (as it is sayde:) To day yf ye wyl heare his voyce, harde not your
hearts.
8 For yf Iesus had geuen them reste, then woulde he not afterwarde haue spoken
of another day.
9 There remayneth therfore yet a rest to the people of God.
10 For he that is entred into his rest, hath ceassed also from his owne workes,
as God dyd from his.
11 Let vs studie therefore to enter into that rest, lest any man fall after the
same ensample of disobedience.
12 For the worde of God is quicke, and myghtie in operation, and sharper then
any two edged sword, and entreth thorowe, euen vnto the deuydyng a sunder of the
soule & the spirite, and of the ioyntes & the marie, and is a discerner of the
thoughtes and of the intentes of the heart:
13 Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in the syght of hym: But
all thinges are naked and open vnto the eyes of hym of whom we speake.
14 Seyng then that we haue a great hye priest, which is entred into heauens,
Iesus the sonne of God, let vs holde faste the confession.
15 For we haue not an hye priest whiche can not be touched with the feelyng of
our infirmities: but was in all poyntes tempted lyke as we are, and yet without
sinne.
16 Let vs therfore come boldly vnto the throne of grace, that we may obteyne
mercie, and fynde grace to helpe in time of neede.

Chapter 5

1 For euery hye priest taken from among men, is ordeined for men, in things
parteynyng to God, to offer gyftes & sacrifices for sinne:
2 Which can sufficiently haue compassion on the ignoraunt, & on them that erre
out of the waye, forasmuche as he hym selfe also is compassed with infirmitie.
3 And for ye same infirmitie he is bounde to offer for sinnes, aswell for hym
selfe, as for the people.
4 And no man taketh the honour vnto hym selfe, but he that is called of God, as
was Aaron.
5 Euen so, Christ also glorified not hym selfe to be made ye hye priest: but he
that sayde vnto hym, thou art my sonne, to day haue I begotten thee gaue it hym.
6 As he saith also in another place: thou art a priest for euer, after the order
of Melchisedech.
7 Which in the dayes of his fleshe, when he had offered vp prayers and
supplications with strong crying and teares, vnto hym that was able to saue hym
from death, and was hearde in that which he feared:
8 Though he were the sonne, yet learned he obediece, by these thinges which he
suffred:
9 And being perfect, was made the aucthour of eternall saluation vnto al them
that obey hym:
10 And is called of God an hye priest after the order of Melchisedech.
11 Of whom we haue many thynges to say, and harde to be vttered, seing ye are
dull of hearyng.
12 For when as concernyng the tyme, ye ought to be teachers, yet haue ye nede
againe that we teache you the first principles of the begynnyng of the worde of
God, and are become such as haue nede of mylke, and not of strong meate.
13 For euery one that vseth mylke, is vnexpert of the worde of righteousnes, for
he is a babe.
14 But strong meate belongeth to them that are perfecte, euen those whiche by
reason of vse, haue their wittes exercised to discerne both good and euyll.

Chapter 6

1 Therefore leauyng the doctrine of the begynnyng of Christe, let vs go foorth
vnto perfection, not laying agayne the foundatio of repentaunce from dead
workes, and of fayth towarde God,
2 Of the doctrine of baptismes, and of laying on of handes, and of resurrection
of the dead, and of eternall iudgement.
3 And this wyll I do, yf God permit.
4 For it can not be that they which were once lighted, and haue tasted of the
heauenly gyft, and were become partakers of the holy ghost,
5 And haue tasted of the good worde of God, and the powers of the worlde to
come:
6 And they fall away, shoulde be renued agayne into repentaunce, hauyng
crucified to the selues the sonne of God a fresshe, and made a mocke of hym.
7 For the earth which drynketh in the rayne that commeth oft vppon it, and
bringeth foorth hearbes meete for them by whom also it is dressed, receaueth
blessyng of God:
8 But that grounde whiche beareth thornes and bryers, is reproued, and is nye
vnto cursyng, whose ende is to be burned.
9 Neuerthelesse, deare frendes, we haue perswaded our selues better thynges of
you, and thynges whiche accompanie saluation, though we thus speake.
10 For God is not vnryghteous, to forget your worke & labour of loue, whiche ye
haue shewed towarde his name, hauyng ministred to the saintes, and do minister.
11 Yea and we desire that euery one of you do shewe the same diligence, to the
full assuraunce of hope, vnto the ende,
12 That ye faynt not, but be folowers of them which through fayth and pacience
inherite the promises.
13 For when God made promise to Abraham, because he had no greater to sweare by,
he sware by hym selfe,
14 Saying: Surely, blessyng I wyll blesse thee, and multipliyng, multiplie thee.
15 And so after that he had taryed paciently, he enioyed the promise.
16 For men veryly sweare by the greater, and an oth for confirmation, is to them
an ende of all stryfe.
17 Wherein God wyllyng very aboundauntly to shewe vnto the heires of promise,
the stablenesse of his counsayle, confirmed by an oth:
18 That by two immutable thynges, in whiche it was vnpossible for God to lye, we
myght haue a strong consolation, which haue fledde to holde fast the hope layde
before vs:
19 Which hope we holde as an ancker of the soule both sure and stedfast, and
entryng in, into that thing which is within the vayle:
20 Whyther the forerunner is for vs entred euen Iesus, after the order of
Melchisedech made a priest for euer.

Chapter 7

1 For this Melchisedech kyng of Salem, priest of the most hye God, who met
Abraham returnyng from the slaughter of the kynges, and blessed hym:
2 To whom also Abraham gaue tythe of all thynges, first being called by
interpretatio king of righteousnes, & after yt also, kyng of Salem, which is,
kyng of peace.
3 Without father, without mother, without kynne, hauyng neither beginnyng of
dayes, neither ende of lyfe, but lykened vnto the sonne of God, and continueth a
priest for euer.
4 Nowe consider howe great this man was, vnto whom also the patriarche Abraham
gaue tythe of the spoyles.
5 And veryly they which are of the children of Leuie, which receaue the office
of the priesthood, haue a commaundement to take tythe of the people accordyng to
the lawe, that is, of their brethren, though they came out of ye loynes of
Abraham.
6 But he whose kynrede is not counted among them, receaued tythe of Abraham, and
blessed hym that had the promises.
7 And without all controuersie, the lesse is blessed of the better.
8 And here men that dye, receaue tithes: but there he receaueth them of whom it
is witnessed that he lyueth.
9 And to say the trueth, Leuie also whiche receaueth tythes, payed tythes in
Abraham.
10 For he was yet in the loynes of his father, when Melchisedech met Abraham.
11 If therefore perfection was by the priesthood of ye Leuites (For vnder that
priesthood the people receaued the law) what neded it furthermore that another
priest shoulde rise after the order of Melchisedech, and not to be called after
the order of Aaron?
12 For yf the priesthood be translated, of necessitie also there is made a
translation of the lawe.
13 For he of whom these thynges are spoken, parteyneth vnto another tribe, of
which no man stoode at the aulter.
14 For it is euident that our Lord sprong out of Iuda, of which tribe spake
Moyses nothyng concernyng priesthood:
15 And it is yet a farre more euidet thing, yf after the similitude of
Melchisedech there aryse another priest,
16 Which is not made after the lawe of the carnall commaundement, but after the
power of the endlesse lyfe:
17 For he testifieth that thou art a priest for euer, after the order of
Melchisedech.
18 For there is truely a disanulling of the commaundement goyng before, for the
weakenesse and vnprofitablenesse therof.
19 For the lawe made nothyng perfect, but was the bryngyng in of a better hope,
by the whiche we drawe nygh vnto God.
20 And in as much as that was not without an oth (For those priestes were made
without an oth:
21 But this priest with an oth, by hym that saide vnto him: The Lord sware and
wyll not repent, thou art a priest for euer, after the order of Melchisedech.)
22 By so much was Iesus made a suertie of a better testament.
23 And among them many were made priestes, because they were forbidden by death
to endure.
24 But this man, because he endureth euer, hath an vnchaungeable priesthood.
25 Wherefore he is able also euer to saue them to the vttermost that come vnto
God by hym, seyng he euer lyueth to make intercession for them.
26 For such an hye priest became vs, whiche is holy, harmelesse, vndefyled,
seperate from sinners, and made hygher then heauens:
27 Whiche nedeth not dayly, as those hie priestes, to offer vp sacrifice, first
for his owne sinnes, and then for the peoples: for that dyd he once, when he
offered vp hym selfe.
28 For the lawe maketh men hye priestes which haue infirmitie: but the word of
the oth which (was) after the lawe (maketh) the sonne, whiche is perfecte for
euermore.

Chapter 8

1 But of the thinges whiche we haue spoken, this is ye summe: We haue such an
hye priest that sitteth on ye ryght hand of ye throne of the maiestie in the
heaues,
2 A minister of holy thynges, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pight,
and not man.
3 For euery hye priest is ordeyned to offer gyftes and sacrifices: Wherefore it
is of necessitie, that this man haue somewhat also to offer.
4 For he were not a priest, yf he were on the earth, seyng there are priestes
that accordyng to the lawe offer gyftes,
5 Who serue vnto the example and shadowe of heauenly thinges, as Moyses was
admonished of God, when he was about to finishe the tabernacle: For see, saith
he, that thou make all thynges accordyng to the patterne shewed to thee in the
mount.
6 But nowe hath he obteyned a more excellent office, by howe much also he is the
mediatour of a better couenaunt, whiche was confirmed in better promises.
7 For yf that first couenaunt had ben founde fautlesse, then shoulde no place
haue ben sought for the seconde.
8 For in rebukyng them, he saith: Beholde the dayes come, saith the Lord, and I
wyll finishe vppon the house of Israel and vppon the house of Iuda a newe
couenaunt:
9 Not lyke that that I made with their fathers, in the day when I toke them by
the hande, to leade them out of the lande of Egypt: because they continued not
in my couenaunt, and I regarded them not, saith the Lorde.
10 For this is the couenaunt that I wyll make with the house of Israel after
those dayes, saith the Lord, geuyng my lawes into their mynde, and in their
heart I wyl write them, and I wyll be to them a God, and they shalbe to me a
people.
11 And they shall not teach euery man his neyghbour, and euery man his brother,
saying, knowe the Lorde: for all shall knowe me, from the litle of them to the
great of them.
12 For I wyll be mercyfull to their vnrighteousnes, and their sinnes and their
iniquities wyll I thynke vpon no more.
13 In that he sayth a newe couenaunt he hath worne out the first: For that which
is worne out and waxed olde, is redie to vanishe away.

Chapter 9

1 The first couenaunt then had verylye iustifiyng ordinaunces, seruinges of God,
and worldlye holynesse.
2 For there was a fore tabernacle made, wherein was the lyght, and the table,
and the shewe bread, whiche is called holy.
3 But after the seconde vayle was a tabernacle, which is called holyest of al:
4 Which had the golden senser, and the arke of the couenaunt ouerlaide rounde
about with golde, wherin was the golden pot hauyng Manna, and Aarons rodde that
had budded, and the tables of the couenaunt:
5 And ouer it, the Cherubins of glorie, shadowyng the mercie seate: Of which
thynges we can not nowe speake particulerlie.
6 When these thynges were thus ordeyned, the priestes went alwayes into the
first tabernacle, accomplishyng the seruice of God.
7 But into ye seconde (went) the hye priest alone once euery yere, not without
blood, which he offered for hym selfe, & for the ignorauncies of the people.
8 The holy ghost this signifiyng, that the waye of holy thinges was not yet
opened, whyle as yet the first tabernacle was standyng:
9 Whiche (was) a similitude for the tyme then preset, in which were offred
giftes and sacrifices, that coulde not make the worshipper perfect as parteining
to the conscience,
10 With only meates and drynkes, and diuers wasshynges, and iustifiynges of the
flesshe, which were layde vp vntyll the tyme of reformation.
11 But Christe beyng come an hye priest of good thynges that shoulde be, by a
greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with handes, that is to say, not
of this buyldyng,
12 Neither by the blood of Goates and Calues: but by his owne blood he entred in
once into the holy place, & founde eternall redemption.
13 For if the blood of Oxen & of Goates, and the asshes of a young Cowe,
sprinklyng the vncleane, sanctifieth to the purifiyng of the flesshe:
14 Howe much more the blood of Christe, which through the eternall spirite
offered hym selfe without spot to God, shall purge your conscience fro dead
workes, to serue the lyuyng God?
15 And for this cause is he the mediatour of the newe couenaunt, that through
death, which was for the redemption of the transgressions that were vnder the
first couenaunt, they whiche are called myght receaue the promise of eternall
inheritaunce.
16 For where as is a testament, there must also of necessitie be the death of
him that maketh it.
17 For a testament is confirmed when men are dead: for it is yet of no value, as
long as he that maketh the testamet is alyue.
18 For which cause also, neither the firste testament was dedicated without
blood.
19 For when Moyses had spoken euery precept to all the people according to the
lawe, takyng the blood of Calues and of Goates, with water & purple wooll and
ysope, he sprynkled both the booke it selfe, and all the people,
20 Saying: This is the blood of the testament, whiche God hath enioyned vnto
you.
21 And lykewise he sprinkled with blood both the tabernacle, and all the vessels
of the ministerie.
22 And almost all thynges are by ye lawe pourged with blood, and without
sheddyng of blood is no remission.
23 It is neede then that the paterne of heauenly thynges, be purified with such
thynges: but the heauenly thynges the selues (be purified) with better
sacrifices then are those.
24 For Christe is not entred into the holy places made with handes (which are)
paternes of true thynges: but into heauen it selfe, nowe to appeare in the syght
of God for vs.
25 Not that he shoulde offer him selfe often, as the hye priest entreth into the
holy places euery yere in strauge blood:
26 (For then must he haue often suffred sence the foundation of the worlde) But
nowe once in the ende of the world hath he appeared, to put away sinne, by the
sacrifice of hym selfe.
27 And as it is appoynted vnto men once to dye, and after this the iudgement:
28 Euen so, Christe once offered to take away the sinnes of many, the seconde
time shalbe seene without sinne, of them which wayte for hym vnto saluation.

Chapter 10

1 For the lawe, hauyng the shadow of good thynges to come, and not the very
fashion of the thinges the selues, can neuer with those sacrifices whiche they
offer yere by yere continually, make the commers therevnto perfect.
2 For woulde not then those sacrifices haue ceassed to haue ben offred, because
that the offerers once pourged, shoulde haue had no more conscience of sinnes?
3 Neuerthelesse, in those (sacrifices) is mention made of sinnes euery yere.
4 For it is not possible that the blood of Bulles & of Goates shoulde take away
sinnes.
5 Wherfore when he commeth into the worlde, he saith: Sacrifice and offring thou
wouldest not haue, but a body hast thou ordeyned me.
6 In burnt sacrifices & sinne (offerynges) thou hast had no pleasure.
7 Then sayde I, lo I come (In the begynnyng of the booke it is written of me) to
do thy wyll O God.
8 Aboue when he saith, that sacrifice, and offeryng, and burnt offeringes, and
sinne offerynges thou wouldest not, neither haddest pleasure therein (which are
offered by the lawe:)
9 Then sayde he, lo I come, to do thy wyll, O God. He taketh away ye first to
stablyshe the seconde.
10 In ye which wyll we are made holy, euen by the offeryng of the body of Iesus
Christe once for all.
11 And euery priest standeth dayly ministryng, & offeryng oftentymes the same
sacrifices, whiche can neuer take away sinnes.
12 But this man, after he hath offered one sacrifice for sinnes, is sit downe
for euer on the ryght hande of God:
13 From hencefoorth tarying tyl his foes be made his footstoole.
14 For with one offeryng hath he made perfite for euer them that are sanctified.
15 And the holy ghost also beareth vs recorde: For after that he tolde before,
16 This is the couenaunt that I wyll make vnto them after those dayes, (sayth
the Lorde) geuyng my lawes in their heart, and in their myndes wyl I write them:
17 And their sinnes and iniquities wyll I remember no more.
18 And where remission of these thinges is there is no more offering for sinne.
19 Hauyng therefore brethren, libertie to enter into holy places in the blood of
Iesus,
20 By the new and lyuing way, which he hath prepared for vs through the vayle,
that is to say his flesshe:
21 And seyng we haue an hye priest ouer the house of God:
22 Let vs drawe nye with a true hearte, in assuraunce of fayth, sprinkeled in
our heartes from an euyll conscience, and wasshed in body with pure water.
23 Let vs holde the profession of the hope without waueryng, (for he is
faythfull that promised:)
24 And let vs consider one another to prouoke vnto loue and good workes,
25 Not forsakyng the assemblyng of our selues together, as the maner of some is
but exhortyng one (another) and so much the more, as ye see the day approchyng.
26 For yf we sinne wyllyngly after that we haue receaued the knowledge of the
trueth, there remayneth no more sacrifice for sinnes:
27 But a fearefull lokyng for of iudgement, and violent fire, whiche shall
deuour the aduersaries.
28 He that despiseth Moyses lawe, dyeth without mercie vnder two or thre
witnesses:
29 Of howe muche sorer punyshement (suppose ye) shall he be worthy, whiche
treadeth vnder foote the sonne of God? and counteth the blood of the couenaut
wherein he was sanctified, an vnholye thyng, and doth despite to the spirite of
grace?
30 For we knowe hym that hath sayde, vengeaunce belongeth vnto me, I wyl render
saith the Lorde: And agayne, the Lorde shall iudge his people.
31 It is a fearefull thyng to fall into the handes of the lyuyng God.
32 Call to remebraunce the former dayes, in the which after ye had receaued
light ye endured a great fyght of aduersities:
33 Partly whyle ye were made a gasing stocke, both by reproches & afflictions,
and partly whyle ye became companions of them whiche were so tossed to & fro.
34 For ye suffred also with my bondes, & toke in woorth the spoylyng of your
goodes with gladnesse: knowyng in your selues how that ye haue in heauen a
better and an enduryng substaunce.
35 Cast not awaye therefore your confidence, which hath great recompence of
rewarde.
36 For ye haue neede of pacience, that after ye haue done the wyll of God, ye
myght receaue the promise.
37 For yet a very litle whyle, and he that shall come, wyll come, and wyll not
tary.
38 And the iuste shall lyue by fayth: And yf he withdrawe hym selfe, my soule
shall haue no pleasure in hym.
39 We are not of them that withdrawe our selues vnto perdition: but we parteyne
vnto fayth, to the wynning of the soule.

Chapter 11

1 Fayth is the grounde of thynges hoped for, the euidence of thynges not seene.
2 For by it, the elders obtayned a good report.
3 Through fayth, we vnderstande that the worldes were ordeined by the word of
God, and that thynges whiche are seene, were made of thynges whiche were not
seene.
4 By fayth Abel offered vnto God a more excellent sacrifice then Cain: by whiche
he was witnessed to be ryghteous, God testifiyng of his gyftes: by which also he
beyng dead, yet speaketh.
5 By fayth was Enoch translated, that he shoulde not see death, neither was he
founde, for God had taken hym away: For afore he was taken away, he was reported
of to haue pleased God.
6 But without fayth it is vnpossible to please hym: For he that cometh to God,
must beleue that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seeke him.
7 By fayth Noe beyng warned of God of thinges not seene as yet, moued with
reuerence, prepared the arke to the sauyng of his house, through the whiche arke
he condempned the worlde, and became heire of the righteousnes which is by
fayth.
8 By fayth Abraham when he was called, obeyed, to go out into a place whiche he
shoulde afterwarde receaue to inheritaunce: and he went out, not knowyng whyther
he shoulde go.
9 By fayth he remoued into the lande of promise, as into a straunge countrey,
whe he had dwelt in tabernacles, with Isaac and Iacob, heires with hym of the
same promise:
10 For he loked for a citie hauyng a foundation, whose buylder and maker is God.
11 Through fayth also Sara her selfe receaued strength to conceaue seede, and
was delyuered of a chylde whe she was past age, because she iudged hym faythfull
which had promised.
12 And therfore sprang there of one, euen of one whiche was as good as dead so
many in multitude, as are the starres in the skye, and as the sande the whiche
is by the sea shore innumerable.
13 These all dyed according to fayth, not hauing receaued the promises, but
seing them a farre of, and beleuyng, and salutyng, and confessyng that they were
straungers and pilgrimes on the earth.
14 For they that saye suche thynges, declare that they seke a countrey.
15 Also yf they had ben myndfull of that countrey from whence they came out,
they had leasure to haue returned:
16 But nowe they desire a better, that is, a heauenly. Wherefore God is not
ashamed of them to be called their God, for he hath prepared for them a citie.
17 By fayth Abraham offered by Isaac when he was proued: and he that had
receaued the promises, offered vp his only begotten sonne:
18 To whom it was saide, that in Isaac shall thy seede be called.
19 For he considered that God was able to rayse the dead vp agayne, fro whence
also he receaued hym in a similitude of the resurrection.
20 By fayth did Isaac blesse Iacob and Esau, concernyng thynges to come.
21 By fayth Iacob when he was a dying, blessed both the sonnes of Ioseph, and
worshypped towarde the toppe of his scepter.
22 By fayth Ioseph when he dyed, remembred the departyng of the chyldren of
Israel, and gaue commaundement of his bones.
23 By fayth Moyses whe he was borne, was hyd three monethes of his father and
mother, because they sawe he was a proper chylde, neither feared they the kynges
commaundement.
24 By fayth Moyses when he was great, refused to be called the sonne of Pharaos
daughter:
25 Chosyng rather to suffer aduersitie with the people of God, then to enioye
the pleasures of sinne for a season:
26 Esteemyng the rebuke of Christ, greater riches, then the treasures of Egypt:
For he had respect vnto the recompence of the rewarde.
27 By fayth he forsoke Egypt, fearyng not the wrath of the kyng: For he endured,
euen as though he had seene him which is inuisible.
28 Through fayth, he ordeyned the Passouer and the effusion of blood, lest he
that destroyed the first borne, shoulde touche them.
29 By fayth, they passed through the redde sea, as by drye lande: which the
Egyptians assaying to do, were drowned.
30 By fayth, the walles of Iericho fell downe, after they were compassed about
seuen dayes.
31 By fayth, the harlot Rahab perished not with them that were disobedient, when
she had receaued the spyes with peace.
32 And what shall I more say? for the tyme woulde fayle me, to rehearse of
Gedeon, of Barac, and of Sampson, and of Iephte, of Dauid also and Samuel, and
of the prophetes:
33 Which through faith subdued kingdomes, wrought righteousnesse, obteyned the
promises, stopped the mouthes of the Lions,
34 Quenched the violence of fyre, escaped the edge of the sworde, out of
weakenesse were made strong, wared valiant in fyght, turned to flyght the armies
of the aliantes.
35 The women receaued their dead, raysed to lyfe agayne: Other were racked, not
lokyng for deliueraunce, that they might receaue a better resurrectio.
36 And others were tryed with mockynges, and scourgynges: Yea, moreouer with
bondes and prisonment:
37 They were stoned, were hewen asunder, were tempted, were slaine with sword,
wandred about in sheepskinnes, and goates skinnes, beyng destitute, afflicted
and tormented:
38 Of who the worlde was not worthie: They wandred in wildernesse, and in
mountaynes, and in dennes, and caues of the earth.
39 And these all through fayth, obteyned good report, and receaued not the
promise:
40 God prouidyng a better thyng for vs, that they without vs shoulde not be made
perfect.

Chapter 12

1 Wherfore, seyng that we are compassed with so great a cloude of witnesses, lay
away all that presseth downe, & the sinne that hangeth so fast on, let vs run
with patience vnto the battayle that is set before vs:
2 Lokyng vnto Iesus, the captayne and finissher of our fayth, which for the ioy
that was set before hym, endured the crosse, hauyng dispised the shame, and is
set downe on the ryght hande of the throne of God.
3 Consider therfore hym that endured such speakyng agaynst hym of sinners, lest
you shoulde be weryed, fayntyng in your myndes.
4 Ye haue not yet resisted vnto blood, stryuyng agaynst sinne.
5 And ye haue forgotten the exhortatio, which speaketh vnto you as vnto
chyldren: My sonne despise not thou the chastenyng of the Lorde, neither faynt
when thou art rebuked of hym:
6 For whom the Lord loueth, he chasteneth, and scourgeth euery sonne that he
receaueth.
7 If ye endure chastenyng, God offereth him selfe as vnto sonnes: For what sonne
is he whom the father chasteneth not?
8 But yf ye be without chastisment, wherof all are partakers, then are ye
bastardes, and not sonnes.
9 Furthermore, we haue had fathers of our fleshe, which corrected vs, and we
gaue them reuerence: Shall we not then much rather be in subiection vnto the
father of spirites, and lyue?
10 For they veryly, for a fewe dayes, chastened vs after their owne pleasure:
but he, for our profite, that we myght be partakers of his holynesse.
11 No chashsyng for the present seemeth to be ioyous, but greeuous:
Neuerthelesse, afterwarde it bryngeth the quiet fruite of ryghteousnesse, vnto
the which are exercised therby.
12 Strayghten vp therfore the handes which were let downe, and the weake knees:
13 And make ryght steppes vnto your feete, lest that which is haltyng, turne you
out of the way: but let it rather be healed.
14 Folowe peace with all men, and holynesse, without the which, no man shall see
the Lorde:
15 Takyng heede that no man fall away from the grace of God, lest any roote of
bitternesse spryngyng vp, trouble you, and therby many be defyled.
16 Let there be no fornicator or vncleane person, as Esau, which for one morsell
of meate, solde his birthryght.
17 For ye knowe, howe that afterwarde when he woulde haue inherited the
blessyng, he was reprobated: For he founde no place of repentaunce, though he
sought it with teares.
18 For ye are not come vnto the mount that is touched, & vnto burnyng fyre, and
vnto storme and darkenesse, and tempestes of weather,
19 And sounde of a trompe, & the voyce of wordes: which voyce they that heard
it, wisshed away, that the worde should not be spoken to them:
20 (For they dyd not abyde that which was commaunded. If a beast touche the
mountaine, it shalbe stoned, or thrust through with a darte.
21 And so terrible was the syght which appeared, that Moyses sayde, I feare and
quake.)
22 But ye are come vnto ye mount Sion, and to the citie of the lyuyng God, the
celestiall Hierusalem, and to an innumerable companie of Angels,
23 And vnto the congregation of the first borne, written in heauen, and to God
the iudge of all, and to the spirites of iust and perfect men:
24 And to Iesus the mediatour of the newe couenaunt, and to the blood of
sprinklyng, that speaketh better then that of Abel.
25 See that ye despise not hym that speaketh: For yf they escaped not, which
refused hym that spake on earth: much more shall we not escape yf we turne away
from hym that speaketh from heauen:
26 Whose voyce then shoke the earth, & nowe hath declared, saying: Yet once more
wyll I shake, not the earth only, but also heauen.
27 And this yet once more signifieth remouyng of those thynges which are shaken,
as of thynges which are made: that the thynges which are not shaken, may
remayne.
28 Wherfore, we receauyng a kingdome which can not be moued, let vs haue grace,
wherby we may so serue God acceptablie, with reuerence & godly feare.
29 For our God is a consumyng fyre.

Chapter 13

1 Let brotherly loue continue.
2 Be not forgetfull to lodge straungers: For therby some hauyng lodged Angels,
were vnawares therof.
3 Remember them that are in bondes, as bounde with them: And them which suffer
aduersitie, as also ye your selues beyng in the body suffered aduersitie.
4 Wedlocke is honorable among all men, and the bed vndefiled: But whoremongers
and adulterers God wyll iudge.
5 Let your conuersation be without couetousnesse, beyng content with such
thynges as ye haue. For he hath sayde: I wyll not fayle thee, neither forsake
thee.
6 So that we may boldely saye, the Lorde is my helper, and I wyll not feare what
man way do vnto me.
7 Remember them which haue the ouersyght of you, which haue spoken vnto you the
worde of God: Whose ende of conuersation ye consideryng, folowe their fayth.
8 Iesus Christe yesterday and to day, and the same for euer.
9 Be not caryed about with diuers & strange doctrines: For it is a good thing
that the heart be stablisshed with grace, & not with meates, which haue not
profited the that haue ben occupied therin.
10 We haue an aulter, wherof they haue no ryght to eate which serue in the
tabernacle.
11 For the bodyes of those beastes whose blood is brought into the holy place by
the hie priest for sinne, are burnt without the tentes.
12 Therfore Iesus also, that he myght sanctifie ye people with his owne blood,
suffered without the gate.
13 Let vs go foorth therfore vnto hym out of the tentes, bearyng his reproche.
14 For here haue we no continuyng citie: but we seke one to come.
15 By hym therfore, do we offer sacrifice of laude alwayes to God: that is, the
fruite of lippes confessyng his name.
16 To do good & to distribute forget not, for with such sacrifices God is
pleased.
17 Obey them that haue the ouersight of you, and submit your selues: for they
watche for your soules, as they that must geue accomptes, that they may do it
with ioy, and not with griefe: for that is vnprofitable for you.
18 Pray for vs: For we trust we haue a good conscience, in all thynges wyllyng
to lyue honestlie.
19 But I desire you the more earnestlie that ye so do, that I may be restored to
you the sooner.
20 The God of peace, that brought agayne from the dead our Lorde Iesus the great
sheephearde of the sheepe, through the blood of the euerlasting couenaunt,
21 Make you perfect in all good workes to do his wyll, workyng in you that which
is pleasaunt in his sight, through Iesus Christe, to whom be prayse for euer and
euer. Amen.
22 And I beseche you brethren, suffer the worde of exhortation: for I haue
written vnto you in fewe wordes.
23 Knowe ye, that brother Timothe is delyuered: With whom (yf he come shortly) I
wyll see you.
24 Salute all them that haue the ouersight of you, and all the saintes. They of
Italie salute you.
25 Grace be with you all. Amen. Written from Italie by Timotheus.


James

Chapter 1

1 Iames a seruaunt of God, and of the lorde Iesus Christ, to ye twelue tribes
which are scattred abroade, greetyng.
2 My brethren, count it all ioy whe ye fall into diuers temptations:
3 Knowyng (this) that the trying of your fayth worketh patience:
4 And let patience haue her perfect worke, that ye may be perfect & sounde,
lackyng nothyng.
5 If any of you lacke wisdome, let him aske of God, that geueth to all men
indifferentlie, and casteth no man in the teeth: and it shalbe geuen hym.
6 But let hym aske in fayth, nothyng waueryng: For he that wauereth, is like a
waue of the sea, tost of the wynde, and caryed with violence.
7 Neither let that man thynke that he shall receaue any thyng of the Lorde.
8 A double mynded man, is vnstable in all his wayes.
9 Let the brother of lowe degree, reioyce in that he is exalted:
10 Agayne, the riche, in that he is made lowe: Because as the flowre of the
grasse he shall passe away.
11 For the sunne hath rysen with heate, and the grasse hath withered, and his
flowre hath fallen away, & the beautie of the fashion of it hath perished: So
also shall the ryche man fade away in his wayes.
12 Blessed is the man that endureth temptation: For when he is tryed, he shall
receaue the crowne of lyfe, which the Lorde hath promised to them that loue hym.
13 Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God can not be
tempted with euyl, neither tempteth he any man:
14 But euery man is tempted, when he is drawen away, & entised of his owne
concupiscence.
15 Then, when lust hath conceaued, it bryngeth foorth sinne: and sinne when it
is finished, bryngeth foorth death.
16 Do not erre my deare brethren.
17 Euery good geuyng, and euery perfect gyft is from aboue, and cometh downe
from the father of lyghtes, with who is no variablenes, neither shadow of
turnyng.
18 Of his owne wyll begat he vs with the worde of trueth, that we shoulde be the
first fruites of his creatures.
19 Wherfore my deare brethre, let euery man be swyft to heare, slowe to speake,
slowe to wrath.
20 For the wrath of man, worketh not that which is ryghteous before God.
21 Wherfore, lay apart all filthinesse, and superfluitie of maliciousnes, and
receaue with mekenesse, the worde that is graffed in you, which is able to saue
your soules.
22 And be ye doers of the worde, and not hearers only, deceauyng your owne
selues.
23 For yf any be a hearer of the worde, and not a doer, he is lyke vnto a man
beholdyng his bodyly face in a glasse:
24 For he hath considered hym selfe, and is gone his wayes, & hath forgotten
immediatly what his fashion was.
25 But who so loketh in the perfect lawe of libertie, and continueth therin he
being not a forgetfull hearer, but a doer of the worke, shalbe blessed in his
deede.
26 If any man among you seeme to be deuout, and refrayneth not his tongue, but
deceaueth his owne heart, this mans deuotion is vayne.
27 Pure deuotion and vndefyled before God and the father, is this: To visite the
fatherlesse and widdowes in their aduersitie, and to kepe hymselfe vnspotted of
the worlde.

Chapter 2

1 My brethren, haue not the fayth of our Lorde Iesus Christe, the Lord of
glorie, with respect of persons.
2 For yf there come into your companie a man wearing a golde ryng, clothed in
goodly apparell, and there come in also a poore man in vile rayment:
3 And ye haue a respect to hym that weareth the gay clothyng, and say vnto hym,
sitte thou here in a good place: & say vnto the poore, stande thou there, or
sitte here vnder my footestoole:
4 Are ye not partiall in your selues, and are made iudges of euyll thoughtes?
5 Hearken my deare beloued brethren. Hath not God chosen the poore of this
worlde, such as are riche in fayth, and heyres of the kyngdome, which he
promised to them that loue hym?
6 But ye haue despised the poore. Do not riche men oppresse you by tirannie, and
drawe you before the iudgementes seates?
7 Do not they blaspheme that good name by the which you are named?
8 If ye fulfyll the royal lawe, according to the scripture, thou shalt loue thy
neighbour as thy selfe, ye do well:
9 But yf ye regarde one person more then another, ye commit sinne, and are
rebuked of the lawe, as transgressours.
10 Whosoeuer shal kepe the whole lawe, and yet fayle in one poynt, he is gyltie
of all.
11 For he that sayde, thou shalt not commit adulterie: sayde also, thou shalt
not kyll. Though thou do none adulterie, yet yf thou kyll, thou art become a
transgressour of the lawe.
12 So speake ye, and so do, as they that shalbe iudged by the lawe of libertie.
13 For he shall haue iudgement without mercie, that sheweth no mercie: And
mercie reioyceth agaynst iudgement.
14 What profiteth it my brethren, though a man say he hath fayth, and hath not
deedes? Can fayth saue hym?
15 If a brother or a sister be naked, and destitute of dayly foode,
16 And one of you say vnto them, depart in peace, be you warmed and fylled:
notwithstandyng, ye geue them not those thinges which are nedefull to, the body,
what shall it profite?
17 Euen so, fayth, yf it haue not deedes, is dead in it selfe:
18 But some man wyll say, thou hast fayth and I haue deedes: shewe me thy fayth
by thy deedes, and I wyll shewe thee my faith by my deedes.
19 Beleuest thou that there is one God? Thou doest well. The deuyls also beleue,
and tremble.
20 But wylt thou knowe, O thou vayne man, that that fayth which is without
workes, is dead?
21 Was not Abraham our father iustified through workes, when he had offered
Isaac his sonne vpon the aulter?
22 Seest thou not, howe ye faith wrought with his deedes, and through ye deedes
was the fayth made perfect?
23 And the scripture was fulfylled, which sayth: Abraham beleued God, and it was
reputed vnto hym for ryghteousnesse: And he was called the friende of God.
24 Ye see then, howe that of deedes a man is iustified, and not of fayth only.
25 Lykewyse also, was not Rahab the harlot iustified through workes, when she
had receaued the messengers, and had sent them out another way?
26 For as the body without the spirite is dead: euen so, fayth without workes,
is dead also

Chapter 3

1 My brethren, be not manie maisters, knowyng howe that we shall receaue the
greater damnation:
2 For in many thynges we sinne all. If a man sinne not in word, the same is a
perfect man, and able also to bridle all the body.
3 Beholde, we put bittes in the horses mouthes, that they may obey vs, and we
turne about all the body of them:
4 Beholde also ye shippes, which though they be so great, and are dryuen of
fierce windes, yet are they turned about with a very small helme, whither soeuer
the violence of the gouernour wyll.
5 Euen so the tongue is a litle member also, & boasteth great thynges. Beholde
how great a matter a litle fire kindleth.
6 And the tongue is fyre, euen a worlde of wickednesse. So is the tongue set
among our members, that it defileth the whole body, and setteth on fyre the
course of nature, & it is set on fyre of hell.
7 All the natures of beastes, & of byrdes, and of serpentes, and thynges of the
sea, are meeked and tamed of the nature of man:
8 But the tongue can no man tame, it is an vnruly euyll, full of deadly poyson.
9 Therwith blesse we God the father: and therwith curse we men, which are made
after the similitude of God.
10 Out of one mouth proceadeth blessing and cursing. My brethren, these thynges
ought not so to be.
11 Doth a fountayne sende foorth at one place, sweete water, and bitter also?
12 Can the fygge tree, my brethren, beare oliue beries? either a vine beare
figges? So can no fountayne geue both salt water and freshe also.
13 Who is a wise man, and endued with knoweledge among you? let him shewe his
workes out of good conuersation with mekenesse of wisdome.
14 But yf ye haue bitter enuiyng & strife in your hearte, glorie not, neither be
lyers agaynst the trueth.
15 For such wisdome descendeth not fro aboue: but is earthlie, sensuall, and
deuelishe.
16 For where enuiyng and strife is, there is sedition & all maner of euyll
workes.
17 But the wisdome that is from aboue, is first pure, then peaseable, gentle,
and easie to be entreated, full of mercie and good fruites, without iudgyng,
without simulation:
18 Yea, and the fruite of ryghteousnes is sowen in peace, of the that make
peace.

Chapter 4

1 From whence cometh warre and fightyng among you? come they not here hence,
euen of your lustes that fight in your members?
2 Ye lust, and haue not: Ye enuie, and haue indignation, and can not obtayne: Ye
fyght and warre, ye haue not, because ye aske not.
3 Ye aske and receaue not, because ye aske amisse, euen to consume it vpon your
lustes.
4 Ye adulterers & adultresses, knowe you not howe that the frendship of the
world is enmitie with God? Whosoeuer therfore wylbe a friende of the worlde, is
made the enemie of God.
5 Either do ye thynke that the scripture sayth in vayne, the spirite that
dwelleth in vs, lusteth after enuie?
6 But the scripture offereth more grace, and therefore sayth, God resisteth the
proude, but geueth grace vnto ye lowlie.
7 Submit your selues therfore to God: but resist the deuyll, and he wyll flee
from you.
8 Drawe nye to God, and he wyll drawe nye to you. Clense your handes ye sinners,
and purifie your heartes ye double mynded.
9 Suffer afflictions, and mourne, and weepe: Let your laughter be turned to
mournyng, and your ioy to heauinesse.
10 Humble your selues in the sight of the Lorde, and he shall lyft you vp.
11 Backbite not one another brethren. He that backbiteth his brother, and he
that iudgeth his brother, backbiteth ye lawe, and iudgeth the lawe: But and yf
thou iudge the lawe, thou art not an obseruer of the lawe, but a iudge.
12 There is one lawe geuer, which is able to saue and to destroy. What art thou
that iudgest another?
13 Go to nowe ye that say, to day and to morowe let vs go into such a citie, and
continue there a yere, and bye and sell, and wynne:
14 And yet can not ye tel what shall happen on the morowe. For what thyng is
your lyfe? It is euen a vapour, that appeareth for a litle tyme, and then he
vanisheth away.
15 For that ye ought to say: If the Lorde wyll, and yf we lyue, let vs do this
or that.
16 But now ye reioyce in your boastinges: All such reioycyng is euyll.
17 Therfore to hym that knoweth howe to do good, and doth it not, to hym it is
sinne.

Chapter 5

1 Go to nowe ye riche men, weepe and howle on your wretchednesse that shall come
vpon you.
2 Your riches is corrupt, your garmentes are motheaten:
3 Your golde and siluer is cankred, and the rust of them shalbe a witnesse
agaynst you, and shall eate your fleshe as it were fyre. Ye haue heaped treasure
together in your last dayes.
4 Beholde, the hire of labourers, which haue reaped downe your fieldes, which
hire is of you kept backe by fraude, cryeth: and the cryes of them which haue
reaped, are entred into the eares of the Lorde Sabaoth.
5 Ye haue liued in pleasure on the earth, and ben wanton: Ye haue nourisshed
your heartes, as in a day of slaughter.
6 Ye haue condempned and kylled the iust, and he hath not resisted you.
7 Be patient therfore brethren, vnto the commyng of the Lorde. Beholde, the
husbandman wayteth for the precious fruite of the earth, and hath long patience
thervpon, vntill he receaue the early and the later rayne.
8 Be ye also patient therfore, and settle your heartes, for the commyng of the
Lorde draweth nye.
9 Grudge not one agaynst another brethren, lest ye be dampned: Beholde, the
iudge standeth before the doore.
10 Take my brethren, the prophetes for an ensample of suffering aduersitie, and
of patience, which spake in the name of the Lorde.
11 Beholde, we count the happy which endure. Ye haue hearde of the patience of
Iob, and haue knowen what ende the Lorde made: For the Lorde is very pitifull
and mercifull.
12 But aboue all thynges my brethren, sweare not, neither by heauen, neither by
earth, neither any other othe: Let your yea, be yea, and your nay nay, lest you
fall into condempnation.
13 Is any among you afflicted? let hym pray. Is any mery? let him sing psalmes.
14 Is any diseased among you? let hym call for the elders of the Churche, and
let them pray for him, and annoynt him with oyle in the name of the Lorde:
15 And the prayer of fayth shall saue the sicke, and the Lorde shall raise him
vp: and yf he haue committed sinnes, they shalbe forgeuen hym.
16 Knowledge your faultes one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may
be healed: For ye feruent prayer of a ryghteous man auayleth much.
17 Elias was a man vnder infirmities euen as we are, and he prayed in his prayer
that it myght not rayne: and it rayned not on the earth by the space of three
yeres and sixe monethes.
18 And he prayed againe, and the heauen gaue rayne, & the earth brought foorth
her fruite.
19 Brethren, yf any of you do erre from the trueth, and another conuert hym,
20 Let the same knowe, that he which conuerteth the sinner from going astray out
of his way, shall saue a soule from death, and shall hyde the multitude of
sinnes.


1 Peter

Chapter 1

1 Peter, an Apostle of Iesus Christ, to them that dwell here and there as
straungers, throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia:
2 Elect accordyng to the foreknoweledge of God the father, vnto the sanctifiyng
of the spirite, through obedience & sprinklyng of ye blood of Iesus Christ:
Grace & peace be multiplied vnto you.
3 Blessed be God the father of our Lorde Iesus Christe, which accordyng to his
aboundaunt mercie begat vs agayne vnto a lyuely hope, by that that Iesus Christe
rose agayne from death,
4 To an inheritaunce immortall, and vndefiled, and that fadeth not away,
reserued in heauen for you,
5 Which are kept by the power of God through fayth vnto saluation, which is
prepared alredie to be shewed in the last tyme.
6 In the which ye reioyce, though nowe for a season (yf nede require) ye are in
heauinesse through manifolde temptations:
7 That the triall of your fayth, beyng much more precious then golde that
perisheth, though it be tried with fyre, myght be founde vnto laude, glorie, and
honour, at the appearyng of Iesus Christe,
8 Whom ye haue not seene, and yet loue hym, in whom euen nowe though ye see hym
not, yet do you beleue, & reioyce with ioy vnspeakeable and glorious:
9 Receauyng the ende of your fayth, euen the saluation of your soules.
10 Of which saluation haue ye prophetes enquired & searched, which prophesied of
the grace that should come vnto you:
11 Searchyng when or at what tyme the spirite of Christ which was in them,
shoulde signifie, which spirite testified before, the passions that should
happen vnto Christe, and the glorie that shoulde folowe after.
12 Unto which prophetes it was also declared, that not vnto them selues, but
vnto vs, they shoulde minister ye thinges which are nowe shewed vnto you of
them, which by the holy ghost sent downe from heauen, haue in the Gospell
preached vnto you, the thynges which the Angels desire to beholde.
13 Wherfore girde vp the loynes of your mynde, be sober, and trust perfectly on
the grace that is brought vnto you, by the reuelation of Iesus Christe:
14 As obedient chyldren, not fashionyng your selues vnto the former lustes of
your ignoraunce:
15 But as he which called you is holy, euen so be ye holy also in all maner of
conuersation:
16 Because it is written, be ye holy, for I am holy.
17 And yf so be that ye call on the father, which without respect of person
iudgeeth accordyng to euery mans worke, see that ye passe the tyme of your
dwellyng here, in feare:
18 Forasmuch as ye knowe, howe that ye were not redeemed with corruptible
thynges, as siluer and golde, from your vayne conuersation which ye receaued by
the tradition of the fathers:
19 But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lambe vndefiled, & without
spot:
20 Which was ordeyned beforehande, euen before the worlde was made, but was
declared in the last tymes for your sakes:
21 Which by his meanes do beleue on God that raysed hym vp from death, and
glorified hym, that ye might haue fayth and hope towarde God:
22 Euen ye which haue purified your soules through the spirite in obeying the
trueth, with brotherly loue vnfayned, see that ye loue one another with a pure
heart feruentlye:
23 For ye are borne a newe, not of mortal seede: but of immortal, by the worde
of God, which lyueth and lasteth for euer.
24 For all fleshe is as grasse, and all the glorie of man, is as the flowre of
grasse. The grasse withereth, and the flowre falleth away:
25 But the worde of the Lorde endureth euer. And this is the worde, which by the
Gospell was preached vnto you.

Chapter 2

1 Wherefore lay asyde all maliciousnesse, and all guile, and faynednesse, and
enuie, and all backbityng,
2 And as newe borne babes, desire ye ye milke of the worde, which is without
deceipt: that ye may growe therby vnto saluatio
3 If so be that ye haue tasted howe gratious the Lorde is:
4 To whom ye come, as vnto a lyuyng stone, disalowed of men, but chosen of God
and precious:
5 And ye as lyuely stones, be you made a spirituall house, an holy priesthood,
for to offer vp spirituall sacrifices, acceptable to God by Iesus Christe.
6 Wherefore it is conteyned also in the scripture: beholde, I put in Sion a
stone to be laide in the chiefe corner, elect and precious, and he that beleueth
on hym, shall not be confounded.
7 Unto you therfore which beleue, he is precious: but vnto them whiche beleue
not, the stone which the buylders refused, the same is made the head of the
corner:
8 And a stone that men stumble at, and a rocke wherat they be offended, whiche
stumble at the worde, and beyng disobedient, vnto the whiche thing they were
euen ordeyned.
9 But ye are a chosen generation, a royall priesthood, an holy nation, a
peculier people: that ye should shewe foorth the vertues of hym that called you
out of darknesse into his marueylous lyght.
10 Which in time past were not a people, but are nowe the people of God: which
sometime had not obteyned mercy, but nowe haue obteyned mercy.
11 Dearely beloued, I beseche you as straugers and pilgrimes, abstaine from
fleshly lustes, whiche fight agaynst the soule:
12 And see that ye haue honest conuersation among the gentiles: that where as
they backbite you as euyll doers, they may by your good workes whiche they shall
see, prayse God in the day of visitation.
13 Submit your selues therfore vnto al maner ordinaunce of ma for the Lordes
sake: whether it be vnto the king, as hauyng the preeminence:
14 Other vnto rulers, as vnto them that are sent of hym for the punyshment of
euyll doers, but for the laude of them that do well.
15 For so is the wyll of God, that with well doyng, ye may stoppe the mouthes of
foolishe and ignoraunt men:
16 As free, and not as hauyng the libertie for a cloke of maliciousnes, but euen
as the seruauntes of God.
17 Honour all men. Loue brotherly felowship. Feare God. Honour the kyng.
18 Seruauntes, obey your maisters with all feare, not only yf they be good &
curteous, but also though they be frowarde.
19 For it is thanke worthy, yf a man for coscience toward god, endure griefe,
and suffer wrong vndeserued.
20 For what prayse is it, yf when ye be buffeted for your faultes, ye take it
paciently? But yf when ye do well ye suffer wrong, & take it paciently, then is
there thanke with God.
21 For herevnto veryly were ye called, for Christe also suffered for vs, leauyng
vs an ensample, that ye should folowe his steppes.
22 Which did no sinne, neyther was there guyle founde in his mouth.
23 Whiche when he was reuiled, reuiled not agayne: when he suffred, he threatned
not, but committed the vengeaunce to him that iudgeth righteously.
24 Which his owne selfe bare our sinnes in his body on the tree, that we beyng
deliuered from sinne, shoulde liue vnto ryghteousnes: By whose strypes ye were
healed.
25 For ye were as sheepe goyng astray: but are nowe turned vnto the sheephearde
and Byshop of your soules.

Chapter 3

1 Likewise ye wyues, be in subiectio to your husbandes, that euen they whiche
obey not the word, may without the word, be wonne by the couersation of ye
wiues,
2 Whyle they beholde your chaste conuersation coupled with feare.
3 Whose apparel shal not be outward with brayded heere, & hanging on of gold,
eyther in putting on of gorgeous apparel.
4 But let the hid man whiche is in the heart, be without all corruption, so that
the spirite be at rest and quiet, whiche spirite is before god a thing much set
by.
5 For after this maner in the olde tyme dyd the holy women, whiche trusted in
God, tyre them selues, and were obedient vnto theyr husbandes.
6 Euen as Sara obeyed Abraham, and called hym Lorde, whose daughters ye are as
long as ye do well, and are not afrayde for any terrour.
7 Lykewyse ye husbandes dwell with them accordyng to knowledge, geuyng honour
vnto the wyfe, as vnto the weaker vessell, and as vnto them that are heires also
of the grace of lyfe, that your prayers be not hyndered.
8 In conclusion, be ye all of one minde, of one heart, loue as brethren, be
pitiful, be curteous,
9 Not rendryng euyl for euyll, or rebuke for rebuke: but contrarywyse blesse,
knowyng that ye are therevnto called, euen that ye shoulde be heyres of the
blessyng.
10 For he that doeth long after lyfe, and loueth to see good dayes, let hym
refrayne his tongue from euyll, and his lippes, that they speake no guyle.
11 Let hym eschewe euyll and do good, let hym seke peace and ensue it.
12 For the eyes of the Lorde are ouer the ryghteous, and his eares are open vnto
their prayers: Againe, the face of the Lorde is ouer them that do euyll.
13 Moreouer, who is it that wyll harme you, yf ye folowe that which is good?
14 Yea, happy are ye if any trouble happen vnto you for ryghteousnes sake: Be
not ye afrayde for any terrour of them, neither be ye troubled:
15 But sanctifie the Lorde God in your heartes. Be redy alwayes to geue an
aunswere to euery man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you,
16 And that with mekenesse and feare, hauyng a good conscience: that where as
they backebite you as euyll doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your
good conuersation in Christe.
17 For it is better, yf the wyll of God be so, that ye suffer for wel doyng,
then for euyll doyng.
18 Forasmuch as Christe hath once suffered for sinnes, the iust for the vniust
to bryng vs to God, and was kylled as parteynyng to the fleshe, but was
quickened in the spirite.
19 In which spirite, he also went & preached vnto the spirites that were in
pryson,
20 Which sometime had ben disobedient, when once the long sufferyng of God abode
in ye dayes of Noe, whyle the Arke was a preparyng, wherein fewe, that is to say
eyght soules, were saued in the water:
21 To the which also the figure agreeth that nowe saueth vs, euen baptisme, not
the puttyng away of the fylth of the fleshe, but in that a good conscience
maketh request to God, by the resurrection of Iesus Christe:
22 Which is on the ryght hande of God, and is gone into heauen, angels, powers,
and myght subdued vnto hym.

Chapter 4

1 For as muche then as Christ hath suffered for vs in the fleshe, arme ye your
selues lykewise with the same mynde: for he which suffereth in the fleshe,
ceasseth from sinne:
2 That he hence forwarde shoulde lyue, as much tyme as remayneth in ye fleshe,
not after the lustes of men, but after the wyll of God.
3 For it is sufficient for vs that we haue spent the tyme that is paste of the
lyfe, after the wyll of the gentiles, walkyng in wantonnesse, lustes, in excesse
of wynes, in excesse of eatyng, in excesse of drynkyng, and abominable
idolatrie.
4 And it seemeth to them an inconuenient thyng, that ye runne not also with them
vnto the same excesse of riote, and therefore speake they euyll of you:
5 Whiche shall geue accomptes to hym that is redy to iudge quicke and dead.
6 For vnto this purpose veryly was the Gospel peached also vnto ye dead, that
they shoulde be iudged lyke other men in the fleshe, but should lyue before God
in the spirite.
7 The ende of all thynges is at hande. Be ye therefore sober, and watche vnto
prayer.
8 But aboue all thynges, haue feruent loue among your selues: For loue shall
couer the multitude of sinnes.
9 Be ye harberous one to another, without grudgyng.
10 As euery man hath receaued the gyft, eue so minister the same one to another,
as good ministers of the manifold grace of God.
11 If any man speake, let hym talke as the wordes of God. If any man minister,
let him do it as of the abilitie which God ministreth vnto hym, that God in all
thinges may be glorified through Iesus Christe, to whom be prayse and dominion
for euer and euer. Amen.
12 Dearely beloued, thinke it not straunge concerning the fierie triall, which
thing is to trye you, as though some straunge thyng happened vnto you.
13 But reioyce, in as much as ye are partakers of Christes passions: that when
his glory appeareth, ye maye be mery and glad.
14 Yf ye be rayled vpon for the name of Christe, happy are ye. For the spirite
of glory and of God, resteth vpon you: On their part he is euyll spoken of, but
on your part he is glorified.
15 See that none of you be punished as a murtherer, or as a thiefe, or an euyll
doer, or as a busie body in other mens matters.
16 Yf any man suffer as a Christian man, let hym not be ashamed, but let him
glorifie God on this behalfe.
17 For the tyme is come that iudgement must begin at the house of God. Yf it
first begin at vs, what shall the ende be of them whiche beleue not the Gospell
of God?
18 And if the ryghteous scacely be saued, where shall the vngodly and the sinner
appeare?
19 Wherefore, let them that are troubled accordyng to the wyll of God, commit
their soules to him with well doyng, as vnto a faythfull creatour.

Chapter 5

1 The elders which are among you, I exhort, whiche am also an elder, & a
wytnesse of the afflictions of Christe, and also a partaker of the glory that
shalbe opened:
2 Feede you God his flocke, whiche is committed vnto you, takyng the ouersight
of them not as compelled therto, but wyllyngly, not for the desyre of fylthy
lucre, but of a good mynde:
3 Not as though ye were Lordes ouer God his heritage: but that ye be an ensample
to the flocke.
4 And when the chiefe shephearde shall appeare, ye shall receaue an
incorruptible crowne of glory.
5 Likewise ye younger, submit your selues vnto the elder: Submit your selues
euery man one to another, decke your selues inwardly in lowlynes of mynde: For
God resisteth the proude, and geueth grace to the humble.
6 Submit your selues therfore vnder the mightie hande of God, that he may exalt
you when the tyme is come.
7 Cast all your care vpon hym, for he careth for you.
8 Be sober, & watche, for your aduersarie the deuyll, as a roaryng Lion walketh
about seking who he may deuour:
9 Whom resist stedfast in the fayth, knowyng that the same afflictions are
accomplished in your brethren that are in the worlde.
10 But the God of all grace whiche hath called vs vnto his eternall glory by
Christe Iesus, shal his owne selfe, after that ye haue suffred a litle
affliction, make you perfite, setle, strength, and stablyshe you.
11 To hym be glory and dominion, for euer and euer. Amen.
12 By Syluanus a faythfull brother, vnto you, as I suppose, haue I wrytten
briefly, exhortyng and testifiyng, howe that this is the true grace of God,
wherin ye stande.
13 The Churche that is at Babylon elected together with you, saluteth you, and
so doeth Marcus my sonne.
14 Greete ye one another with the kysse of loue. Peace be with you all which are
in Christe Iesus. Amen.


2 Peter

Chapter 1

1 Simon Peter, a seruaunt and an Apostle of Iesus Christe, to them which haue
obteined lyke precious faith with vs, thorowe the ryghteousnes of our god and
sauiour Iesus Christe:
2 Grace and peace be multiplied vnto you, through the knowledge of God, and of
Iesus our Lorde:
3 Accordyng as his godly power hath geuen vnto vs all thynges that parteine vnto
lyfe and godlynesse, through the knowledge of hym that hath called vs vnto
glorie and vertue:
4 By the which are geuen vnto vs excellent and most great promises, that by the
meanes thereof, ye might be partakers of the godly nature, yf ye flee the
corruption of worldly lust.
5 And herevnto geue all diligence: in your fayth minister vertue, in vertue
knowledge,
6 In knowledge temperaunce, in temperaunce pacience, in pacience godlynesse,
7 In godlynesse brotherly kyndnesse, in brotherly kyndnesse loue.
8 For yf these thynges be among you, and be plenteous, they wyll make you that
ye neither shalbe idle nor vnfruitefull in the knowledge of our Lorde Iesus
Christe.
9 But he that lacketh these thynges, is blynde, and can not see farre of, & hath
forgotten that he was purged from his olde sinnes.
10 Wherfore brethren, geue the more diligence for to make your callyng and
election sure: For yf ye do such thynges, ye shall neuer fall.
11 Yea, and by this meanes an entryng in shalbe ministred vnto you aboudantlye,
into the euerlastyng kyngdome of our Lorde and sauiour Iesus Christe.
12 Wherfore I wyll not be negligent to put you alwayes in remembraunce of suche
thynges, though ye knowe them your selues, and be stablysshed in the present
trueth.
13 Notwithstandyng I thynke it meete, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to
stirre you vp by puttyng you in remembraunce:
14 Forasmuch as I am sure that shortly I must put of this my tabernacle, euen as
our Lorde Iesus Christe shewed me.
15 I wyll euer also geue my diligence yt ye may haue wherwith to stirre vp the
remembraunce of these thynges after my departyng.
16 For we haue not folowed deceitfull fables, when we opened vnto you the power
and commyng of our Lorde Iesus Christe, but with our eyes we sawe his maiestie:
17 Euen then veryly when he receaued of God the father honour and glorie, & when
there came suche a voyce to hym from the excellent glorie: This is my deare
beloued sonne in whom I delyte.
18 This voyce we heard come from heauen, when we were with him in the holye
mount.
19 We haue also a ryght sure worde of prophesie, wherevnto yf ye take heede, as
vnto a lyght that shyneth in a darke place, ye do well, vntyll the day dawne,
and the day starre arise in your heartes.
20 So that ye first knowe this, that no prophesie in the scripture is of any
priuate motion.
21 For the prophesie came not in olde time by the wyll of man: but holy men of
God, spake as they were moued by the holy ghost.

Chapter 2

1 There were false prophetes also among the people, eue as there shalbe false
teachers among you, whiche pryuyly shal bryng in damnable heresies, euen denying
the Lorde that hath bought them, and bryng vpo them selues swyft damnation.
2 And many shall folowe their damnable wayes, by whom the way of trueth shalbe
euyll spoken of:
3 And through couetousnesse, shall they with fayned wordes make marchaudize of
you, whose iudgement is nowe not farre of, and their damnation sleepeth not.
4 For if God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them downe into hell,
and delyuered them into chaynes of darknesse, to be kept vnto iudgement:
5 Neither spared the olde worlde, but saued Noe the eyght person a preacher of
ryghteousnesse, and brought in the flood vpon the worlde of the vngodly,
6 And turned their cities of Sodome & Gomorrhe into asshes, ouerthrewe the,
dampned them, and made of them an ensample vnto those that after shoulde lyue
vngodly:
7 And iust Lot, vexed with ye vncleane conuersatio of the wicked, deliuered he.
8 For he beyng ryghteous, & dwellyng among them, in seyng and hearyng, vexed his
ryghteous soule from daye to daye with their vnlawfull deedes.
9 The Lorde knoweth howe to delyuer the godly out of temptation, and to reserue
the vniust vnto the day of iudgement for to be punished:
10 But chiefely them that walke after the fleshe in the lust of vncleanenesse,
and despise auctoritie. Presumptious are they, and stande in their owne
conceyte, whiche feare not to speake euyl of them that excell in worship.
11 When the Angels whiche are greater both in power and might, geue not raylyng
iudgement against them before the Lorde.
12 But these, as bruite beastes ledde with sensualitie, and made to be taken and
destroyed, speake euyll of the thynges that they vnderstande not, and shall
perishe through their owne corruption,
13 And receaue the rewarde of vnryghteousnesse, they count it pleasure to lyue
deliciouslye for a season: Spottes they are and blottes, delighting them selues
in their deceauynges, in feastyng with you.
14 Hauyng eyes full of adulterie, & that can not ceasse from sinne, begylyng
vnstable soules: Heartes they haue exercised with robberie, they are cursed
chyldren,
15 Which haue forsaken the ryght waye, and are gone astray, folowyng the way of
Balaam the sonne of Bosor, which loued the rewarde of vnrighteousnesse:
16 But was rebuked of his iniquitie. The dumbe beast, and vsed to the yoke,
speaking with mans voyce, forbad the madnesse of the prophete.
17 These are welles without water, cloudes that are caryed with a tempest, to
whom the mist of darknesse is reserued for euer.
18 For when they haue spoken the great swellyng wordes of vanitie, they entice
through lustes in the voluptuousnesse of the fleshe, them that were cleane
escaped, from them whiche are wrapped in errour,
19 Whyle they promise them libertie, where as they them selues are ye bonde
seruauntes of corruption. For of whom a man is ouercome, vnto the same is he
brought in bondage.
20 For yf they, after they haue escaped from the fylthynesse of the worlde,
thorowe the knowledge of the Lord, & the sauiour Iesus Christe, are yet tangled
agayne therein, and ouercome, then is the later end worse with them then the
begynnyng.
21 For it had ben better for them not to haue knowen the way of righteousnes,
then after they haue knowen it, to turne from the holy commaundement that was
geuen vnto them.
22 But the same is happened vnto them that is vsed to be spoken by the true
prouerbe: The dogge is tourned to his owne vomite againe, and the sowe that was
wasshed, is turned againe to her wallowyng in the myre.

Chapter 3

1 This is the seconde epistle that I now wryte vnto you, dearely beloued,
wherwith I stirre vp & warne your pure myndes,
2 By puttyng you in remembraunce, that ye may be myndfull of the wordes which
were tolde before of the holy prophetes, and also the commaundement of vs,
whiche be Apostles of the Lorde and sauiour.
3 This first vnderstande, that there shall come in the laste dayes mockers,
whiche wyll walke after their owne lustes,
4 And say: Where is the promise of his commyng? For sence the fathers dyed, all
thynges continue a lyke from the begynnyng of the creation.
5 For this they knowe not (and that wylfully) howe that the heauens were of
olde, and the earth that was of the water, and by the water, by the worde of
God:
6 By the which thinges the world that then was, perisshed, beyng then ouerrunne
with water.
7 But the heauens and earth whiche are nowe, be kept by his worde in store, and
reserued vnto fire, agaynst the day of iudgement and perdition of vngodly men.
8 Dearely beloued, be not ignoraunt of this one thyng, howe that one day is with
the Lorde as a thousande yere, & a thousande yere as one day.
9 The Lorde that hath promised, is not slacke, as some men count slacknesse, but
is pacient to vswarde forasmuch as he woulde haue no man lost, but wyll receaue
all men to repentaunce.
10 Neuerthelesse the day of the Lorde wyll come as a theefe in the nyght, in the
which the heauens shal passe away with a noyse, and the elementes shall melt
with heate, the earth also and the workes that are therein shall burne.
11 Seyng then that all these thynges shall perisshe, what maner persons ought ye
to be in holy conuersation and godlynesse:
12 Lokyng for, and hastyng vnto the comyng of the day of God, by whom the
heauens shall perishe with fire, and the elementes shall melt with heate?
13 Neuerthelesse, we accordyng to his promise, loke for a newe heauen, and a
newe earth, wherein dwelleth ryghteousnesse.
14 Wherfore dearely beloued, seyng that ye loke for such thynges, be diligent
that ye may be founde of hym in peace, without spot, and vndefyled:
15 And suppose that the long suffering of the Lord is saluatio, euen as our
dearely beloued brother Paul also, accordyng to the wisedome geuen vnto hym,
hath written vnto you:
16 Yea almost in euery epistle, speakyng of such thinges: among which, are manye
thynges harde to be vnderstande, which they that are vnlearned and vnstable,
peruert, as they do also the other scriptures, vnto their owne destruction.
17 Ye therfore beloued, seyng ye be warned afore hande, beware lest ye with
other men be also plucked away through the errour of the wicked, and fall from
your owne stedfastnesse:
18 But growe in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lorde and sauiour Iesus
Christe, to whom be glorie both nowe and for euer. Amen.


1 John

Chapter 1

1 That whiche was fro the beginning, whiche we haue heard, which we haue seene
with our eyes, whiche we haue loked vpo, & our handes haue handeled of, the
worde of lyfe:
2 (And the lyfe appeared, and we haue seene, and beare witnesse, and shewe vnto
you that eternall lyfe which was with the father, and appeared vnto vs.)
3 That which we haue seene and heard declare we vnto you, that ye also maye haue
felowship with vs, and that our felowship may be with the father, and his sonne
Iesus Christe.
4 And this write we vnto you, that your ioy may be full,
5 And this is the tydynges whiche we haue hearde of hym & declare vnto you, that
God is lyght, & in hym is no darkenesse at all.
6 If we saye that we haue felowship with hym, and walke in darkenesse, we lye,
and do not the trueth.
7 But and yf we walke in light, euen as he is in lyght, then haue we felowship
one with another, and the blood of Iesus Christ his sonne clenseth vs from all
sinne.
8 If we say that we haue no sinne, we deceaue our selues, and the trueth is not
in vs.
9 If we knowledge our sinnes, he is faythfull & iust to forgeue vs our sinnes,
and to clense vs from all vnryghteousnesse.
10 If we say we haue not sinned, we make hym a lyer, and his worde is not in vs.

Chapter 2

1 My litle chyldren, these thynges write I vnto you, that ye sinne not. And yf
any man sinne, we haue an aduocate with the father, Iesus Christe the ryghteous.
2 And he is ye attonement for our sinnes: not for our sinnes only, but also for
the sinnes of all the worlde.
3 And hereby we are sure that we knowe hym, yf we kepe his comaundementes.
4 He that sayth I knowe hym, and kepeth not his commaundementes, is a lyer, and
the veritie is not in hym:
5 But who so kepeth his worde, in him is the loue of God perfect in deede.
Hereby knowe we that we are in hym.
6 He that sayth he bydeth in him, ought to walke euen as he walked.
7 Brethren, I write no newe comaundement vnto you, but that olde comaundement
which ye haue had from the begynnyng. The olde commaundement is the worde which
ye haue hearde fro the begynnyng.
8 Agayne, a newe commaundement I write vnto you, that is true in hym, and the
same is true also in you: For the darkenesse is past, and the true lyght nowe
shyneth.
9 He that sayth howe that he is in the lyght, and yet hateth his brother, is in
darkenesse, euen vntyll this tyme.
10 He that loueth his brother, abydeth in the lyght, and there is none occasion
of euyll in hym.
11 He that hateth his brother, is in darknesse, and walketh in darkenesse, & can
not tell whyther he goeth, because that darkenesse hath blynded his eyes.
12 Babes I write vnto you, because your sinnes are forgeuen you for his names
sake.
13 I write vnto you fathers, because ye haue knowen hym that is from the
begynnyng. I write vnto you young men, because you haue ouercome the wicked.
14 I write to you little chyldren, because ye haue knowe the father. I haue
written to you fathers, because ye haue knowen hym that is from the begynnyng. I
haue written vnto you young men, because, ye are stronge, and the worde of God
abydeth in you, and ye haue ouercome the wicked.
15 See that ye loue not the worlde, neither the thynges that are in the worlde.
If any man loue the worlde, the loue of the father is not in hym.
16 For all that is in the worlde, as the lust of the fleshe, and the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the father, but of the worlde.
17 And the worlde passeth away, and the luste thereof: but he that fulfylleth
the wyll of God, abydeth for euer.
18 Litle chyldren, it is the last time, and as ye haue hearde howe that
antichrist shall come, euen nowe are there many antichristes, whereby we knowe
that it is the last tyme.
19 They went out from vs, but they were not of vs: For yf they had ben of vs,
they woulde no doubt haue continued with vs: But that it myght appeare that they
were not of vs.
20 Neuerthelesse, ye haue an oyntment of hym that is holy, and ye knowe all
thynges.
21 I haue not written vnto you, as though ye knewe not the trueth: but because
ye knowe it, and that no lye is of the trueth.
22 Who is a lyer, but he that denieth that Iesus is Christe? The same is
antichrist that denyeth the father and the sonne.
23 Whosoeuer denyeth the sonne, the same hath not the father But he that
knowledgeth the sonne, hath the father also.
24 Let therfore abyde in you, that same whiche ye hearde from the begynnyng. If
that whiche ye hearde from the begynnyng shall remayne in you, ye also shall
continue in the sonne, and in the father.
25 And this is the promise that he hath promised vs, euen eternall lyfe.
26 These thynges haue I written vnto you, concerning them that deceaue you:
27 And the annoyntyng whiche ye haue receaued of hym dwelleth in you: And ye
nede not that any man teach you, but as the same annoynting teacheth you of all
thynges, and it is true, and not lying: and as it taught you, ye shall abyde in
it.
28 And nowe babes abide in him, that when he shal appeare, we may be bolde and
not be made ashamed of hym at his commyng.
29 If ye knowe that he is ryghteous, knowe also that euery one whiche doth
righteousnes, is borne of hym.

Chapter 3

1 Beholde what loue the father hath shewed on vs, that we shoulde be called the
sonnes of god: For this cause the worlde knoweth you not, because it knoweth not
hym.
2 Dearely beloued, nowe are we the sonnes of God, and yet it doth not appeare
what we shalbe: But we knowe that when he shall appeare, we shalbe lyke hym, for
we shall see hym as he is.
3 And euery man that hath this hope in hym, purgeth hym selfe, euen as he also
is pure.
4 Whosoeuer committeth sinne, transgresseth also the lawe: for sinne is the
transgression of the lawe.
5 And ye know that he appeared to take away our sinnes, & in hym is no sinne.
6 As many as byde in hym, sinne not: whosoeuer sinneth, hath not seene him,
neither knowen hym.
7 Babes, let no man deceaue you: He that doeth righteousnes, is ryghteous, euen
as he is righteous.
8 He that committeth sinne, is of the deuyll: for the deuyll sinneth sence the
beginning. For this purpose appeared the sonne of God, to loose the workes of
the deuyll.
9 Whosoeuer is borne of God, sinneth not: for his seede remayneth in him, and he
can not sinne, because he is borne of God.
10 In this are ye children of God knowe, and the chyldren of the deuyll:
Whosoeuer doth not ryghteousnesse, is not of God, neither he that loueth not his
brother.
11 For this is the tidynges that ye heard from the begynnyng, that ye shoulde
loue one another.
12 Not as Cain, which was of that wicked, and slewe his brother: And wherfore
slewe he hym? Because his owne workes were euyll, and his brothers good.
13 Maruayle not my brethren though the worlde hate you.
14 We knowe, that we are translated from death vnto lyfe, because we loue the
brethren. He that loueth not his brother, abideth in death.
15 Whosoeuer hateth his brother, is a manslear: And ye knowe that no manslear,
hath eternall life abidyng in hym.
16 Hereby perceaue we loue, because he layde downe his lyfe for vs, & we ought
to lay downe our lyues for the brethren.
17 But who so hath this worldes good, and seeth his brother haue neede, and
shutteth vp his compassion from hym: howe dwelleth the loue of God in hym?
18 My babes, let vs not loue in worde, neither in tongue: but in deede and in
veritie.
19 Hereby we knowe that we are of the trueth, and shall assure our heartes
before hym.
20 For yf our heart condempne vs, God is greater then our heart, and knoweth all
thynges.
21 Dearely beloued, yf our heart condempne vs not, then haue we boldnesse
towarde God.
22 And whatsoeuer we aske, we receaue of hym, because we kepe his
commaundementes, and do those thynges which are pleasyng in his syght.
23 And this is his comaundement, that we beleue on the name of his sonne Iesus
Christe, and loue one another, as he gaue commaundement.
24 And he that kepeth his commaundementes, dwelleth in him, and he in him: and
hereby we knowe that he abideth in vs, euen by the spirite which he hath geuen
vs.

Chapter 4

1 Dearly beloued, beleue not euery spirite: but proue the spirites whether they
are of God or not: for many false prophetes are gone out into the worlde.
2 Hereby shall ye knowe the spirite of God: Euery spirite that confesseth that
Iesus Christe is come in the fleshe, is of God:
3 And euery spirite which confesseth not that Iesus Christe is come in the
fleshe, is not of God. And this is that spirite of antichriste, of whom ye haue
hearde howe that he shoulde come: and euen nowe alredy is he in the worlde.
4 Litle chyldren, ye are of God, & haue ouercome them: for greater is he that is
in you, then he that is in the worlde.
5 They are of the world, therfore speake they of the worlde, & the world heareth
them.
6 We are of God. He that knoweth God, heareth vs: he that is not of God, heareth
vs not. Hereby knowe we the spirite of veritie, and the spirite of errour.
7 Dearely beloued, let vs loue one another, for loue commeth of God: And euery
one that loueth, is borne of God, and knoweth God.
8 He that loueth not, knoweth not God: for God is loue.
9 In this appeared the loue of God to vs warde, because God sent his only
begotten sonne into the worlde, that we myght lyue through hym.
10 Herein is loue, not that we loued God, but that he loued vs, and sent his
sonne to be the agreement for our sinnes.
11 Dearely beloued, yf God so loued vs, we ought also to loue one another.
12 No man hath seene God at any time. If we loue one another, God dwelleth in
vs, and his loue is perfect in vs.
13 Hereby knowe we that we dwell in hym, & he in vs: because he hath geuen vs of
his spirite.
14 And we haue seene, and do testifie that the father sent the sonne to be the
sauiour of the worlde.
15 Whosoeuer confesseth that Iesus is the sonne of God, in him dwelleth God, and
he in God.
16 And we haue knowen and beleued the loue that God hath to vs. God is loue, and
he that dwelleth in loue, dwelleth in God, and God in hym.
17 Herein is the loue perfect in vs, that we shoulde haue boldnesse in the day
of iudgement: For as he is, euen so are we in this worlde.
18 There is no feare in loue, but perfect loue casteth out feare: for feare hath
paynefulnesse. He that feareth, is not perfect in loue.
19 We loue hym, for he loued vs first.
20 If a man say, I loue God, & yet hate his brother, he is a lyer: For how can
he yt loueth not his brother whom he hath seene, loue God who he hath not seene?
21 And this commaundement haue we of hym: that he which loueth God, shoulde loue
his brother also.

Chapter 5

1 Whosoeuer beleueth that Iesus is Christe, is borne of God: And euerie one that
loueth him which begat, loueth hym also which is begotten of hym.
2 By this we knowe that we loue the chyldren of God, when we loue God, and kepe
his commaundementes.
3 For this is the loue of God, that we kepe his commaundementes, and his
commaundementes are not greeuous.
4 For all that is borne of God, ouercommeth the worlde. And this is the victorie
that ouercommeth ye worlde, euen our fayth.
5 Who is it that ouercommeth ye worlde, but he which beleueth that Iesus is the
sonne of God?
6 This Iesus Christe, is he that came by water and blood: not by water only, but
by water and blood. And it is the spirite that beareth witnesse, because the
spirite is trueth.
7 For there are three which beare recorde in heauen, the father, the worde, and
the holy ghost, and these three are one.
8 And there are three which beare recorde in earth, the spirite, and water, and
blood, and these three agree in one.
9 If we receaue the witnesse of men, the witnesse of God is greater: For this is
the witnesse of God that is greater which he testified of his sonne.
10 He that beleueth on the sonne of God, hath the witnesse in hym selfe: He that
beleueth not God, hath made hym a lyer, because he beleued not the recorde that
God gaue of his sonne.
11 And this is the recorde, how that God hath geuen vnto vs eternall lyfe, and
this lyfe, is in his sonne.
12 He that hath the sonne, hath lyfe: and he that hath not the sonne of God,
hath not lyfe.
13 These thynges haue I written vnto you that beleue on ye name of the sonne of
God, that ye may knowe howe that ye haue eternall lyfe, and that ye may beleue
on the name of the sonne of God.
14 And this is the trust that we haue in hym: that yf we aske any thyng
accordyng to his wyll, he heareth vs.
15 And yf we knowe that he heare vs, whatsoeuer we aske: we know that we haue ye
petitions that we desire of hym.
16 If any man see his brother sinne a sinne not vnto death, let hym aske, and he
shal geue him life for them that sinne not vnto death. There is a sinne vnto
death: I say not that thou shouldest pray for it.
17 All vnrighteousnes is sinne: and there is sinne vnto death.
18 We knowe that whosoeuer is borne of God, sinneth not: but he that is begotten
of God, kepeth hym selfe, and that wicked toucheth hym not.
19 We knowe that we are of God, & the whole worlde lieth in wickednesse.
20 We knowe that the sonne of God is come, & hath geuen vs a minde to know hym
which is true: and we are in hym that is true, through his sonne Iesus Christe.
This same is very God, and eternall lyfe.
21 Babes kepe your selues from idols. Amen.


2 John

Chapter 1

1 The elder to the elect Lady & her chyldren, whom I loue in the trueth: and not
I only, but also all that haue knowen ye trueth:
2 For the truthes sake which dwelleth in vs, and shalbe in vs for euer:
3 Grace be with you, mercie, and peace from God the father, & from the Lorde
Iesus Christe the sonne of the father, in trueth and loue.
4 I reioyced greatly, that I founde of thy chyldren walkyng in trueth, as we
haue receaued a commaundement of the father.
5 And nowe beseche I thee Lady, not as though I wrote a newe commaundement vnto
thee: but that same which we haue had from the begynnyng, that we shoulde loue
one another.
6 And this is the loue, that we shoulde walke after his comaundement. This
commaundement is, that as ye haue hearde from the begynnyng, ye shoulde walke in
it.
7 For many deceauers are entred into the worlde, which confesse not that Iesus
Christe is come in the fleshe. This is a deceauer and an antichriste.
8 Loke on your selues, that we loose not that we haue wrought: but that we may
haue a full rewarde.
9 Whosoeuer transgresseth, and bideth not in the doctrine of Christe, hath not
God: He that endureth in the doctrine of Christe, hath both the father and the
sonne.
10 If there come any vnto you, and bring not this learnyng, hym receaue not to
house: neither byd hym God speede.
11 For he that byddeth hym God speede, is partaker of his euyll deedes.
12 I had many thynges to write vnto you: neuerthelesse, I woulde not write with
paper & inke, but I trust to come vnto you, and speake with you mouth to mouth,
that our ioy may be full.
13 The sonnes of thy elect sister greete thee. Amen.


3 John

Chapter 1

1 The elder vnto ye beloued Gaius, whom I loue in the trueth.
2 Beloued, I wishe in all thynges that thou prosperedst and faredst well, euen
as thy soule prospereth.
3 For I reioyced greatly, when the brethren came & testified of the trueth that
is in thee, how thou walkest in ye trueth.
4 I haue no greater ioy, the for to heare how that my sonnes walke in veritie.
5 Beloued, thou doest faythfully whatsoeuer thou doest to the brethren, and to
straungers,
6 Which beare witnesse of thy loue before the Churche. Which brethren, yf thou
bryng forwardes of their iourney after a godly sorte, thou shalt do well.
7 Because that for his names sake they went foorth, and toke nothyng of the
gentiles.
8 We therfore ought to receaue such, that we myght be helpers to the trueth.
9 I wrote vnto the Churche: but Diotrephes which loueth to haue the preeminence
among the, receaueth vs not.
10 Wherfore yf I come, I wyll declare his deedes which he doth, iestyng on vs
with malicious wordes, neither is therwith content: not only he hym selfe
receaueth not the brethren: but also he forbiddeth the that woulde, and
thrusteth them out of the Churche.
11 Beloued, folow not that which is euyl, but that which is good. He that doth
well, is of God: but he that doth euyll, seeth not God.
12 Demetrius hath good report of all men, and of the trueth it selfe: Yea, and
we our selues also beare recorde, and ye knowe that our recorde is true.
13 I haue many thynges to write: but I wyll not with inke and penne write vnto
thee.
14 I trust I shal shortly see thee, and we shall speake mouth to mouth. Peace be
vnto thee. The louers salute thee. Greete the louers by name.


Jude

Chapter 1

1 Iude the seruaunt of Iesus Christe, the brother of Iames: To them which are
called and sanctified in God the father, and preserued in Iesus Christe:
2 Mercy vnto you, and peace and loue be multiplied.
3 Beloued, when I gaue all diligence to write vnto you of the common saluation,
it was nedeful for me to write vnto you, to exhorte you, that ye shoulde
earnestly contende for the fayth which was once geuen vnto the saintes.
4 For there are certayne vngodly men craftily crept in, which were before of
olde ordeyned to this condemnation: They turne the grace of our God vnto
wantonnesse, and denye God which is the only Lorde, and our Lorde Iesus Christe.
5 My mynde is therfore to put you in remembraunce: forasmuch as ye once knowe
this, howe that the Lorde, after that he had delyuered the people out of Egypt,
destroyed the which afterward beleued not.
6 The Angels also which kept not their first estate, but left their owne
habitation, he hath reserued in euerlastyng chaynes vnder darkenesse, vnto the
iudgement of the great day.
7 Euen as Sodome and Gomorrhe, and the cities about them, which in lyke maner
defiled them selues with fornication, and folowed straunge fleshe, are set
foorth for an ensample, and suffer the payne of eternall fyre.
8 Lykewyse, these beyng deceaued by dreames, defyle the flesh, despise rulers,
and speake euyll of them that are in aucthoritie.
9 Yet Michael the Archangel, when he stroue agaynst the deuyll, and disputed
about the body of Moyses, durst not geue raylyng sentence, but sayde, the Lorde
rebuke thee.
10 But these speake euyl of those thinges which they knowe not: & what thinges
they know naturally, as beastes which are without reason, in those thynges they
corrupt them selues.
11 Wo be vnto the, for they haue folowed the way of Cain, and are vtterly geuen
to the errour of Balaam for lucres sake, and perishe in the gaynsaying of Core.
12 These are spottes in your feastes of charitie, whe they feast with you,
without al feare feedyng the selues: cloudes they are without water, caryed
about of windes, corrupt trees, and without fruite, twise dead, and plucked vp
by the rootes:
13 They are the ragyng waues of the sea, fomyng out their owne shame: They are
wandryng starres, to whom is reserued the mist of darknes for euer.
14 Enoch the seuenth from Adam, prophesied before of such, saying: Beholde, the
Lorde shall come with thousandes of saintes,
15 To geue iudgement agaynst all men, and to rebuke all that are vngodly among
them, of all their vngodly deedes, which they haue vngodly committed, and of all
their cruel speakynges, which vngodly sinners haue spoken agaynst hym.
16 These are murmurers, complayners, walkyng after their owne lustes, whose
mouthes speake proude thynges. They haue men in great reuerence because of
aduantage.
17 But ye beloued, remember the wordes which were spoken before, of the Apostles
of our Lorde Iesus Christe.
18 Howe that they tolde you, that there shoulde be begilers in ye last tyme,
which should walke after their owne vngodly lustes.
19 These are makers of sectes, fleshlie, hauyng not the spirite.
20 But ye dearely beloued, edifie your selues in your most holy fayth, praying
in the holy ghost,
21 And kepe your selues in the loue of God, lokyng for the mercie of our Lord
Iesus Christe, vnto eternall lyfe.
22 And haue compassion of some, seperatyng them:
23 And other saue with feare, pullyng them out of the fyre, and haue compassion
on the other, and hate euen the garment spotted by the fleshe.
24 Unto him that is able to kepe you free from sinne, and to present you
faultlesse before the presence of his glory with ioy,
25 To God our sauiour, which only is wyse, be glorie, maiestie, dominion, and
power, nowe and euer. Amen.


Revelation

Chapter 1

1 The reuelation of Iesus Christ, which God gaue vnto hym, for to shewe vnto his
seruautes thyngs which must shortlye come to passe: And when he had sent, he
shewed by his Angel, vnto his seruaunt Iohn,
2 Which bare recorde of the worde of God, and of the testimonie of Iesus
Christe, and of all thinges that he sawe.
3 Happy is he that readeth, and they that heare the wordes of this prophesie,
and kepe those thynges which are written therin, for the tyme is at hande.
4 Iohn to the seuen Churches in Asia: Grace be vnto you, and peace, from him
which is, and which was, and which is to come: and from the seuen spirites which
are before his throne,
5 And from Iesus Christe, which is a faythfull witnesse, and first begotten of
the dead, and Lorde ouer the kynges of the earth: Unto hym that loued vs, and
wasshed vs from our sinnes in his owne blood,
6 And made vs kynges and priestes vnto God his father, be glorie and dominion
for euermore. Amen.
7 Beholde, he commeth with cloudes, and all eyes shall see hym, and they also
which pearsed hym: And all kinredes of the earth shall wayle before hym. Euen
so. Amen.
8 I am Alpha and Omega, the begynnyng and the endyng, sayth the Lorde almyghtie,
which is, and which was, and which is to come.
9 I Iohn, your brother and companion in tribulation, and in the kingdome and
patience of Iesus Christe, was in the Ile that is called Pathmos, for ye worde
of God, and for the witnessyng of Iesus Christe.
10 I was in the spirite on the Lordes day, and hearde behynde me a great voyce,
as it had ben of a trumpe.
11 Saying: I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last: That thou seest, write
in a booke, and sende it vnto the seuen Churches which are in Asia, vnto
Ephesus, and vnto Smyrna, and vnto Pergamos, and vnto Thyatira, and vnto Sardis,
and vnto Philadelphia, and vnto Laodicea.
12 And I turned backe to see the voyce that spake to me: And whe I was turned, I
sawe seuen golden candlestickes,
13 And in ye middes of the candlestickes, one lyke vnto the sonne of man,
clothed with a garment downe to the feete, and girde about the pappes with a
golden girdle.
14 His head, and his heeres were whyte as whyte wooll, and as snowe, and his
eyes were as a flambe of fyre.
15 And his feete lyke vnto fine brasse, as though they brent in a furnace, and
his voyce as the sounde of many waters.
16 And he had in his ryght hande, seuen starres: And out of his mouth went a
sharpe two edged sworde: And his face shone, euen as the sunne in his strength.
17 And when I sawe hym, I fell at his feete euen as dead: And he layde his ryght
hande vpon me, saying vnto me, feare not, I am the first and the last,
18 And am alyue, and was dead: And beholde, I am alyue for euermore, Amen, and
haue the keyes of hell and of death.
19 Write therfore the thinges which thou hast seene, and the thynges which are,
and the thinges which must be fulfilled hereafter.
20 The misterie of the seuen starres which thou sawest in my ryght hande, and
the seuen golde candlestickes. The seuen starres, are the Angels of the seue
Churches: And the seuen candlestickes whiche thou sawest, are the seuen
Churches.

Chapter 2

1 Vnto the Angel of the Churche at Ephesus, write: these thynges sayth he that
holdeth the seuen starres in his ryght hande, and that walketh in the middes of
the seuen golden candlestickes:
2 I knowe thy workes, and thy labour, and thy patience, and howe thou canst not
forbeare them which are euyll: and hast examined them which say they are
Apostles, and are not, and hast founde them lyers:
3 And hast suffred, and hast patience, and for my names sake hast laboured, and
hast not faynted.
4 Neuertheles, I haue somewhat against thee, because thou hast left thy first
loue.
5 Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first
workes: Or els I wyll come vnto thee shortly, & wyll remoue thy candlesticke out
of his place, except thou repet.
6 But this thou hast, because thou hatest the deedes of the Nicolaitans, which
(deedes) I also hate.
7 Let hym that hath an eare, heare what ye spirite sayth vnto the Churches. To
hym that ouercommeth, wyll I geue to eate of the tree of lyfe, which is in the
middes of the paradise of God.
8 And vnto the Angel of the Churche of Smyrna, write: These thynges sayth he
that is first and the last, which was dead, and is alyue.
9 I knowe thy workes, and tribulation, and pouertie: but thou art riche. And I
know the blasphemie of them which cal them selues Iewes, and are not, but (are)
the synagogue of Satan.
10 Feare none of those thynges, which thou shalt suffer: Beholde, the deuyll
shall caste some of you into prison, to tempt you, and ye shall haue tribulation
ten dayes. Be faythfull vnto the death, and I wyll geue thee a crowne of lyfe.
11 Let hym that hath an eare, heare what the spirite sayth vnto ye Churches. He
that ouercommeth, shall not be hurt of the seconde death.
12 And to the Angell of the Churche in Pergamos, write: This saith he which hath
ye sharpe sword with two edges:
13 I knowe thy workes, and where thou dwellest, euen where Satans seate is, and
thou kepest my name, and hast not denyed my fayth: Euen in those dayes when
Antipas my faythfull martir was slayne among you, where Satan dwelleth.
14 But I haue a fewe thynges agaynst thee, because thou hast there, them that
maynetayne the doctrine of Balaam, whiche taught in Balacke, to put a stumblyng
blocke before the chyldren of Israel, that they shoulde eate of meate dedicate
vnto idols, & commit fornicatio.
15 Euen so hast thou the that maintayne the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which
thyng I hate.
16 Repent, or els I wyll come vnto thee shortly, and wyll fyght agaynst them
with the sworde of my mouth.
17 Let hym that hath an eare, heare what ye spirite sayth vnto the Churches. To
hym that ouercommeth, wyll I geue to eate Manna that is hyd, and wyll geue hym a
white stone, and in the stone a newe name written, which no man knoweth, sauyng
he yt receaueth it.
18 And vnto the Angell of the Churche of Thyatira, write: This saith ye sonne of
God, who hath eyes lyke vnto a flambe of fyre, and his feete are like fine
brasse.
19 I knowe thy workes, and thy loue, seruice, and fayth, and thy patience, and
thy deedes, which are mo at the last the at the first.
20 Notwithstandyng, I haue a fewe thynges agaynst thee, because thou sufferest
that woman Iesabel, which called her selfe a prophetisse, to teache, and to
deceaue my seruauntes, to make them commit fornication, and to eate meates
offred vp vnto idols.
21 And I gaue her space to repent of her fornication, and she repented not.
22 Beholde, I wyll cast her into a bed, and them that commit fornication with
her into great aduersitie, except they turne from their deedes:
23 And I wyll kyll her chyldren with death, & all the Churches shall knowe, that
I am he which searcheth the raynes and heartes: And I wyll geue vnto euery one
of you, accordyng vnto his workes.
24 Vnto you I say, and vnto other of the of Thyatira, as many as haue not this
learnyng, & which haue not knowe the deepenesse of Satan, as they say, I wyll
put vpon you none other burthen:
25 But that which ye haue alredy, holde fast tyll I come,
26 And whosoeuer ouercommeth, and kepeth my workes vnto the ende, to hym wyll I
geue power ouer nations,
27 And he shall rule them with a rodde of yron: and as the vessels of a potter,
shall they be broken to sheuers:
28 Euen as I receaued of my father, so wyll I geue hym the mornyng starre.
29 Let hym that hath an eare, heare what the spirite sayth to the Churches.

Chapter 3

1 And write vnto the Angel of the Churche that is at Sardis, this sayth he that
hath the seuen spirites of God, and the seuen starres. I knowe thy workes: thou
hast a name that thou lyuest, and thou art dead.
2 Be awake, and strength the thynges which remayne, that are redie to dye: For I
haue not founde thy workes perfect before God.
3 Remember therfore howe thou hast receaued and heard, and holde fast, and
repent. If thou shalt not watche, I wyll come on thee as a thiefe, and thou
shalt not knowe what houre I wyll come vpon thee.
4 Thou hast a fewe names in Sardis, which haue not defiled their garmetes, and
they shall walke with me in white, for they are worthie.
5 He that ouercommeth, shalbe thus clothed in whyte aray, and I wyll not put out
his name out of the booke of life, and I will confesse his name before my
father, and before his Angels.
6 Let him that hath an eare, heare what the spirite sayth vnto the Churches.
7 And write vnto ye Angel of the Church of Philadelphia, this sayth he that is
holy and true, which hath the key of Dauid, which openeth, and no man shutteth,
and shutteth, and no man openeth.
8 I knowe thy workes: Beholde, I haue set before thee an open doore, and no man
can shut it, for thou hast a litle strength, & hast kept my sayinges: and hast
not denyed my name.
9 Beholde, I make them of the synagogue of Satan, which call them selues Iewes
and are not, but do lye: Behold, I wyll make them that they shal come and
worshyp before thy feete, and shall knowe that I haue loued thee.
10 Because thou hast kept the wordes of my patience, therfore I wyll kepe thee
from the houre of temptation, which wyll come vpon all the worlde, to trie them
that dwel vpon the earth.
11 Beholde, I come shortly: Holde that which thou haste, that no man take away
thy crowne.
12 Hym that ouercometh, wyll I make a pyller in the temple of my God, and he
shall go no more out: And I wyll write vpon him the name of my God, and the name
of the citie of my God, newe Hierusalem, which commeth downe out of heauen from
my God, and I wyll write vpon hym my newe name.
13 Let hym that hath an eare, heare what the spirite sayth vnto ye Churches.
14 And vnto the Angel of the Churche which is in Laodicea, write: This saith
Amen, the faythfull and true witnesse, the begynnyng of the creatures of God.
15 I knowe thy workes, that thou arte neither colde nor hotte: I woulde thou
were colde or hotte.
16 So the, because thou art luke warme, and neither colde nor hotte, I wyll
spewe thee out of my mouth:
17 Because thou sayest, I am riche and increased with goodes, and haue neede of
nothyng: & knowest not howe that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poore,
and blynde, and naked.
18 I counsel thee to bye of me gold tryed in the fyre, that thou mayest be
riche, and whyte rayment, that thou mayest be clothed, that thy fylthie
nakednesse do not appeare, and annoynt thyne eyes with eye salue, that thou
mayest see.
19 As many as I loue, I rebuke and chasten: Be feruent therfore, & repent.
20 Beholde, I stande at the doore and knocke: If any man heare my voyce, and
open the doore, I wyll come in to hym, and wyll suppe with hym, and he with me.
21 To hym that ouercommeth, wyll I graunt to sitte with me in my throne, euen as
I ouercame, and haue sitten with my father in his throne.
22 Let hym yt hath an eare, heare what the spirite sayth vnto the Churches.

Chapter 4

1 After this, I loked, and beholde a doore was open in heaue: and the first
voyce which I heard, was as it were of a trumpet talking with me, which saide:
Come vp hyther, and I wyll shewe thee thynges which must be fulfylled hereafter.
2 And immediatly I was in the spirite, and behold, a throne was set in heauen,
and one sate on the throne.
3 And he that sate, was to loke vppon like vnto a Iasper stone and a Sardine
stone: and there was a raynebowe about the throne, in sight like to an Emeralde.
4 And about ye throne were 24 seates, and vpon the seates 24 elders sitting,
clothed in whyte rayment, and had on their heades crownes of golde.
5 And out of the throne proceaded lightnynges, and thundrynges, and voyces, and
there were seue lampes of fire burnyng before the throne, whiche are the seuen
spirites of God.
6 And before the throne there was a sea of glasse, lyke vnto cristall, and in
the myddest of the throne, & rounde about the throne, were foure beastes, full
of eyes before and behynde.
7 And the first beast was lyke a Lion, and the seconde beast lyke a Calfe, & the
thirde beast had a face as a Man, and the fourth beast was like a fleyng Egle.
8 And the foure beastes had eche one of them sixe wynges about hym, and they
were full of eyes within: and they had no rest day neither night, saying: Holy,
holy, holy Lorde God almightie, which was, and is, and is to come.
9 And when those beastes gaue glorie, and honour, and thankes to hym that sate
on the throne, which lyueth for euer and euer:
10 The xxiiij. elders fell downe before him that sate on the throne, and
worshipped hym that lyueth for euer, and cast their crownes before the throne,
saying:
11 Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receaue glorie, and honour, and power: for thou
hast created all thynges, and for thy pleasures sake they are &

Chapter 5

1 And I sawe in the right hande of hym that sate on the throne, a booke written
within, and on the backe syde, sealed with seuen seales.
2 And I sawe a strong angell, whiche preached with a loude voyce: Who is worthy
to open the booke, and to loose the seales therof?
3 And no man in heauen, nor in earth, neither vnder the earth, was able to open
the booke, neither to loke theron.
4 And I wept muche, because no man was founde worthy to open & to reade the
booke, neither to loke theron.
5 And one of the elders sayde vnto me, wepe not: behold a Lion of the tribe of
Iuda, the roote of Dauid, hath obteyned to open the booke, and to loose the
seuen seales therof.
6 And I behelde, and loe in the middes of the throne and of the foure beastes,
and in the middes of the elders, stoode a lambe as though he had ben kylled,
hauyng seuen hornes & seuen eyes, whiche are the seuen spirites of God, sent
into all the worlde.
7 And he came, and toke the booke out of the right hande of him that sate vpon
the throne.
8 And when he had taken the booke, the foure beastes and 24 elders fell downe
before the lambe, hauyng euery one of them harpes, and golden vyals full of
odours, which are the prayers of saintes:
9 And they song a newe song, saying: Thou art worthy to take the booke and to
open the seales therof: for thou wast kylled, and hast redeemed vs to God by thy
blood, out of al kinrede, and tongue, and people, and nation:
10 And hast made vs vnto our God kinges and priestes, and we shall raigne on the
earth.
11 And I beheld, and I heard the voyce of many angels about the throne, and
about the beastes and the elders, and hearde thousande thousandes,
12 Saying with a loude voyce: Worthy is the lambe that was kylled to receaue
power, and richesse, and wisedome, and strength, and honor, and glorie, and
blessyng.
13 And all the creatures whiche are in heauen, and on the earth, and vnder the
earth, and in the sea, and all that are in them, hearde I, saying: Blessyng,
honour, glorie, and power be vnto hym that sitteth vpon the throne, and vnto the
lambe for euermore.
14 And the foure beastes sayde, Amen. And the 24 elders fell vpon their faces,
and worshipped hym that lyueth for euermore. The lambe openeth the sixe seales,
and many thynges folowe the openyng therof, so that this conteyneth a generall
prophesie to the ende of the worlde.

Chapter 6

1 And I sawe when the lambe opened one of the seales, and I heard one of the
foure beastes say, as it were the noyse of thunder, come and see: and I sawe.
2 And behold, there was a whyte horse, and he that sate on hym had a bowe, & a
crowne was geuen vnto hym, and he went foorth conqueryng, and for to ouercome.
3 And when he had opened the seconde seale, I hearde the seconde beast saye,
come and see.
4 And there went out another horse that was redde, and power was geuen to him
that sate theron to take peace from the earth, and that they should kyll one
another: and there was geuen vnto hym a great sworde.
5 And when he had opened the thirde seale, I hearde the third beast say, come
and see. And I behelde, and loe, a blacke horse, and he that sate on hym hadde a
payre of balaunces in his hande.
6 And I hearde a voyce in the myddes of the foure beastes saye: A measure of
wheate for a penie, and three measures of barly for a penie, and oyle and wine
see thou hurt not.
7 And when he had opened the fourth seale, I hearde the voyce of the fourth
beast say, come and see.
8 And I loked, and behold a pale horse, & his name that sate on him was death,
and hell folowed after hym, and power was geuen vnto them ouer the fourth part
of the earth, to kyll with sworde, & with hunger, and with death, and with the
beastes of the earth.
9 And when he had opened the fift seale, I sawe vnder the aulter the soules of
them that were kylled for the worde of God, and for the testimonie which they
had.
10 And they cryed with a loude voyce, saying: Howe long taryest thou Lorde, holy
and true, to iudge and to auenge our blood on the that dwell on ye earth?
11 And long whyte garmentes were geuen vnto euery one of them: and it was sayde
vnto them, that they should reste yet for a litle season, vntyll the number of
their felowes, and brethren, and of them that shoulde be kylled as they were,
were fulfylled.
12 And I behelde when he had opened the sixt seale, and loe there was a great
earthquake, & the sunne was as blacke as sackcloth made of heere, & the moone
waxed all euen as blood:
13 And the starres of heauen fell vnto the earth, euen as a figge tree casteth
her vntimely figges when she is shaken of a myghtie wynde.
14 And heauen vanished awaye as a scroule when it is roulled together, and all
mountaynes and yles were moued out of their places.
15 And the kynges of the earth, and the great men, and the ryche men, and the
chiefe capitaines, and the myghtie men, and euery bonde man, and euery free man,
hyd them selues in dennes and in rockes of the hylles:
16 And sayde to the hylles & rockes, fall on vs, and hyde vs from the presence
of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the lambe:
17 For the great day of his wrath is come: and who is able to endure?

Chapter 7

1 And after that, I sawe foure angels stande on the foure corners of the earth,
holding the foure wyndes of ye earth, that the wynde shoulde not blowe on the
earth, neither on the sea, neither on any tree.
2 And I sawe another angell ascende from the rysing of the sunne, which had the
seale of the lyuyng God, and he cryed with a loude voyce to the foure angels to
whom power was geuen to hurt the earth and the sea,
3 Saying: Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, neither the trees, tyll we haue
sealed the seruautes of our God in their foreheades.
4 And I hearde the number of them which were sealed: And there were sealed an
100 and 44 thousande, of all the tribes of the chyldren of Israel.
5 Of the tribe of Iuda were sealed 12 thousande. Of the tribe of Ruben were
sealed 12 thousande. Of the tribe of Gad were sealed 12 thousande.
6 Of the tribe of Aser were sealed 12 thousande. Of the tribe of Nephthali were
sealed 12 thousande. Of ye tribe of Manasses were sealed 12 thousande.
7 Of the tribe of Simeon were sealed 12 thousande. Of ye tribe of Leui were
sealed 12 thousande. Of ye tribe of Isachar were sealed 12 thousande.
8 Of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed 12 thousande. Of the tribe of Ioseph were
sealed 12 thousande. Of the tribe of Beniamin were sealed 12 thousand.
9 After this I behelde, and loe a great multitude which no man could number of
all nations, and kinredes, and people, and tongues, stoode before the throne,
and before the lambe, clothed with long whyte garmentes, and palmes in their
handes,
10 And cryed with a loude voyce, saying: Saluation be ascribed to hym that
sitteth vpon the throne of our God, and vnto the lambe.
11 And all the angels stoode in the compasse of the throne, and of the elders, &
of the foure beastes, and fell before the throne on their faces, and worshypped
God,
12 Saying, Amen: Blessyng, and glorie, and wisedome, and thankes, & honour, and
power, and myght, be vnto our God for euermore, Amen.
13 And one of the elders aunswered, saying vnto me: What are these which are
arayed in long whyte garmentes? and whence came they?
14 And he sayde vnto hym, Lorde thou wotest. And he sayde to me: These are they
which came out of great tribulation, and haue wasshed their long robes, and made
them whyte by the blood of the lambe.
15 Therefore are they in the presence of the throne of God, and serue hym daye
and nyght in his temple, and he that sitteth in the throne, wyll dwell among
them.
16 They shall hunger no more, neither thirst, neither shall the sunne lyght on
them, neither any heate.
17 For the lambe which is in the myddes of the throne shall feede them, and
shall leade them vnto fountaynes of lyuyng water, and God shall wype awaye all
teares from their eyes.

Chapter 8

1 And when he had opened the seuenth seale, ther was scilence in heaue about the
space of halfe an houre:
2 And I sawe the seuen angels standyng before God, and to them were geuen seuen
trumpets.
3 And another angell came and stoode before the aulter, hauyng a golden senser,
and much of odours was geuen vnto hym, that he should offer of the prayers of
all saintes vpon the golden aulter which was before the throne.
4 And the smoke of the odours whiche came of the prayers of all saintes,
ascended vp before God, out of the angels hande.
5 And the angel toke the senser, and fylled it with fire of the aulter, and cast
it into the earth: and voyces were made, and thundrynges, and lyghtnynges, &
earthquake.
6 And the seuen angels whiche had the seuen trumpettes, prepared them selues to
blowe.
7 The first angell blewe, & there was made hayle & fire, mingled with blood, and
they were cast into the earth, and the thirde part of trees was burnt, and all
greene grasse was burnt.
8 And the seconde angell blewe, and as it were a great mountayne burnyng with
fire was cast into the sea, and the thirde part of the sea turned to blood.
9 And the thirde part of the creatures whiche were in the sea, and hadde lyfe,
dyed, and the thirde part of shippes were destroyed.
10 And the third angell blewe, and there fell a great starre from heauen,
burning as it were a lampe, and it fell into the thirde part of the ryuers, and
into fountaynes of waters:
11 And the name of the starre is called wormewood, and the thirde part was
turned to wormewood, and many men dyed of the waters, because they were made
bitter.
12 And the fourth angell blewe, and the thirde part of the sunne was smytten,
and the thirde part of the moone, and the thirde part of starres, so that the
thirde part of them was darkened: and the day was smitten, that the third part
of it shoulde not shyne, and lykewise the nyght.
13 And I behelde, and hearde an angell fleyng through the myddes of heauen,
saying with a loude voyce, wo, wo, wo to the inhabiters of the earth, because of
the voyces to come of the trumpe of the three angels which were yet to blowe.

Chapter 9

1 And the fift angell blewe, and I sawe a starre fall from heauen vnto ye earth:
and to hym was geuen the key of the bottomlesse pit.
2 And he opened the bottomlesse pit, and the smoke of the pit arose, as the
smoke of a great fornace, and the sunne and the ayre were darkened by the reason
of the smoke of the pit.
3 And there came out of the smoke locustes vpon the earth, and vnto them was
geuen power, as the scorpions of the earth haue power.
4 And it was commaunded them that they shoulde not hurt the grasse of the earth,
neither any greene thing, neither any tree: but only those men which haue not
the seale of God in their forheades.
5 And to them was commaunded that they should not kyll them, but that they
shoulde be vexed fiue monethes, and their paine was as the payne that commeth of
a scorpion when he hath stong a man.
6 And in those dayes shall men seke death, and shall not fynde it, and shall
desire to dye, and death shall flee from them.
7 And the similitude of the locustes was like vnto horses prepared vnto
battayle, and on their heades were as it were crownes lyke vnto golde, and their
faces were as it had ben the faces of men.
8 And they had heere as the heere of women, & their teeth were as ye teeth of
Lions.
9 And they had habbergions as it were habbergions of iron, and the sounde of
their wynges was as ye sounde of charrettes when many horses runne together to
batayle.
10 And they had tayles lyke vnto scorpions, and there were stynges in their
tayles: and their power was to hurt men fiue monethes.
11 And they had a king ouer them, which is the angell of the bottomlesse pytte,
whose name in the Hebrue tongue is Abadon, but in ye Greke tongue Apollyon, that
is to say, a destroyer.
12 One woe is past, & beholde two woes come yet after this.
13 And the sixt angell blewe, & I hearde a voyce from the foure hornes of the
golden aulter, which is before God,
14 Saying to the sixt angell whiche had the trumpe: Loose the foure angels which
are bounde in the great riuer Euphrates.
15 And the foure angels were loosed, whiche were prepared for an houre, for a
day, for a moneth, and for a yere, for to slea the thirde part of men.
16 And the number of horsemen of warre were twentie thousand times ten
thousande, & I hearde the number of them.
17 And thus I sawe the horses in a vision, and them that sate on them, hauing
fierie habbergions of a iacinct colour, and brymstone, and the heades of the
horses were as the heades of lions, and out of their mouthes went foorth fire,
and smoke, and brymstone.
18 And of these three was the third part of men kylled that is to say of fire,
smoke and brymstone, which proceaded out of the mouthes of them.
19 For their power was in their mouthes, & in their tayles: for their tayles
were lyke vnto serpentes, and had heades, & with them they dyd hurt.
20 And the remnaunt of the men whiche were not killed by these plagues, repented
not of the deedes of their handes, that they shoulde not worship deuyls, and
idoles of golde, and syluer, & brasse, and stone, and of wood, whiche neither
can see, neither heare, neither go:
21 Also they repented not of their murther, & of their sorcerie, neither of
their fornication, neither of their theft.

Chapter 10

1 And I sawe another myghtie Angel come downe fro heaue, clothed with a cloude,
and ye raynebowe vpon his head, and his face as it were the sunne, and his feete
as it were pillers of fyre.
2 And he had in his hande a litle booke open, and he put his ryght foote vpon
the sea, and his left foote on the earth:
3 And cryed with a loude voyce, as whe a Lion roreth: And when he had cryed,
seuen thunders vttered their voyces.
4 And when the seuen thunders had vttered their voyces, I was about to write:
and I hearde a voyce from heauen, saying vnto me: seale vp those thinges which
the seuen thunders vttered, and write them not.
5 And the Angel which I sawe stande vpon the sea and vpon the earth, lyft vp his
hande to heauen,
6 And sware by hym that lyueth for euermore, which created heauen and the
thynges that therin are, & the earth and the thinges that therin are, and the
sea, and the thynges which therin are, that there shoulde be no longer tyme.
7 But in the dayes of the voyce of the seuenth Angel, when he shall begyn to
blowe, euen the misterie of God shalbe finished, as he declared to his seruautes
the prophetes.
8 And the voyce which I hearde from heauen, spake vnto me agayne, & sayde: Go,
and take the litle booke which is open in the hande of the Angel, which standeth
vpon the sea and vpon ye earth.
9 And I went vnto the Angel, & sayde vnto hym, geue me the litle booke. And he
sayde vnto me, take it and eate it vp, and it shall make thy belly bitter, but
it shalbe in thy mouth as sweete as hony.
10 And I toke the litle booke out of the Angels hande, and ate it vp, and it was
in my mouth as sweete as hony: and assoone as I had eaten it, my belly was
bitter.
11 And he sayde vnto me, thou must prophesie agayne among the people, and
nations, and tongues, & to many kinges.

Chapter 11

1 And the was geuen me a reede lyke vnto a rod, and the angel stoode by, saying:
Rise & meate ye temple of God, & the aulter, and them that worshippe therein:
2 But the court which is without the temple, cast out, and meate it not: for it
is geuen vnto the gentiles, and the holy citie shall they treade vnder foote
fourtie and two monethes.
3 And I wyl geue power vnto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesie a
thousande, two hundred, and threescore dayes, clothed in sackcloth.
4 These are two oliue trees, and two candlestickes, standyng before the God of
the earth.
5 And yf any man wyll hurt them, fyre shal proceade out of their mouthes, &
cosume their enemies: And if any man wil hurt them, this wyse must he be kylled.
6 These haue power to shut heauen, that it rayne not in the dayes of their
prophesiyng: and haue power ouer waters, to turne them to blood, and to smite
the earth with all maner plagues, as often as they wyll.
7 And whe they haue finished their testimonie, the beast that commeth out of the
bottomlesse pit, shall make warre against them, and shal ouercome them, and kyll
them.
8 And their bodyes shall lye in ye streates of the great citie, which
spiritually is called Sodome and Egypt, where our Lorde was crucified.
9 And they of the people, and kinredes, and tongues, and they of the nations,
shall see their bodyes three dayes and an halfe, & shall not suffer their bodyes
to be put in graues.
10 And they that dwell vpon the earth shal reioyce ouer them, and be glad, and
shall sende gyftes one to another: for these two prophetes vexed them that dwelt
on the earth.
11 And after three dayes and an halfe, the spirite of lyfe commyng from God,
shall enter into them: And they shall stande vp vpon their feete, & great feare
shall come vpon the which sawe them.
12 And they shall heare a great voyce from heauen, saying vnto them, come vp
hyther. And they shall ascende vp to heauen in a cloude, and their enemies shall
see them.
13 And the same houre shall there be a great earthquake, and the tenth part of
the citie shall fall, and in the earthquake shalbe slaine names of men seuen
thousande: and the remnaunt shalbe afraide, and geue glorie to the God of
heauen.
14 The seconde wo is past, and beholde the thirde wo wyll come anone.
15 And the seuenth angell blewe, & there were made greate voyces in heauen,
saying: the kyngdomes of this worlde are our Lordes, and his Christes, and he
shall raigne for euermore.
16 And the 24 elders which sit before God on their seates, fel vpon their faces,
and worshipped God,
17 Saying: we geue thee thankes, O Lorde God almyghtie, which art, and wast, and
art to come: for thou hast receaued thy great myght, & hast raigned.
18 And the nations were angrie, and thy wrath is come, and the tyme of the dead
that they shoulde be iudged, and that thou shouldest geue rewarde vnto thy
seruauntes the prophetes and saintes, and to them that feare thy name, small and
great, and shouldest destroy them which destroy the earth.
19 And the temple of God was opened in heauen, and there were seene in his
temple the arke of his testament: and there folowed lyghtninges, and voyces, and
thundringes, and earthquake, and much hayle.

Chapter 12

1 And there appeared a great wonder in heauen: A woman clothed with the sunne, &
the moone vnder her feete, and vpo her head a crowne of twelue starres:
2 And she was with chylde, and cryed, trauaylyng in birth, and payned redy to be
delyuered.
3 And there appeared another wonder in heauen, for beholde, a great redde
dragon, hauing seuen heades, and tenne hornes, and seuen crownes vpon his
heades.
4 And his tayle drue the thirde part of the starres of heauen, and cast them to
the earth: And the dragon stoode before the woman which was redie to be
deliuered, for to deuoure her chylde assoone as it were borne.
5 And she brought foorth a man chylde, which shoulde rule all nations with a
rodde of yron: And her sonne was taken vp vnto God, and to his throne.
6 And the woman fled into wildernesse, where she had a place prepared of God,
that they should feede her there a thousande two hundreth and threscore days.
7 And there was a battayle in heauen, Michael and his angels fought with the
dragon, and the dragon fought and his angels,
8 And preuayled not, neither was their place founde any more in heauen.
9 And the great dragon, that olde serpent, called the deuyll & Satanas, was cast
out, which deceaueth all the world: And he was cast into the earth, and his
angels were cast out with hym.
10 And I hearde a loude voyce saying in heauen: Nowe is made saluation, &
strength, & the kingdome of our God, & the power of his Christ: For the accuser
of our brethren is cast downe, which accused them before our God day & nyght,
11 And they ouercame hym by the blood of the Lambe, and by the worde of their
testimonie, and they loued not their lyues vnto the death.
12 Therfore reioyce heauens, and ye that dwell in them. Wo to the inhabiters of
the earth, and of the sea: for the deuyll is come downe vnto you, which hath
great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short tyme.
13 And when the dragon sawe that he was cast vnto the earth, he persecuted the
woman which brought foorth the man chylde.
14 And to the woman were geuen two winges, of a great Egle, that she myght flee
into the wildernesse into her place, where she is norished for a tyme, tymes,
and halfe a tyme, from the presence of the serpent.
15 And the serpent cast out of his mouth water after the woman as it had ben a
fludde, that he myght cause her to be caryed away of the fludde.
16 And the earth holpe the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swalowed
vp the ryuer which the dragon cast out of his mouth.
17 And the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went and made warre with the
remnaunt of her seede, which kepe the commaundementes of God, & haue the
testimonie of Iesus Christe.

Chapter 13

1 And I stoode on the sea sande. And I sawe a beast ryse out of the sea, hauing
seuen heades, and ten hornes, & vpon his hornes ten crownes, and vpon his head
the name of blasphemie.
2 And the beast which I sawe, was like a Leoparde, and his feete were as the
feete of a Beare, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion: And the dragon gaue hym
his power, and his seate, and great aucthoritie.
3 And I sawe one of his heades, as it were wounded to death, and his deadly
wounde was healed: And all the world wondred after the beast.
4 And they worshipped the dragon which gaue power vnto the beast, and they
worshipped the beast, saying: Who is lyke vnto the beast? who is able to warre
with hym?
5 And there was geuen vnto hym a mouth, that spake great thynges and
blasphemies, and power was geuen vnto hym, to do.xlij. monethes.
6 And he opened his mouth vnto blasphemie agaynst God, to blaspheme his name,
and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heauen.
7 And it was geuen vnto hym to make warre with the saintes, & to ouercome them:
And power was geuen him ouer all kinredes, and tongues, and nations,
8 And al yt dwel vpon the earth, worshipped him whose names are not writte in
the booke of lyfe of ye lambe, which was killed from the beginnyng of the world.
9 If any man haue an eare, let hym heare.
10 He that leadeth into captiuitie, shall go into captiuitie: He that kylleth
with a sworde, must be kylled with a sworde. Here is the patience and the fayth
of the saintes.
11 And I behelde another beast commyng vp out of the earth, and he had two
hornes lyke a lambe, and he spake as dyd the dragon.
12 And he dyd all that ye first beast coulde do in his presence, & he caused the
earth and them which dwell therein, to worship the first beast, whose deadly
wound was healed.
13 And he dyd great wonders, so that he made fyre come downe from heauen on the
earth in the syght of men.
14 And deceaued them that dwelt on the earth, by the meanes of those signes
which he had power to do in the syght of the beast, saying to them that dwelt on
the earth, that they shoulde make the image of the beast which had the wounde of
a sworde, and dyd lyue.
15 And he had power to geue a spirite vnto the image of the beast, that the
image of the beast shoulde speake, and shoulde cause that as many as woulde not
worship the image of the beast, shoulde be kylled.
16 And he made all both smal & great, rich & poore, free & bonde, to receaue a
marke in their right hand, or in their forheads.
17 And that no man myght bye or sell, saue he that had the marke or ye name of
the beast, other ye number of his name.
18 Here is wisdome. Let hym that hath witte, count ye number of the beast: For
it is the number of a man, & his number is sixe hundred threescore and sixe.

Chapter 14

1 And I loked, and lo, a lambe stoode on the mount Sion, and with hym an
hundreth fourtie and foure thousande, hauyng his fathers name written in their
foreheades.
2 And I hearde a voyce from heauen, as the sounde of many waters, and as the
voyce of a great thunder: And I hearde the voyce of harpers harpyng with their
harpes:
3 And they song as it were a newe song before the throne, and before the foure
beastes, & the elders, and no man coulde learne that song, but the hundreth and
fourtie & foure thousande, which were redeemed from the earth.
4 These are they which were not defiled with wome, for they are virgins: These
folowe the lambe whither soeuer he goeth: These were redeemed fro men, beyng the
first fruites vnto God, and to the lambe.
5 And in their mouthes was founde no guile: For they are without spot before the
throne of God.
6 And I sawe another angell flee in the middes of heauen, hauyng the euerlastyng
Gospell, to preache vnto them that sit and dwel on the earth, and to all
nations, and kinredes, and tongues, and people,
7 Saying with a loude voyce: Feare God, and geue honour to hym, for the houre of
his iudgement is come: and worshippe hym that made heauen and earth, and the
sea, and fountaynes of water.
8 And there folowed another angell, saying: Babylon is fallen is fallen that
great citie, for she made all nations drinke of the wyne of the wrath of her
fornication.
9 And the thirde angell folowed them, saying with a loude voyce: If any man
worshippe the beast and his image, and receaue his marke in his foreheade, or on
his hande,
10 The same shall drynke of the wyne of the wrath of God: yea, of the pure wyne
which is powred in ye cup of his wrath: And he shalbe punisshed in fyre &
brimstone, before the holy angels, and before the lambe.
11 And the smoke of their torment ascendeth vp euermore: And they haue no rest
day nor nyght which worship the beast and his image, and whosoeuer receaueth the
prynt of his name.
12 Here is the pacience of the saintes: Here are they that kepe the
commaundementes of God, and the fayth of Iesus.
13 And I hearde a voyce from heauen, saying vnto me, write: Blessed are the
dead, which hereafter dye in the Lorde. Euen so sayth the spirite, that they
rest from their laboures, and their workes folowe them.
14 And I loked, and beholde a whyte cloude, and vpon the cloude one sittyng lyke
vnto the sonne of man, hauyng on his head a golden crowne, and in his hande a
sharpe sickle.
15 And another angell came out of the temple, crying with a loude voyce to hym
that sate on the cloude: Thrust in thy sickle & reape, for the time is come to
reape: for the haruest of ye earth is ripe.
16 And he that sate on the cloude thrust in his sickle on the earth, and the
earth was reaped.
17 And another angell came out of the temple which is in heauen, hauyng also a
sharpe sickle.
18 And I sawe another angell came out from the aulter, which had power ouer
fyre, and cryed with a loude crye to hym that had the sharpe sickle, and sayde:
Thrust in thy sharpe sickle, and gather the clusters of the vineyarde of ye
earth, for her grapes are ripe.
19 And the angell thrust in his sharpe sickle on the earth, and cut downe the
grapes of the vineyarde of the earth, and cast them into the great wynefat of
the wrath of God.
20 And the wynefat was troden without the citie, and blood came out of the fat,
euen vnto the horse bridles, by the space of a thousand & sixe hundreth
furlonges.

Chapter 15

1 And I sawe another signe in heauen, great & marueylous, seuen angels hauyng
the seuen last plagues, for in them is fulfylled the wrath of God.
2 And I sawe as it were a glassie sea mingled with fyre, and them that had
gotten the victorie of the beast, and of his image, and of his marke, and of the
number of his name, stande on ye glassie sea, hauyng the harpes of God.
3 And they sang the song of Moyses the seruaunt of God, and the song of the
lambe, saying: Great and marueylous are thy workes Lorde God almightie, iust and
true are thy wayes thou kyng of saintes.
4 Who shall not feare thee O Lorde, and glorifie thy name? for thou only art
holy: And all gentiles shal come and worship before thee, for thy iudgemetes are
made manifest.
5 And after that I loked, and beholde, the temple of the tabernacle of
testimonie was open in heauen:
6 And the seuen angels came out of the temple, which had the seuen plagues,
clothed in pure and bryght lynnen, and hauing their brestes girded with golden
girdels.
7 And one of the foure beastes, gaue vnto the seuen angels seuen golden vials,
full of the wrath of God which lyueth for euermore.
8 And the temple was full of the smoke of the glorie of God, and of his power:
and no man was able to enter into the temple, tyll the seuen plagues of the
seuen angels were fulfylled.

Chapter 16

1 And I hearde a great voyce out of the temple, saying to ye seuen angels: Go
your wayes, powre out your vials of wrath vpon the earth.
2 And the first angell went and powred out his vial vpon the earth, and there
fell a noysome and a sore botch vpon the men which had the marke of the beast,
and vpon them which worshipped his image.
3 And the second angell shed out his vial vpon the sea, and it turned as it were
into the blood of a dead man: and euery lyuyng thyng dyed in the sea.
4 And the thirde angell shed out his viall vpon the ryuers and fountaynes of
waters, and they turned to blood.
5 And I hearde the angell of the waters say: Lorde, which art, and wast, thou
art ryghteous & holy, because thou hast geuen such iudgementes:
6 For they shed out the blood of saintes and prophetes, and therfore hast thou
geuen them blood to drynke: for they are worthie.
7 And I heard another out of the aulter say: euen so Lorde God almightie, true
and ryghteous are thy iudgementes.
8 And the fourth angell powred out his viall on the sunne, & power was geuen
vnto hym to vexe men with heate of fyre.
9 And men boyled in great heate, and blasphemed the name of God whiche hath
power ouer these plagues, & they repented not, to geue hym glorie.
10 And the fifth angell powred out his viall vpon the seate of the beast, and
his kyngdome waxed darke, & they gnewe their tongues for sorowe,
11 And blasphemed the God of heauen for their sorowe, and for theirs sores, and
repented not of their deedes.
12 And the sixt angell powred out his vial vpon the great riuer Euphrates, and
the water dryed vp, that the wayes of the kynges of ye east should be prepared.
13 And I sawe three vncleane spirites like frogges, come out of the mouth of ye
dragon, & out of the mouth of the beast, & out of the mouth of the false
prophete.
14 For they are the spirites of deuyls workyng miracles, to go out vnto the
kynges of the earth, and of the whole worlde, to gather them to the battayle of
that great day of God almightie.
15 Beholde, I come as a theefe. Happie is he that watcheth and kepeth his
garmentes, lest he walke naked, and men see his fylthynesse.
16 And he gathered them together into a place, called in the Hebrue tongue
Armagedon.
17 And the seuenth angell powred out his viall into the ayre: And there came a
great voyce out of the temple of heauen, from the throne, saying: it is done.
18 And there folowed voyces, thundringes, & lyghtnynges: and there was a great
earthquake, such as was not sence men were vpon the earth, so mightie an
earquake and so great.
19 And the great citie was deuided into three partes, and the cities of all
nations fell: And great Babylon came in remembraunce before God, to geue vnto
her the cup of the wyne of the fearcenesse of his wrath.
20 Euery Ile also fledde away, and the mountaynes were not founde.
21 And there fell a great hayle, as it had ben talentes, out of heauen vpon the
men, and the men blasphemed God, because of the plague of the hayle: for the
plague therof was exceadyng great.

Chapter 17

1 And there came one of the seue angels, which had the seuen vials, & talked
with me, saying vnto me: Come, I wyll shewe vnto thee the iudgement of the great
whore that sitteth vpon many waters:
2 With whom haue committed fornication the kynges of the earth, and the
inhabiters of the earth are dronken with the wyne of her fornication.
3 So he caryed me away in the spirite into the wildernesse: And I sawe a woman
sit vpon a scarlet coloured beast, ful of names of blasphemie, which had seuen
heades, and ten hornes.
4 And the woman was arayed in purple and scarlet colour, and decked with golde,
precious stone, and pearles, and had a cup of golde in her hande, full of
abhominations and fylthynesse of her fornication.
5 And in her forehead was a name written, a misterie, great Babylon, the mother
of whoredome & abhominations of the earth.
6 And I sawe ye woman dronken with the blood of the martirs of Iesus: And when I
sawe her, I wondred with great maruayle.
7 And the angell sayde vnto me: wherfore maruaylest thou? I wyll shewe thee the
misterie of the woman, and of the beast that beareth her, which hath seuen
heades, and ten hornes.
8 The beast that thou seest, was, and is not, and shall ascende out of the
bottomlesse pyt, and shall go into perdition, and they that dwell on the earth
shall wonder (whose names are not written in the booke of lyfe from the
begynnyng of the world) when they beholde the beast that was, and is not, and
yet is.
9 And here is a mynde that hath wisdome. The seuen heades, are seuen mountaynes
on whiche the woman sitteth: They are also seuen kynges.
10 Fyue are fallen, & one is, and another is not yet come: And whe he commeth,
he must continue a short space.
11 And the beast that was, and is not, is euen the eyght, and is one of the
seuen, and shall go into destruction.
12 And the ten hornes which thou sawest, are ten kynges, which haue receaued no
kyngdome as yet: but shall receaue power as kynges at one houre with the beast.
13 These haue one mynde, and shal geue their power & strength vnto the beast.
14 These shall fyght with the lambe, and the lambe shall ouercome them: For he
is Lorde of Lordes, and Kyng of Kynges, and they that are on his syde, are
called, and chosen, and faythfull.
15 And he sayde vnto me: The waters which thou sawest, where the whore sitteth,
are people, and folke, & nations, and tongues.
16 And the ten hornes which thou sawest vpon the beast, are they that shall hate
the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eate her fleshe, and
burne her with fire.
17 For God hath put in their heartes to fulfyll his wyll, and to do with one
consent, for to geue their kyngdome vnto the beast, vntyll the wordes of God be
fulfylled.
18 And the woman which thou sawest, is that great citie which raigneth ouer the
kynges of the earth.

Chapter 18

1 And after that, I sawe another angell come from heauen, hauyng great power,
and the earth was lyghtened with his glorie.
2 And he cryed myghtyly with a strong voyce, saying: Great Babylon is fallen is
fallen, and is become the habitation of deuyls, and the holde of all foule
spirites, and a cage of all vncleane and hatefull byrdes:
3 For all nations haue dronken of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, &
the kinges of the earth haue committed fornication with her, & the marchauntes
of the earth are waxed riche of the aboundaunce of her pleasures.
4 And I hearde another voyce from heauen say: Come awaye from her my people,
that ye be not partakers of her sinnes, and that ye receaue not of her plagues.
5 For her sinnes are gone vp to heauen, and God hath remembred her wickednesse.
6 Rewarde her euen as she rewarded you, and geue her double accordyng to her
workes, and powre in double to her in the same cuppe which she fylled vnto you.
7 And as much as she glorified her selfe & lyued wantonly, so much powre ye in
for her of punishement & sorowe: for she said in her heart, I sit being a
queene, and am no wydowe, and shall see no sorowe.
8 Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and sorowe, and hunger,
and she shalbe brent with fire: for strong is the Lorde whiche shall iudge her.
9 And they shal bewayl her, & the kinges of the earth shall lament for her,
which haue committed fornication with her, & haue lyued wantonly with her, when
they shal see the smoke of her burnyng.
10 And shall stande a farre of for feare of her punishment, saying: Alas, alas,
that great citie Babylon, that myghtie citie, for at one houre is thy iudgement
come.
11 And the marchauntes of the earth shall wepe and wayle ouer her, for no man
wyll bye their ware any more.
12 The ware of golde and siluer, and precious stones, neither of pearle, &
raynes, and purple, and sylke, and skarlet, and all thinne wood, and all maner
vessels of yuorie, and all maner vessels of most precious wood, and of brasse,
and yron, and marble,
13 And synamon, and odours, and oyntmentes, and frankensence, and wine, and
oyle, and fine floure, and wheate, & beastes, and sheepe, and horses, &
charrets, and bodies, and soules of men.
14 And the apples that thy soule lusted after are departed from thee, and all
thynges which were daintie and had in price are departed from thee, and thou
shalt fynde them no more.
15 The marchauntes of these thynges whiche were waxed ryche, shall stande a
farre of fro her for feare of the punishment of her, wepyng and waylyng,
16 And saying: Alas, alas, that great citie, that was clothed in raynes, and
purple, and skarlet, and decked with golde and precious stones, and pearles:
17 For at one houre so great ryches is come to naught. And euery shippe
gouernour, & all they that occupie shippes, and shippemen which worke in the
sea, stoode a farre of,
18 And cryed, when they sawe the smoke of her burnyng, saying: what citie is
lyke vnto this great citie?
19 And they cast dust on their heades, & cryed, wepyng & waylyng, and saying:
Alas, alas, that great citie, wherein were made riche all that had shippes in
the sea, by reason of her costlynesse, for at one houre is she made desolate.
20 Reioyce ouer her thou heauen, and ye holy apostles and prophetes: for God
hath geuen your iudgement on her.
21 And a myghtie angell toke vp a stone lyke a great mylstone, and cast it into
the sea, saying: With suche violence shall that great citie Babylon be cast, &
shalbe founde no more.
22 And the voyce of harpers, and musitions, & of pypers, and trumpetters, shall
be heard no more in thee, and no craftes man, of whatsoeuer craft he be, shall
be founde any more in thee, and the sounde of a myll shall be heard no more in
thee:
23 And the lyght of a candle shall shyne no more in thee, and the voyce of the
brydegrome and of the bryde shall be hearde no more in thee: for thy marchaunts
were the great men of ye earth, and with thyne inchauntment were deceaued all
nations:
24 And in her was founde the blood of the prophetes, and of the saintes, and of
all that were slayne vpon the earth.

Chapter 19

1 And after that I heard a great voyce of much people in heauen, saying
Alleluia: Saluation, and glory, and honour, and power, be ascribed to the Lorde
our God:
2 For true and ryghteous are his iudgementes, for he hath iudged the great whore
which dyd corrupt ye earth with her fornication, and hath auenged the blood of
his seruauntes of her hande.
3 And agayne they sayde Alleluia: and her smoke rose vp for euermore.
4 And the xxiiij. elders & the foure beastes fell downe, & worshipped God that
sate on the throne, saying Amen, Alleluia.
5 And a voyce came out of the throne, saying: Praise our Lord God all ye that
are his seruauntes, & ye that feare hym both small and great.
6 And I hearde the voyce of much people, euen as the voyce of many waters, and
as the voyce of strong thundringes, saying, Alleluia: for the Lorde our God
omnipotent raigneth.
7 Let vs be glad, & reioyce, & geue honor to hym: for the mariage of the lambe
is come, & his wyfe made her selfe redy.
8 And to her was graunted that she should be arayed with pure and goodly raynes:
For the raynes is the ryghteousnes of saintes.
9 And he sayde vnto me, write: Happy are they which are called vnto the supper
of the lambes mariage. And he said vnto me: These are the true sayinges of God.
10 And I fell at his feete to worship him. And he saide vnto me: See thou do it
not, for I am thy felowe seruaunt, and of thy brethren, euen of them that haue
the testimonie of Iesus. Worship God: For the testimonie of Iesus, is the
spirite of prophesie.
11 And I sawe heauen open, & beholde a white horse, and he that sate vpon him
was called faythfull and true, and in ryghteousnesse he doth iudge and make
battayle.
12 His eyes were as a flambe of fire, and on his head were many crownes, and he
had a name written, that no man knewe but he hym selfe.
13 And he was clothed with a vesture dipt in blood, and his name is called the
worde of God.
14 And the warryers which were in heauen folowed hym vppon whyte horses, clothed
with whyte and pure raynes.
15 And out of his mouth went a sharpe sworde, that with it he shoulde smyte the
heathen: and he shall rule the with a rodde of yron. And he trode the winefat of
fiercenesse and wrath of almightie God.
16 And hath on his vesture and on his thygh a name written, King of kinges, and
Lorde of lordes.
17 And I sawe an angell stande in the sunne, and he cryed with a loude voyce,
saying to all the fowles that flee by the myddes of heauen: Come, and gather
your selues together vnto the supper of the great God:
18 That ye may eate the fleshe of kinges, and the fleshe of hye capitaynes, and
the fleshe of myghtie men, and the fleshe of horses and of them that syt on
them, and the fleshe of all free men, and bonde men, and of small and great.
19 And I sawe the beast, and the kinges of the earth, and their warryers
gathered together, to make battayle agaynst hym that sate on the horse, and
agaynst his souldyers.
20 And the beast was taken, and with hym that false prophete that wrought
miracles before hym, with which he deceaued them that receaued the beastes
marke, and them that worshipped his image. These both were cast quicke into a
ponde of fire, burnyng with brymstone:
21 And the remnaunt were slayne with the sworde of hym that sate vppon the
horse, whiche sworde proceaded out of his mouth, and all the fowles were fylled
with their fleshe.

Chapter 20

1 And I sawe an angel come downe from heauen hauyng the key of the bottomelesse
pytte, and a great chaine in his hand
2 And he toke the dragon, that olde serpent, which is the deuyll and Satanas,
and he bounde hym a thousand yeres.
3 And cast hym into the bottomlesse pit, and he shut hym vp, and set a seale on
hym, that he shoulde deceaue the people no more, tyll the thousande yeres were
fulfylled: and after that, he must be loosed for a litle season.
4 And I sawe thrones, and they sate vpon them, and iudgement was geuen vnto
them: and I sawe the soules of them that were beheaded for the witnesse of
Iesus, and for the word of God, and whiche had not worshipped the beast neither
his image, neither had taken his marke vpon their foreheads, or in their handes:
and they lyued and raigned with Christe a thousand yeres.
5 But the other of the dead men shall not lyue agayne, vntyll the thousande
yeres be finished. This is the first resurrection.
6 Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection: For on such
shal the seconde death haue no power, but they shalbe the priestes of God and of
Christe, and shall raigne with hym a thousande yeres.
7 And when the thousande yeres are expired, Satan shalbe loosed out of his
pryson.
8 And shall go out to deceaue the people which are in the foure quarters of the
earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battayle, whose number is as
the sande of the sea.
9 And they went vp in the playne of the earth, and compassed the tentes of the
saintes about, and the beloued citie: and fire came downe from God out of
heauen, and deuoured them:
10 And the deuyll that deceaued them, was cast into a lake of fire & brymstone,
where the beast and the false prophete shalbe tormented day & nyght for
euermore.
11 And I sawe a great whyte throne, and him that sate on it, fro whose face
fledde away both the earth and heauen, and their place was no more founde.
12 And I sawe the dead both great and small stand before God, and the bookes
were opened: and another booke was opened, which is the booke of lyfe, and the
dead were iudged of those thynges whiche were written in the bookes, accordyng
to their deedes.
13 And the sea gaue vp her dead whiche were in her, and death and hell delyuered
vp the dead whiche were in them: and they were iudged euery man accordyng to his
deedes.
14 And death and hell were cast into the lake of fyre. This is the seconde
death.
15 And whosoeuer was not founde written in the booke of lyfe, was cast into the
lake of fire.

Chapter 21

1 And I sawe a newe heauen & a new earth: for the first heauen & the first earth
were vanisshed awaye, & there was no more sea.
2 And I Iohn sawe the holy citie newe Hierusalem come downe from God out of
heauen, prepared as a bride garnisshed for her husbande.
3 And I hearde a great voyce out of heauen, saying: Beholde, the tabernacle of
God is with men, and he wyll dwell with them, and they shalbe his people, and
God hym selfe shalbe with them, and be their God.
4 And God shall wype away all teares from their eyes: and there shalbe no more
death, neither sorowe, neither crying, neither shall there be any more payne,
for the former thynges are gone.
5 And he that sate vpon the throne, said: Beholde, I make all thynges newe. And
he sayde vnto me, write: for these wordes are faythfull and true.
6 And he sayde vnto me, it is done, I am Alpha and Omega, the begynnyng and the
ende: I wyll geue to hym that is a thirst of the well of the water of lyfe
freely.
7 He that ouercommeth, shall inherite all thynges, and I wyl be his God, and he
shalbe my sonne.
8 But the fearefull and vnbeleuing, and the abhominable, and murtherers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, & all lyers, shall haue their part
in the lake which burneth with fire and brymstone: which is the seconde death.
9 And there came vnto me one of the seuen angels whiche had the seuen vyals full
of the seuen last plagues, and talked with me, saying: Come hyther, I wyll shewe
thee the bryde, the lambes wyfe.
10 And he caryed me away in the spirite to a great and an hye mountayne, and he
shewed me the great citie holy Hierusalem, descendyng out of heauen fro God,
11 Hauing the glorie of God: and her shining was lyke vnto a stone most
precious, euen lyke a Iasper, cleare as Cristall.
12 And had walles great and hye, & had 12 gates, and at the gates 12 angels, &
names written, which are the names of the 12 tribes of Israel.
13 On the east syde three gates, and on the north syde three gates, and towards
the south three gates, and fro the west three gates.
14 And the wall of the citie had 12 foundations, and in them the 12 names of the
lambes 12 Apostles.
15 And he that talked with me had a golden reede to measure the citie withall,
and the gates thereof, and the wall therof.
16 And the citie was buylt foure square, & the length was as large as ye
breadth: and he measured the citie with the reede twelue thousande furlonges,
and the length, and the breadth, and the heyght of it were equall.
17 And he measured the wall thereof an hundreth and fourtie and foure cubites,
by the measure of man, that is of the angell.
18 And the buylding of the wall of it was of Iasper, and the citie was pure
golde lyke vnto cleare glasse.
19 And the foundations of the wall of the citie were garnisshed with all maner
of precious stones. The first foundation was Iasper, the seconde Saphire, the
third a Chalcedonie, the fourth an Emeralde,
20 The fifth Sardonix, ye sixth Sardius, the seuenth Chrysolite, the eygth
Beryl, the ninth a Topas, the tenth a Chrysoprasus, the eleueth a Iacinct, ye
twelfth an Amatist.
21 The 12 gates were 12 pearles, euery gate was of one pearle. and the streate
of the citie was pure golde, as through shynyng glasse.
22 And I sawe no temple therin: For the Lorde God almightie and the Lambe, are
the temple of it.
23 And the citie hath no neede of the sunne, neither of the moone to lighten it:
For the glorie of God dyd lighten it, and the Lambe is the lyght of it.
24 And the people which are saued, shall walke in the lyght of it: and the
kynges of the earth shall bryng their glorie and honor vnto it.
25 And the gates of it are not shut by day, for there shalbe no nyght.
26 And they shall bring the glory and honor of the gentiles vnto it.
27 And there shall enter into it none vncleane thyng, neither whatsoeuer worketh
abhomination, or maketh lyes: but they only which are written in the lambes
booke of lyfe.

Chapter 22

1 And he shewed me a pure ryuer of water of lyfe, cleare as Cristall, proceadyng
out of the throne of god, and of the lambe.
2 In the middes of the streate of it, and of either side of the ryuer, was there
wood of lyfe, which bare twelue maner of fruites, and gaue fruite euery moneth:
and the leaues of the wood serued to heale the people withall.
3 And there shalbe no more curse, but the throne of God and the lambe shalbe in
it: and his seruauntes shal serue hym.
4 And they shall see his face, & his name shalbe in their foreheades.
5 And there shalbe no nyght there, and they neede no candle, neither lyght of
the sunne: for the Lorde God geueth them lyght, and they shall raigne for
euermore.
6 And he sayde vnto me: these sayinges are faythfull and true. And the Lorde God
of the holy prophetes, sent his angell to shewe vnto his seruauntes, the thynges
which must shortly be fulfilled.
7 Beholde, I come shortly: Happy is he that kepeth ye saying of the prophecie of
this booke.
8 I Iohn sawe these thynges, & hearde them: And when I had hearde and seene, I
fell downe to worship before the feete of the angell, which shewed me these
thynges.
9 And he sayde vnto me: see thou do it not, for I am thy felowe seruaunt, and
the felowe seruaunt of thy brethren the prophetes, and of them which kepe the
sayinges of this booke: But worshippe God.
10 And he sayde vnto me, seale not the sayinges of the prophecie of this booke:
For the tyme is at hande.
11 He that doeth euyll, let hym do euyll styll: and he which is filthie, let hym
be filthie styll: and he that is ryghteous, let hym be ryghteous styll: and he
that is holy, let hym be holy styll.
12 And beholde, I come shortly, and my rewarde is with me, to geue euery man
accordyng as his deedes shalbe.
13 I am Alpha and Omega, the begynnyng and the ende, the first and the last.
14 Blessed are they that do his commaundementes, that their power may be in the
tree of lyfe, and may enter in through the gates into the citie.
15 For without shalbe dogges, and inchaunters, and whoremongers, and murtherers,
and idolaters, and whosoeuer loueth or maketh leasynges.
16 I Iesus sent myne angell, to testifie vnto you these thynges in ye Churches.
I am the roote and the generation of Dauid, and the bryght mornyng starre.
17 And the spirite and the bride say, come. And let hym that heareth, say also,
come. And let hym that is a thirst, come. And let whosoeuer wyll, take of the
water of lyfe, freely.
18 I testifie vnto euery man that heareth the wordes of ye prophecie of this
booke: If any man shall adde vnto these thynges, God shall adde vnto hym the
plagues that are written in this booke.
19 And yf any man shall minishe of the wordes of the booke of this prophecie,
God shal take away his part out of the booke of lyfe, and out of the holy citie,
and from the thynges which are writte in this booke.
20 He which testifieth these thynges, sayth surely, I come quickly. Amen. Euen
so, come Lorde Iesus.
21 The grace of our Lord Iesus Christe be with you all. Amen.
